


Management 
Information Systems 
Moving Business Forward 
Fourth Edition 
KELLY RAINER 
BRAD PRINCE 
HUGH WATSON 
with contributions by 
Alina M. Chircu, Bentley University 
Marco Marabelli, Bentley University 

VICE PRESIDENT AND DIRECTOR 
George Hoff man
DIRECTOR 
Veronica Visentin
EXECUTIVE EDITOR 
Darren Lalonde
ASSISTANT DEVELOPMENT EDITOR 
Emma Townsend-Merino
SENIOR CONTENT MANAGER 
Dorothy Sinclair
SENIOR PRODUCTION EDITOR 
Jane Lee Kaddu
SENIOR MARKETING MANAGER 
Chris DeJohn
ASSOCIATE PRODUCT DESIGNER 
Wendy Ashenberg
SENIOR DESIGNER 
Maureen Eide
SENIOR PHOTO EDITOR 
Billy Ray
COVER DESIGNER 
Maureen Eide
PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT SERVICES 
Thomson Digital
COVER CREDIT 
Aleksandarvelasevic © Getty Images
This book was set in Source Sans Pro 9.5/12.5 by Thomson Digital and printed and bound by Courier/
Kendallville.
This book is printed on acid free paper. 
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., has been a valued source of knowledge and understanding 
for more than 200 years, helping people around the world meet their needs and fulfill their aspira-
tions. Our company is built on a foundation of principles that include responsibility to the commu-
nities we serve and where we live and work. In 2008, we launched a Corporate Citizenship Initiative, 
a global eff ort to address the environmental, social, economic, and ethical challenges we face in our 
business. Among the issues we are addressing are carbon impact, paper specifications and procure-
ment, ethical conduct within our business and among our vendors, and community and charitable 
support. For more information, please visit our Web site: www.wiley.com/go/citizenship.
Copyright © 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 
107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the 
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clear-
ance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923 (Web site: www.copyright.com). Requests 
to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online 
at: www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
ISBN-13: 978-1-119-32109-5
The inside back cover will contain printing identification and country of origin if omitted from this 
page. In addition, if the ISBN on the back cover diff ers from the ISBN on this page, the one on the 
back cover is correct.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Rainer, R. Kelly, Jr., 1949-
Title: Management information systems / R. Kelly Rainer, Jr., Brad Prince, Hugh Watson.
Description: Fourth edition. | Hoboken, NJ : John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2017. | Includes bibliographical 
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016034800 (print) | LCCN 2016035388 (ebook) | ISBN 
   9781118890486 (paperback : acid-free paper) | ISBN 9781118890431 (pdf) | 
ISBN 9781119321095 (epub)
Subjects:  LCSH: Management information systems.
Classification: LCC HD30.213 .R35 2017 (print) | LCC HD30.213 (ebook) | DDC 658.4/038011--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016034800
Printed in the United States of America.
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

 
 
 
 
To The Student  
Dear Student, 
Why are you here? We are not asking you a philosophical ques­
tion—that is a different course. We are asking, “Why are you 
about to spend an entire term learning about information sys­
tems? Why are you—an accounting major, or a marketing or 
management major—being required to study this topic?” You 
may be asking, “What’s in IT for me?” The short answer is that 
“IT’s About Business,” and the longer answer is the goal of this 
book. 
Information systems are making the world a very small 
place and are contributing to rapidly increasing global competi­
tion. As a result, organizations are constantly trying to find ways 
to gain a competitive advantage—by achieving operational 
excellence, developing new products and services, developing 
new business models, providing superb customer service, im­
proving decision making, and so on. It should be obvious, then, 
that an introductory course in information systems is critically 
important for success in your chosen career. 
Rapid advances in information systems mean that, as 
business students, change will be the only constant you will 
encounter in today’s dynamic digital business environment. 
We wrote this book for business students of all majors who will 
soon become business professionals. We have three goals in 
mind: 
1.  To help you be immediately successful when you join your 
organization 
2.  To help you understand the importance of information sys­
tems for individuals, organizations, and society as a whole 
3.  To enable you to become informed users of your organiza­
tion’s information systems 
To accomplish these goals, we have tried to provide the essen­
tial, relevant knowledge that you need to understand to eff ec­
tively use information systems in your careers. 
The way we propose to do this is by keeping you actively 
involved in the material. Every section of the chapters has an 
activity that asks you to do something beyond just reading the 
textbook that will help you see why the content is useful for 
your future business career. 
We hope you will enjoy this active approach and success­
fully complete the course with a richer understanding of what’s 
in IT for you. 
KELLY RAINER, BRAD PRINCE, AND HUGH WATSON 

 
 
 
 
 
To The Instructor  
Dear Instructor, 
We are like you. All of us who teach the introductory course in 
information systems realize that it is difficult for students to 
understand the importance and relevance of the topics in the 
course. As a result, students often memorize the content just 
before the exam, and then forget it as soon as the exam is over. 
We all want to engage students at a much deeper level. We 
know that the best way to accomplish this objective is through 
hands-on active learning, leading to increased student engage­
ment in our course content. 
Accordingly, active learning and student engagement 
are key principles of our new book. We recognize the need to 
actively involve students in problem solving, creative  thinking, 
and capitalizing on opportunities. Every section of every chap­
ter includes extensive hands-on exercises, activities, and mini- 
cases. End-of-chapter material also includes exercises that 
require students to use software application tools. Through 
these activities, we enable students to understand how to do 
something with the concepts they learn, such as meet business 
goals using information systems, configure products, and use 
spreadsheets and databases to facilitate problem solving. 
The preface on the next page further outlines the goals, 
features, and support material provided with our new text. We 
hope you will enjoy teaching with this approach! 
KELLY RAINER, BRAD PRINCE, AND HUGH WATSON 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface
Chapter Organization 
Each chapter contains the following elements: 
•  Chapter Outline: Lists the major concepts covered in each 
chapter. 
•  Learning Objectives: Provide an overview of the key 
learning goals that students should achieve after reading the 
chapter. 
•  Chapter-Opening Case: A short case that focuses on a 
small or start-up company that is using information systems 
to solve a business problem. Cases in introductory informa­
tion systems textbooks typically involve very large organiza­
tions. In contrast, our chapter-opening cases demonstrate 
that small and start-up companies also have business prob­
lems that they address using information systems. Students 
will see that small firms usually have to be quite creative in 
building and implementing IS solutions, because they do not 
have MIS departments or large budgets. These small-busi­
ness cases also add an entrepre neurial flavor to each chapter 
for students who are planning to start their own businesses. 
•  Apply the Concept Activities: This book’s unique peda­
gogical structure is designed to keep students actively en­
gaged with the course material. Reading material in each 
chapter subsection is immediately followed by an “Apply the 
Concept” activity that is directly related to a chapter objec­
tive. These activities include links to online videos and arti­
cles and other hands-on activities that require students to 
immediately apply what they have learned. Via WileyPLUS, 
instructors can assign a section of text along with an Apply 
the Concept activity. Each Apply the Concept has the follow­
ing elements: 
• Background (places the activity in the context of relevant 
reading material) 
• Activity (a hands-on activity that students carry out) 
• Deliverable (various tasks for students to complete as they 
perform the activity) 
•  IT’s About Business: Short cases that demonstrate real- 
world applications of IT to business. Each case is accompa­
nied by questions relating the case to concepts covered in 
the chapter. Icons relate these boxes to the specific function­
al areas. 
•  IT’s Personal: Sprinkled throughout the chapters, these 
short vignettes explain the relevance of MIS concepts to stu­
dents’ daily lives. 
•  Before You Go On: End-of-section reviews prompt stu­
dents to pause and test their understanding of concepts be­
fore moving on to the next section. 
•  Examples: Interspersed throughout the text, these high­
light the use (and misuse) of information systems by re­
al-world organizations, thereby illustrating the concepts dis­
cussed in the chapter. 
•  What’s in IT for Me?: A unique end-of-chapter summary 
that demonstrates the rel evance of each key chapter topic 
to different functional areas, including accounting, finance, 
marketing, production/operations management, human 
resources manage ment, and management information sys­
tems. This cross-functional focus makes the book accessible 
for students from any major. 
•  Summary: Keyed to the Learning Objectives listed at the 
beginning of the chapter, the summary enables students to 
review major concepts covered. 
•  Discussion Questions and Problem-Solving Activities: 
Provide practice through active learning. These exercises are 
hands-on opportunities to apply the concepts dis cussed in 
the chapter. 
•  Collaboration Exercises: Team exercises that require stu­
dents to take on different functional roles and collaborate to 
solve business problems using Google Drive. These exercises 
allow students to get first-hand experience solving business 
problems using Cloud-based tools while also experiencing 
an authentic business team dynamic. 
•  Closing Cases: Each chapter concludes with two cases 
about business problems faced by actual companies and 
how they used IS to solve those issues. The cases are broken 
down into three parts: a description of the problem, an over­
view of the IS solution implemented, and a presentation of 
the results of the implementation. Each case is followed by 
discussion questions, so that students can further explore 
the concepts presented in the case. 
•  Spreadsheet Activity: Every chapter includes a hands-on 
spreadsheet project that requires students to practice their 
Excel skills within the context of the chapter mate rial. Wiley-
PLUS Learning Space includes an Excel Lab Manual for stu­
dents who need introductory coverage or review. 
•  Database Activity: Every chapter includes a hands-on da­
tabase project that requires students to practice their Access 
skills while using concepts learned in the chapter. WileyPLUS 
Learning Space includes an Access Lab Manual for students 
who need introductory coverage or review. 
•  Internship Activity: Every chapter includes an Internship 
Activity which presents a business problem found in one of 
four recurring industries (healthcare, banking, manufactur­
ing, and retail.) STUDENTS are directed to various soft ware 
demos that provide useful tools for addressing the business 
problem. Then the students must act as interns and apply 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
viii 
PREFACE 
the concepts they learned in the chapter to provide a solu­
tion to the business problem. 
•  Glossary: A study tool that highlights vocabulary within 
the chapters and facilitates studying. 
Key Features 
Student Engagement As discussed in the note addressed 
to instructors at the beginning of this preface, one of the chief 
goals of this text is to engage students at a level beyond recog­
nition of key terms. We believe the best way to achieve this goal 
is through hands-on, active learning that will lead to increased 
student engagement with the course and its content. 
Accordingly, every section of every chapter provides re­
sources that actively involve students in problem solving, crea­
tive thinking, and capitalizing on opportunities. Every chapter 
includes extensive hands-on exercises, activities, and mini- 
cases, including exercises that require students to solve busi­
ness problems using Excel and Access. 
Cross-Functional Approach We emphasize the importance 
of information systems by calling attention in every chapter to 
how that chapter’s topic relates to each business major. Icons 
guide students to relevant issues for their specific functional 
area—accounting (ACC), fi nance (FIN), marketing (MKT), pro­
duction operations management (POM), human resources man­
agement (HRM), and management information systems (MIS). 
Chapters conclude with a detailed summary (entitled “What’s in 
IT for Me?”) of how key concepts in the chapter relate to each 
functional area. 
ACCT 
FIN 
MKT 
POM 
HRM 
MIS 
Diversified and Unique Examples from Different In­
dustries Extensive use of vivid examples from large corpo­
rations, small businesses, and government and not-for-profit 
organizations enlivens the concepts from the chapter. Th e ex­
amples illustrate everything from the capabilities of informa­
tion systems, to their cost and justification and the innovative 
ways that corporations are using IS in their operations. Small 
businesses have been included in recognition of the fact that 
many students will work for small-to mid-sized companies, and 
some will even start their own small business. In fact, some 
students may already be working at local businesses, and the 
concepts they are learning in class can be readily observed or 
put into practice in their part-time jobs. Each chapter constant­
ly highlights the integral connection between business and IS. 
This connection is especially evident in the chapter-opening 
and closing cases, the “IT’s About Business” boxes, and the 
highlighted examples. 
Successes and Failures Many textbooks present examples 
of the successful implementation of information systems, and 
our book is no exception. However, we go one step beyond by 
also providing numerous examples of IS failures, in the context 
of lessons that can be learned from such failures. Misuse of in­
formation systems can be very expensive. 
Global Focus An understanding of global competition, 
partnerships, and trading is essential to success in a modern 
business environment. Therefore, we provide a broad selec­
tion of international cases and examples. We discuss the role 
of information systems in facilitating export and import, the 
management of international companies, and electronic trad­
ing around the globe. 
Innovation and Creativity In today’s rapidly changing 
business environment, creativity and innovation are necessary 
for a business to operate effectively and profitably. Throughout 
our book, we demonstrate how information systems facilitate 
these processes. 
Focus on Ethics With corporate scandals appearing in the 
headlines almost daily, ethics and ethical questions have come 
to the forefront of business people’s minds. In addition to de­
voting an entire chapter to ethics and privacy (Chapter 6), we 
have included examples and cases throughout the text that fo­
cus on business ethics. 
A Guide to Icons in This Book 
As you read this book, you will notice a variety of icons inter­
spersed throughout the chapters. 
These icons highlight material relating to diff erent 
functional areas. MIS concepts are relevant to all business ca­
reers, not just careers in IT. The functional area icons help stu­
dents of different majors quickly pick out concepts and exam­
ples of particular relevance to them. Below is a quick reference 
of these icons. 
ACCT For the Accounting Major highlights content rele­
vant to the functional area of accounting. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major highlights content relevant 
to the functional area of finance. 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major highlights content rele­
vant to the functional area of marketing. 
POM For the Production/Operations Management 
Major highlights content relevant to the functional area of 
 production/operations management. 
HRM For the Human Resources Major highlights con­
tent relevant to the functional area of human resources. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major highlights content relevant to the 
functional area of MIS. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What’s New in the Fourth Edition? 
Content changes include: 
• Chapter 5: Completely rewritten chapter on Business Analyt­
ics. Chapter provides a visual overview of the Analytics pro­
cess (Figure 5.3), and extensive coverage of descriptive ana­
lytics, predictive analytics, and prescriptive analytics. 
• Plug IT In 5: Completely rewritten Plug IT In on Artificial In­
telligence. This Plug In differentiates between weak AI and 
strong AI and then addresses AI technologies such as expert 
systems, machine learning, deep learning, and neural net­
works. The Plug In continues with a discussion of AI applica­
tions, including machine vision, natural language process­
ing, robotics, speech recognition, and intelligent agents. 
• Chapter 3 contains expanded coverage of Big Data. 
• Plug IT In 1 provides expanded coverage of business processes. 
• All new or updated IT’s About Business, chapter-opening and 
closing cases, and examples. 
• Pedagogical changes include: 
• Revised and streamlined “Apply the Concept” activities 
now relate directly to chapter objectives. 
• New “Internship Activities” replace the Ruby’s Club ac­
tivities from previous editions. Each Internship Activity 
includes a software demo that requires students to apply 
new tools to business problems. 
• Revised “Collaboration Exercises” now each require use of 
Google Drive. 
• Revised and streamlined database and spreadsheet ex­
ercises for every chapter. These include references to les­
sons in the WileyPLUS lab manual for students who need 
instruction or review. 
Online Resources 
www.wiley.com/college/rainer 
Our book also facilitates the teaching of an Introduction 
to Information Systems course by providing extensive support 
materials for instructors and students. Visit www.wiley.com/ 
college/rainer to access the Student and Instructor Companion 
Sites. 
Instructor’s Manual The Instructor’s Manual includes a 
chapter overview, teaching tips and strategies, answers to all 
end-of-chapter questions, supplemental mini-cases with essay 
questions and answers, and experiential exercises that relate 
to particular topics. It also includes answers and solutions to 
all spreadsheet and database activities, along with a guide to 
teaching these exercises, and links to the separate Excel and Ac­
cess starter and solutions files. 
Test Bank The test bank is a comprehensive resource for test 
questions. Each chapter contains multiple choice, true/false, 
PREFACE ix 
short answer, and essay questions. In addition, each chapter 
includes “Apply Your Knowledge” questions that require more 
creative thought to answer. Each multiple choice and true/false 
question is labeled to indicate its level of difficulty: easy, medi­
um, or hard. 
The test bank is available for use in Respondus’ easy-to­
use software. Respondus® is a powerful tool for creating and 
managing exams that can be printed or published directly to 
Blackboard, WebCT, Desire2Learn, eCollege, ANGEL, and other 
learning systems. For more information on Respondus® and the 
Respondus Test Bank Network, please visit www.respondus 
.com. 
Reading Quizzes These multiple choice conceptual ques­
tions can be used by instructors to evaluate a student’s under­
standing of the reading. They are available in Respondus, the 
WileyPLUS course, and the Book Companion Site. 
PowerPoint Presentations The PowerPoint Presentations 
consist of a series of slides for each chapter. The slides are de­
signed around each chapter’s content, incorporating key points 
from the chapter and chapter illustrations as appropriate, as 
well as real-life examples from the Web. 
Image Library All textbook figures are available for down­
load from the Web site. These figures can easily be added to 
PowerPoint presentations. 
Weekly Updates (http://wileyinformationsystemsupdates 
.com) 
Weekly updates, harvested from around the Internet by David 
Firth of the University of Montana, provide you with the latest 
IT news and issues. These are posted every Monday morning 
throughout the year at http://wileyinformationsystemsupdates 
.com/. They include links to current articles and videos as well as 
discussion questions to assign or use in class. 
OfficeGrader Off ice GraderTM is an Access-Based VBA  Macro 
that enables automatic grading of Office assignments. The 
macros compare Off ice files and grade them against a master 
file. Off iceGraderTM is available for Word, Access, Excel, and Pow­
erPoint for Office 2010 and 2013. For more information, contact 
your Wiley sales representative or visit http://www.wiley.com 
/college/sc/off ice2013/off icegrader.html. 
WileyPLUS Learning Space 
WileyPLUS Learning Space is an easy way for students to learn, 
collaborate, and grow. With WileyPLUS Learning Space, stu­
dents create a personalized study plan, assess progress along 
the way, and make deeper connections as they interact with 
the course material and each other. Through a combination of 
dynamic course materials and visual reports, this collaborative 
learning environment gives you and your students immediate 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
x 
PREFACE 
insight into strengths and problem areas in order to act on 
what’s most important. 
• This online teaching and learning environment integrates the 
entire digital textbook with the most effective instructor and 
student resources to accommodate every learn ing style. 
• Students achieve concept mastery in a rich, structured envi­
ronment that is available 24/7. 
• Instructors personalize and manage their course more ef­
fectively with assessment, assignments, grade tracking, and 
more. You can even add your own materials to your Wiley-
PLUS course 
• With WileyPLUS Learning Space you can identify students 
who are falling behind and intervene accordingly, without 
having to wait for them to come to off ice hours. 
• WileyPLUS Learning Space can complement the textbook or 
replace the printed text book altogether. 
WileyPLUS Learning Space for Rainer MIS 3e includes the fol­
lowing resources to support teaching and learning: 
• New author lecture videos for every section of every chapter 
will facilitate switch to “flipped classrooms” and/or will pro­
vide additional learning support for students. 
• Orion, an adaptive, personal learning experience that helps 
students highlight their strengths and problems areas and 
navigate through their studies to get optimal results in the 
most efficient amount of time. (See more information below.). 
• Group chat function facilitates student discussion about ac­
tivities and cases. 
• Complete eText allows searching across all chapters, 
note-taking, highlighting, and the ability to copy and paste or 
print key sections. 
• Lab Manual for Microsoft Office 2010 and Off ice 2013. 
• Automatically graded practice questions 
•  Vocabulary flash cards and quizzes 
• Library of additional “IT’s About Business” cases. 
For more information and a demo, visit here: http://www 
.wiley.com/college/sc/wpls/ 
Acknowledgments 
Creating, developing, and producing a text for the introduction to in­
formation systems course is a formidable undertaking. Along the way, 
we were fortunate to receive continuous evaluation, criticism, and di­
rection from many colleagues who regularly teach this course. 
Special thanks to the following contributors: Ken Corley for designing 
the PowerPoint slides, Jennifer Gerow for writing test bank  questions, 
ORION Included in WileyPLUS Learning Space, ORION helps 
gauge students’ strengths and weaknesses so that instructors 
can tailor instruction accordingly. Instructor reports track ag­
gregate and individual student proficiency at the objective or 
chapter level, to show exactly where students excel as well as 
the areas that need reinforcement. 
Based on cognitive science, WileyPLUS with ORION is a 
personalized, adaptive learning experience that helps students 
build proficiency on topics while using their study time most 
eff ectively. 
For more information and a demo, visit here: http://www 
.wiley.com/college/sc/ oriondemo/. 
WILEY Flex 
In addition to WileyPLUS Learning Space, Wiley provides a wide 
variety of printed and electronic formats that provide many 
choices to your students at a wide range of price points. Con­
tact your Wiley sales representative for more details on any of 
the below. 
Wiley E-Text Powered by VitalSource Wiley E-Texts are 
complete digital versions of the text that help students study 
more efficiently. Students can access content online and off line 
on their desktops, laptops, and mobile devices; search across 
the entire book content, take notes and highlight, and copy and 
paste or print key sections. 
Wiley Binder Version A three-hole-punched, loose-leaf ver­
sion allows students to carry only the content they need, insert 
class notes and hand-outs, and keep all materials in one place. 
Wiley Custom This group’s services allows you to adapt ex­
isting Wiley content and combine text materials, incorporate 
and publish your own materials, and collaborate with Wiley’s 
team to ensure your satisfaction. 
Wiley Custom Select Wiley Custom Select allows you to 
build your own course materials using selected chapters of any 
Wiley text and your own material if desired. For more informa­
tion, visit http:// customselect.wiley.com. 
Bob Gehling for working on the Instructor’s Manual, and Carole 
Hollingsworth for designing Wiley PLUS activities. 
Special thanks to contributors Dawna Dewire, Joan Lumpkin, Kevin 
Lertwachara, Roy DeJoie, and Kala Seal for working on the original 
Apply the Concept activities that appeared in prior editions. Thanks 
also to Efrem Mallach for creating the original database activities in 

  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE xi 
the prior editions. Many thanks also to Alina M. Chircu and Marco Mar­
abelli of Bentley University for developing new material that enhances 
our coverage of business processes and ERP. We are grateful for the 
dedication and creativity of all these contributors in helping us craft 
this new text. 
We would like to thank the Wiley team: Darren Lalonde, Executive 
Editor; Emma Townsend-Merino, Assistant Development Editor; 
Wendy Ashenberg, Associate Product Designer; and Chris DeJohn, 
Senior Marketing Manager.  We also thank the Content  Management 
team, including Dorothy Sinclair, Content Manager; Jane Lee Kaddu, 
Senior Production Editor; and Abhishek Sarkari of Thomson Digital. 
And thanks to Maureen Eide, Senior Designer; and Billy Ray, Senior 
Photo Editor. We would also like to thank Robert Weiss for his skillful 
and thorough editing of the manuscript. 
Finally, we would like to acknowledge the contributions made by the 
individuals listed below who participated in focus groups, teleses­
sions, surveys, chapter walkthroughs, class tests, user feedback sur­
veys, and reviews. 
KELLY RAINER  
BRAD PRINCE  
HUGH WATSON  
Monica Adya, Marquette University 
Lawrence Andrew, Western Illinois University, Macomb 
Orakwue (Bay) Arinze, Drexel University 
Laura Atkins, James Madison University 
Nick Ball, Brigham Young University 
Nicholas Barnes, Nicholls College 
Susan Barzottini, Manchester Community College 
Kristi Berg, Minot State University 
Andy Borchers, Lipscomb University 
David Bouchard, Metropolitan State University 
Dave Bourgeois, Biola University 
Mari Buche, Michigan Tech University 
Richard Burkhard, San Jose State University 
Ashley Bush, Florida State University 
Frank Canovatchel, Champlain College 
Donald Carpenter, Mesa State College 
Teuta Cata, Northern Kentucky University 
Wendy Ceccucci, Quinnipiac University 
Amita Chin, Virginia Commonwealth University 
Susan Chinn, University of Southern ME, Portland 
Richard Christensen, Metropolitan State University 
Dmitriy Chulkov,  Indiana University Kokomo 
Phillip Coleman, Western Kentucky University 
Emilio Collar, Western CT State University 
Daniel Connolly, University of Denver 
Lee Cornell, Minnesota State University, Mankato 
David Croasdell, University of Nevada, Reno 
Jakov Crnkovic, University at Albany, SUNY 
Reet Cronk, Harding University 
Marcia Daley, Clark, Atlanta 
Donald Danner, San Francisco State University 
Roy DeJoie, Purdue University 
Dawna Dewire, Babson College 
Kevin Duff y, Wright State University 
Lauren Eder, Rider University 
Sean Eom, Southeast Missouri State University 
Ahmed Eshra, St. John’s University 
Roger Finnegan, Metropolitan State University 
Thomas Fischer, Metropolitan State University 
Jerry Flatto, University of Indianapolis 
Jonathan Frankel, University of Massachusetts, Boston 
Judith Gebauer, University of North Carolina,  Wilmington 
Jennifer Gerow, Virginia Military Institute 
Matt Graham, University of Maine 
Katie Gray, University of Texas, Austin 
Penelope (Sue) Greenberg, Widener University 
Naveen Gudigantala, University of Portland 
Saurabh Gupta, University of North Florida 
Bernard Han, Western Michigan University 
Hyo-Joo Han, Georgia Southern College 
John Hagle, Texas State Technical College 
Peter Haried,  University of Wisconsin,  LaCrosse 
Ranida Harris, Indiana University Southeast 
Roslin Hauck, Illinois State University 
Bernd Haupt, Penn State University 
Jun He, University of Michigan, Dearborn 
Richard Herschel, St. Joseph’s University 
Bogdan Hoanca, University of Alaska 
Mary Carole Hollingsworth, Georgia Perimeter College, Clarkston  Campus 
Terri Holly, Indian River State College 
Derrick Huang, Florida Atlantic University 
Maggie Hutchison, Flagler College 
Mark Hwang, Central Michigan University 
Lynn Isvik, Upper Iowa University, Fayette 
Curtis Izen,  Baruch College, City University of New York 
Radhika Jain,  Baruch College, City University of New York 
Arpan Jani, University of Wisconsin, River Falls 
Jonathan Jelen, St. John’s University 
Hong Jiang, Benedict College 
Nenad Jukic, Loyola University 
Elene Kent, Capital University 
Stephen Klein, Ramapo College 
Brian Kovar, Kansas State University 
Subodha Kumar,  Texas A&M 
Diane Lending, James Madison University 
Kevin Lertwachara,  Cal Poly San Luis Obispo 
Terry Letsche, Wartburg College 
Victor Lipe, Trident Tech 
Chuck Litecky, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale 
Joan Lumpkin, Wright State University 
Nicole Lytle, Cal State, San Bernardino 
George Mangalaraj, Western Illinois University 
Parand Mansouri-Rad, University of Texas, El Paso 
Michael Martel, Ohio University 
Nancy Martin,  Southern Illinois University, Carbondale 
Richard McMahon, University of Houston, Downtown 
Tony McRae, Collin College 
Vishal Midha, University of Texas, Pan American 
Esmail Mohebbi, University West Florida 
Luvai Motiwalla, University Mass Online 
Mahdi Nasereddin, Penn State, Berks 
Sandra K. Newton, Sonoma State University 
Ann O’Brien, University of Wisconsin, Madison 
Sungjune Park,  University of North Carolina, Charlotte 
Yang Park,  Georgia Southwestern State University 
Alan Peace, West Virginia University 
Jacqueline Pike, Duquesne University 

 
 
 
xii 
PREFACE 
Tony Pittarese, East Tennessee State University 
Jennifer Pitts, Columbus State University 
Richard Platt, University of West Florida 
Larisa Preiser, Cal Poly Pomona 
Michelle Ramim, Nova Southeastern University 
Alison Rampersad, Lynn University 
Ralph Reilly, University of Hartford 
Wes Rhea, Kennesaw State University 
Julio Rivera, University of Alabama, Birmingham 
Thomas Roberts, William Patterson University 
Cynthia Ruppel, Nova Southeastern University 
James Ryan, Troy University 
Russell Sabadosa, Manchester Community College 
Jim Samuel, Baruch College, City University of New York 
Tom Sandman, Cal State, Sacramento 
Kala Seal, Loyola Marymount 
Tod Sedbrook, University of Northern Colorado 
Elaine Seeman, East Carolina University 
Richard Segall, Arkansas State University 
Lee Sellers, Eastern Oregon University—Mt. Hood Metro Center 
Judy Ann Serwatka, Purdue University, North Central 
John Seydel, Arkansas State University 
Jollean Sinclaire, Arkansas State University 
Vivek Shah, Texas State University, San Marcos 
Mehrdad Sharbaf, Loyola Marymount University 
Suengjae Shin,  Mississippi State University, Meridian 
Todd Stabenow, Hawkeye Community College 
Jo Lynne Stalnaker, University of Wyoming 
Cynthia Stone, Indiana University 
Nathan Stout, University of Oklahoma 
Yi Sun, Cal State, San Marcos 
Winston Tellis, Fairfield University 
Doug Francis Tuggle, Chapman University 
Wendy Urban, Temple University 
Darlene de Vida, Lower Columbia College 
James Villars, Metropolitan State University 
Padmal Vitharana, Syracuse University 
Haibo Wang, Texas A&M International University 
Hong Wang, North Carolina A&T State University 
June Wei, University of West Florida 
Melody White, University of North Texas 
Rosemary Wild, Cal Poly San Luis Obispo 
Tom Wilder, Cal State, Chico 
Karen Williams, University of Texas, San Antonio 
Marie Wright,  Western Connecticut State University 
Yaquan Xu, Virginia State University 
Benjamin Yeo, Loyola Marymount University 
Bee Yew, Fayetteville State University 
Jigish Zaveri, Morgan State University 
Grace Zhang, Augusta State University 
Wei Zhang, University of Massachusetts, Boston 
Zuopeng Zhang, SUNY, Plattsburgh 
Fan Zhao, Florida Gulf Coast University 
Robert Zwick, Yeshiva University 

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
 
   
  
  
  
   
Brief Contents  
PREFACE 
vii
 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
1
 2 Organizational Strategy, Competitive 
Advantage, and Information Systems 
33
 3 Data and Knowledge Management 
56
 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
91
 5 Business Analytics 
127
 6 Ethics and Privacy 
155
 7 Information Security 
176
 8 Social Computing 
209
 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
244
 10 Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobi
Commerce 274
le 
11 Information Systems within the 
Organization 306
 12 Customer Relationship Management 
331
 13 Supply Chain Management 
352
 14 Acquiring Information Systems and 
Applications 
370 
PLUG IT IN 1 
Business Processes 
and Business Process 
Management 
398 
PLUG IT IN 2 
Hardware and Soft ware 
411 
PLUG IT IN 3 
Fundamentals of Relational 
Database Operations 
431 
PLUG IT IN 4 
Cloud Computing 
441 
PLUG IT IN 5 
Artificial Intelligence 
464 
PLUG IT IN 6 
Project Management 
477 
PLUG IT IN 7 
Protecting Your Information 
Assets 
488 
INDEX 507 
xiii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
PREFACE 
vii 
 1  Introduction to Information  
Systems 
1  
Opening Case 
1  
Introduction 2  
1.1  
Why Should I Study Information Systems? 3  
1.2  
Overview of Computer-Based Information  
Systems 9  
1.3  
How Does IT Impact Organizations? 17  
1.4 
Importance of Information Systems to Society 23  
Summary 27  
Chapter Glossary 28  
Discussion Questions 29  
Problem-Solving Activities 29  
Closing Case 1 30  
Closing Case 2 31 
 2  Organizational Strategy,  
Competitive Advantage, and  
Information Systems 
33  
Opening Case 33  
Introduction 34  
2.1  
Business Pressures, Organizational Responses, and  
Information Technology Support 35  
2.2  
Competitive Advantage and Strategic Information 
Systems 44  
Summary 51  
Chapter Glossary 52  
Discussion Questions 52  
Problem-Solving Activities 53  
Closing Case 1 
53  
Closing Case 2 54 
 3  Data and Knowledge  
Management 
56  
Opening Case 
56  
Introduction 57  
3.1  
Managing Data 60  
3.2  
The Database Approach 62  
3.3  
Big Data 66  
3.4  
Data Warehouses and Data Marts 75  
3.5 
Knowledge Management 81  
Summary 86  
Chapter Glossary 86  
Discussion Questions 87  
Problem-Solving Activities 87  
Closing Case 1 
88  
Closing Case 2 89 
 4  Telecommunications  
and Networking 
91  
Opening Case 
91  
Introduction 93  
4.1  
What Is a Computer Network? 94  
Network Fundamentals 97
4.2 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 102
4.3 
4.4  
Network Applications: Discovery 107  
4.5  
Network Applications: Communication 110  
4.6  
Network Applications: Collaboration 113  
4.7 
Network Applications: Educational 117  
Summary 120  
Chapter Glossary 121  
Discussion Questions 123  
Problem-Solving Activities 123  
Closing Case 1 124  
Closing Case 2 125 
 5  Business Analytics 
127  
Opening Case 127  
Introduction 128  
5.1  
Managers and Decision Making 129  
5.2  
The Business Analytics Process 133  
5.3  
Business Analytics Tools 137  
5.4  
Business Analytics Models: Descriptive  
Analytics, Predictive Analytics, and Prescriptive  
Analytics 141  
Summary 150  
Chapter Glossary 150  
Discussion Questions 151  
Closing Case 1 151  
Closing Case 2 153 
 6  Ethics and Privacy 
155  
Opening Case 
155  
Introduction 156  
Ethical Issues 157 
6.1 
6.2 
Privacy 163  
Summary 171  
Chapter Glossary 171  
Discussion Questions 172  

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents xv 
Problem-Solving Activities 172  
Closing Case 1 173  
Closing Case 2 174 
 7 Information Security 
176  
Opening Case 176  
Introduction 177  
7.1  
Introduction to Information Security 178  
Systems 180  
7.2 
Unintentional Threats to Information  
7.3  
Deliberate Threats to Information Systems 183  
7.4  
What Organizations Are Doing to Protect  
Information Resources 189  
7.5 
Information Security Controls 191  
Summary 201  
Chapter Glossary 202  
Discussion Questions 204  
Problem-Solving Activities 204  
Closing Case 1 205  
Closing Case 2 207 
 8 Social Computing 
209  
Opening Case 209  
Introduction 211  
Web 2.0 212
8.1 
8.2  
Fundamentals of Social Computing  
in Business 219  
8.3  
Social Computing in Business: Shopping 225  
8.4  
Social Computing in Business: Marketing 229  
8.5  
Social Computing in Business: Customer  
Relationship Management 232  
8.6  
Social Computing in Business: Human Resource 
Management 235  
Summary 238  
Chapter Glossary 239  
Discussion Questions 240  
Problem-Solving Activities 240  
Closing Case 1 240  
Closing Case 2 242 
 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
244  
Opening Case 
244  
Introduction 245  
Overview of E-Business and E-Commerce 247
9.1 
9.2  
Business-to-Consumer (B2C) Electronic  
Commerce 254  
9.3  
Business-to-Business (B2B) Electronic  
Commerce 261  
9.4  
Ethical and Legal Issues in E-Business 264  
Summary 268  
Chapter Glossary 268  
Discussion Questions 269  
Problem-Solving Activities 270  
Closing Case 1 271  
Closing Case 2 272 
 10 Wireless, Mobile Computing, and  
Mobile Commerce 
274  
Opening Case 274  
Introduction 275  
10.1  Wireless Technologies 276  
10.2  Wireless Computer Networks and Internet  
Access 284  
10.3  Mobile Computing and Mobile Commerce 291  
10.4 The Internet of Things 296  
Summary 301  
Chapter Glossary 302  
Discussion Questions 302  
Problem-Solving Activities 303  
Closing Case 1 
303  
Closing Case 2 304 
 11 Information Systems within the  
Organization 
306  
Opening Case 306  
Introduction 307  
11.1  Transaction Processing Systems 308  
11.2  Functional Area Information Systems 309  
11.3  Enterprise Resource Planning Systems 316  
11.4 ERP Support for Business Processes 322  
Summary 327  
Chapter Glossary 327  
Discussion Questions 328  
Problem-Solving Activities 328  
Closing Case 1 329  
Closing Case 2 329 
 12 Customer Relationship  
Management  
331  
Opening Case 331  
Introduction 332  
12.1  Defining Customer Relationship Management 333  
12.2  Operational Customer Relationship Management  
Systems 338  
12.3  Other Types of Customer Relationship Management 
Systems 343  
Summary 347  
Chapter Glossary 347  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xvi 
CONTENTS 
Discussion Questions 348  
Problem-Solving Activities 348  
Closing Case 1 349  
Closing Case 2 350 
 13 Supply Chain Management 
352  
Chapter Opening Case 352  
Introduction 353  
13.1  Supply Chains 354  
13.2  Supply Chain Management 356  
13.3  Information Technology Support for Supply Chain 
Management 361  
Summary 365  
Chapter Glossary 366  
Discussion Questions 366  
Problem-Solving Activities 366  
Closing Case 1 367  
Closing Case 2 
368 
 14 Acquiring Information Systems and  
Applications 
370  
Opening Case 
370  
Introduction 371  
14.1  Planning for and Justifying IT Applications 372  
14.2  Strategies for Acquiring IT Applications 376  
14.3  Traditional Systems Development Life Cycle 381  
14.4  Alternative Methods and Tools for Systems 
Development 387  
Summary 392  
Chapter Glossary 393  
Discussion Questions 394  
Problem-Solving Activities 394  
Closing Case 1 395  
Closing Case 2 396  
Plug IT In 1 
Business  
Processes and Business Process  
Management 
398  
PI1.1 Business Processes 398  
PI1.2  Business Process Improvement, Business  
Process Reengineering, and Business Process  
Management 404  
Summary 409  
Chapter Glossary 410  
Discussion Questions 410  
Plug IT In 2 
Hardware and  
Soft ware 
411  
Introduction 411  
PI2.1 Introduction to Hardware 411  
PI2.2 Introduction to Soft ware 
422  
Summary 428  
Glossary 428  
Discussion Questions 430  
Problem-Solving Activities 430  
Plug IT In 3 
Fundamentals  
of Relational Database  
Operations 
431  
Introduction 431  
PI3.1 Query Languages 431  
PI3.2 Entity–Relationship Modeling 432  
PI3.3 Normalization and Joins 435  
Summary 440  
Glossary 440  
Discussion Questions 440  
Plug IT In 4 
Cloud  
Computing 
441  
PI4.1 Introduction 441  
PI4.2 What Is Cloud Computing? 443  
PI4.3 Different Types of Clouds 447  
PI4.4 Cloud Computing Services 449  
PI4.5 The Benefits of Cloud Computing 453  
PI4.6 Concerns and Risks with Cloud Computing 455  
PI4.7 Web Services and Service-Oriented  
Architecture 459  
Summary 462  
Glossary 463  
Discussion Questions 463  
Problem-Solving Activities 463  
Plug IT In 5 
Artificial  
Intelligence 
464  
PI5.1 Introduction to Artificial Intelligence 464  
PI5.2 Artificial Intelligence Technologies 466  
PI5.3 Artificial Intelligence Applications 470  
Summary 475  
Chapter Glossary 476  
Discussion Questions 476  
Problem-Solving Activities 476  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
CONTENTS xvii 
Plug IT In 6 
Project  
Management 
477  
PI6.1 Project Management for Information Systems 
Projects 477  
PI6.2 The Project Management Process 479  
PI6.3 The Project Management Body  
of Knowledge 482  
Summary 485  
Glossary 485  
Discussion Questions 485  
Collaboration Exercise PI6.1 486  
Problem-Solving Activities 486  
Plug IT In 7 
Protecting Your  
Information Assets 
488  
PI7.1 How to Protect Your Assets: The Basics 488  
PI7.2 Behavioral Actions to Protect Your Information  
Assets  489  
PI7.3 Computer-Based Actions to Protect Your  
Information Assets 492  
Summary 504  
Discussion Questions 505  
Problem-Solving Activities 506  
INDEX 507  

Management 
Information Systems 
Fourth Edition 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
STOCK4B-RF/Getty Images 
CHAPTER 1 
Introduction to Information 
Systems 
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
1.1  Why Should I Study Information 
Systems? 
1.2  Overview of Computer-Based Infor­
mation Systems 
1.3 How Does IT Impact Organizations? 
1.4  Importance of Information Systems 
to Society 
Opening Case 
MKT FanDuel 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
1.1  Identify the reasons why being an informed user of information systems is important 
in today’s world. 
1.2  Describe the various types of computer-based information systems in an organization. 
1.3  Discuss ways in which information technology can affect managers and nonmanage­
rial workers. 
1.4  Identify positive and negative societal effects of the increased use of information 
technology. 
Founded in 2009, FanDuel (www.fanduel.com) operates a 
POM Web-based fantasy sports game. It is the largest company in 
the daily fantasy sports business. In May 2016, FanDuel was legal in 39 
states, taking advantage of an exclusion in the 2006 Unlawful Internet 
Gambling Enforcement Act. This statute bans credit card issuers and 
banks from working with poker and sports-betting Web sites, eff ec­
tively preventing U.S. customers from participating in those industries. 
The law, however, exempts fantasy sports because they are con­
sidered a game of skill, not luck. To maintain legal status, the 
operator of a fantasy sports business must follow four rules: (1) 
publish prize amounts before the games begin, (2) make prize 
amounts independent of the number of players in the game, 
(3) level the playing field by allowing anyone in a league to draft 
any player they want, and (4) disregard point spreads and game 
scores. 
FanDuel delivers simple and fast fantasy betting. Aft er pay­
ing an entry fee, players become eligible to win daily cash payouts 
based on the statistical performance of athletes in games played 
1 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2  
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
that day. Traditional fantasy sports often frustrate players because the 
experience lasts for an entire season. If a player drafts a bad team, then 
he or she is stuck with that team for several months. In addition, seri­
ous fantasy league players analyze large amounts of statistics, roster 
changes, and injury reports. Many casual players do not have time for 
such analyses. In contrast to these leagues, FanDuel allows customers 
to play for just a day, a weekend, or a week. 
FanDuel lets players participate for free or bet up to $5000 to draft 
a team of players in the National Football League (NFL), the National 
Basketball Association (NBA), Major League Baseball (MLB), and the 
National Hockey League (NHL), plus college football and basketball. 
Players can compete head-to-head against another individual or in a 
league with up to 125,000 teams. The winner is the one with the best 
player statistics, which translate into fantasy points. FanDuel takes an 
average of 9 percent of each prize. 
By May 2016, FanDuel claimed more than 1 million customers 
MIS 
and operated in 39 states. However, the company was not yet 
profitable. It has to spend millions of dollars on computing power from 
Amazon Web Services to manage, as only one example, the increase in 
Web traffic just before Sunday’s NFL kickoff. At that time, FanDuel must 
manage 150,000 simultaneous users, who make 250,000 roster changes 
per hour. The company also provides 15 million live scoring updates per 
minute during games, meaning that it must manage 6 terabytes of net­
work traffic during game day. (A terabyte equals 1 trillion bytes.) 
Professional sports have noted that FanDuel, with its easy-to-use 
app, appeals to young and mobile sports fans. Further, these fans have 
money at stake, so they are more inclined to watch games on televi­
sion than they otherwise would be. An increase in viewers leads to an 
increase in advertising rates for the teams. In fact, in 2015 FanDuel 
signed multiyear sponsorship agreements with 15 NFL teams. These 
deals generally include stadium signage, radio and digital advertising, 
and other promotions. Interestingly, the NBA owns an equity stake in 
FanDuel. 
Despite continued success, daily fantasy sports companies face a 
substantive problem. They can operate only as long as the federal gov­
ernment allows them to do so. The government could close the fantasy 
loophole in the 2006 statute at any time. 
Significantly, the federal law does not give daily fantasy sports 
businesses immunity from state laws. In October 2015, New York Attor­
ney General Eric Schneiderman launched an inquiry into FanDuel and 
its chief rival DraftKings. Shortly thereafter, he ruled that the two com­
panies were operating illegally and issued a cease and desist order, 
ordering the two companies to stop taking bets in New York State. 
FanDuel, which is based in New York, said that it would check the 
locations of its users to ensure that they submitted entries from states 
where it is permitted to do so. Users who attempt to circumvent this 
decision could see their accounts terminated and FanDuel refuse to 
pay out any winnings. 
On the other hand, DraftKings, which is based in Massachusetts, 
sent an e-mail to its New York customers assuring them that they could 
continue submitting entries. DraftKings told its New York customer 
that their right to play in New York will remain unchanged unless a New 
York court decides otherwise. 
Interestingly, in the spring of 2016, FanDuel suspended contests 
on college sports in all states as part of a negotiation with the National 
Collegiate Athletic Association. 
And the bottom line? The legal battle continues. 
Sources: Compiled from D. Purdum, “DraftKings, FanDuel to Stop Offering 
College Fantasy Games,” ESPN.com, March 31, 2016; M. Brown, “FanDuel 
Lays Off Workers as Legal Pressure Mounts,” Forbes, January 20, 2016; 
R. Axon, “Facing Threat from N.Y. Attorney General, FanDuel Suspends 
Entries in State,” USA Today, November 17, 2015; L. Baker, “FanDuel, 
DraftKings Vow to Fight New York’s Halt on Bets,” Reuters, November 
12, 2015; D. Alba, “DraftKings and FanDuel Scandal Is a Cautionary 
Startup Tale,” Wired, October 9, 2015; D. Roberts, “Are DraftKings and 
FanDuel Legal?” Fortune, September 24, 2015; K. Wagner, “DraftKings 
and FanDuel Are Battling over Your Favorite Teams,” www.recode.net, 
July 17, 2015; R. Sandomir, “FanDuel and DraftKings, Leaders in Daily 
Fantasy Sports, Are Quickly Gaining Clout,” The New York Times, July 13, 
2015; S. Rodriguez, “Yahoo Enters World of Daily Fantasy Sports, Takes 
on DraftKings and FanDuel,” International Business Times, July 8, 2015; B. 
Schrotenboer, “FanDuel Signs Deals with 15 NFL Teams, Escalating Daily 
Fantasy Integration,” USA Today, April 21, 2015; D. Primack, “DraftKings 
and FanDuel Close in on Massive New Investments,” Fortune, April 6, 
2015; S. Ramachandran and Am Sharma, “Disney to Invest $250 Million in 
Fantasy Site DraftKings,” The Wall Street Journal, April 3, 2015; M. Kosoff, 
“Fantasy Sports Startup FanDuel May Soon Be Worth $1 Billion,” Business 
Insider, February 18, 2015; D. Heitner, “DraftKings Reports $304 Million on 
Entry Fees in 2014,” Forbes, January 22, 2015; S. Bertoni, “Fantasy Sports, 
Real Money,” Forbes, January 19, 2015; B. Schrotenboer, “Fantasy Sports 
Debate: Gambling or Not Gambling?” USA Today, January 12, 2015;  “The 
FanDuel Scam,” The Daily Roto, December 19, 2014; D. Heitner, “Fantasy 
Sports Service, FanDuel, Secures $11 Million Investment; Includes Money 
from Comcast Ventures,” Forbes, January 30, 2013; www.fanduel.com, 
www.draftkings.com, accessed July 17, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Describe how information technology is essential to FanDuel’s op­
erations. 
2.  Discuss the nontechnological problems that FanDuel faces. 
3.  Describe FanDuel’s information technology infrastructure. Now 
discuss possible technological problems that FanDuel might face. 
Introduction 
Before we proceed, we need to define information technology and information systems. Infor­
mation technology (IT) refers to any computer-based tool that people use to work with infor­
mation and to support the information and information-processing needs of an organization. 
An information system (IS) collects, processes, stores, analyzes, and disseminates informa­
tion for a specific purpose. 
IT has far-reaching effects on individuals, organizations, and our planet. Although this text 
is largely devoted to the many ways in which IT has transformed modern organizations, you 
will also learn about the significant impacts of IT on individuals and societies, the global econ­
omy, and our physical environment. In addition, IT is making our world smaller, enabling more 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Why Should I Study Information Systems? 3 
and more people to communicate, collaborate, and compete, thereby leveling the competitive 
playing field. 
When you graduate, you either will start your own business or you will work for an organi­
zation, whether it is public sector, private sector, for-profit, or not-for-profit. Your organization 
will have to survive and compete in an environment that has been radically transformed by 
information technology. This environment is global, massively interconnected, intensely com­
petitive, 24/7/365, real-time, rapidly changing, and information-intensive. To compete success­
fully, your organization must use IT eff ectively. 
As you read this chapter and this text, keep in mind that the information technologies you 
will learn about are important to businesses of all sizes. No matter what area of business you 
major in, what industry you work for, or the size of your company, you will benefit from learning 
about IT. Who knows? Maybe you will use the tools you learn about in this class to make your 
great idea a reality by becoming an entrepreneur and starting your own business! In fact, as 
you see in the chapter opening case and in chapter closing case 2, you can use information 
technology to help you start your own business. 
The modern environment is intensely competitive not only for your organization, but for 
you as well. You must compete with human talent from around the world. Therefore, you will 
also have to make effective use of IT. 
Accordingly, this chapter begins with a discussion of why you should become knowledge­
able about IT. It also distinguishes among data, information, and knowledge, and it diff erenti­
ates computer-based information systems from application programs. Finally, it considers the 
impacts of information systems on organizations and on society in general. 
1.1 Why Should I Study Information Systems? 
You are part of the most connected generation in history: You have grown up online; you are, 
quite literally, never out of touch; you use more information technologies (in the form of digital 
devices), for more tasks, and are bombarded with more information, than any generation in 
history. The MIT Technology Review refers to you as Homo conexus. Information technologies 
are so deeply embedded in your lives that your daily routines would be almost unrecognizable 
to a college student just 20 years ago. 
Essentially, you practice continuous computing, surrounded by a movable information 
network. This network is created by constant cooperation between the digital devices you 
carry (for example, laptops, tablets, and smartphones); the wired and wireless networks that 
you access as you move about; and Web-based tools for finding information and communicat­
ing and collaborating with other people. Your network enables you to pull information about 
virtually anything from anywhere, at any time, and to push your own ideas back to the Web, 
from wherever you are, via a mobile device. Think of everything you do online, often with your 
smart phone: register for classes; take classes (and not just at your university); access class syl­
labi, information, PowerPoints, and lectures; research class papers and presentations; conduct 
banking; pay your bills; research, shop, and buy products from companies or other people; sell 
your “stuff”; search for, and apply for, jobs; make your travel reservations (hotel, airline, rental 
car); create your own blog and post your own podcasts and videocasts to it; design your own 
page on Facebook; make and upload videos to YouTube; take, edit, and print your own digital 
photographs; “burn” your own custom-music CDs and DVDs; use RSS feeds to create your per­
sonal electronic newspaper; text and tweet your friends and family throughout your day; send 
Snaps; and many other activities. (Note: If any of these terms are unfamiliar to you, don’t worry. 
You will learn about everything mentioned here in detail later in this text.) 
The Informed User—You! 
So, the question is: Why you should learn about information systems and information technol­
ogies? After all, you can comfortably use a computer (or other electronic devices) to perform 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
MIS 
MIS 
FIGURE 1.1 IT skills open many 
doors because IT is so widely used. 
many activities, you have been surfing the Web for years, and you feel confident that you can 
manage any IT application that your organization’s MIS department installs. 
The answer lies in you becoming an informed user; that is, a person knowledgeable about 
information systems and information technology. There are several reasons why you should be 
an informed user. 
In general, informed users tend to get more value from whatever technologies they use. 
You will enjoy many benefits from being an informed user of IT, including: 
• You will benefit more from your organization’s IT applications because you will understand 
what is “behind” those applications (see Figure 1.1). That is, what you see on your computer 
screen is brought to you by your MIS department, who are operating “behind” your screen. 
• You will be in a position to enhance the quality of your organization’s IT applications with 
your input. 
• Even as a new graduate, you will quickly be in a position to recommend—and perhaps help 
select—the IT applications that your organization will use. 
• Being an informed user will keep you abreast of both new information technologies and 
rapid developments in existing technologies. Remaining “on top of things” will help you to 
anticipate the impacts that “new and improved” technologies will have on your organiza­
tion and to make recommendations on the adoption and use of these technologies. 
• You will understand how using IT can improve your organization’s performance and team­
work as well as your own productivity. 
• If you have ideas of becoming an entrepreneur, then being an informed user will help you 
use IT when you start your own business. 
Going further, managing the IS function within an organization is no longer the exclusive 
responsibility of the IS department. Rather, users now play key roles in every step of this pro­
cess. The overall objective in this text is to provide you with the necessary information to con­
tribute immediately to managing the IS function in your organization. In short, the goal is to 
help you become a very informed user! 
IT Offers Career Opportunities 
Because IT is vital to the operation of modern businesses, it offers  many employment oppor­
tunities. The demand for traditional IT staff—programmers, business analysts, systems ana­
lysts, and designers—is substantial. In addition, many well-paid jobs exist in areas such as the 
Internet and electronic commerce (e-commerce), mobile commerce (m-commerce), network 
security, telecommunications, and multimedia design. A photograph depicting a lady working on a computer. A vertical dashed line divides the photograph into two. The left part comprising the lady denotes the users and the right part comprising the computer denotes MIS.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Why Should I Study Information Systems? 5 
The IS field includes the people in various organizations who design and build information 
systems, the people who use those systems, and the people responsible for managing those 
systems. At the top of the list is the chief information off icer (CIO). 
The CIO is the executive who is in charge of the IS function. In most modern organizations, 
the CIO works with the chief executive officer (CEO), the chief financial officer (CFO), and other 
senior executives. Therefore, he or she actively participates in the organization’s strategic plan­
ning process. In today’s digital environment, the IS function has become increasingly strategic 
within organizations. As a result, although most CIOs still rise from the IS department, a grow­
ing number are coming up through the ranks in the business units (e.g., marketing, finance). 
Regardless of your major, you could become the CIO of your organization one day. This is 
another reason to be an informed user of information systems! 
Table 1.1 provides a list of IT jobs, along with a description of each one. For further details 
about careers in IT, see www.computerworld.com/careertopics/careers and www.monster.com. 
Career opportunities in IS are strong and are projected to remain strong over the next ten 
years. In fact, the U.S. News & World Report listed its “25 best jobs of 2015,” Money listed its “best 
jobs in America for 2015,” and Forbes listed its “10 best jobs” for 2015. Let’s take a look at these 
rankings. (Note that the rankings differ because the magazines used different criteria in their 
TABLE 1.1
 Information Technology Jobs 
Position 
Job Description 
Chief Information Officer 
Highest-ranking IS manager; responsible for all strategic 
planning in the organization 
IS Director  
Manages all systems throughout the organization and the 
day-to-day operations of the entire IS organization 
Information Center Manager  
Manages IS services such as help desks, hot lines, train­
ing, and consulting 
Applications Development Manager  
Coordinates and manages new systems development 
projects 
Project Manager  
Manages a particular new systems development project 
Systems Manager  
Manages a particular existing system 
Operations Manager  
Supervises the day-to-day operations of the data and/or 
computer center 
Programming Manager  
Coordinates all applications programming efforts 
Systems Analyst  
Interfaces between users and programmers; determines 
information requirements and technical specifications 
for new applications 
Business Analyst  
Focuses on designing solutions for business problems; 
interfaces closely with users to demonstrate how IT can 
be used innovatively 
Systems Programmer  
Creates the computer code for developing new systems 
software or maintaining existing systems software 
Applications Programmer  
Creates the computer code for developing new applica­
tions or maintaining existing applications 
Emerging Technologies Manager  
Forecasts technology trends; evaluates and experiments 
with new technologies 
Network Manager  
Coordinates and manages the organization’s voice and 
data networks 
Database Administrator  
Manages the organization’s databases and oversees the 
use of database-management software 
Auditing or Computer Security Manager  
Oversees the ethical and legal use of information systems 
Webmaster  
Manages the organization’sWeb site 
Web Designer  
Creates Web sites and pages 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
research.) As you can see, jobs suited for MIS majors rank extremely high in all three lists. The 
magazines with their job rankings are as follows: 
U.S. News & World Report (out of 25) 
#3 Soft ware Developer 
#7 Computer System Analyst 
#8 Information Security Analyst 
#11 Web Developer 
#21 IT Manager 
Money 
#1 Soft ware Architect 
#2 Video Game Designer 
#8 Database Developer 
#9 Information Assurance (Security) Analyst 
#11 Clinical Applications Specialist (IT in healthcare) 
#14 User Experience Designer 
#17 IT Program Manager 
Forbes (out of 10) 
#8 Soft ware Engineer 
#10 Computer Systems Analyst 
Not only do IS careers offer strong job growth, but the pay is excellent as well. The Bureau of 
Labor Statistics, an agency within the Department of Labor that is responsible for tracking and 
analyzing trends relating to the labor market, notes that the median salary in 2015 for “com­
puter and information systems managers” was approximately $130,000, and predicted that the 
profession would grow by an average of 15 percent per year through 2022. 
Managing Information Resources 
Managing information systems in modern organizations is a difficult, complex task. Several fac­
tors contribute to this complexity. First, information systems have enormous strategic value 
to organizations. Firms rely on them so heavily that, in some cases, when these systems are 
not working (even for a short time), the firm cannot function. (This situation is called “being 
hostage to information systems.”) Second, information systems are very expensive to acquire, 
operate, and maintain. 
A third factor contributing to the difficulty in managing information systems is the evo­
lution of the management information systems (MIS) function within the organization. When 
businesses first began to use computers in the early 1950s, the MIS department “owned” the 
only computing resource in the organization, the mainframe. At that time, end users did not 
interact directly with the mainframe. 
In contrast, in the modern organization, computers are located in all departments, and 
almost all employees use computers in their work. This situation, known as end user com­
puting, has led to a partnership between the MIS department and the end users. The MIS 
department now acts as more of a consultant to end users, viewing them as customers. 
In fact, the main function of the MIS department is to use IT to solve end users’ business 
problems. 

 
 
 Why Should I Study Information Systems? 7 
MIS
As a result of these developments, the responsibility for managing information resources 
is now divided between the MIS department and the end users. This arrangement raises several 
important questions: Which resources are managed by whom? What is the role of the MIS 
department, its structure, and its place within the organization? What is the appropriate rela­
tionship between the MIS department and the end users? Regardless of who is doing what, it is 
essential that the MIS department and the end users work in close cooperation. 
There is no standard way to divide responsibility for developing and maintaining informa­
tion resources between the MIS department and the end users. Instead, that division depends 
on several factors: the size and nature of the organization, the amount and type of IT resources, 
the organization’s attitudes toward computing, the attitudes of top management toward com­
puting, the maturity level of the technology, the amount and nature of outsourced IT work, and 
even the countries in which the company operates. Generally speaking, the MIS department 
is responsible for corporate-level and shared resources, and the end users are responsible for 
departmental resources. Table 1.2 identifies both the traditional functions and various new, 
consultative functions of the MIS department. 
 The Changing Role of the Information Systems Department 
TABLE 1.2
Traditional Functions of the MIS Department 
Managing systems development and systems project management 
• As an end user, you will have critical input into the systems development process. You will learn 
about systems development in Chapter 13. 
Managing computer operations, including the computer center 
Staffing, training, and developing IS skills 
Providing technical services 
Infrastructure planning, development, and control 
•  As an end user, you will provide critical input about the IS infrastructure needs of your department. 
New (Consultative) Functions of the MIS Department 
Initiating and designing specific strategic information systems 
• As an end user, your information needs will often mandate the development of new strategic infor­
mation systems. 
You will decide which strategic systems you need (because you know your business needs better than 
the MIS department does), and you will provide input into developing these systems. 
Incorporating the Internet and electronic commerce into the business 
•  As an end user, you will be primarily responsible for effectively using the Internet and electronic 
commerce in your business. You will work with the MIS department to accomplish this task. 
Managing system integration including the Internet, intranets, and extranets 
•  As an end user, your business needs will determine how you want to use the Internet, your corpo­
rate intranets, and extranets to accomplish your goals. You will be primarily responsible for advis­
ing the MIS department on the most effective use of the Internet, your corporate intranets, and 
extranets. 
Educating the non-MIS managers about IT 
•  Your department will be primarily responsible for advising the MIS department on how best to edu­
cate and train your employees about IT. 
Educating the MIS staff about the business 
•  Communication between the MIS department and the business units is a two-way street. You will 
be responsible for educating the MIS staff on your business, its needs, and its goals. 
Partnering with business-unit executives 
•  Essentially, you will be in a partnership with the MIS department. You will be responsible for seeing 
that this partnership is one “between equals” and ensuring its success. 
(Continued ) 

 
 
 
 
8 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
Managing outsourcing 
•  Outsourcing is driven by business needs. Therefore, the outsourcing decision resides largely with 
the business units (i.e., with you). The MIS department, working closely with you, will advise you on 
technical issues such as communications bandwidth, security, as well as other issues. 
Proactively using business and technical knowledge to seed innovative ideas about IT 
•  Your business needs often will drive innovative ideas about how to effectively use information sys­
tems to accomplish your goals. The best way to bring these innovative uses of IS to life is to partner 
closely with your MIS department. Such close partnerships have amazing synergies! 
Creating business alliances with business partners 
• The needs of your business unit will drive these alliances, typically along your supply chain. Again, 
your MIS department will act as your advisor on various issues, including hardware and software 
compatibility, implementing extranets, communications, and security. 
So, where do the end users come in? Take a close look at Table 1.2. Under the traditional 
MIS functions, you will see two functions for which you provide vital input: managing systems 
development and infrastructure planning. Under the consultative MIS functions, in contrast, 
you exercise the primary responsibility for each function, while the MIS department acts as 
your advisor. 
Before you go on…
 1. Rate yourself as an informed user. (Be honest; this isn’t a test!)
 2. Explain the benefits of being an informed user of information systems.
 3. Discuss the various career opportunities offered in the IT field. 
Apply the Concept 1.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1.1 Identify the reasons why 
work effectively with computers, regardless of the industry you  
being an informed user of information systems is important in 
find yourself employed in.   
today’s world.  
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you do.) 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
Visit the Web sites of three local businesses: a bank, a dentist, 
Section 1.1 discussed how businesses are utilizing modern 
and a retail shop. Examine their information to see if you can 
technologies to become more productive by connecting to 
determine what types of information systems they use to support 
their customers, suppliers, partners, and other parties. Those 
their operations. It is likely that you will find some similarities 
connections, however, do not exist simply to support the 
and differences among the three. Also, see if they have any open 
businesses. Do you realize how connected you are? Computers 
positions. If they do, what technical skills do these positions 
and information systems have become an essential feature of 
require? Summarize your findings in a paragraph or two.  
our everyday lives. Most of you have a cell phone within reach 
and have looked at it within the past 5 minutes. No longer is a 
STEP 3: Assignment (Here is what you turn in.) 
phone just a phone; rather, it is your connection to family, friends, 
Based on your research, identify five reasons why it is important 
shopping, driving directions, entertainment (games, movies, 
for you to be an informed user of information technology. 
music, etc.), and much more. 
Reference your summarized findings to support your reasoning. 
When you embark on your career, you likely will have to interface 
Submit this list to your instructor, but also keep it in mind. You 
with information systems to post transactions and search for or 
have just looked into the real world (your local world, in fact) and 
record information. Accomplishing these tasks will require you to 
identified a reason for taking this course! 

 
 
 
 
 
Overview of Computer-Based Information Systems 9 
1.2 Overview of Computer-Based 
Information Systems 
Organizations refer to their management information systems functional area by several 
names, including the MIS Department, the Information Systems (IS) Department, the Informa­
tion Technology (IT) Department, and the Information Services Department. Regardless of the 
name, however, this functional area deals with the planning for—and the development, man­
agement, and use of—information technology tools to help people perform all the tasks related 
to information processing and management. Recall that information technology relates to 
any computer-based tool that people use to work with information and to support the informa­
tion and information-processing needs of an organization. 
As previously stated, an information system collects, processes, stores, analyzes, and 
disseminates information for a specific purpose. The purpose of information systems has 
been defined as getting the right information to the right people, at the right time, in the right 
amount, and in the right format. Because information systems are intended to supply useful 
information, we need to differentiate between information and two closely related terms: data 
and knowledge (see Figure 1.2). 
Data items refer to an elementary description of things, events, activities, and transac­
tions that are recorded, classified, and stored but are not organized to convey any specific 
meaning. Data items can be numbers, letters, figures, sounds, and images. Examples of data 
items are collections of numbers (e.g., 3.11, 2.96, 3.95, 1.99, 2.08) and characters (e.g., B, A, C, 
A, B, D, F, C). 
Information refers to data that have been organized so that they have meaning and value 
to the recipient. For example, a grade point average (GPA) by itself is data, but a student’s name 
coupled with his or her GPA is information. The recipient interprets the meaning and draws On the top left corner is a photograph depicting a screen displaying binary numbers (data). From here an arrow points at a photograph depicting a man holding a rolling suitcase and looking at a stock market screen (information). From this photograph another arrow points at a photograph depicting an open book and a light bulb (knowledge).
FIGURE 1.2  Data, Information, 
and Knowledge 

 
 
 
 
 
  
10 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
conclusions and implications from the information. Consider the examples of data provided in 
the preceding paragraph. Within the context of a university, the numbers could be grade point 
averages, and the letters could be grades in an Introduction to MIS class. 
Knowledge consists of data and/or information that have been organized and processed 
to convey understanding, experience, accumulated learning, and expertise as they apply to a 
current business problem. For example, suppose that a company recruiting at your school has 
found over time that students with grade point averages over 3.0 have experienced the great­
est success in its management program. Based on this accumulated knowledge, that company 
may decide to interview only those students with GPAs over 3.0. This example presents an 
example of knowledge because the company utilizes information—GPAs—to address a busi­
ness problem—hiring successful employees. As you can see from this example, organizational 
knowledge, which reflects the experience and expertise of many people, has great value to all 
employees. 
Consider this example: 
Data 
Information 
Knowledge 
[No context] 
[University context] 
3.16 
3.16 + John Jones = GPA 
* Job prospects 
2.92 
2.92 + Sue Smith = GPA 
* Graduate school prospects 
1.39 
1.39 + Kyle Owens = GPA 
* Scholarship prospects 
3.95 
3.95 + Tom Elias = GPA 
Data 
Information 
Knowledge 
[No context] 
[Professional baseball pitcher 
context] 
3.16 
3.16 + Ken Rice = ERA 
2.92  
2.92 + Ed Dyas = ERA 
* Keep pitcher, trade pitcher, or 
send pitcher to minor leagues 
1.39 
1.39 + Hugh Carr = ERA  
* Salary/contract negotiations 
3.95 
3.95 + Nick Ford = ERA 
GPA = Grade point average (higher is better) 
ERA = Earned run average (lower is better); ERA is the number of runs per nine innings that a pitcher 
surrenders. 
You see that the same data items, with no context, can mean entirely different things in diff er­
ent contexts. 
Now that you have a clearer understanding of data, information, and knowledge, let’s shift 
our focus to computer-based information systems. As you have seen, these systems process 
data into information and knowledge that you can use. 
A computer-based information system (CBIS) is an information system that uses com­
puter technology to perform some or all of its intended tasks. Although not all information 
systems are computerized, today most are. For this reason the term “information system” is 
typically used synonymously with “computer-based information system.” The basic compo­
nents of computer-based information systems are listed below. The first four are called infor­
mation technology components. Figure 1.3 illustrates how these four components interact 
to form a CBIS. 
•  Hardware consists of devices such as the processor, monitor, keyboard, and printer. 
Together, these devices accept, process, and display data and information. 
•  Soft ware is a program or collection of programs that enable the hardware to process data. 
• A database is a collection of related files or tables containing data. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview of Computer-Based Information Systems 11 
FIGURE 1.3 It takes technology 
(hardware, soft ware, databases, 
and networks) with appropriate 
procedures to make a CBIS useful 
for people. The top left corner depicts the computer hardware, top right corner depicts database, and bottom left and right corners denote software and network, respectively. All four point arrows at a photograph in the center denoting computer-based information system.
• A network is a connecting system (wireline or wireless) that permits diff erent computers  
to share resources.  
•  Procedures are the instructions for combining the above components to process informa­
tion and generate the desired output.  
• People use the hardware and software, interface with it, or utilize its output. 
Figure 1.4 illustrates how these components are integrated to form the wide variety of infor­
mation systems found within an organization. Starting at the bottom of the figure, you see 
that the IT components of hardware, software, networks (wireline and wireless), and databases 
FIGURE 1.4  Information technol­
ogy inside your organization. Figure depicting information technology inside your organization. At the bottom are three steps denoting IT infrastructure and from bottom to top the steps denote IT components, personnel, and services, respectively. Above IT services is transaction processing systems on which five pillars denoting enterprise resource planning systems are present. From left to right the pillars denote accounting IS, finance IS, production/operation management IS, marketing IS, and human resources IS. Above the pillars is a pyramid denoting business intelligence systems dashboards.

 
 
 
 
 
 
FIN
12 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
form the information technology platform. IT personnel use these components to develop 
information systems, oversee security and risk, and manage data. These activities cumulatively 
are called information technology services. The IT components plus IT services comprise the 
organization’s information technology infrastructure. At the top of the pyramid are the var­
ious organizational information systems. 
Computer-based information systems have many capabilities. Table 1.3 summarizes the 
most important ones. 
Information systems perform these various tasks via a wide spectrum of applications. An 
application (or app) is a computer program designed to support a specific task or business 
process. (A synonymous term is application program.) Each functional area or department 
within a business organization uses dozens of application programs. For instance, the human 
resources department sometimes uses one application for screening job applicants and 
another for monitoring employee turnover. The collection of application programs in a single 
department is usually referred to as a departmental information system (also known as a 
functional area information system). For example, the collection of application programs 
in the human resources area is called the human resources information system (HRIS). 
There are collections of application programs—that is, departmental information systems—in 
the other functional areas as well, such as accounting, finance, marketing, and production/ 
operations. 
Types of Computer-Based Information Systems 
Modern organizations employ many different types of information systems. Figure 1.4 illus­
trates the different types of information systems that function within a single organization, 
and Figure 1.5 shows the different types of information systems that function among multiple 
organizations. You will study transaction processing systems, management information sys­
tems, and enterprise resource planning systems in Chapter 11. You will learn about customer 
relationship management (CRM) systems in Chapter 12 and supply chain management (SCM) 
systems in Chapter 13. 
In the next section you will learn about the numerous and diverse types of information sys­
tems employed by modern organizations. You will also read about the types of support these 
systems provide. 
Breadth of Support of Information Systems. Certain information systems support 
parts of organizations, others support entire organizations, and still others support groups of 
organizations. This section addresses all of these systems. 
Recall that each department or functional area within an organization has its own collec­
tion of application programs, or information systems. These functional area information sys­
tems (FAISs) are supporting pillars for the information systems located at the top of  Figure 1.4, 
namely, business intelligence systems and dashboards. As the name suggests, each FAIS sup­
ports a particular functional area within the organization. Examples are accounting IS, finance 
IS, production/operations management (POM) IS, marketing IS, and human resources IS. 
ACCT 
FIN 
Consider these examples of IT systems in the various functional areas of an organization. 
In finance and accounting, managers use IT systems to forecast revenues and business activity, 
 Major Capabilities of Information Systems 
TABLE 1.3
Perform high-speed, high-volume numerical computations. 
Provide fast, accurate communication and collaboration within and among organizations.  
Store huge amounts of information in an easy-to-access, yet small space.  
Allow quick and inexpensive access to vast amounts of information, worldwide.  
Analyze and interpret vast amounts of data quickly and efficiently.  
Automate both semiautomatic business processes and manual tasks.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview of Computer-Based Information Systems 13 Figure depicting information system that functions among multiple organizations, where a triangle in the center denotes your organization. The left arm of the triangle denotes  supply chain management and the right arm denotes customer relationship management. An ellipse at the bottom left denotes suppliers (B2B) and ellipses on the right top and bottom denote customers (B2C) and business (B2B), respectively. A curved arrow from suppliers representing materials point at the left arm of triangle. From the right arm of triangle arrows denoting physical products point at both the ellipses on the right-hand side. A relationship of online orders, payments, products, and information exists between the triangle and the ellipses.
FIGURE 1.5 Information systems that function among multiple organizations. 
to determine the best sources and uses of funds, and to perform audits to ensure that the 
organization is fundamentally sound and that all financial reports and documents are accu­
rate. 
In sales and marketing, managers use information technology to perform the following 
functions: 
MKT 
• Product analysis: Developing new goods and services. 
• Site analysis: Determining the best location for production and distribution facilities. 
• Promotion analysis: Identifying the best advertising channels. 
• Price analysis: Setting product prices to obtain the highest total revenues. 
Marketing managers also use IT to manage their relationships with their customers. In man­
ufacturing, managers use IT to process customer orders, develop production schedules, con­
trol inventory levels, and monitor product quality. They also use IT to design and manufacture 
products. These processes are called computer-assisted design (CAD) and computer-assisted 
manufacturing (CAM). 
Managers in human resources use IT to manage the recruiting process, analyze and screen 
job applicants, and hire new employees. They also employ IT to help employees manage their 
careers, to administer performance tests to employees, and to monitor employee productivity. 
Finally, they rely on IT to manage compensation and benefits packages. 
Two information systems that support the entire organization, enterprise resource plan­
ning systems and transaction processing systems, are designed to correct a lack of communi­
cation among the functional area ISs. For this reason Figure 1.4 shows ERP systems spanning 
the FAISs. ERP systems were an important innovation because the various functional area ISs 
were often developed as standalone systems and did not communicate effectively (if at all) 
with one another. ERP systems resolve this problem by tightly integrating the functional area 
ISs via a common database. In doing so, they enhance communications among the functional 
areas of an organization. For this reason, experts credit ERP systems with greatly increasing 
organizational productivity. 
A transaction processing system (TPS) supports the monitoring, collection, storage, and 
processing of data from the organization’s basic business transactions, each of which generates 
POM 
HRM 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
data. When you are checking out at Walmart, for example, a transaction occurs each time the 
cashier swipes an item across the bar code reader. Significantly, within an organization, dif­
ferent functions or departments can define a transaction differently. In accounting, for exam­
ple, a transaction is anything that changes a firm’s chart of accounts. The information system 
definition of a transaction is broader: A transaction is anything that changes the firm’s data­
base. The chart of accounts is only part of the firm’s database. Consider a scenario in which a 
student transfers from one section of an Introduction to MIS course to another section. This 
move would be a transaction to the university’s information system, but not to the university’s 
accounting department (the tuition would not change). 
The TPS collects data continuously, typically in real time—that is, as soon as the data are 
generated—and it provides the input data for the corporate databases. TPSs are considered 
critical to the success of any enterprise because they support core operations. Significantly, 
nearly all ERP systems are also TPSs, but not all TPSs are ERP systems. In fact, modern ERP sys­
tems incorporate many functions that previously were handled by the organization’s functional 
area information systems. You study both TPSs and ERP systems in detail in Chapter 11. 
ERP systems and TPSs function primarily within a single organization. Information sys­
tems that connect two or more organizations are referred to as interorganizational informa­
tion systems (IOSs). IOSs support many interorganizational operations, of which supply chain 
management is the best known. An organization’s supply chain is the flow of materials, infor­
mation, money, and services from suppliers of raw materials through factories and warehouses 
to the end customers. 
Note that the supply chain in Figure 1.5 shows physical flows, information flows, and finan­
cial flows. Digitizable products are those that can be represented in electronic form, such as 
music and software. Information flows, financial flows, and digitizable products go through 
the Internet, whereas physical products are shipped. For example, when you order a computer 
from www.dell.com, your information goes to Dell via the Internet. When your transaction is 
completed (that is, your credit card is approved and your order is processed), Dell ships your 
computer to you. (We discuss supply chains in more detail in Chapter 13.) 
Electronic commerce (e-commerce) systems are another type of interorganizational 
information system. These systems enable organizations to conduct transactions, called busi­
ness-to-business (B2B) electronic commerce, and customers to conduct transactions with 
businesses, called business-to-consumer (B2C) electronic commerce. E-commerce systems 
typically are Internet-based. Figure 1.5 illustrates B2B and B2C electronic commerce. Electronic 
commerce systems are so important that we discuss them in detail in Chapter 7, with additional 
examples interspersed throughout the text. IT’s About Business 1.1 shows how information sys­
tems have enabled two roadside assistance companies to grow rapidly via e-commerce. 
IT’s About Business 1.1 
Disrupting the Roadside Assistance Industry 
Roadside assistance is a $10-billion industry in the United States, en­
compassing a range of services including accidents, dead batteries, 
flat tires, towing services, tire services, fuel services, and locksmith 
services. Today, the industry faces disruption from technology com­
panies that are replacing call centers with algorithms that dispatch 
the nearest vehicle to help a driver who is locked out of his car or to 
winch a car out of a ditch. These companies provide an on-demand al­
ternative to paying for insurance plans that drivers might not use or to 
having to call a tow company without knowing how much it charges. 
Two of these companies, Urgent.ly (http://urgent.ly) and Honk 
(www.honkforhelp.com), offer flat rates, promise quick response 
times, and provide maps in their apps that display the location of 
the company vehicle, with real-time updates. The companies do 
not charge annual membership fees, unlike the American Automo­
bile Association (AAA; www.aaa.com). 
Customers are not limited to particular tow-truck operators. 
The companies call the closest service vehicle to the customer, 
which can arrive in less than half the time and cost up to half the 
amounts charged by industry competitors. A basic roadside service 
costs $49. Before users click for service, they are informed in ad­
vance of the total fee, which they pay via credit card. 
These app-based roadside assistance services also benefit 
tow-truck drivers, most of whom work as independents or for small 
operators. The traditional towing industry relies on receiving book­
ings from a central dispatcher, such as the AAA. Those drivers get 
an average of $23 per call, even though customers are typically 
charged $200. Drivers for Urgent.ly and Honk earn nearly double 
the traditional fee, mostly because these services don’t need call 
centers. These drivers can also complete more calls in a day be­
cause the apps use algorithms for dispatching and the drivers use 
GPS-enabled smartphones. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview of Computer-Based Information Systems 15 
Drivers for Urgent.ly and Honk work as contractors, not em-
number of call-and-cancel orders in 2014 that it traced to AAA em­
ployees, using the apps to find customers. The services only work 
ployees. An AAA spokesperson acknowledged that the organization 
with established towing companies, which must have their own 
does “mystery shop” to determine how the comparable services 
business licenses and insurance, so that they are covered in the 
compare. 
event of accidents or other mishaps. The drivers must also add 
Urgent.ly and Honk to their insurance policies and get extra insur-
Sources: Compiled from A. Goodwin, “Urgent.ly Is Like Uber for 
ance for general liability. The apps check out towing companies’ 
Roadside Assistance,” CNET, June 11, 2015; J. Biggs, “Urgent.ly Is 
customer reviews before signing them on to the services.  
Uber for When Your Ride Breaks Down,” TechCrunch, February 14, 
2015; “Honk for Help: The Roadside Assistance Startup,” Insurance 
Urgent.ly and Honk face intense competition from both the 
Zebra, February, 12 2015; R. Rudnansky, “Roadside Assistance Apps 
AAA and car manufacturers that offer roadside assistance. Well-
Challenging AAA,” Travel Pulse, December 11, 2014; K. Owram, “Watch 
known examples are General Motors’ OnStar (www.onstar.com), 
Out, CAA: New Roadside Assistance Apps Seeking to ‘Revolutionize’ 
BMW, Volvo, Lexus, Acura, Mazda, Audi, and Ferrari. The AAA, a 
Towing Industry,” Financial Post, December 9, 2014; C. Elliott, “Have 
nonprofit organization, is a federation of 43 motor clubs dispersed 
Roadside Assistance Apps Replaced AAA?” Outside, December 4, 2014; 
throughout the United States. The organization responds to more  
K. Steinmetz, “There’s an App for the Next Time Your Car Breaks 
than 30 million calls per year. Members typically receive travel  
Down,” Time, December 1, 2014; M. Carney, “Forget AAA: Honk Is a 
Nationwide On-Demand Towing Platform Fueled by Technology,” 
discounts or other membership perks. In addition, the AAA off ers 
Pando, November 19, 2014; R. Gray, “Honk Is a New App that Offers 
members four free tows per year. 
Help on the Highway,” Fox News, November 19, 2014; http://urgent.ly,
Each AAA motor club can customize its offerings. For example, 
www.honkforhelp.com, accessed July 19, 2015. 
in late 2014, the Mid-Atlantic club launched RescueMeNow (www. 
rescuemenow.co), a Web-based on-demand service for nonmem-
Questions
bers, which comes with a follow-up contract enticing users to join 
1. Discuss how information technology enables the business 
the organization. 
models of the Urgent.ly and Honk apps.
The AAA does not disclose how much its towing-service con­
tractors are paid. However, tow-truck operators state that the 
2. Describe the advantages and disadvantages of Urgent.ly and 
amount is about $25 per call. One towing-service company owner 
Honk for customers and for tow-truck operators. 
claimed he makes about $75 if the same call comes through his Ur­
3. Would you use Urgent.ly or Honk? Why or why not? 
gent.ly app. Like Uber, both startups take about 25 percent of the 
4. If you were the CEO of AAA, how would you compete with 
total cost, and the driver keeps the rest. 
Urgent.ly and Honk? Provide specific examples in your 
How intense is the competition between the established or-
answer. 
ganizations and the disrupters? Honk maintains that it received a 
Support for Organizational Employees. So far, you have concentrated on information 
systems that support specific functional areas and operations. Now you will learn about infor­
mation systems that typically support particular employees within the organization. 
Clerical workers, who support managers at all levels of the organization, include bookkeep­
ers, secretaries, electronic file clerks, and insurance claim processors. Lower-level managers 
handle the day-to-day operations of the organization, making routine decisions such as assign­
ing tasks to employees and placing purchase orders. Middle managers make tactical decisions, 
which deal with activities such as short-term planning, organizing, and control. 
Knowledge workers are professional employees such as financial and marketing ana­
lysts, engineers, lawyers, and accountants. All knowledge workers are experts in a particular 
subject area. They create information and knowledge, which they integrate into the business. 
Knowledge workers, in turn, act as advisors to middle managers and executives. Finally, exec­
utives make decisions that deal with situations that can significantly change the manner in 
which business is done. Examples of executive decisions are introducing a new product line, 
acquiring other businesses, and relocating operations to a foreign country. 
Office automation systems (OASs) typically support the clerical staff, lower and middle 
managers, and knowledge workers. These employees use OASs to develop documents (word 
processing and desktop publishing software), schedule resources (electronic calendars), and 
communicate (e-mail, voice mail, videoconferencing, and groupware). 
Functional area information systems summarize data and prepare reports, primarily for 
middle managers, but sometimes for lower-level managers as well. Because these reports typi­
cally concern a specific functional area, report generators (RPGs) are an important type of func­
tional area IS. 
Business intelligence (BI) systems provide computer-based support for complex, non-
routine decisions, primarily for middle managers and knowledge workers. (They also support 
lower-level managers, but to a lesser extent.) These systems are typically used with a data 

 
16 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
warehouse, and they enable users to perform their own data analysis. You learn about BI sys­
tems in Chapter 5. 
Expert systems (ES) attempt to duplicate the work of human experts by applying reason­
ing capabilities, knowledge, and expertise within a specific domain. They have become valu­
able in many application areas, primarily but not exclusively areas involving decision making. 
For example, navigation systems use rules to select routes, but we do not typically think of 
these systems as expert systems. Significantly, expert systems can operate as standalone sys­
tems or be embedded in other applications. We examine ESs in greater detail in Plug IT In 5. 
Dashboards (also called digital dashboards) are a special form of IS that support all man­
agers of the organization. They provide rapid access to timely information and direct access to 
structured information in the form of reports. Dashboards that are tailored to the information 
needs of executives are called executive dashboards. Chapter 5 provides a thorough discussion 
of dashboards. 
Table 1.4 provides an overview of the different types of information systems used by 
organizations. 
TABLE 1.4
 Types of Organizational Information Systems 
Type of System 
Function 
Example 
Functional area IS 
Supports the activities within spe­
cific functional area. 
System for processing payroll 
Transaction processing system 
Enterprise resource planning 
Office automation system 
Management information 
system 
Decision support system 
Expert system 
Executive dashboard 
Supply chain management 
system 
Electronic commerce system 
Processes transaction data from 
terminal 
Integrates all functional areas of 
the organization. 
Supports daily work activities of 
individuals and groups. 
Produces reports summarized 
from transaction data, usually in 
one functional area. 
Provides access to data and 
analysis tools. 
Mimics human expert in a particu­
lar area and makes decisions. 
Presents structured, summarized 
information about aspects of 
business important to executives. 
Manages flows of products, ser­
vices, and information among 
organizations. 
Enables transactions among orga­
nizations and between organiza­
tions and customers. 
Walmart checkout point-of-sale 
business events 
Oracle, SAP system 
Microsoft® Office 
Report on total sales for each 
customer 
“What-if” analysis of changes in 
budget 
Credit card approval analysis 
Status of sales by product 
Walmart Retail Link system con­
necting suppliers to Walmart 
www.dell.com 
Before you go on…
 1. What is a computer-based information system?
 2. Describe the components of computer-based information systems.
 3. What is an application program?
 4. Explain how information systems provide support for knowledge workers.
 5. As we move up the organization’s hierarchy from clerical workers to executives, how does the type of 
support provided by information systems change? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How Does IT Impact Organizations? 17 
Apply the Concept 1.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1.2 Classify the activities 
After you have acquired a solid understanding of the functional 
supported by various types of computer-based information 
areas and information systems that support them, you are ready 
systems in an organization. 
to move forward with the activity! 
STEP 3: Assignment 
STEP 1: Background 
Create a table like the one shown below, and classify the activities 
Section 1.2 discussed the various functional areas in which you 
supported by various types of computer-based information 
most likely will be employed and the different IS that support 
systems. To assist you, we have prefilled one item in each type of 
them. It should be no surprise that these are the majors you 
system. After you complete your chart, submit it to your professor. 
can choose from in most colleges of business. The four major 
functional areas are marketing/sales, finance/accounting, 
manufacturing, and human resources. Often, these areas will use 
the same database and networks within a company, but they will 
use them to support their specific needs. This activity will help 
you develop a solid understanding of the role of IS within the 
different functional areas. 
Marketing/ 
Sales 
Enter Sales Data 
Transaction 
Management 
Decision 
Processing 
Information 
System 
Support 
System 
Accounting/ 
Finance 
STEP 2: Activity 
Human 
Comply
Review the section material that describes the major functions of 
Resources 
with EEOC 
the four major functional areas. Then, review the basic functions 
Manufacturing 
Inventory 
of the following types of information systems: transaction 
Reporting 
processing, management information, and decision support. 
1.3 How Does IT Impact Organizations? 
Throughout this text you will encounter numerous examples of how IT affects various types of 
organizations, which will give you an idea just how important IT actually is to organizations. In 
fact, for the vast majority of organizations, if their information systems fail, they cease opera­
tions until the problems are found and fixed. Consider these examples: 
• In July 2015, United Airlines flights were grounded worldwide for about two hours due 
to a computer problem in the airline’s reservation system. United canceled 61 flights and 
another 1,162 flights were delayed. 
• Also in July 2015, the New York Stock Exchange suspended trading for almost four hours 
due to a soft ware upgrade. 
This section provides an overview of the impact of IT on modern organizations. As you read this 
section you will learn how IT will affect you as well. 
IT Impacts Entire Industries 
As of mid-2015, the technology required to transform industries through software had been 
developed and integrated and could be delivered globally. In addition, software tools and 
Internet-based services enabled companies in many industries to launch new soft ware-pow­
ered startups without investing in new infrastructure or training new employees. For exam­
ple, in 2000, operating a basic Internet application cost businesses approximately $150,000 per 
month. In mid-2015, operating that same application in Amazon’s cloud (we discuss cloud com­
puting in detail in Plug IT In 4) cost less than $1,000 per month. 
In essence, software is impacting every industry, and every organization must prepare for 
these impacts. Let’s examine a few examples of software disruption across several industries. 
Many of these examples focus on two scenarios: (1) industries where software disrupted the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
18 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
previous market-leading companies and (2) industries where a new company (or companies) 
used software to achieve a competitive advantage. 
The Book Industry. What is the largest book publisher and bookseller in the United States 
today? Would it surprise you to learn that the answer is Amazon, a software company? Amazon’s 
core capability is its software engine, which can sell virtually anything online without building 
or maintaining any retail stores. Now, even books themselves have become soft ware products, 
known as electronic (or digital) books, or eBooks. (In mid- 2015, electronic books were gaining 
in popularity, but approximately 80 percent of book sales were still for print books.) 
• Consider the Borders bookstore chain. In 2001, Borders agreed to hand over its online 
business to Amazon because Borders was convinced that online book sales were nonstra­
tegic and unimportant. Ten years later, Borders filed for bankruptcy. 
The Music Industry. Total U.S. album sales peaked at 785 million in 2000, which was the 
year aft er Napster was created. (Recall that Napster allowed anyone with a computer and a 
reasonably fast Web connection to download and trade music for free.) From 2000 to 2015, the 
major music labels (companies) worked diligently to eliminate illegal downloading and shar­
ing, but album sales continued to decline. The result was that the music labels earned about 
$8 billion less in annual retail sales in 2015 than they did in 2000. In addition, prior to 1999 six 
major music labels dominated the industry. By 2015, a series of mergers had created the “Big 
Three” music labels: Warner Music Group (www.wmg.com), Universal Music (www.universal­
music.com), and Sony (www.sonymusic.com). 
These large changes in the music industry were due to the emergence of digital music 
streaming technologies over the Internet. Two digital-streaming business models emerged: 
Internet radio companies such as Pandora (www.pandora.com) that allow subscribers to 
passively listen to music that is customized for their tastes and interactive companies such 
as Spotify (www.spotify.com) and Apple’s iTunes (www.apple.com/itunes) that allow users to 
pick songs. Internet radio companies can operate under a government-mandated license that 
dictates how much they have to pay. In contrast, interactive companies must make deals with 
labels and music publishers in order to license music for legal use in the United States. 
Responding to these disruptions, the Big Three music labels have been buying stakes 
in digital entertainment startups, such as established streaming services Spotify (www.spo­
tify.com) and Rdio (www.rdio.com). The labels buy stakes very cheaply, and then oft en give 
themselves the right to buy larger amounts at deep discounts to market at a later date. The 
labels have purchased parts of startups such as choose-your-own-adventure music video seller 
Interlude (https://interlude.fm), song-recognition company Shazam (www.shazam.com), and 
SoundCloud (https://soundcloud.com). Industry analysts estimate that the three labels have 
amassed positions in digital music startups valued at some $3 billion.  
The Video Industry. Blockbuster—which rented and sold videos and ancillary products 
through its chain of stores—was the industry leader until it was disrupted by a soft ware company, 
Netflix (www.netflix.com). In mid-2015, Netflix had the largest subscriber base of any video ser­
vice with millions of subscribers. Meanwhile, Blockbuster declared bankruptcy in February 2011 
and was acquired by satellite television provider Dish Network (www.dish.com) a month later. 
The Software Industry. Incumbent software companies such as Oracle and Microsoft 
are increasingly threatened by software-as-a-service (SaaS) products (e.g., Salesforce.com) 
and Android, an open-source operating system developed by the Open Handset Alliance 
(www.openhandsetalliance.com). (We discuss operating systems in Plug IT In 2 and SaaS in 
Plug IT In 4.) 
The Videogame Industry. Today, the fastest growing entertainment companies are video-
game makers—again, soft ware. Examples are: Zynga (www.zynga.com), the creator of Farm-
Ville; Rovio (www.rovio.com), the maker of Angry Birds; and Minecraft (www.minecraft .net), 
now owned by Microsoft (www.microsoft .com). 
MIS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How Does IT Impact Organizations? 19 
The Photography Industry. This industry was disrupted by software years ago. Today it is 
virtually impossible to buy a mobile phone that does not include a soft ware-powered camera. 
In addition, people can upload photos automatically to the Internet for permanent archiving 
and global sharing. Leading photography companies include Shutterfly (www.shutterfly.com), 
Snapfish (www.snapfish.com), Flickr (www.flickr.com), and Instagram (www.instagram.com). 
Meanwhile, the longtime market leader, Kodak—whose name was almost synonymous with 
cameras—declared bankruptcy in January 2012. 
The Marketing Industry. Today’s largest direct marketing companies include Facebook 
(www.facebook.com), Google (www.google.com), and Foursquare (www.foursquare.com). All 
of these companies are using software to disrupt the retail marketing industry. 
The Recruiting Industry. LinkedIn (www.linkedin.com) is disrupting the traditional job re­
cruiting industry. For the first time, employees and job searchers can maintain their resumes on 
a publicly accessible Web site that interested parties can search in real time. 
The Financial Services Industry. Software has transformed the financial services indus­
try. Practically every financial transaction (for example, buying and selling stocks) is now per­
formed by software. Also, many of the leading innovators in financial services are soft ware 
companies. For example, Square (https://squareup.com) allows anyone to accept credit card 
payments with a mobile phone. 
MKT 
HRM 
FIN 
The Motion Picture Industry. The process of making feature-length computer-generated 
films has become incredibly IT intensive. Studios require state-of-the-art information technolo­
gies, including massive numbers of servers, sophisticated software, and an enormous amount 
of storage (all described in Plug IT In 2). 
Consider DreamWorks Animation (www.dreamworksanimation.com), a motion picture 
studio that creates animated feature films, television programs, and online virtual worlds. 
For a single motion picture, the studio manages more than 500,000 files and 300 terabytes (a 
terabyte is 1 trillion bytes) of data, and it uses about 80 million central processing unit (CPU; 
described in Plug IT In 2) hours. As DreamWorks executives state, “In reality, our product is data 
that looks like a movie. We are a digital manufacturing company.” 
Software is also disrupting industries that operate primarily in the physical world. Con­
sider these examples: 
•  The Automobile Industry: In modern cars, software is responsible for running the  
engines; controlling safety features; entertaining passengers; guiding drivers to their des­
tinations; and connecting the car to mobile, satellite, and GPS networks. Other soft ware  
functions in modern cars include Wi-Fi receivers, which turn your car into a mobile hot  
spot; software, which helps maximize fuel efficiency; and ultrasonic sensors, which enable  
some models to parallel-park automatically.  
The next step is to network all vehicles together, a necessary step toward the next major 
breakthrough: self-driving or driverless cars. The creation of software-powered driverless cars 
is already being undertaken at Google as well as at several major car companies, and interest­
ingly, Apple. 
•  The Agriculture Industry: Agriculture is increasingly powered by soft ware, including  
satellite analysis of soils linked to per-acre seed selection software algorithms. In addition,  
precision agriculture makes use of automated, driverless tractors controlled by global  
positioning systems and software. (Precision agriculture is based on observing, measur­
ing, and responding to inter- and intra-field variability.)  
•  National Defense: Even national defense is increasingly software based. The modern  
combat soldier is embedded in a web of software that provides intelligence, communica­
tions, logistics, and weapons guidance. Soft ware-powered drone aircraft launch airstrikes  
without placing human pilots at risk. Intelligence agencies perform large-scale data min­
ing with software to uncover and track potential terrorist plots.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
•  The Fashion Industry: Women have long “borrowed” special-occasion dresses from 
department stores, buying them and then returning them after wearing them for one 
evening. Now, Rent the Runway (www.renttherunway.com) has redefined the fashion busi­
ness, making expensive clothing available to more women than ever before. The firm is 
also disrupting traditional physical retailers. After all, why buy a dress when you can rent 
one for a very low price? Some department stores feel so threatened by Rent the Runway 
that they have reportedly told vendors that they will remove floor merchandise if it ever 
shows up on that company’s Web site. 
•  Education: College graduates owe approximately $1 trillion in student debt, a crippling 
burden for many recent graduates. Consider UniversityNow (www.unow.com), founded 
to make college more accessible to working adults by offering online, self-paced degrees. 
Two key characteristics distinguish UniversityNow from an increasing number of rivals: (1) 
very low fees (as little as $2,600, which includes tuition and books for as many courses as 
students can complete in one year) and (2) fully accredited degrees, from an associate’s 
degree to an M.B.A. 
•  The Legal Profession: Today, electronic discovery (e-discovery) soft ware applica­
tions can analyze documents in a fraction of the time that human lawyers would take, at 
a fraction of the cost. For example, Blackstone Discovery (www.blackstonediscovery.com) 
helped one company analyze 1.5 million documents for less than $100,000. That company 
estimated that the process would have cost $1.5 million had it been performed by lawyers. 
IT Reduces the Number of Middle Managers 
IT makes managers more productive, and it increases the number of employees who can report 
to a single manager. Thus, IT ultimately decreases the number of managers and experts. It is 
reasonable to assume, therefore, that in coming years organizations will have fewer managerial 
levels and fewer staff and line managers. If this trend materializes, promotional opportunities 
will decrease, making promotions much more competitive. Bottom line: Pay attention in school! 
IT Changes the Manager’s Job 
One of the most important tasks of managers is making decisions. A major consequence of IT 
has been to change the manner in which managers make their decisions. In this way, IT ulti­
mately has changed managers’ jobs. 
IT often provides managers with near-real-time information, meaning that managers have 
less time to make decisions, making their jobs even more stressful. Fortunately, IT also pro­
vides many tools—for example, business analytics applications such as dashboards, search 
engines, and intranets—to help managers handle the volumes of information they must deal 
with on an ongoing basis. 
So far in this section, we have been focusing on managers in general. Now, let’s focus on 
you. Due to advances in IT, you will increasingly supervise employees and teams who are geo­
graphically dispersed. Employees can work from anywhere at any time, and teams can consist 
of employees who are literally dispersed throughout the world. Information technologies such 
as telepresence systems (discussed in Chapter 4) can help you manage these employees even 
though you do not often see them face-to-face. For these employees, electronic or “remote” 
supervision will become the norm. Remote supervision places greater emphasis on completed 
work and less emphasis on personal contacts and office politics. You will have to reassure your 
employees that they are valued members of the organization, thereby diminishing any feelings 
they might have of being isolated and “out of the loop.” 
Will IT Eliminate Jobs? 
One major concern of every employee, part-time or full-time, is job security. Relentless 
cost-cutting measures in modern organizations often lead to large-scale layoffs. Put simply, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How Does IT Impact Organizations? 21 
HRM 
organizations are responding to today’s highly competitive environment by doing more with 
less. Regardless of your position, then, you consistently will have to add value to your organiza­
tion and to make certain that your superiors are aware of this value. 
Many companies have responded to difficult economic times, increased global competi­
tion, demands for customization, and increased consumer sophistication by increasing their 
investments in IT. In fact, as computers continue to advance in terms of intelligence and capa­
bilities, the competitive advantage of replacing people with machines is increasing rapidly. This 
process frequently leads to layoffs. At the same time, however, IT creates entirely new catego­
ries of jobs, such as electronic medical record keeping and nanotechnology. 
IT Impacts Employees at Work 
Many people have experienced a loss of identity because of computerization. They feel like 
“just another number” because computers reduce or eliminate the human element present in 
noncomputerized systems. 
The Internet threatens to exert an even more isolating influence than have computers and 
television. Encouraging people to work and shop from their living rooms could produce some 
unfortunate psychological effects, such as depression and loneliness. 
IT Impacts Employees’ Health and Safety. Although computers and information sys­
tems are generally regarded as agents of “progress,” they can adversely aff ect individuals’ 
health and safety. To illustrate this point, we consider two issues associated with IT: job stress 
and long-term use of the keyboard. 
An increase in an employee’s workload and/or responsibilities can trigger job stress. 
Although computerization has benefited organizations by increasing productivity, it also has 
created an ever-expanding workload for some employees. Some workers feel overwhelmed 
and have become increasingly anxious about their job performance. These feelings of stress 
and anxiety can actually diminish rather than improve workers’ productivity while jeopardizing 
their physical and mental health. Management can help alleviate these problems by providing 
training, redistributing the workload among workers, and hiring more workers. 
On a more specific level, the long-term use of keyboards can lead to repetitive strain inju­
ries such as backaches and muscle tension in the wrists and fingers. Carpal tunnel syndrome is 
a particularly painful form of repetitive strain injury that affects the wrists and hands. 
Designers are aware of the potential problems associated with the prolonged use of com­
puters. To address these problems, they continually attempt to design a better computing envi­
ronment. The science of designing machines and work settings that minimize injury and illness 
is called ergonomics. The goal of ergonomics is to create an environment that is safe, well lit, 
and comfortable. Examples of ergonomically designed products are antiglare screens that alle­
viate problems of fatigued or damaged eyesight and chairs that contour the human body to 
decrease backaches. Figure 1.6 displays some sample ergonomic products. 
IT Provides Opportunities for People with Disabilities. Computers can create new 
employment opportunities for people with disabilities by integrating speech-recognition and 
vision-recognition capabilities. For example, individuals who cannot type can use a voice-oper­
ated keyboard, and individuals who cannot travel can work at home. 
Going further, adaptive equipment for computers enables people with disabilities to 
perform tasks they normally would not be able to do. For example, the Web and graphical 
user interfaces (GUIs; e.g., Windows) can be difficult for people with impaired vision to use. 
To address this problem, manufacturers have added audible screen tips and voice interfaces, 
which essentially restore the functionality of computers to the way it was before GUIs become 
standard. 
Other devices help improve the quality of life in more mundane, but useful, ways for peo­
ple with disabilities. Examples are a two-way writing telephone, a robotic page turner, a hair 
brusher, and a hospital-bedside video trip to the zoo or the museum. Several organizations 
specialize in IT designed for people with disabilities. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
22 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
Photograph s  depicting some erg
onomic products. The left panel depicts a person using a keyboard with a wrist rest. The right panel depicts a person working on computer with his feet on a foot rest stand.
Before you go on…
 1. Why should employees in all functional areas become knowledgeable about IT?
 2. Describe how IT might change the manager’s job.
 3. Discuss several ways in which IT impacts employees at work. 
Apply the Concept 1.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1.3 Discuss ways in which information  
down on a piece of paper and never entered into a computer 
technology can affect managers and nonmanagerial workers.  
system for preparation. You have most likely also been to a 
very modern restaurant where you enter your own order with 
a tablet, smartphone, or other piece of equipment. Visit http://
STEP 1: Background 
www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept and watch 
Section 1.3 demonstrated that the essential reason businesses 
the two videos about using the restaurant table as the menu 
use information systems is to add value to their daily activities. In 
and ordering stem. 
fact, IS have radically transformed the nature of both managerial 
and nonmanagerial work. Managers employ IT to instantly track 
STEP 3: Assignment 
information that previously was available only in monthly reports. 
Imagine that you are a manager in each type of restaurant. How 
Support staff can view calendars and schedules for all employees 
does working without technology impact how you do your job? 
and can schedule meetings more easily. Sales representatives 
How does adding the technology change your performance? 
can view current product information while visiting with clients. 
Based on your thoughts from Step 2, imagine that you are 
This list does not even scratch the surface of the countless ways 
explaining to your friend the ways that restaurants could benefit 
technology has added value to modern businesses. 
from IT. Prepare a paragraph or two that will discuss the ways that 
the traditional job of a restaurant manager and other employees 
STEP 2: Activity 
has been changed by IT. 
Consider the restaurant industry. You have probably visited 
some “old school” restaurants where your order is written 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
1.4 
Importance of Information Systems to Society  23 
Importance of Information 
Systems to Society 
This section explains in greater detail why IT is important to society as a whole. Other examples 
of the impact of IT on society appear throughout the text. IT’s About Business 1.2 illustrates 
how IT is impacting one society—Cuba—in its entirety. 
IT’s About Business 1.2 
Information Technology Has the Potential for 
“Revolutionizing” Cuba 
In recent years, Cuba’s private sector has been undergoing a huge 
transformation. Hundreds of thousands of Cubans have obtained 
licenses to operate small businesses, but only in a limited set of 
service categories such as restaurants, hair salons, and translation 
services. Despite the limitations, by the end of 2014, the number 
of licensed entrepreneurs—called cuentapropistas in Cuba; roughly 
translated as “those who are on their own”—rose to more than 
471,000. 
Unfortunately, the vast majority of these entrepreneurs do 
not use the Internet because they do not have access to it. In fact, 
experts estimate that only about 5 percent of Cuba’s citizens have 
even periodic Internet access. As of mid-2015, only the “elite” had 
easy Internet access, and only 5 percent of Cubans could access the 
Internet from home. The public can visit cybercafés that are sanc­
tioned by the government. However, it costs more than $5 per hour 
to access sites outside the country. To put this in perspective, the 
average Cuban earns $20 a month. Another barrier to Internet ac­
cess is that visitors to cybercafés must sign agreements that their 
Internet use will not harm “public security.” 
As we discuss below, Cuba is a country of memory sticks and 
human middlemen, physically sent to conduct what in the devel­
oped world are frictionless digital transactions. In Cuba, smart-
phones are common, but they do not have data connections. 
Further, there is no legal way to send or receive payments using 
credit cards or PayPal. 
Young, highly motivated Cuban entrepreneurs, the country’s 
millennials, are circumventing these enormous hindrances by us­
ing digital technologies in different ways. Let’s consider four exam­
ples: Revolico, AlaMesa, El Paquete Semanal, and Vistar. 
MKT 
Revolico  (www.revolico.com). Black markets have been 
commonplace in Cuba for many years, but it was diff icult 
for buyers and sellers to find each other. In December 2007, a young 
Cuban anonymously created Revolico, a Web site for classified ads 
that quickly became the Craigslist of Cuba. 
Three months after the site’s launch, the government blocked 
it. Revolico got around the blocks by changing the Web address for 
its servers and e-mailing personalized URLs to its users. The back­
and-forth between Revolico and the government continues as of 
this writing (July 2015). Despite these tensions, however, Revolico 
has become part of the daily life of many Cubans. 
By July 2015, Revolico had approximately 8 million page 
views per month and 25,000 new listings daily. About half of its 
traffic came from outside Cuba—most of it from south Florida, 
which houses a large Cuban population—where the site makes 
some money selling ads. In Cuba, Revolico has no legal standing. 
The site charges for premium listings, which it promotes. Associ­
ates of Revolico collect payment for those listings unoff icially, in 
cash. 
MKT 
AlaMesa (www.alamesacuba.com). AlaMesa is a Web 
site and Android app that promotes Cuban culinary cul­
ture (think Yelp and OpenTable). Going door-to-door, AlaMesa staff 
members check out restaurants, examine their menus, and, if the 
restaurants agree, list them on the Web site and app. More than 
600 restaurants in nine Cuban provinces have agreed to be listed. 
Roughly 30 percent of these restaurants pay, in cash, to be pro­
moted on the site and app. Foreigners planning a trip to Cuba can 
download the app while at home. In Cuba, devoted fans spread the 
app by physically passing memory sticks to one another. 
El Paquete Semanal. El Paquete Semanal (“the weekly pack­
age”) is the “Internet-in-a-box” for a nonconnected country. More 
precisely, it is the Internet on a portable hard drive. El Paquete is 
a large digital collection of recent movies, TV shows, magazines, 
apps, software updates, and other digital content made available 
to Cubans. It is copied and distributed on portable hard drives 
to 100 people, who then distribute it to 1,000 people, and so on. 
El Paquete is delivered through an informal network of human 
“mules” who travel in public buses to every corner of the island. 
Most customers get the drive at home, where they exchange it for 
last week’s drive. Customers pay more for more recent material and 
they pay based on the amount of material they receive. 
Vistar  (www.vistarmagazine.com). In 2013, the Cuban gov­
ernment’s Office of Periodicals and Publications turned down a 
young Cuban’s application to start an online magazine focusing on 
Cuba’s youth culture. The young man decided to publish the maga­
zine anyway, without identifying the magazine’s creators. The first 
issue of Vistar came out in March 2014. It contained excellent pho­
tography and articles on food, music, ballet, art, and celebrities. By 
July 2015, Vistar had published sixteen monthly issues and even 
listed the magazine’s staff on the masthead. Significantly, the gov­
ernment has not yet off icially objected. 
Although Vistar’s readers have not been harassed by the gov­
ernment, they have to deal with their country’s lack of connectiv­
ity. As a result, they access the magazine by sharing memory sticks 
and hard drives. The magazine’s staff support themselves through 
advertising. This process is noteworthy because advertising that is 
not linked to the government has been almost nonexistent for 50 
years. Vistar, which now publishes in English as well as Spanish, has 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
more than 100,000 downloads, with 60 percent of them originating 
2, 2015; V. Burnett, “Cuba Offers Its Citizens Better Access to Internet,” 
outside Cuba. 
The New York Times, June 18, 2015; “Cuba to Expand Internet Access to 
Battle Country’s Dire Lack of Connectivity,” Associated Press, June 18,
Cuba’s relations with the United States are improving, follow­
2015; D. Renwick and B. Lee, “U.S.-Cuba Relations,” Council on Foreign 
ing President Obama’s decision in December 2014 to begin nor-
Relations, May 29, 2015; S. Marshall, “This Is What It’s Like Using 
malizing relations between the two countries. Under the proposal, 
the Internet in Cuba,” ABC News, March 31, 2015; N. Young, “Cuba’s 
Cuban citizens could enjoy much improved access to communica-
Underground Alternative to the Internet,” www.cbc.ca, January 
tions technology. However, the Internet is still strictly controlled 
25, 2015; T. Johnson, “No Internet in Cuba? For Some, Offline Link 
under the Raúl Castro regime, and there are economic barriers as 
to World Arrives Weekly,” McClatchyDC, January 9, 2015; D. Talbot, 
“Cuba’s Internet Revolution Faces Economic and Political Realities,” 
well as political ones, so it’s not certain whether and when Cubans 
MIT Technology Review, December 21, 2014; S. Fernandes and A. 
will have inexpensive and open Internet access. 
Halkin, “Do Cubans Really Want U.S.-Style Internet Freedom?” nacla.
And the bottom line? Cuban citizens continue their entrepre­
org, December 20, 2014; P. Baker, “U.S. to Restore Full Relations with 
neurial activities, not knowing whether the government will shut 
Cuba, Erasing a Last Trace of Cold War Hostility,” The New York Times, 
them down. Meanwhile, in June 2015, the Cuban government an-
December 17, 2014. 
nounced it would sanction 35 Wi-Fi hotspots around the country, 
which Cubans can access for $2 per hour. Cubans wryly note that 
Questions
this is “good news, bad news.” The good news is that the govern­
ment is allowing any Wi-Fi hotspots at all. The bad news is that 
1. Describe the “work-arounds” that Cuban entrepreneurs 
most Cubans still cannot afford to use them. 
must perform to use digital technologies in the four exam­
ples discussed in this case. 
Sources: Compiled from A. Popescu, “Cuban Web Entrepreneur 
2. Discuss how free, open access to high-speed Internet con-
Endures a Murky Status,” MIT Technology Review, October 6, 2015; I. 
nections would transform the operations of each of the four 
Lakshmanan, “Where the Internet Revolution Is Waiting to Happen,” 
examples. 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, September 1420, 2015; M. Helft, “Cuba’s 
3. Why would the Cuban government limit access to the Inter-
Tech Revolutionaries,” Forbes, July 21, 2015; J. Hamre, “Cuba, an  
Internet Laggard, Opens Wi-Fi Hotspots across Country,” Reuters, July 
net? Provide specific examples in your answer.  
IT Affects Our Quality of Life 
IT has significant implications for our quality of life. The workplace can be expanded from the 
traditional 9-to-5 job at a central location to 24 hours a day at any location. IT can provide 
employees with flexibility that can significantly improve the quality of leisure time, even if it 
doesn’t increase the total amount of leisure time. 
From the opposite perspective, however, IT also can place employees on “constant call,” 
which means they are never truly away from the office, even when they are on vacation. In 
fact, surveys reveal that the majority of respondents take their laptops and smartphones 
on their vacations, and 100 percent took their cell phones. Going further, the majority of 
respondents did some work while vacationing, and almost all of them checked their e-mail 
regularly. 
The Robot Revolution Is Here Now 
Once restricted largely to science fiction movies, robots that can perform practical tasks are 
becoming more common. Around the world, quasi-autonomous devices have become increas­
ingly common on factory floors, in hospital corridors, and in farm fields. Let’s look at two exam­
ples: Baxter and drones. 
Baxter Baxter is a new kind of industrial robot by Rethink Robotics (www.rethinkrobotics. 
com) that sells for $25,000. Humans share a workspace with Baxter, making it an excellent ex­
ample of a social, collaborative robot. Baxter works right out of the box and can be integrated 
into a factory’s workflow in about one hour. Another benefit of Baxter is that other factory work­
ers can train it. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Importance of Information Systems to Society  25 
POM 
In November 2014 Rethink Robotics announced its new Robot Positioning System for Bax­
ter. This system enables Baxter to adapt to changing, real-world environments, such as tables 
and benches being moved. The new system highlights a huge advantage for companies that 
acquire Baxter. Because so much of Baxter’s capabilities are contained in its software, when the 
robot is upgraded it tends to increase in value. 
However, Baxter does raise the question of the future of low-skilled labor in the United 
States: How fast will Baxter replace these workers, and what will they do after they are 
replaced? 
Drones A drone is an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) that either is controlled by pilots from 
the ground or autonomously follows a preprogrammed mission. Commercial drones are used 
for a wide variety of business purposes, in contrast to drones used by hobbyists for recreational 
purposes. Let’s examine five industries that are currently employing drones. 
Sensors on drones, coupled with data analytics (see Chapter 12), are extending precision 
agriculture beyond simply monitoring crops. Drones help farmers increase crop yields by opti­
mizing the fertilizer mix for different parts of a field down to the square meter. They similarly 
help winemakers increase yields by precisely controlling drip irrigation down to the individual 
vine. 
On large-scale construction sites, envisioning the overall “picture” presents a major chal­
lenge for contractors. Drones enable project managers from construction giants such as Bech­
tel (www.bechtel.com) and DPR (www.dpr.com) to monitor progress and supply stockpiles on 
a real-time basis. 
The energy industry uses drones for applications beyond monitoring and inspecting pipe­
lines. In Alaska, BP (www.bp.com) uses drones to monitor its gravel-extraction operations to 
comply with environmental guidelines. ConocoPhillips (www.conocophillips.com) and Chev­
ron (www.chevron.com) use drones in the Arctic to help search for new sources of oil. First Solar 
(www.firstsolar.com) uses drones to inspect for faulty solar panels. 
POM 
POM 
Large mining companies such as Rio Tinto (www.riotinto.com) are reducing risk to their 
workers by using drones to detect potential landslides and to inspect safety infrastructure, as 
well as to more accurately monitor how much mineral their workers are extracting. 
American film and television studios, such as 20th Century Fox (www.foxmovies.com) 
and Warner Bros (www.warnerbros.com), have been using drones in their overseas produc­
tions because they were allowed to do so by foreign governments. When the FAA allowed 
them to use drones in U.S. airspace, these studios began to move their operations back to 
the United States. 
POM 
POM 
It probably will be a long time before we see robots making decisions by themselves, han­
dling unfamiliar situations, and interacting with people. Nevertheless, robots are extremely 
helpful in various environments, particularly those that are repetitive, harsh, or dangerous to 
humans. 
Improvements in Healthcare 
IT has brought about major improvements in healthcare delivery. Medical personnel use IT to 
make better and faster diagnoses and to monitor critically ill patients more accurately. IT also 
has streamlined the process of researching and developing new drugs. Expert systems now 
help doctors diagnose diseases, and machine vision is enhancing the work of radiologists. Sur­
geons use virtual reality to plan complex surgeries. They also employ surgical robots to perform 
long-distance surgery. Finally, doctors discuss complex medical cases via videoconferencing. 
New computer simulations recreate the sense of touch, allowing doctors-in-training to perform 
virtual procedures without risking harm to an actual patient. 
Information technology can be applied to improve the efficiency and eff ectiveness of 
healthcare. In IT’s About Business 1.3 you will see how Apricot Forest is using information tech­
nology to improve healthcare in China. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
IT’s  About Business 1.3 
Apricot Forest Helps China’s Physicians 
patients. Another potential moneymaker from the apps is to aggre­
gate and analyze the data that doctors upload to MedClip and sell 
MIS 
In China, entry-level doctors earn about as much as taxi drivers— 
reports to companies that make medical products. 
roughly $500 a month. Most work in state-operated hospitals 
And the results? By early 2015, roughly 1 in 4 of China’s 2.5 mil-
and see up to 60 patients per day. Not only are their caseloads 
lion physicians were using at least one of Apricot Forest’s apps. 
potentially overwhelming, but doctors also face violence from 
patients. In 2012, each Chinese hospital experienced an aver-
Sources: Compiled from “The Healthcare System and Medical Device 
age of 27 patient assaults of healthcare providers. In some cases, 
Market in China,” PR Newswire, February 17, 2015; “Most Innovative 
they beat, stabbed, or even killed doctors who didn’t meet their 
Companies 2015,” FastCompany, March 2015; L. Qi and L. Burkitt, 
expectations. 
“Falling through the Cracks of China’s Health-Care System,” The 
Needless to say, there was an opportunity for technology to 
Wall Street Journal, January 4, 2015; S. Shankar, “Hospital Attack in 
help Chinese physicians manage their caseload and work environ-
Northern China’s Beidaihe Town Kills 7 People, Including 6 Nurses,” 
International Business Times, November 20, 2014; C. Beam, “Under 
ment. Essentially, such tools must provide China’s physicians with 
the Knife,” The New Yorker, August 25, 2014; E. Rauhala, “Why China’s 
more data—about patients, their records, and their illnesses—as 
Doctors Are Getting Beaten Up,” Time, March 7, 2014; P. Bischoff, 
well as easier access to those data. Further, the tools must allow 
“Apricot Forest Wants to Streamline Your Hospital Visits,” TechinAsia, 
physicians and their patients to communicate seamlessly.  
June 6, 2013; www.xingshulin.com, accessed February 25, 2015. 
Apricot Forest (http://www.xingshulin.com) is a Beijing-based 
startup company that developed three apps to help Chinese physi-
Questions
cians. The main app is MedClip, the Swiss army knife of applica­
1. Explain how Apricot Forest’s apps will help improve the rela­
tions. It allows doctors to take photos of patient records, dictate 
tionship between physicians and patients in China. 
notes, and store and organize patient charts. It links up with the 
2. Explain how Apricot Forest’s apps will help improve overall 
popular Chinese messaging system Weixin (“WeChat”) to send 
healthcare in China. 
reminders and health information to patients. Doctors can also 
consult with each other regarding more challenging cases. Apricot 
3. Discuss potential disadvantages of Apricot Forest’s apps to 
Forest’s second medical app, e-Pocket, is a database that doctors 
patients. 
can refer to with information on drug formulations and specialized 
4. Discuss potential disadvantages of Apricot Forest’s apps to 
calculators. Medical Journals, the third app, gives doctors access to 
physicians.
articles in medical journals. The company notes that all these apps 
Among the thousands of other healthcare applications, 
allow doctors to make house calls, accessing patient and other in-
administrative systems are critically important. These systems per-
formation at the touch of a button. 
form functions ranging from detecting insurance fraud, to creating 
With China’s doctors earning so little money, how does Apri­
nursing schedules, to financial and marketing management. 
cot Forest get revenues? It goes beyond the app sales for other 
The Internet contains vast amounts of useful medical infor­
revenue streams. For example, it charges drug companies for ad­
mation (see www.webmd.com, for example). Despite the fact 
vertisements inside the apps. It earns a commission on the books 
that this information exists on the Internet, physicians caution 
and other publications purchased through the e-Pocket and Medi­
against self-diagnosis. They maintain that people should use diag­
cal Journals apps. The company plans to charge patients for using 
nostic information obtained from Google and medical Web sites 
MedClip to contact their doctors, which is difficult under the exist-
such as WebMD (www.webmd.com) only to ask questions of their 
ing health care system. Doctors would benefit from keeping their 
physicians.
phone numbers private and controlling the amount of contact with 
Before you go on…
 1. What are some of the quality-of-life improvements made possible by IT? Has IT had any negative ef­
fects on our quality of life? If so, explain, and provide examples.
 2. Describe the robotic revolution, and consider its implications for humans.
 3. Explain how IT has improved healthcare practices. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 27 
Apply the Concept 1.4 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1.4 Identify positive and 
materials that help you understand the positive and negative 
negative societal effects of the increased use of information 
effects of the increased use of information technologies.  
technology. 
STEP 3: Assignment 
STEP 1: Background 
Create a table that identifies the positive and negative eff ects 
for the following areas: quality of life, robotics, healthcare, and 
As you have just read, the increased use of IS has had a significant 
work/life balance. Set your table up as in the example below, and 
impact on society. Section 1.4 focused on three areas—quality 
submit it to your instructor.  
of life improvements, robotics, and healthcare—to spark your 
interest in the ways our lives are being touched. Unfortunately, 
the technologies that provide quality-of-life improvements can 
also create economic and political problems. For example, robots 
that make production more streamlined also eliminate jobs. 
Robotics 
Similarly, healthcare improvements raise concerns regarding 
Positive 
Negative 
Quality of Life 
Healthcare 
shared data and privacy violations. 
Work/Life Balance 
STEP 2: Activity 
Conduct a Web search for “technology and work/life balance.” 
Look for programs, articles, research, suggestions, and other 
What’s in IT for me? 
In Section 1.2, we discussed how IT supports each of the functional 
areas of the organization. Here we examine the MIS function. 
MIS For the MIS Major 
The MIS function directly supports all other functional areas in an or­
ganization. That is, the MIS function is responsible for providing the 
information that each functional area needs in order to make deci­
sions. The overall objective of MIS personnel is to help users improve 
performance and solve business problems using IT. To accomplish 
this objective, MIS personnel must understand both the informa­
tion requirements and the technology associated with each func­
tional area. Given their position, however, they must think “business 
needs” first and “technology” second. 
Summary 
1.  Identify the reasons why being an informed user of information 
systems is important in today’s world. 
The benefits of being an informed user of IT include the following: 
•  You will benefit more from your organization’s IT applications be­
cause you will understand what is “behind” those applications. 
•  You will be able to provide input into your organization’s IT applica­
tions, thus improving the quality of those applications. 
•  You will quickly be in a position to recommend, or participate in the 
selection of IT applications that your organization will use. 
•  You will be able to keep up with rapid developments in exist­
ing information technologies, as well as the introduction of new 
 technologies. 
•  You will understand the potential impacts that “new and improved” 
technologies will have on your organization and therefore will be qual­
ified to make recommendations concerning their adoption and use. 
•  You will play a key role in managing the information systems in your 
organization. 
•  You will be in a position to use IT if you decide to start your own 
business. 
2.  Describe the various types of computer-based information systems 
in an organization. 
•  Transaction processing systems (TPS) support the monitoring, col­
lection, storage, and processing of data from the organization’s basic 
business transactions, each of which generates data. 
•  Functional area information systems (FAISs) support a particular 
functional area within the organization. 
•  Interorganizational information systems (IOSs) support many inter-
organizational operations, of which supply chain management is the 
best known. 
•  Enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems correct a lack of commu­
nication among the FAISs by tightly integrating the functional area 
ISs via a common database. 
•  Electronic commerce (e-commerce) systems enable organiza­
tions to conduct transactions with other organizations (called 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
business-to-business (B2B) electronic commerce), and with custom­
ers (called business-to-consumer (B2C) electronic commerce). 
•  Office automation systems (OASs) typically support the clerical staff , 
lower and middle managers, and knowledge workers, by enabling 
them to develop documents (word processing and desktop publish­
ing software), schedule resources (electronic calendars), and com­
municate (e-mail, voice mail, videoconferencing, and groupware). 
•  Business intelligence (BI) systems provide computer-based support 
for complex, nonroutine decisions, primarily for middle managers 
and knowledge workers. 
•  Expert systems (ESs) attempt to duplicate the work of human experts 
by applying reasoning capabilities, knowledge, and expertise within 
a specific domain. 
3.  Discuss ways in which information technology can aff ect managers 
and nonmanagerial workers. 
Potential IT impacts on managers: 
•  IT may reduce the number of middle managers; 
•  IT will provide managers with real-time or near real-time information, 
meaning that managers will have less time to make decisions; 
•  IT will increase the likelihood that managers will have to supervise 
geographically dispersed employees and teams. 
•  Potential IT impacts on nonmanagerial workers: 
•  IT may eliminate jobs; 
•  IT may cause employees to experience a loss of identity; 
•  IT can cause job stress and physical problems, such as repetitive 
stress injury. 
4.  List positive and negative societal effects of the increased use of 
information technology. 
Positive societal eff ects: 
•  IT can provide opportunities for people with disabilities; 
•  IT can provide people with flexibility in their work (e.g., work from 
anywhere, anytime); 
•  Robots will take over mundane chores; 
•  T will enable improvements in healthcare. 
Negative societal eff ects: 
•  IT can cause health problems for individuals; 
•  IT can place employees on constant call; 
•  IT can potentially misinform patients about their health  problems. 
Chapter Glossary 
application (or app) A computer program designed to support a 
specific task or business process. 
business intelligence (BI) systems Provide computer-based support 
for complex, nonroutine decisions, primarily for middle managers 
and knowledge workers. 
computer-based information system (CBIS) An information system 
that uses computer technology to perform some or all of its intended 
tasks. 
dashboards A special form of IS that support all managers of the 
organization by providing rapid access to timely information and 
direct access to structured information in the form of reports. 
data items An elementary description of things, events, activities, and 
transactions that are recorded, classified, and stored but are not 
organized to convey any specific meaning. 
database A collection of related files or tables containing data. 
electronic commerce (e-commerce) systems A type of 
interorganizational information system that enables organizations to 
conduct transactions, called business-to-business (B2B) electronic 
commerce, and customers to conduct transactions with businesses, 
called business-to-consumer (B2C) electronic commerce. 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems Information systems 
that correct a lack of communication among the functional area ISs 
by tightly integrating the functional area ISs via a common database. 
ergonomics The science of adapting machines and work environments 
to people; focuses on creating an environment that is safe, well lit, 
and comfortable. 
expert systems (ES) Attempt to duplicate the work of human experts 
by applying reasoning capabilities, knowledge, and expertise within 
a specific domain. 
functional area information systems (FAISs) ISs that support a 
particular functional area within the organization. 
hardware A device such as a processor, monitor, keyboard, or printer. 
Together, these devices accept, process, and display data and 
information. 
information Data that have been organized so that they have meaning 
and value to the recipient. 
information system (IS) Collects, processes, stores, analyzes, and 
disseminates information for a specific purpose. 
information technology (IT) Relates to any computer-based tool that 
people use to work with information and support the information 
and information-processing needs of an organization. 
information technology components Hardware, soft ware, 
databases, and networks. 
information technology infrastructure IT components plus IT 
services. 
information technology platform Formed by the IT components of 
hardware, software, networks (wireline and wireless), and databases. 
information technology services IT personnel use IT components 
to perform these IT services: develop information systems, oversee 
security and risk, and manage data. 
informed user A person knowledgeable about information systems 
and information technology. 
interorganizational information systems (IOSs) Information 
systems that connect two or more organizations. 
knowledge Data and/or information that have been organized and 
processed to convey understanding, experience, accumulated 
learning, and expertise as they apply to a current problem or 
activity. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Problem-Solving Activities 29 
knowledge workers Professional employees such as financial and 
marketing analysts, engineers, lawyers, and accountants, who are 
experts in a particular subject area and create information and 
knowledge, which they integrate into the business. 
network A connecting system (wireline or wireless) that permits 
different computers to share resources. 
procedures The set of instructions for combining hardware, soft ware, 
database, and network components in order to process information 
and generate the desired output. 
Discussion Questions 
 1.  Describe a business that you would like to start. Discuss how infor­
mation technology could: (a) help you find and research an idea for a 
business, (b) help you formulate your business plan, and (c) help you 
finance your business.
 2.  Your university wants to recruit high-quality high school students from 
your state. Provide examples of (a) the data that your recruiters would 
gather in this process, (b) the information that your recruiters would 
process from these data, and (c) the types of knowledge that your re­
cruiters would infer from this information.
 3.  Can the terms data, information, and knowledge have diff erent mean­
ings for different people? Support your answer with examples.
 4.  Information technology makes it possible to “never be out of touch.” 
Discuss the pros and cons of always being available to your employers 
and clients (regardless of where you are or what you are doing).
 5.  Robots have the positive impact of being able to relieve humans from 
working in dangerous conditions. What are some negative impacts of 
robots in the workplace?
 6.  Is it possible to endanger yourself by accessing too much medical in­
formation on the Web? Why or why not? Support your answer.
 7.  Describe other potential impacts of IT on societies as a whole.
 8.  What are the major reasons why it is important for employees in all 
functional areas to become familiar with IT?
 9.  Given that information technology is impacting every industry, what 
does this mean for a company’s employees? Provide specific examples 
to support your answer. 
10.  Given that information technology is impacting every industry, what 
does this mean for students attending a college of business? Provide 
specific examples to support your answer. 
11.  Is the vast amount of medical information on the Web a good thing? 
Answer from the standpoint of a patient and from the standpoint of a 
physician. 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  Visit some Web sites that offer employment opportunities in IT. Promi­
nent examples are: www.dice.com, www.monster.com, www.collegere­
cruiter.com, www.careerbuilder.com, www.jobcentral.com, www.job 
.com, www.career.com, www.simplyhired.com, and www.truecareers 
.com. Compare the IT salaries to salaries offered to accountants, mar­
keting personnel, financial personnel, operations personnel, and hu­
man resources personnel. For other information on IT salaries, check 
Computerworld’s annual salary survey. 
2.  Enter the Web site of UPS (www.ups.com). 
a.  Find out what information is available to customers before they 
send a package. 
b.  Find out about the “package tracking” system. 
software A program or collection of programs that enable the 
hardware to process data. 
supply chain The flow of materials, information, money, and services 
from suppliers of raw materials through factories and warehouses to 
the end customers. 
transaction processing system (TPS) Supports the monitoring, 
collection, storage, and processing of data from the organization’s 
basic business transactions, each of which generates data.
c.  Compute the cost of delivering a 10" × 20" × 15" box, weighing 40 
pounds, from your hometown to Long Beach, California (or to Lan­
sing, Michigan, if you live in or near Long Beach). Compare the fast­
est delivery against the least cost. How long did this process take? 
Look into the business services offered by UPS. How do they make 
this process easier when you are a business customer? 
3.  Surf the Internet for information about the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS). Examine the available information, and comment on 
the role of information technologies in the department. 
4.  Access www.irobot.com, and investigate the company’s Education and 
Research Robots. Surf the Web for other companies that manufacture 
robots, and compare their products with those of iRobot. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
Closing Case 1  
The United States Postal Service Utilizes Information 
POM 
Technology to Modernize 
The Problems 
Every American is a customer of the United States Postal Service (USPS; 
www.usps.gov), an agency that delivers 158 billion pieces of mail per 
year. Despite its importance to U.S. citizens, however, the agency faces 
multiple challenges, including: 
•  Electronic mail has contributed to a decrease in the volume of 
first-class (or stamped) mail. This decrease has led to a decline 
in USPS revenue. 
•  Another cause of declining revenues is competition from private 
delivery companies like FedEx (www.fedex.com) and UPS (www. 
ups.com). These businesses are taking customers away from 
USPS’s package delivery service while sometimes relying on the 
agency for last-mile delivery. Last-mile delivery is the final and 
typically most expensive leg of a delivery route. 
•  Other companies are also developing services that could disrupt 
the USPS’s parcel delivery service. For example, Matternet (http:// 
mttr.net), Amazon (Amazon Prime Air), and Google (Project Wing) 
have developed unmanned aerial vehicles, or drones, that can 
deliver packages and letters. 
•  Transportation has long been the essential skill at the USPS. Nev­
ertheless, the agency has approximately 160,000 delivery vehi­
cles that are 20 years old and need to be replaced. 
•  In contrast to transportation skills, digital technology has not been 
an essential skill at the USPS. One major example that illustrates 
this problem occurred in November 2014, when the USPS became a 
victim of a cyberattack that threatened to put the names, address­
es, and social security numbers of 800,000 of its employees at risk. 
Further, USPS efforts to utilize cloud computing to reduce costs 
have raised concerns. In September 2014, the USPS inspector general (IG) 
criticized the agency for not properly controlling applications in its cloud 
environment with regard to information accessibility and data security. 
The USPS has long recognized these problems, and it has tried to 
introduce cost-saving measures. However, even though the agency is 
part of the executive branch of the federal government, Congress has 
enormous power over it. (The USPS is not funded by taxpayers.) Specif­
ically, Congress has rejected proposals to eliminate Saturday delivery 
of first-class mail, and it has prevented the USPS from consolidating 
little-used post offices in rural areas. These moves would have helped 
the agency reduce costs. Congress has also required the USPS to make 
regular payments into its future retirees’ health benefits, a mandate 
that imposed financial burdens on the agency. 
The USPS also has massive amounts of data on every piece of 
mail exchanged among millions of Americans as well as the companies 
that sell to them. However, the agency must meet the privacy statutes 
that apply to federal agencies. As a result, the agency cannot sell its 
data to businesses to help them better target consumers and therefore 
increase sales revenues. 
And the result of these numerous and diverse problems? Despite 
taking measures to reduce costs, such as closing processing centers 
and reducing employee working hours, 2015 was the USPS’s ninth con­
secutive year of losses. 
A Variety of Solutions 
To address these problems, the USPS is implementing a variety of solu­
tions. The agency is redesigning its mail-tracking system to encode as 
much information as possible on its letter and parcel bar codes with 
its Intelligent Mail bar code (IMB) system. The IMB uses automatic 
scanning devices and sorting equipment to scan bar codes to capture 
billions of data points and transmit them to a central database. Data 
range from the type of mail being delivered to a parcel’s final destina­
tion. The IMB enables the agency’s postal processing facilities to oper­
ate more eff iciently. 
In addition to supporting this real-time responsiveness, the USPS 
is also using data to enhance mail delivery. Accurately tracking how mail 
moves around the country, from the moment a delivery vehicle arrives 
at a dock to the second a letter reaches a delivery point, provides the 
agency with massive amounts of data. Data analytics enables the USPS 
to develop dynamic routing—the use of sophisticated algorithms to 
map out the most efficient and cost-effective mail delivery routes. 
In addition, mobile computing is driving innovation at the USPS. 
The agency has been replacing letter carriers’ cellphones with mobile 
delivery devices (MDDs). These handheld devices access multiple 
wireless networks to track parcels in real time. In addition, the MDDs 
provide the USPS with location data from its delivery vehicles. This 
process helps the agency to ensure its employees’ safety, predict deliv­
ery times, and pick up urgent materials from its customers. 
In the fall of 2014, the agency introduced an augmented reality 
technology designed to convert standard print ads into interactive 
experiences. The system enables consumers to use a free Android or 
iOS app to view digital presentations when they scan special icons that 
marketers attach to advertising brochures sent through the mail. 
In November 2013, Amazon entered into an arrangement with the 
USPS to deliver packages on Sundays in select cities. The partnership 
created an opportunity for the USPS to establish a stronger foothold in 
the growing package-delivery market. Consequently, its package reve­
nue increased 12 percent from 2012 to 2014. 
In response to the Inspector General’s criticisms regarding 
cloud applications, the USPS is utilizing the Federal Cloud Credential 
Exchange. The exchange is a cloud-based clearing service that acts as 
a hub for validating the digital credentials of people who want access 
to online government services. As a result, the Exchange also provides 
a high level of security for USPS applications running in the cloud. 
And the largest missed opportunity for a possible solution? If 
federal privacy guidelines allowed the practice, the USPS could use 
the IMB to help retailers and catalog companies create successful 
marketing campaigns. Consider a retailer that receives an e-mail or a 
text message alert from the USPS that a particular customer has just 
received the company’s catalog. The retailer could immediately e-mail 
the customer a digital coupon or a promotional offer in an eff ort to 
drive sales and enhance the overall customer experience. 
The Results 
The CIO of the USPS notes that information technology has become a 
core function within the agency. That is, IT is no longer a cost center. 
Instead, it adds essential value to the organization. However, the suc­
cess or failure of these diverse initiatives remains to be seen. That is, 
can the USPS stop losing so much money each year, or at least slow 
the hemorrhage? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 2 31 
Sources: Compiled from D. Leonard, “From: Postmaster General; 
To: Amazon,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, August 3-9, 2015; S. Tracy, 
“Autonomous Vehicles Will Replace Taxi Drivers, but That’s Just the 
Beginning,” Huffington Post, June 12, 2015; “Intelligent Mail Barcode 
for Mailpieces,” United States Postal Service, May 4, 2015; S. Edelstein, 
“U.S.P.S. ‘Long Life’ Vehicles Last 25 Years, But Age Shows Now,” Green 
Car Reports, February 17, 2015; J. Williams, “Heading into 2015, USPS 
Looks to Tech to Reshape Model,” fedscoop, December 31, 2014; C. Waxer, 
“Digital SOS: How Technology Can Save the USPS,” Computerworld, 
December 8, 2014; C. Waxer, “Modernizing the Mail,” Computerworld, 
December, 2014; J. Williams, “USPS Cloud Systems Don’t Comply with 
Established Standards, OIG Says,” fedscoop, September 10, 2014; M. 
Ashley, “Why Amazon Locker Is Better Than Home Delivery,” TechHive, 
July 28, 2014; “U.S. Postal Service Parcel Delivery Lockers,” Office of 
Inspector General, United States Postal Service; December 2013; J. Edgar, 
“How Technology Is Changing the USPS,” The Wall Street Journal, October 
Closing Case 2 
POM New Delivery Services Use Information Technology 
The Problem 
Webvan, an online grocery business that went bankrupt in 2001, is 
considered to be the largest dotcom failure in history. The company’s 
business model was to deliver products to customers’ homes within 30 
minutes of a time they chose.  
Today, busy consumers are increasingly looking for the conveni­
ence of having many items delivered on demand, with food being the 
largest category. In fact, despite the well-known failure of Webvan, 
many same-day, third-party delivery providers are emerging to com­
pete in the $70 billion delivery business. Delivery services are an excel­
lent strategy for small businesses to differentiate themselves from 
their competitors and to compete with giant online retailers. 
Delivery service providers include some of the largest firms in 
technology and retail, as well as specialized startups. The major chal­
lenge facing these companies is how to deliver groceries and other 
items door-to-door without incurring unmanageable costs.  
A Variety of Rapid Delivery-Service Solutions 
These companies use information technology such as apps on GPS-en­
abled smartphones to bypass the need for warehouses and delivery 
fleets in their attempt to serve customers who are willing to pay a bit 
extra to have things done quickly. In addition, these companies oft en 
do not hire their workers. Rather, they use independent contractors 
who are willing to forgo benefits packages (e.g., health insurance, 401 
K plans) for jobs they can perform whenever they want to. 
The delivery services differ from more established grocery deliv­
ery companies such as FreshDirect (www.freshdirect.com), Peapod 
(www.peapod.com), and AmazonFresh (https://fresh.amazon.com) 
because they do not actually sell groceries directly to you. Instead, you 
select what you want online or via an app and choose a delivery time. 
The service then sends a contractor to the store to pick up your order 
and deliver it to your door. Let’s take a look at some of these services. 
Instacart. Instacart (www.instacart.com) delivers items from chains 
such as Safeway, Whole Foods, and Costco as well as local markets. In­
stacart has no physical infrastructure. In fact, the company consists of 
two grocery-delivery smartphone apps. 
10, 2013; W. Jackson, “USPS Set to Put Federal ID System to the Test,” 
GCN.com, August 22, 2013; www.usps.gov, accessed July 14, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Provide specific examples of how information technology is nega­
tively impacting the USPS. 
2.  Provide specific examples of how information technology is posi­
tively impacting the USPS. 
3.  Describe how information technology both positively and nega­
tively impacts your university. 
4.  Is it possible to generalize and describe information technology as 
a “two-edged” sword for all organizations? Why or why not? 
Customers place orders using Instacart’s Web site or mobile app. 
A separate app, used by more than 4,000 personal shoppers whom 
Instacart has hired across 15 cities, guides the shoppers to stores from 
which they buy goods. The app actually identifies the aisle and the 
shelf where an item is located. The goal is to deliver orders within one 
hour of the order being placed. 
Personal shoppers fill several orders at once as they go from store 
to store. The app suggests the optimal driving route to a customer’s 
home, taking into account weather, traffic, sporting events, and local 
construction. Instacart charges a premium based on the size of each 
purchase. The company also offers a $99-per-year membership that 
waives the delivery fee for orders greater than $35. 
Postmates. Postmates (https://postmates.com) works like this: The 
company’s 13,000 couriers receive orders on their smartphones. For 
example, a customer wants 18 pounds of crushed ice, and Postmates 
offers the courier $4.80 to pick up the ice and deliver it. When the cou­
rier accepts the job, his phone guides him to the grocery store and then 
to the customer. 
The majority of deliveries made by Postmates are hot meals. The 
company analyzes data such as food-preparation times to become 
more eff ective at stacking—as their couriers drop off  one order, their 
next pickup is already assigned and being prepared.  
Although roughly 80 percent of Postmates’ orders are prepared 
food, the company is expanding to deliver other commodities; for 
example, healthcare and beauty products. In addition, in mid-2015 
the company reached a deal with Apple to deliver MacBooks and other 
products the same day that customers purchase them online. 
Uber. In 2015, Uber (www.uber.com) launched a meal-delivery service, 
called UberEats, in New York and Chicago. The items on UberEats come 
from a range of local restaurants, with the offerings changing every 
day. The option to order from UberEats shows up on the Uber app only 
when a user is in an area that is covered. 
Sidecar. Sidecar (www.side.cr) is leveraging people who are already on 
the road. The app, which allows people to pay for rides in other peo­
ple’s cars, requires all users to enter in a destination before they get a 
ride, In February 2015, Sidecar announced that it was going to begin 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
CHAPTER 1 Introduction to Information Systems 
using those data to combine ride sharing with delivery. Doubling up 
means more money for both Sidecar and the driver. 
GrubHub/Seamless. GrubHub/Seamless (www.grubhub.com) is a lead­
ing provider of digital ordering services, with 35,000 restaurant part­
ners. The app allows customers to browse menus, place orders, and 
pay for delivery online or via a mobile app. In 2015, the company ac­
quired delivery providers Restaurants on the Run and DiningIn. These 
acquisitions enable GrubHub/Seamless to own the “last mile” of deliv­
ery and become a one-stop shop for food, from ordering to delivery. 
Ola Cabs. Ola Cabs (Ola; https://www.olacabs.com) provides diff erent 
types of cab service in India. Customers can reserve a cab through a 
Web browser or a mobile app. The company commands about 60 per­
cent of the market share in India. In 2015, Ola launched a grocery deliv­
ery service, Ola Store, that offers customers a choice of 12,000 products 
across 13 categories, including fruits, vegetables, eggs, dairy, frozen 
goods, and baby items. 
The Results 
These companies do experience challenges. To begin with, the work­
force that is essential to this business model may present a problem. 
That is, their labor costs will probably rise. In addition, several on-de­
mand companies are being sued for classifying their couriers as inde­
pendent contractors rather than as employees to avoid providing 
them with benefits packages. In June 2015, California’s labor commis­
sioner ruled that a driver for Uber should be classified as a company 
employee. 
Another challenge is that convenience can be expensive because 
delivery charges can vary greatly. For example, Instacart off ers flat 
rates, where Postmates’ fees depend on the distance of the delivery. 
Besides delivery costs, Instacart charges a premium for items from 
some of the stores it delivers from. Another downside is that shoppers 
may miss out on using coupons or browsing for cheaper alternatives 
in the store. Also, the orders do not always go according to plan. For 
example, if an item is sold out, then the delivery person has to call the 
customer for instructions on what to do. 
Perhaps the most serious challenge in the delivery market is com­
petition from many large, established companies that off er delivery 
services. Consider these examples: 
•  Amazon (www.amazon.com) is considering a crowdsourced (see 
Chapter 4) delivery solution that uses individuals to deliver packag­
es and existing retailers to store them, all powered by a mobile app. 
•  Walmart (www.walmart.com), which generates half of its busi­
ness from food, is testing the online grocery concept. 
•  Safeway grocery stores (https://shop.safeway.com) off ers its 
“fresh to your door” delivery service. 
•  Starbucks (www.starbucks.com) offers a delivery service. 
With the intense competition in the delivery services market, it is 
too early to predict any results. However, the companies discussed in 
this case are receiving large amounts of venture capital funding. 
Sources: Compiled from J. Russell, “India’s Ola Takes a Leaf Out of Uber’s 
Book with New Grocery-Delivery Service,” Tech Crunch, July 21, 2015; L. 
Rao, “Instacart Is Asking Its Customers to Do Something New,” Fortune, 
June 26, 2015; K. Kokalitcheva, “Why On-Demand Delivery Startup 
Postmates Really Raised $80 Million,” Fortune, June 25, 2015; M. Kosoff, 
“$2 Billion Grocery Delivery Startup Instacart Is Reclassifying Some of 
Its Workers as Employees,” Business Insider, June 22, 2015; G. Bensinger, 
“Amazon’s Next Delivery Drone: You,” The Wall Street Journal, June 16, 
2015; L. Heller, “Amazon’s Uber-Like Delivery Service Could Be Coming 
Soon,” Forbes, June 16, 2015; A. Connolly, “Amazon Considers Copying 
Postmates with New Crowdsourced Delivery Service,” The Next Web, 
June 16, 2015; P. Vasan, “Tech Giants Serving Up Real Competition for 
FreshDirect,” CNBC, June 12, 2015; J. Pinsker, “What Does the On-Demand 
Workforce Look Like?” The Atlantic, May 20, 2015; L. Jennings, “New 
Services Disrupt Restaurant Delivery Landscape,” Nation’s Restaurant 
News, May 18, 2015; K. Taylor, “We Tested Chipotle and McDonald’s New 
Delivery Services. Here’s What Happened,” Entrepreneur, May 6, 2015; R. 
Tepper, “Watch Out Seamless: New Delivery Services Are Invading Your 
Turf,” Yahoo, May 1, 2015; A. Stevenson, “Death to Amazon? Postmates’ 
Boost to Small Business,” CNBC, April 29, 2015; P. Sawers, “Uber Launches 
a Curated Meal-Delivery Service in New York and Chicago,” Venture 
Beat, April 28, 2015; K. Steinmetz, “Go Fetch,” Time, March 16, 2015; B. 
Solomon, “America’s Most Promising Company: Instacart, the $2 Billion 
Grocery App,” Forbes, January 21, 2015; D. Matthews, “Watch Out, 
Seamless and GrubHub – Amazon Is Coming for You,” Fast Company, 
December 3, 2014; K. Spors, “What Starbucks’ New Delivery Service 
Means for Local Businesses,” American Express, November 3, 2014; J. 
Mangalindan, “Shop Till You’re on Top,” Fortune, October 27, 2014; J. 
Bercovici, “The Same-Day War,” Forbes, May 5, 2014. 
Questions 
1.  Describe the information technology used and developed by the 
entrepreneurs who founded Instacart, Postmates, GrubHub/Seam­
less, Uber, Sidecar, and Ola Cabs. What is the impact of these tech­
nologies on the costs of starting a business? 
2.  What are the advantages and disadvantages of being an independ­
ent contractor for a company? 
3.  Would you consider a job as a courier for one of these companies? 
Why or why not? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Maartje van Caspel/iStockphoto 
CHAPTER 2 
Organizational Strategy,  
Competitive Advantage,  
and Information Systems  
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
2.1  Business Pressures, Organizational 
Responses, and Information Technol­
ogy Support 
2.2  Competitive Advantage and Strategic 
Information Systems 
Opening Case 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
2.1  Identify effective IT responses to different kinds of business pressures. 
2.2  Describe the strategies that organizations typically adopt to counter Porter’s five com­
petitive forces. 
The hero of Big Hero 6 is not necessarily Baymax, but, rather, 
MIS 
the artists and software engineers who developed the tech-
Disney Animation Develops Soft ware 
nology behind this hit motion picture. This animated film is the first 
POM 
ever produced with Hyperion, a software package created by Disney 
to Make Big Hero 6 
that simulates the behavior of light. That is, the soft ware attempts to 
At Disney Animation (www.disneyanimation.com), technology is 
create light the way we actually see it in the real world. The soft ware 
essential. The Disney animated motion picture Big Hero 6 centers on 
must mimic the many obstacles the sun’s rays encounter in our atmos­
a robot (Baymax) and a robotics prodigy (Hiro) who form a superhero 
phere and then diffuse the light the same way natural light does. 
group and take on a villain in the futuristic city of San Fransokyo. This 
The software, which took two years and 200 million comput­
city, a mash-up of San Francisco and Tokyo, is located on a large bay 
ing hours to develop, is what provides Big Hero 6 with its cinematic 
and has many skyscrapers and flashing neon lights. 
imagery and depth. Until Disney developed Hyperion, the company 
33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
CHAPTER 2  Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage, and Information Systems 
had never been able to use light in such a way. For example, the soft ­
ware gives Baymax a transparent glow by allowing light to bounce 
around inside him. 
Before Hyperion, the process of simulating light was tedious, 
because each ray of light’s trajectory had to be individually tracked. A 
single frame of animation could contain several light sources, and each 
ray of light could bounce off multiple surfaces, making the calculation 
of those individual pathways computationally intensive. 
Disney engineers spent so much time creating Hyperion because 
they were simulating 10 billion rays of light bouncing around in each 
scene. Hyperion provides a softness, a depth to shadows, and lifelike 
highlights in every scene. 
Disney needed huge amounts of processing power to produce 
the film. Three Disney server farms in Los Angeles and one in San Fran­
cisco were connected to create a supercomputer of 4,600 servers that 
contained 55,000 central processing units (CPUs). (We describe server 
farms in Plug IT In 4 and supercomputers and CPUs in Plug IT In 2.) 
Coda, an automated information management system, integrated the 
information being processed from the four server farms. Because Dis­
ney artists could utilize such a huge amount of computational power 
to process the images, they could see their work the next morning. 
Animated films typically take about four years to produce, and 
the Disney team was writing the Hyperion software and using it on Big 
Hero 6 at the same time. One Disney software engineer explained, “The 
process was just like building a car while you were driving it.” 
And the result of using the Hyperion soft ware? Big Hero 6 cost 
$165 million to produce. By July 2015, the film had generated more 
than $600 million in box office ticket sales worldwide. Big Hero 6 also 
won an Oscar for Best Animated Feature Film. Disney used Hyperion in 
its movie Zootopia, which the studio released in March 2016. 
Sources: Compiled from R. Conli and A. Hendrickson, “The Secrets 
Behind Disney’s Latest Oscar-Winning Animation,” Creative Blog, 
February 24, 2015; D. Miller, “Software Behind ‘Big Hero 6’ Pushes 
Envelope on Computer Animation,” The Los Angeles Times, February 
20, 2015; K. Costello, “Innovative Light Technology, Algorithmic 
Swarms, and an Inflatable Robot – Big Hero 6 Has It All!” Dogo News, 
December 4, 2014; T. Hammond, “Disney Animation Team Pushes 
Technical Boundaries with Big Hero 6,” TechRepublic, November 28, 
2014; S. Karlin, “The Monster Supercomputing Achievement that Lights 
Up Disney’s ‘Big Hero 6’,” Fast Company, November 28, 2014; J. Volpe, 
“Disney Rendered Its New Animated on a 55,000 – Core Supercomputer,” 
Endgadget, October 18, 2014; S. Ford, “Disney Creates New Digital 
Animation Process for ‘Big Hero 6’,” Orlando Sentinel, October 20, 
2014; M. Seymour, “Disney’s New Production Renderer ‘Hyperion’— 
Yes, Disney!” fxguide, October 13, 2014; www.disneyanimation.com, 
accessed July 24, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Is Hyperion a strategic information system for Disney Animation? Why 
or why not? Provide specific examples to support your answer. 
2.  Will Hyperion provide a sustainable competitive advantage for Disney 
Animation? Why or why not? 
3.  Look ahead in this chapter. Which one of Porter’s strategies for compet­
itive advantage is Disney pursuing? Explain your answer. 
Introduction 
Organizations operate in the incredible complexity of the modern high-tech world. As a result, 
they are subject to a myriad of business pressures. Information systems are critically important 
in helping organizations respond to business pressures and in supporting organizations’ global 
strategies. As you study this chapter, you will see that any information system can be strategic, 
meaning that it can provide a competitive advantage if it is used properly. The chapter opening 
case, as well as all the other cases in this chapter, illustrate how information technology (IT) can 
provide competitive advantage to organizations. 
Competitive advantage refers to any assets that provide an organization with an edge 
against its competitors in some measure such as cost, quality, or speed. A competitive advan­
tage helps an organization to control a market and to accrue larger-than-average profits. Signif­
icantly, both strategy and competitive advantage take many forms. 
Although there are many companies that use technology in more expensive ways, an 
entrepreneurial spirit coupled with a solid understanding of what IT can do for you will provide 
competitive advantages to entrepreneurs just as it does for Wall Street CIOs. As you study this 
chapter, think of the small businesses in your area that are utilizing popular technologies in 
interesting and novel ways. Have any of them found an innovative use for Twitter? Facebook? 
Amazon? PayPal? If not, then can you think of any businesses that would benefit from employ­
ing these technologies? 
This chapter is important for you for several reasons. First, the business pressures we 
address in the chapter will affect your organization. Just as important, however, they also will 
aff ect you. Therefore, you must understand how information systems can help you—and even­
tually your organization—respond to these pressures. 
In addition, acquiring competitive advantage is essential for your organization’s survival. 
Many organizations achieve competitive advantage through the efforts of their employees. 
Therefore, becoming knowledgeable about strategy and how information systems aff ect strat­
egy and competitive position will help you throughout your career. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 
Business Pressures, Organizational Responses, and Information Technology Support 35 
This chapter encourages you to become familiar with your organization’s strategy, mis­
sion, and goals and to understand its business problems and how it makes (or loses) money. It 
will help you understand how information technology contributes to organizational strategy. 
Further, you likely will become a member of business/IT committees that decide (among many 
other things) how to use existing technologies more effectively and whether to adopt new 
ones. After studying this chapter, you will be able to make immediate contributions in these 
committees when you join your organizations. 
In this chapter, you will see how information systems enable organizations to respond to 
business pressures. Next, you will learn how information systems help organizations gain com­
petitive advantages in the marketplace. 
Business Pressures, Organizational 
Responses, and Information Technology 
Support 
Modern organizations compete in a challenging environment. To remain competitive, they 
must react rapidly to problems and opportunities that arise from extremely dynamic condi­
tions. In this section, you examine some of the major pressures confronting modern organiza­
tions and the strategies that organizations employ to respond to these pressures. 
Business Pressures 
The business environment is the combination of social, legal, economic, physical, and politi­
cal factors in which businesses conduct their operations. Significant changes in any of these fac­
tors are likely to create business pressures on organizations. Organizations typically respond to 
these pressures with activities supported by IT. Figure 2.1 illustrates the relationships among 
business pressures, organizational performance and responses, and IT support. You will learn 
about three major types of business pressures: market, technology, and societal pressures. 
Market Pressures. Market pressures are generated by the global economy, intense compe­
tition, the changing nature of the workforce, and powerful customers. Let’s look more closely 
at each of these factors. 
Globalization. Globalization is the integration and interdependence of economic, social, 
cultural, and ecological facets of life, made possible by rapid advances in information technol­
ogy. Today, individuals around the world are able to connect, compute, communicate, collab­
orate, and compete everywhere and anywhere, anytime and all the time; to access limitless 
amounts of information, services, and entertainment; to exchange knowledge; and to produce 
and sell goods and services. People and organizations can now operate without regard to geog­
raphy, time, distance, or even language barriers. The bottom line? Globalization is markedly 
increasing competition. 
These observations highlight the importance of market pressures for you. Simply put, you 
and the organizations you join will be competing with people and organizations from all over 
a flat world. 
Let’s consider some examples of globalization: 
• Multinational corporations operate on a global scale, with offices and branches located 
worldwide. 
• Many automobile manufacturers use parts from other countries, such as a car being 
assembled in the United States with parts coming from Japan, Germany, or Korea. 

 
 
36 
CHAPTER 2  Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage, and Information Systems 
Figure dep i cting three concentr
ic rings where in the center of
 the inner most ring is written IT. This ring is divided into nine sections denoting electronic commerce, strategic systems, CRM, continuous improvement effort, business process restructuring and management, intelligent data management, on-demand mass customization, better data management, and business alliance. The next ring denotes organizational performance responses divided into ten parts. Starting from the top and moving clockwise the parts denote global economy and strong competition, need for real-time operations, changing workforce, powerful customers, technological innovations, information overload, social responsibility, compliance with government, ethical issues, and terrorist attack and homeland security. The outermost ring is divided into three parts, namely, economic, technology, and societal/political/legal.
• The World Trade Organization (WTO; www.wto.org) supervises international trade. 
• Regional agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which 
includes the United States, Canada, and Mexico, have contributed to increased world trade 
and increased competition. 
• The European Union is an economic and political union of 28 countries that are located 
primarily in Europe. 
• The rise of India and China as economic powerhouses has increased global competition. 
One important pressure that businesses in a global market must contend with is the cost of 
labor, which varies widely among countries. In general, labor costs are higher in developed 
countries such as the United States and Japan than in developing countries such as Bangladesh 
and El Salvador. Also, developed countries usually off er greater benefits, such as healthcare, 
to employees, driving the cost of doing business even higher. Therefore, many labor-intensive 
industries have moved their operations to countries with low labor costs. IT has made such 
moves much easier to implement. 
However, manufacturing overseas is no longer the bargain it once was, and manufacturing 
in the United States is no longer as expensive. For example, manufacturing wages in China have 
more than doubled between 2002 and 2015, and they continue to rise. Meanwhile, the value of 
China’s currency has steadily risen. 
The Changing Nature of the Workforce. The workforce, particularly in developed 
countries, is becoming more diversified. Increasing numbers of women, single parents, minor­
ities, and persons with disabilities are now employed in all types of positions. IT is easing the 
integration of these employees into the traditional workforce. IT is also enabling people to 
work from home, which can be a major benefit for parents with young children and for people 
confronted with mobility and/or transportation issues. 
HRM 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Pressures, Organizational Responses, and Information Technology Support 37 
MKT 
Powerful Customers. Consumer sophistication and expectations increase as customers 
become more knowledgeable about the products and services they acquire. Customers can 
use the Internet to find detailed information about products and services, to compare prices, 
and to purchase items at electronic auctions. 
Organizations recognize the importance of customers and they have increased their 
efforts to acquire and retain them. Modern firms strive to learn as much as possible about 
their customers to better anticipate and address their needs. This process, called customer 
intimacy, is an important component of customer relationship management (CRM), an organ­
ization-wide effort toward maximizing the customer experience. You will learn about CRM in 
Chapter 12. 
Technology Pressures. The second category of business pressures consists of those pres­
sures related to technology. Two major technology-related pressures are technological innova­
tion and information overload. 
Technological Innovation and Obsolescence. New and improved technologies rap­
idly create or support substitutes for products, alternative service options, and superb quality. 
As a result, today’s state-of-the-art products may be obsolete tomorrow. For example, how fast 
are new versions of your smartphone being released? How quickly are electronic versions of 
books, magazines, and newspapers replacing traditional hard copy versions? These changes 
force businesses to keep up with consumer demands. 
Consider the rapid technological innovation of the Apple iPad (www.apple.com/ipad): 
• Apple released the first iPad in April 2010 and sold three million devices in just 80 days. 
• Apple released the iPad 2 on March 11, 2011, only 11 months later. 
• Apple released the iPad 3 on March 7, 2012. 
• Apple released its fourth-generation iPad on November 2, 2012, along with the iPad mini. 
• On November 1, 2013, Apple released the fifth generation of its iPad, called the iPad Air. 
• On November 12, 2013, Apple released its iPad Mini 2 with Retina Display. 
• In October 2014, Apple released the iPad Air 2 and the iPad Mini 3. 
• In September 2015, Apple announced the iPad Pro. 
One manifestation of technological innovation is “bring your own device (BYOD).” BYOD refers 
to the policy of permitting employees to bring personally owned mobile devices (laptops, tab­
let computers, and smartphones) to the workplace and to use those devices to connect to the 
corporate network as well as for personal use as well. The academic version of BYOD involves 
students’ utilizing personally owned devices in educational settings to connect to their school’s 
network. 
The rapid increase in BYOD represents a huge challenge for IT departments. Not only has IT 
lost the ability to fully control and manage these devices, but employees are now demanding 
that they be able to conduct company business from multiple personal devices. 
The good news is that BYOD has increased worker productivity and satisfaction. In fact, 
some employees with BYOD privileges actually work longer hours with no additional pay. 
The bad news is security concerns. Many companies with BYOD policies have experi­
enced an increase in malware (malicious soft ware, discussed in Chapter 7). Further, there is 
an increased risk of losing sensitive, proprietary information. Such information might not be 
securely stored on a personal, mobile device, which can be lost or stolen. 
Information Overload. The amount of information available on the Internet doubles 
approximately every year, and much of it is free. The Internet and other telecommunications 
networks are bringing a flood of information to managers. To make decisions eff ectively and 
efficiently, managers must be able to access, navigate, and utilize these vast stores of data, 
information, and knowledge. Information technologies, such as search engines (discussed in 
Chapter 4) and data mining (Chapter 5), provide valuable support in these eff orts. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
CHAPTER 2  Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage, and Information Systems 
Societal/Political/Legal Pressures. The third category of business pressures includes 
social responsibility, government regulation/deregulation, spending for social programs, 
spending to protect against terrorism, and ethics. This section will explain how all of these ele­
ments affect modern businesses. We start with social responsibility. 
Social Responsibility. Social issues that affect businesses and individuals range from 
the state of the physical environment, to company and individual philanthropy, to education. 
Some corporations and individuals are willing to spend time and/or money to address various 
social problems. These efforts are known as organizational social responsibility or individ­
ual social responsibility. 
One critical social problem is the state of the physical environment. A growing IT initiative, 
called green IT, addresses some of the most pressing environmental concerns. IT is instrumen­
tal in organizational efforts to “go green” in three areas: 
1.  Facilities design and management. Organizations are creating more environmentally sus­
tainable work environments. Many organizations are pursuing Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design (LEED) certification from the U.S. Green Building Council, a nonprofit 
group that promotes the construction of environmentally friendly buildings. One impact of 
this development is that IT professionals are expected to help create green facilities. 
2.  Carbon management. As companies try to reduce their carbon footprints, they are turning 
to IT executives to develop the systems needed to monitor carbon throughout the organi­
zation and its supply chain, which can be global in scope. Therefore, IT employees need to 
become knowledgeable about embedded carbon and how to measure it in the company’s 
products and processes. 
3.  International and U.S. environmental laws. IT executives must deal with federal and state 
laws and international regulations that impact everything from the IT products they buy, 
to how they dispose of them, to their company’s carbon footprint. 
Continuing our discussion of social responsibility, social problems all over the world may be 
addressed through corporate and individual philanthropy. In some cases, questions arise as to 
what percentage of contributions actually goes to the intended causes and recipients and what 
percentage goes to the charity’s overhead. Another problem that concerns contributors is that 
they often exert little influence over the selection of projects their contributions will support. 
The Internet can help address these concerns and facilitate generosity and connection. Con­
sider the following examples: 
•  PatientsLikeMe (www.patientslikeme.com), or any of the thousands of message boards 
dedicated to infertility, cancer, and various other ailments. People use these sites and 
message boards to obtain information about healthcare decisions based on volunteered 
information, while also receiving much-needed emotional support from strangers. 
•  Collaborative Consumption (www.collaborativeconsumption.com): This Web site is an 
online hub for discussions about the growing business of sharing, resale, reuse, and barter 
(with many links to Web sites engaged in these practices). 
•  Kiva (www.kiva.org): Kiva is a nonprofit enterprise that provides a link between lenders in 
developed countries and entrepreneurs in developing countries. Users pledge interest-free 
loans rather than tax-deductible donations. Kiva directs 100 percent of the loans to borrowers. 
•  DonorsChoose (www.donorschoose.org): DonorsChoose is an education-oriented Web site 
that functions entirely within the United States. Users make donations rather than loans. 
The Web site addresses the huge problem of underfunded public schools. 
Still another social problem that affects modern business is the digital divide. The digital 
divide refers to the wide gap between those individuals who have access to information and 
communications technology and those who do not. This gap exists both within and among 
countries. 
Many government and international organizations are trying to close the digital divide. As 
technologies develop and become less expensive, the speed at which the gap can be closed will 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Pressures, Organizational Responses, and Information Technology Support 39 
accelerate. On the other hand, the rapid pace of technological development can make it more 
difficult for groups with few resources to keep up with more aff luent groups. 
One well-known project to narrow the divide is the One Laptop per Child (OLPC) project 
(http://one.laptop.org). OLPC is a nonprofit association dedicated to developing a very inex­
pensive laptop—a technology that aims to revolutionize how the world can educate its chil­
dren. In early 2015, the price of OLPC’s laptop remains approximately $200. We should note 
however, that this price includes educational software loaded on the laptop. 
IT’s About Business 2.1 examines the role that IT plays in two important social issues: 
(1) social responsibility in the form of protecting the environment and (2) narrowing the digital 
divide. 
IT’s About Business 2.1 
Using Information Technology for Social Good 
Stopping illegal logging. According to a 2014 study by Interpol 
(www.interpol.int), an organization that encourages cooperation 
among law enforcement agencies in different countries, illegal log­
ging is pervasive, accounting for between 50 and 90 percent of all 
trees harvested. According to the World Wildlife Fund (WWW; www 
.worldwildlife.org), illegal logging is particularly serious in the Ama­
zon and Congo Basins, but it is widespread all over the world. 
Going further, these activities contribute to a multibillion-dol­
lar black market for wood, reducing world timber prices by about 
15 percent. The World Bank estimates that illegal logging costs the 
global industry $10 billion every year. 
These illegal logging activities reduce the size of the world’s 
rainforests by 5 to 10 percent every 10 years, causing a biodiversity 
crisis. Moreover, about 17 percent of greenhouse gas emissions are 
caused by illegal logging. 
One organization that is hoping to halt illegal logging is a San 
Francisco-based nonprofit known as the Rainforest Connection 
(https://rfcx.org). Volunteers put solar panels on old smartphones 
and place them high in the trees in the middle of a rainforest. The 
phones can pick up the sound of chainsaws cutting down a tree 
within one square mile, and emit data to rangers patrolling the for­
est, who can quickly stop the loggers. Just one phone can save 
enough trees to stop 15,000 tons of carbon from entering the 
atmosphere. 
The Infoladies of Bangladesh. Just 3 percent of people 
in Bangladesh have regular Internet connections. Most 
people who want to use the Internet are in rural villages. To provide 
regular access to villagers, the nonprofit organization Dnet (http:// 
dnet.org.bd) set up the Infoladies project (http://infolady.com 
.bd). Armed with a laptop and other digital equipment, a group of 
MIS 
50 young women cycle to the villages to make computers, tablets, 
smartphones, and digital cameras available to all. The Infoladies 
also bring a glucometer so that villagers can monitor their blood 
sugar levels. Farmers can also research information on crops and 
farming methods. The most popular request is for villagers to com­
municate with male relatives via Skype. Many of these men work 
in the Middle East. Dnet also lends women $650 so they can buy 
their own equipment to have an Infoladies franchise. Each franchi­
see earns an average of $90 per month for offering these digital ser­
vices, more than what most farmers in Bangladesh earn. 
Sources: Compiled from “Start-Up Creates Devices from Old Cell 
Phones to Tackle Illegal Logging and Poaching,” We Are Anonymous, 
July 28, 2015; J. Prentice-Dunn, “How Technology Can Help Stop 
Illegal Logging,” Sierra Club, July 6, 2015; J. Szczepanska, “Infoladies 
of Bangladesh,” OpenIDEO, April 15, 2015; “Bangladesh’s Travelling 
Infoladies: A Rural Revolution,” Philanthropy Age, January 25, 2015; J. 
Hance, “Daring Activists Use High-Tech to Track Illegal Logging Trucks 
in the Brazilian Amazon,” MongaBay, October 15, 2014; S. Chowdhury, 
“‘Infoladies’ Bring Change in Rural Bangladesh,” Aljazeera, August 
28, 2014; L. Gilpin, “How Recycled Solar Powered Phones Could 
Save Rainforests and Change How the Tech Industry Tackles Climate 
Change,” TechRepublic, August 8, 2014; G. Akash, “The Infoladies of 
Bangladesh,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, July 3, 2014; http://infolady. 
com.bd; https://rfcx.org, accessed July 26, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Describe how the Infoladies are a strategic information sys­
tem for the country of Bangladesh. Provide specific exam­
ples to support your answer. 
2. Discuss how the Rainforest Connection’s use of smartphones 
is a strategic information system for our planet. Provide spe­
cific examples to support your answer. 
Compliance with Government Regulations. Another major source of business pres­
sures is government regulations regarding health, safety, environmental protection, and equal 
opportunity. Businesses tend to view government regulations as expensive constraints on their 
activities. In general, government deregulation intensifies competition. 
In the wake of 9/11 and numerous corporate scandals, the U.S. government passed many 
new laws, including the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, the USA PATRIOT Act, the Gramm–Leach–Bliley 
Act, and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Organizations must be 
in compliance with the regulations contained in these statutes. The process of becoming and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
40 
CHAPTER 2  Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage, and Information Systems 
remaining compliant is expensive and time consuming. In almost all cases, organizations rely 
on IT support to provide the necessary controls and information for compliance. 
Protection Against Terrorist Attacks. Since September 11, 2001, organizations have 
been under increased pressure to protect themselves against terrorist attacks. In addition, 
employees who are in the military reserves have been called up for active duty, creating per­
sonnel problems. Information technology can help protect businesses by providing security 
systems and possibly identifying patterns of behavior associated with terrorist activities, 
including cyberattacks (discussed in Chapter 7). For a good example of a firm that provides this 
protection, see Palantir (www.palantir.com). 
An example of protection against terrorism is the Department of Homeland Security’s 
(DHS) Office of Biometric Identity Management (OBIM) program. (We discuss biometrics in 
Chapter 7.) OBIM is a network of biometric screening systems, such as fingerprint and iris and 
retina scanners, that ties into government databases and watch lists to check the identities of 
millions of people entering the United States. The system is now operational in more than 300 
locations, including major international ports of entry by air, sea, and land. 
Ethical Issues. Ethics relates to general standards of right and wrong. Information ethics 
relates specifically to standards of right and wrong in information processing practices. Ethical 
issues are very important because, if handled poorly, they can damage an organization’s image 
and destroy its employees’ morale. The use of IT raises many ethical issues, ranging from mon­
itoring e-mail to invading the privacy of millions of customers whose data are stored in private 
and public databases. Chapter 6 covers ethical issues in detail. 
Clearly, then, the pressures on organizations are increasing, and organizations must be 
prepared to take responsive actions if they are to succeed. You will learn about these organiza­
tional responses in the next section. 
Organizational Responses 
Organizations are responding to the various pressures just discussed by implementing IT such 
as strategic systems, customer focus, make-to-order and mass customization, and e-business. 
This section explores each of these responses. 
Strategic Systems. Strategic systems provide organizations with advantages that enable 
them to increase their market share and/or profits, to better negotiate with suppliers, and to 
prevent competitors from entering their markets. IT’s About Business 2.2 provides another 
example of how strategically important information systems can be by examining technology 
improvements in airports and airlines. 
IT’s About Business 2.2 
Innovative Technologies for Airlines and 
POM 
Airports 
Airlines and airports are producing innovative tools in ground and air 
operations, with the idea of making the flying experience more con­
venient and enjoyable. Technology is also improving customer ser­
vice, allowing staff to spend more time with passengers needing help. 
Airports are deploying multifunction kiosks in many areas, 
allowing passengers to serve themselves without agents’ help. 
Passengers can use these kiosks to weigh and tag their luggage 
without the assistance of an agent and drop them off at a baggage 
drop-off. At other kiosks, customers can do things such as rebook a 
cancelled flight. If they need help, passengers can ask an agent who 
is stationed near the kiosks. 
Some airport gates have kiosks that provide do-it-yourself 
boarding, speeding up the process. Passengers scan their boarding 
passes and can head directly to their seats. 
Many international airports allow passengers to serve them­
selves at Customs, scanning their passports at an automated kiosk 
and answering questions on the touch screen. These kiosks speed 
up the process of going through Customs. 
Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport is rolling out “digi­
tal way finders”—touch screens allowing passengers to find rest-
rooms, restaurants, and other amenities—by 2018. 
It’s not just passengers who are benefiting from self-serve 
technology—many airports are equipping staff with the means to 
improve productivity. For example, many airports have given staff 
iPads so they can inspect stores, take photos of any issues, such as a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Pressures, Organizational Responses, and Information Technology Support 41 
full trash can, and report the issue to the store management to take 
immediate action. In the not-too-distant future, passengers may be 
able to use their smartphones in the terminal to order food and gift s. 
Walkbase (www.walkbase.com) developed the tools for man­
aging the flow of people through Helsinki airport. The company is 
taking advantage of the fact that up to 70 percent of airport visitors 
leave the Wi-Fi turned on their smartphones. Walkbase’s dozens of 
sensors in the airport track the movements of these passengers, 
without gathering any of their personal data. The sensors track 
passenger flows throughout the entire terminal, from the car parks 
to departure gates. 
The Walkbase technology aims to improve the flying experi­
ence by alleviating bottlenecks in passenger flow, such as in certain 
shopping areas or at the security gate. The system allows stores 
and services in the airport to send marketing notifications and off er 
to passengers’ smartphones. 
Airports regularly face the problem of lost bags. Airports such 
as Hong Kong International Airport are using radio frequency iden­
tification (RFID) technology (discussed in Chapter 10) to track 
where bags are and where they should go. Helping alleviate a com­
mon source of passenger frustration, the RFID tags allow fliers to 
find out in real time where their bags are, thanks to Bluetooth and 
other mobile technologies. 
MIS 
Another burgeoning airport technology is iris scanners. 
It’s used at London’s Gatwick Airport to help speed up 
the check-in and boarding processes. At check-in, passengers scan 
their irises and then do it again at the gate, to ensure they made 
their flight. Gatwick contends that this technology has decreased 
wait times. 
In another use of a biometric system (discussed in Chapter 7), 
French company Thales (www.thalesgroup.com) has developed 
technology that scans passengers’ facial features for identification 
purposes. The system takes a photo of the passenger’s face and iris 
and shares that with computers around the airport. When the pas­
senger gets to Immigration, a machine can confirm their identity. 
When the passenger receives their boarding pass at check-in, a 
photo of their face is encrypted on the pass, which is scanned at the 
gate to confirm their identity. 
MIS 
Safran (www.safran-group.com) has developed soft ware 
to analyze the large amount of data being collected on 
more than 100 million passengers. The software analyzes passen­
ger records, looking for more than 300 warning signs of behavior 
that could indicate a problem passenger. The soft ware also com­
pares passenger data against Interpol and other police databases 
in case any passengers are flagged as potential terrorists or orga­
nized criminals. 
The popular Google Glass device is helping customer service 
agents at Edinburgh Airport in Scotland provide better services 
to passengers, such as real-time flight information and foreign-
language translations. The device allows the agents to display the 
information hands-free while they communicate with the Internet 
via voice commands or take pictures by winking. 
Delta Airlines’ 20,000 flight attendants are equipped on­
board with mobile devices that allow them to read their on-board 
manual, sell meals, find out information about minors traveling 
alone, and help passengers who didn’t receive their requested 
upgrade. 
The mobile devices can also be used in maintenance opera­
tions. For example, the flight crew can use the device on board to 
take a picture of a broken armrest or luggage compartment door 
and send it to maintenance. Mechanics can then be ready to meet 
the plane with the proper parts when it lands. 
Sources: Compiled from C. Weissman, “These Are the Insane New 
Technologies Airports Are Using to Learn Everything about You,” 
Business Insider, June 19, 2015; E. Randolph, “Robot Border Guards 
among New Airport Tech at Paris Air Show,” phys.org, June 19, 2015; K. 
Moskvitch, “The New Tech Changing Airport Security,” BBC News, May 
19, 2015; A. Chardy, “Miami Airport: Apps, Kiosks, Shorten Wait Times 
at Immigration Control”, Miami Herald, May 9, 2015; “SFO: Airport 
Unveils New Automated Passport Kiosk,” San Jose Mercury News, April 
23, 2015; B. Peterson, “Do Self-Service Kiosks at Airport Customer 
Actually Save Time?”  Condé Nast Traveler, April 3, 2015; G. Korte, 
“U.S. Airports Will Automate Customs to Speed Passengers,” USA 
Today, February 13, 2015; M. Leibovitz, “Flight Attendants, Prepare 
for Takeoff (and Wi-Fi Tech Support),” Innovation Insights, January 
5, 2015; “Edinburgh Airport First in Scotland to Use Google Glass to 
Enhance Its Passenger Experience,” Airport Business, October 8, 2014; 
Y. Hammett, “New Tampa Airport Kiosks Speed International Visitors 
through Customs,” Tampa Tribune, August 19, 2014; “A Global First – 
Helsinki Airport’s New Technology to Develop the Travel Experience,” 
Finavia, July 30, 2014; C. Jones, “Airlines, Airports Improve Technology 
for Passengers,” USA Today, April 14, 2014. 
Questions 
1. Look ahead to Porter’s five strategies for competitive advan­
tage. Provide an example of a technology discussed in this 
case that supports each of Porter’s strategies.   
2. Propose additional applications that airports and airlines 
might develop that could create a competitive advantage in 
the marketplace. 
3. Are the technologies discussed in this case examples of stra­
tegic information systems? Why or why not? 
Customer Focus. Organizational attempts to provide superb customer service can make 
the difference between attracting and retaining customers versus losing them to competitors. 
Numerous IT tools and business processes have been designed to keep customers happy. 
(Recall that a business process is a collection of related activities that produce a product or a 
service of value to the organization, its business partners, and/or its customers.) Consider 
Amazon, for example. When you visit Amazon’s Web site any time after your first visit, the site 
welcomes you back by name and it presents you with information about items that you might 
like, based on your previous purchases. In another example, Dell guides you through the pro­
cess of purchasing a computer by providing information and choices that help you make an 
informed buying decision. 
MKT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
CHAPTER 2  Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage, and Information Systems 
Make-to-Order and Mass Customization. Make-to-order is a strategy of producing cus­
tomized (made to individual specifications) products and services. The business problem is 
how to manufacture customized goods efficiently and at a reasonably low cost. Part of the 
solution is to change manufacturing processes from mass production to mass customization. 
In mass production, a company produces a large quantity of identical items. An early example 
of mass production was Henry Ford’s Model T, where buyers could pick any color—as long as it 
was black. 
Ford’s policy of offering a single product for all of its customers eventually gave way to 
consumer segmentation, in which companies provided standard specifications for diff erent 
consumer groups, or segments. Clothes manufacturers, for example, designed their products 
in different sizes and colors to appeal to different customers. The next step was configured mass 
customization, in which companies offer features that allow each shopper to customize his or 
her product or service with a range of components. Examples are ordering a car, a computer, or 
a smartphone, where the customer can specify which features he or she wants. 
In the current strategy, known as mass customization, a company produces a large quan­
tity of items, but it customizes them to match the needs and preferences of individual custom­
ers. Mass customization is essentially an attempt to perform make-to-order on a large scale. 
Examples include: 
• NikeID (www.nikeid.com): Allows customers to design their footwear. 
• M&M candies: My M&Ms (www.mymms.com) allows customers to add photos, art, and 
messages to candy. 
• Dell (www.dell.com) and HP (www.hp.com): Allow customers to exactly specify the com­
puter that they want. 
It’s About Business 2.3 provides another example of mass customization, the problem of “fit” 
in online shopping for clothes. 
IT’s About Business 2.3 
MKT The “Fit” Problem When Shopping  
POM for Clothes Online  
Online shopping for the latest fashions is convenient for custom­
ers, but they cannot try on the clothes. Not being able to determine 
actual fit is a problem because in the fashion world, size varies from 
brand to brand, so even when an online retailer provides clothing 
measurements, it is not necessarily an accurate indication of how 
a garment will actually fit. Fashion industry analysts claim this 
situation is deliberate: If a customer knows that Levi’s jeans, for 
example, are going to fit, then he or she will generally purchase that 
brand. Going further, there is not much agreement across brands 
about what a specific size is, leading to customer frustration. 
Even if sizes were standard, there would still be a fit problem. 
Specifically, consider the different types of clothing fabrics—some 
are more “stretchy” than others. Two pieces of clothing of the 
same size could be made from different fabrics and therefore fit 
diff erently. 
The lack of virtual dressing rooms contributes to the high 
rates of return (20 to 40 percent) and shopping cart abandonment 
(50 percent) in online fashion shopping. Online retailer Zappos 
has set the industry standard on returns, pioneering no-cost ship­
ping and handling for returns. No-cost shipping for returns raised 
customer satisfaction to new levels and stimulated online retail 
purchasing, reducing barriers to shoppers being reluctant to buy 
something they couldn’t try on. However, the policy costs online 
retailers a great deal of money. 
As a result of these return costs, several startup companies 
are addressing the fit problem. These companies believe that 
if customers’ clothes fit better, then they will be more satisfied 
and less likely to return the items. Let’s consider several of these 
companies. 
Virtusize (www.virtusize.com) asks the user to provide the 
measurements of a favorite dress shirt or pair of jeans for an online 
comparison. The measurements are used to create reference gar­
ments so that, when customers are shopping online, they can layer 
a silhouette of the garment they are interested in buying over the 
silhouette of the garment they already own. 
Clothes Horse (acquired in December 2014 by fits.me; http:// 
fits.me) has developed data-driven software that takes data from 
both consumers (body type, favorite brands, fit preferences) and 
clothing manufacturers. The result is a third-party database of 
actual fit data—chest, waist, hips, sleeves—for every garment and 
every brand in the company’s database, which it then uses to make 
a recommendation to a customer regarding fit. The soft ware also 
contains proprietary algorithms that take variables such as type of 
fabric into account. 
LoveThatFit (http://beta.lovethatfit.com) allows consumers 
to upload a full body image taken in tightly fitting clothing. The 
startup uses proprietary algorithms to address the fit problem. It 
even adjusts for tilt and distortion in the picture, while accurately 
identifying the points of fit on the customer’s body. The Web site is 
social, enabling customers to share potential purchases within a 
shopper’s network. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Pressures, Organizational Responses, and Information Technology Support 43 
Bodymetrics (www.bodymetrics.com) is a good example of 
2015; N. Laskowski, “Fashion Tech Startups Use Data Science to Build 
mass customization. Bodymetrics provides a “body scanner” that 
Virtual Dressing Rooms,” Tech Target, January 14, 2015; L. Wang, “Can 
Technology Solve the Fit Problem in Fashion E-Commerce?” Business
customers can access either at home or in a store. This technol­
of Fashion, August 12, 2014; E. Brooke, “8 Startups Trying to Help You 
ogy scans the customer’s body, captures more than 150 measure-
Find Clothing that Fits,” Fashionista, July 22, 2014; R. Shah, “Fixing
ments, and produces a digital replica of the customer’s size and 
How Clothes Fit You Can Reshape Online Retail Logistics,” Forbes,
shape. This scan is then used to provide made-to-measure jeans 
April 11, 2014; “Gina Mancuso, LoveThatFit,” Charlottesville Tomorrow, 
and swimsuits for women and men. 
March 24, 2014; V. Woollaston, “The End of Online Returns? App Lets 
Toshiba has developed a “digital changing booth” that lets  
You See How Clothes Will Fit Based on Items You Already Own,” Daily 
Mail, March 17, 2014; 
customers virtually try on clothes through a display. The system  
uses an off-the-shelf 3D scanner and a camera to analyze the cus­
tomer’s measurements. It then sizes the clothes to fit. A companion  
Questions
app uses the customer’s mobile device to let him or her mix and 
1. Look ahead to Porter’s five strategies for competitive advan­
match outfits or place an order. 
tage. Take each of the example companies in this case, and 
identify which of Porter’s strategies that company is using. 
Sources: Compiled from “Japan’s ‘Virtual Dressing Rooms,’” BBC News,  
January 23, 2015; J. Ersing, “Clothing Stores Are Setting a Powerful 
2. Do the systems these companies are using constitute strate- 
Example that All Businesses Should Follow,” Identities.mic, January 8, 
gic information systems? Why or why not?  
E-Business and E-Commerce. Conducting business electronically is an essential strategy 
for companies that are competing in today’s business environment. Electronic commerce (EC 
or e-commerce) describes the process of buying, selling, transferring, or exchanging products, 
services, or information via computer networks, including the Internet. E-business is a some­
what broader concept. In addition to the buying and selling of goods and services, e-business 
also refers to servicing customers, collaborating with business partners, and performing elec­
tronic transactions within an organization. Chapter 9 focuses extensively on this topic. In addi­
tion, e-commerce applications appear throughout the text. 
You now have a general overview of the pressures that affect companies in today’s busi­
ness environment and the responses that they choose to manage these pressures. To plan for 
the most effective responses, companies formulate strategies. In the new digital economy, 
these strategies rely heavily on information technology, especially strategic information sys­
tems. You examine these topics in the next section. 
Before you go on…
 1. What are the characteristics of the modern business environment?
 2. Discuss some of the pressures that characterize the modern global business environment.
 3. Identify some of the organizational responses to these pressures. Are any of these responses specific 
to a particular pressure? If so, which ones? 
Apply the Concept 2.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2.1 Identify eff ective IT 
responses to different kinds of business pressures. 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
Businesses face immense pressures today from every angle 
imaginable. The market is constantly shift ing, technology 
becomes obsolete almost as quickly as it is implemented, 
society expects businesses to take more responsibility for 
the communities their work impacts, and legal compliance 
is required. Businesses increasingly employ cutting-edge 
technologies to navigate these diff icult waters. 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you do.) 
Pick one business pressure from each of the three broad 
categories presented in the chapter: Market, Technology, and 
Societal/Political/Legal. Now search for a real-world business 
story related to each of the pressures you have chosen.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
CHAPTER 2  Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage, and Information Systems 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.) 
After you have selected your three examples, identify an eff ective 
IT response to each one. Feel free to use the responses listed in 
the chapter. Explain why you feel this is an appropriate response 
to the business pressure you have identified.  
Perhaps there is a response outlined in the story you have 
found. If so, determine whether the response was truly eff ective 
in dealing with the business pressure. Your submission should 
follow the outline below:  
Broad Category: _______________ 
Business Pressure: _______________ 
IT Response: _______________ 
Description: _______________ 
2.2 
Competitive Advantage and Strategic 
Information Systems 
A competitive strategy is a statement that identifies a business’s approach to compete, its goals, 
and the plans and policies that will be required to carry out those goals (Porter, 1985).1 A strat­
egy, in general, can apply to a desired outcome, such as gaining market share. A competitive 
strategy focuses on achieving a desired outcome when competitors want to prevent you from 
reaching your goal. Therefore, when you create a competitive strategy, you must plan your own 
moves, but you must also anticipate and counter your competitors’ moves. 
Through its competitive strategy, an organization seeks a competitive advantage in an 
industry. That is, it seeks to outperform its competitors in a critical measure such as cost, qual­
ity, and time-to-market. Competitive advantage helps a company function profitably with a 
market and generate larger-than-average profits. 
Competitive advantage is increasingly important in today’s business environment, as you 
will note throughout the text. In general, the core business of companies has remained the 
same. That is, information technologies simply offer tools that can enhance an organization’s 
success through its traditional sources of competitive advantage, such as low cost, excellent 
customer service, and superior supply chain management. Strategic information systems 
(SISs) provide a competitive advantage by helping an organization implement its strategic 
goals and improve its performance and productivity. Any information system that helps an 
organization either achieve a competitive advantage or reduce a competitive disadvantage 
qualifies as a strategic information system. 
Porter’s Competitive Forces Model 
The best-known framework for analyzing competitiveness is Michael Porter’s competitive 
forces model (Porter, 1985). Companies use Porter’s model to develop strategies to increase 
their competitive edge. Porter’s model also demonstrates how IT can make a company more 
competitive. 
Porter’s model identifies five major forces that can endanger or enhance a company’s posi­
tion in a given industry. Figure 2.2 highlights these forces. Although the Web has changed the 
nature of competition, it has not changed Porter’s five fundamental forces. In fact, what makes 
these forces so valuable as analytical tools is that they have not changed for centuries. Every 
competitive organization, no matter how large or small, or what business it is in, is driven by 
these forces. This observation applies even to organizations that you might not consider com­
petitive, such as local governments. Although local governments are not for-profit enterprises, 
they compete for businesses to locate in their districts, for funding from higher levels of govern­
ment, for employees, and for many other things. 
1 Porter, M.E. (1985) Competitive Advantage, Free Press, New York. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Competitive Advantage and Strategic Information Systems 45 
Significantly, Porter (2001)2 concludes that the 
overall impact of the Web is to increase competition, 
which generally diminishes a firm’s profitability. Let’s 
examine Porter’s five forces and the ways that the 
Web influences them. 
1.  The threat of entry of new competitors. The threat 
that new competitors will enter your market is 
high when entry is easy and low when there are 
significant barriers to entry. An entry barrier 
is a product or service feature that customers 
have learned to expect from organizations in a 
certain industry. A competing organization must 
offer this feature in order to survive in the mar­
ketplace. There are many types of entry barriers. 
Consider, for example, legal requirements such 
as admission to the bar to practice law or a license to serve liquor, where only a certain 
number of licenses are available. 
Suppose you want to open a gasoline station. In order to compete in that industry, you 
would have to offer pay-at-the-pump service to your customers. Pay-at-the-pump is an 
IT-based barrier to entering this market because you must offer it for free. The first gas 
station that offered this service gained first-mover advantage and established barriers to 
entry. This advantage did not last, however, because competitors quickly offered the same 
service and thus overcame the entry barrier. 
For most firms, the Web increases the threat that new competitors will enter the market 
because it sharply reduces traditional barriers to entry, such as the need for a sales force 
or a physical storefront. Today, competitors frequently need only to set up a Web site. This 
threat of increased competition is particularly acute in industries that perform an inter­
mediation role, which is a link between buyers and sellers (e.g., stock brokers and travel 
agents), as well as in industries where the primary product or service is digital (e.g., the 
music industry). In addition, the geographical reach of the Web enables distant competi­
tors to compete more directly with an existing firm. 
In some cases, the Web increases barriers to entry. This scenario occurs primarily when 
customers have come to expect a nontrivial capability from their suppliers. For example, 
the first company to offer Web-based package tracking gained a competitive advantage 
from that service. Competitors were forced to follow. 
2.  The bargaining power of suppliers. Supplier power is high when buyers have few choices 
from whom to buy and low when buyers have many choices. Therefore, organizations 
would rather have more potential suppliers so that they will be in a stronger position to 
negotiate price, quality, and delivery terms. 
The Internet’s impact on suppliers is mixed. On the one hand, it enables buyers to find 
alternative suppliers and to compare prices more easily, thereby reducing the supplier’s 
bargaining power. On the other hand, as companies use the Internet to integrate their sup­
ply chains, participating suppliers prosper by locking in customers. 
3.  The bargaining power of customers (buyers). Buyer power is high when buyers have many 
choices from whom to buy and low when buyers have few choices. For example, in the 
past, there were few locations where students could purchase textbooks (typically, one 
or two campus bookstores). In this situation, students had low buyer power. Today, the 
Web provides students with access to a multitude of potential suppliers as well as detailed 
information about textbooks. As a result, student buyer power has increased dramatically.
 
In contrast, loyalty programs reduce buyer power. As their name suggests, loyalty pro­
grams reward customers based on the amount of business they conduct with a particular 
2 Porter, M.E. (2001) “Strategy and the Internet,” Harvard Business Review, March. Figure depicting Porter’s competitive forces model, where a box in the center denoting rivalry has two circles representing your organization and competing organization connected by a bidirectional arrow. Arrows from boxes denoting threat of new entrants, buyer power, threat of substitute products or services, and supplier power point at the central box (from all the four sides).
FIGURE 2.2  Porter’s competitive 
forces model. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
CHAPTER 2  Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage, and Information Systems 
organization (e.g., airlines, hotels, rental car companies). Information technology enables 
companies to track the activities and accounts of millions of customers, thereby reducing 
buyer power. That is, customers who receive “perks” from loyalty programs are less likely 
to do business with competitors. (Loyalty programs are associated with customer relation­
ship management, which you will study in Chapter 12.) 
4.  The threat of substitute products or services. If there are many alternatives to an organi­
zation’s products or services, then the threat of substitutes is high. If there are few alter­
natives, then the threat is low. Today, new technologies create substitute products very 
rapidly. For example, customers today can purchase wireless telephones instead of land-
line telephones, Internet music services instead of traditional CDs, and ethanol instead of 
gasoline for their cars. 
Information-based industries experience the greatest threat from substitutes. Any indus­
try in which digitized information can replace material goods (e.g., music, books, soft ware) 
must view the Internet as a threat because the Internet can convey this information eff i­
ciently and at low cost and high quality. 
Even when there are many substitutes for their products, however, companies can create a 
competitive advantage by increasing switching costs. Switching costs are the costs, in money 
and time, imposed by a decision to buy elsewhere. For example, contracts with smartphone 
providers typically include a substantial penalty for switching to another provider until the 
term of the contract expires (quite often, two years). This switching cost is monetary. 
As another example, when you buy products from Amazon, the company develops a pro­
file of your shopping habits and recommends products targeted to your preferences. If you 
switch to another online vendor, that company will need time to develop a profile of your 
wants and needs. In this case, the switching cost involves time rather than money. 
5.  The rivalry among existing firms in the industry. The threat from rivalry is high when there is 
intense competition among many firms in an industry. The threat is low when the compe­
tition is among fewer firms and is not as intense. 
In the past, proprietary information systems—systems that belong exclusively to a single 
organization—have provided strategic advantage to firms in highly competitive industries. 
Today, however, the visibility of Internet applications on the Web makes proprietary sys­
tems more difficult to keep secret. In simple terms, when I see my competitor’s new system 
online, I will rapidly match its features to remain competitive. The result is fewer diff er­
ences among competitors, which leads to more intense competition in an industry. 
To understand this concept, consider the highly competitive grocery industry, where Wal­
mart, Kroger, Safeway, and other companies compete essentially on price. Some of these 
companies have IT-enabled loyalty programs in which customers receive discounts and 
the store gains valuable business intelligence on customers’ buying preferences. Stores 
use this business intelligence in their marketing and promotional campaigns. (You will 
learn about business intelligence in Chapter 5.) 
Grocery stores are also experimenting with wireless technologies such as radio-frequency 
identification (RFID, discussed in Chapter 10) to speed up the checkout process, track cus­
tomers through the store, and notify customers of discounts as they pass by certain prod­
ucts. Grocery companies also use IT to tightly integrate their supply chains for maximum 
efficiency and thus reduce prices for shoppers. 
Established companies can also gain a competitive advantage by allowing customers to 
use data from the company’s products to improve their own performance. For example, 
Babolat (www.babolat.com), a manufacturer of sports equipment, has developed its Bab­
olat Play Pure Drive system. The system has sensors embedded into the handle of its ten­
nis rackets. A smartphone app utilizes the data from the sensors to monitor and evaluate 
ball speed, spin, and impact location to give tennis players valuable feedback. 
Competition also is being affected by the extremely low variable cost of digital products. 
That is, once a digital product has been developed, the cost of producing additional “units” 
approaches zero. Consider the music industry as an example. When artists record music, 
their songs are captured in digital format. Physical products, such as CDs or DVDs of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure depicting Porter’s value chain model represented by a broad rightward arrow. The arrow is horizontally divided into two parts, the upper part denotes support activities (administration and management, human resource management, legal, accounting, finance management, and so on) and the lower part denotes primary activities (inbound logistics, operations, outbound logistics, marketing and sales, and customer service). The arrow head denotes firm adds value.
FIGURE 2.3 Porter’s value chain 
model. 
Competitive Advantage and Strategic Information Systems 47 
songs for sale in music stores, involve costs. The costs of a physical distribution channel 
are much higher than those involved in delivering the songs digitally over the Internet. 
In fact, in the future companies might give away some products for free. For example, some 
analysts predict that commissions for online stock trading will approach zero because 
investors can search the Internet for information to make their own decisions regarding 
buying and selling stocks. At that point, consumers will no longer need brokers to give 
them information that they can obtain themselves, virtually for free. 
Porter’s Value Chain Model 
Organizations use Porter’s competitive forces model to design general strategies. To identify 
specific activities where they can use competitive strategies for greatest impact, they use his 
value chain model (1985). A value chain is a sequence of activities through which the organi­
zation’s inputs, whatever they are, are transformed into more valuable outputs, whatever they 
are. The value chain model identifies points where an organization can use information tech­
nology to achieve competitive advantage (see Figure 2.3). 
According to Porter’s value chain model, the activities conducted in any organization can 
be divided into two categories: primary activities and support activities. Primary activities 
relate to the production and distribution of the firm’s products and services. These activities 
create value for which customers are willing to pay. The primary activities are buttressed by 
support activities. Unlike primary activities, support activities do not add value directly to 
the firm’s products or services. Rather, as their name suggests, they contribute to the firm’s 
competitive advantage by supporting the primary activities. 
Next, you will see examples of primary and support activities in the value chain of a manu­
facturing company. Keep in mind that other types of firms, such as transportation, healthcare, 
education, retail, and others, have different value chains. The key point is that every organiza­
tion has a value chain. 
In a manufacturing company, primary activities involve purchasing materials, processing 
the materials into products, and delivering the products to customers. Manufacturing compa­
nies typically perform five primary activities in the following sequence: 
1. Inbound logistics (inputs) 
2. Operations (manufacturing and testing) 
3. Outbound logistics (storage and distribution) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
CHAPTER 2  Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage, and Information Systems 
4.  Marketing and sales 
5.  Services 
As work progresses in this sequence, value is added to the product in each activity. Specifically, 
the following steps occur: 
1.  The incoming materials are processed (in receiving, storage, and so on) in activities called 
inbound logistics. 
2.  The materials are used in operations, where value is added by turning raw materials into 
products. 
3.  These products are prepared for delivery (packaging, storing, and shipping) in the out­
bound logistics activities. 
4.  Marketing and sales sell the products to customers, increasing product value by creating 
demand for the company’s products. 
5.  Finally, the company performs after-sales service for the customer, such as warranty ser­
vice or upgrade notification, adding further value. 
As noted above, these primary activities are buttressed by support activities. Support activities 
consist of the following: 
1.  The firm’s infrastructure (accounting, finance, management) 
2.  Human resources management 
3.  Product and technology development (R&D) 
4.  Procurement 
Each support activity can be applied to any or all of the primary activities. In addition, the sup­
port activities can also support one another. 
A firm’s value chain is part of a larger stream of activities, which Porter calls a value sys­
tem. A value system, or an industry value chain, includes the suppliers that provide the inputs 
necessary to the firm along with their value chains. After the firm creates products, these prod­
ucts pass through the value chains of distributors (which also have their own value chains), all 
the way to the customers. All parts of these chains are included in the value system. To achieve 
and sustain a competitive advantage, and to support that advantage with information technol­
ogies, a firm must understand every component of this value system. 
Strategies for Competitive Advantage 
Organizations continually try to develop strategies to counter the five competitive forces iden­
tified by Porter. You will learn about five of those strategies here. Before we go into specifics, 
however, it is important to note that an organization’s choice of strategy involves trade-off s. For 
example, a firm that concentrates only on cost leadership might not have the resources avail­
able for research and development, leaving the firm unable to innovate. As another example, 
a company that invests in customer happiness (customer orientation strategy) will experience 
increased costs. 
Companies must select a strategy and then stay with it, because a confused strategy can­
not succeed. This selection, in turn, decides how a company will utilize its information systems. 
A new information system that can improve customer service but will increase costs slightly 
will be welcomed at a high-end retailer such as Nordstrom’s, but not at a discount store such as 
Walmart. The following list presents the most commonly used strategies. Figure 2.4 provides 
an overview of these strategies. 
1.  Cost leadership strategy. Produce products and/or services at the lowest cost in the indus­
try. An example is Walmart’s automatic inventory replenishment system, which enables 
Walmart to reduce inventory storage requirements. As a result, Walmart stores use floor 
space only to sell products, and not to store them, thereby reducing inventory costs. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Competitive Advantage and Strategic Information Systems 49 
2.  Diff erentiation strategy. Off er different products, services, or  
product features than your competitors. Southwest Airlines,  
for example, has differentiated itself as a low-cost, short-haul,  
express airline. This has proved to be a winning strategy for com­
peting in the highly competitive airline industry.  
3.  Innovation strategy. Introduce new products and services, add new  
features to existing products and services, or develop new ways to  
produce them. A classic example is the introduction of automated  
teller machines (ATMs) by Citibank. The convenience and cost-cut­
ting features of this innovation gave Citibank a huge advantage  
over its competitors. Like many innovative products, the ATM  
changed the nature of competition in the banking industry. Today,  
an ATM is a competitive necessity for any bank. Another excellent  
example is Apple’s rapid introduction of innovative products.  
4.  Operational eff ectiveness strategy. Improve the manner in which 
a firm executes its internal business processes so that it performs these activities more 
effectively than its rivals. Such improvements increase quality, productivity, and employee 
and customer satisfaction while decreasing time to market. 
5.  Customer orientation strategy. Concentrate on making customers happy. Web-based sys­
tems are particularly effective in this area because they can create a personalized, one-
to-one relationship with each customer. Amazon (www.amazon.com), Apple (www.apple 
.com), and Starbucks (www.starbucks.com) are classic examples of companies devoted to 
customer satisfaction. 
Business–Information Technology Alignment 
The best way for organizations to maximize the strategic value of IT is to achieve business–infor­
mation technology alignment. In fact, the “holy grail” of organizations is business–information 
technology alignment, or strategic alignment (which we will call simply alignment). Business– 
information technology alignment (business-IT alignment) is the tight integration of the 
IT function with the organization’s strategy, mission, and goals. That is, the IT function directly 
supports the business objectives of the organization. There are six characteristics of excellent 
alignment: 
1.  Organizations view IT as an engine of innovation that continually transforms the business, 
often creating new revenue streams. 
2.  Organizations view their internal and external customers and their customer service func­
tion as supremely important. 
3.  Organizations rotate business and IT professionals across departments and job functions. 
4.  Organizations provide overarching goals that are completely clear to each IT and business 
employee. 
5.  Organizations ensure that IT employees understand how the company makes (or loses) 
money. 
6.  Organizations create a vibrant and inclusive company culture. 
Unfortunately, many organizations fail to achieve this type of close alignment. In fact, accord­
ing to a McKinsey & Company survey on IT strategy and spending, only 16 percent of the IT and 
business executives who participated agreed that their organization had adequate alignment 
between IT and the business. Given the importance of business–IT alignment, why do so many 
organizations fail to implement this policy? The major reasons are the following: 
• Business managers and IT managers have diff erent objectives. 
• The business and IT departments are ignorant of the other group’s expertise. 
• A lack of communication. Figure illustrating strategies for competitive advantage represented by five boxes, where two boxes on the left and two on the right are placed vertically and the fifth box is placed below the four boxes aligned to the center. The boxes in the left panel denote cost leader (upper) and innovation (lower). The boxes in the right panel denote differentiation (upper) and operational effectiveness (lower). The fifth box denotes customer oriented.
FIGURE 2.4 Strategies for com­
petitive advantage. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
CHAPTER 2  Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage, and Information Systems 
Put simply, business executives often know little about information technology, and IT execu­
tives understand the technology but may not understand the real needs of the business. One 
solution to this problem is to foster a collaborative environment in organizations so that busi­
ness and IT executives can communicate freely and learn from each other. 
Businesses can also utilize enterprise architecture to foster alignment. Originally devel­
oped as a tool to organize a company’s IT initiatives, the enterprise architecture concept has 
evolved to encompass both a technical specification (the information and communication 
technologies and the information systems used in an organization) and a business specifica­
tion (a collection of core business processes and management activities). 
Before you go on…
 1. What are strategic information systems?
 2. According to Porter, what are the five forces that could endanger a firm’s position in its industry or 
marketplaces?
 3. Describe Porter’s value chain model. Differentiate between Porter’s competitive forces model and his 
value chain model.
 4. What strategies can companies use to gain competitive advantage?
 5. What is business–IT alignment?
 6. Give examples of business–IT alignment at your university, regarding student systems. (Hint: What 
are the “business” goals of your university with regard to student registration, fee payment, grade 
posting, etc.?) 
Apply the Concept 2.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2.2 Describe the strategies 
STEP 2: Activity 
that organizations typically adopt to counter Porter’s five 
Visit your favorite restaurant, and ask to speak to the manager. 
competitive forces. 
Asking only a few questions, evaluate whether the manager has 
a grasp of the five forces model. Do not ask anything specifically 
STEP 1: Background 
about Porter. Rather, inquire about rivals, substitutes, customers’ 
bargaining power, suppliers’ power, and so on. A good manager 
This section has exposed you to Porter’s five forces model, which 
should be familiar with these concepts regardless of whether he 
explains how various forces can affect an organization. The threat 
or she uses the term “Porter’s five forces.” Finally, ask the manager 
of entry of new competitors, bargaining power of suppliers, 
what strategy he or she uses. Then, try to classify that strategy 
bargaining power of customers, threat of substitute products or 
as a cost leadership, differentiation, innovation, operational 
services, and rivalry among existing firms in the industry all have 
effectiveness, and customer orientation strategy. 
an impact on the organization’s success. Based on this model, the 
chapter presents five strategies for competitive advantage: cost 
leadership, differentiation, innovation, operational eff ectiveness, 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
and customer orientation. 
Identify which of the five forces are at work based on the 
Walmart is a worldwide company that focuses on a cost-
manager’s feedback. Then, describe the strategies that COULD 
leadership strategy. Review the ways Walmart uses the five 
help deal with these particular forces, and explain IF this is what 
forces (or controls them) to maintain their position as a global 
the restaurant is currently attempting to do. If it is not, then 
cost leader. Although it may be somewhat easy to perform this 
explain what they should do differently. Your submission will 
exercise with a global giant like Walmart, it is very diff icult to 
have two parts: (1) a definition of the forces, and (2) a description 
apply these concepts to small businesses. 
of the strategies at play in response to those forces. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 51 
What’s in IT for me? 
For All Majors 
All functional areas in any organization must work together in an 
integrated fashion in order for the firm to respond adequately to 
business pressures. These responses typically require each func­
tional area to utilize a variety of information systems to support, 
document, and manage cross-functional business processes. In 
today’s competitive global marketplace, the timeliness and accuracy 
of these responses are even more critical. 
Closely following this discussion, all functional areas must 
work together for the organization to gain competitive advantage in 
its marketplace. Again, the functional areas use a variety of strate­
gic information systems to achieve this goal. BPR and BPI process 
change efforts contribute to the goal as well. 
You have seen why companies must be concerned with strate­
gic advantage. But why is this chapter so important for you? There 
are several reasons. First, the business pressures you have learned 
about have an impact on your organization, but they also aff ect you 
as an individual. So, it is critical that you understand how information 
systems can help you, and eventually your organization, respond to 
these pressures. 
In addition, achieving competitive advantage is essential for 
your organization’s survival. In many cases, you, your team, and all 
your colleagues will be responsible for creating a competitive advan­
tage. Therefore, having general knowledge about strategy and about 
how information systems affect the organization’s strategy and com­
petitive position will help you in your career. 
You also need a basic knowledge of your organization’s strat­
egy, mission, and goals, as well as its business problems and how it 
makes (or loses) money. You now know how to analyze your organi­
zation’s strategy and value chain, as well as the strategies and value 
chains of your competitors. You also have acquired a general knowl­
edge of how information technology contributes to organizational 
strategy. This knowledge will help you to do your job better, to be 
promoted more quickly, and to contribute significantly to the suc­
cess of your organization. 
Summary 
1. Identify effective IT responses to different kinds of business 
pressures. 
•  Market pressures: An example of a market pressure is powerful 
customers. Customer relationship management is an eff ective IT 
response that helps companies achieve customer intimacy. 
•  Technology pressures: An example of a technology pressure is infor­
mation overload. Search engines and business intelligence applica­
tions enable managers to access, navigate, and utilize vast amounts 
of information. 
•  Societal/political/legal pressures: An example of a societal/ political/ 
legal pressure is social responsibility, such as the state of the physical 
environment. Green IT is one response that is intended to improve 
the environment. 
2.  Describe the strategies that organizations typically adopt to counter 
Porter’s five competitive forces. 
Porter’s five competitive forces: 
1.  The threat of entry of new competitors: For most firms, the Web increas­
es the threat that new competitors will enter the market by reducing 
traditional barriers to entry. Frequently, competitors need only to set 
up a Web site to enter a market. The Web can also increase barriers to 
entry, as when customers come to expect a nontrivial capability from 
their suppliers. 
2.  The bargaining power of suppliers: The Web enables buyers to find alter­
native suppliers and to compare prices more easily, thereby reducing 
suppliers’ bargaining power. From a different perspective, as compa­
nies use the Web to integrate their supply chains, participating sup­
pliers can lock in customers, thereby increasing suppliers’ bargaining 
power. 
3.  The bargaining power of customers (buyers): The Web provides custom­
ers with incredible amounts of choices for products, as well as informa­
tion about those choices. As a result, the Web increases buyer power. 
However, companies can implement loyalty programs in which they 
use the Web to monitor the activities of millions of customers. Such 
programs reduce buyer power. 
4.  The threat of substitute products or services: New technologies create 
substitute products very rapidly, and the Web makes information about 
these products available almost instantly. As a result, industries (par­
ticularly information-based industries) are in great danger from substi­
tutes (e.g., music, books, newspapers, magazines, soft ware). However, 
the Web also can enable a company to build in switching costs, so that 
it will cost customers time and/or money to switch from your company 
to a competitor. 
5.  The rivalry among existing firms in the industry: In the past, 
proprietary information systems provided strategic advantage for 
firms in highly competitive industries. The visibility of Internet ap­
plications on the Web makes proprietary systems more difficult to 
keep secret. Therefore, the Web makes strategic advantage more 
short-lived. 
The five strategies are as follows: 
1.  Cost leadership strategy—Produce products and/or services at the low­
est cost in the industry. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
CHAPTER 2  Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage, and Information Systems 
2. Diff erentiation strategy—Off er different products, services, or product  
4. Operational eff ectiveness strategy—Improve the manner in which in-
features.  
ternal business processes are executed so that a firm performs similar 
activities better than its rivals. 
3.  Innovation strategy—Introduce new products and services, put new fea­
tures in existing products and services, or develop new ways to produce 
5. Customer orientation strategy—Concentrate on making customers 
them. 
 happy. 
Chapter Glossary 
business environment The combination of social, legal, economic, 
physical, and political factors in which businesses conduct their 
operations. 
business–information technology alignment The tight integration 
of the IT function with the strategy, mission, and goals of the 
organization. 
competitive advantage An advantage over competitors in some 
measure such as cost, quality, or speed; leads to control of a market 
and to larger-than-average profits. 
competitive forces model A business framework devised by Michael 
Porter that analyzes competitiveness by recognizing five major 
forces that could endanger a company’s position. 
digital divide The gap between those who have access to information 
and communications technology and those who do not. 
entry barrier Product or service feature that customers expect from 
organizations in a certain industry; an organization trying to enter 
this market must provide this product or service at a minimum to be 
able to compete. 
globalization The integration and interdependence of economic, 
social, cultural, and ecological facets of life, enabled by rapid 
advances in information technology. 
individual social responsibility See organizational social 
responsibility. 
make-to-order The strategy of producing customized products and 
services. 
mass customization A production process in which items are 
produced in large quantities but are customized to fit the desires of 
each customer. 
organizational social responsibility (also individual social 
responsibility) Efforts by organizations to solve various social 
problems. 
primary activities Those business activities related to the production 
and distribution of the firm’s products and services, thus creating 
value. 
strategic information systems (SISs) Systems that help an 
organization gain a competitive advantage by supporting 
its strategic goals and/or increasing performance and 
productivity. 
support activities Business activities that do not add value directly 
to a firm’s product or service under consideration but support the 
primary activities that do add value. 
value chain A sequence of activities through which the organization’s 
inputs, whatever they are, are transformed into more valuable 
outputs, whatever they are. 
value chain model Model that shows the primary activities that 
sequentially add value to the profit margin; also shows the support 
activities. 
value system Includes the producers, suppliers, distributors, and 
buyers, all with their value chains. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  Explain why IT is both a business pressure and an enabler of response 
activities that counter business pressures. 
2.  What does a flat world mean to you in your choice of a major? In your 
choice of a career? Will you have to be a “lifelong learner”? Why or why 
not? 
3.  What might the impact of a flat world be on your standard of living? 
4.  Is IT a strategic weapon or a survival tool? Discuss. 
5.  Why might it be difficult to justify a strategic information system? 
6.  Describe the five forces in Porter’s competitive forces model, and ex­
plain how increased access to high-speed Internet has aff ected each 
one. 
7.  Describe Porter’s value chain model. What is the relationship between 
the competitive forces model and the value chain model? 
8.  Describe how IT can be used to support different value chains for diff er­
ent companies. 
9.  Discuss the idea that an information system by itself can rarely provide 
a sustainable competitive advantage. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 1 53 
Problem-Solving Activities  
1.  Surf the Internet for information about the Department of Homeland 
Security. Examine the available information, and comment on the role 
of information technologies in the department. 
2.  Experience mass customization by designing your own shoes at www 
.nike.com, your car at www.jaguar.com, your CD at www.easternrecording 
.com, your business card at www.iprint.com, and your diamond ring at 
www.bluenile.com. Summarize your experiences. 
3.  Access www.go4customer.com. What does this company do and where 
is it located? Who are its customers? Provide examples of how a U.S. 
company would use its services. 
4.  Enter Walmart China (www.wal-martchina.com/english/index.htm). 
How does Walmart China differ from your local Walmart (consider prod­
ucts, prices, services, etc.)? Describe these diff erences. 
5.  Apply Porter’s value chain model to Costco (www.costco.com). What 
is Costco’s competitive strategy? Who are Costco’s major competitors? 
Describe Costco’s business model. Describe the tasks that Costco must 
accomplish for each primary value chain activity. How would Costco’s 
information systems contribute to Costco’s competitive strategy, given 
the nature of its business? 
6.  Apply Porter’s value chain model to Dell (www.dell.com). What is Dell’s 
competitive strategy? Who are Dell’s major competitors? Describe 
Dell’s business model. Describe the tasks that Dell must accomplish for 
each primary value chain activity. How would Dell’s information sys­
tems contribute to Dell’s competitive strategy, given the nature of its 
 business? 
Closing Case 1 
MIS 
Football Teams Use Virtual Reality 
The Problem 
College and professional football teams have a unique set of problems. 
First and foremost, teams would like to reduce the physical wear and 
tear of drills and practices on their players. In the National Football 
League (NFL), the most recent Collective Bargaining Agreement (2011) 
reduced the number of off-season practices, prohibited training camp 
“two-a-day” practices, and limited the number of contact practices in 
both the preseason and the regular season. 
At the same time, however, players must learn the playbook as 
quickly and thoroughly as possible. However, when football teams 
practice, the time on the field for repetitions (“reps”) is limited. It is 
particularly important for the starting players to participate in reps 
together. 
Specifically, consider quarterbacks, arguably the most important 
position on a football team. Young quarterbacks are often thrown into 
live action before they are ready because starters are injured. This 
situation compresses the amount of time available for young quar­
terbacks to learn enough to make correct decisions, let alone have a 
chance of winning. 
A Potential Solution 
Teams are beginning to use an immersive virtual reality experience 
that makes players feel and think as if they are actually on the practice 
field. Virtual reality (VR) is a set of information technologies that simu­
late physical presence in the real world, including sight, smell, sound, 
and touch. Modern VR environments are presented on stereoscopic, 
head-mounted displays—for example, the Oculus Rift, now owned by 
Facebook; www.oculus.com—to realistically create an artificial experi­
ence such as a video game. VR environments can also create a lifelike, 
real-world experience such as football. As of July 2015, two compa­
nies were providing VR experiences for professional, college, and high 
school football programs: STriVR Labs (http://strivrlabs.com) and EON 
Sports (www.eonsportsvr.com). 
Here is how these experiences work from the perspective of a 
quarterback. When he puts on the Oculus Rift headset and the head­
phones, he is standing in his position on the practice field. As he scans 
the field, he recognizes the defensive alignment, and he observes how 
his offense is positioned. He turns around, and he sees that his run­
ning back is waiting for the handoff. A voice calls the play, the ball is 
snapped, and a play unfolds. As the play progresses, the quarterback 
can scan the defense to determine the type of coverage. One quarter­
back noted, “It is like watching film, but you are actually there on the 
field. I feel like I am actually in the scrimmage.” 
The systems offer a fully immersive, 360-degree view for players 
and coaches as teams run through plays on a practice field, providing 
simulated bodies with natural body movements. In addition, players 
can hear coaches talking as well as the things they would normally 
hear on the practice field. Staff members spend many hours turning 
the video into useful virtual reality footage. 
The systems gather video from multiple cameras on four-foot tri­
pods placed around the scrimmage on both the offensive and defen­
sive sides. The cameras capture live plays and content from teams’ 
practices and then, via their software, produce three-dimensional 
video for players through an Oculus Rift headset and headphones. The 
VR technology essentially has football players walking through real-
game experiences. 
Although the systems work for every player, quarterback was the 
logical starting point. The systems initially were utilized as a method 
to train quarterbacks with mental exercises to reinforce actual prac­
tice repetitions. They quickly expanded for use with other positions, 
because they are invaluable in improving players’ reaction times and 
decision making. 
STriVR and EON clients include college teams such as Stanford, 
Auburn, Clemson, Dartmouth, Vanderbilt, Kansas, Mississippi, and 
UCLA, as well as the National Football League’s Dallas Cowboys and 
New England Patriots. The first pick in the 2015 NFL Draft, Jameis Win­
ston of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, trained using the EON system. Fur­
ther, nearly 100 high school football programs are using VR packages. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 
CHAPTER 2  Organizational Strategy, Competitive Advantage, and Information Systems 
STriVR and EON have concentrated on building libraries of basic 
plays for their clients. After shooting video at various practices, the 
companies deliver the VR footage to the teams within a few weeks. 
However, in the near future, the companies hope to reduce the turn­
around time, allowing teams to use VR video tailored to specific game 
plans. 
There are other uses for VR technology in football programs, 
including: 
•  Teaching incoming freshmen and preparing backup players who 
do not get as many reps as the starters. 
•  Providing value in recruiting, because coaches could take lap-
tops, VR headsets, and headphones on the road. Without visiting 
a campus, recruits could be virtually standing in a locker room 
with potential teammates, listening to a pregame pep talk. They 
could then be in the tunnel, racing onto the field with the other 
players, or on the sidelines during a game. 
•  Helping injured players—instead of pushing their bodies through 
a real practice, they could work on their reps and their mental ex­
ercises virtually. 
The Results 
The use of virtual reality technology in sports in just beginning. How­
ever, one NFL executive told STriVR to charge $250,000 per year to pro­
fessional football teams because teams using the technology would be 
“picking up half a coach.” 
Closing Case 2 
Bank of America Transforms Its Information 
MIS 
Technology 
The Problem 
Many economists classify the financial crisis of 2007-2008 as the worst 
financial crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930s. The crisis 
threatened to bring about the collapse of large financial institutions, 
which was prevented only by the bailout of banks by national gov­
ernments. To stabilize the U.S. financial system, the U.S. government 
invested huge sums in institutions it considered to be critical to the 
functioning of the entire financial system; that is, “too big to fail.” 
One of these institutions was the Bank of America (BofA; www 
.bankofamerica.com), which received $45 billion in bailout funds. 
(Note: Bank of American repaid the entire amount in December 2009). 
The bank paid a further $17 billion in August 2014 to settle charges of 
mortgage fraud stemming from poor lending practices leading up to 
the financial crisis. 
After the crisis, BofA executives directed the bank to take meas­
ures to eliminate the problems that led to its near-death experience in 
the financial crisis. Many of these measures involved BofA’s informa­
tion technology. 
A Multipart Solution 
BofA developed a series of strategic goals for its IT function: (1) stand­
ardize its IT infrastructure, (2) streamline applications, (3) develop 
customer-focused innovations, and (4) streamline the physical infra­
structure. BofA’s IT organization, called Global Technology and Opera­
tions, was directly tasked with achieving the first three goals. 
Finally, STriVR and EON have plans for basketball and baseball in 
the near future. 
Sources: Compiled from S. Wagner-McGough, “Report: Patriots Will Arm 
Themselves with Virtual Reality Technology,” CBS Sports, July 23, 2015; 
S. Springer, “Patriots Poised to Enhance Practice with Virtual Reality 
Technology,” The Boston Globe, July 22, 2015; M. Lelinwalla, “All You 
Need to Know about Virtual Reality Training in College Football and the 
NFL,” Tech Times, June 29, 2015; G. Schroeder, “Virtual Reality Becomes a 
Reality for College Football,” USA Today, June 9, 2015; B. Fischer, “Use of 
Virtual-Reality Training Continues to Grow in College Football,” NFL.com, 
June 8, 2015; B. Wallace, “Tackling Tech: Why Virtual Reality Will Become 
Reality for the NFL,” www.patriots.com, May 28, 2015; B. Feldman, “‘I Was 
Blown Away’: Welcome to Football’s Quarterback Revolution,” Fox Sports, 
March 11, 2015; M. Tait, “KU Becomes Pioneer in Using Virtual Reality to 
Enhance Football Program,” Tale of the Tait KUsports.com, March 26, 2013; 
N. Davis, “NFL, Players Announce New 10-Year Labor Agreement,” USA 
Today, July 25, 2011; http://strivrlabs.com, accessed July 22, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  In what other ways could professional and college football programs 
use virtual reality systems? (Hint: Consider the fan experience.) 
2.  Are STriVR and EON strategic information systems for any football pro­
gram? Why or why not? Support your answer with specific examples. 
3.  Will STriVR and EON become competitive necessities for football pro­
grams? Why or why not? Support your answer with specific examples. 
IT Infrastructure. In the past, the IT department typically allocated 
separate servers in its data centers for each line of business, such as 
its mortgage business and its trading applications. To improve eff i­
ciency and reduce costs, the bank’s first strategic goal was to create 
a standardized, shared IT infrastructure that all business units could 
readily access. As a result, BofA closed down 20 data centers and im­
plemented a private cloud. (We discuss cloud computing in detail in 
Plug IT In 4.) 
The business goals of moving the IT infrastructure to a private 
cloud were to enable the bank to respond more quickly to changing 
business conditions and to cut costs—as much as 50 percent from 
the bank’s current data center costs. The cloud approach also ena­
bled the bank to perform more computing tasks with less hardware. 
In addition it increased the ability of the bank’s network, storage, 
and server capacity to scale up or scale down as business condi­
tions dictate. Essentially, the cloud gives the bank more flexibil­
ity and speed to react to changes in the bank’s dynamic business 
environment. 
Corporate data often reside on specific servers in a single loca­
tion. In contrast, data in a cloud environment may be stored on shared 
servers in multiple locations. This arrangement requires more com­
plex security controls and compliance reporting. BofA must be able to 
prove to auditors that it is securely managing sensitive data such as 
bank account numbers and credit card information in its cloud. In fact, 
to improve information security and regulatory compliance, the bank 
is experimenting with tagging or labeling each piece of data so that it 
can follow the data across its global network, tracking anyone who has 
had access to it or has made changes to it. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 2 55 
Applications. Under a four-year plan implemented in 2010, BofA re­
tired more than 18,000 applications, many of them left over from its 
acquisitions of other companies. For example, the bank spent $100 mil­
lion to consolidate 5 Merrill Lynch financial adviser applications into 
one. (BofA acquired Merrill Lynch in 2013.) Further, users at corporate 
clients in 140 countries now access BofA’s CashPro Online portal in 11 
languages. The portal replaced hundreds of applications, including li­
quidity management, currency conversion, wire transfers, and many 
others. The bank also consolidated 22 collateral management systems 
into one and 8 teller systems into one. 
Simplifying its IT infrastructure and reducing the license and 
support costs of thousands of applications have enabled the bank to 
invest a larger percentage of its $9 billion annual IT budget on new, 
innovative applications. In fact, BofA has doubled its spending on new 
development since 2009. 
Innovative Customer Service. The bank’s customers stated they wanted 
their bank to be “where they are.” In response, the bank launched new 
versions of its customer smartphone and iPad app in 2014. The app 
provides three features: 
1.  Account information and transactional capabilities. For example, cus­
tomers must be able to view account details and transfer funds on 
any device from wherever they are. Further, customers can order new 
debit and credit cards, view their available card credit, schedule ap­
pointments, modify scheduled bill payments, order copies of posted 
checks, and perform many other functions. 
2.  Service. For example, if bank customers are traveling internation­
ally, then they should be able to place a travel notification on their 
accounts via a mobile device rather than having to call the bank to 
speak to a customer service representative. 
3.  Mobile payments and commerce. BofA is offering services such as its 
clearXchange person-to-person payments network jointly with JP-
Morgan Chase and Wells Fargo. In addition, the bank offers its BankA­
meriDeals merchant-funded rewards program, which allows custom­
ers to receive coupons from retailers by clicking on offers sent directly 
to their online banking accounts. 
By July 2015, the app had 15 million users and was growing by more 
than 200,000 customers per month. In the second quarter of 2015, 
BofA managed a record 19 million deposits made from mobile devices. 
This amount is growing at a rate of 50 percent per year. 
Physical Infrastructure. To reduce costs, BofA analyzed its network of 
banking centers; that is, bank branch locations and ATMS. The bank 
tracked every transaction by customer, location, time, and channel. 
It then stored the information for 60 months—a total of more than 20 
terabytes of data. For security purposes, the bank removed all details 
that would identify any individual. In addition to tracking customer 
activity, the bank examined the capacity of each branch and ATM, the 
costs of each location, each branch’s total revenues, annual sales, and 
first-year revenue sales to a new customer. Based on the results of the 
analysis, BofA was able to reduce its banking centers from 6,151 in 
2008 to fewer than 5,000 by July 2015. The bank also reduced its an­
nual branch and ATM expenses by nearly 15 percent from $5.5 billion to 
$4.7 billion. 
Interestingly, beginning in 2009 Bank of America IT executives 
meet annually with 40 technology startups in Silicon Valley to learn 
about new products. Over the years, the bank has decided to do busi­
ness with about 17 percent of these startups. BofA’s work with startups 
balances the bank’s need for scale and reliability against its need for 
new ideas. 
BofA has high expectations for these vendors. The bank requires 
open standards and interoperability. It also requires technology con­
tracts in which costs scale down as well as up. Finally, technology ven­
dors must share BofA’s risk and regulatory rules, including, in some 
cases, agreeing to contracts where vendors share in the liability if their 
technology causes problems that lead to losses or fines for the bank. 
The Results 
The IT transformation is ongoing, but the bank’s financial results 
seem sound. In July 2015, Bank of American was the country’s sec­
ond-largest bank, with approximately $2.1 trillion in assets. Further, 
the bank reported net income of $5.3 billion in the second quarter of 
that year. 
Sources: Compiled from H. Clancy, “This Fortune 500 Bank’s Patents Are 
Cited by Apple, Google, and Nike,” Fortune, June 29, 2015; R. King, “Bank 
of America’s Data Initiative Follows Internet Companies into the Cloud,” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 6, 2015; C. Murphy, “How Bank of America 
Taps Tech Startups,” InformationWeek, December 1, 2014; R. Preston, “IT 
Chief of the Year: Bank of America’s Cathy Bessant,” InformationWeek, 
December 1, 2014; T. Groenfeldt, “Bank of America’s Data Mapping Adds 
$1 Per Share,” Forbes, August 21, 2014; C. Murphy, “Bank of America’s 
‘Why Stop There?’ Cloud Strategy,” InformationWeek, February 4, 2014; D. 
Campbell, “Bank of America Finishes Merger of Merrill Lynch into Parent,” 
Bloomberg Business, October 1, 2013; B. Yurcan, “The Future of Moble at 
Bank of America,” InformationWeek, March 25, 2013; P. Crosman, “Inside 
BofA’s IT Makeover,” American Banker, September 1, 2011; “BofA Repays 
All of Government Funds,” MSNBC, December 10, 2009; www.bankofamer­
ica.com, accessed July 25, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  What is the relationship between the development of mobile banking 
customer applications and the closing of banking centers? 
2.  Refer to Porter’s strategies for competitive advantage. Which strategy 
(or strategies) is (are) the Bank of America pursuing? Provide specific 
examples to support your answer. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 
Data and Knowledge 
Management 
© Oleksiy Mark/iStockphoto 
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
3.1  Managing Data 
3.2  The Database Approach 
3.3  Big Data 
3.4  Data Warehouses and Data Marts 
3.5  Knowledge Management 
Opening Case 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
3.1  Discuss ways that common challenges in managing data can be addressed using data 
governance. 
3.2  Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of relational databases. 
3.3  Define Big Data and its basic characteristics. 
3.4  Explain the elements necessary to successfully implement and maintain data 
warehouses. 
3.5  Describe the benefits and challenges of implementing knowledge management sys­
tems in organizations. 
MIS Database Saves the State of Washington 
Medicaid Dollars 
When a patient is admitted to the emergency room (ER) of a hospital, 
his physician may never have seen him before. Nevertheless, she must 
diagnose his problem very quickly. If the physician already knew the 
56 
patient’s medical history, then her examination and subsequent diag­
nosis would be faster, less expensive, and more accurate. 
As the Affordable Care Act expands Medicaid to an increasing 
number of patients, the need for states to control ER costs becomes 
more critical. Many Medicaid patients visit hospital ERs too many 
times. In fact, in the state of Washington, patients who went to the ER 
more than four times in one year comprise 20 percent of all ER visits 
paid for by Medicaid. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 57 
To address this problem, the State of Washington implemented 
part because patients cannot visit multiple health facilities to obtain 
the Emergency Department Information Exchange (EDIE), a database 
prescriptions. More than 400 primary care physicians have signed up 
that contains the records of each patient treated in every hospital ER 
to receive automatic notifications when one of their patients is admit-
in the state. The database enables physicians to track patients’ ER vis-
ted to the ER. The state is signing up more family doctors as well as 
its to multiple hospitals. 
community and mental health clinics. 
The state experienced some difficulties implementing the 
Physicians can now send many of their patients to clinics or other 
database. In the past, some state hospitals had attempted to create 
less expensive care centers rather than ERs. Data released in March 
regional databases. However, many hospitals did not join these eff orts, 
2014 indicate that ER visits by Medicaid patients dropped 10 percent 
fearing they would lose both patients and Medicaid dollars. 
in the 2013 fiscal year, and the rate of ER visits that resulted in a non-
In response, the state announced that it would no longer reim-
acute diagnosis decreased more than 14 percent. The state credits the 
burse hospitals for more than three non-emergency ER visits by a Med-
database for a substantial amount of the state’s $33.7 million reduc­
icaid recipient each year. Physicians and hospitals successfully sued 
tion in 2013 Medicaid costs. 
the state, claiming the policy was arbitrary and would increase the 
hospitals’ costs. 
Sources: Compiled from “EDIE and PMP Integration,” American College 
The state’s Medicaid office responded by creating a list of 500 
of Emergency Physicians, August 11, 2015; “How Big Data Can Reduce ER 
medical problems—for example, acute bronchitis, urinary tract infec-
Visits,” Real Business, October 23, 2014; J. Creswell, “Doctors Find Barriers 
to Sharing Digital Medical Records,” The New York Times, September 30, 
tions, and headaches—that it would no longer reimburse as emer­
2014; T. Bannow, “Oregon Hospitals Begin Sharing ER Data,” The Bend
gency care. The state argued that those complaints could be treated in 
Bulletin, September 18, 2014; “Report Finds Data Sharing Popular Among 
doctors’ offices or clinics. 
Hospitals,” ClinicalKey, September 12, 2014; R. Daly, “EHR Data Sharing 
Hospitals objected to this list because patients who were not 
Challenges Hospitals,” Healthcare Financial Management Association, 
treated in hospitals would reduce hospitals’ income. As a result, the 
August 7, 2014; D. Gorenstein, “Data: The Secret Ingredient in Hospital 
state adopted the EDIE database as a compromise. The EDIE database 
Cooperation,” Marketplace.org, June 5, 2014; K. Weise, “Hospitals Share 
meets federal health privacy laws by allowing only approved medical  
Data to Stop ER Abusers,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, April 7-13, 2014; 
“Emergency Department Partnership Is Improving Care and Saving 
staff members to access data on patients under their care. When a 
Medicaid Funds,” Washing State Hospital Association, March 20, 2014; 
patient registers at an ER anywhere in the state, the attending physi-
E. Rizzo, “When Hospitals Share Data, Who Benefits?” Becker’s Hospital 
cian and nurses immediately receive a fax (some hospitals still use fax 
Review, March 12, 2014; “When Hospitals Share Patient Records, 
machines) or an e-mail from the database. The report lists all of the 
Emergency Patients Benefit, Study Suggests,” University of Michigan 
patient’s recent ER admissions, diagnoses, and treatments. 
Health System, January 24, 2014. 
Further, when patients leave the ER, the database helps phy­
sicians track their care. One hospital sends paramedics to check on 
Questions 
high-risk patients. Other hospitals hire care coordinators to ensure 
1. Describe additional benefits (beyond those discussed in the case) 
that patients make appointments with a family doctor or specialist. 
of the State of Washington’s EDIE database. 
Still other hospitals discovered that many of their ER patients needed 
2. Describe potential disadvantages of the State of Washington’s EDIE 
help managing pain, so they set up a pain-management clinic. 
database.  
In addition, the database has helped reduce the prescription of  
narcotics in the state’s ERs by 24 percent in its first year of use, in large 
Introduction 
Information technologies and systems support organizations in managing—that is, acquiring, 
organizing, storing, accessing, analyzing, and interpreting—data. As you noted in Chapter 1, 
when these data are managed properly, they become information and then knowledge. As you 
see in the chapter’s opening case, information and knowledge are invaluable organizational 
resources that can provide any organization with a competitive advantage. 
So, just how important are data and data management to organizations? From confiden­
tial customer information, to intellectual property, to financial transactions, to social media 
posts, organizations possess massive amounts of data that are critical to their success. Of 
course, to benefit from these data, they need to manage them effectively. This type of man­
agement, however, comes at a huge cost. According to Symantec’s (www.symantec.com) State 
of Information Survey, digital information costs organizations worldwide over $1 trillion annu­
ally, and it makes up roughly half of an organization’s total value. The survey found that large 
organizations spend an average of some $40 million annually to maintain and utilize data, and 
small-to-medium-sized businesses spend almost $350,000. 
Despite the monetary value of data, some organizations are building their business mod­
els on giving data away for free. IT’s About Business 3.1 shows how Jana is bringing Internet 
access to the developing world using this practice. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
IT’s About Business 3.1 
Giving Data Away for Free 
they pay for the cost of accessing their sites. Facebook, Google, and 
WhatsApp have used zero-rating for some time with bare-bones 
MKT 
The rapid increase in the number of new smartphones in devel­
services such as Facebook Zero, a text-only version with no images. 
oping countries has not been accompanied by a corresponding 
In a move to make its Android apps more accessible, Google has 
increase in mobile marketing because wireless data are still too 
created a data-sponsorship program. 
expensive. In Africa and Asia, for example, prepaid plans are the 
The zero-rating system has its critics because larger apps 
norm, not contracts, meaning that most mobile users pay as they 
with deeper pockets to pay for data have an unfair advantage over 
go, buying small amounts of minutes and data. 
smaller apps that do not. Also, some users are not aware of what 
The cost of wireless access in developing countries may seem 
the Internet is and how it usually works. In Indonesia, for example, 
affordable by American standards, but it’s not when compared with 
11 percent of Facebook Zero users said they didn’t know that they 
average incomes. In India, for example, a gigabyte of 3G data costs 
were on the Internet. In fact, Indian critics have protested Face-
just $4, compared with about $20 in the United States. A smart­
book’s Internet.org app, saying that the fact that it lets smartphone 
phone in India can cost as little as $40, and the average monthly 
users browse certain sites for free misleads consumers into know-
bill is $7. But in many developing countries, the minimum wage is 
ing how open the Web can be. 
just 20 cents an hour. In India, only 57 percent of smartphone own-
Jana maintains that the objections to zero-rating systems do 
ers use data, and the average monthly use is just 80 megabytes, 
not apply to its mCent app. The reason is that after signing up for 
compared with 800 for the average American. In the United States, 
a sponsored app, consumers can use their free data however they 
mobile data costs 1 to 2 percent of a person’s average wage, com­
like, including any app, Web site, or video clip. 
pared with 10 percent in Brazil and more than 33 percent in Africa. 
Critics say that companies going into emerging markets used 
One company is trying to help emerging market consumers 
sponsored data to increase data consumption, while impoverished 
access the Internet more cheaply. Jana (http://jana.com) is a mo­
consumers who are just getting to know the Internet and how it 
bile startup that has business relationships with 237 telecommu­
works risk being exploited. 
nications operators in 102 countries, giving the startup access to 
Significantly, mCent users can also be exploited because they 
3.5 billion mobile phones. In 2014, Jana deployed Marketplace, a 
may download many apps they’re not interested in so that they can 
service that allows marketers to send ads to mobile users around 
receive free data. Jana attempts to avoid this problem by personal-
the world at no cost to the user. The ads can be either short videos 
izing mCent to users and by tracking the time that users spend on 
or app install ads. 
the apps they download.  
For many millions of people in the developing world, Jana is  
an entry point to the mobile Web. Jana’s mCent (www.mcent.com) 
Sources: Compiled from “Facebook’s Internet.org ‘Not Scalable’ 
app rewards mobile users with data in exchange for trying out apps 
Claims Rival Startup mCent,” Mobile World Live, September 9, 2015; 
and allowing Jana to collect personal information, such as their us-
N. Pahwa, “Google Joins Facebook in Trying to Prevent IAMAI from 
age history and which friends they persuaded to sign up for the ser-
Taking Strong Anti-Zero Rating Stand,” Medianama, August 20, 2015; P. 
Olson, “This App Is Cashing in on Giving the World Free Data,” Forbes,
vice. The app developers pay for the data rewards and Jana takes 
July 29, 2015; N. Alawadhi, “Google Puts Zero Rating Plan in India on 
a cut. For example, in India, mobile customers can sign up for the 
Backburner for Fear of Backlash,” The Times of India, May 28, 2015;
chat app LINE (http://line.me/en/) and receive 13 rupees worth of 
S. Vijayakumar, “Jana Is in Full Support of Net Neutrality,” The Hindu,
data, and sign up for the music service Saavn (www.saavn.com) 
May 8, 2015; J. Nanos, “Mobile App Marketplace Jana Pushes Deeper 
and get 28 rupees worth of data. Thus, users acquire free data with 
into the Developing World,” The Boston Globe, May 6, 2015; M. Godwin, 
which to surf the Web. 
“What the ‘Zero Rating’ Debate Reveals about Net Neutrality,” Reason. 
mCent’s popularity exploded, ranking it India’s fift h most  
com, April 8, 2015; A. Howard, “Zero Rating Poses a Conundrum for 
Net Neutrality Advocates around the World,” TechRepublic, January 
popular app in just 12 months. It helped Jana turn a profit by early 
23, 2015; A. Drossos, “Forget Fast Lanes. The Real Threat Net­
2015. Approximately 50 percent of Jana’s revenue comes from Chi-
Neutrality Is Zero-Rated Content,” GigaOM, April 26, 2014; M. Bergen, 
na’s Tencent, Amazon, and Twitter, with the remainder (more than 
“Mobile Startup Jana Launches Tool to Reach Next Billion Consumers, 
1500 apps) coming from many other companies.  
on Their Phones,” Advertising Age, March 19, 2014; “Why Jana Will 
Jana released its Marketplace platform in an attempt to solve 
Help Marketers Reach the Next Billion Customers,” vivaki.com, July 15, 
the difficult mobile economics problem in emerging markets. More 
2013; http://jana.com, www.mcent.com, accessed October 11, 2015. 
cell towers would help increase bandwidth, but carriers in the de­
veloping world are limited by narrow profit margins, increasing 
Questions 
competition, and low capital budgets. In many countries, the aver­
1. At first glance, giving away data for free seems to be a ques­
age revenue per user is decreasing as impoverished people increas­
tionable business strategy. Describe how Jana’s business 
ingly access wireless networks. 
model makes this practice a success.  
In addition to increasing its profits, Jana’s goal is to provide  
2. Why are Facebook and Google so interested in bringing Inter-
free Internet service to billions of people. The startup is facing in-
net access to the developing world? 
tense competition in this effort.   
3. Discuss the pros and cons of the zero-rating system. 
One solution to the Internet access problem is zero-rating— 
also called sponsored data—systems. With zero-rating, Web-based 
4. Is Jana correct in claiming that its system is not really a 
companies establish deals with Internet service providers whereby 
zero-rating system? Why or why not? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 59 
This chapter will examine the processes whereby data are transformed first into informa­
tion and then into knowledge. Managing data is critically important in all organizations. Few 
business professionals are comfortable making or justifying business decisions that are not 
based on solid information. This is especially true today, when modern information systems 
make access to that information quick and easy. For example, we have information systems 
that format data in a way that managers and analysts can easily understand. Consequently, 
these professionals can access these data themselves and then analyze them according to their 
needs. The result is useful information. Managers can then apply their experience to use this 
information to address a business problem, thereby producing knowledge. Knowledge man­
agement, enabled by information technology, captures and stores knowledge in forms that all 
organizational employees can access and apply, thereby creating the flexible, powerful “learn­
ing organization.” 
Organizations store data in databases. Recall from Chapter 1 that a database is a collection 
of related data files or tables containing data. We discuss databases in Section 3.2. 
Clearly, data and knowledge management are vital to modern organizations. But, why 
should you learn about them? The reason is that you will play an important role in the devel­
opment of database applications. The structure and content of your organization’s database 
depend on how users (you) define your business activities. For example, when database devel­
opers in the firm’s MIS group build a database, they use a tool called entity-relationship (ER) 
modeling. This tool creates a model of how users view a business activity. When you under­
stand how to create and interpret an ER model, then you can evaluate whether the developers 
have captured your business activities correctly. 
Keep in mind that decisions about data last longer, and have a broader impact, than 
decisions about hardware or software. If decisions concerning hardware are wrong, then the 
equipment can be replaced relatively easily. If software decisions turn out to be incorrect, 
they can be modified, though not always painlessly or inexpensively. Database decisions, in 
contrast, are much harder to undo. Database design constrains what the organization can do 
with its data for a long time. Remember that business users will be stuck with a bad database 
design, while the programmers who created the database will quickly move on to their next 
projects. 
Further, consider that databases typically underlie the enterprise applications that users 
access. If there are problems with organizational databases, it is unlikely that any applications 
will be able to provide the necessary functionality for users. Databases are difficult to set up 
properly and to maintain. They are also the component of an information system that is most 
likely to receive the blame for poor performance of the system, and the least likely to be rec­
ognized for excellent performance of the system. This is why it is so important to get database 
designs right the first time—and you will play a key role in these designs. 
In addition, you might want to create a small, personal database using a soft ware product 
such as Microsoft Access. In that case, you will need to be familiar with at least the basics of the 
product. 
After the data are stored in your organization’s databases, they must be accessible to users 
in a form that helps them make decisions. Organizations accomplish this objective by devel­
oping data warehouses. You should become familiar with data warehouses because they are 
invaluable decision-making tools. We discuss data warehouses in Section 3.4. 
You will also make extensive use of your organization’s knowledge base to perform your 
job. For example, when you are assigned a new project, you will likely research your firm’s 
knowledge base to identify factors that contributed to the success (or failure) of previous, sim­
ilar projects. We discuss knowledge management in Section 3.5. 
You begin this chapter by examining the multiple problems involved in managing data. 
You then study the database approach that organizations use to help solve these prob­
lems. You turn your attention to Big Data, which organizations must manage in today’s 
business environment. Next, you study data warehouses and data marts, and you learn 
how to utilize them for decision making. You finish the chapter by examining knowledge 
management. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
3.1  Managing Data 
All IT applications require data. These data should be of high quality, meaning that they should 
be accurate, complete, timely, consistent, accessible, relevant, and concise. Unfortunately, the 
process of acquiring, keeping, and managing data is becoming increasingly diff icult. 
The Difficulties of Managing Data 
Because data are processed in several stages and often in multiple locations, they are fre­
quently subject to problems and difficulties. Managing data in organizations is diff icult for 
many reasons. 
First, the amount of data increases exponentially with time. Much historical data must 
be kept for a long time, and new data are added rapidly. For example, to support millions of 
customers, large retailers such as Walmart have to manage petabytes of data. (A petabyte is 
approximately 1,000 terabytes, or trillions of bytes; see Plug IT In 2.) 
In addition, data are also scattered throughout organizations, and they are collected 
by many individuals using various methods and devices. These data are frequently stored in 
numerous servers and locations and in different computing systems, databases, formats, and 
human and computer languages. 
Another problem is that data are generated from multiple sources: internal sources (for 
example, corporate databases and company documents); personal sources (for example, per­
sonal thoughts, opinions, and experiences); and external sources (for example, commercial 
databases, government reports, and corporate Web sites). Data also come from the Web, in the 
form of clickstream data. Clickstream data are those data that visitors and customers produce 
when they visit a Web site and click on hyperlinks (described in Chapter 4). Clickstream data 
provide a trail of the users’ activities in the Web site, including user behavior and browsing 
patterns. 
Adding to these problems is the fact that new sources of data, such as blogs, podcasts, 
videocasts, and RFID tags and other wireless sensors, are constantly being developed and the 
data these technologies generate must be managed. In addition, data degrade over time. For 
example, customers move to new addresses or change their names, companies go out of busi­
ness or are bought, new products are developed, employees are hired or fired, and companies 
expand into new countries. 
Data are also subject to data rot. Data rot refers primarily to problems with the media on 
which the data are stored. Over time, temperature, humidity, and exposure to light can cause 
physical problems with storage media and thus make it difficult to access the data. The second 
aspect of data rot is that finding the machines needed to access the data can be diff icult. For 
example, it is almost impossible today to find 8-track players. Consequently, a library of 8-track 
tapes has become relatively worthless, unless you have a functioning 8-track player or you con­
vert the tapes to a modern medium such as CDs. 
Data security, quality, and integrity are critical, yet they are easily jeopardized. In addition, 
legal requirements relating to data differ among countries as well as among industries, and 
they change frequently. 
Another problem arises from the fact that, over time, organizations have developed infor­
mation systems for specific business processes, such as transaction processing, supply chain 
management, and customer relationship management. Information systems that specifically 
support these processes impose unique requirements on data, which results in repetition and 
conflicts across the organization. For example, the marketing function might maintain infor­
mation on customers, sales territories, and markets. These data might be duplicated within 
the billing or customer service functions. This situation can produce inconsistent data within 
the enterprise. Inconsistent data prevent a company from developing a unified view of core 
business information—data concerning customers, products, finances, and so on—across the 
organization and its information systems. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCT 
 Managing Data 61 
Two other factors complicate data management. First, federal regulations—for example, 
the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002—have made it a top priority for companies to better account 
for how they are managing information. Sarbanes–Oxley requires that (1) public companies 
evaluate and disclose the effectiveness of their internal financial controls and (2) independent 
auditors for these companies agree to this disclosure. The law also holds CEOs and CFOs per­
sonally responsible for such disclosures. If their companies lack satisfactory data management 
policies and fraud or a security breach occurs, the company officers could be held liable and 
face prosecution. 
Second, companies are drowning in data, much of which is unstructured. As you have 
seen, the amount of data is increasing exponentially. To be profitable, companies must develop 
a strategy for managing these data eff ectively. 
An additional problem with data management is Big Data. Big Data is so important that we 
devote the entire Section 3.3 to this topic. 
Data Governance 
To address the numerous problems associated with managing data, organizations are turn­
ing to data governance. Data governance is an approach to managing information across an 
entire organization. It involves a formal set of business processes and policies that are designed 
to ensure that data are handled in a certain, well-defined fashion. That is, the organization 
follows unambiguous rules for creating, collecting, handling, and protecting its information. 
The objective is to make information available, transparent, and useful for the people who 
are authorized to access it, from the moment it enters an organization until it is outdated and 
deleted. 
One strategy for implementing data governance is master data management. Master data 
management is a process that spans all organizational business processes and applications. 
It provides companies with the ability to store, maintain, exchange, and synchronize a consist­
ent, accurate, and timely “single version of the truth” for the company’s master data. 
Master data are a set of core data, such as customer, product, employee, vendor, geo­
graphic location, and so on, that span the enterprise information systems. It is important to 
distinguish between master data and transaction data. Transaction data, which are generated 
and captured by operational systems, describe the business’s activities, or transactions. In con­
trast, master data are applied to multiple transactions and are used to categorize, aggregate, 
and evaluate the transaction data. 
Let’s look at an example of a transaction: You (Mary Jones) purchase one Samsung 42-inch 
plasma television, part number 1234, from Bill Roberts at Best Buy, for $2,000, on April 20, 2015. 
In this example, the master data are “product sold,” “vendor,” “salesperson,” “store,” “part 
number,” “purchase price,” and “date.” When specific values are applied to the master data, 
then a transaction is represented. Therefore, transaction data would be, respectively, “42-inch 
plasma television,” “Samsung,” “Best Buy,” “Bill Roberts,” “1234,” “$2,000,” and “April 20, 2015.” 
An example of master data management is Dallas, Texas, which implemented a plan for 
digitizing the city’s public and private records, such as paper documents, images, drawings, 
and video and audio content. The master database can be utilized by any of the 38 government 
departments that have appropriate access. The city is also integrating its financial and billing 
processes with its customer relationship management program. (You will learn about customer 
relationship management in Chapter 12.) 
How will Dallas utilize this system? Imagine that the city experiences a water-main break. 
Before it implemented the system, repair crews had to search City Hall for records that were 
filed haphazardly. Once the workers found the hard-copy blueprints, they would take them to 
the site and, after examining them manually, would decide on a plan of action. In contrast, the 
new system delivers the blueprints wirelessly to the laptops of crews in the field, who can mag­
nify or highlight areas of concern to generate a rapid response. This process reduces the time it 
takes to respond to an emergency by several hours. 
Along with data governance, organizations use the database approach to eff iciently and 
effectively manage their data. We discuss the database approach in Section 3.2. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
Before you go on…
 1. What are some of the difficulties involved in managing data?
 2. Define data governance, master data, and transactional data. 
Apply the Concept 3.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3.1 Discuss ways that 
dated (December, 2012), the concepts it presents are still valid. 
common challenges in managing data can be addressed using 
Watch this five-minute video, and consider how the trends 
data governance. 
it presents relate to the challenges discussed in this section. 
Now, imagine that your parents own their own business. It is 
successful, but it is also struggling under pressure to upgrade 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
IT services for its employees and customers. How could you 
The amount of data we create today is absolutely mind-boggling. 
help them to look ahead to the future rather than keeping the 
EMC is a global company that focuses on helping organizations 
status quo? 
manage their data. Recently, the company sponsored a study to 
determine exactly how big the “digital universe” actually is and to 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.) 
envision its projected growth. There are some amazing findings in 
this study that point to a dramatic growth in data and an increase 
Write an e-mail to your parents to explain how data and 
in virtual data centers. In the future, it will be possible to run your 
data management are likely to evolve over the next 10 years. 
information systems in data centers that do not operate on your 
Describe the common challenges they face, and discuss how 
premises.  
data governance can help address these issues. Also, based on 
the video, highlight the qualities they should look for in new 
employees. Finally, identify the types of training they should 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you do) 
provide for their current employees. 
Visit YouTube and search for a video titled “The Digital  
Universe and You” by EMC. Although the video is somewhat 
Submit your e-mail to your instructor.  
3.2 The Database Approach 
From the mid-1950s, when businesses first adopted computer applications, until the early 
1970s, organizations managed their data in a file management environment. This environment 
evolved because organizations typically automated their functions one application at a time. 
Therefore, the various automated systems developed independently from one another, with­
out any overall planning. Each application required its own data, which were organized in a 
data file. 
A data file is a collection of logically related records. In a file management environment, 
each application has a specific data file related to it. This file contains all of the data records the 
application requires. Over time, organizations developed numerous applications, each with an 
associated, application-specific data file. 
For example, imagine that most of your information is stored in your university’s central 
database, but a club to which you belong maintains its own files, the athletics department has 
separate files for student athletes, and your instructors maintain grade data on their personal 
computers. It is easy for your name to be misspelled in one of these databases or files. Simi­
larly, if you move, then your address might be updated correctly in one database or file but not 
in others. 
Using databases eliminates many problems that arose from previous methods of storing 
and accessing data, such as file management systems. Databases are arranged so that one set 
of soft ware programs—the database management system—provides all users with access to 

 
 
 
 
 
The Database Approach 63 
all of the data. (You will study database management systems later in this chapter.) Database 
systems minimize the following problems: 
•  Data redundancy: The same data are stored in multiple locations. 
•  Data isolation: Applications cannot access data associated with other applications. 
•  Data inconsistency: Various copies of the data do not agree. 
In addition, database systems maximize the following: 
•  Data security: Because data are “put in one place” in databases, there is a risk of losing a 
lot of data at one time. Therefore, databases must have extremely high security measures 
in place to minimize mistakes and deter attacks. 
•  Data integrity: Data meet certain constraints; for example, there are no alphabetic charac­
ters in a Social Security number field. 
•  Data independence: Applications and data are independent of one another; that is, appli­
cations and data are not linked to each other, so all applications are able to access the 
same data. 
Figure 3.1 illustrates a university database. Note that university applications from the regis­
trar’s office, the accounting department, and the athletics department access data through the 
database management system. 
A database can contain vast amounts of data. To make these data more understandable 
and useful, they are arranged in a hierarchy. We take a closer look at this hierarchy in the next 
section. 
The Data Hierarchy 
Data are organized in a hierarchy that begins with bits and proceeds all the way to databases 
(see Figure 3.2). A bit (binary digit) represents the smallest unit of data a computer can pro­
cess. The term binary means that a bit can consist only of a 0 or a 1. A group of eight bits, 
called a byte, represents a single character. A byte can be a letter, a number, or a symbol. A 
logical grouping of characters into a word, a small group of words, or an identification number 
is called a field. For example, a student’s name in a university’s computer files would appear 
in the “name” field, and her or his Social Security number would appear in the “Social Security 
number” field. Fields can also contain data other than text and numbers. They can contain an 
image, or any other type of multimedia. Examples are a motor vehicle department’s licens­
ing database that contains a driver’s photograph and a field that contains a voice sample to 
authorize access to a secure facility. 
A logical grouping of related fields, such as the student’s name, the courses taken, the 
date, and the grade, comprises a record. In the Apple iTunes Store, a song is a field in a record, 
with other fields containing the song’s title, its price, and the album on which it appears. A log­
ical grouping of related records is called a data file or a table. For example, a grouping of the A schematic diagram depicting database management system. Three computer systems are placed vertically representing registrar's office, accounting department, and athletics department (top to bottom). The first computer is connected bidirectionally to a box representing course listing and enrollment data and student registration data. The second system is connected bidirectionally to a box representing student tuition, fee, and payment data. The third system is bidirectionally connected to athletic team data and student-athlete data. All the three boxes are further connected bidirectionally to database management system, which includes course listings, enrollment, students registration, fees, payment, tuition, and student athlete and athletic team.
FIGURE 3.1  Database manage­
ment system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management Schematic diagram depicting hierarchy of data for a computer-based file. University database is divided into file, student, and faculty. File further consists of record and record includes field. Field are composed of byte and byte of bit. Student includes John Jones MIS that is divided into name: John Jones and major: MIS. Name and major are further divided into bytes and bits. Faculty consists of Kelly Rainer Professor that is divided into name and position. Both these are further divided into bytes and bits.
Hierarchy of data for a computer-based file. 
FIGURE 3.2 
records from a particular course, consisting of course number, professor, and students’ grades, 
would constitute a data file for that course. Continuing up the hierarchy, a logical grouping of 
related files constitutes a database. Using the same example, the student course file could be 
grouped with files on students’ personal histories and financial backgrounds to create a stu­
dent database. In the next section, you will learn about relational database model. 
The Relational Database Model 
A database management system (DBMS) is a set of programs that provide users with tools to 
create and manage a database. Managing a database refers to the processes of adding, delet­
ing, accessing, modifying, and analyzing data stored in a database. An organization can access 
the data by using query and reporting tools that are part of the DBMS or by using application 
programs specifically written to perform this function. DBMSs also provide the mechanisms for 
maintaining the integrity of stored data, managing security and user access, and recovering 
information if the system fails. Because databases and DBMSs are essential to all areas of busi­
ness, they must be carefully managed. 
There are a number of different database architectures, but we focus on the relational database 
model because it is popular and easy to use. Other database models (for example, the hierarchical 
and network models) are the responsibility of the MIS function and are not used by organizational 
employees. Popular examples of relational databases are Microsoft Access and Oracle. 
Most business data—especially accounting and financial data—traditionally were organ­
ized into simple tables consisting of columns and rows. Tables allow people to compare infor­
mation quickly by row or column. In addition, users can retrieve items rather easily by locating 
the point of intersection of a particular row and column. 
The relational database model is based on the concept of two-dimensional tables. A rela­
tional database generally is not one big table—usually called a flat file—that contains all of the 
records and attributes. Such a design would entail far too much data redundancy. Instead, a 
relational database is usually designed with a number of related tables. Each of these tables 
contains records (listed in rows) and attributes (listed in columns). 
To be valuable, a relational database must be organized so that users can retrieve, analyze, 
and understand the data they need. A key to designing an effective database is the data model. 
A data model is a diagram that represents entities in the database and their relationships. An 
entity is a person, place, thing, or event—such as a customer, an employee, or a product— 
about which information is maintained. Entities can typically be identified in the user’s work 
environment. A record generally describes an entity. An instance of an entity refers to each 
row in a relational table, which is a specific, unique representation of the entity. For example, 
your university’s student database contains an entity called student. An instance of the student 
entity would be a particular student. For instance, you are an instance of the student entity in 
your university’s student database. 

 
 
 
 
 
The Database Approach 65 
Each characteristic or quality of a particular entity is called an attribute. For example, 
if our entities were a customer, an employee, and a product, entity attributes would include 
customer name, employee number, and product color. 
Consider the relational database example about students diagrammed in Figure 3.3. The 
table contains data about the entity called students. As you can see, each row of the table cor­
responds to one student record. (You have your own row in your university’s student database.) 
Attributes of the entity are student name, undergraduate major, grade point average, and grad­
uation date. The rows are the records on Sally Adams, John Jones, Jane Lee, Kevin Durham, 
Juan Rodriguez, Stella Zubnicki, and Ben Jones. Of course, your university keeps much more 
data on you than our example shows. In fact, your university’s student database probably 
keeps hundreds of attributes on each student. 
Every record in the database must contain at least one field that uniquely identifies that 
record so that it can be retrieved, updated, and sorted. This identifier field (or attribute) is 
called the primary key. For example, a student record in a U.S. university would use a unique 
student number as its primary key. (Note: In the past, your Social Security number served as 
the primary key for your student record. However, for security reasons, this practice has been 
discontinued.) You see that Sally Adams is uniquely identified by her student ID of 012345. 
In some cases, locating a particular record requires the use of secondary keys. A second­
ary key is another field that has some identifying information, but typically does not identify 
the record with complete accuracy. For example, the student’s major might be a secondary key 
if a user wanted to identify all of the students majoring in a particular field of study. It should 
not be the primary key, however, because many students can have the same major. Therefore, 
it cannot uniquely identify an individual student. 
A foreign key is a field (or group of fields) in one table that uniquely identifies a row of 
another table. A foreign key is used to establish and enforce a link between two tables. We dis­
cuss foreign keys in more detail in Plug IT In 3. 
Organizations implement databases to efficiently and effectively manage their data. There 
are a variety of operations that can be performed on databases. We look at three of these oper­
ations in detail in Plug IT In 3: query languages, normalization, and joins. 
As we noted earlier in this chapter, organizations must manage huge quantities of data. 
Such data consist of structured and unstructured data and are called Big Data (discussed in 
Section 3.3). Unstructured data refers to data that does not reside in a traditional relational 
database. Examples of unstructured data include e-mail messages, word processing docu­
ments, videos, images, audio files, PowerPoint presentations, Facebook posts, tweets, snaps, 
ratings and recommendations, and Web pages. Industry analysts estimate that 80 to 90 percent 
of the data in an organization is unstructured. To manage Big Data, many organizations are 
using special types of databases, which we also discuss in Section 3.3. 
A screensh o t image depicting
 an example of student database.

 
 
 
 
 
66 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
Because databases typically process data in real time (or near real time), it is not practical 
to allow users access to the databases. After all, the data will change while the user is looking 
at them! As a result, data warehouses have been developed to allow users to access data for 
decision making. You will learn about data warehouses in Section 3.4. 
Before you go on…
 1. What is a data model?
 2. What is a primary key? A secondary key?
 3. What is an entity? An attribute? An instance?
 4. What are the advantages and disadvantages of relational databases? 
Apply the Concept 3.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3.2 Discuss the advantages 
must keep track of the project’s title, description, location, 
and disadvantages of relational databases. 
estimated budget, and due date. 
Each employee can be assigned to one or more projects. Some 
STEP 1: Background 
employees can also be on leave and therefore will not be working 
on any assignments. Project leaders usually need to know the 
This section has introduced you to the advantages and 
following information about their team members: name, address, 
disadvantages of using a relational database. This is one of 
phone number, Social Security number, highest degree attained, 
those concepts that cannot really be appreciated until you work 
and his/her expertise (for example, IS, accounting, marketing, 
through the process of designing a database. Even though very 
finance). 
few people go on to become database administrators, it is still 
valuable to have some understanding of how a database is built 
Your manager has instructed you to present an overview of the 
and administered. In this activity, you will be presented with 
advantages and disadvantages of a database that would support 
a scenario, and you will then apply the concepts you have just 
the company’s efforts to manage the data described in this 
read about. In the process, you will develop a solid foundation 
scenario. At a minimum, you should define the tables and the 
to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of relational 
relationships among the key variables to provide structure to the 
databases.  
information that would be included in the database. 
STEP 2: Activity 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
You are employed as the coordinator of multiple ongoing projects 
Using the relational database design you created in Step 2, 
within a company. Your responsibilities include keeping track 
prepare a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of 
of the company’s commercial projects, its employees, and the 
this database. How will it benefit the company? What additional 
employees’ participation in each project. Usually, a project will 
challenges might it create?  
have multiple team members, but some projects have not been  
assigned to any team members. For each project, the company 
Submit your design and your discussion to your instructor.  
3.3  Big Data 
We are accumulating data and information at an increasingly rapid pace from many diverse 
sources. In fact, organizations are capturing data about almost all events—including events 
that, in the past, firms never used to think of as data at all, such as a person’s location, the 
vibrations and temperature of an engine, and the stress at numerous points on a bridge—and 
then analyzing those data. 
Organizations and individuals must process a vast amount of data that continues to rap­
idly increase. According to IDC (a technology research firm; www.idc.com), the world generates 
exabytes of data each year (an exabyte is 1 trillion terabytes). Furthermore, the amount of data 
produced worldwide is increasing by 50 percent each year. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Big Data 67 
As recently as the year 2000, only 25 percent of the stored information in the world was 
digital. The other 75 percent was analog; that is, it was stored on paper, film, vinyl records, and 
the like. By 2015, the amount of stored information in the world was over 98 percent digital and 
less than 2 percent nondigital. 
As we discussed at the beginning of the chapter, we refer to the superabundance of data 
available today as Big Data. That is, Big Data is a collection of data so large and complex that it 
is difficult to manage using traditional database management systems. (We capitalize Big Data 
to distinguish the term from large amounts of traditional data.) 
Essentially, Big Data is about predictions. Predictions do not come from “teaching” com­
puters to “think” like humans. Instead, predictions come from applying mathematics to huge 
quantities of data to infer probabilities. Consider these examples: 
• The likelihood that an e-mail message is spam; 
• The likelihood that the typed letters “teh” are supposed to be “the”; 
• The likelihood that the trajectory and velocity of a person jaywalking indicates that he 
will make it across the street in time, meaning that a self-driving car need only slow 
down slightly. 
Big Data systems perform well because they contain huge amounts of data on which to base 
their predictions. Moreover, these systems are configured to improve themselves over time by 
searching for the most valuable signals and patterns as more data are input. 
Defining Big Data 
It is difficult to define Big Data. Here we present two descriptions of the phenomenon. First, the 
technology research firm Gartner (www.gartner.com) defines Big Data as diverse, high-volume, 
high-velocity information assets that require new forms of processing to enable enhanced deci­
sion making, insight discovery, and process optimization. Second, the Big Data Institute (TBDI; 
https://thebigdatainstitute.wordpress.com/) defines Big Data as vast datasets that: 
• Exhibit variety; 
• Include structured, unstructured, and semi-structured data; 
• Are generated at high velocity with an uncertain pattern; 
• Do not fit neatly into traditional, structured, relational databases; and 
• Can be captured, processed, transformed, and analyzed in a reasonable amount of time 
only by sophisticated information systems. 
Big Data generally consists of the following: 
• Traditional enterprise data—examples are customer information from customer relation­
ship management systems, transactional enterprise resource planning data, Web store 
transactions, operations data, and general ledger data. 
• Machine-generated/sensor data—examples are smart meters; manufacturing sensors; 
sensors integrated into smartphones, automobiles, airplane engines, and industrial 
machines; equipment logs; and trading systems data. 
• Social data—examples are customer feedback comments; microblogging sites such as 
Twitter; and social media sites such as Facebook, YouTube, and LinkedIn. 
• Images captured by billions of devices located throughout the world, from digital cameras 
and camera phones to medical scanners and security cameras. 
Let’s take a look at a few specific examples of Big Data: 
• In 2015 Google was processing more than 27 petabytes of data every day. 
• Facebook members upload more than 10 million new photos every hour. In addition, they 
click a “like” button or leave a comment nearly 3 billion times every day. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
• The 800 million monthly users of Google’s YouTube service upload more than an hour of 
video every second. 
• The number of messages on Twitter is growing at 200 percent every year. By mid-2015, the 
volume exceeded 550 million tweets per day. 
Characteristics of Big Data 
Big Data has three distinct characteristics: volume, velocity, and variety. These characteristics 
distinguish Big Data from traditional data: 
1.  Volume: We have noted the huge volume of Big Data. Consider machine-generated data, 
which are generated in much larger quantities than nontraditional data. For instance, sen­
sors in a single jet engine can generate 10 terabytes of data in 30 minutes. (See our discus­
sion of the Internet of Things in Chapter 10.) With more than 25,000 airline flights per day, 
the daily volume of data from just this single source is incredible. Smart electrical meters, 
sensors in heavy industrial equipment, and telemetry from automobiles compound the 
volume problem. 
2.  Velocity: The rate at which data flow into an organization is rapidly increasing. Velocity 
is critical because it increases the speed of the feedback loop between a company, its 
customers, its suppliers, and its business partners. For example, the Internet and mobile 
technology enable online retailers to compile histories not only on final sales, but on their 
customers’ every click and interaction. Companies that can quickly utilize that informa­
tion—for example, by recommending additional purchases—gain competitive advantage. 
3.  Variety: Traditional data formats tend to be structured and relatively well described, and 
they change slowly. Traditional data include financial market data, point-of-sale transac­
tions, and much more. In contrast, Big Data formats change rapidly. They include satellite 
imagery, broadcast audio streams, digital music files, Web page content, scans of govern­
ment documents, and comments posted on social networks. 
Irrespective of their source, structure, format, and frequency, Big Data are valuable. If certain 
types of data appear to have no value today, it is because we have not yet been able to ana­
lyze them effectively. For example, several years ago when Google began harnessing satellite 
imagery, capturing street views, and then sharing these geographical data for free, few people 
understood its value. Today, we recognize that such data are incredibly valuable because anal­
yses of Big Data yield deep insights. We discuss analytics in detail in Chapter 5. 
Issues with Big Data 
Despite its extreme value, Big Data does have issues. In this section, we take a look at data 
integrity, data quality, and the nuances of analysis that are worth noting. 
Big Data Can Come from Untrusted Sources. As we discussed above, one of the char­
acteristics of Big Data is variety, meaning that Big Data can come from numerous, widely varied 
sources. These sources may be internal or external to the organization. For instance, a com­
pany might want to integrate data from unstructured sources such as e-mails, call center notes, 
and social media posts with structured data about its customers from its data warehouse. The 
question is, How trustworthy are those external sources of data? For example, how trustworthy 
is a tweet? The data may come from an unverified source. Further, the data itself, reported by 
the source, can be false or misleading. 
Big Data Is Dirty. Dirty data refers to inaccurate, incomplete, incorrect, duplicate, or erro­
neous data. Examples of such problems are misspelling of words and duplicate data such as 
retweets or company press releases that appear numerous times in social media. 
Suppose a company is interested in performing a competitive analysis using social media 
data. The company wants to see how often a competitor’s product appears in social media 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 Big Data 69 
outlets as well as the sentiments associated with those posts. The company notices that the 
number of positive posts about the competitor is twice as large the number of positive posts 
about itself. This finding could simply be a case where the competitor is pushing out its press 
releases to multiple sources, in essence “blowing its own horn.” Alternatively, the competitor 
could be getting many people to retweet an announcement. 
Big Data Changes, Especially in Data Streams. Organizations must be aware that data 
quality in an analysis can change, or the data itself can change, because the conditions under 
which the data are captured can change. For instance, imagine a utility company that analyzes 
weather data and smart-meter data to predict customer power usage. What happens when the 
utility is analyzing this data in real time and it discovers data missing from some of its smart 
meters? 
Managing Big Data 
Big Data makes it possible to do many things that were previously impossible; for example, 
to spot business trends more rapidly and accurately, prevent disease, track crime, and so on. 
When properly analyzed, Big Data can reveal valuable patterns and information that were pre­
viously hidden because of the amount of work required to discover them. Leading corpora­
tions, such as Walmart and Google, have been able to process Big Data for years, but only at 
great expense. Today’s hardware, cloud computing (see Plug IT In 4), and open-source soft ware 
make processing Big Data affordable for most organizations. 
The first step for many organizations toward managing data was to integrate information 
silos into a database environment and then to develop data warehouses for decision making. 
(An information silo is an information system that does not communicate with other, related 
information systems in an organization.) After completing this step, many organizations turned 
their attention to the business of information management—making sense of their proliferat­
ing data. In recent years, Oracle, IBM, Microsoft, and SAP have spent billions of dollars purchas­
ing software firms that specialize in data management and business intelligence. (You will learn 
about business intelligence in Chapter 5.) 
In addition to existing data management systems, today many organizations employ 
NoSQL databases to process Big Data. Think of them as “not only SQL” (structured query lan­
guage) databases. (We discuss SQL in Plug IT In 3.) 
As you have seen in this chapter, traditional relational databases such as Oracle and MySQL 
store data in tables organized into rows and columns. Recall that each row is associated with 
a unique record and each column is associated with a field that defines an attribute of that 
account. 
In contrast, NoSQL databases can manipulate structured as well as unstructured data 
and inconsistent or missing data. For this reason, NoSQL databases are particularly useful 
when working with Big Data. Many products utilize NoSQL databases, including Cassandra 
(http://cassandra.apache.org), CouchDB (http://couchdb.apache.org), and MongoDB (www 
.mongodb.org). 
Hadoop (http://hadoop.apache.org) is not a type of database, but rather a collection of 
programs that allow storage, retrieval, and analysis of very large datasets using massively par­
allel processing. Massively parallel processing is the coordinated processing of an application 
by multiple processors that work on different parts of the application, with each processing 
using its own operating system and memory. As such, Hadoop enables the processing of NoSQL 
databases, which can be spread across thousands of servers without a reduction in perfor­
mance. For example, a large database application which could take 20 hours of processing time 
on a centralized relational database system may only take a few minutes when using Hadoop’s 
parallel processing. IT’s About Business 3.2 shows how TrueCar uses Hadoop to manage its 
rapidly growing amount of data. 
MapReduce refers to the software procedure of dividing an analysis into pieces that can be 
distributed across different servers in different locations. MapReduce first distributes the anal­
ysis (map) and then collects and integrates the results back into one report (reduce). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
IT’s About Business 3.2 
TrueCar Uses Hadoop 
TrueCar (www.truecar.com) is an automotive pricing and informa­
tion Web site for buyers and dealers of new and used cars. Via its 
e-commerce Web site, the company provides buyers with informa­
tion on how much other customers have paid for cars in addition to 
upfront pricing and access to a network of more than 10,000 True-
Car dealers. Participating dealerships pay TrueCar when customers 
purchase a car from them through the site. 
Founded in 2005, TrueCar grew very rapidly, but its data 
management infrastructure did not keep pace. TrueCar 
decided to implement Hadoop, for two reasons. First, the soft ware 
tool is an economical way to store data, and it’s compatible with 
several analytics tools. 
Second, TrueCar experienced problems in using traditional 
relational databases to analyze very large amounts of rapidly ac­
cumulating data. For example, the car data vary greatly in struc­
ture, meaning that some of the data are structured and some are 
unstructured. Examples of the company’s structured data are car 
brand, car name, car color, and car price. Examples of unstructured 
data are customer comments and images of cars. This data vari­
ability had created problems for TrueCar’s existing infrastructure. 
Essentially, the company is using Hadoop to pursue new data-
driven business models specifically developed to exploit all of the 
information assets available to them. 
TrueCar went on to create a 2-petabyte Hadoop data lake 
storage repository that currently holds information on vehicles, 
transactions, registrations, customers’ buying behaviors, and 
many additional variables. A data lake stores vast amounts of data 
in their native (original) format until they are needed, rather than 
forcing the integration of large volumes of data before analysis. 
Examples of these raw data are documents in .doc, .txt, or .rtf for­
mats; Adobe Photoshop documents in .psd formats; images in .jpg 
and .gif formats; and video in .mp4 format. 
Hadoop allows TrueCar to work with rapidly increasing 
amounts of data. In fact, TrueCar was managing 24 times as much 
data by the end of 2014 as it was a year earlier. Those data origi­
nated from 12,000 data sources and contain 65 billion data points. 
Of the 2 petabytes in its Hadoop data lake, TrueCar has 600 tera­
bytes in active use at any one time, involving more than 20 million 
buyer profiles. Hadoop provides TrueCar customers with an ad­
vanced, multidimensional, real-time search capability to help them 
find their perfect cars. 
An early example of TrueCar’s use of Hadoop was to manage 
700 million car photos every day. The firm notes that if there is no 
image of a vehicle, then there is no sale. 
TrueCar is also using Hadoop to make money from “exhaust 
data,” which is information resulting as a byproduct of normal op­
erations. For example, the company collects exhaust data about 
MKT 
MIS 
actual and potential car buyers who visit its Web site. TrueCar ana­
lyzes that data and provides pricing and Web sales tips to its net­
work of car dealers. 
TrueCar has experienced problems implementing Hadoop. 
For example, TrueCar sells a “white label” or generic version of its 
platform to other companies, such as banks, to rebrand as their 
own. But the white label version requires security features that Ha­
doop does not currently support. Third-party clients such as banks 
and financial institutions must comply with regulations and privacy 
laws in order for Hadoop data to work. Because of these particular 
data requirements, TrueCar is closely monitoring the development 
of new features in Hadoop such as enhanced security features and 
the ability to track metadata. 
Because the Hadoop data lake holds all of the data in a single 
location, TrueCar can perform a variety of valuable analytics strate­
gies. For instance, one analysis revealed a positive link between the 
size of a Web cache and sales. A Web cache temporarily stores Web 
documents, such as images, to speed up the loading of Web pages. 
The analysis found that the larger the Web caches, the faster the 
page loads, the more satisfied the customer is, and the greater the 
likelihood of a purchase. 
This is one example of how TrueCar’s analytics now include 
“dark data,” which organizations typically deleted, overlooked, or 
ignored. That is, the sizes of Web caches were largely ignored in the 
past, but today they are considered valuable. 
And how is TrueCar doing? As of July 2015, more than two mil­
lion vehicles had been bought from TrueCar-certified dealers. 
Sources: Compiled from K. Korosec, “TrueCar Helps Sam’s Club Get 
into the Car Business,” Fortune, September 3, 2015; C. Bruce, “Scott 
Painter Stepping Down as TrueCar CEO by Year End,” Autoblog, 
August 10, 2015; D. Undercoffler, “TrueCar Works on Relationships,” 
Automotive News, July 27, 2015; “TrueCar Announces Its Users Have 
Bought over 2 Million Vehicles from TrueCar Certified Dealers,” PR 
Newswire, June 29, 2015; D. Levin, “TrueCar, Facing Lawsuits, Sees 
Share Price Decline for Most of 2015,” TheStreet, June 20, 2015; D. 
Needle, “Hadoop Summit: Wrangling Big Data Requires Novel Tools, 
Techniques,” eWeek, June 10, 2015; D. Undercoffler, “Dealers vs. 
TrueCar: The Saga Continues,” Automotive News, June 1, 2015; J. 
Vaughan, “Hadoop Fuels TrueCar’s Data-Driven Business Model,” 
TechTarget, November 21, 2014; “TrueCar: Over 1 Million Cars Sold 
through Affinity Auto Buying Programs,” InsuranceNewsNet, June 13, 
2014; www.truecar.com, accessed October 10, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Describe how Hadoop manages Big Data in its data lake. 
2. Discuss why relational databases experienced problems with 
the variety of data that TrueCar has to manage and analyze. 
3. What are the benefits of Big Data to TrueCar? 
Putting Big Data to Use 
Organizations must manage Big Data and gain value from it. There are several ways to do this. 
Making Big Data Available. Making Big Data available for relevant stakeholders can help 
organizations gain value. For example, consider open data in the public sector. Open data is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Big Data 71 
accessible public data that individuals and organizations can use to create new businesses 
and solve complex problems. In particular, government agencies gather very large amounts 
of data, some of which is Big Data. Making that data available can provide economic benefits. 
The Open Data 500 study at the GovLab at New York University found some 500 examples of 
U.S.-based companies whose business models depend on analyzing open government data. 
Another example of making Big Data available occurred in the fight against the Ebola virus, as 
you see in IT’s About Business 3.3. 
IT’s About Business 3.3 
Combining Big Data and Open Data to Fight Ebola 
In December 2013, an outbreak of the Ebola virus began in the 
West African nation of Guinea and then spread to the neighbor­
ing countries of Liberia and Sierra Leone. In mid-2014, the World 
Health Organization (WHO; www.who.it) declared the outbreak a 
public health emergency of international concern. A dysfunctional 
healthcare system, a mistrust of government off icials aft er years 
of armed conflict, local burial customs that include washing the 
body after death, widespread poverty, severely limited health and 
infrastructure resources, and the delay in responding to the out­
break for several months all contributed to the failure to control 
the epidemic. The outbreak became the largest recorded occur­
rence of Ebola.  
The unprecedented scope of the outbreak, coupled with the 
fact that the Ebola virus incubates between 2 and 21 days before 
the victim knows they are infected, made it extremely diff icult to 
determine how and where the disease would spread. This situation 
presented an enormous challenge for the humanitarian agencies 
providing care to those most in need. For example, out of a popu­
lation of four million, Liberia had only 200 physicians. As a result, 
the integration of open data from governments, Big Data, analytics 
software, and the willingness to collaborate across traditional geo­
political boundaries was essential in the fight against the disease. 
IBM’s research lab in Africa (www.research.ibm.com/labs/ 
africa/) developed a citizen engagement and analytics system that 
enables citizens to report their concerns directly to government 
agencies. In addition, IBM provided staff who volunteered to iden­
tify and classify all sources of open Ebola-related data in the Ebola 
Open Data Repository (www.eboladata.org). The system provides 
information on the daily experiences of communities to govern­
ments and aid agencies in the hopes of helping to stop the spread 
of the disease. 
Launched in collaboration with Sierra Leone’s Open Govern­
ment initiative (www.ogi.gov.sl), Cambridge University’s Africa’s 
Voices project, telecommunications company Airtel (www.airtel 
.com), and Kenya’s Echo Mobile (www.echomobile.org), IBM’s sys­
tem incorporates data from a number of sources. For example, 
wireless carriers gather data from cell phones and make it anony­
mous before providing it to researchers. Specifically, Airtel set up a 
toll-free number that citizens used to report Ebola-related matters 
via short message service (SMS) or voice calls. 
Utilizing IBM’s cloud-based analytics software, the system 
highlighted and correlated trends found among all messages. 
The text message and voice data identify location, so the system 
can show heatmaps that link public mobile call data with specific 
locations. (A heatmap is a graphical representation of data that 
represents individual data values as colors.) The analytics pro­
cess provided an overview of regional population movements that 
helped predict the spread of Ebola. The cell phone data models and 
WHO reports were used to focus on the best ways to prevent the 
spread and provide healthcare. 
Integrating other information, such as social media, hospital 
updates, health clinic and physician reports, media reports, trans­
actional data from retailers and pharmacies, and flight records, 
authorities used analytics software to determine where and how 
to respond to the crisis. The system also integrated open data from 
governments that assisted in relief efforts, such as census data and 
other data concerning roads, airports, schools, and medical facili­
ties. Finally, it enabled healthcare workers to pinpoint previously 
unanticipated trends and reduce the spread of the disease, thereby 
limiting the number of deaths.  
The system also allowed authorities to home in on areas with 
suspected Ebola cases that might need medical supplies and elec­
tricity. It also assisted in the stark tasks of collecting bodies and 
performing burials. In addition, the system provided data for gov­
ernments to use in requesting international aid, particularly more 
testing facilities and equipment. 
Sources: Compiled from “Ebola Situation Report,” World Health 
Organization Report, September 30, 2015; K. Dvorak, “Researchers 
Turn to Big Data, Social Media to Track Ebola,” FierceHealthIT, May 13, 
2015; M. Shacklett, “Fighting Ebola with a Holistic Vision of Big Data,” 
TechRepublic, March 23, 2015; B. Rossi, “How Big Data Is Beating 
Ebola,” Information Age, March 5, 2015; E. Malykhina, “IBM Brings 
Open Data Tech to Ebola Fight,” InformationWeek, November 10, 2014; 
“Ebola and Big Data: Call for Help,” The Economist, October 25, 2014; 
M. Wall, “Ebola: Can Big Data Analytics Help Contain Its Spread?” 
BBC News, October 15, 2014; D. Richards, “How Big Data Could Help 
Stop the Ebola Outbreak,” CNBC, October 1, 2014; “How Big Data Can 
Help Beat Ebola,” IBM Smarter Planet, August, 2014; L. Gilpin, “How 
an Algorithm Detected the Ebola Outbreak a Week Early, and What 
It Could Do Next,” TechRepublic, August 26, 2014; www.who.int, ac­
cessed October 13, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Provide examples of open data mentioned in this case. 
2. Provide examples of Big Data mentioned in this case. 
3. Why was the integration of open data and Big Data essential 
to help lessen the impact of the Ebola virus? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data and Knowledge Management 
72 
CHAPTER 3  
POM 
MKT 
MKT 
Enabling Organizations to Conduct Experiments. Big Data allows organizations to 
improve performance by conducting controlled experiments. For example, Amazon (and many 
other companies such as Google and LinkedIn) constantly experiments by off ering slight dif­
ferent “looks” on its Web site. These experiments are called A/B experiments, because each 
experiment has only two possible outcomes. Here is an example of an A/B experiment at Etsy 
.com, an online marketplace for vintage and handmade products. 
When Etsy analysts noticed that one of its Web pages attracted customer attention but 
failed to keep it, they looked more closely at the page. They found that the page had few “calls 
to action.” (A call to action is an item, such as a button, on a Web page that enables a customer 
to do something.) On this particular Etsy page, customers could leave, buy, search, or click on 
two additional product images. The analysts decided to show more product images on the 
page. 
Consequently, one group of visitors to the page saw a strip across the top of the page 
that displayed additional product images. Another group of page visitors saw only the two 
original product images. On the page with additional images, customers viewed more prod­
ucts and bought more products. The results of this experiment revealed valuable information 
to Etsy. 
Micro-Segmentation of Customers. Segmentation of a company’s customers means 
dividing them up into groups that share one or more characteristics. Micro-segmentation 
simply means dividing customers up into very small groups, or even down to the individual 
level. 
For example, Paytronix Systems (www.paytronix.com) provides loyalty and rewards pro­
gram software for thousands of different restaurants. Paytronix gathers restaurant guest data 
from a variety of sources beyond loyalty and gift programs, including social media. Paytronix 
analyzes this Big Data to help its restaurant clients micro-segment their guests. Restaurant 
managers are now able to more precisely customize their loyalty and gift programs. In doing 
so, the managers are noting improved performance in their restaurants in terms of profitability 
and customer satisfaction. 
Creating New Business Models. Companies are able to use Big Data to create new busi­
ness models. For example, a commercial transportation company operated a large fleet of 
large, long-haul trucks. The company recently placed sensors on all its trucks. These sensors 
wirelessly communicate large amounts of information to the company, a process called 
telematics. The sensors collect data on vehicle usage (including acceleration, braking, corner­
ing, etc.), driver performance, and vehicle maintenance. 
By analyzing this Big Data, the transportation company was able to improve the condi­
tion of its trucks through near-real-time analysis that proactively suggested preventive main­
tenance. In addition, the company was able to improve the driving skills of its operators by 
analyzing their driving styles. 
The transportation company then made its Big Data available to its insurance carrier. Using 
this data, the insurance carrier performed risk analysis on driver behavior and the condition of 
the trucks, resulting in a more precise assessment. The insurance carrier offered the transpor­
tation company a new pricing model that lowered the transportation company’s premiums by 
10 percent. 
Organizations Can Analyze More Data. In some cases, organizations can even process 
all the data relating to a particular phenomenon, meaning that they do not have to rely as 
much on sampling. Random sampling works well, but it is not as effective as analyzing an entire 
dataset. In addition, random sampling has some basic weaknesses. To begin with, its accuracy 
depends on ensuring randomness when collecting the sample data. However, achieving such 
randomness is problematic. Systematic biases in the process of data collection can cause the 
results to be highly inaccurate. For example, consider political polling using landline phones. 
This sample tends to exclude people who use only cell phones. This bias can seriously skew the 
results because cell phone users are typically younger and more liberal than people who rely 
primarily on landline phones. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Big Data 73 
Big Data Used in the Functional Areas of the Organization 
In this section, we provide examples of how Big Data is valuable to various functional areas in 
the firm. 
Human Resources. Employee benefits, particularly healthcare, represent a major busi­
ness expense. Consequently, some companies have turned to Big Data to better manage these 
benefits. Caesars Entertainment (www.caesars.com), for example, analyzes health-insurance 
claim data for its 65,000 employees and their covered family members. Managers can track 
thousands of variables that indicate how employees use medical services, such as the num­
ber of emergency room visits and whether employees choose a generic or brand name drug. 
Consider the following scenario: Data revealed that too many employees with medical 
emergencies were being treated at hospital emergency rooms rather than at less-expensive 
urgent-care facilities. The company launched a campaign to remind employees of the high cost 
of emergency room visits, and they provided a list of alternative facilities. Subsequently, 10,000 
emergencies shifted to less-expensive alternatives, for a total savings of $4.5 million. 
Big Data is also having an impact on hiring. An example is Catalyst IT Services (www 
.catalystdevworks.com), a technology outsourcing company that hires teams for programming 
jobs. Traditional recruiting is typically too slow, and hiring managers often subjectively choose 
candidates who are not the best fit for the job. Catalyst addresses this problem by requiring 
candidates to fill out an online assessment. It then uses the assessment to collect thousands 
of data points about each candidate. In fact, the company collects more data based on how 
candidates answer than on what they answer. 
For example, the assessment might give a problem requiring calculus to an applicant who 
is not expected to know the subject. How the candidate responds—laboring over an answer, 
answering quickly and then returning later, or skipping the problem entirely—provides insight 
into how that candidate might deal with challenges that he or she will encounter on the job. 
That is, someone who labors over a difficult question might be effective in an assignment that 
requires a methodical approach to problem solving, whereas an applicant who takes a more 
aggressive approach might perform better in a different job setting. 
The benefit of this big-data approach is that it recognizes that people bring diff erent skills 
to the table and that there is no one-size-fits-all person for any job. Analyzing millions of data 
points can reveal which attributes candidates bring to specific situations. 
As one measure of success, employee turnover at Catalyst averages about 15 percent per 
year, compared with more than 30 percent for its U.S. competitors and more than 20 percent 
for similar companies overseas. 
Product Development. Big Data can help capture customer preferences and put that infor­
mation to work in designing new products. For example, Ford Motor Company (www.ford.com) 
was considering a “three blink” turn indicator that had been available on its European cars for 
years. Unlike the turn signals on its U.S. vehicles, this indicator flashes three times at the driv­
er’s touch and then automatically shuts off . 
Ford decided that conducting a full-scale market research test on this blinker would be too 
costly and time consuming. Instead, it examined auto-enthusiast Web sites and owner forums to 
discover what drivers were saying about turn indicators. Using text-mining algorithms, research­
ers culled more than 10,000 mentions and then summarized the most relevant comments. 
The results? Ford introduced the three-blink indicator on the new Ford Fiesta in 2010, and 
by 2013 it was available on most Ford products. Although some Ford owners complained online 
that they have had trouble getting used to the new turn indicator, many others defended it. 
Ford managers note that the use of text-mining algorithms was critical in this eff ort because 
they provided the company with a complete picture that would not have been available using 
traditional market research. 
Operations. For years, companies have been using information technology to make their 
operations more efficient. Consider United Parcel Service (UPS). The company has long relied 
on data to improve its operations. Specifically, it uses sensors in its delivery vehicles that can, 
POM 
HRM 
MKT 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
74 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
among other things, capture the truck’s speed and location, the number of times it is placed in 
reverse, and whether the driver’s seat belt is buckled. These data are uploaded at the end of 
each day to a UPS data center, where they are analyzed overnight. By combining GPS informa­
tion and data from sensors installed on more than 46,000 vehicles, UPS reduced fuel consump­
tion by 8.4 million gallons, and it cut 85 million miles off its routes. 
Marketing. Marketing managers have long used data to better understand their customers 
and to target their marketing efforts more directly. Today, Big Data enables marketers to craft 
much more personalized messages. 
The United Kingdom’s InterContinental Hotels Group (IHG; www.ihg.com) has gathered 
details about the members of its Priority Club rewards program, such as income levels and 
whether members prefer family-style or business-traveler accommodations. The company then 
consolidated all this information with information obtained from social media into a single 
data warehouse. Using its data warehouse and analytics software, the hotelier launched a new 
marketing campaign. Where previous marketing campaigns generated, on average, between 
7 and 15 customized marketing messages, the new campaign generated more than 1,500. IHG 
rolled out these messages in stages to an initial core of 12 customer groups, each of which is 
defined by 4,000 attributes. One group, for instance, tends to stay on weekends, redeem reward 
points for gift  cards, and register through IHG marketing partners. Utilizing this information, 
IHG sent these customers a marketing message that alerted them to local weekend events. 
The campaign proved to be highly successful. It generated a 35 percent higher rate of cus­
tomer conversions, or acceptances, than previous, similar campaigns. 
Government Operations. With 55 percent of the population of the Netherlands living 
under the threat of flooding, water management is critically important to the Dutch govern­
ment. The government operates a sophisticated water management system, managing a net­
work of dykes or levees, canals, locks, harbors, dams, rivers, storm-surge barriers, sluices, and 
pumping stations. 
In its water management efforts, the government makes use of a vast number of sensors 
embedded in every physical structure used for water control. The sensors generate at least 2 
petabytes of data annually. As the sensors are becoming cheaper, the government is deploying 
more of them, increasing the amount of data generated. 
In just one example of the use of sensor data, sensors in dykes can provide information 
on the structure of the dyke, how well it is able to handle the stress of the water it controls, 
and whether it is likely to fail. Further, the sensor data are providing valuable insights for new 
designs for Dutch dykes. The result is that Dutch authorities have reduced the costs of manag­
ing water by 15 percent. 
MKT 
POM 
Before you go on…
 1. Define Big Data.
 2. Describe the characteristics of Big Data.
 3. Describe how companies can use Big Data to gain competitive advantage. 
Apply the Concept 3.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3.3 Define Big Data and its 
basic characteristics. 
STEP 1: Background 
This section describes Big Data as an ongoing phenomenon 
that is providing businesses with access to vast amounts of 
information. The key “ingredients” that make the Big Data 
phenomenon a reality are volume, velocity, and variety.   
STEP 2: Activity 
TIBCO (www.tibco.com) is a company that provides a real-time 
event-processing software platform that brings customers 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Data Warehouses and Data Marts 75 
and vendors together in a very interactive and engaging way. 
It uses vast amounts of data (volume), in real time (velocity), 
from multiple sources (variety) to bring this solution to its 
customers. Visit YouTube, and search for two videos —“Deliver 
Personalized Retail Experiences Using Big Data” and “Harnessing 
Big Data and Social Media to Engage Customers”—both by user 
“TIBCOSoft ware.” 
As you view these videos, watch carefully for the three 
“ingredients” mentioned above. 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Choose one of the videos mentioned in Step 2, and write a 
review. In your review, define Big Data, and discuss its basic 
characteristics relative to the video. Also in your review, note the 
functional areas of an organization referred to in each video. 
Submit your review to your instructor. 
3.4 Data Warehouses and Data Marts 
Today, the most successful companies are those that can respond quickly and flexibly to mar­
ket changes and opportunities. A key to this response is the effective and efficient use of data 
and information by analysts and managers. The challenge is providing users with access to 
corporate data so that they can analyze the data to make better decisions. Let’s look at an 
example. If the manager of a local bookstore wanted to know the profit margin on used books 
at her store, she could obtain that information from her database, using SQL or QBE. However, 
if she needed to know the trend in the profit margins on used books over the past 10 years, she 
would have to construct a very complicated SQL or QBE query. 
This example illustrates several reasons why organizations are building data warehouses 
and/or data marts. First, the bookstore’s databases contain the necessary information to answer 
the manager’s query, but this information is not organized in a way that makes it easy for her to 
find what she needs. Second, the organization’s databases are designed to process millions of 
transactions every day. Therefore, complicated queries might take a long time to answer, and 
they also might degrade the performance of the databases. Third, transactional databases are 
designed to be updated. This update process requires extra processing. Data warehouses and 
data marts are read-only, and the extra processing is eliminated because data already contained 
in the data warehouse are not updated. Fourth, transactional databases are designed to access a 
single record at a time. Data warehouses are designed to access large groups of related records. 
As a result of these problems, companies are using a variety of tools with data warehouses 
and data marts to make it easier and faster for users to access, analyze, and query data. You will 
learn about these tools in Chapter 5 on Business Analytics. 
Describing Data Warehouses and Data Marts 
In general, data warehouses and data marts support business intelligence (BI) applications. As 
you will see in Chapter 5, business intelligence encompasses a broad category of applications, 
technologies, and processes for gathering, storing, accessing, and analyzing data to help busi­
ness users make better decisions. A data warehouse is a repository of historical data that are 
organized by subject to support decision makers in the organization. 
Because data warehouses are so expensive, they are used primarily by large companies. 
A data mart is a low-cost, scaled-down version of a data warehouse that is designed for the 
end-user needs in a strategic business unit (SBU) or an individual department. Data marts can 
be implemented more quickly than data warehouses, often in less than 90 days. Further, they 
support local rather than central control by conferring power on the user group. Typically, 
groups that need a single or a few BI applications require only a data mart, rather than a data 
warehouse. 
The basic characteristics of data warehouses and data marts include the following: 
•  Organized by business dimension or subject. Data are organized by subject—for exam­
ple, by customer, vendor, product, price level, and region. This arrangement diff ers from 

 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
transactional systems, where data are organized by business process, such as order entry, 
inventory control, and accounts receivable. 
•  Use online analytical processing. Typically, organizational databases are oriented toward 
handling transactions. That is, databases use online transaction processing (OLTP), where 
business transactions are processed online as soon as they occur. The objectives are speed 
and efficiency, which are critical to a successful Internet-based business operation. Data 
warehouses and data marts, which are designed to support decision makers but not OLTP, 
use OLTP. Online analytical processing involves the analysis of accumulated data by end 
users. We consider OLAP in greater detail in Chapter 5. 
•  Integrated. Data are collected from multiple systems and then integrated around subjects. 
For example, customer data may be extracted from internal (and external) systems and 
then integrated around a customer identifier, thereby creating a comprehensive view of 
the customer. 
•  Time variant. Data warehouses and data marts maintain historical data (i.e., data that 
include time as a variable). Unlike transactional systems, which maintain only recent 
data (such as for the last day, week, or month), a warehouse or mart may store years of 
data. Organizations utilize historical data to detect deviations, trends, and long-term 
relationships. 
•  Nonvolatile. Data warehouses and data marts are nonvolatile—that is, users cannot change 
or update the data. Therefore, the warehouse or mart reflects history, which, as we just 
saw, is critical for identifying and analyzing trends. Warehouses and marts are updated, 
but through IT-controlled load processes rather than by users. 
•  Multidimensional. Typically the data warehouse or mart uses a multidimensional data 
structure. Recall that relational databases store data in two-dimensional tables. In con­
trast, data warehouses and marts store data in more than two dimensions. For this reason, 
the data are said to be stored in a multidimensional structure. A common representa­
tion for this multidimensional structure is the data cube. 
The data in data warehouses and marts are organized by business dimensions, which are sub­
jects such as product, geographic area, and time period that represent the edges of the data 
cube. If you look ahead to Figure 3.6 for an example of a data cube, you see that the product 
dimension is comprised of nuts, screws, bolts, and washers; the geographic area dimension 
is comprised of East, West, and Central; and the time period dimension is comprised of 2013, 
2014, and 2015. Users can view and analyze data from the perspective of these business dimen­
sions. This analysis is intuitive because the dimensions are presented in business terms that 
users can easily understand. 
A Generic Data Warehouse Environment 
The environment for data warehouses and marts includes the following: 
• Source systems that provide data to the warehouse or mart 
• Data-integration technology and processes that prepare the data for use 
• Different architectures for storing data in an organization’s data warehouse or data marts 
• Different tools and applications for the variety of users. (You will learn about these tools 
and applications in Chapter 5.) 
• Metadata, data-quality, and governance processes that ensure that the warehouse or mart 
meets its purposes 
Figure 3.4 depicts a generic data warehouse/data mart environment. Let’s drill down into the 
component parts. 
Source Systems. There is typically some “organizational pain” (i.e., business need) that 
motivates a firm to develop its BI capabilities. Working backward, this pain leads to information 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Warehouses and Data Marts 77 
Figure dep i cting data ware
house framework that includes source systems (POS, ERP, legacy, external web documents), data integration (ETL, supply chain data, and metadata repository and enterprise data warehouse), storing data (marketing, management, and finance), and users (DSS, EIS reporting, relational query tools, OLAP/ROLAP, and data mining).
requirements, BI applications, and source system data requirements. The data requirements 
can range from a single source system, as in the case of a data mart, to hundreds of source 
systems, as in the case of an enterprisewide data warehouse. 
Modern organizations can select from a variety of source systems, including: operational/ 
transactional systems, enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, Web site data, third-party 
data (e.g., customer demographic data), and more. The trend is to include more types of data 
(e.g., sensing data from RFID tags). These source systems often use diff erent soft ware packages 
(e.g., IBM, Oracle) and store data in different formats (e.g., relational, hierarchical). 
A common source for the data in data warehouses is the company’s operational databases, 
which can be relational databases. To differentiate between relational databases and multi­
dimensional data warehouses and marts, imagine your company manufactures four prod-
ucts—nuts, screws, bolts, and washers—and has sold them in three territories—East, West, 
and Central—for the previous three years—2013, 2014, and 2015. In a relational database, 
these sales data would resemble Figure 3.5(a) through (c). In a multidimensional database, 
in contrast, these data would be represented by a three-dimensional matrix (or data cube), 
as depicted in Figure 3.6. This matrix represents sales dimensioned by products and regions 
and year. Notice that Figure 3.5(a) presents only sales for 2013. Sales for 2014 and 2015 are 
presented in Figure 3.5(b) and (c), respectively. Figure 3.7(a) through (c) illustrates the equiva­
lence between these relational and multidimensional databases. Figure depicting relational databases for the years 2013, 2014, and 2015 presented in a tabular manner. From left the first column denotes product followed by region, and sales.
FIGURE 3.5  Relational databases. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
78 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
FIGURE 3.6 F igure depicting data cube, where on the left-hand side the data cubes for 2013–2015 are clubbed together. From top to bottom the rows of the cubes denote east, west, and central and from left to right the columns denote nuts, screws, bolts, and washers, respectively. Arrows from this cube points rightward at three cubes corresponding to (a) 2015, (b) 2014, and (c) 2013.
Figure depicting the rational database and their corresponding data cube.
FIGURE 3.7 
Unfortunately, many source systems that have been in use for years contain “bad data” 
(e.g., missing or incorrect data) and are poorly documented. As a result, data-profiling soft ware 
should be used at the beginning of a warehousing project to better understand the data. For 
example, this software can provide statistics on missing data, identify possible primary and 
foreign keys, and reveal how derived values (e.g., column 3 = column 1 + column 2) are calcu­
lated. Subject area database specialists (e.g., marketing, human resources) can also assist in 
understanding and accessing the data in source systems. 
Organizations need to address other source systems issues as well. Often there are multi­
ple systems that contain some of the same data and the best system must be selected as the 
source system. Organizations must also decide how granular (i.e., detailed) the data should 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Warehouses and Data Marts 79 
be. For example, does the organization need daily sales figures or data at the individual trans­
action level? The conventional wisdom is that it is best to store data at a highly granular level 
because someone will likely request the data at some point. 
Data Integration. In addition to storing data in their source systems, organizations need 
to extract the data, transform them, and then load them into a data mart or warehouse. This 
process is often called ETL, although the term data integration is increasingly being used to 
reflect the growing number of ways that source system data can be handled. For example, in 
some cases, data are extracted, loaded into a mart or warehouse, and then transformed (i.e., 
ELT rather than ETL). 
Data extraction can be performed either by handwritten code (e.g., SQL queries) or by 
commercial data-integration software. Most companies employ commercial soft ware. This 
software makes it relatively easy to specify the tables and attributes in the source systems that 
are to be used, map and schedule the movement of the data to the target (e.g., a data mart or 
warehouse), make the required transformations, and ultimately load the data. 
After the data are extracted they are transformed to make them more useful. For exam­
ple, data from different systems may be integrated around a common key, such as a customer 
identification number. Organizations adopt this approach to create a 360-degree view of all of 
their interactions with their customers. As an example of this process, consider a bank. Cus­
tomers can engage in a variety of interactions: visiting a branch, banking online, using an ATM, 
obtaining a car loan, and more. The systems for these touch points—defined as the numerous 
ways that organizations interact with customers, such as e-mail, the Web, direct contact, and 
the telephone—are typically independent of one another. To obtain a holistic picture of how 
customers are using the bank, the bank must integrate the data from the various source sys­
tems into a data mart or warehouse. 
Other kinds of transformations also take place. For example, format changes to the data 
may be required, such as using male and female to denote gender, as opposed to 0 and 1 or M 
and F. Aggregations may be performed, say on sales figures, so that queries can use the summa­
ries rather than recalculating them each time. Data-cleansing software may be used to “clean 
up” the data; for example, eliminating duplicate records for the same customer. 
Finally, data are loaded into the warehouse or mart during a specific period known as the 
“load window.” This window is becoming smaller as companies seek to store ever-fresher data 
in their warehouses. For this reason, many companies have moved to real-time data warehous­
ing where data are moved (using data-integration processes) from source systems to the data 
warehouse or mart almost instantly. For example, within 15 minutes of a purchase at Walmart, 
the details of the sale have been loaded into a warehouse and are available for analysis. 
Storing the Data. A variety of architectures can be used to store decision-support data. The 
most common architecture is one central enterprise data warehouse, without data marts. Most 
organizations use this approach, because the data stored in the warehouse are accessed by all 
users and represent the single version of the truth. 
Another architecture is independent data marts. This architecture stores data for a single 
application or a few applications, such as marketing and finance. Limited thought is given to 
how the data might be used for other applications or by other functional areas in the organiza­
tion. This is a very application-centric approach to storing data. 
The independent data mart architecture is not particularly effective. Although it may meet 
a specific organizational need, it does not reflect an enterprise-wide approach to data man­
agement. Instead, the various organizational units create independent data marts. Not only 
are these marts expensive to build and maintain, but they often contain inconsistent data. For 
example, they may have inconsistent data definitions such as: What is a customer? Is a particu­
lar individual a potential or current customer? They might also use different source systems 
(which may have different data for the same item, such as a customer address). Although inde­
pendent data marts are an organizational reality, larger companies have increasingly moved to 
data warehouses. 
Still another data warehouse architecture is the hub and spoke. This architecture contains 
a central data warehouse that stores the data plus multiple dependent data marts that source 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
their data from the central repository. Because the marts obtain their data from the central 
repository, the data in these marts still comprise the single version of the truth for decision-sup­
port purposes. 
The dependent data marts store the data in a format that is appropriate for how the data 
will be used and for providing faster response times to queries and applications. As you have 
learned, users can view and analyze data from the perspective of business dimensions and 
measures. This analysis is intuitive because the dimensions are in business terms, easily under­
stood by users. 
Metadata. It is important to maintain data about the data, known as metadata, in the data 
warehouse. Both the IT personnel who operate and manage the data warehouse and the users 
who access the data need metadata. IT personnel need information about data sources; data­
base, table, and column names; refresh schedules; and data-usage measures. Users’ needs 
include data definitions, report/query tools, report distribution information, and contact infor­
mation for the help desk. 
Data Quality. The quality of the data in the warehouse must meet users’ needs. If it does not, 
users will not trust the data and ultimately will not use it. Most organizations find that the qual­
ity of the data in source systems is poor and must be improved before the data can be used in 
the data warehouse. Some of the data can be improved with data-cleansing software, but the 
better, long-term solution is to improve the quality at the source system level. This approach 
requires the business owners of the data to assume responsibility for making any necessary 
changes to implement this solution. 
To illustrate this point, consider the case of a large hotel chain that wanted to conduct tar­
geted marketing promotions using zip code data it collected from its guests when they checked 
in. When the company analyzed the zip code data, they discovered that many of the zip codes 
were 99999. How did this error occur? The answer is that the clerks were not asking customers 
for their zip codes, but they needed to enter something to complete the registration process. 
A short-term solution to this problem was to conduct the marketing campaign using city and 
state data instead of zip codes. The long-term solution was to make certain the clerks entered 
the actual zip codes. The latter solution required the hotel managers to take the responsibility 
for making certain their clerks enter the correct data. 
Governance. To ensure that BI is meeting their needs, organizations must implement gover­
nance to plan and control their BI activities. Governance requires that people, committees, and 
processes be in place. Companies that are effective in BI governance often create a senior-level 
committee comprised of vice presidents and directors who (1) ensure that the business strate­
gies and BI strategies are in alignment, (2) prioritize projects, and (3) allocate resources. These 
companies also establish a middle management–level committee that oversees the various 
projects in the BI portfolio to ensure that these projects are being completed in accordance 
with the company’s objectives. Finally, lower level operational committees perform tasks such 
as creating data definitions and identifying and solving data problems. All of these committees 
rely on the collaboration and contributions of business users and IT personnel. 
Users. Once the data are loaded in a data mart or warehouse, they can be accessed. At this 
point the organization begins to obtain business value from BI; all of the prior stages constitute 
creating BI infrastructure. 
There are many potential BI users, including IT developers; frontline workers; analysts; 
information workers; managers and executives; and suppliers, customers, and regulators. 
Some of these users are information producers whose primary role is to create information for 
other users. IT developers and analysts typically fall into this category. Other users—including 
managers and executives—are information consumers, because they utilize information cre­
ated by others. 
Companies have reported hundreds of successful data-warehousing applications. You 
can read client success stories and case studies at the Web sites of vendors such as NCR 
Corp. (www.ncr.com) and Oracle (www.oracle.com). For a more detailed discussion, visit the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knowledge Management 81 
Data Warehouse Institute (http://tdwi.org). The benefits of data warehousing include the 
following: 
• End users can access needed data quickly and easily via Web browsers because these data 
are located in one place. 
• End users can conduct extensive analysis with data in ways that were not previously possible. 
• End users can obtain a consolidated view of organizational data. 
These benefits can improve business knowledge, provide competitive advantage, enhance 
customer service and satisfaction, facilitate decision making, and streamline business 
processes. 
Despite their many benefits, data warehouses have some limitations. First, they can be 
very expensive to build and to maintain. Second, incorporating data from obsolete mainframe 
systems can be difficult and expensive. Finally, people in one department might be reluctant to 
share data with other departments. 
Before you go on…
 1. Differentiate between data warehouses and data marts.
 2. Describe the characteristics of a data warehouse.
 3. What are three possible architectures for data warehouses and data marts in an organization? 
Apply the Concept 3.4 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3.4 Explain the elements 
in the article. (The term “warehouse” is not used, but the concept 
necessary to successfully implement and maintain data 
is applicable.)  Also, although the article seems to focus on real-
warehouses. 
time data usage, imagine the possibilities of compiling years of 
this type of data in a data warehouse.  
STEP 1: Background 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
A set of general ingredients is required for organizations to 
effectively utilize the power of data marts and data warehouses. 
To demonstrate that you recognize the environmental factors 
Figure 3.4 presents this information. Healthcare as an industry 
necessary to implement and maintain a data warehouse, imagine 
has not been centralized for many business, legal and ethical 
that the date is exactly five years in the future. Write a newspaper 
reasons. However, the overall health implications of a centralized 
article titled “Data from Gadgets Like Fitbit Remade How Doctors 
data warehouse are unimaginable.  
Treated Us.” In your article imagine that all of the ingredients 
necessary in the environment have come together.  Discuss what 
the environment was like five years ago (today) and how things 
STEP 2: Activity 
have evolved to create the right mix of environmental factors.  
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and read the article in WIRED magazine from March 6, 2014, titled 
Be aware that there is no right/wrong answer to this exercise. The 
“Gadgets Like Fitbit Are Remaking How Doctors Treat You.” As you 
objective is for you to recognize the necessary environment for a 
read this article, you will see that several key ingredients exist, 
successful data warehouse implementation. The healthcare-related 
though no one has built a medical data warehouse as described 
example simply provides a platform to accomplish this task. 
3.5  Knowledge Management 
As we have noted throughout this text, data and information are critically important organiza­
tional assets. Knowledge is a vital asset as well. Successful managers have always valued and 
utilized intellectual assets. These efforts were not systematic, however, and they did not ensure 
that knowledge was shared and dispersed in a way that benefited the overall organization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
Moreover, industry analysts estimate that most of a company’s knowledge assets are not 
housed in relational databases. Instead, they are dispersed in e-mail, word-processing doc­
uments, spreadsheets, presentations on individual computers, and in people’s heads. This 
arrangement makes it extremely difficult for companies to access and integrate this knowl­
edge. The result frequently is less-effective decision making. 
Concepts and Definitions 
Knowledge management (KM) is a process that helps organizations manipulate important 
knowledge that comprises part of the organization’s memory, usually in an unstructured for­
mat. For an organization to be successful, knowledge, as a form of capital, must exist in a for­
mat that can be exchanged among persons. In addition, it must be able to grow. 
Knowledge. In the information technology context, knowledge is distinct from data and 
information. As you learned in Chapter 1, data are a collection of facts, measurements, and 
statistics; information is organized or processed data that are timely and accurate. Knowledge 
is information that is contextual, relevant, and useful. Simply put, knowledge is information in 
action. Intellectual capital (or intellectual assets) is another term for knowledge. 
To illustrate, a bulletin listing all of the courses offered by your university during one 
semester would be considered data. When you register, you process the data from the bulle­
tin to create your schedule for the semester. Your schedule would be considered information. 
Awareness of your work schedule, your major, your desired social schedule, and characteristics 
of different faculty members could be construed as knowledge, because it can affect the way 
you build your schedule. You see that this awareness is contextual and relevant (to developing 
an optimal schedule of classes) as well as useful (it can lead to changes in your schedule). The 
implication is that knowledge has strong experiential and reflective elements that distinguish 
it from information in a given context. Unlike information, knowledge can be utilized to solve 
a problem. 
Numerous theories and models classify different types of knowledge. In the next section, 
we will focus on the distinction between explicit knowledge and tacit knowledge. 
Explicit and Tacit Knowledge. Explicit knowledge deals with more objective, rational, 
and technical knowledge. In an organization, explicit knowledge consists of the policies, pro­
cedural guides, reports, products, strategies, goals, core competencies, and IT infrastructure 
of the enterprise. In other words, explicit knowledge is the knowledge that has been codified 
(documented) in a form that can be distributed to others or transformed into a process or a 
strategy. A description of how to process a job application that is documented in a firm’s human 
resources policy manual is an example of explicit knowledge. 
In contrast, tacit knowledge is the cumulative store of subjective or experiential learn­
ing. In an organization, tacit knowledge consists of an organization’s experiences, insights, 
expertise, know-how, trade secrets, skill sets, understanding, and learning. It also includes 
the organizational culture, which reflects the past and present experiences of the organiza­
tion’s people and processes, as well as the organization’s prevailing values. Tacit knowledge 
is generally imprecise and costly to transfer. It is also highly personal. Finally, because it is 
unstructured, it is difficult to formalize or codify, in contrast to explicit knowledge. A salesper­
son who has worked with particular customers over time and has come to know their needs 
quite well would possess extensive tacit knowledge. This knowledge is typically not recorded. 
In fact, it might be difficult for the salesperson to put into writing, even if he or she were willing 
to share it. 
Knowledge Management Systems 
The goal of knowledge management is to help an organization make the most productive use 
of the knowledge it has accumulated. Historically, management information systems have 
focused on capturing, storing, managing, and reporting explicit knowledge. Organizations now 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Knowledge Management 83 
realize they need to integrate explicit and tacit knowledge into formal information systems. 
Knowledge management systems (KMSs) refer to the use of modern information technol­
ogies—the Internet, intranets, extranets, databases—to systematize, enhance, and expedite 
intrafirm and interfirm knowledge management. KMSs are intended to help an organization 
cope with turnover, rapid change, and downsizing by making the expertise of the organization’s 
human capital widely accessible. IT’s About Business 3.4 illustrates how Performance Bicycle 
implemented the Learning Center, a knowledge management system. 
IT’s About Business 3.4 
Performance Bicycle Leverages Its 
Employees’ Knowledge 
Performance Bicycle (PB; www.performancebike.com) is a leading 
retailer of cycling products. The company has 2,200 employees and 
more than 100 stores in 20 states. It also has a print catalog and 
sells more than 10,000 products on its Web site. 
The company wanted to use the Web to increase its customer 
base as part of its long-term business plan. PB knew that its e-
commerce site could extend its reach beyond its brick-and-mortar 
stores. To do this, it would need more than just great products. 
Performance Bicycle decided to leverage its employees’ 
passion for cycling. Most of them keep bikes in their offices or cu­
bicles. By using the staff’s knowledge and enthusiasm, PB could 
motivate new customers and cement its reputation as a cycling 
expert. Significantly, the company recognized that although its 
employees’ knowledge is extremely valuable, it was also largely 
untapped. The challenge confronting Performance Bicycle was to 
capture this knowledge and share it with its customers in an en­
gaging way. PB addressed this challenge by launching its Learn­
ing Center. 
To make its employees’ knowledge available to customers 
on its Web site, Performance Bicycle added a knowledge manage­
ment system, called the Learning Center, where staff share their 
expertise, tips, and tricks via videos, articles, and how-to guides. 
Key to the Learning Center’s success is its seamless integration with 
e-commerce, allowing customers to easily find products and the 
relevant multimedia content about them. For example, custom­
ers interested in performing maintenance on their bike can watch 
a how-to video and then click directly to the replacement parts 
they’ll need to order. 
Performance Bicycle conducted knowledge-transfer sessions 
to obtain the knowledge for the Learning Center. PB has an edito­
rial team that reviews content produced by employees, includ­
ing articles and video guides. When publishing the content to the 
Learning Center, the editorial team makes links to relevant pages 
MKT 
MIS 
on the e-commerce site. When new products are added for sale, the 
editorial team links back to relevant Learning Center content. 
For Performance Bicycle employees and customers alike, cy­
cling is a lifestyle. Its e-commerce site and Learning Center have 
helped forge its reputation as a leading cycling authority. The 
site succeeds in inspiring both experienced and new cyclists, and 
helps them navigate the otherwise bumpy road of a wide range of 
products. 
And the bottom line? Within just four months of the Learning 
Center going live, traffic on PB’s site tripled. The Learning Center is 
now referring more than 40 percent of all of the company’s direct 
online sales. Meanwhile, PB has begun to implement the Learning 
Center as a mobile application to further improve the customer 
experience. 
Sources: Compiled from A. Dow, “Top Takeaways for Retail from 
VMworld,” VMware Blogs, September 15, 2015; “Consumer and Retail 
Companies Must Focus on Distribution and Localization in Emerging 
Markets,” M-Brain, July 5, 2015; E. Tucker, “Positive Stories about 
Working in Retail,” APQC.org, April 29, 2015; T. Hussein and S. Khan, 
“Knowledge Management: An Instrument for Implementation in 
Retail Marketing,” MATRIX Academic International Online Journal 
of Engineering and Technology, April, 2015; “Performance Bike: 
Architecting a Customer Learning Center,” Sirius Digital Experience, 
2015; A. Pickrell, “Putting the ‘Perform’ in Performance Bicycle,” 
IBM Amplify, 2015; J. Gregoire, “5 Challenges, Opportunities, and 
Imperatives for Retailers in 2015,” CPC Strategy, October 8, 2014; 
“Performance Bicycle,” IBM Smarter Commerce, April 22, 2014; 
“Performance Bicycle Launches Learning Center,” MarketWatch, 
September 25, 2013; www.performancebike.com, accessed 
September 26, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Describe several ways in which Performance Bicycle incorpo­
rates employee knowledge in its customer experience. 
2. Is Performance Bicycle capturing and using its employee’s 
tacit knowledge or explicit knowledge? Explain your answer. 
Organizations can realize many benefits with KMSs. Most importantly, they make best 
practices—the most eff ective and efficient ways of doing things—readily available to a wide 
range of employees. Enhanced access to best-practice knowledge improves overall organ­
izational performance. For example, account managers can now make available their tacit 
knowledge about how best to manage large accounts. The organization can then utilize this 
knowledge when it trains new account managers. Other benefits include improved customer 
service, more efficient product development, and improved employee morale and retention. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management Figure depicting the knowledge management system cycle where create, capture, refine, store, manage, disseminate, and knowledge are arranged in a cyclic manner. Knowledge is represented by a box whereas the others by ellipse.
The knowledge management system cycle. 
FIGURE 3.8 
At the same time, however, implementing effective KMSs pre­
sents several challenges. First, employees must be willing to share 
their personal tacit knowledge. To encourage this behavior, organi­
zations must create a knowledge management culture that rewards 
employees who add their expertise to the knowledge base. Second, 
the organization must continually maintain and upgrade its knowl­
edge base. Specifically, it must incorporate new knowledge and 
delete old, outdated knowledge. Finally, companies must be willing 
to invest in the resources needed to carry out these operations. 
The KMS Cycle 
A functioning KMS follows a cycle that consists of six steps (see 
Figure 3.8). The reason the system is cyclical is that knowledge is 
dynamically refined over time. The knowledge in an eff ective KMS 
is never finalized because the environment changes over time and 
knowledge must be updated to reflect these changes. The cycle 
works as follows: 
1.  Create knowledge. Knowledge is created as people determine new ways of doing things or 
develop know-how. Sometimes external knowledge is brought in. 
2.  Capture knowledge. New knowledge must be identified as valuable and be represented in 
a reasonable way. 
3.  Refine knowledge. New knowledge must be placed in context so that it is actionable. This 
is where tacit qualities (human insights) must be captured along with explicit facts. 
4.  Store knowledge. Useful knowledge must then be stored in a reasonable format in a knowl­
edge repository so that other people in the organization can access it. 
5.  Manage knowledge. Like a library, the knowledge must be kept current. It must be re­
viewed regularly to verify that it is relevant and accurate. 
6.  Disseminate knowledge. Knowledge must be made available in a useful format to anyone 
in the organization who needs it, anywhere and anytime. 
Before you go on…
 1. What is knowledge management?
 2. What is the difference between tacit knowledge and explicit knowledge?
 3. Describe the knowledge management system cycle. 
Apply the Concept 3.5 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3.5 Describe the benefits and 
challenges of implementing knowledge management systems in 
organizations. 
STEP 1: Background 
As you have learned in this text, data are captured, stored, 
analyzed, and shared to create knowledge within organizations. 
This knowledge is exposed in meetings when colleagues are 
interpreting the information they received from the latest report, 
in employee presentations, in e-mail among coworkers, and in 
numerous other scenarios. The problem many organizations face 
is that there are massive amounts of knowledge that are created 
and shared, but this information is not stored in a centralized, 
searchable format. 
STEP 2: Activity 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, and 
click on the links provided for Apply the Concept 3.5. They will take 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
you to two YouTube videos: “Discover What You Know” by user 
“Ken Porter” and “Lee Bryant—Knowledge Management” by user 
“usnowfilm.” Both videos illustrate the importance of capturing 
knowledge within an organization so it can be shared with the right 
person at the right time to support effective decision making. 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Write a short paragraph or two to discuss the benefits and 
challenges faced by companies when they attempt to implement 
 Knowledge Management 85 
a knowledge management system. How many of these elements 
are technical, and how many are social? Also, discuss the ways 
that companies can use Web 2.0 technologies to help capture and 
share knowledge. 
Submit this essay to your instructor. 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For the Accounting Major 
The accounting function is intimately concerned with keeping track 
of the transactions and internal controls of an organization. Modern 
databases enable accountants to perform these functions more ef­
fectively. Databases help accountants manage the flood of data in 
today’s organizations so that they can keep their firms in compliance 
with the standards imposed by Sarbanes–Oxley. 
Accountants also play a role in cost justifying the creation of a 
knowledge base and then auditing its cost-effectiveness. In addition, 
if you work for a large CPA company that provides management ser­
vices or sells knowledge, you will most likely use some of your com­
pany’s best practices that are stored in a knowledge base. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
Financial managers make extensive use of computerized databases 
that are external to the organization, such as CompuStat or Dow 
Jones, to obtain financial data on organizations in their industry. 
They can use these data to determine if their organization meets in­
dustry benchmarks in return on investment, cash management, and 
other financial ratios. 
Financial managers, who produce the organization’s financial 
status reports, are also closely involved with Sarbanes–Oxley. Data­
bases help these managers comply with the law’s standards. 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major 
Databases help marketing managers access data from the organi­
zation’s marketing transactions, such as customer purchases, to 
plan targeted marketing campaigns and to evaluate the success of 
previous campaigns. Knowledge about customers can make the 
difference between success and failure. In many databases and 
knowledge bases, the vast majority of information and knowledge 
concerns customers, products, sales, and marketing. Marketing 
managers regularly use an organization’s knowledge base, and they 
often participate in its creation. 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
Production/operations personnel access organizational data to de­
termine optimum inventory levels for parts in a production process. 
Past production data enable production/operations management 
(POM) personnel to determine the optimum configuration for as­
sembly lines. Firms also collect quality data that inform them not 
only about the quality of finished products but also about qual­
ity issues with incoming raw materials, production irregularities, 
shipping and logistics, and after-sale use and maintenance of the 
product. 
Knowledge management is extremely important for running 
complex operations. The accumulated knowledge regarding sched­
uling, logistics, maintenance, and other functions is very valuable. 
Innovative ideas are necessary for improving operations and can be 
supported by knowledge management. 
HRM For the Human Resources Management Major 
Organizations keep extensive data on employees, including gender, 
age, race, current and past job descriptions, and performance evalu­
ations. HR personnel access these data to provide reports to govern­
ment agencies regarding compliance with federal equal opportunity 
guidelines. HR managers also use these data to evaluate hiring prac­
tices, evaluate salary structures, and manage any discrimination 
grievances or lawsuits brought against the firm. 
Databases help HR managers provide assistance to all employ­
ees as companies turn over more and more decisions about health-
care and retirement planning to the employees themselves. The 
employees can use the databases for help in selecting the optimal 
mix among these critical choices. 
HR managers also need to use a knowledge base frequently to 
find out how past cases were handled. Consistency in how employees 
are treated not only is important, but it also protects the company 
against legal actions. In addition, training for building, maintaining, 
and using the knowledge system sometimes is the responsibility of 
the HR department. Finally, the HR department might be responsible 
for compensating employees who contribute their knowledge to the 
knowledge base. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
The MIS function manages the organization’s data as well as the da­
tabases. MIS database administrators standardize data names by 
using the data dictionary. This process ensures that all users under­
stand which data are in the database. Database personnel also help 
users access needed data and generate reports with query tools. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
Summary  
1.  Discuss ways that common challenges in managing data can be 
addressed using data governance. 
The following are three common challenges in managing data: 
•  Data are scattered throughout organizations and are collected by 
many individuals using various methods and devices. These data are 
frequently stored in numerous servers and locations and in diff erent 
computing systems, databases, formats, and human and computer 
languages. 
•  Data come from multiple sources. 
•  Information systems that support particular business processes impose 
unique requirements on data, which results in repetition and conflicts 
across an organization. 
One strategy for implementing data governance is master data manage­
ment. Master data management provides companies with the ability to 
store, maintain, exchange, and synchronize a consistent, accurate, and 
timely “single version of the truth” for the company’s core master data. 
Master data management manages data gathered from across an organ­
ization, manages data from multiple sources, and manages data across 
business processes in an organization. 
2.  Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of relational databases. 
Relational databases allow people to compare information quickly by row 
or column. In addition, items are easy to retrieve by finding the point of 
intersection of a particular row and column. On the other hand, large-scale 
relational databases can be composed of many interrelated tables, making 
the overall design complex with slow search and access times. 
3.  Define Big Data and its basic characteristics. 
Big Data is composed of high volume, high velocity, and high variety infor­
mation assets that require new forms of processing to enable enhanced 
decision making, insight discovery, and process optimization. Big Data 
has three distinct characteristics, which are volume, velocity, and variety. 
These characteristics distinguish Big Data from traditional data: 
•  Volume: Big Data consists of vast quantities of data. 
•  Velocity: Big Data flows into an organization at incredible speeds. 
•  Variety: Big Data includes a huge variety of different data in diff ering data 
formats. 
4.  Explain the elements necessary to successfully implement and 
maintain data warehouses. 
To successfully implement and maintain a data warehouse, an organiza­
tion must: 
•  Link source systems that provide data to the warehouse or mart. 
•  Prepare the necessary data for the data warehouse using data integra­
tion technology and processes. 
•  Decide on an appropriate architecture for storing data in the data ware­
house or data mart. 
•  Select the tools and applications for the variety of organizational users. 
•  Ensure that metadata, data quality, and governance processes are in 
place to ensure that the data warehouse or mart meets its purposes. 
5.  Describe the benefits and challenges of implementing knowledge 
management systems in organizations. 
Organizations can realize many benefits with KMSs, including: 
•  Best practices are readily available to a wide range of employees. 
•  Improved customer service; 
•  More efficient product development; and 
•  Improved employee morale and retention. 
Challenges to implementing KMSs include: 
•  Employees must be willing to share their personal tacit knowledge. 
•  Organizations must create a knowledge management culture that 
rewards employees who add their expertise to the knowledge base. 
•  The knowledge base must be continually maintained and updated. 
•  Companies must be willing to invest in the resources needed to carry out 
these operations. 
Chapter Glossary 
Dattribute Each characteristic or quality of a particular entity. 
best practices The most effective and efficient ways to do things. 
Big Data A collection of data so large and complex that it is diff icult to 
manage using traditional database management systems. 
bit A binary digit—that is, a 0 or a 1. 
byte A group of eight bits that represents a single character. 
clickstream data Data collected about user behavior and browsing 
patterns by monitoring users’ activities when they visit a Web site. 
data file (also table) A collection of logically related records. 
data governance An approach to managing information across an 
entire organization. 
data mart A low-cost, scaled-down version of a data warehouse that 
is designed for the end-user needs in a strategic business unit (SBU) 
or a department. 
data model A diagram that represents entities in the database and 
their relationships. 
data warehouse A repository of historical data that are organized by 
subject to support decision makers in the organization. 
database management system (DBMS) The soft ware 
program (or group of programs) that provides access to a 
database. 
entity Any person, place, thing, or event of interest to a user. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Problem-Solving Activities 87 
explicit knowledge The more objective, rational, and technical 
types of knowledge. 
fi eld A characteristic of interest that describes an entity. 
foreign key A field (or group of fields) in one table that uniquely 
identifies a row (or record) of another table. 
instance Each row in a relational table, which is a specific, unique 
representation of the entity. 
intellectual capital (or intellectual assets) Other terms for 
knowledge. 
knowledge management (KM) A process that helps 
organizations identify, select, organize, disseminate, transfer, and 
apply information and expertise that are part of the organization’s 
memory and that typically reside within the organization in an 
unstructured manner. 
knowledge management systems (KMSs) Information 
technologies used to systematize, enhance, and expedite intra- and 
interfirm knowledge management. 
master data A set of core data, such as customer, product, employee, 
vendor, geographic location, and so on, that spans an enterprise’s 
information systems. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  Is Big Data really a problem on its own, or are the use, control, and secu­
rity of the data the true problems? Provide specific examples to support 
your answer. 
2.  What are the implications of having incorrect data points in your Big 
Data? What are the implications of incorrect or duplicated customer 
data? How valuable are decisions that are based on faulty information 
derived from incorrect data? 
3.  Explain the difficulties involved in managing data. 
4.  What are the problems associated with poor-quality data? 
5.  What is master data management? What does it have to do with 
high-quality data? 
6.  Explain why master data management is so important in companies 
that have multiple data sources. 
7.  Describe the advantages and disadvantages of relational databases. 
8.  Explain why it is important to capture and manage knowledge. 
9.  Compare and contrast tacit knowledge and explicit knowledge. 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  Access various employment Web sites (e.g., www.monster.com and 
www.dice.com) and find several job descriptions for a database admin­
istrator. Are the job descriptions similar? What are the salaries off ered 
in these positions? 
2.  Access the Web sites of several real estate companies. Find the sites that 
take you through a step-by-step process for buying a home, that pro­
vide virtual reality tours of homes in your price range (say, $200,000 to 
$250,000) and location, that provide mortgage and interest rate calcu­
lators, and that offer financing for your home. Do the sites require that 
you register to access their services? Can you request that an e-mail be 
sent to you when properties in which you might be interested become 
master data management A process that provides companies 
with the ability to store, maintain, exchange, and synchronize a 
consistent, accurate, and timely “single version of the truth” for the 
company’s core master data. 
multidimensional structure Storage of data in more than two 
dimensions; a common representation is the data cube. 
primary key An field (or attribute) of a record that uniquely identifies 
that record so that it can be retrieved, updated, and sorted. 
record A grouping of logically related fields. 
relational database model Data model based on the simple 
concept of tables in order to capitalize on characteristics of rows and 
columns of data. 
secondary key A field that has some identifying information, but 
typically does not uniquely identify a record with complete accuracy. 
table A grouping of logically related records. 
tacit knowledge The cumulative store of subjective or experiential 
learning, which is highly personal and hard to formalize. 
unstructured data Data that does not reside in a traditional 
relational database. 
available? How does the process outlined influence your likelihood of 
selecting this company for your real estate purchase? 
3.  It is possible to find many Web sites that provide demographic infor­
mation. Access several of these sites and see what they offer. Do the 
sites differ in the types of demographic information they offer? If so, 
how? Do the sites require a fee for the information they off er? Would 
demographic information be useful to you if you wanted to start a new 
business? If so, how and why? 
4.  Search the Web for uses of Big Data in homeland security. Specifically, 
read about the spying by the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA). What 
role did technology and Big Data play in this questionable practice? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
5.  Visit the website for HowStuff Works (www.howstuff works.com), and 
search for “Big Data: Friend or Foe?” What points does this article pres­
ent concerning the delicate balance between shared data and custom­
er privacy? 
6.  Access the Web sites of IBM (www.ibm.com), Sybase (www.sybase 
.com), and Oracle (www.oracle.com), and trace the capabilities of their 
latest data management products, including Web connections. 
7.  Enter the Web site of the Gartner Group (www.gartner.com). Exam­
ine the company’s research studies pertaining to data management. 
Prepare a report on the state of the art. 
8.  Calculate your personal digital footprint at http://www.emc.com/ 
digital_universe/downloads/web/personal-ticker.htm. 
9.  Diagram a knowledge management system cycle for a fictional company 
that sells customized T-shirts to students. 
Closing Case 1 
POM Tracking Pot from Seed to Customer 
The Problem 
When Colorado’s Amendment 64 legalized recreational marijuana in 
2012, most of its support came from voters in Denver and its surround­
ing metropolitan area, and not from the state’s more rural areas. As 
a result, Colorado remains divided over the drug, which is still illegal 
under federal law (as of October 2015). 
In fact, of 321 municipalities in Colorado, 228 “opted out” of 
allowing marijuana. Local officials and law enforcement throughout 
the state, unconvinced of the benefits of legalizing marijuana, have 
tried to push back against legalization, citing the federal government’s 
ban on the drug. Meanwhile, investors, business owners, tourists, and 
many Colorado residents argue that legal recreational marijuana has 
benefited the state. 
At least partially in response to this ongoing debate, Colorado has 
placed strict regulations on all aspects of the marijuana production 
process. These regulations mandate that producers and distributors 
track each plant throughout its lifecycle. The problem was how to 
implement these regulations in an efficient, accountable, cost-eff ec­
tive manner. 
The IT Solution 
Colorado’s marijuana growers and distributors are having to adjust to 
regulations concerning their newly legitimate businesses. Under the 
state’s rules, growers must put a microchip on each plant so it can be 
recorded and monitored in Colorado’s Marijuana Inventory Tracking 
Solution (MITS). 
A yellow radio-frequency identification (RFID) tag placed on each 
plant enables officials consulting a statewide database to track crops 
from “bud to blunt.” The tags contain 24-digit identification codes, and 
they are staked into the soil or wrapped around individual plants while 
they grow. The tags travel with the plants through the grow house, to 
harvest, and as the pot flowers are dried and cured for flavor. (A grow 
house is a property that is primarily used for the production of mar­
ijuana.) For shipment to stores, each strain of marijuana is grouped 
into a batch that receives its own RFID tag, which remains on the pack­
ages until the batch is sold. During scheduled and unscheduled visits 
to dispensaries or grow houses, state officials use RFID scanners and 
electronic inventories to ensure that none of the plants goes missing. 
Franwell (www.franwell.com), a Florida-based technology com­
pany, developed the RFID tag system. Each plant tag costs 45 cents, 
and the batch package tag costs 25 cents. Growers contend that the 
tags are expensive. For many growers, however, their biggest frustra­
tion is having to enter the data twice: once into their own accounting 
databases and again into the MITS system, which is not compatible 
with most other accounting programs. The penalties for mistakes in 
entering the data include loss of license and criminal charges. Given 
that the potential for mistakes is high, growers feel that these pen­
alties are excessively harsh. For example, when a plant dies, growers 
must follow a lengthy ticketing procedure to document and delete that 
plant from the system or face severe penalties for a “missing” plant.  
Franwell is working to develop a system that integrates with 
grower databases. The company notes that the water- and chemi­
cal-resistant tags are relatively cheap given that orders are usually 
small. 
A spokeswoman for Colorado’s marijuana enforcement division 
maintains that red tape and fees are “part of being regulated.” Com­
plaints notwithstanding, one grower stated that RFID tagging and 
capturing the data in the MITS database is necessary to legitimize the 
industry. 
The plant tags do provide some benefits to growers. Specifically, 
they offer knowledgeable growers a closer look at which strains are 
selling well or where a troublesome batch shipped. For example, 
when a batch of pot-infused gummy bears shipped from Native Roots 
(http://nativeroots303.com, the largest marijuana dispensary in Col­
orado) became moldy, the store manager used the data recorded on 
the MITS database to locate and recall only the rotten gummies. Other 
growers are installing their own RFID scanners to electronically track 
each plant’s location in their warehouses. 
The Results 
As of July 2015, the state of Colorado had issued nearly 2,500 licenses 
for marijuana cultivation, production, and testing facilities and retail 
stores in both the medical and recreational markets. Marijuana 
brought in nearly $80 million for the state in taxes and fees during the 
2015 fiscal year. The revenue comes from a 2.9 percent retail and med­
ical marijuana sales tax, a 10 percent retail marijuana special sales tax, 
and a 15 percent marijuana excise tax, plus application and license 
fees for retail and medical marijuana. 
Those figures did not keep track of the economic contributions of 
thousands of tourists who come to Colorado partly for its marijuana. 
In fact, according to Colorado’s Marijuana Enforcement Division, up to 
90 percent of recreational marijuana sales in some areas, particularly 
mountain resort towns, are made to tourists. 
In November 2014, Oregon legalized nonmedical cultivation and 
uses of marijuana beginning in July 2015. (The state had previously 
allowed small amounts of marijuana to be used for medical purposes.) 
The state is planning to use an RFID system similar to Colorado’s to 
monitor marijuana production and distribution. 
Sources: Compiled from R. Grenoble, “Revenue from Colorado Marijuana 
Tax Expected to Double in 2015,” The Huffington Post, September 21, 2015; 
K. Wyatt, “Colorado Pot Growers Save Big Bucks on Tax Holiday Caused 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by Quirk in State Law,” US News and World Report, September 16, 2015; 
J. Frank, “Ahead of 2015 Vote, Campaign Pushes Marijuana Tax Question 
in Colorado,” The Denver Post, September 13, 2015; C. Cooper, “Colorado 
Profits, But Still Divided on Legal Weed,” The Center for Public Integrity, 
August 16, 2015; R. Baca, “Colorado Pot Sales Spike in June, Top $50 
Million for First Time,” The Cannabist, August 13, 2015; H. Borrud, “Oregon 
Pot Tracking System Will Use RFID Technology,” East Oregonian, June 14, 
2015; S. Lohmeyer, “States Turn to Tech for Tracking Marijuana,” GCN.com, 
May 26, 2015; K. Mulvaney, “Advocate Says Colorado Received $60 Million 
in Taxes and Fees from Marijuana in 2014,” Providence Journal, January 
11, 2015; K. Weise, “Tracking Colorado’s Legal Pot, Plant by Plant,” 
Closing Case 2 89 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, March 17-23, 2014; R. Hiscott, “RFID Tags Track 
Marijuana from Seed to Sale in Colorado,” Mashable, February 11, 2014. 
Questions 
1.  Describe how database technology plays an important role ena­
bling Colorado to closely monitor the marijuana production and 
distribution process. 
2.  Describe potential disadvantages in using RFID tags to monitor 
marijuana production and distribution. 
Closing Case 2 
POM Big Data and the Treatment of Cancer 
The Problem 
The global statistics on cancer are sobering. Every year, 8 million 
people die from cancer, and 14 million people discover they have the 
disease. Approximately $100 billion is spent on cancer drugs globally. 
Unfortunately, the majority of cancer treatments are not successful. 
Despite years of effort by the medical establishment to persuade 
doctors and hospitals to embrace electronic medical records (EMRs), 
oncology data have remained difficult to access and use. (Oncology 
is the branch of medicine that deals with the study and treatment of 
cancer.) 
Data on a single cancer patient can come from multiple sources, 
including internists, oncologists, radiologists, surgeons, and labora­
tory and pathology reports. Even when the data are digitized, they 
are often in an unstructured format. Rather than being organized in 
databases, the data are often in multiple, inconsistent formats across 
different lab reports and records. Making matters worse, much data 
remain hidden in reports that have been written by hand and scanned, 
in audio recordings, and in low-resolution PDF files printed from fax 
machines. Finally, incompatible systems and strict privacy regula­
tions—for example, the Health Insurance Portability and Accounta­
bility Act, or HIPAA—that govern personal health information make it 
even more difficult for data to be shared across thousands of oncology 
practices. 
Only a small fraction of cancer patient treatment data are being 
collected systematically. Those data are typically collected from ran­
domized clinical trials, which cover only 4 percent of adult cancer 
patients. 
A Proposed IT Solution 
Flatiron Health (Flatiron; www.flatiron.com) wants to help doctors 
develop better treatment options for cancer. Founded in 2012, Flatiron 
essentially fights cancer with organized data. With its OncologyCloud, 
the company is helping oncologists enhance patient care. The com­
pany collects, organizes, and standardizes much of the information for 
the 96 percent of patients not included in clinical trials and then off ers 
those data back to physicians in a format that can be analyzed. 
The two Flatiron founders began their startup by visiting 60 can­
cer centers, speaking directly with experts, and visiting patients with 
physicians. Working with oncology experts, they decided that the 
most pressing need in cancer treatment was to organize the massive 
volumes of clinical data that are scattered in the filing systems of 
oncology treatment centers throughout the country. They proposed to 
collect the data—both digital and otherwise—and then organize them, 
aggregate them, and provide them to physicians, who can use the data 
to make better decisions about how to treat their patients. 
In theory, electronic medical records (EMRs) were supposed to 
make such data aggregation and integration easier. Unfortunately, 
those benefits have not totally materialized. In fact, more than 25 per­
cent of U.S. medical records remain in hard-copy format. 
The Flatiron founders spent more than two years building what 
they call a data model, which is their strategy to organize clinical 
information into categories. Working with a team of physicians, they 
decided to focus initially on one type of cancer: colon cancer. Using 
published clinical trials, they extracted more than 350 data categories, 
including demographics, geographic location, cancer stages, biologi­
cal markers of disease, and responses to therapies. Then they repeated 
the process for other forms of cancer. 
To automate the process of extracting data from medical records, 
which can be labor intensive, Flatiron used matching algorithms 
targeted at pinpointing values in lab reports. They also utilized nat­
ural-language processing to enable computers to read documents 
and extract data from them. Such systems must be trained. To accom­
plish this task, Flatiron hired a team of 60 nurses to enter data on 500 
patients by hand, creating a “training set” that was used to detect 
errors in data that had been collected automatically. Data collection 
errors were then fed back into the system as inputs to help improve the 
automated collection process. 
The Results 
Using Flatiron’s OncologyCloud, oncologists are able to see the most 
effective therapies for the most patients in similar circumstances. Fur­
ther, these physicians are able to evaluate their own treatment out­
comes against those of other specialists across the nation and then 
quickly correct any deficiencies. The OncologyCloud also highlights 
cost-effective therapies and wasteful healthcare spending. Finally, the 
system helps to match patients with suitable clinical trials, hopefully 
speeding up the development and approval of new medicines. 
In 2014, Flatiron acquired Altos Solutions, which developed the 
first oncology-specific electronic medical record. This acquisition gave 
Flatiron a larger installed base and closer contact with physicians. By 
October 2015 Flatiron systems were being used in 210 cancer centers 
that collectively see about 300,000 new patients every year. Further, 
in 2014 Google invested more than $100 million in Flatiron via Google 
Ventures, the company’s venture capital unit. 
In 2015, Flatiron and Guardant Health (www.guardanthealth 
.com) began to collaborate to enable more effective cancer treatment. 
Flatiron will provide the structure and all of the clinical trial informa­
tion for the OncologyCloud. Guardant’s commercially available cancer 

 
 
 
 
 
90 
CHAPTER 3  Data and Knowledge Management 
screening product, Guardant360, will be used to collect data from 
patients’ blood samples in a much more efficient manner than was 
previously possible.  
And the bottom line? In 2014, nearly 1.7 million Americans were 
newly diagnosed with cancer. If oncologists using the OncologyCloud 
could improve the patient survival rate by 5 percent, they would save 
tens of thousands of lives every year. 
Sources: Compiled from L. Ramsey, “Cancer Treatment Is on the Brink 
of a Data Revolution,” Business Insider, September 22, 2015; N. Versel, 
“GuardantHealth, Flatiron Health to Link Genomics, Analytics for 
Personalized Cancer Care,” MedCityNews, August 19, 2015; C. Magee, 
“GuardantHealth and Flatiron Health Team Up to Cure Cancer with Big 
Data,” TechCrunch, August 19, 2015; “Fighting Cancer with Big Data,” 
The Rambus Blog, August 10, 2015; T. Stephens, “California Initiative 
to Advance Precision Medicine Funds UC Santa Cruz Pediatric Cancer 
Project,” University of California at Santa Cruz News Center, August 3, 2015; 
B. Marr, “How Big Data Is Transforming the Fight Against Cancer,” Forbes, 
June 28, 2015; “Varian Medical Systems and Flatiron Health to Develop 
Next Generation of Cloud-Based Oncology Software,” Flatiron Health 
Press Release, May 26, 2015; “Foundation Medicine and Flatiron Health 
Collaborate to Develop First In-Class Data Platform to Accelerate Precision 
Medicine for Cancer,” Foundation Medicine, December 2, 2014; M. Helft, 
“Can Big Data Cure Cancer?” Fortune, August 11, 2014; S. Baum, “Flatiron 
Health Finds Ideal Match with Duke Cancer Care Research Director,” 
MedCityNews, July 2, 2014; K. Noyes, “Flatiron Health’s Bold Proposition 
to Fight Cancer with Big Data,” Fortune, June 12, 2014; N. Taylor, “Buzz: 
Google Ventures Leading $100M Round in Oncology Big Data Platform,” 
FierceBioTechIT, May 5, 2014; www.flatiron.com, www.guardanthealth 
.com, accessed August 26, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Describe the Big Data issues in this case. 
2.  How does Flatiron use Big Data in its attempt to improve cancer 
treatment? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 
Henrik5000/iStockphoto 
Telecommunications 
and Networking 
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
4.1  What Is a Computer Network? 
4.2  Network Fundamentals 
4.3  The Internet and the World Wide 
Web 
4.4  Network Applications: Discovery 
4.5  Network Applications: 
Communication 
4.6  Network Applications: Collaboration 
4.7  Network Applications: Educational 
Opening Case 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
4.1  Compare and contrast the major types of networks. 
4.2  Describe the wireline communications media and transmission technologies. 
4.3  Describe the most common methods for accessing the Internet. 
4.4  Explain the impact that discovery network applications have had on business and ev­
eryday life. 
4.5  Explain the impact that communication network applications have had on business 
and everyday life. 
4.6  Explain the impact that collaboration network applications have had on business and 
everyday life. 
4.7  Explain the impact that educational network applications have had on business and 
everyday life. 
MKT 
POM What to Do About Landline Telephones? 
The Problem 
Large telecommunications companies such as AT&T (www.att.com) 
and Verizon Communications (www.verizon.com) want to get rid 
of their twisted-pair copper wire networks (discussed later in this 
chapter), called plain old telephone system, or POTS, and to replace 
them with Internet Protocol (IP) systems that will use the same wired 
and wireless broadband networks that provide Internet access, cable 
television, and telephone service to your home. There are several rea­
sons why these large carriers find this transition desirable. 
First, the U.S. government has a universal service guarantee, 
established by the Communications Act of 1934, that mandates that 
every resident have a baseline level of telecommunications services. 
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) recognizes that 
91
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 
CHAPTER 4  Telecommunications and Networking 
telephone services provide a vital link to emergency services, gov­
ernment services, and surrounding communities. Because of the uni­
versal service guarantee, carriers frequently must operate expensive 
copper twisted-pair phone lines in rural areas to support small popula­
tions when it would be less expensive to provide cellular coverage. The 
carriers are compensated for these costs through a tax on customers’ 
phone bills called the Universal Service Fund. 
Second, many Americans either have gotten rid of their landline 
telephones or are preparing to do so. In fact, only 8 percent of U.S. 
households rely exclusively on a landline telephone. As the carriers’ 
revenues decrease due to the falling number of POTS subscribers, the 
costs of maintaining the old POTS network are increasing. Put simply, 
landlines are becoming much less profitable. 
Third, carriers want to increase their stock prices. The stock mar­
ket favors companies with high revenue growth and punishes those 
that exhibit either no growth or declining revenues. Because POTS net­
works inhibit revenue growth and profitability, they tend to hold down 
the stock prices of companies like AT&T and Verizon. 
In Mantoloking, New Jersey, Verizon wants to replace its POTS 
network, which Hurricane Sandy destroyed in 2012, with the compa­
ny’s wireless Voice Link. This operation would make Mantoloking the 
first U.S. community to be completely without POTS. However, not all 
residents favor this scenario for reasons we discuss later in this case. 
In addition, New Jersey’s state legislature has concerns about, for 
example, inoperable building alarm systems because wireless sys­
tems cannot manage these systems. Verizon tried to implement the 
same process on Fire Island, New York, when its POTS was destroyed. 
Public opposition, however, forced the company to install fiber-optic 
cable. 
For people living in rural areas, where cell towers are few and 
wireless capabilities are limited, eliminating POTS could create serious 
problems. In contrast, residents in metropolitan areas do not really 
have to worry about the end of POTS because high-speed wireline and 
wireless services are readily available replacements. 
Despite industry pressures to eliminate POTS, there are several 
arguments in favor of keeping these networks. First, consider safety. 
When you call 911 from a landline telephone, the emergency operator 
knows your exact address. In contrast, wireless phones do not provide 
this specific location data, even if they contain GPS systems. Conse­
quently, operators can respond more effectively to emergency calls 
from POTS networks than to calls from IP networks. 
Second, POTS does not require power for landline phones to 
work. This advantage is critical in the event of a natural disaster, when 
cell towers are quickly jammed or become inoperable. 
These issues concern the FCC. Because universal access for U.S. 
citizens is a key principle, the agency is unwilling to let telecommu­
nications companies drop geographically undesirable customers. 
Instead, telecommunication companies must obtain FCC approval to 
completely eliminate services. The agency will not grant this approval 
unless there is a viable competitor to provide communications to peo­
ple who have none. Many rural areas do not have viable competitors. 
That is the crux of the problem: The carriers want to eliminate their 
existing POTS networks, but the universal service guarantee makes 
that process extremely diff icult. 
Proposed Solutions 
Although the FCC frequently denies permission to companies to elim­
inate POTS, it does allow carriers to experiment with the removal of 
landline telephones. To protect the universal service guarantee, how­
ever, carriers must meet certain FCC standards during these trials: 
•  Public safety communications must be available regardless of 
which technology is used; 
•  All Americans must have access to aff ordable communications 
 services; 
•  Competition in the marketplace must provide choice for consum­
ers and businesses; 
•  Consumer protection must be paramount. 
On February 28, 2014, AT&T announced a trial program to eliminate 
landline telephones in Carbon Hill, Alabama, (population 2,071) and 
offer broadband and Voice-over-Internet-Protocol (VoIP) services in 
their place. The company and the FCC want to use this trial to learn 
several things: (a) how households will reach 911, (b) how small busi­
nesses will connect to customers, (c) how people with medical moni­
toring devices or home alarms will be certain that they are connected 
to a reliable network, and (d) the costs of converting from POTS to IP 
networks. 
An additional challenge for AT&T in the Carbon Hill trial is that 
4 percent of the residential customers are located too far away from 
AT&T facilities to receive broadband service. The carrier is investigat­
ing strategies to provide telephone service for these residents. 
In addition to these trials, by September 2015, approximately 30 
states had passed or were considering laws that restrict state govern­
ment oversight of POTS networks. These laws eliminate the “carrier 
of last resort” rules. (A carrier of last resort is a telecommunications 
provider that is required by law to provide service to any customer 
in a service area who requests it, even if serving that customer is not 
economically viable at existing rates.) This move would abolish the 
universal service guarantee that gives every U.S. resident access to 
affordable telephone service. These states argue that telecommunica­
tions resources should be directed to developing modern telephone 
technologies rather than to supporting POTS networks. 
The Results 
As of September 2015, the outcome of the carriers’ experiments and the 
state legislation remained largely unknown. However, it appears that 
the move away from POTS networks toward IP networks will continue. 
Sources: J. Balmert, “Kasich Proposal Could Eliminate Landlines,” 
Cincinnati.com, June 22, 2015; J. Wernau and E. Hirst, “Phone Companies 
Would Like to Cut Your Landline Cord for You,” Chicago Tribune, December 
18, 2014; “Carbon Hill, Alabama – ‘The City with a Future’ (Without 
Landlines),” nojitter.com, November 28, 2014; “Local Woman Fights 
Statewide Plan to Eliminated Landline Phones,” myFOXDetroit, October 
17, 2014; K. Vlahos, “FCC Tests Ways to Kill the Telephone Wire,” Digital 
Trends, June 15, 2014; D. Weil, “AT&T Begins Process to Eliminate Some 
Landlines,” Newsmax, April 8, 2014; J. Waters, “Prepare to Hang Up the 
Phone, Forever,” Wall Street Journal, March 29, 2014; B. Dyas, “11 Reasons 
to Bring Back Landlines in 2014 (Seriously),” The Huffington Post, January 
23, 2014; “Opponents Say Bill to Eliminate Landline Service Threatens 
Public Safety,” ABC News, December 9, 2013; M. Anders, “Controversial 
Landline Phone Legislation Passes Michigan Senate Committee,” mLive. 
com, December 3, 2013; B. Fung, “We Spend Billions a Year Maintaining 
Phone Lines (Almost) Nobody Depends On. Should We Get Rid of Them?” 
The Washington Post, October 8, 2013; M. Cherney, “When Will the Old 
Phone Networks Die? Not Soon,” InformationWeek, April 8, 2013; www.fcc 
.gov, accessed September 14, 2015. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 93 
Questions  
b. Debate this argument from the viewpoint of rural customers. 
1. Should the large carriers be able to eliminate their POTS networks? 
2. Why are wireless networks unable to take over all of the functions 
of POTS networks at this time (September 2015)? 
a.  Debate this argument from the viewpoint of the large telecom­
munications carriers. 
Introduction 
In addition to networks being essential in your personal lives, there are three fundamental 
points about network computing you need to know. First, in modern organizations computers 
do not work in isolation. Rather, they constantly exchange data with one another. Second, this 
exchange of data—facilitated by telecommunications technologies—provides companies with 
a number of very significant advantages. Third, this exchange can take place over any distance 
and over networks of any size. 
Without networks, the computer on your desk would be merely another productivity-en­
hancement tool, just as the typewriter once was. The power of networks, however, turns your 
computer into an amazingly effective tool for accessing information from thousands of sources, 
thereby making both you and your organization more productive. Regardless of the type of 
organization (profit/not-for-profit, large/small, global/local) or industry (manufacturing, 
financial services, healthcare), networks in general, and the Internet in particular, have trans­
formed—and will continue to transform—the way we do business. 
Networks support new and innovative ways of doing business, from marketing to supply 
chain management to customer service to human resources management. In particular, the 
Internet and private intranets—a network located within a single organization that uses Inter­
net software and TCP/IP protocols—have an enormous impact on our lives, both professionally 
and personally. 
For all organizations regardless of their size, having a telecommunications and network­
ing system is no longer just a source of competitive advantage. Rather, it is necessary for 
survival. 
Computer networks are essential to modern organizations for many reasons. First, net­
worked computer systems enable organizations to become more flexible so that they can adapt 
to rapidly changing business conditions. Second, networks allow companies to share hardware, 
computer applications, and data across the organization and among diff erent organizations. 
Third, networks make it possible for geographically dispersed employees and workgroups to 
share documents, ideas, and creative insights. This sharing encourages teamwork, innovation, 
and more efficient and effective interactions. In addition, networks are a critical link between 
businesses, their business partners, and their customers. 
Clearly, networks are essential tools for modern businesses. But, why do you need to be 
familiar with networks? The simple fact is that if you operate your own business or work in a 
business, you cannot function without networks. You will need to communicate rapidly with 
your customers, business partners, suppliers, employees, and colleagues. Until about 1990, 
you would have used the postal service or the telephone system with voice or fax capabilities 
for business communication. Today, however, the pace of business is much faster—almost 
real time. To keep up with this incredibly fast pace, you will need to use computers, e-mail, 
the Internet, cell phones, and mobile devices. Furthermore, all of these technologies will 
be connected via networks to enable you to communicate, collaborate, and compete on a 
global scale. 
Networking and the Internet are the foundations for commerce in the twenty-first century. 
Recall that one important objective of this book is to help you become an informed user of 
information systems. Knowledge of networking is an essential component of modern business 
literacy. In fact, as you see in IT’s About Business 4.1, a robust telecommunications infrastruc­
ture is essential for entire nations as well. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94 
CHAPTER 4  Telecommunications and Networking 
IT’s About Business 4.1 
The Least Connected Country on Earth 
Eritrea, a nation of six million people, is located on Africa’s east 
coast, bordered by Sudan, Djibouti, and Ethiopia. The country 
has been ruled by a dictatorship since it achieved independence 
in 1993. Since 2009, Reporters Without Borders (www.rsf.org) has 
ranked Eritrea at the bottom of its press freedom index. 
Eritrea is also the least-connected country on earth, accord­
ing to data compiled by the United Nations International Telecom­
munication Union (ITU; www.itu.int). Eritreans are allowed to make 
international calls and to use the Internet. However, according to 
ITU data, only 1 percent of Eritreans have a landline, and only 5.6 
percent have a cell phone. Both of these percentages are the lowest 
in the world. 
The country’s only telecommunications provider, Eritrea 
Telecommunication Services (EriTel; www.eritel.com.er), is con­
trolled by the government. Customers must ask permission from 
local authorities to own a cell phone, and pay 200 nakfa ($13.29) to 
apply. Citizens who are fulfilling compulsory military service aren’t 
given permission to have a cell phone. To activate their phone, cus­
tomers pay EriTel the equivalent of $33.60. When they add minutes 
to their phone, that costs at least $3.65 every time. Because the 
average Eritrean earns roughly $500 a year, this expense is prohibi­
tive to most. 
Robert Van Buskirk, a Fulbright scholar from the United 
States, set up the country’s first unofficial e-mail service in the mid­
1990s. He used international phone calls to send e-mails between 
a computer at the University of Asmara—Eritrea’s capital city—and 
a computer in California. For a couple of years, he singlehandedly 
operated the entire country’s e-mail service. 
As of September 2015, less than 1 percent of Eritreans are con­
nected, according to the ITU. Access is available in just a few places. 
However, Internet connections are almost always dial-up, and they 
are extremely slow. Eritrea was also the last African country to 
establish a satellite connection to the Internet. Further, the country 
is one of only two African coastal nations with no fiber-optic con­
nections. Only about 150 landline broadband connections exist, 
and only a handful of residences have Internet access, mostly dial­
up connections costing about $200 a month. 
Eritreans can get public Internet access in about 100 Internet 
cafés throughout the country. There is often a wait to use one of 
MIS 
about 10 computers in each café. Users pay roughly $1.34 to be 
online for an hour, the equivalent of seven loaves of bread. Some 
cafés download American movies and TV shows and show them in 
the evenings for a fee. 
Significantly, despite the government’s severe repression of 
press freedom, there seems to be little censorship of the Internet. 
One likely reason is that high costs and long download times have 
marginalized the use of the Internet as a protest vehicle. Another 
possible reason is that the country is experiencing severe economic 
difficulties, and the government may recognize that strengthening 
the country’s telecommunications would help improve the econ­
omy. In addition, the government wants to improve tourism. This 
goal would require a greatly improved telecommunications infra­
structure as well. 
Sources: Compiled from “Eritrea—Telecoms, Mobile, and 
Broadband—Market Insights and Statistics,” budde.com.au, June 
4, 2015; Y. Abselom, “Eritrea Blossoming Beautifully at 24,” Geeska 
Afrika Online, May 10, 2015; “Sadly, Eritrea Remains at Tail of All World 
Indexes,” harnnet.org, January 12, 2015; “Eritrea Telecommunication 
Report 2015,” Business Monitor International, December 24, 2014; 
“Eritrea: Stronger Private Sector, Qualified Workforce, International 
Integration Needed, Says AFDB,” Caperi.com, October 8, 2014; C. 
Winter and B. Haile, “The World…Eritrea,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 
June 30 – July 6, 2014; C. Winter, “Eritrea’s Communications 
Disconnect,” Bloomberg Business Week, June 26, 2014.R. Atkinson 
and L. Stewart, “The Economic Benefits of Information and 
Communications Technology,” Information Technology & Innovation 
Foundation, May 14, 2013. 
Questions 
1. Describe the impacts of a lack of telecommunications infra­
structure on Eritrea. 
2. Besides improving the economy, what other areas of Eritrean 
life would be impacted by a greatly improved telecommuni­
cations infrastructure? 
3. Can the government of Eritrea allow an improved telecom­
munications infrastructure while maintaining strict control 
over communications and information? Why or why not? 
Support your answer. 
You begin this chapter by learning what a computer network is and by identifying the vari­
ous types of networks. You then study network fundamentals, and you next turn your attention 
to the basics of the Internet and the World Wide Web. You conclude by examining the many 
network applications available to individuals and organizations—that is, what networks help 
you do. 
4.1 
What Is a Computer Network? 
A computer network is a system that connects computers and other devices (e.g., printers) via 
communications media so that data and information can be transmitted among them. Voice 
and data communication networks are continually becoming faster—that is, their bandwidth 

 
 
 
 
 
What Is a Computer Network? 95 
is increasing—and cheaper. Bandwidth refers to the transmission capacity of a network; it is 
stated in bits per second. Bandwidth ranges from narrowband (relatively low transmission 
capacity) to broadband (relatively high network capacity). 
The telecommunications industry itself has difficulty defining the term broadband. In 
February 2015, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) proposed new rules defining 
broadband as the transmission capacity of a communications medium (discussed later in 
this chapter) faster than 25 megabits per second (Mbps) for download (transmission speed for 
material coming to you from an Internet server, such as a movie streamed from Netflix) and 4 
Mbps for upload (transmission speed for material that you upload to an Internet server such as 
a Facebook post). The definition of broadband remains fluid, however, and it will undoubtedly 
continue to change to reflect greater transmission capacities in the future. 
You are likely familiar with certain types of broadband connections, such as digital sub­
scriber line (DSL) and cable to your homes and dorms. DSL and cable fall within the range of 
transmission capacity mentioned here and are thus defined as broadband connections. 
The various types of computer networks range from small to worldwide. They include (from 
smallest to largest) personal area networks (PANs), local area networks (LANs), metropolitan 
area networks (MANs), wide area networks (WANs), and the ultimate WAN, the Internet. PANs 
are short-range networks—typically a few meters—that are used for communication among 
devices close to one person. They can be wired or wireless. (You will learn about wireless PANs 
in Chapter 10.) MANs are relatively large computer networks that cover a metropolitan area. 
MANs fall between LANs and WANs in size. WANs typically cover large geographical areas; in 
some cases they can span the entire planet. 
Local Area Networks 
Regardless of their size, networks represent a compromise among three objectives: speed, dis­
tance, and cost. Organizations typically must select two of the three. To cover long distances, 
organizations can have fast communication if they are willing to pay for it, or cheap commu­
nication if they are willing to accept slower speeds. A third possible combination of the three 
trade-offs is fast, cheap communication with distance limitations. This is the idea behind local 
area networks. 
A local area network (LAN) connects two or more devices in a limited geographical 
region, usually within the same building, so that every device on the network can communi­
cate with every other device. Most LANs today use Ethernet (discussed later in this chapter). 
Figure 4.1 illustrates an Ethernet LAN that consists of four computers, a server, and a printer, 
Figure depi cting Ethernet local
 area network, where a horizontal line denoting shared cable is connected to three (on the upper side) and two (on the lower side) computer systems. On the lower side the shared cable is also connected to a printer.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
96 
CHAPTER 4  Telecommunications and Networking 
all of which connect via a shared cable. Every device in the LAN has a network interface card 
(NIC) that allows the device to physically connect to the LAN’s communications medium. This 
medium is typically unshielded twisted-pair wire (UTP). 
Although it is not required, many LANs have a file server or network server. The server 
typically contains various software and data for the network. It also houses the LAN’s network 
operating system, which manages the server and routes and manages communications on the 
network. 
Wide Area Networks 
When businesses have to transmit and receive data beyond the confines of the LAN, they 
use wide area networks. The term wide area network did not even exist until local area net­
works appeared. Before that time, what we call a wide area network today was simply called 
a “network.” 
A wide area network (WAN) is a network that covers a large geographical area. WANs 
typically connect multiple LANs. They are generally provided by common carriers such as 
telephone companies and the international networks of global communications services 
providers. Examples of these providers include AT&T (www.att.com) in the United States, 
Deutsche Telekom in Germany (www.telekom.com), and NTT Communications (www.ntt 
.com) in Japan. 
WANs have large capacity, and they typically combine multiple channels (e.g., fiber-optic 
cables, microwave, and satellite). The Internet is an example of a WAN. 
WANs also contain routers—a communications processor that routes messages from a 
LAN to the Internet, across several connected LANs, or across a WAN such as the Internet. 
Enterprise Networks 
Organizations today have multiple LANs and may have multiple WANs. All of these networks 
are interconnected to form an enterprise network. Figure 4.2 displays a model of enterprise 
computing. Note that the enterprise network in the figure has a backbone network. Corpo­
rate backbone networks are high-speed central networks to which multiple smaller networks 
(such as LANs and smaller WANs) connect. The LANs are called embedded LANs because they 
connect to the backbone WAN. 
Unfortunately, traditional networks can be rigid and lack the flexibility to keep pace with 
increasing business networking requirements. The reason for this problem is that the functions 
of traditional networks are distributed across physical routers and devices (i.e., hardware). This 
process means that to implement changes, each network device must be configured individu­
ally. In some cases, devices must be configured manually. Soft ware-defined networks (SDN) are 
an emerging technology that is becoming increasingly important to help organizations manage Figure depicting enterprise network. A circle representing corporate backbone (WAN) is placed in the center and connected to small circled denoting finance LAN, marketing LAN, accounting LAN, manufacturing LAN, human resource LAN, and a box representing mainframe. 
their data flows across their enterprise networks. 
With SDN, decisions controlling how network traff ic flows 
across network devices are managed centrally by soft ware. The 
software dynamically adjusts data flows to meet business and 
application needs. 
Think of traditional networks as the road system of a city 
in 1920. Data packets are the cars that travel through the city. 
A traff ic officer (physical network devices) controls each inter­
section and directs traffic by recognizing the turn signals, and 
size and shape of the vehicles passing through the intersection. 
The officers can direct only the traffic at their intersection. They 
do not know the overall traff ic volume in the city nor do they 
know traffic movement across the city. Therefore, it is diff icult 
to control the city’s traffic patterns as a whole and to manage 
peak-hour traffic. When problems occur, the city must commu­
 Enterprise network. 
nicate with each individual officer via radio. 
FIGURE 4.2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Network Fundamentals 97 
Now think of SDN as the road system of a modern city. Each traff ic officer is replaced by a 
traffic light and a set of electronic vehicle counters, which are connected to central monitoring 
and control software. As such, the city’s traff ic can be instantly and centrally controlled. The 
control software can direct traff ic differently at various times of the day (say, rush hours). The 
software monitors traffic flow and automatically changes the traffic lights to help traff ic flow 
through the city with minimal disruption. 
Before you go on…
 1. What are the primary business reasons for using networks?
 2. What are the differences between LANs and WANs?
 3. Describe an enterprise network. 
Apply the Concept 4.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4.1 Compare and contrast the 
2. Salesforce: The company has 15 technicians who service 
major types of networks. 
equipment sold within the United States. Each technician 
has a laptop that must connect to the database at 
headquarters about three hours each day to check 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
inventory, enter repairs, and place orders. Technicians 
Section 4.1 has introduced you to the different types of networks 
are constantly on the road, and they need to be able 
that connect businesses around the world. These networking 
to check inventory whether they are in a hotel or at a 
capabilities enable modern organizations to operate over many 
customer site. In addition, each evening the technicians 
geographic locations. Frequently, a company’s headquarters are 
must log on to check for updates and to post their daily 
located in one city with various branches in other countries. In 
activities. 
addition, employees often work from home rather than commute 
3. Employees from home: JLB TechWizards has a number of 
to a physical office. The computer network is the technology 
employees who work from home part time on flextime. 
that allows all of this to happen. For a network to function, a few 
These employees must have a fast, secure connection 
components are required. In this activity, you will place these 
because some of them are dealing with financial 
data stored in the main computer and its databases 
components in the appropriate places to create a computer 
at headquarters. They all live within 20 miles of their 
network. 
workplace. 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you do.) 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.) 
Consider the following company, called JLB TechWizards, and 
these potential network components. 
Use the description of JLB TechWizards presented above to 
compare and contrast the types of networks discussed in this 
1. Headquarters: JLB TechWizards manufactures, sells, and 
section. Explain how these networks will or will not meet the 
services computer equipment. The company’s headquarters, 
needs of each situation. A table may be useful to present this 
ocated in Chicago, house several key functions including  
marketing, accounting, HR, and manufacturing. Each off ice  
information, but it is not required. Create a Word document 
has a number of PCs that connect to the main server. All 
with your description and explanations and submit it to your 
offices share data and printers. 
instructor. 
4.2  Network Fundamentals 
In this section, you will learn the basics of how networks actually operate. You begin by stud­
ying wireline communications media, which enable computers in a network to transmit and 
receive data. You conclude this section by looking at network protocols and types of network 
processing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98 
CHAPTER 4  Telecommunications and Networking 
Today, computer networks communicate via digital signals, which are discrete pulses that 
are either on or off, representing a series of bits (0s and 1s). This quality allows digital signals to 
convey information in a binary form that can be interpreted by computers. 
The U.S. public telephone system (called the plain old telephone system or POTS) was orig­
inally designed as an analog network to carry voice signals or sounds in an analog wave for­
mat (see the chapter opening case). In order for this type of circuit to carry digital information, 
that information must be converted into an analog wave pattern by a dial-up modem. Dial-up 
modems are almost extinct in most parts of the developed world. 
Cable modems are modems that operate over coaxial cable—for example, cable TV. They 
offer broadband access to the Internet or corporate intranets. Cable modem speeds vary widely. 
Most providers offer bandwidth between 1 and 6 million bits per second (Mbps) for downloads 
(from the Internet to a computer) and between 128 and 768 thousand bits per second (Kbps) 
for uploads. Cable modem services share bandwidth among subscribers in a locality. That is, 
the same cable line connects to many households. Therefore, when large numbers of neighbors 
access the Internet at the same time, cable speeds can decrease significantly. 
DSL modems operate on the same lines as voice telephones and dial-up modems. DSL 
modems always maintain a connection, so an Internet connection is immediately available. 
Communications Media and Channels 
Communicating data from one location to another requires some form of pathway or medium. 
A communications channel is such a pathway. It is comprised of two types of media: cable 
(twisted-pair wire, coaxial cable, or fiber-optic cable) and broadcast (microwave, satellite, 
radio, or infrared). 
Wireline media or cable media use physical wires or cables to transmit data and infor­
mation. Twisted-pair wire and coaxial cables are made of copper, and fiber-optic cable is made 
of glass. The alternative is communication over broadcast media or wireless media. The key 
to mobile communications in today’s rapidly moving society is data transmissions over elec­
tromagnetic media—the “airwaves.” In this section, you will study the three wireline channels. 
Table 4.1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each of these channels. You will 
become familiar with wireless media in Chapter 10. 
Twisted-Pair Wire. The most prevalent form of communications wiring—twisted-pair 
wire—is used for almost all business telephone wiring. As the name suggests, it consists of 
strands of copper wire twisted in pairs (see Figure 4.3). Twisted-pair wire is relatively inexpen­
sive to purchase, widely available, and easy to work with. However, it also has some significant 
disadvantages. Specifically, it is relatively slow for transmitting data, it is subject to interfer­
ence from other electrical sources, and it can be easily tapped by unintended receivers to gain 
unauthorized access to data. 
TABLE 4.1
Channel 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Twisted-pair wire 
Inexpensive 
Slow (low bandwidth) 
 Advantages and Disadvantages of Wireline Communications Channels Figure depicting four twisted-pair wire that consist of strands of copper wire twisted in pairs. The colors of the wire are blue, orange, green, and brown.
Widely available 
Subject to interference 
Easy to work with 
Easily tapped (low security) 
Coaxial cable 
Higher bandwidth than twisted-pair 
Relatively expensive and inflexible 
Easily tapped (low to medium security) 
Less susceptible to electromagnetic 
Somewhat difficult to work with 
interference 
Fiber-optic cable 
Very high bandwidth 
Difficult to work with (difficult to splice) 
Relatively inexpensive 
 Twisted-pair wire. 
Difficult to tap (good security) 
FIGURE 4.3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Left-hand side photograph depicts a cross-section view of fiber-optic cable whereas the photograph on the right-hand side depicts how the fiber-optic cable looks to us.
FIGURE 4.5 Two views of  fiber-
optic cable. 
 Network Fundamentals 99 
Left-hand s ide photograph depict
s a cross-section view of coaxial cable whereas the photograph on the right-hand side depicts how the cable looks to us.
Coaxial Cable. Coaxial cable (Figure 4.4) consists of insulated copper wire. Compared with 
twisted-pair wire, it is much less susceptible to electrical interference, and it can carry much 
more data. For these reasons, it is commonly used to carry high-speed data traffic as well as 
television signals (thus the term cable TV). However, coaxial cable is more expensive and more 
difficult to work with than twisted-pair wire. It is also somewhat inflexible. 
Fiber Optics. Fiber-optic cable (Figure 4.5) consists of thousands of very thin filaments of 
glass fibers that transmit information via light pulses generated by lasers. The fiber-optic cable 
is surrounded by cladding, a coating that prevents the light from leaking out of the fiber. 
Fiber-optic cables are significantly smaller and lighter than traditional cable media. They 
also can transmit far more data, and they provide greater security from interference and tap­
ping. As of early-2015, optical fiber had reached data transmission rates of more than 50 trillion 
bits (terabits) per second in laboratory experiments. Fiber-optic cable is typically used as the 
backbone for a network, whereas twisted-pair wire and coaxial cable connect the backbone to 
individual devices on the network. 
Network Protocols 
Computing devices that are connected to the network must access and share the network to 
transmit and receive data. These devices are often referred to as nodes of the network. They 
work together by adhering to a common set of rules and procedures—known as a protocol— 
that enable them to communicate with one another. The two major protocols are the Ethernet 
and Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure depicting the four layers of the TCP/IP reference model, where two computer monitors are placed side-by-side and a table with three column and four rows is present below the computers. From top to bottom the middle column denotes application, transport, internet, and network interface. A downward, rightward, and upward arrow is present on the left, bottom, and right side of the table. From top to bottom the rows in first column denote sending a message via SMPT, breaking message into packets, sending and receiving IP address, and determination of path across network. From bottom to top the rows in last column denote receipt of packet, packets routed through internal network to desired IP address, packets reordered and replaced, and message received.
FIGURE 4.6 The four layers of the 
TCP/IP reference model. Figure depicting the four layers of the TCP/IP reference model, where two computer monitors are placed side-by-side and a table with three column and four rows is present below the computers. From top to bottom the middle column denotes application, transport, internet, and network interface. A downward, rightward, and upward arrow is present on the left, bottom, and right side of the table. From top to bottom the rows in first column denote sending a message via SMPT, breaking message into packets, sending and receiving IP address, and determination of path across network. From bottom to top the rows in last column denote receipt of packet, packets routed through internal network to desired IP address, packets reordered and replaced, and message received.
100 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
Ethernet. A common LAN protocol is Ethernet. Many organizations use 100-gigabit Ethernet, 
where the network provides data transmission speeds of 100 gigabits (100 billion bits) per sec­
ond. The 400-gigabit Ethernet is projected to be in service in 2017. 
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol. The Transmission Control Proto­
col/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) is the protocol of the Internet. TCP/IP uses a suite of protocols, 
the main ones being the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the Internet Protocol (IP). The 
TCP performs three basic functions: (1) It manages the movement of data packets (see below) 
between computers by establishing a connection between the computers, (2) it sequences the 
transfer of packets, and (3) it acknowledges the packets that have been transmitted. The Inter­
net Protocol (IP) is responsible for disassembling, delivering, and reassembling the data dur­
ing transmission. 
Before data are transmitted over the Internet, they are divided into small, fixed bundles 
called packets. The transmission technology that breaks up blocks of text into packets is called 
packet switching. Each packet carries the information that will help it reach its destination—the 
sender’s IP address, the intended receiver’s IP address, the number of packets in the message, 
and the sequence number of the particular packet within the message. Each packet travels 
independently across the network and can be routed through different paths in the network. 
When the packets reach their destination, they are reassembled into the original message. 
It is important to note that packet-switching networks are reliable and fault tolerant. For 
example, if a path in the network is very busy or is broken, packets can be dynamically (“on the 
fly”) rerouted around that path. Also, if one or more packets do not get to the receiving com­
puter, then only those packets need to be resent. 
Why do organizations use packet switching? The main reason is to achieve reliable end-to­
end message transmission over sometimes unreliable networks that may have short-acting or 
long-acting problems. 
The packets use the TCP/IP protocol to carry their data. TCP/IP functions in four layers (see 
Figure 4.6). The application layer enables client application programs to access the other lay­
ers, and it defines the protocols that applications use to exchange data. One of these application 
protocols is the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), which defines how messages are formu­
lated and how they are interpreted by their receivers. (We discuss hypertext in Section 4.3.) The 
transport layer provides the application layer with communication and packet services. This 
layer includes TCP and other protocols. The Internet layer is responsible for addressing, rout­
ing, and packaging data packets. The IP is one of the protocols in this layer. Finally, the network 
interface layer places packets on, and receives them from, the network medium, which can be 
any networking technology. 
Two computers using TCP/IP can communicate even if they use different hardware and 
software. Data sent from one computer to another proceed downward through all four layers, 
Email: Sending a Message via SMPT 
(Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) 
Application 
Email: Message received 
Break Message into packets and 
determine order 
Transport 
Packets reordered and replaced 
(if lost) 
Assign sending and receiving IP 
addresses and apply to each packet 
Internet 
Packets routed through internal 
network to desired IP address 
Determine path across network/ 
Internet to intended destination 
Network 
Interface 
Receipt of packets 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Network Fundamentals 101 
Figure dep i cting packet switching where a message consisting of 6 packets (P1–P6) is sent from New York. The different packets travel via Chicago, Atlanta, and Dallas to reach their destination in Los Angeles, where they are reassembled into the complete message.
beginning with the sending computer’s application layer and going through its network inter­
face layer. After the data reach the receiving computer, they travel up the layers. 
TCP/IP enables users to send data across sometimes unreliable networks with the assur­
ance that the data will arrive in uncorrupted form. TCP/IP is very popular with business organ­
izations because of its reliability and the ease with which it can support intranets and related 
functions. 
Let’s look at an example of packet switching across the Internet. Figure 4.7 illustrates a 
message being sent from New York City to Los Angeles over a packet-switching network. Note 
that the different colored packets travel by different routes to reach their destination in Los 
Angeles, where they are reassembled into the complete message. 
Types of Network Processing 
Organizations typically use multiple computer systems across the firm. Distributed processing 
divides processing work among two or more computers. This process enables computers in 
different locations to communicate with one another via telecommunications links. A common 
type of distributed processing is client/server processing. A special type of client/server pro­
cessing is peer-to-peer processing. 
Client/Server Computing. Client/server computing links two or more computers in an 
arrangement in which some machines, called servers, provide computing services for user PCs, 
called clients. Usually, an organization performs the bulk of its processing or application/data 
storage on suitably powerful servers that can be accessed by less powerful client machines. The 
client requests applications, data, or processing from the server, which acts on these requests 
by “serving” the desired commodity. 
Client/server computing leads to the ideas of “fat” clients and “thin” clients. As discussed 
in Plug IT In 2, fat clients have large storage and processing power and therefore can run local 
programs (such as Microsoft Office) if the network goes down. In contrast, thin clients may have 
no local storage and only limited processing power. Thus, they must depend on the network to 
run applications. For this reason, they are of little value when the network is not functioning. 
Peer-to-Peer Processing. Peer-to-peer (P2P) processing is a type of client/server dis­
tributed processing where each computer acts as both a client and a server. Each computer can 
access (as assigned for security or integrity purposes) all files on all other computers. 
There are three basic types of peer-to-peer processing. The first type accesses unused 
CPU power among networked computers. An application of this type is SETI@home (http:// 
setiathome.ssl.berkeley.edu). These applications are from open-source projects, and they can 
be downloaded at no cost. 
The second form of peer-to-peer is real-time, person-to-person collaboration, such as 
Microsoft SharePoint Workspace (http://off ice.microsoft .com/en-us/sharepoint-workspace). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
This product provides P2P collaborative applications that use buddy lists to establish a con­
nection and allow real-time collaboration within the application. 
The third peer-to-peer category is advanced search and file sharing. This category is char­
acterized by natural language searches of millions of peer systems. It enables users to discover 
other users, not just data and Web pages. One example of this category is BitTorrent. 
BitTorrent (www.bittorrent.com) is an open-source, free, peer-to-peer file-sharing appli­
cation that simplifies the problem of sharing large files by dividing them into tiny pieces, or 
“torrents.” BitTorrent addresses two of the biggest problems of file sharing: (1) downloading 
bogs down when many people access a file at once, and (2) some people leech, meaning they 
download content but refuse to share it. BitTorrent eliminates the bottleneck by enabling all 
users to share little pieces of a file at the same time—a process called swarming. The program 
prevents leeching because users must upload a file while they download it. Thus, the more 
popular the content, the more efficiently it travels over a network. 
Before you go on…
 1. Compare and contrast the three wireline communications channels.
 2. Describe the various technologies that enable users to send high-volume data over any network.
 3. Describe the Ethernet and TCP/IP protocols.
 4. Differentiate between client/server computing and peer-to-peer processing. 
Apply the Concept 4.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4.2 Describe the wireline 
your home Internet (required connection speed of 1.5 MB/ 
communications media and transmission technologies. 
sec minimum) would also be reimbursed quarterly. The only 
requirement is that you finalize the same number of bills each 
STEP 1: Background 
day from home as you did in the office. You can schedule your 
own time, as long as your work gets done. 
Section 4.2 covers network channels, protocols, and other 
network fundamentals. These computer networks enable 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept to 
businesses to receive and share information with customers, 
watch a few videos about telecommuting. 
suppliers, and employees. Made up of several possible cable 
types and protocols, they are quite literally the backbone of 
modern businesses. 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Describe the wireline communication media and the transmission 
STEP 2: Activity 
technologies (protocols) that you will need to be able to 
Imagine that you work in the billing department of a midsized 
telecommute. Your description should (at a minimum) include 
hospital. Recently, your supervisor stated that hospital growth 
the home Internet connection, use of the Web, and connections 
had created a need for office space to be repurposed, and your 
within the office. It should also describe the protocols that 
work would now be done from home. You would be reimbursed 
operate to support these connections. Submit your description to 
for any expenses involved in preparing your home off ice, and 
your instructor. 
4.3 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 
The Internet (“the Net”) is a global WAN that connects approximately one million 
organizational computer networks in more than 200 countries on all continents, including 
Antarctica. It has become so widespread that it features in the daily routine of some three bil­
lion people. Participating computer systems include smartphones, PCs, LANs, databases, and 
mainframes. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 103 
The computers and organizational nodes on the Internet can be of different types and 
makes. They are connected to one another by data communications lines of diff erent speeds. 
The primary network connections and telecommunications lines that link the nodes are 
referred to as the Internet backbone. For the Internet, the backbone is a fiber-optic network 
that is operated primarily by large telecommunications companies. 
As a network of networks, the Internet enables people to access data in other organizations 
and to communicate, collaborate, and exchange information seamlessly around the world, 
quickly and inexpensively. Thus, the Internet has become a necessity for modern businesses. 
The Internet grew out of an experimental project of the Advanced Research Project Agency 
(ARPA) of the U.S. Department of Defense. The project began in 1969 as the ARPAnet. Its purpose 
was to test the feasibility of a WAN over which researchers, educators, military personnel, and 
government agencies could share data, exchange messages, and transfer files. 
Today, Internet technologies are being used both within and among organizations. An 
intranet is a network that uses Internet protocols so that users can take advantage of familiar 
applications and work habits. Intranets support discovery (easy and inexpensive browsing and 
search), communication, and collaboration inside an organization. 
In contrast, an extranet connects parts of the intranets of different organizations. In 
addition, it enables business partners to communicate securely over the Internet using virtual 
private networks (VPNs) (explained in Chapter 7). Extranets offer limited accessibility to the 
intranets of participating companies, as well as necessary interorganizational communica­
tions. They are widely used in the areas of business-to-business (B2B) electronic commerce 
(see Chapter 9) and supply chain management (SCM) (see Chapter 13). 
No central agency manages the Internet. Instead, the costs of its operation are shared 
among hundreds of thousands of nodes. Thus, the cost for any one organization is small. 
Organizations must pay a small fee if they wish to register their names, and they need to install 
their own hardware and software to operate their internal networks. The organizations are 
obliged to move any data or information that enter their organizational network, regardless 
of the source, to their destination, at no charge to the senders. The senders, of course, pay the 
telephone bills for using either the backbone or regular telephone lines. 
Accessing the Internet 
You can access the Internet in several ways. From your place of work or your university, you 
can utilize your organization’s LAN. A campus or company backbone connects all of the various 
LANs and servers in the organization to the Internet. You can also log onto the Internet from 
your home or on the road, using either wireline or wireless connections. 
Connecting via an Online Service. You can also access the Internet by opening an 
account with an Internet service provider. An Internet service provider (ISP) is a company 
that provides Internet connections for a fee. Large ISPs include Comcast (www.comcast.com), 
AT&T (www.att.com), Time Warner Cable (www.timewarnercable.com) and Verizon (www 
.verizon.com). 
ISPs connect to one another through network access points (NAPs). NAPs are exchange 
points for Internet traffic. They determine how traffic is routed. NAPs are key components of 
the Internet backbone. Figure 4.8 displays a schematic of the Internet. The white links at the 
top of the figure represent the Internet backbone; the brown dots where the white links meet 
are the NAPs. 
Connecting via Other Means. There have been several attempts to make access to the 
Internet cheaper, faster, and easier. For example, terminals known as Internet kiosks have been 
located in such public places as libraries and airports (and even in convenience stores in some 
countries) for use by people who do not have their own computers. Accessing the Internet from 
smartphones and tablets is common, and fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) is growing rapidly. FTTH 
involves connecting fiber-optic cable directly to individual homes. Table 4.2 summarizes the 
various means of connecting to the Internet. Satellite connections and Google Fiber are worth 
noting in more detail. 

 
 
 
 
 
104 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
Figure dep i cting a map of the 
USA illustrating the internet represented as network with white lines.
TABLE 4.2
 Internet Connection Methods 
Service 
Description 
Dial-up 
Still used in the United States where broadband is not available 
DSL 
Broadband access via telephone companies 
Cable modem 
Access over your cable TV coaxial cable. Can have degraded performance 
if many of your neighbors are accessing the Internet at once 
Satellite 
Access where cable and DSL are not available 
Wireless 
Very convenient, and WiMAX will increase the use of broadband wireless 
Fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) 
Expensive and usually placed only in new housing developments 
Connecting via satellite. In January 2015, OneWeb (http://oneweb.world) announced 
that it would build a micro-satellite network to bring Internet access to all corners of the 
globe. OneWeb aims to target rural markets, emerging markets, and in-flight Internet services 
on airlines. The company plans to create a network of 648 small satellites, each weighing some 
285 pounds and orbiting 750 miles above the Earth. OneWeb plans to launch its Internet over 
satellite service in 2018. 
On the other hand, Elon Musk (the founder of Tesla Motorcars and SpaceX) announced his 
plans to launch 4000 satellites into low earth orbit by 2021. Musk said his Internet-over-satellite 
service was intended to be the primary means of long-distance Internet traffic for people in 
sparsely populated areas. 
Google Fiber. Cable distribution giants such as Verizon (www.verizon.com), Time Warner 
Cable (www.timewarnercable.com), and Comcast (www.comcast.com) enjoy healthy profit 
margins on their Internet services. None of these companies, however, appears to have plans 
to extend fiber-to-the-home services to additional geographical areas. Rather, their business 
goal is to sign up more people in their existing service areas. They have adopted this strategy 
because focusing on existing service areas adds the most revenue without increasing the com­
panies’ capital costs. Essentially, there are no compelling business incentives for the estab­
lished cable companies to expand their service offerings. This policy is unfortunate because 
most Americans have no choice but to do business with their local cable company. To com­
pound this problem, few outside companies have the money to compete with the existing, 
cash-heavy telecommunications companies who control existing cable networks. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Internet and the World Wide Web 105 
Today, Google is installing and operating ultrafast fiber-optic cable service, known as 
Google Fiber (http://fiber.google.com), in U.S. cities. Google Fiber was first deployed to homes 
in Kansas City (Kansas and Missouri). By May 2016, Google Fiber was operating in nine U.S. cit­
ies. Significantly, about seven months after Google announced its intentions to bring Fiber to 
Austin, AT&T announced it was introducing 1-Gbps service in the same city. 
Addresses on the Internet. Each computer on the Internet has an assigned address, 
called the Internet Protocol (IP) address, that distinguishes it from all other computers. The 
IP address consists of sets of numbers, in four parts, separated by dots. For example, the IP 
address of one computer might be 135.62.128.91. You can access a Web site by typing this num­
ber in the address bar of your browser. 
Currently, there are two IP addressing schemes. The first scheme, IPv4, is the most widely 
used. IP addresses using IPv4 consist of 32 bits, meaning that there are 232 possibilities for IP 
addresses, or 4,294,967,295 distinct addresses. Note that the IP address in the preceding par­
agraph (135.62.128.91) is an IPv4 address. At the time that IPv4 was developed, there were not 
as many computers that need addresses as there are today. Therefore, a new IP addressing 
scheme has been developed, IPv6. 
IP addresses using IPv6 consist of 128 bits, meaning that there are 2128 possibilities for 
distinct IP addresses, which is an unimaginably large number. IPv6, which is replacing IPv4, 
will accommodate the rapidly increasing number of devices that need IP addresses, such as 
smartphones. 
IP addresses must be unique so that computers on the Internet know where to find one 
another. The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names (ICANN) (www.icann.org) coordinates 
these unique addresses throughout the world. Without that coordination, we would not have 
one global Internet. 
ICANN planned to transition its functions to a “global multistakeholder community” in 
2015. In September 2015, the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN; www.arin.net), the 
organization responsible for issuing IP addresses in North America, announced that it had run 
out of freely available IPv4 addresses. This situation will not affect normal Internet users, but it 
will put more pressure on Internet service providers, software companies, and large organiza­
tions to accelerate their migration to IPv6. 
Because the numeric IP addresses are difficult to remember, most computers have names 
as well. ICANN accredits certain companies called registrars to register these names, which are 
derived from a system called the domain name system (DNS). Domain names consist of multi­
ple parts, separated by dots, that are read from right to left. For example, consider the domain 
name business.auburn.edu. The rightmost part (or zone) of an Internet name is its top-level 
domain (TLD). The letters edu in business.auburn.edu indicate that this is an educational site. 
The following are popular U.S. TLDs: 
com 
commercial sites 
edu 
educational sites 
mil 
military government sites 
gov 
civilian government sites 
org 
organizations 
To conclude our domain name example, auburn is the name of the organization (Auburn 
University), and business is the name of the particular machine (server) within the organization 
to which the message is being sent. 
A top-level domain (TLD) is the domain at the highest level in the hierarchical Domain 
Name System of the Internet. The top-level domain names are located in the root zone (right­
most zone) of the name. Management of most TLDs is delegated to responsible organizations 
by ICANN. ICANN operates the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), which is in charge of 
maintaining the DNS root zone. Today, IANA distinguishes the following groups of TLDs: 
• Country-code top-level domains (ccTLD): Two letter domains established for countries or 
territories. For example, de stands for Germany, it for Italy, and ru for Russia. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
106 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
• Internationalized country code top-level domains (IDN ccTLD): These are ccTLDs in non-
Latin character sets (e.g., Arabic or Chinese). 
• Generic top-level domains (gTLD): Top-level domains with three or more characters. gTLDs 
initially consisted of .gov, .edu, .com, .mil, .org, and .net. In late 2000, ICANN introduced 
.aero, .biz, .coop, .info, .museum, .name, and .pro. 
The Future of the Internet 
Researchers assert that if Internet bandwidth is not improved rapidly, then within a few years 
the Internet will be able to function only at a much reduced speed. The Internet sometimes is 
too slow for data-intensive applications such as full-motion video files (movies) and large med­
ical files (X-rays). In addition, the Internet is unreliable and is not secure. As a result, Internet2 
has been developed by many U.S. universities collaborating with industry and government. 
Internet2 develops and deploys advanced network applications such as remote medical 
diagnosis, digital libraries, distance education, online simulation, and virtual laboratories. It 
is designed to be fast, always on, everywhere, natural, intelligent, easy, and trusted. Note that 
Internet2 is not a separate physical network from the Internet. At the end of 2014, Internet2 
had over 500 members, including 252 institutions of higher education and 82 members from 
industry. For more details, see www.internet2.edu. 
The World Wide Web 
Many people equate the Internet with the World Wide Web. However, they are not the same 
thing. The Internet functions as a transport mechanism, whereas the World Wide Web is an 
application that uses those transport functions. Other applications, such as e-mail, also run on 
the Internet. 
The World Wide Web (The Web, WWW, or W3) is a system of universally accepted stand­
ards for storing, retrieving, formatting, and displaying information via a client/server architec­
ture. The Web handles all types of digital information, including text, hypermedia, graphics, 
and sound. It uses graphical user interfaces (GUIs) (explained in Plug IT In 2), so it is very easy 
to navigate. 
Hypertext is the underlying concept defining the structure of the World Wide Web. Hyper­
text is the text displayed on a computer display or other electronic device with references, 
called hyperlinks, to other text that the reader can immediately access, or where text can be 
revealed progressively at additional levels of details. A hyperlink is a connection from a hyper­
text file or document to another location or file, typically activated by clicking on a highlighted 
word or image on the screen, or by touching the screen. 
Organizations that wish to offer information through the Web must establish a home page, 
which is a text and graphical screen display that usually welcomes the user and provides basic 
information on the organization that has established the page. In most cases, the home page 
will lead users to other pages. All the pages of a particular company or individual are collec­
tively known as a Web site. Most Web pages provide a way to contact the organization or the 
individual. The person in charge of an organization’s Web site is its Webmaster. (Note: Webmas­
ter is a gender-neutral title.) 
To access a Web site, the user must specify a uniform resource locator (URL), which 
points to the address of a specific resource on the Web. For instance, the URL for Microsoft 
is http://www.microsoft.com. Recall that HTTP stands for hypertext transport protocol. The 
remaining letters in this URL—www.microsoft.com—indicate the domain name that identifies 
the Web server that stores the Web site. 
Users access the Web primarily through software applications called browsers. Browsers 
provide a graphical front end that enables users to point-and-click their way across the Web, a 
process called surfing. Web browsers became a means of universal access because they deliver 
the same interface on any operating system on which they run. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Before you go on…
Network Applications: Discovery 107 
1. Describe the various ways that you can connect to the Internet.
 2. Identify each part of an Internet address.
 3. Describe the difference between the Internet and the World Wide Web.
 4. What are the functions of browsers? 
Apply the Concept 4.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4.3 Describe the most  
a little more detail about the types of connections mentioned in 
common methods for accessing the Internet.  
Table 4.2. You will learn about advantages, disadvantages, and 
things to consider for the different methods of connecting to the 
Internet.  
STEP 1: Background 
Section 4.3 has explained the difference between the Internet 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
and the World Wide Web. Although many people use these 
terms interchangeably, they are very different. Most computers 
Imagine that your parents are “technologically challenged” 
today are continuously connected to the Internet, though they 
(some of you may not have to imagine). They have just bought 
are not always accessing the Web. Offices and other places of 
a house at the beach, and they are getting ready to set up an 
employment typically set up an Internet connection via a local 
Internet connection. At home, there is only one provider, so DSL 
area network (LAN). However, at home you have several options 
vs. cable vs. cellular vs. satellite is not an issue. However, there 
to consider. 
are several options at the beach, and your parents do not know 
where to begin. 
STEP 2: Activity 
Compose an email to your parents that describes the most 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
common methods for accessing the Internet to help them 
and watch the YouTube videos listed there. These videos go into 
develop criteria for making their choice. 
4.4 
Network Applications: Discovery 
Now that you have a working knowledge of what networks are and how you can access them, 
the key question is: How do businesses use networks to improve their operations? In the next 
four sections of this chapter, we explore four network applications: discovery, communica­
tion, collaboration, and education. These applications, however, are merely a sampling of 
the many network applications currently available to users. Even if these applications formed 
an exhaustive list today, they would not do so tomorrow when something new will be devel­
oped. Furthermore, placing network applications in categories is difficult because there will 
always be borderline cases. For example, telecommuting really combines communication and 
collaboration. 
The Internet enables users to access or discover information located in databases all over 
the world. By browsing and searching data sources on the Web, users can apply the Internet’s 
discovery capability to areas ranging from education to government services to entertainment 
to commerce. Although having access to all this information is a great benefit, it is critically 
important to realize that there is no quality assurance for information on the Web. The Web 
is truly democratic in that anyone can post information to it. Therefore, the fundamental rule 
about information on the Web is “User beware!” 
In addition, the Web’s major strength—the vast stores of information it contains—also pre­
sents a major challenge. The amount of information on the Web can be overwhelming, and it 
doubles approximately each year. As a result, navigating through the Web and gaining access 
to necessary information are becoming more and more difficult. To accomplish these tasks, 
people increasingly are using search engines, directories, and portals. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
108 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
FIGURE 4.9  Google Translate. 
(Google and the Google logo are 
registered trademarks of Google 
Inc., used with permission). 
Search Engines and Metasearch Engines 
A search engine is a computer program that searches for specific information by keywords and 
then reports the results. A search engine maintains an index of billions of Web pages. It uses 
that index to find pages that match a set of user-specified keywords. Such indexes are created 
and updated by webcrawlers, which are computer programs that browse the Web and create a 
copy of all visited pages. Search engines then index these pages to provide fast searches. 
In mid-2016, four search engines accounted for almost all searches in the United States. 
They are, in order, Google (www.google.com), Bing (www.bing.com), Yahoo! (www.yahoo.com), 
and Ask (www.ask.com). The leading search engine in China is Baidu (www.baidu.com), which 
claimed approximately three-fourths of the Chinese market in mid-2016. 
There are an incredible number of other search engines that are quite useful, many of 
which perform very specific searches. Examples include: Boardreader (www.boardreader.com), 
BuzzSumo (www.buzzsumo.com), CrunchBase (www.crunchbase.com), DuckDuckGo (https:// 
duckduckgo.com), and Topsy (www.topsy.com). 
For an even more thorough search, you can use a metasearch engine. Metasearch engines 
search several engines at once and then integrate the findings to answer users’ queries. Exam­
ples are Surf-wax (www.surfwax.com), Metacrawler (www.metacrawler.com), Mamma (www 
.mamma.com), KartOO (www.kartoo.com), and Dogpile (www.dogpile.com). 
Publication of Material in Foreign Languages 
Not only is there a huge amount of information on the Internet, but it is also written in many 
different languages. How, then, do you access this information? The answer is that you use an 
automatic translation of Web pages. Such translation is available to and from all major lan­
guages, and its quality is improving with time. Some major translation products are Micro­
soft’s Bing translator (http://www.microsofttranslator.com) and Google (www.google.com/ 
language_tools) (see Figure 4.9), as well as products and services available at Trados (www 
.trados.com). 
Companies invest resources to make their Web sites accessible in multiple languages as a 
result of the global nature of the business environment. That is, multilingual Web sites are now 
a competitive necessity. When companies are disseminating information around the world, 
getting that information correct is essential. It is not enough for companies to translate Web 
content. They must also localize that content and be sensitive to the needs of the people in 
local markets. 
To reach 80 percent of the world’s Internet users, a Web site needs to support a mini­
mum of 10 languages: English, Chinese, Spanish, Japanese, German, Korean, French, Italian, 
Russian, and Portuguese. At 20 cents and more per word, translation services are expensive. 
Companies supporting 10 languages can spend $200,000 annually to localize information and A screenshot image of Google Translate page.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Network Applications: Discovery 109 
another $50,000 to maintain the Web sites. Translation budgets for major multinational com­
panies can run in millions of dollars. Many large companies use Systran S.A. (www.systransoft 
.com) for high-quality machine translation services. 
Portals 
Most organizations and their managers encounter information overload. Information is scat­
tered across numerous documents, e-mail messages, and databases at different locations and 
systems. Finding relevant and accurate information is often time-consuming and may require 
users to access multiple systems. 
One solution to this problem is to use portals. A portal is a Web-based, personalized gate­
way to information and knowledge that provides relevant information from different IT sys­
tems and the Internet using advanced search and indexing techniques. After reading the next 
section, you will be able to distinguish among four types of portals: commercial, aff inity, corpo­
rate, and industrywide. The four types of portals are differentiated by the audiences they serve. 
A commercial (public) portal is the most popular type of portal on the Internet. It is 
intended for broad and diverse audiences, and it offers routine content, some of it in real time 
(e.g., a stock ticker). Examples are Lycos (www.lycos.com) and Microsoft Network (www.msn 
.com). 
In contrast, an aff inity portal offers a single point of entry to an entire community of aff il­
iated interests, such as a hobby group or a political party. Your university most likely has an 
affinity portal for its alumni. Figure 4.10 displays the affinity portal for the University of West 
Georgia. Other examples of affinity portals are www.techweb.com and www.zdnet.com. 
As the name suggests, a corporate portal offers a personalized, single point of access 
through a Web browser to critical business information located inside and outside an organi­
zation. These portals are also known as enterprise portals, information portals, and enterprise 
information portals. In addition to making it easier to find needed information, corporate por­
tals offer customers and employees self-service opportunities. 
Whereas corporate portals are associated with a single company, an industrywide por­
tal serves entire industries. An example is TruckNet (www.truck.net), a portal for the trucking 
industry and the trucking community, including professional drivers, owner/operators, and 
trucking companies. A screenshot image depicting login page of University of West Georgia.
FIGURE 4.10 University of West Georgia affinity portal. (Courtesy of the University of West Georgia). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
110 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
Before you go on…
 1. Differentiate between search engines and metasearch engines.
 2. What are some reasons why publication of material in a number of languages is so important?
 3. Describe the various reasons that portals are useful to us. 
Apply the Concept 4.4 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4.4 Explain the impact 
go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept to watch a video about the use  
that discovery network applications have had on business and 
of the “old school” library card catalog.  
everyday life.  
STEP 3: Deliverable 
STEP 1: Background 
Search the web for the book referenced in the YouTube video 
Section 4.4 has introduced you to the discovery aspect of 
linked above. Use multiple search engines (such as google.com, 
networks, specifically, the web. Search engines (of all kinds) 
yahoo.com, or bing.com), some meta search engines (such as 
open up doors of knowledge for anyone with a question. 
dogpile.com, blingo.com, or excite.com), and your school’s library 
Translation tools allow you to even discover your answer from 
system. Make note of the amount of and type of information you 
other languages. These, however, are very broad tools. Portals 
are able to find in just a few minutes about the book referenced in 
help to narrow the by focusing your search within a narrow realm 
the YouTube video above. Write a paragraph that compares your 
of information. They also push very specific information to you 
experience to the card catalog system.  
rather than waiting on you to request everything.  
Now think even bigger. If discovery applications have made 
this much impact on something as simple as finding a book (or 
information on the book), how much bigger is the impact on 
STEP 2: Activity 
Before there were online search tools, there was the library card 
business and everyday life? Prepare a second paragraph that 
catalog. It was a method of organizing information in a library 
discusses the latter question.  
so that you could easily retrieve the information needed. Today,  
research is handled very differently. Visit http://www.wiley.com/ 
Submit both paragraphs to your instructor.  
4.5 
Network Applications: Communication 
The second major category of network applications is communication. There are many types of 
communication technologies, including e-mail, call centers, chat rooms, and voice. Further, we 
discuss an interesting application of communication: telecommuting. Note: You will read about 
other types of communication, blogging and microblogging, in Chapter 8. 
Electronic Mail 
Electronic mail (e-mail) is the largest-volume application running over the Internet. Studies 
have found that almost all companies conduct business transactions via e-mail, and the vast 
majority confirm that e-mail is tied to their means of generating revenue. On the other hand, 
the amount of e-mail that managers receive has become overwhelming. In fact, too much 
e-mail can lead to a loss of productivity. 
Web-Based Call Centers 
Effective personalized customer contact is becoming an important aspect of Web-based cus­
tomer support. Such service is provided through Web-based call centers, also known as cus­
tomer care centers. For example, if you need to contact a software vendor for technical support, 
you will usually be communicating with the vendor’s Web-based call center, using e-mail, a 

 
 
 
 
Network Applications: Communication 111 
telephone conversation, or a simultaneous voice/Web session. Web-based call centers are 
sometimes located in foreign countries such as India. Such off shoring is an important issue for 
the U.S. companies. (We discuss offshoring in Chapter 14.) 
Significantly, some of the U.S. companies are moving their call center operations back to 
the United States, for several reasons. First, they believe they have less control of their oper­
ations when the centers are located overseas. They must depend on the vendor company to 
uphold their standards, such as quality of service. A second difficulty is language diff erences, 
which can create serious communication problems. Third, companies that manage sensitive 
information risk breaching customer confidentiality and security. Finally, the call center repre­
sentatives typically work with many companies. As a result, they may not deliver the same level 
of customer services that each company requires. 
Electronic Chat Rooms 
Electronic chat refers to an arrangement whereby participants exchange conversational mes­
sages in real time in a chat room. Chat programs allow you to send messages to people who 
are connected to the same channel of communication at the same time. Anyone can join in the 
conversation. Messages are displayed on your screen as they arrive. 
There are two major types of chat programs. The first type is Web based, which allows you 
to send messages to Internet users by using a Web browser and visiting a Web chat site (e.g., 
http://messenger.yahoo.com). The second type is e-mail based (text only); it is called Internet 
Relay Chat (IRC). A business can use IRC to interact with customers, provide online experts for 
answers to questions, and so on. 
Voice Communication 
The plain old telephone service (POTS) has been largely replaced by Internet telephony. With 
Internet telephony, also known as Voice-over-Internet Protocol or VoIP, phone calls are 
treated as just another kind of data. That is, your analog voice signals are digitized, sectioned 
into packets, and then sent over the Internet. 
Consider Skype (www.skype.com), which provides several VoIP services for free: voice and 
video calls to users who also have Skype, instant messaging, short message service, voice mail, 
one-to-one and group chats, and conference calls with up to nine people. As of September 
2015, the most current version of Skype offered full-screen, high-definition video calling, Skype 
Access (to access WiFi hotspots), call transfer to a Skype contact on either a mobile or a lan­
dline phone, improved quality of calls, and ease of use. It also provided additional functions 
for which users pay. For example, SkypeOut allows you to make calls to landline phones and 
mobile phones. SkypeIn provides a number that your friends can call from any phone, and you 
pick up the call in Skype. 
Vonage (www.vonage.com) also provides VoIP services, but for a fee ($9.99 per month for 
the first six months and then $28 per month). With Vonage you make and receive calls with your 
existing home phone through your broadband Internet connection. Your phone actually con­
nects to Vonage instead of an actual phone company. The person whom you are calling does 
not need to have Vonage or even an Internet connection. 
Unified Communications 
In the past, organizational networks for wired and wireless data, voice communications, and 
videoconferencing operated independently, and the IT department managed each network 
separately. This arrangement increased costs and reduced productivity. 
Unified communications (UC) simplifies and integrates all forms of communications— 
voice, voice mail, fax, chat, e-mail, instant messaging, short message service, presence 
(location) services, and videoconferencing—on a common hardware and soft ware platform. 
Presence services enable users to know where their intended recipients are and if they are avail­
able, in real time. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
UC unifies all forms of human and computer communications into a common user expe­
rience. For example, UC allows an individual to receive a voice mail message and then read it 
in his or her e-mail inbox. In another example, UC enables users to seamlessly collaborate with 
another person on a project, regardless of where the users are located. One user could quickly 
locate the other user by accessing an interactive directory, determining whether that user is 
available, engaging in a text messaging session, and then escalating the session to a voice call 
or even a video call, all in real time. 
Telecommuting 
Knowledge workers are being called the distributed workforce, or “digital nomads.” This group 
of highly prized workers is now able to work anywhere and anytime, a process called tele­
commuting. Distributed workers are those who have no permanent office at their companies, 
preferring to work at home offices, in airport lounges, or client conference rooms, or on a high 
school stadium bleacher. The growth of the distributed workforce is driven by globalization, 
extremely long commutes to work, rising gasoline prices, ubiquitous broadband communica­
tions links (wireline and wireless), and powerful laptop computers and computing devices. 
Telecommuting off ers a number of potential advantages for employees, employers, and 
society. For employees, the benefits include reduced stress and improved family life. In addi­
tion, telecommuting offers employment opportunities for housebound people such as single 
parents and persons with disabilities. Benefits for employers include increased productivity, 
the ability to retain skilled employees, and the ability to attract employees who do not live 
within commuting distance. 
However, telecommuting also has some potential disadvantages. For employees, the 
major disadvantages are increased feelings of isolation, possible loss of fringe benefits, lower 
pay (in some cases), no workplace visibility, the potential for slower promotions, and lack of 
socialization. In a 2013 study, researchers at Stanford University found that telecommuting 
employees are 50 percent less likely to receive a promotion than onsite workers. The research­
ers concluded that a lack of “face time” with bosses caused careers to stall. 
In addition, telecommuting employees oft en have diff iculties “training” their families to 
understand that they are at work even though they are physically at home. Families have to 
understand that they should not disturb the telecommuter for anything that they would not 
have disturbed him or her about in a “real” office. The major disadvantages to employers are 
difficulties in supervising work and potential data security problems. 
Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer banned telecommuting in her company in February 2013. Best 
Buy and HP followed suit that same year. Despite being banned at these three large companies, 
telecommuting continues to grow. 
HRM 
Before you go on…
 1. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of electronic mail.
 2. Why are many companies bringing their call centers back to the United States?
 3. Describe Voice-over-Internet Protocol.
 4. What are the advantages and disadvantages of telecommuting to you as an individual? 
Apply the Concept 4.5 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4.5 Explain the impact that 
STEP 1: Background 
communication network applications have had on business and 
Section 4.5 has introduced you to the communication aspect of 
everyday life. 
networks that have radically changed the way humans interact 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Network Applications: Collaboration 113 
with each other. Most of these methods of communication 
are even available on our mobile devices now via a cellular 
connection. Such drastic changes have brought about many 
struggles and possibilities for businesses.    
STEP 2: Activity 
The methods that we use to communicate today vary greatly 
from just 50 years ago. Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/ 
MIS4e/applytheconcept to watch YouTube video about how 
communication has changed. While it only goes up to 1965, 
you will still recognize the situations and the uses of improved 
communications.  
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Consider the various uses of communications in the video 
(work, personal, military, emergency, etc.). How do our modern 
technologies such as Internet, video, mobile, and text impact 
what is possible on these types of communication? Create a 
list of the ways that the technologies discussed in this section 
have changed the way we communicate on a personal level, 
at work, in emergencies, and in military situations and give a 
brief explanation of each. Discuss at least three changes for 
each area of communication. Submit your answers to your 
professor. 
4.6 
Network Applications: Collaboration 
The third major category of network applications is collaboration. Collaboration refers to 
efforts by two or more entities—that is, individuals, teams, groups, or organizations—who work 
together to accomplish certain tasks. The term workgroup refers specifically to two or more 
individuals who act together to perform some task. 
Workflow is the movement of information as it progresses through the sequence of steps 
that make up an organization’s work procedures. Workflow management makes it possible to 
pass documents, information, and tasks from one participant to another in a way that is gov­
erned by the organization’s rules or procedures. Workflow systems are tools for automating 
business processes. 
If group members are working in different locations, they constitute a virtual group 
(team). Virtual groups conduct virtual meetings—that is, they “meet” electronically. Virtual 
collaboration (or e-collaboration) refers to the use of digital technologies that enable organiza­
tions or individuals who are geographically dispersed to collaboratively plan, design, develop, 
manage, and research products, services, and innovative applications. Organizational employ­
ees frequently collaborate virtually with one another. In addition, organizations collaborate 
virtually with customers, suppliers, and other business partners to become more productive 
and competitive. 
Collaboration can be synchronous, meaning that all team members meet at the same time. 
Teams may also collaborate asynchronously when team members cannot meet at the same 
time. Virtual teams, whose members are located throughout the world, typically must collab­
orate asynchronously. 
A variety of software products are available to support all types of collaboration. Among 
the most prominent are Google Drive (http://drive.google.com), Microsoft SharePoint Work­
space (www.microsoft.com/ Sharepoint/default.mspx), Jive (www.jivesoftware.com), and IBM 
Lotus Quickr (www.ibm.com/lotus/quickr). In general, these products provide online collabo­
ration capabilities, workgroup e-mail, distributed databases, bulletin whiteboards, electronic 
text editing, document management, workflow capabilities, instant virtual meetings, applica­
tion sharing, instant messaging, consensus building, voting, ranking, and various application 
development tools. 
These products also provide varying degrees of content control. Google Drive, Microsoft 
SharePoint Workspace, and Jive provide for shared content with version management, whereas 
Microsoft SharePoint Workspace and IBM Lotus Quickr off er version control. Products that pro­
vide version management track changes to documents and provide features to accommodate 
multiple people working on the same document at the same time. In contrast, version-control 
systems provide each team member with an account that includes a set of permissions. Docu­
ment directories are often set up so that users must check out documents before they can edit 
them. When one team member checks out a document, no other member can access it. Once 
the document has been checked in, it becomes available to other members. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
114 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
Collaboration is so important that companies are using information technology to enable 
the process as much as possible. IT’s About Business 4.2 shows how Raytheon uses CAVEs to 
maximize collaboration. 
IT’s About Business 4.2 
The Collaboration Environment at 
environment complete with a desert, mountains, or ocean, for the 
ultimate in product demonstration. This helps customers focus on 
MIS 
Raytheon 
what they’re looking for. It can also help Raytheon with a classic 
The Raytheon Company (www.raytheon.com) is a U.S. defense con-
“upsell” move – showing customers how one product can serve 
tractor that manufactures weapons and military and commercial 
needs they didn’t even know they had. As an example, the com­
electronics. Raytheon’s design and development process was high-
pany used S3D to simulate a battleship at sea to demonstrate a 
tech in that it involved computer-aided design (CAD). But it was 
ship-based missile for a client. The customer was so impressed 
still low-tech when it came to collaboration. Raytheon engineers 
with that missile’s capabilities that it ordered a land-based missile 
would sit together and look at each other’s laptops in an extremely 
with similar functions. The land-based missile was not on the cus­
time-consuming process. Now, Raytheon engineers designing mis-
tomer’s shopping list going in to the presentation. 
siles work with the company’s manufacturing and IT departments, 
Raytheon also takes its CAVEs on the road, encouraging mid-
as well as partners and suppliers, using stereoscopic 3-D (S3D) and 
dle school students to get involved in STEM (science, technology, 
augmented reality technologies. 
engineering, mathematics). The S3D technology isn’t just good for 
Raytheon engineers produce CAD product drawings, which 
product prototypes, either. Raytheon used it to design and test a 
become 3D models. In a manner that could be from Star Trek, the 
missile factory in Huntsville, Alabama. The factory itself produces 
models are displayed on S3D screens called Cave Automatic Virtual 
missiles with state-of-the-art robotics and computer-controlled 
Environments, or CAVE. A CAVE is a series of 72 ultrahigh-definition 
tools. 
3-D television sets, stacked eight feet high and arranged in a pan-
CAVEs do present challenges. Converting Raytheon’s conven­
orama that stretches over 320 degrees. 
tional 2-D images to 3-D images involves time and eff ort. It’s also 
There are also portable versions of CAVEs that can be used off 
not possible to entirely escape the physical world, as the company 
site. Regardless of the physical form, engineers wear 3-D eyewear 
must invest in the space and TV screens needed to construct the 
and “step into” the CAVE and enter a virtual reality world. They 
large CAVEs. 
and others around the world can share in seeing products such as 
The benefits of S3D are many. The technology has allowed 
missiles in a three-dimensional environment, such as a simulated 
Raytheon to avoid potential design and mock-up errors, saving 
battle. 
considerable amounts of time and money. It’s shaved countless 
The CAVE allows technical blueprints to come to life, so engi-
hours off the time to engineer and manufacture products. It’s cut 
neers can not only see an object, but touch and manipulate it as 
down on the amount of travel for Raytheon engineers to visit sup-
well. CAVE users can make quick changes to technical specifica-
pliers. It’s enabled Raytheon to review and complete designs faster. 
tions. Potential Raytheon customers, such as military personnel, 
And it’s helped identify potential mechanical defects that might 
can walk into a CAVE and adjust equipment according to their 
have gone undetected until the product was on the production line. 
needs. CAVE translates the abstract into the real, using what Ray-
What’s next for Raytheon’s S3D? It’s working on the next gen­
theon calls “the common language of visualization.” 
eration of the technology, which will not require CAVE users to don 
The CAVE technology has changed the way that Raytheon 
eyewear. The firm is evaluating the virtual-reality headsets from 
works with clients. Instead of giving a presentation to clients, Ray-
Oculus Rift (www.oculus.com). 
theon engineers sit with them in a CAVE videoconference and they 
explore the 3-D models together. The technology allows Raytheon 
Sources: Compiled from J. Meister, “Raytheon Animators Create 
designers to show clients their raw materials on the CAVE screens 
Simulated Defense Situations,” PDDNet, September 2, 2015; D. 
as easily as if they were being spread out on a boardroom table. 
Adams, “Now Showing at Raytheon: Missiles in 3-D,” The Boston 
Globe, November 10, 2014; A. Shaheed, “Missile Makers Use Virtual 
One benefit of CAVEs is that it is far more cost-effective to cre­
‘CAVE’ to Test Weapons,” Fox News, June 26, 2014; A. Barrie, “Next­
ate virtual missile prototypes than it is to build physical prototypes. 
Gen Missile Killers Created in a Virtual ‘Batcave’,” Fox News, April 11,
Another benefit is that CAVEs speed up the design process and get 
2014; S. O’Neill, “Raytheon 3-D CAVEs Speed Missile Design, Testing,” 
products to market faster. If engineers suspect that something is 
InformationWeek, April 1, 2014; “Futuristic Raytheon Alabama Factory 
wrong with the wiring inside a missile prototype, for example, they 
Makes Missile with Robots,” madeinalabama.com, June 18, 2013; 
can examine the 3-D model inside a CAVE and make adjustments 
www.raytheon.com, accessed September 18, 2015. 
quickly, such as moving wires farther away from a part that gets 
very hot. That would be expensive and time-consuming to do with 
Questions
a physical missile prototype. 
1. Describe the use of information technologies in Raytheon’s 
CAVEs have improved the level of teamwork both inside Ray- 
CAVEs.  
theon and with business partners and suppliers. Interestingly,  
CAVEs have energized customer presentations. Raytheon can put 
2. What are potential disadvantages of using CAVEs in the prod- 
customers right in the field, using CAVEs to simulate a combat 
uct design process?  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Network Applications: Collaboration 115 
Crowdsourcing 
One type of collaboration is crowdsourcing, in which an organization outsources a task to an 
undefined, generally large group of people in the form of an open call. Crowdsourcing pro­
vides many potential benefits to organizations. First, crowds can explore problems—and oft en 
resolve them—at relatively low cost, and often very quickly. Second, the organization can tap 
a wider range of talent than might be present among its employees. Third, by listening to the 
crowd, organizations gain firsthand insight into their customers’ desires. Finally, crowdsourc­
ing taps into the global world of ideas, helping companies work through a rapid design process. 
Let’s look at some examples of crowdsourcing. 
• Crowdsourcing help desks: IT help desks are a necessary service on college campuses  
because students depend on their computers and Internet access to complete their school­
work and attend class online. At Indiana University at Bloomington, new IT help desks use  
crowdsourcing to alleviate the cost and pressure of having to answer so many calls. Stu­
dents and professors post their IT problems on an online forum, where other students and  
amateur IT experts answer them.  
• Recruitment: Champlain College in Vermont developed a Champlain For Reel program,  
inviting students to share via YouTube videos recounting their experiences at the school  
and the ways they benefited from their time there. The YouTube channel serves to recruit  
prospective students and even updates alumni on campus and community events.  
• Scitable (www.nature.com/scitable) combines social networking and academic collabora­
tion. Through crowdsourcing, students, professors, and scientists discuss problems, find  
solutions, and swap resources and journals. Scitable is a free site that lets each individual  
user turn to crowdsourcing for answers even while helping others.  
• Procter & Gamble (P&G) uses InnoCentive (www.innocentive.com), where company  
researchers post their problems. P&G off ers cash rewards to problem solvers.  
• SAP’s Idea Place (https://ideas.sap.com) generates ideas for not-yet-developed soft ware  
improvements and innovation. Any person can view the content in the Idea Place. The  
Idea Place is organized into numerous sessions, or categories, under which the ideas are  
organized. Once you have posted your idea, other users can vote on it and add comments.  
Status updates on your idea allow you to follow it as it progresses through the Idea Place.  
Every idea is reviewed by a team of experts made up of engineers, product managers, and  
community managers who evaluate the potential for implementation. The ideas with the  
most votes will receive a higher level of attention from SAP.  
Although crowdsourcing has numerous success stories, there are many questions and con­
cerns about this system, including the following: 
• Should the crowd be limited to experts? If so, then how would a company go about imple­
menting this policy?  
• How accurate is the content created by the nonexperts in the crowd? How is accuracy  
maintained?  
• How is crowd-created content being updated? How can companies be certain the content  
is relevant?  
• The crowd may submit too many ideas, with most of them being worthless. In this scenario,  
evaluating all of these ideas can be prohibitively expensive. For example, during the BP oil spill  
in 2010, crowds submitted more than 20,000 suggestions on how to stem the flow of oil. The  
problem was very technical, so there were many poor suggestions. Nevertheless, despite the  
fact that BP was under severe time constraints, the company had to evaluate all of the ideas.  
• Content contributors may violate copyrights, either intentionally or unintentionally. 
• The quality of content (and therefore subsequent decisions) depends on the composition  
of the crowd. The best decisions may come if the crowd is made up of people with diverse  
opinions and ideas. In many cases, however, companies do not know the makeup of the  
crowd in advance.  
MIS 
MKT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking A photograph depicting telepresence system, where in a conference room four persons sitting on chairs are looking at large screen placed across the table depicting people involved in the meeting.
FIGURE 4.11  Telepresence 
system. A photograph depicting telepresence system, where in a conference room four persons sitting on chairs are looking at large screen placed across the table depicting people involved in the meeting.
Electronic Teleconferencing and Video Conferencing 
Teleconferencing is the use of electronic communication technology that enables two or 
more people at different locations to hold a conference. There are several types of teleconfer­
encing. The oldest and simplest is a telephone conference call, where several people talk to 
one another from multiple locations. The biggest disadvantage of conference calls is that they 
do not allow the participants to communicate face to face nor can they see graphs, charts, and 
pictures at other locations. 
To overcome these shortcomings, organizations are increasingly turning to video telecon­
ferencing or videoconferencing. In a videoconference, participants in one location can view 
participants, documents, and presentations at other locations. The latest version of videocon­
ferencing, called telepresence, enables participants to seamlessly share data, voice, pictures, 
graphics, and animation by electronic means. Conferees can also transmit data along with 
voice and video, which allows them to work together on documents and to exchange computer 
files. 
Telepresence systems range from on-premise, high-end systems to cloud-based systems. 
(We discuss on-premise computing and cloud computing in Plug IT In 4). On-premise, high-end 
systems are expensive and require dedicated rooms with large high-definition screens to show 
people sitting around conference tables (see Figure 4.11). These systems have advanced audio 
capabilities that let everyone talk at once without canceling out any voices. These systems also 
require technical staff to operate and maintain. Examples of high-end systems include Cisco’s 
TelePresence system (www.cisco.com) and Polycom’s RealPresence Immersive system (www 
.polycom.com). 
Interestingly, in 2006, Cisco’s telepresence system cost approximately $300,000 per instal­
lation, but in September 2015 the company offered its system for approximately $20,000. This 
steep decline in pricing is a good example of Moore’s Law in action. (See Plug IT In 2.) 
However, having dedicated rooms where telepresence meetings take place is not par­
ticularly useful when so many employees work remotely. As a result, companies such as Fuze 
(www.fuze.com) and BlueJeans Nework (www.bluejeans.com) offer telepresence systems that 
utilize cloud computing. The cloud delivery model means that Fuze and BlueJeans provide sys­
tems that are cheaper, more flexible, and require fewer in-house technical staff to operate and 
maintain. In addition, Fuze and BlueJeans can deliver their telepresence systems to any device, 
including smartphones, tablets, and laptop and desktop computers. 
Monthly telepresence subscription fees for Fuze and BlueJeans cost $10 to $15 per user 
per month. In response, Cisco is now offering cloud-based telepresence systems at monthly 
rates of $25 per user and high-end, conference room telepresence systems at monthly rates of 
$5,100 per user. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Before you go on…
Network Applications: Educational 117 
1. Describe virtual collaboration and why it is important to you.
 2. Define crowdsourcing and provide two examples of crowdsourcing not mentioned in this section.
 3. Identify the business conditions that have made videoconferencing more important. 
Apply the Concept 4.6 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4.6 Explain the impact that 
.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept and watch the 
collaboration network applications have had on business and 
YouTube video that introduces the company. Then click the 
everyday life. 
second link to visit the Brightidea website. There are several 
case studies, videos, and product explanations that will help you 
STEP 1: Background 
understand what this product off ers. 
As you have seen, collaboration tools impact people inside and 
outside of the organization. Some collaboration tools allow 
geographically separated employees to work together while some 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
allow those across the hall to work more effectively. Other tools 
As you peruse Brightidea’s website, look for evidence that the 
just allow larger groups to brainstorm and be creative. The big 
software supports the topics discussed in this section: workflow, 
idea here is that there is synergy created when people are able to 
virtual collaboration, crowdsourcing, and teleconferencing. 
work together via digital tools that overcome time and space.  
Prepare a set of presentation slides (use any tool at your 
disposal or at your instructors request) that discusses the impact 
STEP: Activity 
that collaboration network applications (such as Brightidea’s 
Brightidea is a company that provides a suite of products that 
products) have had on businesses. ßPresent your slides to your 
touches on many of the topics in the chapter. Visit http://www 
class and professor. 
4.7 
Network Applications: Educational 
The fourth major category of network applications consists of education applications. In this 
section, we discuss e-learning, distance learning, and virtual universities. 
E-Learning and Distance Learning 
E-learning and distance learning are not the same thing, but they do overlap. E-learning 
refers to learning supported by the Web. It can take place inside classrooms as a support to 
conventional teaching, such as when students work on the Web during class. It also can take 
place in virtual classrooms, in which all coursework is completed online and classes do not 
meet face-to-face. In these cases, e-learning is a part of distance learning. Distance learning 
(DL) refers to any learning situation in which teachers and students do not meet face-to-face. 
Today, the Web provides a multimedia interactive environment for self-study. Web- 
enabled systems make knowledge accessible to those who need it, when they need it, any­
time, anywhere. For this reason, e-learning and DL can be useful for both formal education and 
 corporate training. 
There are many benefits of e-learning. For example, online materials can deliver very cur­
rent content that is of high quality (created by content experts) and consistent (presented the 
same way every time). It also gives students the flexibility to learn at any place, at any time, and 
at their own pace. In corporate training centers that use e-learning, learning time generally is 
shorter, which means that more people can be trained within a given time frame. This system 
reduces training costs and eliminates the expense of renting facility space. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
Despite these benefits, e-learning has some drawbacks. For one, students must be com­
puter literate. Also, they may miss the face-to-face interaction with instructors and fellow stu­
dents. In addition, accurately assessing students’ work can be problematic because instructors 
really do not know who completed the assignments. 
E-learning does not usually replace the classroom setting. Rather, it enhances it by taking 
advantage of new content and delivery technologies. Advanced e-learning support environ­
ments, such as Blackboard (www.blackboard.com), add value to traditional learning in higher 
education. 
A new form of distance learning has recently appeared, called massive open online courses 
or MOOCs. MOOCs are a tool for democratizing higher education. Several factors have con­
tributed to the growth of MOOCs, including improved technology and the rapidly increasing 
costs of traditional universities. MOOCs are highly automated, complete with computer-graded 
assignments and exams. 
MOOCs have not yet proved that they can effectively teach the thousands of students who 
enroll in them. In addition, they do not provide revenues for universities. Further, MOOCs can 
register a mixture of high school students, retirees, faculty, enrolled students, and working 
professionals. Designing a course that adequately meets the needs of such a diverse student 
population is difficult. Finally, although initial registrations for a MOOC might exceed 100,000 
students, completion rates in any one MOOC tend to be less than 10 percent. 
Hundreds of thousands of students around the world who lack access to universities are 
using MOOCs to acquire sophisticated skills and high-paying jobs without having to pay tuition 
or obtain a college degree. IT’s About Business 4.3 takes a closer look at MOOCs in India. 
IT’s About Business 4.3 
Massive Open Online Courses in India 
MOOCs in India With 3.2 million students enrolled in India’s uni­
versities, there are simply not enough professors to teach every­
one in person. Some rural universities cannot even off er essential 
courses. In many universities, first-year courses are taught by peo­
ple with just a bachelor’s degree. Further, a degree from most of 
India’s 35,000 colleges does not mean a great deal to international 
employers. India’s best hope to address this problem is a greater 
role for online education. 
Today, many fields, particular ones in technical areas, are 
embracing online education for career advancement. Indian enroll­
ments account for about 8 percent of worldwide activity in Coursera 
(www.coursera.org) and 12 percent in edX (www.edx.org), the two 
leading providers of massive open online courses, or MOOCs. Only 
the U.S.’s share is higher. Coursera’s most popular offering in India 
is a University of Maryland course on how to build mobile applica­
tions for Android devices. After that course come Python program­
ming classes from the University of Michigan and Rice University, 
followed by a Stanford University class on machine learning. 
In the United States and Europe, MOOCs have proved to be 
less revolutionary than first predicted when they became popular 
in 2012. Rather than displacing traditional undergraduate pro­
grams, MOOCs in developed economies find their largest audiences 
among people eager to learn more about specific subjects. 
Among college students and recent graduates in India, online 
courses from the United States and Europe are immensely popular. 
They see taking the right technical courses as a means of advancing 
in their careers. They are also frequently willing to pay $20 to $250 
for a certificate that attests to their successful performance on a 
final exam. 
Consider one Indian student who took his country’s most 
difficult college placement exam, the Indian Institutes of Technol­
ogy (IIT) Joint Entrance Exam. Fewer than 3 percent of the more 
than 300,000 students who attempted the test qualified for a place 
at one of the elite Indian Institutes of Technology. This student’s 
score, which placed him in the top 1 percent of exam-takers, gained 
him entrance to IIT Delhi (www.iitd.ac.in). But he didn’t place high 
enough to qualify for the school’s most competitive degree pro­
gram, computer science. As a result, he was told to major in civil 
engineering. 
He took civil engineering courses, but he didn’t want to be a 
civil engineer, so he took a variety of management courses as well. 
As a result, he landed his first job after graduation at Wipro (www 
.wipro.com), one of India’s leading information-technology com­
panies. He then enrolled in three online data science classes via 
Coursera, all taught by Johns Hopkins professors. By earning cer­
tificates from the courses, he gained the attention of Dunnhumby 
(www.dunnhumby.com), one of England’s largest customer- 
analytics companies. He now works for them as a Delhi-based 
senior analyst. 
Companies such as Google, Wipro, Infosys, Infineon, and 
Microsoft have hired Indian engineers with online-education cre­
dentials. Thousands of Indian engineers now list schools such as 
Stanford, MIT, and Carnegie Mellon on LinkedIn as part of their 
educational background, based solely on their having completed 
online courses offered by professors at those U.S. universities. 
Eager to establish that India can create its own advanced 
online classes rather than simply import content from the United 
States, in 2014 the Ministry of Human Resources Development 
introduced plans for its own MOOC platform, called Swayam. As of 
June 2015, only three Swayam courses had been announced. By 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Network Applications: Educational 119 
Virtual Universities 
way of comparison, Coursera and edX each offers more than 500 
online classes. 
Significantly, Indian professors have noted several limitations 
in MOOCs. They maintain that making the technology work is the 
easy part. The greater challenge is to rearrange university priori­
ties so that India’s best instructors have enough discretionary time 
to build MOOCs. Another problem is schools’ reluctance to provide 
academic credit for online learning. 
In addition, Indian professors have found that it is diff icult 
to test the depth of students’ understanding of the material. The 
MOOC format requires professors to develop assignments and 
exams that can be machine-graded, which biases the material 
toward more superficial questions than a traditional classroom 
exam would contain. The professors have concluded that students 
are more likely to gain an “awareness” of a field than to acquire in-
depth knowledge. 
The All India Council for Technical Education is working to estab­
lish new guidelines that would allow students to earn 15 percent of 
their credits online. One proposal would permit outlying colleges to 
use a blended model, in which online instruction supplements class 
lectures and discussions. That approach has been incorporated into 
the 2015-2016 academic year, with 50 of India’s autonomous insti­
tutes working with IIT Bombay to offer blended MOOCs in three sub­
jects: Introduction to Computer Programming, Thermodynamics, 
and Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Computation. 
Virtual universities are online universities in which students take classes via the Internet 
either at home or in an off-site location. A large number of existing universities offer online edu­
cation of some form. Some universities, such as the University of Phoenix (www.phoenix.edu), 
California Virtual Campus (www.cvc.edu), and the University of Maryland (www.umuc.edu), 
offer thousands of courses and dozens of degrees to students worldwide, all of them online. 
Other universities offer limited online courses and degrees, but they employ innovative teach­
ing methods and multimedia support in the traditional classroom. 
Before you go on…
 1. Describe the differences between e-learning and distance learning.
 2. What are virtual universities? Would you be willing to attend a virtual university? Why or why not? 
Apply the Concept 4.7 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4.7 Explain the impact that 
educational network applications have had on business and 
everyday life. 
STEP 1: Background 
Imagine that you are an expert in math. Someone hands you a 
piece of chalk and a chalkboard and gives you a task of creating 
an educational experience to share your knowledge with other 
people. You would probably create a traditional classroom. Now 
imagine that you are not handed chalk, but the Internet, video 
Sources: Compiled from P. Newton, “How MOOCs Are Impacting 
India’s Business Education,” IntelligenceHQ, August 12, 2015; G. 
Anders, “India Loves MOOCs,” MIT Technology Review, July 27, 2015; 
“SWAYAM—MOOC Initiative by India,” EduWire, June 7, 2015; “Can 
MOOCs Improve India’s Higher Education?” discover.isif.asia, May 26, 
2015; F. Nisha and V. Senthil, “MOOCs: Changing Trend Towards Open 
Distance Learning with Special Reference to India,” Journal of Library 
& Information Technology, March, 2015; A. Vishnoi, “MOOCs Platform: 
PM Narendra Modi’s Gift to Nation on I-Day,” India Today, August 12, 
2014; P. Bharti, “Indian HRD Ministry Launches a MOOC Platform— 
SWAYAM,” EdTechReview, October 16, 2014; D. Shah, “India Announces 
Official MOOC Platform ‘Swayam’,” Class Central, October 2, 2014; C. 
Fox, “Higher, Open Education for India,” OpenSource.com, August 29, 
2013; M. Nair, “MOOCs Click with Indians,” The Times of India, August 
18, 2013. 
Questions 
1. Discuss possible quality control issues with MOOCs in India. 
For each issue, explain how you would solve the problem. 
2. Discuss the possible impacts of MOOCs on traditional higher 
education in India. 
3. Would you be willing to enroll in a MOOC as a full-time stu­
dent at your university? Why or why not? 
4. Would you be willing to enroll in a MOOC after you graduate? 
Why or why not? 
capabilities, file sharing, collaboration, tools, and more! Imagine 
the possibilities! 
STEP 2: Activity 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept and 
visit the Web site about Brightspace. Be sure to look at the video 
about how technology has changed education. Brightspace (you 
may have heard it called by its former name, Desire2Learn) is a 
learning management system that several schools use as a platform 
to offer educational activities using the digital tools available today. 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
This platform can be used to offer e-learning experiences, distance 
learning opportunities, or fully virtual classrooms. 
There are many discussions about how these educational 
network applications impact individual’s everyday life. Single 
parents are able to go to school using educational network 
applications. Working professionals are able to pursue graduate 
degrees online. But what about the impact on businesses? 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Many organizations use these tools to facilitate mandatory 
training or for onboarding new employees. Visit http://www 
.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept and view the second 
link about Brightspace’s enterprise offerings. Research their site 
to create and discuss a list of five ways that educational network 
applications impact businesses. 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For the Accounting Major 
Accounting personnel use corporate intranets and portals to consoli­
date transaction data from legacy systems to provide an overall view 
of internal projects. This view contains the current costs charged to 
each project, the number of hours spent on each project by indi­
vidual employees, and an analysis of how actual costs compare with 
projected costs. Finally, accounting personnel use Internet access 
to government and professional Web sites to stay informed on legal 
and other changes affecting their profession. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
Corporate intranets and portals can provide a model to evaluate the 
risks of a project or an investment. Financial analysts use two types 
of data in the model: historical transaction data from corporate data­
bases via the intranet and industry data obtained via the Internet. In 
addition, financial services firms can use the Web for marketing and 
to provide services. 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major 
Marketing managers use corporate intranets and portals to coordinate 
the activities of the sales force. Sales personnel access corporate por­
tals via the intranet to discover updates on pricing, promotion, rebates, 
customer information, and information about competitors. Sales staff 
can also download and customize presentations for their customers. 
The Internet, particularly the Web, opens a completely new marketing 
channel for many industries. Just how advertising, purchasing, and 
information dispensation should occur appears to vary from industry 
to industry, product to product, and service to service. 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
Companies are using intranets and portals to speed product devel­
opment by providing the development team with three-dimensional 
models and animation. All team members can access the models 
for faster exploration of ideas and enhanced feedback. Corporate 
portals, accessed via intranets, enable managers to carefully super­
vise their inventories as well as real-time production on assembly 
lines. Extranets are also proving valuable as communication for­
mats for joint research and design efforts among companies. The 
Internet is also a great source of cutting-edge information for POM 
managers. 
HRM For the Human Resources Management 
Major 
Human resources personnel use portals and intranets to pub­
lish corporate policy manuals, job postings, company telephone 
directories, and training classes. Many companies deliver online 
training obtained from the Internet to employees through their 
intranets. Human resources departments use intranets to offer 
employees healthcare, savings, and benefit plans, as well as the 
opportunity to take competency tests online. The Internet sup­
ports worldwide recruiting efforts; it can also be the communi­
cations platform for supporting geographically dispersed work 
teams. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
As important as the networking technology infrastructure is, it is 
invisible to users (unless something goes wrong). The MIS function is 
responsible for keeping all organizational networks up and running 
all the time. MIS personnel, therefore, provide all users with an “eye 
to the world” and the ability to compute, communicate, and collabo­
rate anytime, anywhere. For example, organizations have access to 
experts at remote locations without having to duplicate that exper­
tise in multiple areas of the firm. Virtual teaming allows experts phys­
ically located in different cities to work on projects as though they 
were in the same off ice. 
Summary 
1.  Compare and contrast the two major types of networks. 
are usually composed of one communications medium. In contrast, WANs 
encompass a broad geographical area and are usually composed of multi-
The two major types of networks are local area networks (LANs) and wide 
ple communications media. 
area networks (WANs). LANs encompass a limited geographical area and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Glossary 121 
2.  Describe the wireline communications media and channels. 
Twisted-pair wire, the most prevalent form of communications wiring, con­
sists of strands of copper wire twisted in pairs. It is relatively inexpensive to 
purchase, widely available, and easy to work with. However, it is relatively 
slow for transmitting data, it is subject to interference from other electrical 
sources, and it can be easily tapped by unintended receivers. 
Coaxial cable consists of insulated copper wire. It is much less susceptible 
to electrical interference than is twisted-pair wire and it can carry much 
more data. However, coaxial cable is more expensive and more diff icult to 
work with than twisted-pair wire. It is also somewhat inflexible. 
Fiber-optic cables consist of thousands of very thin filaments of glass fibers 
that transmit information via light pulses generated by lasers. Fiber-optic 
cables are significantly smaller and lighter than traditional cable media. 
They can also transmit far more data, and they provide greater security 
from interference and tapping. Fiber-optic cable is often used as the back­
bone for a network, whereas twisted-pair wire and coaxial cable connect 
the backbone to individual devices on the network. 
3.  Describe the most common methods for accessing the Internet. 
Common methods for connecting to the Internet include dial-up, DSL, 
cable modem, satellite, wireless, and fiber to the home. 
4.  Explain the impact that discovery network applications have had on 
business and everyday life. 
Discovery involves browsing and information retrieval, and provides users 
the ability to view information in databases, download it, and/or process it. 
Discovery tools include search engines, directories, and portals. Discovery 
tools enable business users to efficiently find needed information. 
Chapter Glossary 
affi nity portal A Web site that offers a single point of entry to an entire 
community of aff iliated interests. 
analog signals Continuous waves that transmit information by altering 
the amplitude and frequency of the waves. 
backbone networks High-speed central networks to which multiple 
smaller networks (e.g., LANs and smaller WANs) connect. 
bandwidth The transmission capacity of a network, stated in bits per 
second. 
broadband The transmission capacity of a communications medium 
faster than 4 Mbps. 
broadcast media (also called wireless media) Communications 
channels that use electromagnetic media (the “airwaves”) to 
transmit data. 
browsers Software applications through which users primarily access 
the Web. 
cable media (also called wireline media) Communications channels 
that use physical wires or cables to transmit data and information. 
chat room A virtual meeting place where groups of regulars come to 
“gab” electronically. 
client/server computing Form of distributed processing in which 
some machines (servers) perform computing functions for end-user 
PCs (clients). 
5.  Explain the impact that communication network applications have 
had on business and everyday life. 
Networks provide fast, inexpensive communications, via e-mail, call 
centers, chat rooms, voice communications, and blogs. Communications 
tools provide business users with a seamless interface among team mem­
bers, colleagues, business partners, and customers. 
Telecommuting is the process whereby knowledge workers are able to work 
anywhere and anytime. Telecommuting provides flexibility for employees, 
with many benefits and some drawbacks. 
6.  Explain the impact that collaboration network applications have 
had on business and everyday life. 
Collaboration refers to mutual efforts by two or more entities (individu­
als, groups, or companies) who work together to accomplish tasks. Col­
laboration is enabled by workflow systems. Collaboration tools enable 
business users to collaborate with colleagues, business partners, and 
customers. 
7.  Explain the impact that educational network applications have had 
on business and everyday life. 
E-learning refers to learning supported by the Web. Distance learning refers 
to any learning situation in which teachers and students do not meet face­
to-face. E-learning provides tools for business users to enable their lifelong 
learning. 
Virtual universities are online universities in which students take classes via 
the Internet at home or an off-site location. Virtual universities make it pos­
sible for students to obtain degrees while working full time, thus increasing 
their value to their firms. 
clients Computers, such as users’ personal computers, that use any of 
the services provided by servers. 
coaxial cable Insulated copper wire; used to carry high-speed data 
traffic and television signals. 
collaboration Mutual efforts by two or more individuals who perform 
activities in order to accomplish certain tasks. 
commercial (public) portal A Web site that offers fairly routine 
content for diverse audiences; offers customization only at the user 
interface. 
communications channel Pathway for communicating data from one 
location to another. 
computer network A system that connects computers and other 
devices via communications media so that data and information can 
be transmitted among them. 
corporate portal A Web site that provides a single point of access 
to critical business information located inside and outside of an 
organization. 
crowdsourcing A process in which an organization outsources a task 
to an undefined, generally large group of people in the form of an 
open call. 
digital signals A discrete pulse, either on or off, that conveys 
information in a binary form. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
distance learning (DL) Learning situations in which teachers and 
students do not meet face-to-face. 
distributed processing Network architecture that divides processing 
work between two or more computers, linked together in a network. 
domain name system (DNS) The system administered by the 
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names (ICANN) that assigns names 
to each site on the Internet. 
domain names The name assigned to an Internet site, consisting of 
multiple parts, separated by dots, which are translated from right to 
left . 
e-learning Learning supported by the Web; can be done inside 
traditional classrooms or in virtual classrooms. 
enterprise network An organization’s network composed of 
interconnected multiple LANs and WANs. 
Ethernet A common local area network protocol. 
extranet A network that connects parts of the intranets of diff erent 
organizations. 
fi ber-optic cable A communications medium consisting of thousands 
of very thin filaments of glass fibers, surrounded by cladding, that 
transmit information via light pulses generated by lasers. 
file server  (also called network server) A computer that contains 
various software and data files for a local area network and contains 
the network operating system. 
hyperlink A connection from a hypertext file or document to another 
location or file, typically activated by clicking on a highlighted word 
or image on the screen, or by touching the screen. 
hypertext Text displayed on a computer display with references, called 
hyperlinks, to other text that the reader can immediately access. 
Hypertext Transport Protocol (HTTP) The communications 
standard used to transfer pages across the WWW portion of the 
Internet; defines how messages are formulated and transmitted. 
industrywide portal A Web-based gateway to information and 
knowledge for an entire industry. 
Internet (the Net) A massive global WAN that connects approximately 
1 million organizational computer networks in more than 200 
countries on all continents, including Antarctica, and features 
in the daily routine of almost 2 billion people. Participating 
computer systems include smartphones, PCs, LANs, databases, and 
mainframes. 
Internet backbone The primary network connections and 
telecommunications lines that link the computers and organizational 
nodes of the Internet. 
Internet Protocol (IP) A set of rules responsible for disassembling, 
delivering, and reassembling packets over the Internet. 
Internet Protocol (IP) address An assigned address that uniquely 
identifies a computer on the Internet. 
Internet service provider (ISP) A company that provides Internet 
connections for a fee. 
Internet telephony (Voice-over-Internet Protocol or VoIP) The 
use of the Internet as the transmission medium for telephone calls. 
Internet2 A new, faster telecommunications network that deploys 
advanced network applications such as remote medical diagnosis, 
digital libraries, distance education, online simulation, and virtual 
laboratories. 
intranet A private network that uses Internet software and TCP/IP 
protocols. 
local area network (LAN) A network that connects communications 
devices in a limited geographic region, such as a building, so that 
every user device on the network can communicate with every other 
device. 
metasearch engine A computer program that searches several 
engines at once and integrates the findings of the various search 
engines to answer queries posted by users. 
modem Device that converts signals from analog to digital and vice 
versa. 
network access points (NAPs) Computers that act as exchange 
points for Internet traffic and determine how traffic is routed. 
network server See file server. 
packet switching The transmission technology that divides blocks of 
text into packets. 
peer-to-peer (P2P) processing A type of client/server distributed 
processing that allows two or more computers to pool their 
resources, making each computer both a client and a server. 
portal A Web-based personalized gateway to information and 
knowledge that provides information from disparate information 
systems and the Internet, using advanced search and indexing 
techniques. 
protocol The set of rules and procedures governing transmission 
across a network. 
router A communications processor that routes messages from a LAN 
to the Internet, across several connected LANs, or across a wide area 
network such as the Internet. 
search engine A computer program that searches for specific 
information by keywords and reports the results. 
servers Computers that provide access to various network services, 
such as printing, data, and communications. 
telecommuting A work arrangement whereby employees work 
at home, at the customer’s premises, in special workplaces, or 
while traveling, usually using a computer linked to their place of 
employment. 
teleconferencing The use of electronic communication that allows 
two or more people at different locations to have a simultaneous 
conference. 
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) A file 
transfer protocol that can send large files of information across 
sometimes unreliable networks with assurance that the data will 
arrive uncorrupted. 
twisted-pair wire A communications medium consisting of strands of 
copper wire twisted together in pairs. 
unifi ed communications Common hardware and soft ware platform 
that simplifies and integrates all forms of communications—voice, 
e-mail, instant messaging, location, and videoconferencing—across 
an organization. 
uniform resource locator (URL) The set of letters that identifies the 
address of a specific resource on the Web. 
videoconference A virtual meeting in which participants in one 
location can see and hear participants at other locations and can 
share data and graphics by electronic means. 
virtual collaboration The use of digital technologies that enable 
organizations or individuals to collaboratively plan, design, 
develop, manage, and research products, services, and innovative 
information systems and electronic commerce applications. 
virtual group (team) A workgroup whose members are in diff erent 
locations and who meet electronically. 
virtual universities Online universities in which students take classes 
via the Internet at home or at an off -site location. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Problem-Solving Activities 123 
Voice-over-Internet Protocol (VoIP) See Internet telephony. 
Web site Collectively, all of the Web pages of a particular company or 
individual. 
wide area network (WAN) A network, generally provided by 
common carriers, that covers a wide geographical area. 
wireless media See broadcast media. 
wireline media See cable media. 
workgroup Two or more individuals who act together to perform some 
task, on either a permanent or on a temporary basis. 
Discussion Questions
 1.  What are the implications of having fiber-optic cable to everyone’s 
home?
 2.  What are the implications of BitTorrent for the music industry? For the 
motion picture industry?
 3.  Discuss the pros and cons of P2P networks.
 4.  Should the Internet be regulated? If so, by whom?
 5.  Discuss the pros and cons of delivering this book over the Internet.
 6.  Explain how the Internet works. Assume you are talking with some­
one who has no knowledge of information technology (in other words, 
keep it very simple).
 7.  How are the network applications of communication and collabora­
tion related? Do communication tools also support collaboration? 
Give examples.
 8.  Search online for the article from The Atlantic: “Is Google Making Us 
Stupid?” Is Google making us stupid? Support your answer.
 9.  Network neutrality is an operating model under which Internet service 
providers (ISPs) must allow customers equal access to content and 
applications, regardless of the source or nature of the content. That 
is, Internet backbone carriers must treat all Web traffic equally, not 
charging different rates by user, content, site, platform, or application. 
Telecommunications and cable companies want to replace network 
neutrality with an arrangement in which they can charge diff erentiated 
prices based on the amount of bandwidth consumed by the content 
that is being delivered over the Internet. ISPs further contend that 
net neutrality hinders U.S. international competitiveness by decreas­
ing innovation and discouraging capital investments in new network 
technologies. Without such investments and innovations, ISPs will be 
unable to handle the exploding demand for Internet and wireless data 
transmission. 
From the opposite perspective, proponents of network neutrality ar­
gue that the risk of censorship increases when network providers can 
selectively block or slow access to certain content, such as access to 
competing low-cost services such as Skype and Vonage. They also as­
sert that a neutral Internet encourages innovation. Finally, they con­
tend that the neutral Internet has helped to create many new busi­
nesses. 
a.  How do you feel about the net neutrality issue? 
b.  Do you believe heavier bandwidth users should pay for more band­
width? 
c.  Do you believe wireless carriers should operate under diff erent 
rules than wireline carriers? 
d.  Evaluate your own bandwidth usage. (For example: Do you upload 
and download large files, such as movies?) If network neutrality 
were to be eliminated, what would the impact be for you? 
10.  Should businesses monitor network usage? Do see a problem with 
employees using company-purchased bandwidth for personal use? 
Please explain your answer. 
Problem-Solving Activities 
 1.  Calculate how much bandwidth you consume when using the Internet 
every day. How many e-mails do you send daily and what is the size 
of each? (Your e-mail program may have e-mail file size information.) 
How many music and video clips do you download (or upload) daily 
and what is the size of each? If you view YouTube often, surf the Web to 
find out the size of a typical YouTube file. Add up the number of e-mail, 
audio, and video files you transmit or receive on a typical day. When 
you have calculated your daily Internet usage, determine if you are a 
“normal” Internet user or a “power” Internet user. What impact does 
network neutrality have on you as a “normal” user? As a “power” user?
workfl ow The movement of information as it flows through 
the sequence of steps that make up an organization’s work 
procedures. 
World Wide Web  (the Web, WWW, or W3) A system of universally 
accepted standards for storing, retrieving, formatting, and 
displaying information via a client/server architecture; it uses the 
transport functions of the Internet.
 2.  Access several P2P applications, such as SETI@home. Describe the 
purpose of each application, and indicate which ones you would like 
to join.
 3.  Access http://ipv6.com and www.ipv6news.info and learn about more 
advantages of IPv6.
 4.  Access www.icann.org and learn more about this important
 organization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
124 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking
 5.  Set up your own Web site using your name for the domain name (e.g., 
KellyRainer). 
a.  Explain the process for registering a domain. 
b.  Which top-level domain will you use and why?
 6.  Access www.icann.org and obtain the name of an agency or company 
that can register a domain for the TLD that you selected. What is the 
name of that agency or company?
 7.  Access the Web site for that agency or company (in question 6) to learn 
the process that you must use. How much will it initially cost to regis­
ter your domain name? How much will it cost to maintain that name 
in the future?
 8.  You plan to take a two-week vacation in Australia this year. Using the 
Internet, find information that will help you plan the trip. Such infor­
mation includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  Geographical location and weather conditions at the time of 
your trip 
b.  Major tourist attractions and recreational facilities 
c.  Travel arrangements (airlines, approximate fares) 
d.  Car rental; local tours 
e.  Alternatives for accommodation (within a moderate budget) and 
food 
f.  Estimated cost of the vacation (travel, lodging, food, recreation, 
shopping, etc.) 
g.  Country regulations regarding the entrance of your dog 
h.  Shopping 
i.  Passport information (either to obtain one or to renew one) 
j.  Information on the country’s language and culture 
k.  What else do you think you should research before going to 
 Australia?
 9.  From your own experience or from the vendor’s information, list 
the major capabilities of Lotus Notes/Domino. Do the same for 
Microsoft Exchange. Compare and contrast the products. Explain 
how the products can be used to support knowledge workers and 
managers. 
10.  Visit Web sites of companies that manufacture telepresence products 
for the Internet. Prepare a report. Differentiate between telepresence 
products and videoconferencing products. 
11.  Access Google (or YouTube) videos and search for “Cisco Magic.” This 
video shows Cisco’s next-generation telepresence system. Compare 
and contrast it with current telepresence systems. 
12.  Access the Web site of your university. Does the Web site provide 
high-quality information (right amount, clear, accurate, etc.)? Do 
you think a high-school student who is thinking of attending your 
university would feel the same way? 
13.  Compare and contrast Google Sites (www.google.com/sites) and 
Microsoft Office Live (www.liveoffice.com). Which site would you use 
to create your own Web site? Explain your choice. 
14.  Access the Web site of the Recording Industry Association of America 
(www.riaa.com). Discuss what you find there regarding copyright in­
fringement (i.e., downloading music files). How do you feel about the 
RIAA’s efforts to stop music downloads? Debate this issue from your 
point of view and from the RIAA’s point of view. 
15.  Research the companies involved in Internet telephony (Voice-over IP). 
Compare their offerings as to price, necessary technologies, ease of 
installation, and so on. Which company is the most attractive to you? 
Which company might be the most attractive for a large company? 
16.  Access various search engines other than Google. Search for the same 
terms on several of the alternative search engines and on Google. 
Compare the results on breadth (number of results found) and preci­
sion (results are what you were looking for). 
17.  Second Life (www.secondlife.com) is a three-dimensional, online 
world built and owned by its residents. Residents of Second Life are 
avatars who have been created by real people. Access Second Life, 
learn about it, and create your own avatar to explore this world. Learn 
about the thousands of people who are making “real-world” money 
from operations in Second Life. 
18.  Access Microsoft’s Bing translator (http://www.microsoft translator 
.com) or Google (www.google.com/language_tools) translation pages. 
Type in a paragraph in English and select, for example, English-to-
French. When you see the translated paragraph in French, copy it into 
the text box, and select French-to-English. Is the paragraph that you 
first entered the same as the one you are looking at now? Why or why 
not? Support your answer. 
Closing Case 1 
POM 
MKT 
MIS 
Using Technology for Sustainable Seafood 
The Problem 
To avoid a tariff of approximately 65 percent imposed on 
low-priced imports of fish, some foreign seafood businesses 
deliberately mislabel cheaper fish species as more expensive species 
to mislead inspectors. In one case, a business saved more than $60 
million in tariff s by labeling Asian catfish as grouper. In 2013 Oceana 
(www.oceana.org), a nonprofit U.S. organization, performed DNA tests 
on 1,200 fish samples and found that one-third had been mislabeled. 
Researchers tend to identify seafood fraud with foreign fisher­
ies. A large majority of the seafood consumed in the United States is 
imported from countries with loose aquaculture laws, with Thailand 
and Vietnam being the worst off enders. 
The Pew Charitable Trusts (www.pewtrusts.org) estimates that 
one of every five fish taken from the ocean is caught illegally. This 
practice depletes stocks of certain species (e.g., tuna) to levels that 
threaten their survival. Whether it is to avoid fines for fishing without 
permits or for exceeding their quotas or to boost profits, fishermen 
often try to pass off one type of fish as another. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 2 125 
Potential Solutions 
For decades, DNA sequencing has been the only tool that can posi­
tively identify the correct species of fish. However, the process takes 
at least 12 hours, which is too much time for most wholesale buying 
decisions. Today, however, Grouperchek, a portable technology, can 
accurately identify one species of fish—grouper—in 45 minutes, for 
only $30. Grouperchek developers are working to expand the technol­
ogy’s capabilities to other species of fish. 
Shellcatch (www.shellcatch.com) is providing another solution. 
The San Francisco-based startup is taking advantage of the increas­
ing demand for sustainable seafood. The company hopes that its 
technology will combat the overfishing and fraud that threaten the 
international seafood trade. Shellcatch claims that its technology lets 
consumers know the people behind the fish they are eating. 
Shellcatch is trying to fill a gap in the marketplace. Many coun­
tries already require large commercial fishing boats to be equipped 
with either vessel-monitoring systems or human observers to certify 
that the boats are not straying into protected areas. However, these 
systems are too expensive. In addition, they are oft en logistically 
impossible to implement across millions of small fishing boats. 
In the past, Chilean fishermen have fished for flounder and aba­
lone using nets, hooks, and their accumulated knowledge of their 
craft. Today, they also utilize satellite networks and cloud comput­
ing to earn the best possible price for their catch. Approximately 250 
Chilean fishermen have signed on to use Shellcatch technology. The 
Chilean office of the Nature Conservancy provided $106,000 in grant 
support and training for to help fishermen deploy Shellcatch’s equip­
ment on their boats. 
Fishing boats using Shellcatch have a small GPS-enabled camera 
that records which types of fish they catch and where. On the dock, the 
fishermen weigh their catches on a video-equipped scale and tag them 
with unique Shellcatch bar codes and Quick Response (QR) codes. The 
data are then uploaded into the cloud, where a diner at a restaurant 
can retrieve them by waving a smartphone over the menu. Diners can 
also access photos of the fisherman making the catch, which is a detail 
calculated to appeal to consumers who want to know the identity and 
origin of their food. One restaurant owner notes that many of her cus­
tomers like to find out information about the fish on their tables, even 
down to the particular cove where the fish was caught. 
Shellcatch’s hardware is suitable for small boats. The device is 
compact and waterproof, and it has a long battery life, so it can be used 
on boats with no power source. The software is constantly upgraded, 
to further automate the monitoring process. Shellcatch uses video 
analytics, which, for instance can detect whether sea turtles are being 
accidentally caught in fishing nets. The Mexican government, which is 
facing the threat of U.S. trade sanctions over the rising death toll of 
endangered loggerhead sea turtles in the Northern Pacific, is paying 
Closing Case 2 
MKT Local Language Web Sites in India 
The Problem 
The World Bank (www.worldbank.org) estimates that 80 percent 
of online content is available in only 1 of 10 languages: English, Chi­
nese, Spanish, Japanese, Arabic, Portuguese, German, French, Rus­
sian, and Korean. Roughly three billion people speak one of these 
as their first language. However, more than half of all online content 
Shellcatch to monitor 16 fishing boats. The U.S. claims that Mexican 
fishermen are catching the turtles in their nets; Mexico denies the 
charges. Shellcatch has announced that it will soon begin monitoring 
an additional 200 boats in Mexican waters. 
The Results 
Chilean fishermen who use Shellcatch claim they earn a 25 percent 
premium, on average, for their catch from upscale restaurants and 
supermarkets that want to know in which waters their fish are caught. 
The fishermen also believe that Shellcatch can help reverse years of 
overfishing. The reason is they can catch fewer fish and still earn the 
same amount of money. 
Shellcatch’s business plan is to eventually make a profit by selling 
its services to fishermen who want to sell traceable fish. In 2015, some 
of the Chilean fishermen the company had recruited did indeed begin 
paying for the service. In addition, Shellcatch has established relation­
ships with more than 50 restaurants, supermarkets, and stores in Chile 
that purchase seafood verified by the system. 
The company’s business plan also includes marketing the data 
it collects to governments, environmental organizations, restaurant 
owners, retailers, and distributors. The firm could also benefit from 
President Obama’s recent push to clean up the seafood trade by pro­
moting the creation of a system that tracks fish from the boat to the 
plate. In addition, Shellcatch is expanding its operations to Peru, and it 
plans to expand to other countries. 
Sources: Compiled from D. Bank, “Bountiful Catch for Sustainable 
Seafood Investors: Finalists in Fish 2.0 Competition,” The Huffington Post, 
September 16, 2015; “37 Innovative Seafood Companies to Pitch at Fish 
2.0 Finals,” Fish 2.0, September 14, 2015; The Green Man, “Consumers 
Can See Who Caught Their Fish,” The Vancouver Sun blogs, June 2, 2015; 
C. Elton, “Tracing the Fish on Your Plate Back to the Sea,” Bloomberg 
BusinessWeek, May 25-31, 2015; M. Fontanazza, “Untangling the Net 
of Seafood Fraud,” Food Safety Tech, April 14, 2015; N. Lou, “Bait and 
Switch: The Fraud Crisis in the Seafood Industry,” The Atlantic, March 
19, 2015; D. Abel, “U.S. Aims to Curb Seafood Fraud,” The Boston Globe, 
March 16, 2015; C. Rentz, “Seafood Fraud Cases Plummet as NOAA Cuts 
Investigators,” Portland Press Herald, December 12, 2014; R. Jordan, 
“Trash to Treasure: Stanford Researcher Tells a Seafood Story,” Stanford 
News Service, March 18, 2014; “SmartFish: Catching Gold in the Fish 
Market,” National Geographic, November 1, 2013; www.shellcatch.com, 
www.fish20.org, accessed September 18, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Describe how the Shellcatch technology benefits fishermen, con­
sumers, and the environment. 
2.  What are the potential disadvantages of the Shellcatch technology 
for fishermen? 
is written in English, which is understood by only 21 percent of the 
world’s population.   
Consider India, whose citizens speak roughly 425 languages and 
dialects. Industry analysts estimate that less than 0.1 percent of all 
Web content is composed in Hindi, the first language of approximately 
260 million people. 
Companies such as Amazon (www.amazon.com) and Soft Bank 
(www.softbank.com) are investing in India to take advantage of rapid 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
126 
CHAPTER 4 Telecommunications and Networking 
increases in Web usage. Since 2013, an additional 100 million Indians 
have begun accessing the Web, for a total of more than 350 million as 
of September 2015. In fact, India now is second only to China in total 
number of Internet users. Further, the Internet & Mobile Association of 
India (www.iamai.in) predicts that more than 500 million Indians will 
access the Internet by 2017. 
Unfortunately, a large proportion of India’s population cannot 
make use of any existing online offerings. Almost all the Web sites in 
India are available only in English, a language that is familiar to many 
middle-class city dwellers but not to a large segment of the country’s 
population. Roughly one-third of the Indians online do not speak 
English, and they are poorly served because of the lack of localized 
content. 
Consider the case of a resident of the city of Chennai who is a 
native speaker of Tamil, a language common in India’s southern states. 
His knowledge of English is very limited. He can check his e-mail online 
and can sometimes use the Internet to look up addresses and phone 
numbers, but that is about all he can do. Even Indian Web sites that 
focus on his major interests—yoga, movies, and sports—are of little 
use to him, because they are written primarily in English. As a result, 
he depends on books and Tamil newspapers. 
Adding to these problems, among India’s smartphone users, 
fewer than 40 percent have devices that can display Hindi, the most 
common local language. Support for India’s nine other major lan­
guages is even more limited. 
Potential Solutions 
U.S. companies seeking to expand in India must be able to manage the 
language problem, and Google (www.google.com) has taken the lead. 
Google has been able to expand its language options without having 
to hire many new workers because the company already has employ­
ees from throughout India whom it has enlisted for these projects. 
In November 2014, Google announced partnerships with 18 Indian 
companies, including Process Nine Technologies (www.process9 
.com) and Reverie Language Technologies (http://go.reverieinc.com), 
to develop online content in languages other than English. Google is 
also targeting ads to non-English speakers. In December 2014, the firm 
introduced AdSense in Hindi, enabling owners of Hindi-language Web 
sites to purchase Hindi keywords. 
Google also made India the first market for its Android One smart-
phones, priced at about $100. Google worked with Indian phone man­
ufacturers such as Micromax (www.micromaxinfo.com) and Karbonn 
(www.karbonnmobiles.com) to develop the phones. The Android One 
supports English and Hindi. In addition, it will add five more local lan­
guages when Google releases the next version of its mobile operating 
system. The Android One also supports Hindi voice-search capabilities. 
Other companies are pursuing local-language options as well. 
In 2014, Microsoft (www.microsoft.com) began offering users the abil­
ity to input Hindi text on their mobile phones. Also in 2014, Facebook 
announced a contest to encourage developers to create local-language 
mobile apps. Mozillla, which controls the open-source browser Firefox, 
is using India as a testing ground for software that customers who buy 
Firefox-branded smartphones can use to create local-language Web 
sites and apps. 
Among Indian companies, e-commerce Web site Snapdeal (www 
.snapdeal.com) is a leader, introducing Hindi and Tamil versions in 
2014. The country’s other two large e-commerce companies, Amazon 
India and Indian rival Flipkart, are available only in English. 
India’s government is principally working on more basic issues, 
such as helping more Indians gain access to the Internet. Prime Min­
ister Modi’s government is promoting an $18 billion Digital India cam­
paign (www.digitalindia.gov.in) to expand broadband Internet access 
and services. However, the government’s program to connect 250,000 
villages to the Web by 2016 is far behind schedule. 
Industry analysts note one outstanding opportunity for Modi’s 
government to pursue, Indian Railways. About 23 million people per 
day ride Indian Railways (www.indianrail.gov.in), including millions 
of speakers of Tamil, Bengali, Gujarati, and other local languages. 
However, the Indian Railways Web site is available only in English 
and Hindi. 
The Results 
In March 2015, ongoing monitoring by W3Techs (http://w3techs.com) 
revealed that more than half of the most visited Web sites in India still 
had English-language homepages. Therefore, it appears that progress 
in producing local-language content will remain slow. 
Sources: Compiled from “Usage of Content Languages for Web Sites,” 
http://w3techs.com, retrieved September 19, 2015; “India Internet 
Userbase Crosses 350-mn Milestone in June,” Deccan Herald, September 
2, 2015; “India’s Internet User Base at 350 Million, to Reach 503 Million by 
2017,” Press Trust of India, July 20, 2015; N. Najar, “India’s Leader Maps 
Out a More Robust Digital Future,” The New York Times, July 5, 2015; “PM 
Modi Launches Digital India Campaign: Asks Why Can’t Google Be Made in 
India,” The Economic Times, July 1, 2015; M. Orcutt, “The Online Language 
Barrier,” MIT Technology Review, March 6, 2015; B. Einhorn, M. Sharma, 
and G. Nagarajan, “Imagine How Hard It Would Be to Use the Internet If 
You Could Read Only One-Third of It,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, January 
19-25, 2015; M. Chanchani, “Top E-Tailers Launching Sites in Regional 
Languages to Woo Customers,” The Economic Times, July 3, 2014; P. 
Mishra, “Snapdeal Launches Local Language Site as Indian E-Commerce 
Goes Native,” TechCrunch, January 30, 2014. 
Questions 
1.  Suppose that approximately 500 million Indians have access to 
Web sites in their native languages by 2017. What are the implica­
tions for you as students?  
2.  Why is it so important for U.S. companies to be able to provide con­
tent in local languages around the world? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nan104/iStockphoto 
Business Analytics  
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
5.1  Managers and Decision Making 
5.2  The Business Analytics Process 
5.3  Business Analytics Tools 
5.4  Business Analytics Models: 
Descriptive Analytics, Predictive 
Analytics, and Prescriptive Analytics 
Opening Case 
Rent the Runway 
CHAPTER 5  
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
5.1  Use a decision support framework to demonstrate how technology supports manage­
rial decision making at each phase of the decision-making process. 
5.2  Describe each phase of the business analytics process. 
5.3  Describe each of the various analytics tools and examples of their uses. 
5.4  Provide a definition and a use case example for descriptive analytics, predictive 
analytics, and prescriptive analytics. 
On average, an American woman buys 64 new pieces of
POM clothing per year—half of which she will wear only one time. 
Facebook and Instagram are actually making matters worse. Today, 
women often feel that they cannot wear an outfit repeatedly because 
their friends have seen that outfit on social media. Moreover, fashion 
industry analysts note that new fashion trends in women’s apparel 
emerge on average every 10 weeks. Therefore, if a woman wants to 
feel that she is in step with fashion, she would need to change at least 
part of her wardrobe that frequently. 
A major trend in today’s economy is a transition from ownership 
to subscribing and sharing. At least one company has implemented 
this business model in the fashion industry. Located at the intersection 
of the sharing economy, Facebook, and Instagram, Rent the Runway 
(RTR; www.renttherunway.com) buys designer dresses wholesale and 
rents them over the Web for a night or two, charging only a fraction 
of the price of the dress. For instance, an RTR customer can wear a 
Calvin Klein gown that costs thousands of dollars for only $70. In 2015, 
RTR launched a subscription service called Unlimited that allows 
127
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
128 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
customers to borrow up to three accessories (sunglasses, bags, jack­
ets) for as long as they want for $99 per month. 
When RTR merchandisers decide whether to buy a new dress, 
they follow a list of 40 data points such as fabric, zippers, stitching, and 
shape to determine whether the dress will hold up to the rigors of mul­
tiple rentals. The longer the lifespan, the higher the return on capital. 
In mid-2015, RTR averaged 30 turns (rentals) per dress. 
Delivering a delicate designer dress is a difficult, complicated, and 
expensive operation. The dresses must arrive on time and in perfect 
condition. One mistake—a late arrival, an unsightly stain, a poor fit— 
creates a customer relations nightmare. To accomplish the firm’s goals, 
every day RTR algorithms analyze more than 65,000 dresses and 25,000 
earrings, bracelets, and necklaces as they move around the country 
among the firm’s five million members. The algorithms enable RTR to 
ship out 60 percent of the dresses the same day they arrive. In the RTR 
warehouse, employees sort returns, remove all kinds of stains, sterilize 
jewelry, and mend tears in clothing. The RTR process works like this: 
•  Customers return thousands of dresses in barcoded envelopes. 
•  Employees scan the dresses into the RTR analytics and logistics 
 systems. 
•  Workers inspect the dresses and sort them into bins marked for 
regular cleaning, stain removal, or repairs. 
•  Employees who are part chemists and part artists remove stains 
from clothing, extending the life of the dresses. A database sug­
gests the optimal chemicals to use for each type of stain and each 
type of material. 
•  Automated cleaning machines sterilize and smooth gowns in one 
minute. (RTR operates the largest dry-cleaning operation in the 
United States.) 
•  Seamstresses repair tears, reattach beads, and replace sequins to 
get gowns ready for wear. 
•  Orders are assembled and checked for accuracy. The system fore­
casts dress demand to choose the most cost-eff ective shipping 
method for customer returns (ground or overnight air). 
•  Dresses are double-bagged and mailed to the next customer. To 
ensure a good fit, customers receive the same dress in two sizes 
at no extra cost. 
With every dress it rents, RTR’s analytics algorithms learn more about 
effective strategies to track the location of each item, forecast demand, 
select shipping methods, set prices, and control inventory. RTR’s algo­
rithms also examine customer reviews to learn which dresses women 
are renting for certain occasions. They then forecast demand to deter­
mine whether the prepaid shipping label that goes with a dress should 
require the customer to return the dress overnight or whether a three-
day return, which costs less, is suff icient. 
RTR operates five physical retail locations in the United 
States—New York City (Flatiron and Soho), Chicago, Las Vegas, and 
Introduction  
Washington, DC. The company plans to add another 10 locations 
over the next few years. Prices in the retail stores are identical to 
online prices. RTR is opening these stores to help alleviate the fears 
that women have when trying new brands. In addition, in-store cus­
tomers are likely to explore more styles than they might discover 
online. 
In 2014 the total value of RTR dress and accessory rentals 
exceeded $800 million, and the company earned $50 million in rev­
enue. Revenue is expected to increase to $80 million in 2015. The 
number of customers, amount of repeat business, and rental volume 
doubled in 2014 and are projected to double again in 2015. By mid­
2015, RTR had raised $116 million in venture capital funding. 
RTR predicts that in 5 to 10 years women’s closets will look very 
different. There will be one portion filled with clothes that she owns 
and another portion that will be in constant rotation, filled with rented 
items. Also, RTR predicts that women might go on vacation without 
taking a suitcase. Instead, they will arrive at their hotel rooms with 
only one small bag, and they will find their closets already filled with 
rented clothing from RTR. 
Further, the founders envision RTR as a marketplace for retailers 
and brands to rent unsold inventory instead of shipping it to discount 
retailers. Their overall strategy is to build the Amazon of retail. 
Sources: Compiled from P. Vasan, “Rent the Runway’s Designer Closet 
Tops $800 Million,” CNBC, July 25, 2015; D. Silver, “A High-End Version of 
Rent the Runway Is Headed to the Hamptons This Summer,” Observer, 
June 4, 2015; E. Nagy, “Rent the Runway’s Formula for Finding and 
Fostering Women Leaders,” Fast Company, May 13, 2015; L. King, “Be 
Authentic: Rent the Runway’s CEO on How to Win,” Forbes, March 28, 
2015; J. D’Onfro, “Why the CEO of a $400 Million E-Commerce Company 
Wants UPS and FedEx ‘Out of Business,’” Business Insider, March 18, 
2015; J. D’Onfro, “This Startup Founder Wants You to Be Able to Go on a 
Vacation Without Packing a Suitcase,” Business Insider, March 14, 2015; 
R. King, “Q&A: How Rent the Runway Dazzles Shoppers with Data,” 
ZDNet, February 20, 2015; A. Agarwal, “The Key to Successful Commerce 
Businesses Is Supply Chain,” TechCrunch, December 24, 2014; S. Bertoni, 
“The Billion-Dollar Dress,” Forbes, September 8, 2014; A. Samuel, 
“Established Companies, Get Ready for the Collaborative Economy,” 
Harvard Business Review, March 4, 2014; www.renttherunway.com, ac­
cessed August 24, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Describe the descriptive analytics applications of Rent the Run­
way’s business model. 
2.  Describe the predictive analytics applications of Rent the Runway’s 
business model. 
3.  Describe a possible prescriptive analytics application for Rent the 
Runway. 
4.  What companies and industries are in danger of being disrupted by 
Rent the Runway? (Hint: Will Rent the Runway change the way that 
women buy clothes?) 
The chapter opening case illustrates the importance and far-reaching nature of business ana­
lytics applications. Business analytics (BA) is the process of developing actionable decisions 
or recommendations for actions based on insights generated from historical data. Business 
analytics examines data with a variety of tools and techniques, formulates descriptive, pre­
dictive, and prescriptive models, and communicates these results to organizational decision 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Managers and Decision Making 129 
makers. Business analytics can answer questions such as: What happened, how many, how 
 often, where the problem is, what actions are needed, why is this happening, what will happen 
if these trends continue, what will happen next, what is the best (or worst) that can happen, and 
what actions should the organization take to achieve various successful business outcomes? 
There is a great deal of confusion between the terms business analytics and business 
 intelligence. Business intelligence (BI) has been defined as a broad category of applica­
tions, technologies, and processes for gathering, storing, accessing, and analyzing data to 
help business users make better decisions. Many experts argue that the terms should be used 
interchangeably. We agree. However, for simplicity we use the term business analytics (BA) 
throughout this chapter. 
This chapter describes information systems (ISs) that support decision making. Essentially 
all organizational information systems support decision making (refer to Figure 1.4 and Chap­
ter 11). Fundamental organizational ISs such as transaction processing systems, functional area 
information systems, and enterprise resource planning systems provide a variety of reports 
that help decision makers. This chapter focuses on business analytics systems, which provide 
critically important support to the vast majority of organizational decision makers. 
The chapter begins by reviewing the manager’s job and the nature of modern managerial 
decisions. This discussion will help you to understand why managers need computerized sup­
port. The chapter then introduces the business analytics process and addresses each step in 
that process in turn. 
It is impossible to overstate the importance of business analytics within modern organi­
zations. Recall from Chapter 1 that the essential goal of information systems is to provide the 
right information to the right person, in the right amount, at the right time, in the right for­
mat. In essence, BA achieves this goal. Business analytics systems provide actionable business 
results that decision makers can act on in a timely fashion. 
It is also impossible to overstate the importance of your input into the BA process within 
an organization, for several reasons. First, you (the user community) will decide what data 
should be stored in your organization’s data warehouse. You will then work closely with the 
MIS department to obtain these data. 
Further, you will use your organization’s BA applications, probably from your first day on 
the job. With some BA tools such as data mining and decision support systems, you will decide 
how you want to analyze the data (user-driven analysis). With BA presentation applications 
such as dashboards, you will decide which data you need and in which format. Again, you will 
work closely with your MIS department to ensure that these applications meet your needs. 
In addition, a significant change is taking place within the BA environment. In the past, 
organizations used BA only to support management. Today, however, BA applications are 
increasingly available to front-line personnel (e.g., call center operators), suppliers, custom­
ers, and even regulators. These groups rely on BA to provide them with the most current 
information. 
Much of this chapter is concerned with large-scale BA applications. You should keep in 
mind, however, that smaller organizations, and even individual users, can implement small-
scale BA applications as well. 
After you finish this chapter, you will have a basic understanding of decision making, the 
BA process, and the incredibly broad range of BA applications employed in modern organi­
zations. This knowledge will enable you to immediately and confidently provide input into 
your organization’s BA processes and applications. Further, this chapter will help you use your 
organization’s BA applications to effectively analyze data and thus make better decisions. We 
hope that this chapter will help you to “ask the next question.” Enjoy! 
5.1 
Managers and Decision Making  
Management is a process by which an organization achieves its goals through the use of 
resources (people, money, materials, and information). These resources are considered to 
be inputs. Achieving the organization’s goals is the output of the process. Managers oversee 

 
 
 
 
  
 
130 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
this process in an attempt to optimize it. A manager’s success often is measured by the ratio 
between the inputs and outputs for which he or she is responsible. This ratio is an indication of 
the organization’s productivity. 
The Manager’s Job and Decision Making 
To appreciate how information systems support managers, you first must understand the man­
ager’s job. Managers do many things, depending on their position in the organization, the type 
and size of the organization, the organization’s policies and culture, and the personalities of 
the managers themselves. Despite these variations,  however, all managers perform three basic 
roles (Mintzberg, 1973):1 
1. Interpersonal roles: Figurehead, leader, liaison 
2. Informational roles: Monitor, disseminator, spokesperson, analyzer 
3. Decisional roles: Entrepreneur, disturbance handler, resource  allocator, negotiator 
Early information systems primarily supported the informational roles. In recent years, 
however, information systems have been developed that support all three roles. In this chapter, 
you will focus on the support that IT can provide for decisional roles. 
A decision refers to a choice among two or more alternatives that individuals and groups 
make. Decisions are diverse and are made continuously. Decision making is a systematic pro­
cess. Economist Herbert Simon (1977)2 described decision making as composed of three major 
phases: intelligence, design, and choice. Once the choice is made, the decision is implemented. 
Figure 5.1 illustrates this process, highlighting the tasks that are in each phase. Note that there 
A flowchart  depicting the p
rocess and phases in decision making. On the right-hand side three rectangles placed vertically denoting intelligence phase, design phase, and choice phase (top to bottom) are connected by downward arrows. On the left of intelligence phase is a cloud denoting reality and an arrow denoting examination points from reality to intelligence phase. Arrows from design and choice phase point at the reality. After the choice phase the solution is implemented and if it worked as proposed then it is a success else a failure and information returns to previous phase (dotted arrow).
1 Mintzberg, H. (1973) The Nature of Managerial Work, Harper & Row, New York.  
2 Simon, H.A. (1977) The New Science of Management Decision, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Managers and Decision Making 131 
is a continuous flow of information from intelligence, to design, to choice (bold lines). At any 
phase, however, there may be a return to a previous phase (broken lines). 
This model of decision making is quite general. Undoubtedly, you have made decisions 
where you did not construct a model of the situation, validate your model with test data, or 
conduct a sensitivity analysis. The model we present here is intended to encompass all of 
the conditions that might occur when making a decision. For some decisions, some steps or 
phrases may be minimal, implicit (understood), or completely absent. 
The decision-making process starts with the intelligence phase, in which managers exam­
ine a situation and then identify and define the problem or opportunity. In the design phase, 
decision makers construct a model for addressing the situation. They perform this task by mak­
ing assumptions that simplify reality and by expressing the relationships among all of the rel­
evant variables. Managers then validate the model by using test data. Finally, decision makers 
set criteria for evaluating all of the potential solutions that are proposed. The choice phase 
involves selecting a solution or course of action that seems best suited to resolve the problem. 
This solution (the decision) is then implemented. Implementation is successful if the proposed 
solution solves the problem or seizes the opportunity. If the solution fails, then the process 
returns to the previous phases. Computer-based decision support assists managers in the deci­
sion-making process. 
Why Managers Need IT Support 
Making good decisions is very difficult without solid information. Information is vital for each 
phase and activity in the decision-making process. Even when information is available, how­
ever, decision making is difficult due to the following trends: 
• The  number of alternatives is constantly increasing, due to innovations in technology, 
improved communications, the development of global markets, and the use of the Inter­
net and e-business. A key to good decision making is to explore and compare many rel­
evant alternatives. The greater the number of alternatives, the more a decision maker 
needs computer- assisted searches and comparisons. 
• Most decisions must be made under time pressure. It often is not possible to manually pro­
cess information fast enough to be eff ective. 
• Due to increased uncertainty in the decision environment, decisions are becoming more 
complex. It is usually necessary to conduct a sophisticated analysis in order to make a good 
decision. 
• It often is necessary to rapidly access remote information, consult with experts, or conduct 
a group decision-making session, all without incurring major expenses. Decision makers, 
as well as the information they need to access, can be situated in different locations. Bring­
ing everything together quickly and inexpensively represents a serious challenge. 
These trends create major difficulties for decision makers. Fortunately, as you will see 
throughout this chapter, computerized decision support can be of enormous help. 
Next you will learn about two aspects of decision making that place our discussion of BA in 
context—problem structure and the nature of the decisions. 
A Framework for Computerized Decision Analysis 
To better understand business analytics, note that various types of decisions can be placed 
along two major dimensions: problem structure and the nature of the decision (Gorry and Scott
 Morton, 1971).3 Figure 5.2 provides an overview of decision making along these two  dimensions. 
Problem Structure. The first dimension is problem structure, where decision-making pro­
cesses fall along a continuum ranging from highly structured to highly unstructured (see the 
3 Gorry, G.A. and Scott Morton, M. (1971) “A Framework for Management Information Systems,” Sloan 
Management Review, Fall, 21–36. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
132 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
Figure dep i cting decision su
pport framework represented in a tabular form consisting of three rows and three columns. From top to bottom the rows denote structured, semistructured, and unstructured and from left to right the columns denote operational control, management control, and strategic planning. 
left  column in Figure 5.2). Structured decisions deal with routine and repetitive problems for 
which standard solutions exist, such as inventory control. In a structured decision, the first 
three phases of the decision process—intelligence, design, and choice—are laid out in a par­
ticular sequence, and the procedures for obtaining the best (or at least a good enough) solution 
are known. These types of decisions are candidates for decision automation. 
At the other extreme of complexity are unstructured decisions. These decisions are 
intended to deal with “fuzzy,” complex problems for which there are no cut-and-dried solu­
tions. An unstructured decision is one in which there is no standardized procedure for carrying 
out any of the three phases. In making such a decision, human intuition and judgment oft en 
play an important role. Typical unstructured decisions include planning new service off erings, 
hiring an executive, and choosing a set of research and development (R&D) projects for the 
coming year. Although BA cannot make unstructured decisions, it can provide information that 
assists decision makers. 
Located between structured and unstructured decisions are semistructured decisions, 
in which only some of the decision-process phases are structured. Semistructured decisions 
require a combination of standard solution procedures and individual judgment. Examples of 
semistructured decisions are evaluating employees, setting marketing budgets for consumer 
products, performing capital acquisition analysis, and trading bonds. 
The Nature of Decisions. The second dimension of decision support deals with the nature 
of decisions. All managerial decisions fall into one of three broad categories: 
1.  Operational control: Executing specific tasks efficiently and eff ectively 
2.  Management control: Acquiring and using resources efficiently in accomplishing organiza­
tional goals 
3.  Strategic planning: The long-range goals and policies for growth and resource allocation 
These categories are displayed along the top row of Figure 5.2. 
The Decision Matrix. The three primary classes of problem structure and the three broad cat­
egories of the nature of decisions can be combined in a decision-support matrix that consists of 
nine cells, as diagrammed in Figure 5.2. Lower-level managers usually perform the tasks in cells 1, 
2, and 4. The tasks in cells 3, 5, and 7 are usually the responsibility of middle managers and pro­
fessional staff. Finally, the tasks in cells 6, 8, and 9 are generally carried out by senior executives. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Business Analytics Process 133 
Today, it is difficult to state that certain organizational information systems support cer­
tain cells in the decision matrix. The fact is that the increasing sophistication of information 
systems means that essentially any information system can be useful to any decision maker, 
regardless of his or her level in the organization or function in the organization. As you study 
this chapter, you will see that business analytics is applicable across all cells of the decision 
matrix. 
Before you go on…
 1. Describe the decision-making process proposed by Simon.
 2. You are registering for classes next semester. Apply the decision-making process to your decision 
about how many and which courses to take. Is your decision structured, semistructured, or unstruc­
tured? Support your answer.
 3. Consider your decision-making process when registering for classes next semester. Explain how in­
formation technology supports (or does not support) each phase of this process. 
Apply the Concept 5.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5.1 Use a decision 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you do.) 
support framework to demonstrate how technology supports 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
managerial decision making at each phase of the decision-
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 5.1. The link 
making process. 
will take you to a YouTube video titled “Data-Driven Decision 
Making” by user “minnetonka schools.” This video mentions a 
strategic plan, operational control, and decisional control. As you 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
view the video, make certain to watch for these key points, and 
If you look back through this section, you will see that Henry 
pay special attention to how they are supported by data. 
Mintzberg’s 1973 book, The Nature of Managerial Work, was 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.) 
referenced when the three basic roles of a manager were 
presented. This text focuses on the decisional role because 
Write a short paper (a couple of paragraphs is plenty) for your 
that is the one that is most supported by information systems. 
professor that will identify the phases in the decision-making 
However, Mintzberg’s work goes well beyond the decisional 
process for Minnetonka Schools.  Be sure to demonstrate how 
role. 
technology supports their decision making in each phase. 
5.2 
The Business Analytics Process 
As previously defined, business analytics is the process of developing actionable decisions 
or recommendations for actions based upon insights generated from historical data. Busi­
ness analytics encompasses not only applications, but also technologies and processes. It 
includes both “getting data in” (to a data mart or warehouse) and “getting data out” (through 
BA applications). 
Figure 5.3 illustrates the BA process in an organization. As you see in the figure, the BA 
process requires multiple steps, technologies, tools, and models. Let’s look at each step of Fig­
ure 5.3 in turn, from left to right. 
The entire BA process begins with a business problem, known as pain points to practicing 
managers. When organizations face business problems, they often turn to business analytics. 
Before we begin our discussion of the BA process, let’s emphasize the importance of the 
technologies that enable the entire process (see Figure 5.3). These technologies, all of which 
are improving exponentially, include microprocessors, storage, and networks. 
Microprocessors (or chips) are becoming increasingly powerful (see Plug IT In 2). For exam­
ple, specialized graphics processing units (GPUs) are essential to neural networks, an analytics 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
134 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
FIGURE 5.3 The Business Analytics Process 
tool that we discuss in Plug IT In 5. Digital storage capacity and access speed are both increas­
ing exponentially. These advances are driving the cost of storage down exponentially as well. 
Transmission speed (bandwidth; see Chapter 4) in computer networks, particularly the Inter­
net, is also increasing exponentially. As a result, decision makers are able to collaborate on 
difficult, time-sensitive decisions regardless of their locations. 
To actually begin the BA process, an organization must have data (and lots of it!). As you 
saw from our discussion of enabling technologies, organizations are now able to analyze rap­
idly increasing amounts of data. As you learned in Chapter 3, these data originate from internal 
sources (e.g., structured data in relational databases) and external sources (e.g., unstructured 
data from social media). Organizations are now able to combine and analyze structured and 
unstructured data from many sources in the form of Big Data. At this point, organizations 
integrate and “clean” these data into data marts and data warehouses (see Chapter 3) through 
a process called extract, transform, and load (ETL). The data in the data warehouse are now 
available to be analyzed by a variety of analytics tools and techniques. 
There are numerous analytics tools and techniques available to decision makers. These 
tools include Excel, decision-support systems, online analytical processing (OLAP), data 
mining, machine learning, deep learning, and neural networks. We discuss the first four in 
Section 5.3, and the last three in Plug IT In 5. Note that there are many statistical modeling 
tools available in analytics software packages. These tools are beyond the scope of this 
chapter. 
Organizations can apply analytics tools and techniques to data in the form of three possi­
ble analytics models: descriptive analytics, predictive analytics, and prescriptive analytics. We 
discuss these three models in Section 5.4. 
All three models will produce results, which must be communicated to decision makers 
in the organization. In general, data scientists will use various analytics tools and techniques 
to examine analytics models. Many organizations have employees who “translate” the results 
of the analytics models into business terms for the decision makers. These translators oft en 
use presentation tools in the form of dashboards to get the message across visually (see 
Section 5.4). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Business Analytics Process 135 
What is interesting about the analytics process is that once the results are obtained and 
presented, decision makers must be ready to “ask the next question.” Everyone involved in the 
BA process must use their creativity and intuition at this point. In addition, the results of the BA 
process almost always will lead to new, unanswered questions. To address these questions, the 
BA process starts over at the data management stage. 
The Scope of Business Analytics 
The use of BA in organizations varies considerably. In smaller organizations, BA may be limited 
to Excel spreadsheets. In larger ones, BA often is enterprisewide, and it includes applications 
such as data mining/predictive analytics, dashboards, and data visualization. It is important 
to recognize that the importance of BA to organizations continues to grow. In fact, it is not 
an exaggeration to assert that for many firms, BA is now a requirement for competing in the 
marketplace. 
Not all organizations use BA in the same way. For example, some organizations employ 
only one or a few applications, whereas others utilize enterprisewide BA. In general, there are 
three specific analytics targets that represent different levels of change. These targets diff er 
in terms of their focus; scope; level of sponsorship, commitment, and required resources; 
technical architecture; impact on personnel and business processes; and benefits. 
The Development of One or a Few Related Analytics Applications. This target is 
often a point solution for a departmental need, such as campaign management in marketing. 
Sponsorship, approval, funding, impacts, and benefits typically occur at the departmental lev­
el. For this target, organizations usually create a data mart to store the necessary data. Organi­
zations must be careful that the data mart—an “independent” application—does not become a 
“data silo” that stores data that are inconsistent with, and cannot be integrated with, data used 
elsewhere in the organization. 
The Development of Infrastructure to Support Enterprisewide Analytics. This 
target supports both current and future analytics needs. A crucial component of analytics at 
this level is an enterprise data warehouse. Because it is an enterprisewide initiative, senior 
management often provides sponsorship, approval, and funding. In addition, the impacts and 
benefits are felt throughout the organization. 
An example of this target is the 3M Corporation. Traditionally, 3M’s various divisions had 
operated independently, using separate decision-support platforms. Not only was this arrange­
ment costly, but it prevented 3M from integrating the data and presenting a “single face” to 
its customers. For example, sales representatives did not know whether or how business 
customers were interacting with other 3M divisions. The solution was to develop an enterprise 
data warehouse that enabled 3M to operate as an integrated company. As an added benefit, 
the costs of implementing this system were offset by savings resulting from the consolidation 
of the various platforms. 
Support for Organizational Transformation. With this target, a company uses busi­
ness analytics to fundamentally transform the ways it competes in the marketplace. Business 
analytics supports a new business model, and it enables the business strategy. Because of the 
scope and importance of these changes, critical elements such as sponsorship, approval, and 
funding originate at the highest organizational levels. The impact on personnel and processes 
can be significant, and the benefits accrue across the organization. 
Harrah’s Entertainment (a brand of Caesars Entertainment; www.caesars.com) provides a 
good example of this analytics target. Harrah’s developed a customer loyalty program known 
as Total Rewards. To implement the program, Harrah’s created a data warehouse that inte­
grated data from casino, hotel, and special event systems (e.g., wine-tasting weekends) across 
all the various customer touchpoints (e.g., slot machines, table games, and Internet). Harrah’s 
utilized these data to reward loyal customers and to reach out to them in personal and appeal­
ing ways, such as through promotional offers. These efforts helped the company to become a 
leader in the gaming industry. 
MKT 
MKT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
136 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
IT’s About Business 5.1 describes business analytics applications at Darden Restaurants, 
Twiddy & Company, and Point Defiance Zoo & Aquarium. As you read about the three compa­
nies, think about the following: 
1.  What is the scope of business analytics in each company? 
2.  After you have studied Section 5.4, what is (are) the business analytics model(s) that each 
company is using? 
IT’s About Business 5.1 
POM Darden Restaurants 
Darden Restaurants (www.darden.com) encompasses 
MKT 
seven brands—Olive Garden, Longhorn Steakhouse, Ba­
hama Breeze, Seasons 52, The Capital Grill, Eddie V’s, and Yard 
House. The company owns and operates more than 1,500 restau­
rants, employs more than 150,000 people, and serves more than 
320 million meals every year. 
The company needed a more effective strategy to gather 
data about what was happening in individual restaurants than 
simply calling restaurant managers on the telephone at the end 
of every day. As a result, Darden implemented a Check-Level Ana­
lytics system to improve decision making. The system collects 
information about patrons from the time they arrive until they 
settle the bill. 
The restaurant chain analyzes these types of data, among others: 
•  How long it takes for a guest to be seated or given a wait time. 
•  The length of the cook time. Darden calculates cook times for 
each menu item so that each restaurant can pace both the meal 
and the food preparation. 
•  The name of the server who served the guest. 
•  What time the customer paid the check. 
•  How much time the guest spent in the restaurant. 
Darden links all of these data to the guest satisfaction survey, 
should the guest complete it. In this way, Darden can get a better 
picture of what its customers experience in all of its restaurants. 
Darden’s goal is to better understand its guests. For example: 
•  When is the best time to offer early-bird specials or happy hour 
to fill more tables? 
•  How effective are any specials? 
•  What is the optimal physical configuration of the restaurant to 
reduce wait times? 
•  Are too many two-place tables sitting empty while parties of 
four wait for tables? 
•  How much is wait time reduced, and how many more tables can 
be turned, by adding servers or kitchen staff during busy times? 
•  What special requests do guests have—for example, a seat by 
the window or a private corner—that the restaurant cannot 
accommodate? 
•  Who are your guests? Is this their first visit? Are they celebrating 
a special occasion? How did they hear about you? 
Darden’s use of analytics has produced results. The restaurant 
company has saved at least $20 million. 
MKT Twiddy & Company 
Travelers to the Outer Banks of North Carolina can search more 
than 1,000 homes to rent on the islands through Twiddy & Com­
pany (www.twiddy.com). Twiddy has two business goals: to ensure 
that travelers enjoy their stay and that homeowners maximize their 
profit. 
Over the years, Twiddy had used spreadsheets to accumu­
late operational data. The company invested $40,000 in BA tools 
from SAS (www.sas.com) to integrate these data into an analyzable 
format. Before implementing SAS analytics, about the only thing 
that Twiddy could tell its homeowners was what dates their homes 
were available to rent. Now, Twiddy can analyze data on market 
and seasonal trends, and property locations and sizes, to suggest 
optimal prices to homeowners for any particular week. 
Twiddy bookings increased and the size of its property inven­
tory rose by more than 10 percent after the company began using 
SAS. While revenues increased, costs decreased by 15 percent, 
thanks to a reduction in invoice processing errors and the automa­
tion of service schedules. The total savings? About $50,000 since 
using the SAS analytics. 
POM Point Defiance Zoo & Aquarium 
For Point Defiance Zoo & Aquarium (www.pdza.org),
MKT 
located in Tacoma, Washington, the biggest business 
problem is the weather. Specifically, unpredictable weather makes 
estimating zoo attendance extremely difficult. Historically, Point 
Defiance used standard weather forecasts to predict attendance, 
with mixed results. 
Attendance is critical to the success of zoos. Therefore, Point 
Defiance partnered with IBM (www.ibm.com) and analytics firm 
BrightStar Partners (www.brightstarpartners.com). The zoo com­
pared its attendance records for the past several years with his­
torical weather data collected by the National Weather Service 
(www.weather.gov). Now, for any given weekend, the zoo can es­
timate attendance with an impressive amount of accuracy. The 
zoo uses these predictions to flexibly schedule its staff ing. How 
effective is this system? For Memorial Day 2014, the projected at­
tendance was within 113 people of the actual attendance—that is 
pretty accurate. 
The analytics software doesn’t just use weather data—it col­
lects information on zoo guests to help target its marketing cam­
paigns. For example, the system analyzed the zip codes of the 
most regular patrons and targeted membership discounts to them, 
which boosted membership by 13 percent in the first three months 
of 2014. Point Defiance sold $60,000 worth of memberships by 
spending just $4,000. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Analytics Tools 137 
Point Defiance also analyzed data about online ticket sales 
and found that many people bought tickets in the evenings and 
mornings when they weren’t at work. As a result, the zoo imple­
mented time-limited deals, which helped boost its online ticket 
sales by 771 percent since 2013. Even in-person ticket sales got a 
boost, setting records during the same time period. 
Sources: Compiled from M. Harper, “The Future of Customer Data for 
Restaurants,” Applied Predictive Technologies, August 5, 2015; R. Delgado, 
“How Restaurants Are Using Big Data,” SmartData Collective, May 6, 
2015; C. Brubaker, “Not Taking Advantage of Restaurant Analytics Is 
Costing You Money,” Swipely, April 20, 2015; “New Benchmarking Reports 
Help Twiddy Boost Email Open Rates by 500%,” Google Analytics Blog, 
September 10, 2014; R. Lahiri and M. DeRosa, “How Data Analytics Can 
Improve Real Property Management,” FCW: The Business of Federal 
Technology, September 2, 2014; J. Martindale, “Animals Inspire Analytics 
Innovation,” All Analytics, August 21, 2014; E. Alton, “What Big Data 
Means for Animal Attractions,” Entertainment Designer, July 18, 2014; 
Before you go on…
 1. Describe the business analytics process.
 2. Describe the three business analytics targets. 
J. O’Brien, “5 Ways Big Data Is Changing Real Estate,” Mashable, July 9, 
2014; K. Kelleher, “Big Data, Small Budget,” Inc., July/August, 2014; M. 
Heller, “How Data Analytics Is Transforming the Real-Estate Industry,” 
CIO, May 28, 2014; D. Carr, “Darden Seeks Integrated View of Customers 
across Brands,” InformationWeek, April 1, 2014; “Restaurant Analytics: 
Uncovering Answers to Grow Your Business,” Teradata, 2013; www. 
darden.com, www.twiddy.com, www.pdza.org, accessed August 28, 2015. 
Questions 
1. What is the scope of business analytics for each company? 
2. Describe how Darden Restaurants might employ predictive 
and prescriptive analytics. 
3. Describe how Twiddy & Company might employ predictive 
and prescriptive analytics. 
4. Describe how Point Defiance might employ prescriptive 
analytics. 
Apply the Concept 5.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5.2 Describe each phase of 
STEP 2: Activity 
the business analytics process. 
There are several companies that provide data management and 
BA tools to help make decisions. Two of these companies are 
Avitas and Intricity. Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/ 
STEP 1: Background 
applytheconcept to watch a short YouTube video about BA by 
In this section you have learned that BA is a concept that 
each of these companies. While you watch, look for examples 
encompasses everything from the collection, analysis, and 
of how their tools support departments, enterprises, and/or 
dissemination of data to the technology tools that enable this 
organizational change. 
process to take place. In particular, organizations use BA to 
support: 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Write a short description of how Avitas and Intricity help users 
• Specific departmental needs, and 
work through the BA process (see Figure 5.3). Try to show how the 
• Organizational change. 
process is supported, but also be aware that there might be gaps. 
Make note of any areas for improvement as well, if you find any. 
5.3 
Business Analytics Tools 
A variety of BA tools for analyzing data are available. They include Excel, multidimensional 
analysis (also called OLAP), data mining, and decision-support systems. There are also numer­
ous statistical tools that business analytics models employ. These tools include linear and mul­
tiple regression, time series models, classification, clustering, and many others. A discussion of 
these diverse models, however, is beyond the scope of our discussion. 
Excel 
The most popular BA tool by far is Excel. For years, BA vendors “fought” against the use of Excel. 
Eventually, however, they decided to “join it” by designing their software so that it interfaces 

 
 
 
 
 
 
138 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
with Excel. How does this process work? Essentially, users download plug-ins that add func­
tionality (e.g., the ability to list the top 10 percent of customers, based on purchases) to Excel. 
This process can be thought of as creating “Excel on steroids.” Excel then connects to the ven­
dor’s application server—which provides additional data analysis capabilities—which in turn 
connects to a backend database, such as a data mart or warehouse. This arrangement gives 
Excel users the functionality and access to data typical of sophisticated BA products, while 
allowing them to work with a familiar tool—Excel. Due to advances in the functionality of Excel, 
the following BA tools can often be accomplished by using this soft ware package. 
Multidimensional Analysis or Online Analytical Processing 
Some BA applications include online analytical processing, also referred to as multidimen­
sional analysis capabilities. OLAP involves “slicing and dicing” data stored in a dimensional 
format, drilling down in the data to greater detail, and aggregating the data. 
Consider our example from Chapter 3. Recall Figure 3.6 illustrating the data cube. The 
product is on the x-axis, geography is on the y-axis, and time is on the z-axis. Now, suppose you 
want to know how many nuts the company sold in the West region in 2013. You would slice and 
dice the cube, using nuts as the specific measure for product, West as the measure for geogra­
phy, and 2013 as the measure for time. The value or values that remain in the cell(s) aft er our 
slicing and dicing is (are) the answer to our question. As an example of drilling down, you also 
might want to know how many nuts were sold in January 2013. Alternatively, you might want 
to know how many nuts were sold during 2013–2015, which is an example of aggregation, also 
called “rollup.” 
Data Mining 
Data mining refers to the process of searching for valuable business information in a large 
database, data warehouse, or data mart. Data mining can perform two basic operations: (1) 
predicting trends and behaviors and (2) identifying previously unknown patterns. Business 
analytics applications typically provide users with a view of what has happened; data mining 
helps to explain why it is happening, and it predicts what will happen in the future. 
Regarding the first operation, data mining automates the process of finding predictive 
information in large databases. Questions that traditionally required extensive hands-on anal­
ysis now can be answered directly and quickly from the data. For example, targeted marketing 
relies on predictive information. Data mining can use data from past promotional mailings to 
identify those prospects who are most likely to respond favorably to future mailings. Another 
business problem that uses predictive information is the forecasting of bankruptcy and other 
forms of default. 
Data mining can also identify previously hidden patterns in a single step. For example, it 
can analyze retail sales data to discover seemingly unrelated products that people oft en pur­
chase together. The classic example is beer and diapers. Data mining found that young men 
tend to buy beer and diapers at the same time when shopping at convenience stores. 
One significant predictive analytics operation is detecting fraudulent credit card transac­
tions. Over time a pattern emerges of the typical ways you use your credit card and your typical 
shopping behaviors—the places in which you use your card, the amounts you spend, and so on. 
If your card is stolen and used fraudulently, then the usage often varies noticeably from your 
established pattern. Data-mining tools can discern this difference and bring the issue to your 
attention. 
Numerous data-mining applications are used in business and in other fields. According to 
a Gartner report (www.gartner.com), most Fortune 1000 companies worldwide currently use 
data mining, as the following representative examples illustrate. Note that in most cases the 
purpose of data mining is to identify a business opportunity in order to create a sustainable 
competitive advantage. 
POM 
• Retailing and sales: Predicting sales, preventing theft and fraud, and determining correct 
inventory levels and distribution schedules among outlets. For example, retailers such 
MKT 
FIN 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Analytics Tools 139 
as AAFES (stores on military bases) use Fraud Watch from SAP (www.sap.com) to combat  
fraud by employees in their 1,400 stores.  
•  Banking: Forecasting levels of bad loans and fraudulent credit card use, predicting credit  
card spending by new customers, and determining which kinds of customers will best  
respond to (and qualify for) new loan off ers.  
•  Manufacturing and production: Predicting machinery failures and finding key factors that  
help optimize manufacturing capacity.  
•  Insurance: Forecasting claim amounts and medical coverage costs, classifying the most  
important elements that affect medical coverage, and predicting which customers will buy  
new insurance policies. (See IT’s About Business 5.2.)  
•  Policework: Tracking crime patterns, locations, and criminal behavior; identifying attrib­
utes to assist in solving criminal cases. Consider PredPol (www.predpol.com), the pre­
dictive policing company. After deploying PredPol, the Los Angeles Police Department’s  
Foothill Division noted a 20 percent decrease in crimes year over year from January 2013  
to January 2014.  
FIN 
POM 
POM 
POM 
•  Healthcare: Correlating demographics of patients with critical illnesses and developing  
better insights on how to identify and treat symptoms and their causes. In March 2013,  
Microsoft and Stanford University announced that they had mined the search data of mil­
lions of users to successfully identify unreported side effects of certain medications.  
•  Marketing: Classifying customer demographics that can be used to predict which custom­
ers will respond to a mailing or buy a particular product.  
•  Politics: In his FiveThirtyEight blog, Nate Silver famously analyzed polling and economic  
data to predict the results of the 2008 presidential election, calling 49 out of 50 states cor­
rectly. He then correctly predicted all 50 states in the 2012 presidential election.  
•  Weather: The National Weather Service is predicting weather with increasing accuracy and  
precision.  
•  Higher education: Desire2Learn (www.desire2learn.com) provides an application called  
Degree Compass that recommends courses based on students’ majors, transcripts, and  
past course success rates. In March 2013, Degree Compass reported a 92 percent accu­
racy rate across four universities in predicting the grade that a student would receive in  
a course.  
•  Social good: As you read about in IT’s About Business 5.4, Simpa Networks sells solar­
as-a-service to poor households and small businesses. Simpa partnered with DataKind  
(www.datakind.org) whose data scientists analyzed Simpa’s historical customer data to  
help Simpa assess potential customers.  
Decision Support Systems 
Decision support systems (DSSs) combine models and data to analyze semistructured prob­
lems and some unstructured problems that involve extensive user involvement. Models are 
simplified representations, or abstractions, of reality. Decision support systems enable busi­
ness managers and analysts to access data interactively, to manipulate these data, and to 
conduct appropriate analyses. 
Decision support systems can enhance learning and contribute to all levels of decision 
making. DSSs also employ mathematical models. Finally, they have the related capabilities 
of sensitivity analysis, what–if analysis, and goal-seeking analysis, which you will learn about 
next. You should keep in mind that these three types of analysis are useful for any type of 
decision-support application. Excel, for example, supports all three. 
To learn about DSS and the three types of analysis, let’s look at an example. Blue Nile 
(www.bluenile.com) is an online retailer of certified diamonds. The firm’s website has a built-in 
decision support system to help customers find the diamond that best meets their needs. Blue 
Nile’s DSS provides an excellent example of sensitivity analysis, what-if analysis, and goal- 
seeking analysis. 
MKT 
MKT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
140 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
Access the Blue Nile website and click on “Diamonds” in the upper left corner. On the drop-
down box, you will see “Search for diamonds.” There are many types of diamonds, but for this 
example click on “Round.” You will see: 
• The number of round diamonds available for sale, again in the upper left corner. When we 
accessed the Blue Nile DSS, the firm offered 112,333 round diamonds for sale. 
• Five slide bars labeled: Price, Carat, Cut, Color, and Clarity. Each slide bar represents a 
variable in Blue Nile’s DSS. 
• A list of each diamond accompanied by a value for each of the five variables. This list con­
stitutes the data (all round diamonds available for sale) for your analyses. 
Keep in mind that when you experiment with the Blue Nile DSS, the number of round diamonds 
available will vary from what we obtained when we accessed the DSS and performed the anal­
yses. The reason is that the Blue Nile website is updated in near real-time as the company sells 
its diamonds. 
Sensitivity Analysis. Sensitivity analysis examines how sensitive an output is to any 
change in an input while keeping other inputs constant. Sensitivity analysis is valuable because 
it enables the system to adapt to changing conditions and to the varying requirements of diff er­
ent decision-making situations. 
Let’s perform two sensitivity analyses on the data: 
• First, adjust the slide bars for the Carat variable, so that you will see only those round dia­
monds between 1.00 and 1.50 carats. Keep all the other slide bars in their fully open posi­
tion. In that way, you keep the other variables constant. Note that the number of round 
diamonds available decreases dramatically. When we followed this procedure, the num­
ber of round diamonds available for sale dropped to 14,009. 
• Second, adjust the slide bars for the Color variable, so that you will only see those round 
diamonds of D, E, and F color. Be sure to open the slide bars for Carat and keep the other 
slide bars in their fully open position. When we followed this procedure, the number of 
round diamonds available for sale dropped to 58,993. 
Comparing the results of these two sensitivity analyses, we can say that the number of round 
diamonds for sale is more sensitive to changes in Carat than to changes in Color, with the other 
variables constant. 
What–If Analysis. A model builder must make predictions and assumptions regarding the 
input data, many of which are based on the assessment of uncertain futures. The results de­
pend on the accuracy of these assumptions, which can be highly subjective. What–if analysis 
attempts to predict the impact of changes in the assumptions (input data) on the proposed 
solution. 
Let’s perform a what-if analysis on the data. A young man’s fiancée has decided that she 
would like her engagement ring to be between one and two carats, at least a Very Good cut, 
an F color or better, and a clarity of at least VVS2 (VVS2 means “two very, very small imperfec­
tions”). Adjust the slide bars for all four of the variables at once. When we followed this proce­
dure, the number of round diamonds available for sale dropped to 3,830. 
Goal-Seeking Analysis. Goal-seeking analysis represents a “backward” solution approach. 
Goal seeking attempts to calculate the value of the inputs necessary to achieve a desired level 
of output. 
Let’s perform a goal-seeking analysis on the data. When the young man in our example 
looked at the list of 3,830 diamonds (using the scroll bar on the right side of the list), he noticed 
that the prices ranged from $6,356 to $10,117. He told his fiancée that he had only $5,000 to 
invest in a diamond. Consequently, they opened up the slide bars for the Carat, Cut, Color, and 
Clarity variables and adjusted the slide bar for the Price variable to be between $4,500 and 
$5,000. When we followed this procedure, the number of round diamonds available for sale 
dropped to 3,874. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Analytics Models: Descriptive Analytics, Predictive Analytics, and Prescriptive Analytics 141 
The couple now had the problem of examining the list of diamonds to decide which combina­
tion of the four variables would be suitable. They did this be performing several what-if analyses: 
• She decided that she really wanted a diamond between one and two carats. Aft er adjust­
ing the Carat slide bar, the number of round diamonds available dropped to 2,035. 
• She then decided that she wanted a D, E, or F color. After adjusting the Color slide bar, the 
number of round diamonds available dropped to 424. 
• Next, she chose a Cut that was at least Very Good. Aft er adjusting the Cut slide bar, the 
number of round diamonds available dropped to 266. 
• The couple noticed that all 266 diamonds had a Clarity variable of either SI1 (one small 
imperfection) or SI2 (two small imperfections). Either they could decide that this level of 
clarity is acceptable, or go back and perform additional what-if analyses on other variables. 
Before you go on…
 1. Describe multidimensional analysis.
 2. What are the two basic operations of data mining?
 3. What is the purpose of decision support systems? 
Apply the Concept 5.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5.3 Describe each of the 
recruitment, administration, and much more. Each of these 
various analytics tools and examples of their uses. 
departments has its special purpose, but overall the enterprise 
exists to support student learning. 
STEP 1: Background 
Visit your university’s website, and look for these various 
This section has explained that data are more abundant today 
functions. What can you learn about their purpose? Based 
than ever before. One thing we are learning is that there is 
on this knowledge, what can you imply about the types of BA 
much we can know that we do not know. In fact, there are many 
applications they might use? 
questions we are not even aware we should be asking! For such 
questions, we use multidimensional analysis and data-mining 
tools to extract valuable insights from the data. When we know 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
the questions, we frequently employ decision support systems to 
Within the context of Higher Education, describe the various 
run sensitivity, what-if, or goal-seeking analysis. 
tools and provide an example of how each could be used 
to support your campus. Submit your response to your 
STEP 2: Activity 
instructor. 
Consider your university. Various departments focus on 
teaching, student academic support, financial aid, admissions, 
5.4 
Business Analytics Models: Descriptive 
Analytics, Predictive Analytics, and 
Prescriptive Analytics 
Organizations must analyze huge amounts of raw data in order to make sense out of them. This 
overall process is known as data reduction. Data reduction is the conversion of raw data into a 
smaller amount of more useful information. Descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics 
are essentially steps in data reduction. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
MKT 
Descriptive Analytics 
Descriptive analytics are the first step in data reduction. Industry analysts estimate that the 
majority of business analytics are descriptive. Descriptive analytics summarize what has hap­
pened in the past and allow decision makers to learn from past behaviors. Common examples 
of descriptive analytics are reports that provide historical insights regarding an organization’s 
production, financials, operations, sales, finance, inventory, and customers. 
For example, Fandango (www.fandango.com), the leading online ticket seller for movie 
theaters, wants to analyze the movie preferences of its customers during the past year. 
The firm sells millions of tickets to approximately 20,000 movie theaters across the United 
States. Fandango captures data about customers, movie theaters, ticket sales, and show 
times. Using a sample of movie titles, Fandango analysts can investigate the correlations 
among total sales for different movies. Using a sample of moviegoers, they can calculate 
the average ticket sales for a week, the most popular movie, the distribution of custom­
ers among the movie genres, the busiest hours of the day in the movie theater, and many 
other analyses. These descriptive analyses help Fandango set ticket prices, offer discounts 
for certain movies or show times, and assign show times of the same movie in different 
theaters. 
For other examples of descriptive analytics, see this chapter’s opening case, closing 
case 1, closing case 2, and all IT’s About Business. IT’s About Business 5.2 shows how Esur­
ance successfully employs descriptive analytics to provide personalized quotes to prospective 
customers. 
IT’s About Business 5.2 
Esurance Uses Analytics to Provide 
Personalized Quotes 
MKT 
Esurance (www.esurance.com) sells automobile insur­
ance directly to consumers online and over the tele­
phone. The firm offers services to almost 90 percent of the U.S. 
population in 40 states. The insurer also functions as a shopping 
and comparison site for customers in the 10 remaining states. Esur­
ance is a wholly owned subsidiary of Allstate (www.allstate.com). 
For most customers, choosing the right insurance is compli­
cated. Esurance wanted to make it easier for its Web customers to 
make choices quickly and knowledgeably. Specifically, Esurance 
wanted to make the online purchasing process equivalent to a 
face-to-face meeting with an insurance agent. As a result, the com­
pany developed an analytics software package called the Coverage 
Rules Engine (CRE). 
The CRE integrates and analyzes data from two sources. First, 
Esurance staff members formulate business rules by analyzing que­
ries against the historical information in the firm’s database and by 
talking with Esurance’s agents, who assist customers online, over 
the phone, and in person. The insurer spent about 18 months add­
ing business rules to the CRE. Second, the CRE relies on the answers 
from a questionnaire filled out by customers. These answers pro­
duce about 55 variables that the CRE can utilize to modify the initial 
package presentation. By analyzing the two types of data, the CRE 
can provide almost unlimited customization—up to 8 billion pos­
sible packages of coverage. 
Consider this example of how Esurance uses its CRE. A com­
mon business practice is “upselling”—promoting additional 
products or services to customers after they’ve made their initial 
purchase. Esurance noted that in the insurance business, agents 
dealing with customers in person would often suggest they add 
towing and roadside emergency insurance, which was a popu­
lar add-on. But Esurance customers on the Web would rarely add 
towing to their packages. Consequently, Esurance conducted an 
experiment. The company added a button on its site that asked 
customers before completing their transaction if they wanted to 
add towing to their policies. If not, they just completed their pur­
chase. With this new feature, many customers did select the towing 
option, just like with in-person sales. 
Thanks to CRE, shopping for insurance online is becoming 
more and more like the experience with an agent face-to-face. 
Descriptive analytics help Esurance to instantly customize and 
present the packages and options that are most likely to succeed 
with the customer. The company continuously monitors how 
well the CRE is doing by comparing the numbers of customers 
who buy a policy with those who leave the site without making 
a purchase. 
Esurance also wants to make sure customers don’t buy too 
little or too much insurance. It’s convinced that the CRE comes up 
with the right combination for each customer. Not only does Esur­
ance feel that its quotes and packages are optimal, but that they 
are provided in half the time (15 minutes) that another online car 
insurer (GEICO) advertises. 
Although the CRE platform cost $1 million to develop and im­
plement, the company has saved between $500,000 and $1 million 
annually in further IT costs, including any subscriptions to analytics 
soft ware-as-a-service (SaaS). 
Sources: Compiled from C. Babcock, “Esurance Puts Analytics  
Closer to the Customer,” InformationWeek, April 28, 2015; D. Jergler,  
“Google Compare May Go Beyond Auto Insurance,” Insurance Journal,  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Analytics Models: Descriptive Analytics, Predictive Analytics, and Prescriptive Analytics 143 
March 11, 2015; G. Bartholomew, “Demystifying the Rate Madness 
Questions  
in Insurance Advertising,” EagleEye Analytics, October 17, 2014;  
1. Describe how Esurance’s CRE analytics package contributes 
S. Overby, “Progressive Insurance Uses Data Analytics to Fine-Tune 
to the customer’s experience. 
Ad Strategy,” CIO, September 28, 2014; R. Clarke and A. Libarikian,  
“Unleashing the Value of Advance Analytics in Insurance,” McKinsey, 
2. Provide an example of a predictive analytics application that  
August, 2014; D. Wing, “Evolution of Homeowners Data and Analytics,”  
Esurance could implement. 
Verisk Analytics, Quarter 2, 2014; C. Boulton, “Auto Insurers Bank on 
3. Provide an example of a prescriptive analytics application 
Big Data to Drive New Business,” The Wall Street Journal, February 20, 
2013; www.esurance.com, accessed August 28, 2015. 
that Esurance could implement. 
The emergence of technology for capturing, storing, and using real-time data (e.g., the 
Internet of Things, see Chapter 10) has enabled real-time BA users to employ analytics models 
to analyze data in real time. In addition, it helps organizations to make decisions and to interact 
with customers in new ways. Real-time BA is closely related to descriptive analytics because the 
focus of decisions is real time, rather than at some point in the future. IT’s About  Business 5.3 
illustrates how TaKaDu uses sensor data as inputs into real-time analytics software to monitor 
the pipes of water utilities. 
IT’s About Business 5.3 
TaKaDu’s Dashboard Helps to Conserve Water 
Israel is a desert nation that has been dealing with a 
POM drought caused by record-low rainfall since 2008. There­
fore, freshwater sources in Israel and the surrounding region are 
precious. Israelis use water from three sources: recycled wastewa­
ter (about 85 percent); a reservoir, filled by pipelines from the Sea 
of Galilee 90 miles to the north (some 10 percent); and desalination 
(approximately 5 percent). 
Regardless of the source of water, the pipes carrying this pre­
cious resource are all-important. About one third of water distributed 
by utilities around the world is lost to leaks. Consequently, the ability 
to detect leaks instantly is the most valuable conservation technology. 
In 2008, startup TaKaDu (www.takadu.com) designed cloud-
based analytics software that utilizes raw data from smart sensors 
placed in the pipes of the water network. (See our discussion of the 
Internet of Things in Chapter 10.) These sensors monitor the flow 
rates, pressure, and quality of the water, and they identify prob­
lems in the meters, valves, pipes, and other system equipment. The 
software’s algorithms then analyze these data to determine when 
and where water is leaking. As an added benefit, the sensors can 
detect weaknesses in the pipes that could lead to future leaks. Con­
sequently they enable utilities to prevent leaks before they occur. 
TaKaDu provides its results in the form of dashboards on 
employee smart phones. By scanning the dashboards, company 
employees monitor whether the meters are accurate, the water 
quality and pressure are optimal, the water flow is normal, and the 
pumps are operating properly. How do employees know if the wa­
ter flow is normal and therefore when use is abnormal? The TaKaDu 
software determines a baseline of regular use throughout the day. 
For example, it establishes that water use is highest when people 
are typically at home—in the mornings before they go to work and 
in the evenings when they return. 
The software also considers local factors. At a Dutch utility, 
for instance, the system noted regular peaks of flow one Friday af­
ternoon. It turned out that increased water use happened during 
breaks in play during a World Cup game between the Netherlands 
and Spain, when fans used their bathrooms. 
In addition to leaks and use patterns, TaKaDu soft ware can 
also help pinpoint problems that could be due to theft. A utility in 
Melbourne, Australia, Unitywater (www.unitywater.com), detected 
spikes of water coming from a fire hydrant. Officials discovered that 
a strawberry farmer was siphoning water from the hydrant. Net-
work-wide, Unitywater saved more than one billion liters of water 
in the first 12 months of implementing the TaKaDu system, with a 
value of more than $2 million. The utility saves not only money, but 
time, because it now takes 60 percent less time to repair problems. 
TaKaDu software is most effective when it works with other 
systems. For example, it complements the sound equipment 
developed by the technology company Aquarius Spectrum (www 
.aquarius-spectrum.com). TaKaDu software identifies the location 
of a leak within a neighborhood, and then Aquarius’s technology 
detects the exact pipe that the leak is coming from. Another com­
pany, Curapipe (www.curapipe.com), has technology that plugs 
leaks automatically without the need for digging. 
TaKaDu has helped Israel to enjoy higher agricultural yields 
during the current drought than the country had previously 
achieved in nondrought years. Recall that global utilities tend 
to lose 30 percent of the water they distribute. That figure is just 
10 percent for Jerusalem’s utility, Hagihon, since implementing 
TaKaDu. In mid-2015, Israel even enjoyed a water surplus, some of 
which (about 150 million cubic meters per year) it pumps to Jordan 
and the Palestinian Authority. 
By mid-2015, TaKaDu software had been adopted by 14 
other utilities in cities ranging from Campo Grande, Brazil, to Bil­
bao, Spain. In 2015, Australia’s largest utility, Sydney Water (www. 
sydneywater.com.au), adopted the system as well. Also in 2015, 
TaKaDu introduced its service for U.S. utilities that monitor water 
quality, an activity that is closely regulated by the U.S. Environmen­
tal Protection Agency. 
Unfortunately, despite this progress, in mid-2015 only 1 out of 
5 utilities worldwide were using smart sensors in their water net­
works, and in the United States, it’s an even lower proportion. But 
TaKaDu expects the use of its technology will increase, especially 
among American utilities, as the cost of hardware declines, net­
works age, and droughts become more common. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
144 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
Sources: Compiled from “3M Partners with TaKaDu to Offer Water Utilities 
Questions  
a More Complete Solution,” TaKaDu Press Release, August 26, 2015; D.  
1. How does the TaKaDu system utilize the Internet of Things? 
Asper, “TaKaDu’s Water-Saving Technology Saves Australia Millions of 
(Hint: See Chapter 10.) 
Dollars,” NoCamels, April 6, 2015; J. Foreshew, “TaKaDu Helps Keep Water 
Flowing for Unitywater,” The Australian Business Review, March 31, 2015; 
2. Provide an example of how TaKaDu uses its system for pre-
A. Little, “Anybody Call a Plumber?” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, January 
dictive analytics.
12-18, 2015; J. Neeman, J. Buxton, and K. Cornish, “Water Utilities Turn 
3. Provide an example of how TaKaDu could use its system for 
to New Technologies to Increase Intelligence in Systems,” Breaking  
Energy, December 4, 2014; H. Moreno, “Transforming Utilities Using Data 
prescriptive analytics.  
Analytics,” Forbes, September 30, 2014; S. Udasin, “Hagihon, TaKaDu  
4. Refer to Chapter 2. Is the TaKaDu system a strategic informa-
Sign Contract for Jerusalem Water Management,” The Jerusalem Post, 
tion system for Jerusalem? Why or why not? 
September 10, 2014; J. Ollagnier, “Water Utilities: Can They Use Analytics  
for Smart Monitoring?” Accenture, March 28, 2014; www.takadu.com,  
accessed August 27, 2015.  
Predictive Analytics 
Predictive analytics are the next step in data reduction. Predictive analytics utilize a variety 
of analytics techniques and tools to examine recent and historical data in order to detect pat­
terns and predict future outcomes and trends. Predictive analytics provide estimates about the 
likelihood of a future outcome. 
The purpose of predictive analytics is not to tell decision makers what will happen in the 
future. Predictive analytics can only forecast what might happen in the future, because predic­
tive analytics are based on probabilities. 
Continuing our example of Fandango. How does the ticket seller know when to send 
e-mails to its members with discount offers for a specific movie on a specific day? Consider 
John Jones. Predictive analytics tools analyze terabytes of data to determine that while John 
likes science fiction movies, he has not seen the latest science fiction movie, which has been in 
theaters since the previous Friday. 
Predictive analytics are used throughout organizations in every industry. Let’s look at 
some examples. 
• Predictive analytics drive the coupons you receive at the grocery cash register. In the 
United Kingdom, grocery giant Tesco (www.tesco.com) predicts which discounts will be 
redeemed in order to target more than 100 million personalized coupons annually at cash 
registers in 13 countries. This process increased coupon redemption rates by a factor of 3.6 
over previous methods. 
• Websites predict which ads you will click in order to instantly choose which ad to show 
you, a process that drives millions of dollars in new revenue. 
• President Obama was re-elected in 2012 with the help of voter prediction. His campaign 
predicted which voters would be positively persuaded by campaign contact, and which 
voters would be negatively impacted. 
• Leading online dating companies Match (www.match.com), OKCupid (www.okcupid.com), 
and eHarmony (www.eharmony.com) predict which prospect on your screen will be the 
most compatible with you. 
• Student essay grade prediction has been developed for automatic grading. The system 
grades as accurately as human graders. 
• Wireless carriers predict how likely it is you will cancel and defect to a competitor (churn), 
possibly before you have decided to do so. The predictions are based on factors such as 
dropped calls, your phone usage, your billing information, and whether your contacts 
have already defected. 
• Allstate Insurance tripled the accuracy of predicting bodily injury liability from car crashes 
based on the characteristics of the insured vehicle. This process results in approximately 
$40 million annual savings. 
• Stanford University data scientists used predictive analytics to diagnose breast cancer bet­
ter than human physicians by discovering an innovative method that takes into account a 
greater number of contributing factors in a tissue sample. 
MKT 
MKT 
MKT 
MKT 
POM 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Analytics Models: Descriptive Analytics, Predictive Analytics, and Prescriptive Analytics 145 
FIN 
• Officials in Oregon and Pennsylvania are using predictive analytics to assess the risk that 
a convict will off end again. 
• Financial services firms use predictive analytics to produce credit scores. They use these 
scores to determine the probability of customers making future credit payments on time. 
• Other examples of predictive analytics include understanding how sales might close at the 
end of the year, predicting what items customers will purchase together, and forecasting 
inventory levels based on a large number of variables. 
• Sentiment analysis is another type of predictive analysis. The input to this type of model is 
plain text (e.g., ratings, recommendations, tweets, Facebook posts) and the output of the 
model is a sentiment score. This score can be positive or negative. This score could also be 
a number between −1 and +1, indicating the degree of positivity or negativity. 
For other examples of descriptive analytics, see this chapter’s opening case, closing case 1, 
closing case 2, and all IT’s About Business. IT’s About Business 5.4 illustrates how a startup com­
pany in India uses analytics to predict which of its customers will be a good credit risk. 
IT’s About Business 5.4 
Simpa Networks Provide Solar Energy 
to India’s Poor 
Worldwide, approximately 1.6 billion people do not have 
access to electricity, and another 1 billion have only unre­
liable access. Many of these people depend on kerosene lanterns 
and battery-powered flashlights for light. Moreover, these same 
people often earn less than $10 per day, and they spend up to 30 
percent of their incomes on inefficient and expensive means of ac­
cessing electricity. 
The lack of electricity is particularly acute in India, with 75 mil­
lion families not having access. Consequently, these people rely on 
“dirty” fuels such as kerosene, which they use in lamps. There is hope, 
however. There are effective alternatives to electricity, such as solar 
power, which can meet the needs of homes and small businesses. 
To address these energy needs, Simpa Networks (www.simpa­
networks.com), a startup technology company founded in 2010, sells 
solar power not as a system but as a service, to rural households and 
businesses. Its mission is to bring sustainable energy to those who 
currently do not have enough money to pay for their energy needs. 
Simpa’s customers use the “Progressive Purchase” pricing 
model. Under this model, the consumer makes a series of pay­
ments, each of which unlocks the solar home system for a specified 
amount of energy consumption. When the prepaid consumption is 
exhausted, the solar home system is temporarily disabled until the 
customer makes another payment. When the consumer has fully 
paid the total purchase price of the product, then Simpa restores 
full functionality. The system is permanently unlocked, and it pro­
duces energy for free. 
Simpa’s problem is that, because it has limited resources, it 
must be selective in deciding which families and businesses to sup­
port. As a result, the company turned to DataKind for help. Data-
Kind (www.datakind.org) is a nonprofit organization that connects 
data scientists with organizations working to address humanitar­
ian issues. 
DataKind’s scientists used Simpa’s historical data on cus­
tomer energy usage and payment behavior as inputs into a credit-
scoring model that helps Simpa better assess new customers. The 
objective is to offer the most appropriate services and support. 
MKT 
POM 
That is, the model enables Simpa to become “smarter” in selecting 
customers. The model also enables Simpa to take risks when lend­
ing to rural farmers who cannot turn to banks for loans. 
Simpa’s solar-as-a-service has resulted in huge time savings 
for those doing farming and household tasks such as cooking and 
cleaning. The system also has health benefits, including better 
quality of light and better air quality thanks to reduced kerosene 
fumes and wood smoke. Prior to Simpa’s system, approximately 
80 percent of energy-poor individuals suffered eye irritation from 
fumes. After customers deployed the system, that number fell to 
28 percent. Further, fire accidents dropped to zero. The system also 
helps increase sales in shops that can stay open longer thanks to 
cheaper energy. 
By mid-2015, Simpa’s clean, reliable energy could be found in 
more than 63,000 rural households and small businesses in India. 
The credit-scoring model helped Simpa provide its system to the 
optimal mix of customers. In that way, the company was able to 
receive an excellent return on its investment and, in turn, help ad­
ditional families and businesses. 
Sources: Compiled from M. Barlow, “Data and Social Good,” O’Reilly, 
August 15, 2015; “Simpa Networks: Making Solar Power Affordable in 
Rural India,” OPIC, 2014; J. Novet, “DataKind’s Do-Good Data-Science 
Projects Arrive in 5 More Cities,” Venture Beat, August 21, 2014; B. 
Prows, “Rural Solar Energy Lights India’s Future,” MobileBeyond, July 
12, 2014; A. Satter, “Watch How Solar Power Is Transforming Rural 
India,” Think Progress, July 10, 2014; “We Envision a World without 
Energy Poverty by 2030: Bijli Program Update,” The Climate Group, 
July 3, 2014; “Affordable Pay-As-You-Go Solar Power for India’s Energy-
Poor Homes,” ADB Knowledge Showcases, August 2013; www.data­
kind.org, www.simpanetworks.com accessed August 28, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Describe how Simpa Networks uses descriptive analytics to 
further its mission. 
2. How does predictive analytics help Simpa Networks provide 
solar energy to India’s underserved population? 
2. Describe how Simpa Networks could use prescriptive analyt­
ics to further its mission. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
146 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
POM 
Prescriptive Analytics 
Prescriptive analytics go beyond descriptive and predictive models by recommending one or 
more courses of action and showing the likely outcome of each decision. Predictive analytics 
does not predict one possible future, but rather multiple future outcomes based on the deci­
sion maker’s actions. Prescriptive analytics attempt to quantify the effect of future decisions in 
order to advise on possible outcomes before the decisions are actually made. 
Some companies are successfully using prescriptive analytics to optimize production, 
scheduling, and inventory along the supply chain to make sure that they deliver the right prod­
ucts at the right time in order to optimize the customer experience. 
Prescriptive analytics requires a predictive model with two additional components: 
actionable data and a feedback system that tracks the outcome produced by the action taken. 
Because a prescriptive model is able to predict the possible consequences based on diff er­
ent choices of action, it can also recommend the best course of action for any pre-specified 
outcome. 
Continuing with the Fandango example: The company uses prescriptive analytics to be 
able to change ticket price offerings every hour. Fandango has learned when the most desirable 
movie times are by analyzing millions of show times instantaneously. This data is then used to 
set an optimal price at any given time, based on the supply of show times and the demand for 
movie tickets. This process maximizes profits. The data from each show provides the feedback 
as to the contribution of each ticket price to profits. 
For examples of prescriptive analytics, see this chapter’s two closing cases. Pay particular 
attention to how the organizations in these two cases progress from descriptive analytics, to 
predictive analytics, and then on to prescriptive analytics. 
Presentation Tools 
After applying BA models, the results are presented to users in visual formats such as text, 
graphics, and tables. This process, known as data visualization, makes IT applications more 
attractive and understandable to users. A variety of visualization methods and soft ware 
packages that support decision making are available. Dashboards are the most common BA 
presentation tool. We also take a look at another valuable data visualization tool: geographic 
information systems. 
Dashboards. Dashboards evolved from executive information systems, which were informa­
tion systems designed specifically for the information needs of top executives. Today, however, 
many employees, business partners, and customers use digital dashboards. 
A dashboard provides easy access to timely information and direct access to manage­
ment reports. It is user friendly, it is supported by graphics, and, most importantly, it enables 
managers to examine exception reports and drill down into detailed data. Table 5.1 summa­
rizes the various capabilities common to many dashboards. Moreover, some of the capabili­
ties discussed in this section have been incorporated into many BA products, as illustrated in 
Figure 5.4. 
One outstanding example of a dashboard is Bloomberg LP (www.bloomberg.com), a pri­
vately held company, that provides a subscription service that sells financial data, soft ware to 
analyze these data, trading tools, and news (electronic, print, TV, and radio). All of this informa­
tion is accessible through a color-coded Bloomberg keyboard that displays the desired infor­
mation on a computer screen, either the user’s screen or one that Bloomberg provides. Users 
can also set up their own computers to access the service without a Bloomberg keyboard. The 
subscription service plus the keyboard is called the Bloomberg Terminal. It literally represents 
a do-it-yourself dashboard, because users can customize their information feeds as well as the 
look and feel of those feeds (see Figure 5.5). 
In another example, a human resources dashboard/scorecard developed by iDashboards, 
one of the leading BA software vendors. At a glance, users can see employee productivity, hours, 
team, department, and division performance in graphical, tabular, summary, and detailed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Analytics Models: Descriptive Analytics, Predictive Analytics, and Prescriptive Analytics 147 
TABLE 5.1
 The Capabilities of Dashboards 
Capability 
Description 
Drill down 
The ability to go to details, at several levels; it can be done by a 
series of menus or by clicking on a drillable portion of the screen. 
Critical success factors (CSFs)  
The factors most critical for the success of business. These can be 
organizational, industry, departmental, or for individual workers. 
Key performance indicators  
The specific measures of CSFs. 
Status access  
The latest data available on KPI or some other metric, often in real 
time. 
Trend analysis  
Short-, medium-, and long-term trend of KPIs or metrics, which are 
projected using forecasting methods. 
Exception reporting  
Reports highlight deviations larger than certain  thresholds. Reports 
may include only deviations. 
A screensh o t image depicting a
 sample performance dashboard.
form. The selector box to the left enables the user to easily change between specific analyses 
to compare their performance. 
A unique and interesting application of dashboards to support the informational needs 
of executives is the Management Cockpit. Essentially, a Management Cockpit is a strate­
gic management room containing an elaborate set of dashboards that enable top-level 
decision makers to pilot their businesses better. The goal is to create an environment that 
encourages more efficient management meetings and boosts team performance via eff ec­
tive communication. To help achieve this goal, the dashboard graphically displays KPIs and 
information relating to critical success factors on the walls of a meeting room called the 
Management Cockpit Room (see Figure 5.6). The cockpit-like arrangement of instrument 
panels and displays helps managers visualize how all of the different factors in the business 
interrelate. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
148 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
FIGURE 5.5 P hotograph depicting Bloomberg Terminal.
FIGURE 5.6  Management 
 Cockpit. Photograph of a Management Cockpit War Room where the walls are covered with large graphic displays depicting the latest information on market and company developments.
Within the room, the four walls are designated by color: Black, Red, Blue, and White. 
The Black Wall displays the principal success factors and financial indicators. The Red 
Wall measures market performance. The Blue Wall projects the performance of internal 
processes and employees. Finally, the White Wall indicates the status of strategic projects. 
The Flight Deck, a six-screen, high-end PC, enables executives to drill down to detailed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Analytics Models: Descriptive Analytics, Predictive Analytics, and Prescriptive Analytics 149 
information. External information needed for competitive analyses can easily be imported 
into the room. 
Board members and other executives hold meetings in the Management Cockpit Room. 
Managers also meet there with the comptroller to discuss current business issues. The Man­
agement Cockpit can implement various what–if scenarios for this purpose. It also provides 
a common basis for information and communication. Finally, it supports efforts to translate a 
corporate strategy into concrete activities by identifying performance indicators. 
Geographic Information Systems. A geographic information system (GIS) is a computer-
based system for capturing, integrating, manipulating, and displaying data using digitized 
maps. Its most distinguishing characteristic is that every record or digital object has an iden­
tified geographical location. This process, called geocoding, enables users to generate infor­
mation for planning, problem solving, and decision making. In addition, the graphical format 
makes it easy for managers to visualize the data. There are countless applications of GISs to 
improve decision making in both the public and private sectors. 
Children’s National Health System offers injury prevention advice to the community. Clini­
cians have found that using geospatial data helps them accomplish this mission. The health-
care center integrated its existing electronic health records system with GIS software from ESRI 
(www.esri.com) to display health data with geospatial coordinates. One of the integrated sys­
tem’s first projects focused on pediatric burn cases. 
GIS mapping enabled the clinic to identify the hotspots where injuries were occurring on a 
map. That map allowed staff members to develop prevention programs tailored to the demo­
graphics of areas with high rates of injuries. For example, if the system identifies a cluster of 
children with burns in an Hispanic neighborhood, the staff will work with community groups to 
provide parents with Spanish-language information about safety. 
The new system has produced results. The clinic is seeing fewer burn patients overall and 
fewer patients requiring high-level burn care. Children’s National Health System is now using 
its system to map concentrations of other medical conditions, such as obesity and asthma. 
Before you go on…
 1. Differentiate among descriptive analytics, predictive analytics, and prescriptive analytics.
 2. What is a dashboard? Why are dashboards so valuable to employees? 
Apply the Concept 5.4 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5.4 Provide a definition and 
link will take you to a video that describes prescriptive analytics 
a use case example for descriptive analytics, predictive analytics, 
to help a rock climber determine the best path to the top based 
and prescriptive analytics. 
on certain decisions. While this is a simple example, it illustrates 
the need to think past the next choice and to see how this 
STEP 1: Background 
choice will impact the overall probability of reaching the desired 
outcome. 
Section 5.4 discusses descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive 
analytics. Descriptive analytics describe what has happened, 
predictive analytics predicts what might happen, and prescriptive 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
analytics prescribes probabilities to future outcomes based on 
Based on the video and any of your own Web research, describe 
future activities. 
and give examples of how a rock climber might use descriptive 
STEP 2: Activity 
analytics, predictive analytics, and prescriptive analytics to 
determine the best path to the goal.  
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 5.4. This 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
150 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For the Accounting Major 
BA is used extensively in auditing to uncover irregularities. It also is 
used to uncover and prevent fraud. CPAs use BA for many of their du­
ties, ranging from risk analysis to cost control. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
People have been using computers for decades to solve financial 
problems. Innovative BA applications have been created for ac­
tivities such as making stock market decisions, refinancing bonds, 
assessing debt risks, analyzing financial conditions, predicting busi­
ness failures, forecasting financial trends, and investing in global 
markets. 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major 
Marketing personnel utilize BA in many applications, from planning 
and executing marketing campaigns, to allocating advertising bud­
gets, to evaluating alternative routings of salespeople. New market­
ing approaches such as targeted marketing and database marketing 
Summary 
1.  Use a decision support framework to demonstrate how technology 
supports managerial decision making at each phase of the decision-
making process. 
When making a decision, either organizational or personal, the deci­
sion maker goes through a three-step process: intelligence, design, and 
choice. When the choice is made, the decision is implemented. In gen­
eral, it is difficult to state which information systems support specific 
decision makers in an organization. Modern information systems, par­
ticularly business analytics systems, are available to support everyone 
in an organization. 
2.  Describe each phase of the business analytics process. 
Business analytics is the process of developing actionable decisions or 
recommendations for actions based on insights generated from historical 
data. The phases in the business analytics process are shown in FIGURE 5.3 
and include data management, analytics tools and techniques, analytics 
models, and presentation tools. 
3.  Describe each of the various analytics tools and examples of their 
uses. 
These techniques and tools include Excel, decision support systems, online 
analytical processing (OLAP), data mining, machine learning, deep learning, 
and neural networks. We discuss the first four in Section 5.3, and the last three 
in Plug IT In 5. Note that there are many statistical modeling tools available in 
analytics software packages. These tools are beyond the scope of this chapter 
4.  Provide a definition and a use case example for descriptive 
analytics, predictive analytics, and prescriptive analytics. 
Descriptive analytics summarize what has happened in the past and allow 
decision makers to learn from past behaviors. Predictive analytics utilize a 
variety of analytics techniques and tools to examine recent and historical 
data in order to detect patterns and predict future outcomes and trends. 
Prescriptive analytics go beyond descriptive and predictive models by rec­
ommending one or more courses of action and showing the likely outcome 
of each decision. We leave the examples of each analytics model to you. 
Chapter Glossary 
business analytics (BA) The process of developing actionable 
decisions or recommendations for actions based on insights 
generated from historical data. 
business intelligence (BI) A broad category of applications, 
technologies, and processes for gathering, storing, accessing, and 
analyzing data to help business users make better decisions. 
depend heavily on IT in general, and on data warehouses and busi­
ness intelligence applications in particular. 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
BA supports complex operations and production decisions from in­
ventory control, to production planning, to supply chain integration. 
HRM For the Human Resources Management Major 
Human resources personnel use BA for many of their activities. For 
example, BA applications can find resumes of applicants posted on 
the Web and sort them to match needed skills and to support man­
agement succession planning. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
MIS provides the data infrastructure used in BA. MIS personnel are 
also involved in building, deploying, and supporting BA applications. 
dashboard A business analytics presentation tool that provides rapid 
access to timely information and direct access to management 
reports. 
data mining The process of searching for valuable business 
information in a large database, data warehouse, or data mart. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 1 151 
decision A choice that individuals and groups make among two or 
more alternatives. 
decision support systems (DSSs) Business intelligence systems that 
combine models and data in an attempt to solve semistructured and 
some unstructured problems with extensive user involvement. 
descriptive analytics A type of business analytics that summarize 
what has happened in the past and allow decision makers to learn 
from past behaviors. 
geographic information system (GIS) A computer-based system 
for capturing, integrating, manipulating, and displaying data using 
digitized maps. 
management A process by which organizational goals are achieved 
through the use of resources. 
model (in decision making) A simplified representation, or 
abstraction, of reality. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  Your company is considering opening a new factory in China. List sever­
al typical activities involved in each phase of the decision (intelligence, 
design, and choice). 
2.  Recall that a market basket analysis (a type of data mining) of conven­
ience store purchases revealed that customers tended to buy beer and 
diapers at the same time when they shopped. Now that the analysis 
uncovered this relationship exists, provide a rationale for it. Note: You 
will have to decide what the next question is. 
3.  American Can Company announced that it was interested in acquiring 
a company in the health maintenance organization (HMO) field. Two 
decisions were involved in this act: (1) the decision to acquire an HMO, 
and (2) the decision of which HMO to acquire. How can the use of BA 
assist the company in this endeavor? 
4.  Discuss the strategic benefits of business analytics. 
5.  In early 2012, The New York Times reported the story of a Target data 
scientist who was able to determine if a customer was pregnant based 
on her pattern of previous purchases. 
a.  Describe the business analytics models that the data scientist used. 
b.  Refer to Chapter 6 and discuss the ethics of Target’s analytics 
 process. 
c.  Research the story and note the unintended consequences of 
Target’s analytics process. 
6.  Consider the admissions process at your university. Your university’s 
admissions process involves the analysis of many variables to decide 
whom to admit to each year’s freshman class. Contact your admissions 
office and gather information on the variables used in the admis­
sions process. As you recall from applying at your university, typi­
cal variables would include high school attended, high school grade 
point average, standardized test scores such as ACT or SAT, and many 
others. (Do not be surprised if there are variables that your admis­
sions office cannot provide.) 
a.  Provide an example of how your admissions office uses descriptive 
analytics in the admissions process. Use the variables you have 
found in your example. 
b.  Provide an example of how your admissions office uses predictive 
analytics in the admissions process. Use the variables you have 
found in your example. 
c.  Provide an example of how your admissions office uses prescrip­
tive analytics in the admissions process. Use the variables you have 
found in your example. 
Closing Case 1 
Analytics in the National Basketball Association 
POM The Problem 
Historically the primary method of judging how well a player or team 
was performing was the “eye test.” This term refers to the intuitive feel­
ing that people with long experience in a sport acquired from watch­
ing games and practices. Today, professional sports teams are utilizing 
analytics to provide data-driven judgments. 
multidimensional data analysis See online analytical processing 
(OLAP). 
online analytical processing (OLAP) (or multidimensional data 
analysis) A set of capabilities for “slicing and dicing” data using 
dimensions and measures associated with the data. 
predictive analytics A type of business analytics that utilize a 
variety of analytics tools to examine recent and historical data 
in order to detect patterns and predict future outcomes and 
trends. 
prescriptive analytics A type of business analytics that recommend 
one or more courses of action and showing the likely outcome of 
each decision. 
productivity The ratio between the inputs to a process and the 
outputs from that process. 
The analytics revolution in professional sports began in base­
ball, as highlighted in the book and the movie Moneyball. Baseball 
is a relatively simple sport to analyze statistically because it centers 
on a sequence of one-on-one confrontations between a batter and a 
pitcher. Further, each play has an obvious start point and end point. 
Statisticians call each of those plays a “state.” 
In contrast the discrete, state-to-state action in baseball, basket­
ball is a constant flow. Players switch instantly from offense to defense. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
152 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
Moreover, regardless of a player’s position, he or she can be anywhere 
on the court at any time. The game has no states, so analysts could 
not statistically determine the odds of a given outcome (e.g., a player 
making a shot). 
Consequently, modern analytics focuses on the locations and 
movement of the players and the ball. Essentially, analytics in the 
National Basketball Association (NBA; www.nba.com) is a mapping 
and data visualization problem. The challenge is to visually depict data 
about movement through space and time; that is, to make numbers 
visible. 
The Solution 
The First System. Kirk Goldsberry, a longtime basketball fan with a 
Ph.D. in geography, undertook the task of developing analytics soft ­
ware for professional basketball. First, he divided the 1,284 square feet 
of the court where players actually shoot—the area that stretches from 
just outside the three-point line (roughly 25 feet) to the basket—into 
cells. Then he searched for data. 
Obtaining the relevant data for accurate analysis was diff icult. 
Tracking 10 players in constant motion is not a simple process. On 
ESPN.com, Goldsberry found statistics for every shot taken in the NBA, 
including who took the shot, from where, and whether it went in the 
basket. He then developed a database with the spatial coordinates for 
all 700,000 shots taken in every NBA game from 2006 to 2011. 
Goldsberry next analyzed his data to generate maps that showed 
where a given player shot, how often, and whether or not the shot was 
good. Goldsberry called his system CourtVision. This system revealed 
differences in players that had not been previously quantified. For 
example, Ray Allen, one of the NBA’s best shooters, had several areas 
where he made a high percentage of his shots from three-point range. 
However, he rarely attempted any mid-range shots. 
For the first time, fans could see the types of shots their favorite 
players took as well as the relative value of those shots. However, 
CourtVision did not take into account variables such as who the 
defender was or what else was happening on the court. Nevertheless, 
Goldsberry’s system provided team management with an initial tool to 
evaluate players. 
Today’s System. The next opportunity to collect data came when a 
company called Stats (www.stats.com) developed a six-camera setup 
for basketball. The camera system, which is now employed in all 29 
NBA arenas, tracks each player on the court throughout every game. It 
therefore provides a complete view of the entire game, including track­
ing individual players and ball possession. 
Stats offered its data to Goldsberry. The data were more specific 
than the data Goldsberry had obtained from ESPN.com. Once Golds-
berry had the data, he could analyze them to answer any number of 
questions. 
•  Players who “draw the defense” can be quantified as ones who 
pass the ball effectively when two or more players are guarding 
them. 
•  “Getting good spacing” visualizes which players control which 
parts of the court. 
•  “On-ball defense” assesses how effectively a player defending the 
ball decreases his opponent’s chance of scoring. 
In addition, analyzing the camera data enabled Goldsberry to under­
stand one of the most difficult aspects of basketball: defense. Histori­
cally, teams had relied on counting statistics—for example, how many 
steals, how many blocks—to capture a player’s defensive value. The 
new system provided a much more sophisticated picture of the game. 
Goldsberry began by observing that the area right around 
the basket is the most important real estate on the court to defend 
because this area is where offensive players shoot the highest percent­
age. Therefore, he analyzed how effectively defenders within five feet 
of the basket were able to prevent opponents from scoring. He found 
that the average NBA defender allowed a shooting percentage of 49.7 
in that area. 
Utilizing his new data, Goldsberry identified two classes of 
defense. In the first type, defenders blocked or altered their oppo­
nents’ shots – that is, they reduced “shooting efficiency.” In the 2014 
NBA season, for example, Indiana Pacers center Roy Hibbert and Mil­
waukee Bucks center Larry Sanders led the NBA, holding opponents 
to 38 percent. 
The second approach to defense was more subtle. Goldsberry 
found that some players reduced the frequency of their opponents’ 
shots, not just their efficiency. By comparing the average rate of shots 
to the rate when specific defenders were guarding the area, he could 
calculate when the number of shots decreased. Again in the 2014 NBA 
season, the best player at this type of defense was Houston Rockets 
center Dwight Howard, who caused opposing teams to shoot 9 per­
cent less frequently around the basket. As opponents shot less oft en 
around the basket, they took more mid-range shots, which are the 
least productive shots in the NBA. 
The Results 
Goldsberry essentially divided basketball games into slices of time 
and then employed the same kinds of analyses that analysts had been 
applying to the states in baseball. He could then quantify the value—in 
terms of points—of every move on the court, from an entry pass into 
the post (the area close to the basket) to a drive to the basket. These 
analyses created a new method to evaluate everything a player and 
team does. 
Let’s consider one example, the Houston Rockets. Utilizing the 
results of its analytics software, the team rarely shoots long-range 
two-point jump shots, because the Rockets believe this type of shot 
is among the worst strategies in basketball. The shots are too far away 
from the basket to be a high-probability scoring opportunity, yet not 
far enough (behind the three-point line) to be awarded an extra point 
for the risk in taking an even longer shot. 
Analytics are impacting not only the Rockets, but the entire NBA 
as well. For instance, in January 2015 NBA data analysis revealed that 
players attempted more three-point shot attempts than free throws. 
In fact, three three-point shot defines the shift to analytics in the NBA. 
It is not a coincidence that the Golden State Warriors, the 2015 NBA 
champions, were the league’s best three-point shooting team during 
the regular season. 
Sources: Compiled from “NBA Teams That Have Analytics Department,” 
NBAStuffer.com, August 17, 2015; T. Ross, “Welcome to Smarter Basketball,” 
The Atlantic, June 25, 2015; K. Mehta, “Data and the NBA: A Slam Dunk 
Approach to Basketball,” umbel.com, June 22, 2015; C. Benjamin, “The 
4 Fallacies of NBA Analytics,” Men’s Journal, June 3, 2015; S. Hammer, 
“Analytics Key to Modern NBA Success,” The Miscellany News, May 6, 2015; 
M. Lawrence, “Big Data’s Air-Ball: Five Questions about Players that NBA 
Analytics Can’t Answer,” Forbes, February 27, 2015; B. Alamar, “The Inside 
Man: NBA Analytics,” ESPN.com, February 25, 2015; M. McClusky, “This Guy’s 
Quest to Track Every Shot in the NBA Changed Basketball Forever,” Wired, 
November, 2014; T. Moynihan, “The NBA’s New High-Tech Control Center Is 
a Hoops Fan’s Dream,” Wired, October 28, 2014; R. Simmons, “Golden State 
Warriors at the Forefront of NBA Data Analysis,” SFGate, September 14, 2014; 
B. Holmes, “New Age of NBA Analytics: Advantage or Overload?” The Boston 
Globe, March 30, 2014; D. Oliver, “How Numbers Have Changed the NBA,” 
ESPN.com, November, 15, 2013; www.nba.com, accessed August 25, 2015. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 2 153 
Questions 
3.  Provide an example of the use of prescriptive analytics for an NBA 
team using Goldberry’s system. 
1.  Provide an example of the use of descriptive analytics for an NBA 
team using Goldberry’s system.  
4. What are the advantages and disadvantages of Goldsberry’s system 
to NBA players? Provide specific examples to support your answer. 
2.  Provide an example of the use of predictive analytics for an NBA 
team using Goldberry’s system. 
Closing Case 2 
United Parcel Service Uses Three Types of Analytics 
POM The Problem 
United Parcel Service (UPS; www.ups.com) is a global organization, 
with 424,000 employees and nearly 100,000 vehicles. UPS drivers typ­
ically make between 120 and 175 “drops” per day. Between any two 
drops, drivers can take a number of possible paths. With 55,000 routes 
in the Unites States alone, the total number of possible routes is incon­
ceivably vast. Clearly, it is in the best interest of UPS and its drivers to 
find the most efficient routes. Therefore, any tiny amount of eff iciency 
that can be gained in daily operations yields significant improvements 
to the company’s bottom line. Essentially, “little” things matter a great 
deal to UPS. 
In addition, UPS must manage a low-margin business as well as a 
unionized workforce that is compensated at the high end of the indus­
try scale. Significantly, rival FedEx (www.fedex.com) uses independ­
ent contractors for its ground network. Consequently, FedEx does not 
have the burden of expensive employee benefits packages. 
Another problem for UPS is that the increase in electronic com­
merce has shifted an increasing number of UPS’s delivery stops from 
retailers to residences. In fact, UPS expects that residential deliveries 
will make up half of the company’s total deliveries by 2018. Histori­
cally, drivers would drop off multiple packages at a retailer. Today, they 
must make scattered stops to drop off packages at individual houses 
in a neighborhood. This process involves more routes and is more time 
consuming. 
The Solution 
For decades UPS has been using three types of analytics to produce 
eff iciencies: 
•  Descriptive analytics asks, “Where are we today?” 
•  Predictive analytics asks, “With our current trajectory, where will 
we be tomorrow?” 
•  Prescriptive analytics asks, “Where should we be tomorrow?” 
As UPS has moved from descriptive to predictive to prescriptive ana­
lytics, its data needs have increased, the skill set of its people has 
increased, and the business impact of analytics has increased. We con­
sider these developments below. 
Descriptive Analytics. UPS implemented descriptive analytics in 
the 1990s when the company provided its drivers with hand-held 
computers, called Delivery Information Acquisition Devices (DIADs). 
The DIADs enabled UPS to capture detailed data that measured the 
company’s current status. For example, the company measured 
driving variables in hundredths of a second. Their reasoning was 
that if they could reduce one mile per driver per day in the United 
States alone, that process would add up to $50 million to the bot­
tom line annually. 
One drawback to the DIAD system was that the data were scat­
tered across various locations. Specifically, some of the data were with 
employees, some were located in corporate repositories, some were 
contained in Excel spreadsheets, and some were distributed through­
out the company. However, UPS did not have a predictive model that 
could help the company “tomorrow.” 
Predictive Analytics. To address this problem, in 2003 UPS deployed pre­
dictive analytics with its Package Flow Technologies system. With this 
system, drivers started the day with a DIAD that detailed the packages 
they were to deliver and the order in which they were to deliver those 
packages. The DIAD became the drivers’ assistant. The system enabled 
UPS to reduce total delivery driving by 85 million miles per year. That 
process saved the firm 8.5 million gallons of fuel, and it saved the planet 
from 85,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide going into the atmosphere. 
However, drivers had to provide different services from the same 
vehicle—for example, deferred service and premium service. They had 
some packages that had to be delivered by 10:30 AM, some that had 
to be delivered by noon, and some that had to be delivered by 2:00 
PM. Drivers therefore had to decide how they were going to service 
those customers. With so many variables to consider, it was practically 
impossible for drivers to optimize their routes. 
Prescriptive Analytics. UPS realized that it needed to take analytics to 
the next level. So, in mid-2012, the company began deploying its On-
Road Integrated Optimization and Navigation (ORION) system. ORION 
reorganizes the drivers’ routes based on today’s customers, today’s 
needs, and today’s packages, and it designs deliveries in a very spe­
cific, optimized order. ORION takes into account UPS business rules, 
maps, what time drivers need to be at specific locations, and customer 
preferences. 
When UPS drivers are on the road, they usually travel at speeds 
of 20–25 miles per hour. Therefore, every mile reduced equates to a 
savings of 2–3 minutes. Because ORION shortens routes by 7–8 miles 
per day, this savings enables UPS to deliver more packages. 
ORION enhances UPS customer service with more eff icient rout­
ing, and it allows UPS to offer innovative services and customized 
solutions. An example of this type of service is UPS My Choice, which 
gives customers a one-day alert for the time a package is arriving, and 
allows them to control the timing and location of the delivery. By mid­
2015, UPS My Choice had almost 13 million members. 
At the beginning of a shift , a UPS driver checks his DIAD, which 
displays two possible delivery routes. One route uses ORION, and the 
other uses UPS’s traditional combination of work rules, procedures, 
and analytic tools. Drivers can choose either route, but if they decide 
not to use ORION, then they will be asked to explain their decisions. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
154 
CHAPTER 5 Business Analytics 
Driver reaction to ORION has been mixed. The experience can frustrate 
some drivers who might not want to surrender their autonomy or who 
might not follow ORION’s logic in designing their routes. 
The Results 
In 2013, ORION saved 1.5 million gallons of fuel (on top of the 8.5 mil­
lion gallons the firm was already saving). UPS gained those savings 
despite the fact that only 20 percent of its 50,000 drivers had adopted 
the system. UPS plans to complete the deployment of ORION by the 
end of 2016. When ORION is fully implemented, the system is expected 
to reduce the distance driven by its drivers by 100 million miles annu­
ally. Further, ORION will produce annual savings of $300 million as well 
as an additional 10 million gallons of fuel. In addition, ORION will pro­
duce further environmental benefits and cost reductions when UPS 
vehicles outside the United States are equipped with the technology. 
UPS continues to look into the future. Interestingly, ORION pro­
vides a natural link to driverless vehicles. 
However, ORION does not yet perform certain functions. For 
example, when drivers leave in the morning, the route they have in 
their DIAD does not change, meaning the system does not update 
routes if something goes wrong. In addition, ORION also does not take 
traffic or weather into account. UPS plans to integrate these features 
into subsequent upgrades of ORION. 
Sources: Compiled from C. Powers, “How UPS Augments Its Drivers’ 
Intuition with Predictive Analytics,” ASUG News, June 9, 2015; E. Siegel, 
“Predictive Analytics Driving Results, ROI at UPS,” Data Informed, June 
1, 2015; E. Siegel, “Wise Practitioner—Predictive Analytics Interview 
Series: Jack Levis of UPS,” Predictive Analytics World, April 28, 2015; 
J. Berman, “UPS Is Focused on the Future for Its ORION Technology,” 
Logistics Management, March 3, 2015; “UPS Moves Up Full ORION Rollout 
in U.S. Market to the End of 2016,” DC Velocity, March 2, 2015; J. Gidman, 
“Algorithm Will Tell All UPS Trucks Where to Go,” Newser, February 17, 
2015; S. Rosenbush and L. Stevens, “At UPS, the Algorithm Is the Driver,” 
The Wall Street Journal, February 16, 2015; J. Dix, “How UPS Uses Analytics 
to Drive Down Costs,” Network World, December 1, 2014; K. Noyes, “The 
Shortest Distance Between Two Points? At UPS, It’s Complicated,” Fortune, 
July 25, 2014; www.ups.com, accessed August 26, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Explain how DIADs were a descriptive analytics solution for UPS. 
2.  Explain how the Package Flow Technologies system was a predic­
tive analytics solution for UPS. 
3.  Explain how the ORION system was a prescriptive analytics solu­
tion for UPS. 
4.  Describe another potential application for the UPS ORION system. 
That is, what is the next question that UPS managers might ask of 
the ORION system? 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 6  
© winterling/iStockphoto 
Ethics and Privacy  
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
6.1  Ethical Issues 
6.1  Describe ethics, its three fundamental tenets, and the four categories of ethical issues 
6.2  Privacy 
related to information technology. 
6.2  Discuss at least one potential threat to the privacy of the data stored in each of three 
places that store personal data. 
Opening Case 
MIS 
Marriott Blocks Guests’ Wi-Fi Access 
In many ways, technology is disrupting profitable services that hotels 
previously provided to their guests, causing hotels to lose these 
sources of revenue. Consider these examples: 
•  Phone calls: Disrupted by smartphones (see Chapter 10) and 
Voice-Over Internet Protocol (see Chapter 4); 
•  Internet access: Disrupted by personal Wi-Fi hotspots on smart-
phones and Mi-Fi (see Chapter 10); 
•  Premium television: Netflix (www.netflix.com), Hulu (www.hulu 
.com), Amazon Prime (www.amazon.com/prime), and custom­
ers streaming their own TiVo (www.tivo.com) recordings have 
replaced in-room, on-demand movies and some premium sport­
ing events. 
•  Room service: Disrupted by Seamless (www.seamless.com) and 
Eat24 (http://eat24.com), who deliver food to your door; 
•  Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up: Disrupted by Washio (www 
.getwashio.com), Postmates (http://postmates.com), and the 
mobile Web sites of local cleaners themselves who off er pick-up 
and delivery. 
•  Honor bar: Disrupted by apps such as Instacart (www.instacart 
.com) that deliver drinks and snacks to your door, possibly for a 
lower cost than the compact refrigerator in hotel rooms. 
To avoid losing revenue, hotels have been forced to devise strate­
gies to compete with these services. Consider hotel chain Marriott 
(www.marriott.com). Wireless connection rates for Marriott start at 
155 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156 
CHAPTER 6 Ethics and Privacy 
$14.95  per day. For $19.95, guests receive “enhanced high-speed 
Internet,” which includes video chatting, downloading large files, and 
streaming video. Rather than pay these expensive charges, many guests 
use their data allotment from their cell phone providers.  Marriott was 
also charging conference organizers and exhibitors between $250 and 
$1,000 per access point to use the hotel’s Wi-Fi connection. 
Marriott attempted to maintain its Internet revenues by blocking 
Wi-Fi access in its hotels’ conference areas. Unfortunately for Marriott, 
this policy generated more problems than income. In 2013, a confer­
ence attendee at the Gaylord Opryland Hotel in Nashville, Tennessee— 
which is managed by Marriott—discovered that the hotel was jamming 
Wi-Fi devices in its ballrooms, although it was providing access in the 
guest rooms. The guest complained to the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC; www.fcc.gov). 
In response, the FCC launched an investigation. In 2014, the 
agency concluded that Marriott had blocked personal hotspots and 
was therefore in violation of the Communications Act. The FCC fined 
the hotel chain $600,000 for these violations. In addition, Marriott had 
to submit compliance reports to the agency for three years. 
Marriott defended its policies by claiming that its objective was 
to protect its guests from rogue wireless hotspots that could cause 
degraded service, cyberattacks, and identity theft. The company fur­
ther contended that the Opryland Hotel’s actions were lawful. 
In August 2014, Marriott petitioned the FCC to change the Com­
munications Act so the company could continue to block Wi-Fi ser­
vices in its hotels’ conference spaces. The hotel chain asserted this 
practice was necessary to prevent attendees from launching cyber-
attacks on the company’s network. Many customers were outraged 
by the petition, claiming that Marriott’s request was an attempt to 
ban Wi-Fi access in hotel rooms and lobbies as well as in conference 
rooms. 
In December 2014, Microsoft, Google, the Consumer Electronics 
Association (www.ce.org), and others filed comments with the FCC 
opposing Marriott’s Wi-Fi blocking plan. These companies noted that 
Marriott and other hotels make large amounts of money by charging 
businesses and individuals expensive rates to connect to the Internet 
in conference halls and meeting rooms. They contended that these 
policies were against the public interest, illegal, and malicious. They 
Introduction 
further charged that the security claims being made by Marriott were 
misleading. In response to negative publicity, in January 2015, Marriott 
issued a statement announcing that it would not block Wi-Fi at any 
hotel for any reason. 
Meanwhile, in a strongly worded statement released the same 
month, the FCC asserted it would aggressively investigate and act 
upon unlawful intentional interference with Wi-Fi access in any 
establishment. Several months later, the commission fined Smart 
City Holdings (www.smartcity.com) $750,000 for blocking Wi-Fi 
access at a number of convention centers served by the company 
in order to force customers to utilize the company’s own, expensive 
Wi-Fi options. 
Sources: Compiled from A. Lee, “Marriott Ends Its Bid to Kill Your Wi-Fi 
Hotspot,” ReadWrite, February 2, 2015; D. Murphy, “Marriott Abandons FCC 
Petition for Hotel Wi-Fi Blocking,” PC Magazine, February 1, 2015; M. Moon, 
“Marriott Is No Longer Fighting for Permission to Block Wi-Fi Hotspots,” 
Engadget, January 31, 2015; B. Brown, “FCC Calls Blocking of Personal 
Wi-Fi Hotspots ‘Disturbing Trend’,” Network World, January 27, 2015; “FCC 
to Marriott: Never Try to Block Wi-Fi Again,” CNN Money, January 27, 2015; 
“Marriott: You Win, We Won’t Block Wi-Fi,” CNN Money, January 15, 2015; 
“Marriott Hotels Do U-Turn over Wi-Fi Hotspot Blocks,” BBC News, January 
15, 2015; “Marriott Is Bad, and Should Feel Bad,” The Economist, January 
6, 2015; “Should Hotels Be Allowed to Block Competing Wi-Fi?” Consumer 
Traveler, October 6, 2014; “How This Hotel Made Sure Your Wi-Fi Hotspot 
Sucked,” ReadWrite, October 4, 2014; K. Knibbs, “The FCC Fined Marriott 
$600,000 for Blocking Guests’ Wi-Fi,” Gizmodo, October 3, 2014; www 
.marriott.com, www.fcc.gov, accessed August 31, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Discuss the ethicality and legality of Marriott’s decision to block 
Wi-Fi access in conference centers in its hotels. 
2.  After the FCC found that Marriott had broken the law, did the  hotel 
chain manage the situation correctly? Why or why not? If not, then 
how should Marriott have handled the situation? That is, what 
could the hotel chain have done better? 
3.  Describe the privacy implications of Marriott’s trying to force guests 
to use its Wi-Fi access point. 
The chapter opening case about Marriott blocking Wi-Fi access addresses the two major issues 
you will study in this chapter: ethics and privacy. The two issues are closely related to each 
other and also to IT, and both raise significant questions involving access to information in the 
digital age. For example: Are the actions of Marriott ethical? Did Marriott violate the privacy of 
its guests? The answers to these questions are not straightforward. In fact, IT has made finding 
answers to these questions even more diff icult. 
You will encounter numerous ethical and privacy issues in your career, many of which will 
involve IT in some manner. This chapter provides insights into how to respond to these issues. 
Furthermore, it will help you to make immediate contributions to your company’s code of eth­
ics and its privacy policies. You will also be able to provide meaningful input concerning the 
potential ethical and privacy impacts of your organization’s information systems on people 
within and outside the organization. 
For example, suppose your organization decides to adopt social computing technologies 
(which you will study in Chapter 8) to include business partners and customers in new product 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ethical Issues 157 
development. You will be able to analyze the potential privacy and ethical implications of 
implementing these technologies. 
All organizations, large and small, must be concerned with ethics. In particular, small busi­
ness (or startup) owners face a very difficult situation when their employees have access to 
sensitive customer information. There is a delicate balance between access to information and 
the appropriate use of that information. This balance is best maintained by hiring honest and 
trustworthy employees who abide by the organization’s code of ethics. Ultimately this issue 
leads to another question: Does the small business, or a startup, even have a code of ethics to 
fall back on in this type of situation? 
6.1  Ethical Issues 
Ethics refers to the principles of right and wrong that individuals use to make choices that 
guide their behavior. Deciding what is right or wrong is not always easy or clear-cut. Fortu­
nately, there are many frameworks that can help us make ethical decisions. 
Ethical Frameworks 
There are many sources for ethical standards. Here we consider four widely used standards: 
the utilitarian approach, the rights approach, the fairness approach, and the common good 
approach. There are many other sources, but these four are representative. 
The utilitarian approach states that an ethical action is the one that provides the most 
good or does the least harm. The ethical corporate action would be the one that produces the 
greatest good and does the least harm for all affected parties—customers, employees, share­
holders, the community, and the physical environment. 
The rights approach maintains that an ethical action is the one that best protects and 
respects the moral rights of the aff ected parties. Moral rights can include the rights to make 
one’s own choices about what kind of life to lead, to be told the truth, not to be injured, and to 
enjoy a degree of privacy. Which of these rights people are actually entitled to—and under what 
circumstances—is widely debated. Nevertheless, most people acknowledge that individuals 
are entitled to some moral rights. An ethical organizational action would be one that protects 
and respects the moral rights of customers, employees, shareholders, business partners, and 
even competitors. 
The fairness approach posits that ethical actions treat all human beings equally, or, if une­
qually, then fairly, based on some defensible standard. For example, most people might believe 
it is fair to pay people higher salaries if they work harder or if they contribute a greater amount 
to the firm. However, there is less certainty regarding CEO salaries that are hundreds or thou­
sands of times larger than those of other employees. Many people question whether this huge 
disparity is based on a defensible standard or whether it is the result of an imbalance of power 
and hence is unfair. 
Finally, the common good approach highlights the interlocking relationships that under­
lie all societies. This approach argues that respect and compassion for all others is the basis 
for ethical actions. It emphasizes the common conditions that are important to the welfare of 
everyone. These conditions can include a system of laws, effective police and fire departments, 
healthcare, a public educational system, and even public recreation areas. 
If we combine these four standards, we can develop a general framework for ethics 
(or ethical decision making). This framework consists of five steps: 
1.  Recognize an ethical issue:  
Could this decision or situation damage someone or some group?  
Does this decision involve a choice between a good and a bad alternative?  
Does this issue involve more than simply legal considerations? If so, then in what way?  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
158 
CHAPTER 6 Ethics and Privacy 
2.  Get the facts: 
What are the relevant facts of the situation? 
Do I have sufficient information to make a decision? 
Which individuals and/or groups have an important stake in the outcome? 
Have I consulted all relevant persons and groups? 
3.  Evaluate alternative actions: 
Which option will produce the most good and do the least harm? (the utilitarian approach) 
Which option best respects the rights of all stakeholders? (the rights approach) 
Which option treats people equally or proportionately? (the fairness approach) 
Which option best serves the community as a whole, and not just some members? (the 
common good approach) 
4.  Make a decision and test it: 
Considering all the approaches, which option best addresses the situation? 
5.  Act and reflect on the outcome of your decision: 
How can I implement my decision with the greatest care and attention to the concerns of  
all stakeholders?  
How did my decision turn out, and what did I learn from this specific situation?  
Now that we have created a general ethical framework, we will focus specifically on ethics in 
the corporate environment. 
Ethics in the Corporate Environment 
Many companies and professional organizations develop their own codes of ethics. A code of 
ethics is a collection of principles intended to guide decision making by members of the organ­
ization. For example, the Association for Computing Machinery (www.acm.org), an organiza­
tion of computing professionals, has a thoughtful code of ethics for its members (see www 
.acm.org/constitution/code.html). 
Keep in mind that different codes of ethics are not always consistent with one another. 
Therefore, an individual might be expected to conform to multiple codes. For example, a per­
son who is a member of two large professional computing-related organizations may be simul­
taneously required by one organization to comply with all applicable laws and by the other 
organization to refuse to obey unjust laws. 
Fundamental tenets of ethics include:
 Responsibility means that you accept the consequences of your decisions and actions.
 Accountability refers to determining who is responsible for actions that were taken.
 Liability is a legal concept that gives individuals the right to recover the damages done to them 
by other individuals, organizations, or systems. 
Before you go any further, it is critical that you realize that what is unethical is not neces­
sarily illegal. For example, a bank’s decision to foreclose on a home can be technically legal, 
but it can raise many ethical questions. In many instances, then, an individual or organization 
faced with an ethical decision is not considering whether to break the law. As the foreclosure 
example illustrates, however, ethical decisions can have serious consequences for individuals, 
organizations, and society at large. 
We have witnessed a large number of extremely poor ethical decisions, not to mention 
outright criminal behavior, at many organizations. During 2001 and 2002, three highly publi-
FIN 
cized fiascos occurred at Enron, WorldCom, and Tyco. At each company, executives were con­
victed of various types of fraud for using illegal accounting practices. These actions led to the 
passage of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act in 2002. Sarbanes–Oxley requires publicly held companies 
to implement financial controls and company executives to personally certify financial reports. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ethical Issues 159 
Then, the subprime mortgage crisis exposed unethical lending practices throughout the 
mortgage industry. The crisis also highlighted pervasive weaknesses in the regulation of the 
U.S. financial industry as well as the global financial system. It ultimately contributed to a deep 
recession in the global economy. Along these same lines, financier Bernie Madoff was convicted 
in 2009 of operating a Ponzi scheme and sentenced to 150 years in federal prison. In addition, 
several of Madoff’s employees were convicted in 2014. 
Advancements in information technologies have generated a new set of ethical problems. 
Computing processing power doubles roughly every 18 months, meaning that organizations 
are more dependent than ever on their information systems. Organizations can store increas­
ing amounts of data at decreasing costs. As a result, they can maintain more data on individ­
uals for longer periods of time. Going further, computer networks, particularly the Internet, 
enable organizations to collect, integrate, and distribute enormous amounts of information 
on individuals, groups, and institutions. These developments have created numerous ethical 
problems concerning the appropriate collection and use of customer information, personal pri­
vacy, and the protection of intellectual property. IT’s About Business 6.1 illustrates how misuse 
of information technology at Volkswagen led to a global scandal. 
IT’s About Business 6.1 
Volkswagen and the “Diesel Dupe” 
Beginning in 2009, German car manufacturer Volkswagen (VW; 
http://en.volkswagen.com) launched a global marketing campaign 
promoting the low emissions of its diesel cars. During this period, 
global sales of VW diesel cars increased noticeably, and the vehicles 
won several environmental awards. The low emissions became a 
critical selling point as consumers and governments became in­
creasingly concerned with pollution and global warming. 
On September 18, 2015, the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA; www.epa.gov) issued a notice of violation of the 1970 
Clean Air Act to VW. The agency charged that VW had installed soft ­
ware in millions of its diesel cars that could detect when the cars 
were undergoing emissions testing and then could alter the perfor­
mance in order to meet federal standards. 
Essentially, Volkswagen had intentionally programmed these 
diesel engines to activate certain emissions controls only during 
laboratory emissions testing. During this testing, cars are typically 
placed on a stationary device called a dynamometer. The program­
ming caused the vehicles’ output of pollutants known as nitrogen 
oxides to meet U.S. emissions standards during laboratory testing. 
However, during actual driving the soft ware shut down the emis­
sions controls. As a result the cars provided better performance 
and fuel economy. However, they also produced up to 40 times 
more nitrogen oxides. Approximately 11 million cars worldwide, 
manufactured between model years 2009 and 2015 included this 
programming, known as a “defeat device.” 
As of this writing the case against Volkswagen appears to be 
solid. Volkswagen fully acknowledged that they had manipulated 
the vehicle emission tests after being shown the evidence of the de­
feat device. Both VW CEO Martin Winterkorn and VW America CEO 
Michael Horn admitted the charges were valid. 
The consequences of the scandal, which became known 
as the “Diesel Dupe,” have been severe. The issue wasn’t limited 
to the United States. Authorities in Britain, Canada, Italy, France, 
Germany, and South Korea are among those investigating the au­
tomaker. These countries are questioning whether any of the emis­
sions testing of VW vehicles was legitimate. 
The EPA announced that should the allegations be proved, VW 
could face fines of up to $37,500 per vehicle, for a total of approxi­
mately $18 billion. On September 20, 2015, the company off icially 
stopped selling affected diesel vehicles. 
Shortly thereafter, VW announced plans to repair up to 11 mil­
lion vehicles affected by the scandal. It was unclear whether the 
repairs would include both software and hardware modifications. 
The recall began in January 2016, with all of the affected cars pro­
jected to be fixed by the end of that year. The carmaker earmarked 
$18 billion to settle the worldwide costs of the recall, fines, and 
other repercussions. Of this total, $10 billion were for the compa­
ny’s settlement with car owners in the United States. In addition, 
Volkswagen established an online service where customers can 
learn if their car is impacted based on the car’s vehicle identifica­
tion number (VIN). 
The timing of the emissions scandal was significant, because 
the sales of diesel vehicles had already been declining. In Europe, 
the impact of the scandal could be devastating, perhaps prompting 
consumers to switch to gasoline-powered cars. 
On October 7, 2015, hundreds of class-action lawsuits had 
been reportedly filed in the United States on behalf of Volkswa­
gen owners, claiming fraud and breach of contract. The lawsuits 
claimed that diesel vehicles will be worth less money because 
they will need to be fixed to conform to pollution regulations, 
due to expected reductions in horsepower and fuel eff iciency. 
By the end of that month, the resale value of the affected cars in 
the United States had declined between 5 and 16 percent, based 
on used car auction prices listed in the Kelley Blue Book (www 
.kbb.com). 
Perhaps the most significant element of the VW scandal is 
that the workaround to improve emissions during testing was pro­
grammed into the software that controlled the cars’ emissions. 
Cheating that occurs within the software can be subtle and diff i-
cult to detect. The significance of the software cheating could have 
ramifications in other situations, as similar software is being used 
in everything from voting machines to electric power distribution. 
As we give more control of our lives to software, we need better 
verification and transparency of these technologies. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
160 
CHAPTER 6 Ethics and Privacy 
On September 23, 2015, VW CEO Martin Winterkorn resigned, 
Wall Street Journal, September 28, 2015; B. Schneier, “Volkswagen 
although he denied any personal wrongdoing. It remained unclear  
Scandal Could Just Be the Beginning,” CNN, September 28, 2015; 
“That’ll Set You Back at Least $7.3 Billion,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek,
which company executives knew what and when they knew it, al-
September 28, 2015; “Volkswagen Scandal . . . . in Two Minutes,” 
though the German newspaper Der Spiegel reported that at least 30 
CNN Money, September 28, 2015; T. Claburn, “Volkswagen’s New 
people in management positions at VW were aware of the deceit for 
CEO Brings Software Know-How,” InformationWeek, September 26, 
years. VW denied this allegation. 
2015; R. Hotten, “Volkswagen: The Scandal Explained,” BBC News, 
In November 2015, the EPA announced that it was investigat-
December 10, 2015; A. Davies, “The Real Winner in the VW Diesel 
ing Audi and Porsche for allegedly using defeat devices on their 
Scandal? Hybrid Cars,” Wired, September 24, 2015; B. Berman, “What 
the VW Scandal Means for Clean Diesel,” MIT Technology Review,
diesel automobiles. The costs of the Diesel Dupe were to blame for 
September 23, 2015; A. Davies, “VW Owners Aren’t Going to Like 
VW’s first quarterly loss in 15 years as the company suffered a large 
the Fixes for Their Diesels,” Wired, September 22, 2015; T. Claburn, 
writedown. In fact, Volkswagen’s stock price declined by as much 
“Volkswagen: 11 Million Cars Used Deceptive Emissions Software,” 
as 40 percent since the scandal was discovered. 
InformationWeek, September 22, 2015; J. Ewing and C. Davenport, 
“Volkswagen Stops Selling Cars Facing U.S. Inquiry,” The New York 
Sources: Compiled from D. Francis, “Analysis: Volkswagen’s 
Times, September 21, 2015; W. Boston, A. Harder, M. Spector, and 
Emissions Cheat Headache Just Got Worse,” Chicago Tribune, May 17, 
C. Rogers, “Volkswagen Halts U.S. Sales of Certain Diesel Cars,” The 
2016; “VW Emissions Scandal: U.S. Regulators Find More Cars with 
Wall Street Journal, September 20, 2015; http://en.volkswagen.com, 
Cheat Tests,” BBC News, November 3, 2015; T. Pollard, “Volkswagen’s 
accessed October 31, 2015.  
Emissions ‘Cheat’ Software Scandal: The Latest,” Car Magazine,  
October 23, 2015; D. Ivory and K. Bradsher, “Regulators Investigating  
Questions
2nd VW Emissions Program,” The New York Times, October 9, 2015; 
N. Bomey, “House Slams ‘Arrogance’ of VW; CEO Says No Buyback 
1. Describe the role that information technology played in 
Planned,” USA Today, October 9, 2015; M. Spector and A. Harder, 
Volkswagen’s Diesel Dupe. 
“VW’s U.S. Chief Apologizes, Says Engineers at Fault,” The Wall Street 
2. The fundamental tenets of ethics include responsibility, 
Journal, October 9, 2015; I. Chapple and M. Thompson, “Volkswagen 
accountability, and liability. Discuss each of these tenets as 
HQ Raided by German Police,” CNN Money, October 8, 2015; 
K. Johnson and J. Willhite, “Volkswagen CFO Is in the Hot Seat,” The 
it applies to the Volkswagen scandal. 
Ethics and Information Technology 
All employees have a responsibility to encourage ethical uses of information and information 
technology. Many of the business decisions you will face at work will have an ethical dimension. 
Consider the following decisions that you might have to make: 
HRM 
MKT 
HRM 
• Should organizations monitor employees’ Web surfing and e-mail? 
• Should organizations sell customer information to other companies? 
• Should organizations audit employees’ computers for unauthorized software or illegally 
downloaded music or video files? 
The diversity and ever-expanding use of IT applications have created a variety of ethi­
cal issues. These issues fall into four general categories: privacy, accuracy, property, and 
accessibility. 
1. Privacy issues involve collecting, storing, and disseminating information about individuals. 
2.  Accuracy issues involve the authenticity, fidelity, and correctness of information that is 
collected and processed. 
3. Property issues involve the ownership and value of information. 
4.  Accessibility issues revolve around who should have access to information and whether 
they should pay a fee for this access. 
IT’s About Business 6.2 illustrates the ethical (and privacy) issues surrounding the European 
Court of Justice’s decision that implemented the “right to be forgotten” in the European Union. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ethical Issues 161 
IT’s About Business 6.2 
Do You Have the Right to Be Forgotten? 
In 1998, a lawyer in Spain undergoing financial trouble had to put 
a piece of property he owned up for auction. This was reported in a 
Spanish newspaper, La Vanguardia. Soon after, the lawyer cleared 
his debts, but the newspaper article was still accessible online 
when someone searched his name on Google. 
The lawyer in 2010 demanded that the newspaper take down 
the online articles and that Google remove the links to them. The 
Spanish Data Protection Agency (www.agpd.es) turned down his 
request for the newspaper to remove the articles, but it allowed his 
request that Google not link to them. In 2014, the Spanish agency’s 
decisions were upheld by the European Court of Justice, the supe­
rior court for countries of the European Union. The Court of Justice 
decision went even further, protecting the rights of all individuals 
in member countries to have Google take down links to any infor­
mation about them that was deemed “inadequate, irrelevant or no 
longer relevant, or excessive in relation to the purposes for which 
they were processed and in the light of the time that has elapsed.” 
In effect, then, the European Union’s highest court had ruled 
that citizens have a “right to be forgotten” on the Web and can 
therefore force Google and other search engines to remove out­
dated or “irrelevant” links about their personal histories from 
search results. The “right to be forgotten” is the right for individuals 
to request that information about them be taken off line after it’s no 
longer relevant. Specifically, individuals can ask Google to remove 
links to news articles, court judgments, and other documents in 
search results for their name. The court’s decision empowers indi­
viduals to ask Google or other search operators to take down links 
to Web pages that are published by third parties, such as newspa­
pers, that contain information relating to them. The decision does 
not require that the article or the Web site be removed or altered 
by the original publisher. Rather, the link to this content must be 
removed. 
Subsequent to the courts’ decision, requests to remove 
embarrassing and negative links exploded. By September 2015, 
roughly 250,000 requests had been submitted. In one instance, a 
former politician seeking reelection requested the removal of links 
to articles about his poor behavior while in office. In another sce­
nario, a physician sought to erase negative online reviews. 
Not surprisingly, the “right to be forgotten” has created a 
great deal of controversy. Privacy advocates defend the decision 
as a reclamation of privacy rights. Opponents contend that, were 
this policy to be implemented, people’s search results would come 
to resemble official biographies that record only the facts that 
individuals want other people to know. That situation could be 
dangerous. Opponents further argue that the court decision fails 
to identify which criteria the search engines should use to decide 
which requests to honor. The ruling also does not require that em­
barrassing material—revealing photographs, court documents, 
gossip—be erased from the Internet, just from search results. 
While the European Court of Justice decision was clear on 
granting the “right to be forgotten” to all citizens, it was unclear 
how exactly that would happen. The ruling called for a balance be­
tween the privacy rights of individuals and the rights of the pub­
lic to information. But the decision by Europe’s highest court is 
binding on the courts in member states, which must interpret it as 
best they can. Consequently, privacy and the “right to be forgotten” 
could vary from one country to another, potentially generating a 
great deal of confusion and uncertainty. 
As of September 2015, it was not clear how search engines 
such as Google needed to comply with the EU ruling. Google has 
a page that allows users to request that certain links be deleted, 
based on copyright and similar claims. In March 2016, Google an­
nounced that it would apply the right to be forgotten to all Euro­
pean Union searches. 
Google has implemented a two-part system for complying 
with the court’s decision. The first part created a soft ware infra­
structure to remove links. This software enables Google to apply 
its existing system to delete copyrighted and trademarked works. 
In the second part, Google created an administrative system 
to collect and act on requests to remove links. Internet users in all 
of the EU countries covered by the decision can fill out a form in 
one of 25 languages through the local Google site in that country. 
(The form is not available through the main Google.com homepage 
based in the United States.) Individuals fill in their name and the 
links they want removed, and must also explain why they feel the 
information is objectionable, such as that it is no longer relevant 
or is out of date. If Google agrees with the petitioner, it notifies the 
Webmaster of the sites in question and allows those sites to state 
their case to keep the link. 
Each request for link deletion is reviewed by a team of law­
yers, paralegals, and others assembled by Google. The reviewers 
are mainly looking at whether the petitioner is a public or private 
figure, if the information is from a reputable news organization or 
government agency, if the petitioner themselves originally pub­
lished the information, and whether the link relates to political 
speech or criminal charges. 
Meanwhile, another dispute has arisen concerning the scope 
of the court’s ruling. Specifically, France’s data regulators deter­
mined that it is not sufficient for Google to remove a result from 
its European search pages (Google.fr, Google.de, etc.). Instead, the 
company must remove links worldwide by deleting them from its 
“Google.com” version as well. In response, Google informed the 
French regulators in September 2015 that it would not implement 
“right to be forgotten” requests on a worldwide basis. The company 
argued that although the right to be forgotten is the law in Europe, 
it is not the law globally. Further, content that is declared illegal 
under the laws of one country can still be legal in other countries. 
Sources: Compiled from C. Lecher, “Google Will Apply the ‘Right to 
Be Forgotten’ to All EU Searches Next Week,” The Verge, March 4, 
2016; M. Stern, “UK Orders Google to Censor Links to Articles about 
‘Right to Be Forgotten,’ Removals” Slate, August 21, 2015; F. Manjoo, 
“‘Right to Be Forgotten’ Online Could Spread,” The New York Times, 
August 5, 2015; A. Hern, “Google Says Non to French Demand to 
Expand Right to Be Forgotten Worldwide,” The Guardian, July 30, 
2015; J. Roberts, “The Right to Be Forgotten from Google? Forget It, 
Says U.S. Crowd,” Fortune, March 12, 2015; H. Maycotte, “America’s 
‘Right to Be Forgotten’ Fight Heats Up,” Forbes, September 30, 2014; 
J. Toobin, “The Solace of Oblivion,” The New Yorker, September 29, 
2014; “Internet Privacy: Do Users Have a ‘Right to be Forgotten’?” 
The Week, May 30, 2014; T. Claburn, “Google Ordered to ‘Forget,’” 

 
 
 
 
 
162 
CHAPTER 6 Ethics and Privacy 
InformationWeek, May 13, 2014; “Google’s Legal Blow: What the ‘Right 
2. What are the potential long-term disadvantages of the “right 
to Be Forgotten’ Means,” The Wall Street Journal, May 13, 2014; D. Lee, 
to be forgotten” policy? Provide examples to support your 
“What Is the ‘Right to Be Forgotten’?” BBC News, May 13, 2014; www 
answer. 
.google.com, accessed September 7, 2015. 
3. Describe the ethicality and legality of the “right to be 
forgotten” policy. 
Questions 
4. What are the privacy implications of the “right to be forgot­
1. Describe the advantages to individuals of the “right to be for-
ten” policy? 
gotten” policy. Provide examples to support your answer. 
Table 6.1 lists representative questions and issues for each of these categories. In addi­
tion, Online Ethics Cases presents 14 scenarios that raise ethical issues. These scenarios will 
provide a context for you to consider situations that involve ethical or unethical behavior. 
Many of the issues and scenarios discussed in this chapter involve privacy as well as ethics. 
In the next section, you will learn about privacy issues in more detail. 
 A Framework for Ethical Issues 
TABLE 6.1
Privacy Issues 
What information about oneself should an individual be required to reveal to others? 
What kinds of surveillance can an employer use on its employees? 
What types of personal information can people keep to themselves and not be forced to reveal to others? 
What information about individuals should be kept in databases, and how secure is the information 
there? 
Accuracy issues 
Who is responsible for the authenticity, fidelity, and accuracy of the information collected? 
How can we ensure that the information will be processed properly and presented accurately to 
users? 
How can we ensure that errors in databases, data transmissions, and data processing are accidental 
and not intentional? 
Who is to be held accountable for errors in information, and how should the injured parties be com­
pensated? 
Property Issues 
Who owns the information?  
What are the just and fair prices for its exchange?  
How should we handle software piracy (illegally copying copyrighted software)?  
Under what circumstances can one use proprietary databases?  
Can corporate computers be used for private purposes?  
How should experts who contribute their knowledge to create expert systems be compensated?  
How should access to information channels be allocated?  
Accessibility issues 
Who is allowed to access information?  
How much should companies charge for permitting access to information?  
How can access to computers be provided for employees with disabilities?  
Who will be provided with the equipment needed for accessing information?  
What information does a person or an organization have a right to obtain, under what conditions, and  
with what safeguards?  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy 163 
Before you go on…
 1. What does a code of ethics contain?
 2. Describe the fundamental tenets of ethics. 
Apply the Concept 6.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6.1 Describe ethics, its three 
November 2013. The article describes an unusual (or not-so­
fundamental tenets, and the four categories of ethical issues 
unusual) action on the part of Goldman Sachs. It seems they have 
related to information technology. 
decided that their junior bankers should have weekends off ! 
Understand that it isn’t illegal to require your employees to work 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
weekends, nor is it illegal to give them time off. It also isn’t illegal 
to work people 75 hours a week. Many of the talking points in this 
As you begin your career, you need to be aware of the current 
article focus expressly on ethics. An employer is trying to do the 
trends affecting the four areas of concern presented in Section 
“right” thing, and they have used a new standard to define “right.” 
6.1. Privacy (what people know about you), property (who owns  
the data about you), accuracy (are the data about you accurate),  
and accessibility (who can access your data) are major topics 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.)  
in the today’s high-tech world. They are especially important in  
Summarize the article for your professor. In your summary, 
the migration to electronic health records, mobile wallets, social 
make certain to define ethics and to describe how the three 
media, and government-run databases, to name a few. 
fundamental tenets of ethics (responsibility, liability, and 
accountability) played a role in Goldman Sach’s decision. Finally, 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you are doing.) 
(not from the article) discuss how these same bankers deal with 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
the four areas of ethical concern with regards to your financial 
and read the article posted on the Huff ington Post Web site from 
information. 
6.2  Privacy 
In general, privacy is the right to be left alone and to be free of unreasonable personal intru­
sions. Information privacy is the right to determine when, and to what extent, information 
about you can be gathered and/or communicated to others. Privacy rights apply to individuals, 
groups, and institutions. The right to privacy is recognized today in all the U.S. states and by the 
federal government, either by statute or in common law. 
Privacy can be interpreted quite broadly. However, court decisions in many countries have 
followed two rules fairly closely: 
1. The right of privacy is not absolute. Privacy must be balanced against the needs of society. 
2. The public’s right to know supersedes the individual’s right of privacy. 
These two rules illustrate why determining and enforcing privacy regulations can be diff icult. 
As we discussed earlier, rapid advances in information technologies have made it much 
easier to collect, store, and integrate vast amounts of data on individuals in large databases. On 
an average day, data about you are generated in many ways: surveillance cameras located on 
toll roads, on other roadways, in busy intersections, in public places, and at work; credit card 
transactions; telephone calls (landline and cellular); banking transactions; queries to search 
engines; and government records (including police records). These data can be integrated to 
produce a digital dossier, which is an electronic profile of you and your habits. The process of 
forming a digital dossier is called profiling. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
164 
CHAPTER 6 Ethics and Privacy 
Data aggregators, such as LexisNexis (www.lexisnexis.com), ChoicePoint (www.choicepoint 
.com), and Acxiom (www.acxiom.com), are prominent examples of profilers. These compa­
nies collect public data such as real estate records and published telephone numbers, in addi­
tion to nonpublic information such as Social Security numbers; financial data; and police, 
criminal, and motor vehicle records. They then integrate these data to form digital dossiers 
on most adults in the United States. They ultimately sell these dossiers to law enforcement 
agencies and companies that conduct background checks on potential employees. They also 
sell them to companies that want to know their customers better, a process called customer 
intimacy. 
Data on individuals can also be used in more controversial manners. For example, a con­
troversial map in California identifies the addresses of donors who supported Proposition 8, 
the referendum approved by California voters in the 2008 election that outlawed same-sex 
marriage in that state (see www.eightmaps.com). Gay activists created the map by combin­
ing Google’s satellite mapping technology with publicly available campaign records that listed 
Proposition 8 donors who contributed $100 or more. These donors were outraged, claiming 
that the map invaded their privacy. 
Electronic Surveillance 
According to the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), tracking people’s activities with the aid 
of information technology has become a major privacy-related problem. The ACLU notes that 
this monitoring, or electronic surveillance, is rapidly increasing, particularly with the emer­
gence of new technologies. Electronic surveillance is conducted by employers, the govern­
ment, and other institutions. 
Americans today live with a degree of surveillance that would have been unimaginable 
just a few years ago. For example, surveillance cameras track you at airports, subways, banks, 
and other public venues. In addition, inexpensive digital sensors are now everywhere. They are 
incorporated into laptop webcams, video-game motion sensors, smartphone cameras, utility 
meters, passports, and employee ID cards. Step out your front door and you could be captured 
in a high-resolution photograph taken from the air or from the street by Google or Microsoft , 
as they update their mapping services. Drive down a city street, cross a toll bridge, or park at a 
shopping mall, and your license plate will be recorded and time-stamped. 
Emerging technologies such as low-cost digital cameras, motion sensors, and biometric 
readers are helping to increase the monitoring of human activity. In addition, the costs of stor­
ing and using digital data are rapidly decreasing. The result is an explosion of sensor data col­
lection and storage. 
In fact, your smartphone has become a sensor. The average price of a smartphone has 
increased 17 percent since 2000. However, the phone’s processing capability has increased by 
13,000 percent during that time, according to technology market research firm ABI Research 
(www.abiresearch.com). As you will study in Chapter 10, smartphones can now record video, 
take pictures, send and receive e-mail, search for information, access the Internet, and locate 
you on a map, among many other things. Your phone also stores large amounts of information 
about you that can be collected and analyzed. A special problem arises with smartphones that 
are equipped with global positioning system (GPS) sensors. These sensors routinely geotag 
photos and videos, embedding images with the longitude and latitude of the location shown 
in the image. Thus, you could be inadvertently supplying criminals with useful intelligence by 
posting personal images on social networks or photo-sharing Web sites. These actions would 
show the criminals exactly where you live. 
Another example of how new devices can contribute to electronic surveillance is facial rec­
ognition technology. Just a few years ago, this software worked only in very controlled settings 
such as passport checkpoints. However, this technology can now match faces even in regular 
snapshots and online images. For example, Intel and Microsoft have introduced in-store digital 
billboards that can recognize your face. These billboards can keep track of the products you 
are interested in based on your purchases or browsing behavior. One marketing analyst has 
predicted that your experience in every store will soon be customized. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy 165 
Google and Facebook are using facial-recognition software—Google Picasa and Facebook 
Photo Albums—in their popular online photo-editing and sharing services. Both companies 
encourage users to assign names to people in photos, a practice referred to as photo tagging. 
Facial-recognition software then indexes facial features. Once an individual in a photo is tagged, 
the soft ware searches for similar facial features in untagged photos. This process allows the 
user to quickly group photos in which the tagged person appears. Significantly, the individual 
is not aware of this process. 
Why is tagging important? The reason is that once you are tagged in a photo, that photo 
can be used to search for matches across the entire Internet or in private databases, including 
databases fed by surveillance cameras. How could this type of surveillance affect you? As one 
example, a car dealer can take a picture of you when you step onto the car lot. He or she could 
then quickly profile you (find out information about where you live, your employment, etc.) on 
the Web to achieve a competitive edge in making a sale. Even worse, a stranger in a restaurant 
could photograph you with a smartphone and then go online to profile you for reasons of his or 
her own. One privacy attorney has asserted that losing your right to anonymity would have a 
chilling effect on where you go, whom you meet, and how you live your life. IT’s About Business 
6.3 illustrates another type of surveillance technology employed by law enforcement agencies. 
IT’s About Business 6.3
MIS  The StingRay 
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC; www.fcc.gov) has 
authorized the Harris Corporation (www.harris.com), a defense 
contractor, to sell a surveillance device that tracks cellphones. The 
StingRay, the size of a suitcase, acts like a cell tower, emitting sig­
nals that can dupe phones up to one mile away into sending identi­
fying information. The device can also capture texts, calls, e-mails, 
and other data. Harris routinely refuses to discuss the StingRay. 
The StingRays are popular among local law enforcement 
agencies, which have spent millions on them, using part of the 
more than $35 billion in grants from the Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS; www.dhs.gov) earmarked for cities, counties, and 
states to fight terrorism and prepare for emergencies and disasters. 
The StingRay funding also comes from federal drug enforcement 
grants and money raised by nonprofit organizations for local police 
departments. 
The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU; www.aclu.org) 
claims that cellphone surveillance equipment is owned by at least 
44 police forces in 18 states, while other local law enforcement 
agencies borrow the equipment from federal agencies such as the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI; www.fbi.gov) and the Drug 
Enforcement Administration (DEA; www.dea.gov). 
The StingRay technology is a closely guarded secret. The FBI 
says it must be kept confidential or else criminals and terrorists 
could try to circumvent it. As a result, law enforcement agencies 
must sign a nondisclosure agreement before buying a StingRay. 
There is controversy that the nondisclosure agreements make gov­
ernment practices less transparent. Legal experts claim that these 
agreements raise important issues of privacy and even constitu­
tional issues. 
Because the StingRay can monitor all cellphones within 
range, civil liberties advocates say that it violates the privacy of in­
nocent people, not just potential criminals who are being targeted. 
Further, until 2015 police officers could use the devices without in­
forming anyone or having to obtain approval from judges, as they 
would have to do to obtain phone records. 
The secrecy over StingRay has led to unintended conse­
quences. For example, reporters have uncovered cases where the 
police used a StingRay as part of their routine police work, includ­
ing locating petty criminals, and then did not reveal the cellphone 
surveillance tactic to the suspects, their lawyers, or even the judges 
hearing the cases. 
The use of StingRays has stirred up a hornet’s nest regarding 
procedural issues in the justice system. Suspects usually have the 
right to know what evidence was collected against them and to 
challenge the legality of the method used to gather that evidence. 
While police have used StingRays against those suspected of every­
thing from petty crimes to murder, records show that that evidence 
has been routinely hidden or obscured from the suspects in court. 
In fact, many such suspects were never even prosecuted. About 
one-third of cases involving evidence from StingRays are thrown 
out, even those involving stolen cellphones. Only half of those who 
were prosecuted are convicted. Even though state law requires 
that defense attorneys be informed about electronic surveillance, 
many say they weren’t told that a StingRay was involved. 
As one example, consider a case in which the police had used 
a StingRay to locate a man accused of armed robbery. The man’s 
lawyer asked police to demonstrate the technology, which they re­
fused, despite a judge’s order that police and prosecutors produce 
the machine. As a result, the man was allowed to plea bargain for 
the lesser crime of petty theft . 
In September 2015, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ; 
www.doj.gov) mandated that federal agencies had to obtain search 
warrants to use StingRays. To enhance privacy protections, the pol­
icy requires that data gathered via a StingRay be deleted as soon 
as the cell phone is located. Further, all data must be deleted at 
least once per day. The policy also forbids federal agencies from 
using StingRays during criminal investigations to gather data from 
communication, such as such as e-mails, texts, contact lists, and 
images. Significantly, the ACLU notes that the policy only applies 
to federal agencies and not the many state and local police depart­
ments that have bought StingRays with federal funds. In that sense, 
the ACLU argues, the policy does not go far enough. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
166 
CHAPTER 6 Ethics and Privacy 
In response to the objections of the ACLU and the DOJ, federal 
K. Klonick, “Stingrays: Not Just for Feds!” Slate, November 10, 2014; 
officials stated that StingRays allow them to monitor dangerous 
P. Robison, “Another Privacy Concern: Police Spying on Cell Phones,” 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, October 16, 2014; K. Zetter, “Florida Cops’ 
criminals. For example, FBI Director James Comey asserted that 
Secret Weapon: Warrantless Cellphone Tracking,” Wired, March 3, 
the agency uses StingRay to find killers, kidnappers, drug dealers, 
2014; R. Gallagher, “Meet the Machines that Steal Your Phone’s Data,” 
missing children, and pedophiles. 
Ars Technica, September 25, 2013. 
Sources: Compiled from N. Woolf, “2,000 Cases May Be Overturned 
Questions
Because Police Used Secret StingRay Surveillance,” The Guardian, 
1. As technology advances, what are the implications for elec-
September 4, 2015; W. Ashford, “U.S. Cracks Down on Mobile Phone 
Tracking by Federal Agencies,” Computer Weekly, September 4, 
tronic surveillance? 
2015; K. Zetter, “The Feds Need a Warrant to Spy with StingRays 
2. Discuss the legality and ethicality of the police using Sting-
from Now On,” Wired, September 3, 2015; B. Heath, “Police Secretly 
Rays for ordinary crime. 
Track Cellphones to Locate Even Petty Criminals,” USA Today, August 
24, 2015; C. Farivar, “In Rare Move, Silicon Valley County Gov’t Kills 
3. Discuss the legality and ethicality of federal law enforcement 
Stingray Acquisition,” Ars Technica, May 7, 2015; J. Fenton, “Baltimore 
agencies using StingRays to find terrorists. 
Police Say Stingray Phone Tracking Use Exceeds 25,000 Instances,” 
4. Are your answers to Questions 2 and 3 different? Explain your 
The Baltimore Sun, April 20, 2015; M. Richtel, “A Police Gadget Tracks 
reasoning. 
Phones? Shhh! It’s Secret,” The New York Times, March 15, 2015; 
The scenarios we just considered deal primarily with your personal life. However, electronic sur­
veillance has become a reality in the workplace as well. In general, employees have very limited 
legal protection against surveillance by employers. The law supports the right of employers to 
read their employees’ e-mail and other electronic documents and to monitor their employees’ 
Internet use. Today, more than three-fourths of organizations routinely monitor their employ­
ees’ Internet usage. In addition, two-thirds use software to block connections to inappropriate 
Web sites, a practice called URL filtering. Furthermore, organizations are installing monitoring 
and filtering software to enhance security by blocking malicious software and to increase pro­
ductivity by discouraging employees from wasting time. 
In one organization, the chief information officer (CIO) monitored roughly 13, 000 employ­
ees for three months to determine the type of traffic they engaged in on the network. He then 
forwarded the data to the chief executive officer (CEO) and the heads of the human resources 
and legal departments. These executives were shocked at the questionable Web sites the 
employees were visiting, as well as the amount of time they were spending on those sites. The 
executives quickly decided to implement a URL filtering product. 
In general, surveillance is a concern for private individuals regardless of whether it is con­
ducted by corporations, government bodies, or criminals. As a nation, the United States is still 
struggling to define the appropriate balance between personal privacy and electronic surveil­
lance, especially in situations that involve threats to national security. 
Personal Information in Databases 
Modern institutions store information about individuals in many databases. Perhaps the most vis­
ible locations of such records are credit-reporting agencies. Other institutions that store personal 
information include banks and financial institutions; cable TV, telephone, and utilities compa­
nies; employers; mortgage companies; hospitals; schools and universities; retail establishments; 
government agencies (Internal Revenue Service, your state, your municipality); and many others. 
There are several concerns about the information you provide to these record keepers. 
Some of the major concerns are as follows: 
• Do you know where the records are? 
• Are the records accurate? 
• Can you change inaccurate data? 
• How long will it take to make a change? 
• Under what circumstances will the personal data be released? 
• How are the data used? 
• To whom are the data given or sold? 
• How secure are the data against access by unauthorized people? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy 167 
Information on Internet Bulletin Boards, Newsgroups, 
and Social Networking Sites 
Every day we see more and more electronic bulletin boards, newsgroups, electronic discussions 
such as chat rooms, and social networking sites (discussed in Chapter 8). These sites appear on 
the Internet, within corporate intranets, and on blogs. A blog, short for “Weblog,” is an infor­
mal, personal journal that is frequently updated and is intended for general public reading. 
How does society keep owners of bulletin boards from disseminating information that may be 
offensive to readers or simply untrue? This is a difficult problem because it involves the conflict 
between freedom of speech on the one hand and privacy on the other. This conflict is a funda­
mental and continuing ethical issue in the United States and throughout the world. 
There is no better illustration of the conflict between free speech and privacy than the 
Internet. Many Web sites contain anonymous, derogatory information on individuals, who 
typically have little recourse in the matter. The vast majority of the U.S. firms use the Internet 
in examining job applications, including searching on Google and on social networking sites. 
Consequently, derogatory information contained on the Internet can harm a person’s chances 
of being hired. 
New information technologies can also present serious privacy concerns. IT’s About Busi­
ness 6.4 shows how life and automobile insurance companies use technology to track individ­
ual policy holders. 
IT’s About Business 6.4 
MIS 
Tracking Data Impacts Life and 
Automobile Insurance 
MKT 
Life Insurance Only 44 percent of households in the United States 
own individual life insurance policies, a 50-year low. As a result, 
John Hancock (www.johnhancock.com) is offering a new type of 
life insurance program, which the insurer hopes will increase sales. 
Life insurance policies are typically underwritten using a 
snapshot of a person’s medical status at the time they apply for the 
policy. In this way, life insurance is a “one and done” process, unlike 
health insurance, which requires ongoing medical information to 
adjust premiums annually. 
In its new program, John Hancock will price policies continu­
ously for participating consumers. These customers must agree to 
continually share their medical data with Hancock. The insurer oper­
ates the program in conjunction with Vitality (www.thevitalitygroup 
.com), a global wellness company. 
Similar programs implemented by Vitality in other countries, 
including Australia, South Africa, and Singapore, have shown im­
pressive results: policyholders are motivated to improve their fit­
ness to bring down their life insurance premiums. Vitality found in a 
2014 study that participants who had not been exercising but who 
underwent a fitness regime for three years reduced their health 
risk factors by 13 percent. Those who were active before the study 
but increased their fitness activities cut their health risk factors by 
22 percent over the three years. 
Holders of the John Hancock life insurance policy through 
Vitality earn points for various fitness activities that are expected 
to increase their longevity. The more points they earn, the bigger 
the discount they receive on their premiums. Participants receive a 
free Fitbit monitor and they may choose to upload their data to the 
insurance company. Policyholders receive 1,000 points for being a 
nonsmoker; 1,000 points for each reading in the “normal” range of 
cholesterol, glucose, and blood sugar; 3,120 points over a year for 
doing a standard workout three times a week or an advanced work­
out twice a week; and 400 points for getting a flu shot. Ten percent 
of earned points can be carried over to the next year. 
All participants start the program by paying a premium at the 
“gold” level, which requires 7,000 points per year. The gold-level 
premium is discounted by about 9 percent over the regular pre­
mium. If over the course of the program a participant can’t main­
tain gold status, their premium could increase by up to 1.6 percent 
each year. If a participant reaches platinum status, which requires 
10,000 points a year, the premium goes down by about 0.3 percent 
per year. 
The program does raise questions about the security of con­
sumers’ health information and whether it could be used in ways 
that work against a consumer’s best interests. For example: 
•  Would an insurance company penalize a policyholder whose Fit-
bit data shows they have symptoms of stress? 
•  What if insurance underwriters make mistakes or incorrect 
assumptions in analyzing Fitbit data? 
•  What happens when insurance companies violate protections 
guaranteed by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountabil­
ity Act (HIPAA)? Will they be fined and if so, how much? 
Hancock’s program also raises privacy concerns. Hancock  responds 
by stating that consumers do not have to send the company any 
data that they are not comfortable with, although they will not ac­
cumulate points for data that they do not share. 
And one final interesting question: For most life insurance 
policyholders, the older they are, the higher their risk. Therefore, 
why would anyone want to continuously price their policies when 
they could enjoy level premiums over the years (depending on the 
policy they purchased)? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
168 
CHAPTER 6 Ethics and Privacy 
Automobile Insurance If you have a clean driving record, you may 
be paying too much for car insurance. That’s because auto insur­
ance companies base rates on statistical averages for characteris­
tics such as age, sex, marital status, location, and the type and age 
of car. Some drivers get a discount based on how long they have 
gone accident-free. 
Technology now enables drivers to get a break on their auto 
insurance premiums based on how they actually drive, rather than 
on statistics. The strategy, called usage-based insurance, lets auto 
insurers track your driving in exchange for an annual discount on 
your insurance premium, depending on your driving habits. Partici­
pation is voluntary. 
The technology works like this. Drivers plug a device into the 
diagnostic ports in their cars. The tool collects data from the car’s 
computer, such as the time of day, mileage, speed, and accelera­
tion and braking rates. The tool then sends this data to the auto 
insurance via a cellular network. 
State Farm (www.statefarm.com; Drive Safe), Progressive 
(www.progressive.com; Snapshot), and Allstate (www.allstate 
.com; Drive Wise) all offer usage-based automobile insurance. Let’s 
take a closer look at Progressive’s Snapshot product. 
As with the other companies, Progressive drivers plug the de­
vice into their cars’ data ports. Drivers can earn a discount if their 
data shows a good driving record after 30 days. The tracking lasts 
six months, after which drivers return the tool back to the company. 
They can be eligible to receive a discount of up to 30 percent from 
then on. Progressive does not raise rates based on any data it col­
lects. Participation in the program is free. 
Progressive’s usage-based insurance program has been tried 
by more than 1.4 million people, and about one-third continued 
with it. Of those who continued, about two-thirds received a dis­
count, usually from 10 to 15 percent. The program currently pro­
vides approximately 10 percent of the company’s revenue. 
As of May 2016, none of the three auto insurers was collecting 
GPS data, so drivers’ locations remained private. Further, the three 
companies were not raising rates on drivers whose data turned out 
to be poor. 
Privacy is a major concern with these programs. There is a 
fear that data may end up in the hands of people outside the in­
surance company or that the data may be used for reasons other 
than originally intended. For example, auto insurers may have little 
interest in a driver’s location at a certain time on a certain day, but 
if insurers start to collect and store that data, lawyers may one day 
subpoena the information. Another privacy concern is that the auto 
insurers will contribute driver histories into a central industry da­
tabase. In that case, drivers would have a “driver score” similar to 
the credit score that FICO (www.myfico.com) maintains. Therefore, 
when drivers look to purchase automobile insurance, their driver 
scores will impact the premium cost. 
Sources: Compiled from “Automotive Usage-Based Insurance (UBI) 
Market Report 2015-2025 Insurance Telematics and the Connected 
Car – Reportlinker Review,” PR Newswire, October 7, 2015; C. 
Tuohy, “Health Data Leads to Floating Premiums in Some Life 
Policies,” InsuranceNewsNet, July 10, 2015; A. Dart, “The Case for 
Connected Wearables in Life Insurance,” CSC, July 3, 2015; “Usage-
Based Insurance and Telematics,” National Association of Insurance 
Commissioners, April 24, 2015; M. Mapp, “John Hancock’s Bargain: Give 
Us More Data, You Pay Less in Rates,” CNBC, April 19, 2015; K. Calamur, 
“John Hancock Hopes You’ll Trade Activity Data for Insurance 
Discounts,” NPR.org, April 8, 2015; T. Bernard, “Giving Out Private Data 
for Discount in Insurance,” The New York Times, April 8, 2015; R. Lieber, 
“Lower Your Car Insurance Bill, at the Price of Some Privacy,” The New 
York Times, August 15, 2014; A. Tanner, “Data Monitoring Saves Some 
People on Car Insurance, But Some Will Pay More,” Forbes, August 
14, 2013; C. Woodyard and J. O’Donnell, “Your Car May Be Invading 
Your Privacy,” USA Today, March 25, 2013; J. Anderson, “Data-Tracking 
Technology Can Help Lower Your Car Insurance,” Kiplinger, October 
2011; www.johnhancock.com, www.thevitalitygroup.com, accessed 
September 1, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Describe the advantages of continuous life insurance un­
derwriting and usage-based automobile insurance to the 
consumer. 
2. Describe the advantages of continuous life insurance un­
derwriting and usage-based automobile insurance to the 
company. 
3. Would you be willing to participate in continuous life insur­
ance? Why or why not? 
4. Would you be willing to participate in usage-based automo­
bile insurance? Why or why not? 
5. Are your answers to Questions #3 and #4 different? If so, why? 
Privacy Codes and Policies 
Privacy policies or privacy codes are an organization’s guidelines for protecting the privacy 
of its customers, clients, and employees. In many corporations, senior management has begun 
to understand that when they collect vast amounts of personal information, they must protect 
it. In addition, many organizations give their customers some voice in how their information is 
used by providing them with opt-out choices. The opt-out model of informed consent permits 
the company to collect personal information until the customer specifically requests that the 
data not be collected. Privacy advocates prefer the opt-in model of informed consent, which 
prohibits an organization from collecting any personal information unless the customer specif­
ically authorizes it. 
One privacy tool available to consumers is the Platform for Privacy Preferences (P3P), a pro­
tocol that automatically communicates privacy policies between an electronic commerce Web 
site and visitors to that site. P3P enables visitors to determine the types of personal data that 
can be extracted by the sites they visit. It also allows visitors to compare a site’s privacy policy 

 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy 169 
TABLE 6.2
 Privacy Policy Guidelines: A Sampler 
Data Collection 
Data should be collected on individuals only for the purpose of accomplishing a legitimate business 
objective. 
Data should be adequate, relevant, and not excessive in relation to the business objective. 
Individuals must give their consent before data pertaining to them can be gathered. Such consent 
may be implied from the individual’s actions (e.g., applications for credit, insurance, or employment). 
Data Accuracy 
Sensitive data gathered on individuals should be verified before they are entered into the database.  
Data should be kept current, where and when necessary.  
The file should be made available so that the individual can ensure that the data are correct.  
In any disagreement about the accuracy of the data, the individual’s version should be noted and  
included with any disclosure of the file.  
Data Confidentiality 
Computer security procedures should be implemented to ensure against unauthorized disclosure of 
data. These procedures should include physical, technical, and administrative security measures. 
Third parties should not be given access to data without the individual’s knowledge or permission, 
except as required by law. 
Disclosures of data, other than the most routine, should be noted and maintained for as long as the 
data are maintained. 
Data should not be disclosed for reasons incompatible with the business objective for which they are 
collected. 
to the visitors’ preferences or to other standards, such as the Federal Trade Commission’s (FTC) 
Fair Information Practices Standard or the European Directive on Data Protection. 
Table 6.2 provides a sampling of privacy policy guidelines. The last section, “Data Confi­
dentiality,” refers to security, which we consider in Chapter 7. All of the good privacy intentions 
in the world are useless unless they are supported and enforced by effective security measures. 
Despite privacy codes and policies, and despite opt-out and opt-in models, guarding 
whatever is left of your privacy is becoming increasingly difficult. This problem is illustrated in 
chapter closing case 1. 
International Aspects of Privacy 
As the number of online users has increased globally, governments throughout the world have 
enacted a large number of inconsistent privacy and security laws. This highly complex global 
legal framework is creating regulatory problems for companies. Approximately 50 countries 
have some form of data protection laws. Many of these laws conflict with those of other coun­
tries, or they require specific security measures. Other countries have no privacy laws at all. 
The absence of consistent or uniform standards for privacy and security obstructs the flow 
of information among countries (transborder data flows). The European Union (EU), for one, 
has taken steps to overcome this problem. In 1998 the European Community Commission (ECC) 
issued guidelines to all of its member countries regarding the rights of individuals to access 
information about themselves. The EU data protection laws are stricter than the U.S. laws and 
therefore could create problems for the U.S.-based multinational corporations, which could 
face lawsuits for privacy violations. 
The transfer of data into and out of a nation without the knowledge of either the authori­
ties or the individuals involved raises a number of privacy issues. Whose laws have jurisdiction 
when records are stored in a different country for reprocessing or retransmission purposes? 
For example, if data are transmitted by a Polish company through a U.S. satellite to a British 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
170 
CHAPTER 6 Ethics and Privacy 
corporation, which country’s privacy laws control the data, and at what points in the trans­
mission? Questions like these will become more complicated and frequent as time goes on. 
Governments must make an effort to develop laws and standards to cope with rapidly changing 
information technologies to solve some of these privacy issues. 
The United States and the European Union share the goal of privacy protection for their 
citizens, but the United States takes a different approach. To bridge the diff erent privacy 
approaches, the U.S. Department of Commerce, in consultation with the European Union, 
developed a “safe harbor” framework to regulate the way that the U.S. companies export and 
handle the personal data (e.g., names and addresses) of European citizens. See www.export 
.gov/safeharbor and http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/fsj/privacy/index_en.htm. 
Before you go on…
 1. Describe the issue of privacy as it is affected by IT.
 2. Discuss how privacy issues can impact transborder data flows. 
Apply the Concept 6.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6.2 Discuss at least one 
computer system that chose to abide by the Constitution even if it 
potential threat to the privacy of the data stored in each of three 
meant having the president of the United States assassinated. 
places that store personal data. 
STEP 2: Activity 
Movie night! If you have not seen these two films, then schedule
STEP 1: Background 
a movie night, and watch them from the perspective of privacy 
Section 6.2 has defined privacy as the right to be left alone and to 
and information security. Discuss the movies with your friends, 
be free of unreasonable personal intrusions. Information privacy 
and obtain their thoughts on these issues. If you don’t have time 
is the right to determine when, and to what extent, information 
to watch the movies, then visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/ 
about you can be gathered and/or communicated to others. And, 
MIS4e/applytheconcept to read a synopsis of both films on IMDB 
where our data are concerned, we are in control, right? If so, then 
.com. 
why do people always seem to fear that “Big Brother” is spying 
on us and violating our privacy? Going further, the law generally 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
assigns a higher priority to society’s right to access information 
After considering the plots in these movies, prepare a paper 
than to an individual’s right to privacy. 
identifying three places where you store personal data. For each 
The 2002 movie Minority Report presented a future where a 
location, discuss at least one potential threat to your personal 
special police unit could predict when and where crimes were 
privacy that arises from storing your information there. Make 
going to occur before they actually did. This unit could arrest 
them major threats . . . on the scale of the movies. Consider just 
“criminals” before they committed the crime. Along these same 
how far your seemingly innocent decisions can take you! Present 
lines, a 2008 movie titled Eagle Eye focused on a highly intelligent 
your paper to the class and submit it to your instructor. 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For the Accounting Major 
Public companies, their accountants, and their auditors have sig­
nificant ethical responsibilities. Accountants now are being held 
professionally and personally responsible for increasing the trans­
parency of transactions and assuring compliance with Generally 
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). In fact, regulatory agen­
cies such as the SEC and the Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board (PCAOB) require accounting departments to adhere to strict 
ethical principles. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
As a result of global regulatory requirements and the passage of 
Sarbanes-Oxley, financial managers must follow strict ethical guide­
lines. They are responsible for full, fair, accurate, timely, and under­
standable disclosure in all financial reports and documents that 
their companies submit to the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC) and in all other public financial reports. Furthermore, financial 
managers are responsible for compliance with all applicable govern­
mental laws, rules, and regulations. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major 
Marketing professionals have new opportunities to collect data on 
their customers, for example, through business-to-consumer elec­
tronic commerce (discussed in Chapter 9). Business ethics clearly 
mandate that these data should be used only within the company 
and should not be sold to anyone else. Marketers do not want to be 
sued for invasion of privacy over data collected for the marketing 
database. 
Customers expect their data to be properly secured. How­
ever, profit-motivated criminals want that data. Therefore, market­
ing managers must analyze the risks of their operations. Failure to 
protect corporate and customer data will cause significant public 
relations problems and outrage customers. Customer relationship 
management (discussed in Chapter 12) operations and tracking cus­
tomers’ online buying habits can expose unencrypted data to misuse 
or result in privacy violations. 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
POM professionals decide whether to outsource (or off shore) man­
ufacturing operations. In some cases, these operations are sent 
Chapter Glossary 171 
overseas to countries that do not have strict labor laws. This situa­
tion raises serious ethical questions. For example: Is it ethical to hire 
employees in countries with poor working conditions in order to re­
duce labor costs? 
HRM For the Human Resource Management Major 
Ethics is critically important to HR managers. HR policies explain the 
appropriate use of information technologies in the workplace. Ques­
tions such as the following can arise: Can employees use the Inter­
net, e-mail, or chat systems for personal purposes while at work? Is 
it ethical to monitor employees? If so, how? How much? How oft en? 
HR managers must formulate and enforce such policies while at the 
same time maintaining trusting relationships between employees 
and management. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
Ethics might be more important for MIS personnel than for anyone 
else in the organization, because these individuals have control of 
the information assets. They also have control over a huge amount 
of the employees’ personal information. As a result, the MIS function 
must be held to the highest ethical standards. 
Summary 
1.  Describe ethics, its three fundamental tenets, and the four 
categories of ethical issues related to information technology. 
Ethics refers to the principles of right and wrong that individuals use to 
make choices that guide their behavior. 
Fundamental tenets of ethics include responsibility, accountability, and 
liability. Responsibility means that you accept the consequences of your 
decisions and actions. Accountability refers to determining who is respon­
sible for actions that were taken. Liability is a legal concept that gives indi­
viduals the right to recover the damages done to them by other individuals, 
organizations, or systems. 
The major ethical issues related to IT are privacy, accuracy, property 
(including intellectual property), and access to information. Privacy may 
be violated when data are held in databases or transmitted over networks. 
Privacy policies that address issues of data collection, data accuracy, and 
data confidentiality can help organizations avoid legal problems. 
2.  Discuss at least one potential threat to the privacy of the data stored 
in each of three places that store personal data. 
Privacy is the right to be left alone and to be free of unreasonable personal 
intrusions. Threats to privacy include advances in information technolo­
gies, electronic surveillance, personal information in databases, Internet 
bulletin boards, newsgroups, and social networking sites. The privacy 
threat in Internet bulletin boards, newsgroups, and social networking sites 
is that you might post too much personal information that many unknown 
people can see. 
Chapter Glossary 
accountability A tenet of ethics that refers to determining who is 
responsible for actions that were taken. 
code of ethics A collection of principles intended to guide decision 
making by members of an organization. 
digital dossier An electronic description of an individual and his or her 
habits. 
electronic surveillance Tracking people’s activities with the aid of 
computers. 
ethics The principles of right and wrong that individuals use to make 
choices to guide their behaviors. 
information privacy The right to determine when, and to what extent, 
personal information can be gathered by and/or communicated to 
others. 
liability A legal concept that gives individuals the right to recover 
the damages done to them by other individuals, organizations, or 
systems. 
opt-in model A model of informed consent in which a business is 
prohibited from collecting any personal information unless the 
customer specifically authorizes it. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
172 
CHAPTER 6 Ethics and Privacy 
opt-out model A model of informed consent that permits a company 
to collect personal information until the customer specifically 
requests that the data not be collected. 
privacy The right to be left alone and to be free of unreasonable 
personal intrusions. 
privacy codes See privacy policies. 
privacy policies (also known as privacy codes) An organization’s 
guidelines for protecting the privacy of customers, clients, and 
employees. 
profi ling The process of forming a digital dossier. 
responsibility A tenet of ethics in which you accept the consequences 
of your decisions and actions. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  In 2008, the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) ob­
tained a temporary restraining order barring three Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT) students from publicly displaying what 
they claimed to be a way to get “free subway rides for life.” Specifically, 
the 10-day injunction prohibited the students from revealing vulnera­
bilities of the MBTA’s fare card. The students were scheduled to pres­
ent their findings in Las Vegas at the DEFCON computer hacking con­
ference. Were the students’ actions legal? Were their actions ethical? 
Discuss your answer from the students’ perspective and then from the 
perspective of the MBTA. 
2.  Frank Abagnale, the criminal played by Leonardo DiCaprio in the mo­
tion picture Catch Me If You Can, ended up in prison. After he left prison, 
however, he worked as a consultant to many companies on matters of 
fraud. 
a.  Why do these companies hire the perpetrators (if caught) as con­
sultants? Is this a good idea? 
b.  You are the CEO of a company. Discuss the ethical implications of 
hiring Frank Abagnale as a consultant. 
3.  Access various search engines to find information relating to the use 
of drones (unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)) for electronic surveillance 
purposes in the United States. 
a.  Take the position favoring the use of drones for electronic surveil­
lance. 
b.  Take the position against the use of drones for electronic surveil­
lance. 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  An information security manager routinely monitored Web surfing 
among her company’s employees. She discovered that many employees 
were visiting the “sinful six” Web sites. (Note: The “sinful six” are Web 
sites with material related to pornography, gambling, hate, illegal activi­
ties, tastelessness, and violence.) She then prepared a list of the employ­
ees and their surfing histories and gave the list to management. Some 
managers punished their employees. Some employees, in turn, objected 
to the monitoring, claiming that they should have a right to privacy. 
a.  Is monitoring of Web surfing by managers ethical? (It is legal.) Sup­
port your answer. 
b.  Is employee Web surfing on the “sinful six” ethical? Support your 
answer. 
c.  Is the security manager’s submission of the list of abusers to man­
agement ethical? Why or why not? 
d.  Is punishing the abusers ethical? Why or why not? If yes, then what 
types of punishment are acceptable? 
e.  What should the company do in this situation? (Note: There are a 
variety of possibilities here.) 
2.  Access the Computer Ethics Institute’s Web site at www.cpsr.org/issues/ 
ethics/cei. The site offers the “Ten Commandments of Computer Ethics.” 
Study these rules and decide whether any others should be added. 
3.  Access the Association for Computing Machinery’s code of ethics for 
its members (see www.acm.org/constitution/code.html). Discuss the 
major points of this code. Is this code complete? Why or why not? Sup­
port your answer. 
4.  Access www.eightmaps.com. Is the use of data on this Web site illegal? 
Unethical? Support your answer. 
5.  The Electronic Frontier Foundation (www.eff.org) has a mission of pro­
tecting rights and promoting freedom in the “electronic frontier.” Re­
view the organization’s suggestions about how to protect your online 
privacy, and summarize what you can do to protect yourself. 
6.  Access your university’s guidelines for ethical computer and Internet 
use. Are there limitations as to the types of Web sites that you can visit 
and the types of material you can view? Are you allowed to change the 
programs on the lab computers? Are you allowed to download soft ware 
from the lab computers for your personal use? Are there rules govern­
ing the personal use of computers and e-mail? 
7.  Access http://www.albion.com/netiquette/corerules.html. What do you 
think of this code of ethics? Should it be expanded? Is it too general? 
8.  Access www.cookiecentral.com and www.epubliceye.com. Do these 
sites provide information that helps you protect your privacy? If so, 
then explain how. 
9.  Do you believe that a university should be allowed to monitor e-mail 
sent and received on university computers? Why or why not? Support 
your answer. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 1 173 
Closing Case 1 
The Ashley Madison Breach 
The Problem 
Launched in 2001, Ashley Madison (www.ashleymadison.com) is an 
online dating and social network service based in Canada. Unlike most 
dating services, Ashley Madison marketed specifically to people who 
are married or in a committed relationship but are seeking an out­
side relationship. In mid-2015, the site claimed 39 million members 
in 53 countries, and it generated an estimated $115 million in annual 
revenue. 
Significantly, Ashley Madison purportedly allowed users to 
hide their account profiles for free. Users who wanted to delete their 
accounts had to pay a $19 fee. Ashley Madison assured its users that 
its “full delete option” removed all relevant data from the site: user 
profiles, all messages sent and received, site usage history, personally 
identifiable information, and photos. 
On July 15, 2015, Ashley Madison was hacked by a group called 
“The Impact Team.” The hackers claimed to have stolen personal 
information about the site’s users, and it threatened to release names, 
addresses, search histories, and credit card numbers if the site did 
not immediately cease operations. The Impact Team claimed their 
demand was caused by Ashley Madison’s failure to delete users’ per­
sonal information following their invoiced requests to do so. 
When Ashley Madison ignored the demand, The Impact Team 
launched its first data release on August 18, followed by a second 
release three days later. The second batch of data included Ashley 
Madison CEO Noel Biderman’s personal e-mails. 
The data, which initially appeared on the Dark Web, were copied 
and made public on the open Web. The Dark Web is the World Wide 
Web content that exists on networks that require encryption, specific 
software, or authorization to access. The Dark Web is not indexed by 
search engines, and it can be accessed only through a browser called 
Tor (www.torproject.org). The Dark Web is used today for a wide range 
of anonymous activities including communication by dissidents in 
authoritarian countries who wish to access the Internet. It has also 
emerged as a platform for illegal activities such as cybercrime, child 
pornography, and drug traff icking. 
Ashley Madison’s Attempts at a Solution 
Immediately following The Impact Team’s announcement, CEO Bider-
man confirmed the hack and asserted that the company was “working 
diligently and feverishly” to try and stop the spread of the leaked data. 
Ashley Madison released the following statement: “We are actively 
monitoring and investigating this situation to determine the validity 
of any information posted online . . . We will continue to put forth sub­
stantial efforts into removing any information unlawfully released to 
the public, as well as continuing to operate our business.” In addition, 
the company issued copyright takedown notices under the 1998 Dig­
ital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) to multiple sites, claiming that 
“intellectual property in the data” was being infringed upon. Many of 
the sites complied with these requests. 
Ashley Madison subsequently announced that it had secured its 
site. It labeled the hack an act of “cyberterrorism,” and it apologized 
to its users. The company offered $500,000 (Canadian) to anyone with 
information that leads to the identification of the hackers. Finally, the 
site announced that in the future it would delete user information free 
of charge, thus eliminating the $19 fee. 
The Results 
By late August 2015, more than $1 billion in lawsuits had been filed 
against Ashley Madison. On August 28, CEO Biderman stepped down. 
According to the official press release, the senior management team 
currently in place will continue to lead the company. 
Meanwhile, both the site and its users experienced further 
fallout from the breach. For example, spammers quickly began to 
extort people whose information was made public. One group, for 
example, sent e-mails to Ashley Madison users demanding one bit-
coin (approximately $225) to prevent their information from being 
shared. The group gave the users seven days before it exposed them. 
In addition to extortion, victims of the breach risk identity theft as 
well. Meanwhile, in 2015, Ashley Madison had announced that it 
hoped to raise $200 million in an initial public offering in London 
after it had failed in a previous IPO attempt in Canada. Those plans 
are now in jeopardy. In fact, as of late 2015, Ashley Madison’s very 
survival is questionable. 
While the moral and ethical outrage surrounding the Ashley 
Madison hack has received most of the headlines, industry analysts 
maintain that the real issues are the assault on consumer privacy 
and the inability of businesses to protect their customers’ data. Ana­
lysts further predict that in the future businesses will likely be held 
far more accountable for data security than they have been in the 
past. 
From a different perspective, private investigation startup Trus­
tify (www.trustify.info) capitalized on the Ashley Madison breach by 
launching a service just after the attack that let anyone search the 
data dump from the hackers. Trustify advertised its services to sus­
picious partners who were concerned by a name that they found on 
the list. 
Sources: Compiled from R. Hackett, “CEO of Ashley Madison Parent 
Company Stepping Down,” Fortune, August 28, 2015; L. Loeb, “Ashley 
Madison Fallout: Investigations, Lawsuits, Lessons,” InformationWeek, 
August 26, 2015; R. King, “IBM Advises Companies to Keep Networks 
Free from Dark Web,” The Wall Street Journal, August 26, 2015; B. Krebs, 
“Who Hacked Ashley Madison?” Krebs on Security, August 26, 2015; M. 
Slater-Robins, “Here’s What Ashley Madison’s $19 ‘Full Delete’ Feature 
Actually Removes,” Business Insider, August 26, 2015; J. Greenberg, 
“Private Investigator Startup Exploits Ashley Madison Hack,” Wired, 
August 25, 2015; A. Blake, “Ashley Madison Hack Could Cost Dating Site 
More than $1 Billion as Lawsuits Mount,” The Washington Times, August 
25, 2015; W. Ashford, “Avid Life Media Offers Reward for Information on 
Ashley Madison Hack as Writs Loom,” Computer Weekly, August 25, 2015; 
D. George-Cosh, “Canadian Police Call Ashley Madison Hack Criminal,” 
The Wall Street Journal, August 24, 2015; “The Ashley Madison Hack… 
in 2 Minutes,” CNN Money, August 24, 2015; “Ashley Madison Users Now 
Facing Extortion,” CNN Money, August 21, 2015; B. Cole, “Will Data Privacy 
Finally Come to the Fore, Post Ashley Madison Hack?” TechTarget, August 
21, 2015; “Ashley Madison Tries to Stop the Spread of Its Leaked Data,” 
CNN Money, August 21, 2015; C. Welch, “Ashley Madison’s $19 ‘Full Delete’ 
Option Made the Company Millions,” The Verge, August 19, 2015; “Ashley 
Madison Probes Veracity of Data Leaked by Hackers,” CNBC, August 19, 
2015; “Hackers Expose First Ashley Madison Users,” CBS News, July 22, 
2015; Q. Fottrell, “Ashley Madison May Have to Kiss Its IPO Goodbye,” 
Market Watch, July 21, 2015; B. Krebs, “Online Cheating Site Ashley 
Madison Hacked,” Krebs on Security, July 19, 2015; www.ashleymadison 
.com, accessed August 29, 2015. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
174 
CHAPTER 6 Ethics and Privacy 
Questions 
1.  Discuss the legality and the ethicality of the Ashley Madison Web 
site. 
2.  Discuss the legality and the ethicality of the actions of the hackers 
who attacked the Ashley Madison Web site. 
3.  Discuss the legality and ethicality of the actions of people who cop­
ied the Ashley Madison data from the Dark Web and then made the 
data available on the open Web. 
4.  Discuss the legality and ethicality of the reporters who used hacked 
(stolen) information in their stories. 
5.  Discuss the legality and ethicality of the actions of Trustify. 
6.  Are there differences in your answers to the first five questions? If 
so, then describe them. How do you account for them? 
7.  What are the implications of the Ashley Madison breach for general 
privacy concerns regarding digital data? 
Closing Case 2 
The Facebook Experiments 
The Problem 
Facebook (www.facebook.com) has long conducted digital experi­
ments on various aspects of its Web site. For example, just before the 
2012 election, the company conducted an experiment on the News 
Feeds of nearly two million users so that they would see more “hard 
news” shared by their friends. In the experiment, news articles that 
Facebook users’ friends had posted appeared higher in their News 
feeds. Facebook claimed that the news stories being shared were gen­
eral in nature and not political. The stories originated from a list of 
100 top media outlets from The New York Times to Fox News. Industry 
analysts claim that the change may have boosted voter turnout by as 
much as 3 percent. 
Next, Facebook decided to conduct a different kind of experiment 
that analyzed human emotions. The social network has observed that 
people’s friends often produce more News Feed content than they can 
read. As a result, Facebook filters that content with algorithms to show 
users the most relevant and engaging content. For one week in 2012, 
Facebook changed the algorithms it uses to determine which status 
updates appeared in the News Feed of 689,000 randomly selected 
users (about 1 of every 2,500 Facebook users). In this experiment, the 
algorithm filtered content based on its emotional content. Specifi­
cally, it identified a post as “positive” or “negative” if it used at least 
one word previously identified by Facebook as positive or negative. 
In essence, Facebook altered the regular news feeds of those users, 
showing one set of users happy, positive posts while displaying dreary, 
negative posts to another set. 
Previous studies had found that the largely positive content that 
Facebook tends to feature has made users feel bitter and resentful. The 
rationale for this finding is that users become jealous over the success 
of other people, and they feel they are not “keeping up.” Those studies, 
therefore, predicted that reducing the positive content in users’ feeds 
might actually make users less unhappy. Clearly, Facebook would 
want to determine what types of feeds will make users spend more 
time on its site rather than leave the site in disgust or despair. Conse­
quently, Facebook designed its experiment to investigate the theory 
that seeing friends’ positive content makes users sad. 
The researchers—one from Facebook and two from academia— 
conducted two experiments, with a total of four groups of users. In the 
first experiment, they reduced the positive content of News Feeds; in 
the second experiment, they reduced the negative content. In both 
experiments, these treatment conditions were compared with control 
groups in which News Feeds were randomly filtered without regard to 
positive or negative content. 
The results were interesting. When users received more posi­
tive content in their News Feed, a slightly larger percentage of words 
in their status updates were positive, and a smaller percentage were 
negative. When positivity was reduced, the opposite pattern occurred. 
The researchers concluded that the emotions expressed by friends, via 
online social networks, elicited similar emotions from users. Interest­
ingly, the results of this experiment did not support the hypothesis that 
seeing friends’ positive content made users sad. 
Significantly, Facebook had not explicitly informed the participants 
that they were being studied. In fact, few users were aware of this fact 
until the study was published in a paper titled “Experimental evidence 
of massive-scale emotional contagion through social networks” in the 
prominent scientific journal Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences. At that point, many people became upset that Facebook had 
secretly performed a digital experiment on its users. The only warning 
that Facebook had issued was buried in the social network’s one-click 
user agreement. Facebook’s Data Use Policy states that Facebook “may 
use the information we receive about you . . . for internal operations, 
including troubleshooting, data analysis, testing, research, and service 
improvement.” This policy led to charges that the experiment violated 
laws designed to protect human research subjects. 
Some lawyers urged legal action against Facebook over its exper­
iment. While acknowledging the potential benefits of digital research, 
they asserted that online research such as the Facebook experiment 
should be held to some of the same standards required of govern­
ment-sponsored clinical trials. What makes the Facebook experiment 
unethical, in their opinion, was that the company did not explicitly 
seek subjects’ approval at the time of the study. 
Some industry analysts challenged this contention, arguing that 
clinical research requirements should not be imposed on Facebook. 
They placed Facebook’s experiment in the context of manipulative 
advertising—on the Web and elsewhere—and news outlets that select 
stories and write headlines in a way that is designed to exploit emo­
tional responses by their readers. 
On July 3, 2014, the privacy group Electronic Privacy Information 
Center (EPIC; www.epic.org) filed a formal complaint with the Fed­
eral Trade Commission (FTC; www.ftc.gov) claiming that Facebook 
had broken the law when it conducted the experiment without the 
participants’ knowledge or consent. EPIC alleged that Facebook had 
deceived its users by secretly conducting a psychological experiment 
on their emotions. 
Facebook’s Response 
Facebook Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandburg defended the 
experiment on the grounds that it was a part of ongoing research that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 2 175 
companies perform to test different products. She conceded, however, 
that the experiment had been poorly communicated, and she formally 
apologized. In addition, the lead author of the Facebook experiment 
stated, “I can understand why some people have concerns about it 
(the study), and my coauthors and I are very sorry for the way the (aca­
demic) paper described the research and any anxiety it caused.” 
For its part, Facebook conceded that the experiment should have 
been “done differently,” and it announced a new set of guidelines for 
how the social network will approach future research studies. Specifi­
cally, research that relates to content that “may be considered deeply 
personal” will go through an enhanced review process before it can 
begin. 
The Results 
At Facebook, the experiments continue. In May 2015, the social net­
work launched an experiment called Instant Articles in partnership 
with nine major international newspapers. This new feature allowed 
Facebook to host articles from various news publications directly on 
its platform, an option that the social network claims will generate a 
richer multimedia experience and faster page-loading times. 
The following month Facebook experimented with its Trending 
sidebar, which groups news and hashtags into five categories among 
which users can toggle: all news, politics, science and technology, 
sports, and entertainment. Facebook maintained that the objective 
is to help users discover which topics they may be interested in. This 
experiment could be part of Facebook’s new effort to become a one-
stop news distributor, an approach that would encourage users to 
remain on the site for as long as possible. 
Sources: Compiled from J. Matias, “Were All Those Rainbow Profile 
Photos Another Facebook Study?” The Atlantic, June 28, 2015; J. Vaughn, 
“Facebook Experiment Points to Data Ethics Hurdles in Digital Research,” 
SearchDataManagement, November 14, 2014; G. Smith, “Facebook 
Conducted Another Secret Experiment on Users,” The Huffington Post, 
November 3, 2014; D. Rushe, “Facebook Sorry – Almost – for Secret 
Psychological Experiment on Users,” The Guardian, October 2, 2014; 
J. O’Toole, “Facebook: We’re Still Experimenting on Users, But Now 
It’s Less Creepy,” CNN Money, October 2, 2014; R. Meyer, “Facebook’s 
Mood Manipulation Experiment Might Have Been Illegal,” The Atlantic, 
September 24, 2014; “The Facebook Experiment: What It Means for You,” 
Forbes, August 4, 2014; R. Albergotti, “Furor Erupts over Facebook’s 
Experiment on Users,” The Wall Street Journal, June 30, 2014; “Facebook 
Emotion Experiment Sparks Criticism,” BBC News, June 30, 2014; A. 
Ma, “Facebook Is Experimenting with How You Read the News,” The 
Huffington Post, June 30, 2014; M. Meyer, “Everything You Need to Know 
about Facebook’s Controversial Emotion Experiment,” Wired, June 30, 
2014; V. Goel, “Facebook Tinkers with Users’ Emotions in News Feed 
Experiment, Stirring Outcry,” The New York Times, June 29, 2014; C. Miller, 
“Why Facebook’s News Experiment Matters to Readers,” The New York 
Times, May 14, 2014; Z. Corbyn, “Facebook Experiment Boosts U.S. Voter 
Turnout,” Nature, September 12, 2012; www.facebook.com, accessed 
September 3, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Discuss the ethicality and legality of Facebook’s experiment with 
human emotions. 
2.  Was Facebook’s response to criticism concerning that experiment 
adequate? Why or why not? 
3.  Consider the experiments that Facebook conducted in May and 
June 2015. Is there a difference between these two experiments 
and Facebook’s experiment with human emotions? Why or why 
not? 
4.  Should the law require companies to inform their users every time 
they conduct experiments? Why or why not? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
CHAPTER 7  
Henrik5000/iStockphoto 
Information Security  
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
7.1  Introduction to Information Security 
7.2  Unintentional Threats to Information 
Systems 
7.3  Deliberate Threats to Information 
Systems 
7.4  What Organizations Are Doing to 
Protect Information Resources 
7.5  Information Security Controls 
Opening Case 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
7.1. Identify the five factors that contribute to the increasing vulnerability of information 
resources and specific examples of each factor. 
7.2  Compare and contrast human mistakes and social engineering, along with specific 
examples of each one. 
7.3. Discuss the 10 types of deliberate attacks. 
7.4. Describe the three risk mitigation strategies and examples of each one in the context 
of owning a home. 
7.5. Identify the three major types of controls that organizations can use to protect their 
information resources along with an example of each one. 
(http://stlouis.cardinals.mlb.com), were divisional rivals in Major 
League Baseball’s National League. For part of that time, Jeff Luh-
The St. Louis Cardinals Investigated for 
now was a Cardinals executive whose primary responsibilities were 
MIS 
scouting and player development. He was credited with developing 
Hacking the Houston Astros 
professional baseball’s best minor league system, and he draft ed sev-
From 1994 to 2012, two professional baseball teams, the Houston 
eral players who were instrumental to the Cardinals victory in the 2011 
Astros (http://houston.astros.mlb.com) and the St. Louis Cardinals 
World Series. 
176 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 177 
While Luhnow was working for the Cardinals, the team developed 
network, suggesting that they thought that perhaps Luhnow used the 
a computer system called Redbird. The system managed the team’s 
same passwords while working for the Astros that he used while work-
baseball operations information. This valuable, highly secret informa-
ing with the Cardinals. 
tion included scouting reports and player information. 
In July 2015, the Cardinals terminated the contract of their scout-
Then, in December 2011, the Astros hired Luhnow away from the 
ing director, who admitted hacking into the Astros’ system. He main-
Cardinals to be their general manager. When Luhnow joined the Astros, 
tained, however, that his sole objective was to determine whether the 
some of the Cardinals front-office personnel went with him. The Astros 
Astros had stolen proprietary data from the Cardinals. 
promptly developed a computer system called Ground Control. Similar 
If the charges against the Cardinals are confirmed, then this 
to Redbird, Ground Control managed the team’s baseball operations 
attack would represent the first known case of corporate espionage in 
information. Specifically, the system analyzed a group of variables and 
which a professional sports team hacked the network of another team. 
weighted them according to the values determined by the team’s stat-
Somewhat humorously, when Luhnow was asked how the breach 
isticians, physicians, scouts, and coaches. 
affected the way he deals with other teams, he responded that he now 
In 2014, some of the information from the Astros’ information sys-
uses a pencil and paper. 
tem was anonymously posted online. Details included trade discussions 
that the Astros had conducted with other teams. Believing that the Astros’ 
Sources: Compiled from D. Brown, “Cardinals Fire Scouting Director, 
network had been compromised, Major League Baseball notified the FBI. 
Possibly Linked to Hacking Scandal,” CBS Sports, July 2, 2015; B. Reiter, 
The FBI began investigating the Cardinals’ front-off ice personnel,  
“Exclusive: Astros GM Jeff Luhnow Speaks Out about Hacking Scandal,” 
SI.com, June 18, 2015; I. Crouch, “Baseball’s Data Breaches,” The New 
whom they accused of hacking into an internal network of the Astros 
Yorker, June 17, 2015; “FBI Investigates Cardinals for Hacking into Astros’ 
to steal proprietary information about players. Investigators uncov-
Database,” ESPN.com, June 17, 2015; D. Wilber and M. Levinson, “FBI 
ered evidence that Cardinals’ employees illegally accessed an Astros 
Investigating St. Louis Cardinals for Hacking Houston Astros,” Bloomberg 
database containing information concerning internal discussions 
BusinessWeek, June 16, 2015; J. Green, “My Time with the Architect of 
about trades, proprietary player statistics, and scouting reports. Sub-
the Astros’ ‘Ground Control’ Database,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, June 
poenas have been served on the Cardinals and Major League Baseball 
16, 2015; M. Schmidt, “Cardinals Investigated for Hacking into Astros’ 
for electronic correspondence. 
Database,” The New York Times, June 16, 2015; J. Green, “Extreme 
Moneyball: The Houston Astros Go All in on Data Analysis,” Bloomberg 
Law enforcement officials believe that Cardinals’ front-off ice 
BusinessWeek, August 28, 2014; http://houston.astros.mlb.com, http://
employees hacked the Astros’ database to damage Luhnow’s work. 
stlouis.cardinals.mlb.com), accessed July 31, 2015. 
Specifically, they claim that Cardinals’ personnel were concerned that 
Luhnow had taken both their idea (Redbird) and proprietary base-
Questions
ball information to the Astros. Investigators further contend that they 
1. Describe how the Cardinals apparently were able to gain access to 
examined a list of passwords used by Luhnow and the other Astros off i-
the Astros’ computer system. 
cials when they worked for the Cardinals. The Cardinals’ employees  
are believed to have used those passwords to gain access to the Astros’ 
2. What lessons should the Astros learn from this security breach?  
Introduction 
The cases in this chapter provide several lessons. First, it is difficult, if not impossible, for 
organizations to provide perfect security for their data. Second, there is a growing danger that 
countries are engaging in economic cyberwarfare among themselves. Third, it appears that it is 
impossible to secure the Internet.  The answer to this question impacts each and every one of 
us. In essence, our personally identifiable, private data is not secure. 
The answers to these issues and others are not clear. As you learn about information security 
in the context of information technology, you will acquire a better understanding of these issues, 
their importance, their relationships, and their trade-offs. Keep in mind that the issues involved 
in information security impact individuals and small organizations as well as large companies. 
Information security is especially important to small businesses. Large organizations that 
experience an information security problem have greater resources to bring to both resolve 
and survive the problem. In contrast, small businesses have fewer resources and therefore can 
be destroyed by a data breach. 
When properly used, information technologies can have enormous benefits for individ­
uals, organizations, and entire societies. In Chapters 1 and 2, you read about diverse ways in 
which IT has made businesses more productive, eff icient, and responsive to consumers. You 
also explored fields such as medicine and philanthropy in which IT has improved people’s 
health and well-being. Unfortunately, information technologies can also be misused, oft en 
with devastating consequences. Consider the following scenarios: 
• Individuals can have their identities stolen. 
• Organizations can have customer information stolen, leading to financial losses, erosion of 
customer confidence, and legal action. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
178 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
• Countries face the threats of cyberterrorism and cyberwarfare, terms for Internet-based 
attacks. Cyberwarfare is a critical problem for the U.S. government. In fact, President 
Obama signed a cyberwarfare directive in October 2012. In that directive, the White House, 
for the first time, laid out specific ground rules for how and when the U.S. military can carry 
out offensive and defensive cyber operations against foreign threats. The directive empha­
sizes the Obama administration’s focus on cybersecurity as a top priority. 
Clearly, the misuse of information technologies has come to the forefront of any discussion 
of IT. Studies have revealed that each security breach costs an organization millions of dollars. 
For example, consider the Sony and Office of Personnel Management breaches described in 
this chapter’s closing cases. The direct costs of a data breach include hiring forensic experts, 
notifying customers, setting up telephone hotlines to field queries from concerned or aff ected 
customers, offering free credit monitoring, and providing discounts for future products and 
services. The more intangible costs of a breach include the loss of business from increased 
customer turnover—called customer churn—and decreases in customer trust. 
In fact, a study by the Ponemon Institute (www.ponemon.org) revealed that for large com­
panies around the world, the average cost of a data breach was almost $4 million in 2015. In 
addition, the annual global cost of cybercrime is estimated to be approximately $400 billion. 
Finally, the two industries with the highest per-record cost of a data breach are healthcare 
($359 per record) and education ($294 per record). 
Unfortunately, employee negligence caused many of the data breaches, meaning that 
organizational employees are a weak link in information security. It is therefore very important 
for you to learn about information security so that you will be better prepared when you enter 
the workforce. 
7.1 Introduction to Information Security 
Security can be defined as the degree of protection against criminal activity, danger, damage, 
and/or loss. Following this broad definition, information security refers to all of the processes 
and policies designed to protect an organization’s information and information systems (IS) from 
unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction. You have seen that 
information and information systems can be compromised by deliberate criminal actions and by 
anything that can impair the proper functioning of an organization’s information systems. 
Before continuing, let’s consider these key concepts. Organizations collect huge amounts 
of information and employ numerous information systems that are subject to myriad threats. 
A threat to an information resource is any danger to which a system may be exposed. The 
exposure of an information resource is the harm, loss, or damage that can result if a threat 
compromises that resource. An information resource’s vulnerability is the possibility that the 
system will be harmed by a threat. 
Today, five key factors are contributing to the increasing vulnerability of organizational 
information resources, making it much more difficult to secure them: 
1. Today’s interconnected, interdependent, wirelessly networked business environment 
2. Smaller, faster, cheaper computers and storage devices 
3. Decreasing skills necessary to be a computer hacker 
4. International organized crime taking over cybercrime 
5. Lack of management support 
The first factor is the evolution of the IT resource from mainframe-only to today’s highly 
complex, interconnected, interdependent, wirelessly networked business environment. The 
Internet now enables millions of computers and computer networks to communicate freely 
and seamlessly with one another. Organizations and individuals are exposed to a world of 
untrusted networks and potential attackers. In general, a trusted network, is any network within 
your organization and an untrusted network is any network external to your organization. In 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction to Information Security 179 
addition, wireless technologies enable employees to compute, communicate, and access the 
Internet anywhere and anytime. Significantly, wireless is an inherently unsecure broadcast 
communications medium. 
The second factor reflects the fact that modern computers and storage devices (e.g., 
thumb drives or flash drives) continue to become smaller, faster, cheaper, and more portable, 
with greater storage capacity. These characteristics make it much easier to steal or lose a com­
puter or storage device that contains huge amounts of sensitive information. Also, far more 
people are able to afford powerful computers and connect inexpensively to the Internet, thus 
raising the potential of an attack on information assets. 
The third factor is that the computing skills necessary to be a hacker are decreasing. The 
reason is that the Internet contains information and computer programs called scripts that 
users with few skills can download and use to attack any information system connected to the 
Internet. (Security experts can also use these scripts for legitimate purposes, such as testing 
the security of various systems.) 
The fourth factor is that international organized crime is taking over cybercrime. 
Cybercrime refers to illegal activities conducted over computer networks, particularly the 
Internet. iDefense (http://labs.idefense.com), a company that specializes in providing security 
information to governments and Fortune 500 companies, maintains that groups of well-organ­
ized criminal organizations have taken control of a global billion-dollar crime network. The net­
work, powered by skillful hackers, targets known software security weaknesses. These crimes 
are typically nonviolent, but quite lucrative. Consider, for example, that losses from armed rob­
beries average hundreds of dollars, and those from white-collar crimes average tens of thou­
sands of dollars. In contrast, losses from computer crimes average hundreds of thousands of 
dollars. Also, computer crimes can be committed from anywhere in the world, at any time, 
effectively providing an international safe haven for cybercriminals. Computer-based crimes 
cause billions of dollars in damages to businesses each year, including the costs of repairing 
information systems and of lost business. 
The fifth, and final, factor is lack of management support. For the entire organization to 
take security policies and procedures seriously, senior managers must set the tone. Unfortu­
nately, senior managers often do not do so. Ultimately, however, lower-level managers may be 
even more important. These managers are in close contact with employees every day and thus 
are in a better position to determine whether employees are following security procedures. 
Before you go on…
 1. Define information security.
 2. Differentiate among a threat, an exposure, and a vulnerability.
 3. Why are the skills needed to be a hacker decreasing? 
Apply the Concept 7.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 7.1 Identify the five factors 
that contribute to the increasing vulnerability of information 
resources and specific examples of each factor. 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
Section 7.1 has taught you about the importance of information 
security, particularly when you are conducting business over the 
Web. It is important to note that a chain is only as strong as its 
weakest link. Therefore, although you may have been careful to 
maintain security across your network, if your business partners 
have not done so as well, then as your information passes over 
their networks it will be at risk. 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you are doing.) 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the link to VeriSign’s Web site. As you read this page, 
keep in mind that VeriSign is in the business of protecting Web 
sites and Web users, which is something we all appreciate. In fact, 
it is likely that you feel some level of comfort when you see the 
VeriSign symbol on an e-commerce site. 

  
 
180 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.)  
provide examples of how Verisign can help protect the client’s 
digital assets against these threats. Submit your memo to your 
After reading the article, compose a brief memo from VeriSign 
instructor. 
to a potential client. Identify the five factors that contribute 
to the increasing vulnerability of information resources and 
7.2 Unintentional Threats to Information 
Systems 
Information systems are vulnerable to many potential hazards and threats, as you can see in 
Figure 7.1. The two major categories of threats are unintentional threats and deliberate threats. 
This section discusses unintentional threats, and the next section addresses deliberate threats. 
FIGURE 7.1 F igure illustrating security threats, where a ring denoting corporate LAN (intranet) is placed in the center. The part above the ring denotes outside threats and the part below denotes inside threats. Downward arrows from a cloud denoting internet point at the ring. The arrows denote malware, denial of service, and unauthorized users. Arrows from boxes denoting natural disasters and man-made disasters also point at the ring. The inside threats include employees, system software, other insiders, and hardware threats.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unintentional Threats to Information Systems 181 
Unintentional threats are acts performed without malicious intent that nevertheless rep­
resent a serious threat to information security. A major category of unintentional threats is 
human error. 
Human Errors 
Organizational employees span the breadth and depth of the organization, from mail clerks 
to the CEO, and across all functional areas. There are two important points to be made about 
employees. First, the higher the level of employee, the greater the threat he or she poses to 
information security. This is true because higher-level employees typically have greater access 
to corporate data, and they enjoy greater privileges on organizational information systems. 
Second, employees in two areas of the organization pose especially significant threats to infor­
mation security: human resources and information systems (IS). Human resources employ­
ees generally have access to sensitive personal information about all employees. Likewise, IS 
employees not only have access to sensitive organizational data, but also often control the 
means to create, store, transmit, and modify those data. 
Other employees include contract labor, consultants, and janitors and guards. Contract 
labor, such as temporary hires, may be overlooked in information security arrangements. How­
ever, these employees often have access to the company’s network, information systems, and 
information assets. Consultants, although technically not employees, perform work for the 
company. Depending on the nature of their work, they may also have access to the company’s 
network, information systems, and information assets. 
Finally, janitors and guards are the most frequently ignored people in information security 
systems. Companies frequently outsource their security and janitorial services. As with contrac­
tors, then, these individuals work for the company although they technically are not employees. 
Moreover, they are usually present when most—if not all—other employees have gone home. 
They typically have keys to every office, and nobody questions their presence in even the most 
sensitive parts of the building. In fact, an article from 2600: The Hacker Quarterly described how to 
get a job as a janitor for the purpose of gaining physical access to an organization. 
Human errors or mistakes by employees pose a serious problem. These errors are typically 
the result of laziness, carelessness, or a lack of awareness concerning information security. This 
lack of awareness arises from poor education and training efforts by the organization. Human 
mistakes manifest themselves in many different ways, as illustrated in Table 7.1. 
TABLE 7.1 Human Mistakes 
Human Mistake 
Description and Examples 
Carelessness with laptops 
Losing or misplacing laptops, leaving them in taxis, and so on. 
Carelessness with  computing devices  
Losing or misplacing these devices, or using them carelessly so that malware is introduced 
into an organization’s network. 
Opening questionable e-mails  
Opening e-mails from someone unknown, or clicking on links embedded in e-mails (see 
phishing attack in Table 7.2). 
Careless Internet surfing  
Accessing questionable Web sites; can result in malware and/or alien software being intro­
duced into the organization’s network. 
Poor password selection and use  
Choosing and using weak passwords (see strong passwords in the “Authentication” section 
later in this chapter). 
Carelessness with one’s office  
Leaving desks and filing cabinets unlocked when employees go home at night; not logging 
off the company network when leaving the office for any extended period of time. 
Carelessness using unmanaged devices  
Unmanaged devices are those outside the control of an organization’s IT department and 
company security procedures. These devices include computers belonging to customers 
and business partners, computers in the business centers of hotels, and so on. 
Carelessness with  discarded  equipment  
Discarding old computer hardware and devices without completely wiping the memory; 
includes computers, smartphones, BlackBerry® units, and digital copiers and printers. 
Careless monitoring of environmental hazards 
These hazards, which include dirt, dust, humidity, and static electricity, are harmful to the 
operation of computing equipment. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
182 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
The human errors you have just studied, although unintentional, are committed entirely 
by employees. However, employees also can make unintentional mistakes in response to 
actions by an attacker. Attackers often employ social engineering to induce individuals to make 
unintentional mistakes and disclose sensitive information. 
Social Engineering 
Social engineering is an attack in which the perpetrator uses social skills to trick or manipulate 
legitimate employees into providing confidential company information such as passwords. The 
most common example of social engineering occurs when the attacker impersonates some­
one else on the telephone, such as a company manager or an information systems employee. 
The attacker claims he forgot his password and asks the legitimate employee to give him a 
password to use. Other common ploys include posing as an exterminator, an air-conditioning 
technician, or a fire marshal. Examples of social engineering abound. 
In one company, a perpetrator entered a company building wearing a company ID card 
that looked legitimate. He walked around and put up signs on bulletin boards reading “The 
help desk telephone number has been changed. The new number is 555-1234.” He then exited 
the building and began receiving calls from legitimate employees thinking they were calling the 
company help desk. Naturally, the first thing the perpetrator asked for was username and pass­
word. He now had the information necessary to access the company’s information systems. 
Two other social engineering techniques are tailgating and shoulder surfing. Tailgating is a tech­
nique designed to allow the perpetrator to enter restricted areas that are controlled with locks or 
card entry. The perpetrator follows closely behind a legitimate employee and, when the employee 
gains entry, the attacker asks him or her to “hold the door.” Shoulder surfing occurs when a per­
petrator watches an employee’s computer screen over the employee’s shoulder. This technique is 
particularly successful in public areas such as in airports and on commuter trains and airplanes. 
Before you go on…
 1. What is an unintentional threat to an information system?
 2. Provide examples of social engineering attacks other than the ones just discussed. 
Apply the Concept 7.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 7.2 Compare and contrast 
STEP 2: Activity 
human mistakes and social engineering, along with specific 
Go to http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
examples of each one. 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 7.2. You will 
find an article about how the hard drive in a printer sometimes 
STEP 1: Background 
stores images of all of the documents that have been copied. In 
the past, when these printers were discarded their hard drives 
Sensitive information is generally stored in a safe location, both 
were not erased, leaving medical records, police reports, and 
physically and digitally. However, as you have just read, this 
other private information in a vulnerable state. 
information is often vulnerable to unintentional threats that result 
from careless mistakes. As one example, employees frequently 
use USB (flash) drives to take information home. Although these 
actions are perfectly legal, the USB drive makes it easy to lose the 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
information or to copy it onto unauthorized machines. In fact, any 
Compare and contrast human mistakes and social engineering 
device that stores information can become a threat to information 
using the example above. How might someone make a mistake 
security—backup drives, CDs, DVDs, and even printers! 
with a printer? How might someone use social engineering 
Printers?! Because people can “copy” information? Not quite. 
to access or create copies of personal information? Put your 
Continue the activity to find out more. 
thoughts into a report and submit it to your instructor. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deliberate Threats to Information Systems 183 
7.3  Deliberate Threats to Information  
Systems  
There are many types of deliberate threats to information systems. We provide a list of 10 com­
mon types for your convenience:
 1. Espionage or trespass
 2. Information extortion
 3. Sabotage or vandalism
 4. Theft of equipment or information
 5. Identity theft
 6. Compromises to intellectual property
 7. Soft ware attacks
 8. Alien soft ware
 9. Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) attacks 
10. Cyberterrorism and cyberwarfare 
Espionage or Trespass 
Espionage or trespass occurs when an unauthorized individual attempts to gain illegal access 
to organizational information. It is important to distinguish between competitive intelligence 
and industrial espionage. Competitive intelligence consists of legal information-gathering 
techniques, such as studying a company’s Web site and press releases, attending trade shows, 
and similar actions. In contrast, industrial espionage crosses the legal boundary. 
Information Extortion 
Information extortion occurs when an attacker either threatens to steal, or actually steals, 
information from a company. The perpetrator demands payment for not stealing the informa­
tion, for returning stolen information, or for agreeing not to disclose the information. 
Sabotage or Vandalism 
Sabotage and vandalism are deliberate acts that involve defacing an organization’s Web site, 
potentially damaging the organization’s image and causing its customers to lose faith. One 
form of online vandalism is a hacktivist or cyberactivist operation. These are cases of high-tech 
civil disobedience to protest the operations, policies, or actions of an organization or govern­
ment agency. For example, the English Twitter account for the Arabic news network Al Jazeera 
was subject to hacktivism. The Associated Press reported that supporters of Syrian President 
Bashar Assad used the account to tweet pro-Assad links and messages. 
Theft of Equipment or Information 
Computing devices and storage devices are becoming smaller yet more powerful with vastly 
increased storage (e.g., laptops, personal digital assistants, smartphones, digital cameras, 
thumb drives, iPods). As a result, these devices are becoming easier to steal and easier for 
attackers to use to steal information. 
Table 7.1 points out that one type of human mistake is carelessness with laptops. In fact, 
many laptops have been stolen due to such carelessness. The cost of a stolen laptop includes 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
184 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
the loss of data, the loss of intellectual property, laptop replacement, legal and regulatory 
costs, investigation fees, and lost productivity. 
One form of theft, known as dumpster diving, involves rummaging through commercial or 
residential trash to find discarded information. Paper files, letters, memos, photographs, IDs, 
passwords, credit cards, and other forms of information can be found in dumpsters. Unfortu­
nately, many people never consider that the sensitive items they throw in the trash might be 
recovered. When this information is recovered, it can be used for fraudulent purposes. 
Dumpster diving is not necessarily theft, because the legality of this act varies. Because 
dumpsters are usually located on private premises, dumpster diving is illegal in some parts of 
the United States. Even in these cases, however, these laws are enforced with varying degrees 
of rigor. 
Identity Theft 
Identity theft is the deliberate assumption of another person’s identity, usually to gain access 
to his or her financial information or to frame him or her for a crime. Techniques for illegally 
obtaining personal information include the following: 
• Stealing mail or dumpster diving 
• Stealing personal information in computer databases 
• Infiltrating organizations that store large amounts of personal information (e.g., data 
aggregators such as Acxiom) (www.acxiom.com) 
• Impersonating a trusted organization in an electronic communication (phishing) 
Recovering from identity theft is costly, time consuming, and burdensome. Victims also 
report problems in obtaining credit and obtaining or holding a job, as well as adverse eff ects on 
insurance or credit rates. In addition, victims state that it is oft en difficult to remove negative 
information from their records, such as their credit reports. 
Your personal information can be compromised in other ways. For example, your identity 
can be uncovered just by examining your searches in a search engine. The ability to analyze all 
searches by a single user can enable a criminal to identify who the user is and what he or she is 
doing. To demonstrate this fact, The New York Times tracked down a particular individual based 
solely on her AOL searches. 
Compromises to Intellectual Property 
Protecting intellectual property is a vital issue for people who make their livelihood in knowl­
edge fields. Intellectual property is the property created by individuals or corporations that is 
protected under trade secret, patent, and copyright laws. 
A trade secret is an intellectual work, such as a business plan, that is a company secret 
and is not based on public information. An example is the formula for Coca-Cola. A patent is 
an official document that grants the holder exclusive rights on an invention or a process for a 
specified period of time. Copyright is a statutory grant that provides the creators or owners of 
intellectual property with ownership of the property, also for a designated period. Current U.S. 
laws award patents for 20 years and copyright protection for the life of the creator plus 70 years. 
Owners are entitled to collect fees from anyone who wants to copy their creations. It is impor­
tant to note that these are definitions under U.S. law. There is some international standardi­
zation of copyrights and patents, but it is far from total. Therefore, there can be discrepancies 
between U.S. law and other countries’ laws. 
The most common intellectual property related to IT deals with software. In 1980, the U.S. 
Congress amended the Copyright Act to include software. The amendment provides protection 
for the source code and object code of computer software, but it does not clearly identify what 
is eligible for protection. For example, copyright law does not protect fundamental concepts, 
functions, and general features such as pull-down menus, colors, and icons. However, copying 
a software program without making payment to the owner—including giving a disc to a friend 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deliberate Threats to Information Systems 185 
to install on his or her computer—is a copyright violation. Not surprisingly, this practice, called 
piracy, is a major problem for software vendors. The BSA (www.bsa.org) Global Soft ware Piracy 
Study found that the commercial value of soft ware theft totals billions of dollars per year. 
Soft ware Attacks 
Software attacks have evolved from the early years of the computer era, when attackers used 
malicious soft ware (called malware) to infect as many computers worldwide as possible, to the 
profit-driven, Web-based attacks of today. Modern cybercriminals use sophisticated, blended 
malware attacks, typically via the Web, to make money. Table 7.2 displays a variety of soft ware 
attacks. These attacks are grouped into three categories: remote attacks requiring user action; 
remote attacks requiring no user action; and software attacks initiated by programmers during 
the development of a system. This chapter’s opening and closing cases provide excellent exam­
ples of soft ware attacks. 
Not all cybercriminals are sophisticated, however. For example, a student at a U.S. uni­
versity was sentenced to one year in prison for using keylogging software (discussed later in 
this chapter) to steal 750 fellow students’ passwords and vote himself and four of his fraternity 
TABLE 7.2 Types of Software Attacks 
Type 
Description 
Remote Attacks Requiring User Action 
Virus  
Segment of computer code that performs malicious actions 
by attaching to another computer program 
Worm  
Segment of computer code that performs malicious actions 
and will replicate, or spread, by itself (without requiring 
another computer program) 
Phishing attack  
Phishing attacks use deception to acquire sensitive person­
al information by masquerading as official-looking e-mails 
or instant messages. 
Spear phishing  
Phishing attacks target large groups of people. In spear 
phishing attacks, attack the perpetrators find out as much 
information about an individual as possible to improve 
their chances that phishing techniques will obtain sensi­
tive, personal information. 
Remote Attacks Needing No User Action 
Denial-of-service attack  
An attacker sends so many information requests to a target 
computer system that the target cannot handle them suc­
cessfully and typically crashes (ceases to function). 
Distributed denial-of-service attack  
An attacker first takes over many computers, typically 
by using malicious software. These computers are called 
zombies or bots. The attacker uses these bots—which form 
a botnet—to deliver a coordinated stream of information 
requests to a target computer, causing it to crash.
 Attacks by a Programmer Developing a System 
Trojan horse  
Software programs that hide in other computer programs 
and reveal their designed behavior only when they are 
activated 
Back door  
Typically a password, known only to the attacker, that 
allows him or her to access a computer system at will, 
without having to go through any security procedures (also 
called a trap door). 
Logic bomb  
A segment of computer code that is embedded within an 
organization’s existing computer programs and is designed 
to activate and perform a destructive action at a certain 
time or date. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
186 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
brothers into the student government’s president and four vice president positions. The five 
positions would have brought the students a combined $36,000 in stipends. 
The student was caught when university security personnel noticed strange activity on the 
campus network. Authorities identified the computer used in the activity from its IP address. 
On this computer, which belonged to the student in question, authorities found a PowerPoint 
presentation detailing the scheme. Authorities also found research on his computer, with que­
ries such as “how to rig an election” and “jail time for keylogger.” 
Once the university caught onto the scheme, the student reportedly turned back to hack­
ing to try to get himself out of trouble. He created new Facebook accounts in the names of 
actual classmates, going as far as conducting fake conversations between the accounts to try to 
deflect the blame. Those actions contributed to the one-year prison sentence, which the judge 
imposed even after the student pleaded guilty and requested probation. 
There are many different kinds of software attacks, with more appearing every day. As you 
see in IT’s About Business 7.1, ransomware has become a huge problem very quickly. 
IT’s About Business 7.1 
Ransomware 
Mark Stevens, president of a small firm, was notified by one of his 
employees that her computer was locked. Within hours, the mali­
cious software spread from her computer to the company’s servers 
and backup systems. The malware encrypted the firm’s client and 
financial data. A ransom note appeared on the company’s comput­
ers: Pay $400 within 72 hours to unlock the data. 
Mr. Stevens’s initial reaction was to ignore the ransom de­
mand. However, his information technology group informed him 
that it would take far greater time and money to try to break the 
encryption than to pay the ransom. Therefore, one of his employ­
ees went to the local Walgreens, took a MoneyGram gift card, and 
had the cashier load the $400 on it. Within 30 minutes, a program 
unencrypted the data. 
In the end, no data were stolen, and no confidential­
ity breaches occurred. Within 72 hours the company was fully 
operational. 
The malicious software that infected Mr. Stevens’s company 
is called ransomware. Simply put, ransomware blocks access to a 
computer system until the system owner or operator pays a sum 
of money. Types of ransomware include Cryptolocker, Cryptowall, 
TeslaCrypt, and CTB Locker. The most current form of ransomware 
demands payment via the hard-to-trace cryptocurrency Bitcoin, 
and it uses the anonymizing Tor network (www.torproject.org). 
When ransomware first appeared, it was relatively unknown 
and therefore could infect thousands of computers in a few days. 
The malware was typically disseminated through established bot-
nets and phishing attacks. Victims were told to pay the ransom 
in Bitcoin or via MoneyGram to untraceable gift cards in Eastern 
Europe. 
Many ransomware victims reported that the attackers were 
honoring their promise to remove the encryption if the victim met 
the terms within the specified time period. This situation encour­
aged additional victims to pay the ransom instead of pursuing an­
other, generally more costly solution. 
There are two possible solutions to the ransomware problem. 
The first is to hope that if your computer is infected, a third-party 
supplier will have come up with antivirus software to deal with 
your ransomware. Several antivirus vendors have provided fixes 
MIS 
that victims can download to a USB stick. The victim then plugs the 
stick into the infected computer. Unfortunately, antivirus compa­
nies can’t always keep up with the ransomware versions that pop 
up all the time. Therefore, if you are infected with a new type of 
ransomware, you may have little choice if you want your system 
and data back, other than to pay the ransom. 
The second possible solution to the ransomware problem 
is more effective. Essentially, hackers profit from the fact that 
many people don’t back up their valuable information. There­
fore, an effective defense against ransomware is to back up your 
entire system (all of your data, your files, and your operating 
system) every day onto a hard drive that is separate from your 
computer. 
You can also use a cloud storage company or an online backup 
service to make copies of your operating system and data. See, for 
example, iDrive (www.idrive.com), CrashPlan (www.code42.com/ 
crashplan), and SOS Online Backup (www.barracuda.com). This 
process will save you from the inconvenience of having to back up 
every day, but it will cost more money. 
Sources: Compiled from W. Ashford, “Hacker Tries to Hold Plex 
Video Streaming Service to Ransom,” Computer Weekly, July 3, 2015; 
P. Muncaster, “Over One-Third of Firms Hit by Ransomware Blitz,” 
InfoSecurity Magazine, June 26, 2015; C. Stobing, “Ransomware Is 
the New Hot Threat Everyone Is Talking About; What Do You Need 
to Know?” Digital Trends, June 6, 2015; R. Lemos, “Ransomware 
Threat Drives Companies to Enforce Better Backup Habits,” 
eWeek, May 26, 2015; R. Simon, “‘Ransomware’ a Growing Threat 
to Small Businesses,” The Wall Street Journal, April 15, 2015; F. 
Donovan, “Firms Hit by Ransomware More Willing to Negotiate for 
Data,” FierceITSecurity, April 2, 2015; R. Lemos, “How to Prevent 
Ransomware: What One Company Learned the Hard Way,” PC 
World, March 26, 2015; T. Simonite, “Holding Data Hostage: The 
Perfect Internet Crime?” MIT Technology Review, February 4, 2015; 
L. Constantin, “Malvertising Campaign Delivers Digitally Signed 
CryptoWall Ransomware,” PC World, September 29, 2014; “Your Money 
or Your Life Files,” KnowBe4.com, June 2014. 
Questions 
1. Why is ransomware more than a nuisance? 
2. Are your digital files adequately backed up? Why or why not? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Deliberate Threats to Information Systems 187 
Alien Soft ware 
Many personal computers have alien soft ware, or pestware, running on them that the own­
ers are unaware of. Alien soft ware is clandestine software that is installed on your computer 
through duplicitous methods. It typically is not as malicious as viruses, worms, or Trojan horses, 
but it does use up valuable system resources. In addition, it can enable other parties to track 
your Web surfing habits and other personal behaviors. 
The vast majority of pestware is adware—software that causes pop-up advertisements to 
appear on your screen. Adware is common because it works. According to advertising agencies, 
for every 100 people who close a pop-up ad, 3 click on it. This “hit rate” is extremely high for 
Internet advertising. 
Spyware is software that collects personal information about users without their consent. 
Two common types of spyware are keystroke loggers and screen scrapers. 
Keystroke loggers, also called keyloggers, record both your individual keystrokes and 
your Internet Web browsing history. The purposes range from criminal—for example, theft of 
passwords and sensitive personal information such as credit card numbers—to annoying—for 
example, recording your Internet search history for targeted advertising. 
Companies have attempted to counter keyloggers by switching to other forms of identify­
ing users. For example, at some point all of us have been forced to look at wavy, distorted let­
ters and type them correctly into a box. That string of letters is called a CAPTCHA, and it is a test. 
The point of CAPTCHA is that computers cannot (yet) accurately read those distorted letters. 
Therefore, the fact that you can transcribe them means that you are probably not a soft ware 
program run by an unauthorized person, such as a spammer. As a result, attackers have turned 
to screen scrapers, or screen grabbers. This software records a continuous “movie” of a screen’s 
contents rather than simply recording keystrokes. 
Spamware is pestware that uses your computer as a launch pad for spammers. Spam 
is unsolicited e-mail, usually advertising for products and services. When your computer is 
infected with spamware, e-mails from spammers are sent to everyone in your e-mail address 
book, but they appear to come from you. 
Not only is spam a nuisance, but it wastes time and money. Spam costs U.S. companies 
billions of dollars every year. These costs arise from productivity losses, clogged e-mail sys­
tems, additional storage, user support, and antispam software. Spam can also carry viruses 
and worms, making it even more dangerous. 
Cookies are small amounts of information that Web sites store on your computer, tem­
porarily or more or less permanently. In many cases, cookies are useful and innocuous. For 
example, some cookies are passwords and user IDs that you do not want to retype every time 
you access the Web site that issued the cookie. Cookies are also necessary for online shopping 
because merchants use them for your shopping carts. 
Tracking cookies, however, can be used to track your path through a Web site, the time 
you spend there, what links you click on, and other details that the company wants to record, 
usually for marketing purposes. Tracking cookies can also combine this information with your 
name, purchases, credit card information, and other personal data to develop an intrusive pro­
file of your spending habits. 
Most cookies can be read only by the party that created them. However, some companies 
that manage online banner advertising are, in essence, cookie-sharing rings. These companies 
can track information such as which pages you load and which ads you click on. They then 
share this information with their client Web sites, which may number in the thousands. 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition Attacks 
SCADA refers to a large-scale, distributed measurement and control system. SCADA systems are 
used to monitor or to control chemical, physical, and transport processes such as those used 
in oil refineries, water and sewage treatment plants, electrical generators, and nuclear power 
plants. Essentially, SCADA systems provide a link between the physical world and the electronic 
world. 

 
 
 
  
 
 
188 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
SCADA systems consist of multiple sensors, a master computer, and communications infra­
structure. The sensors connect to physical equipment. They read status data such as the open/ 
closed status of a switch or a valve, as well as measurements such as pressure, flow, voltage, 
and current. They control the equipment by sending signals to it, such as opening or closing a 
switch or a valve or setting the speed of a pump. 
The sensors are connected in a network, and each sensor typically has an Internet address 
(Internet Protocol, or IP, address, discussed in Chapter 4). If attackers gain access to the net­
work, they can cause serious damage, such as disrupting the power grid over a large area or 
upsetting the operations of a large chemical or nuclear plant. Such actions could have cata­
strophic results. 
Cyberterrorism and Cyberwarfare 
Cyberterrorism and cyberwarfare refer to malicious acts in which attackers use a target’s 
computer systems, particularly via the Internet, to cause physical, real-world harm or severe 
disruption, often to carry out a political agenda. Although not definitely proven in early 2016, 
the U.S. government considers the Sony hack (see chapter closing case 1) to be an example of 
cyberwarfare committed by North Korea. These actions range from gathering data to attack­
ing critical infrastructure (e.g., via SCADA systems). We treat the two types of attacks as syn­
onymous here, even though cyberterrorism typically is carried out by individuals or groups, 
whereas cyberwarfare is carried out by nation states or non-state actors such as terrorists. 
Before you go on…
 1. Why has the theft of computing devices become more serious over time?
 2. What are the three types of soft ware attacks?
 3. Define alien software and explain why it is a serious problem.
 4. What is a SCADA system? Why can attacks against SCADA system have catastrophic consequences 
Apply the Concept 7.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 7.3 Discuss the ten types of  
will take you to a video about foreign lotteries and a Web site the 
deliberate attacks.  
U.S. Postal Service provides to help people realize when they are 
being scammed. This type of scam has taken advantage of many 
people who are not aware that such scams exist. Aft er watching 
STEP 1: Background 
the video, search the Web for other fraudulent activities that 
Unfortunately there are many people who take advantage of 
involve Craigslist, eBay, and any other sites you find. 
others. Fraud, espionage, information extortion, identity theft , 
cyberterrorism, spamming, phishing, and many other deliberate 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
acts have created a world where we must always confirm the 
Imagine you are the owner of a site such as Craigslist. Draft a 
identity of the people we share information with. 
memo to your users—both buyers and sellers—explaining your 
intention to run a “clean” site where all parties are safe. In your 
STEP 2: Activity 
memo, discuss the ten types of deliberate attacks that you want 
Go to http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
your users to be aware of as they conduct business on your site. 
and click on the links provided for Apply the Concept 7.3. The link 
Submit your memo to your instructor. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.4 
What Organizations Are Doing to Protect Information Resources 189 
What Organizations Are Doing to 
Protect Information Resources 
Why is stopping cybercriminals such a challenge? Table 7.3 illustrates the many major diff icul­
ties involved in protecting information. Because organizing an appropriate defense system is 
so important to the entire enterprise, it is one of the major responsibilities of any prudent CIO 
as well as of the functional managers who control information resources. In fact, IT security is 
the business of everyone in an organization. 
In addition to the problems listed in Table 7.3, another reason why information resources 
are difficult to protect is that the online commerce industry is not particularly willing to install 
safeguards that would make completing transactions more difficult or complicated. As one 
example, merchants could demand passwords or personal identification numbers for all credit 
card transactions. However, these requirements might discourage people from shopping 
online. For credit card companies, it is cheaper to block a stolen credit card and move on than 
to invest time and money prosecuting cybercriminals. 
And the final reason why information resources are difficult to protect is that it is extremely 
difficult to catch perpetrators. However, IT’s About Business 7.2 shows that it is possible to 
catch attackers, albeit with great effort, time, and expense. 
Difficulties in Protecting Information Resources 
TABLE 7.3 
Hundreds of potential threats exist. 
Computing resources may be situated in many locations. 
Many individuals control or have access to information assets.  
Computer networks can be located outside the organization, making them difficult to protect.  
Rapid technological changes make some controls obsolete as soon as they are installed.  
Many computer crimes are undetected for a long period of time, so it is difficult to learn from experi­
ence.  
People tend to violate security procedures because the procedures are inconvenient.  
The amount of computer knowledge necessary to commit computer crimes is usually minimal. As a  
matter of fact, a potential criminal can learn hacking, for free, on the Internet.  
The costs of preventing hazards can be very high. Therefore, most organizations simply cannot afford  
to protect themselves against all possible hazards.  
It is difficult to conduct a cost–benefit justification for controls before an attack occurs because it is 
difficult to assess the impact of a hypothetical attack. 
IT’s About Business 7.2 
MIS 
Catching a Hacker 
To be a hacker, all you really need is a computer and an Internet 
connection. Aleksandr Panin is a Russian hacker who created 
SpyEye, one of the most sophisticated and destructive malicious 
software programs ever developed. According to court documents, 
Panin launched SpyEye on January 10, 2010, using www.darkode. 
com, a hacker marketplace. Fellow hackers could buy the basic ver­
sion of SpyEye for $1,000, or advanced versions for up to $8,500. 
SpyEye automates the collection of confidential personal and 
financial information. The malware can hijack Web browsers and/ 
or present fake bank Web pages that prompt users to enter their 
login information. SpyEye also scans infected computers for credit 
card credentials. 
The FBI estimates that Panin had sold 150 SpyEye packages. 
Panin allegedly provided his clients with SpyEye updates and secu­
rity patches as well as after-sale maintenance, updates, and techni­
cal support. 
SpyEye systematically infected nearly 1.5 million comput­
ers around the world, creating a massive botnet. The malware 
penetrated computers at multinational corporations, financial in­
stitutions, and governments. SpyEye collected data ranging from 
passwords to credit card and bank account information. The U.S. 
Justice Department estimates that SpyEye caused $500 million 
worth of theft and other damage. 
The Chase The FBI was after Panin. Agents traveled the world, 
posing as cybercrooks and becoming hackers themselves. They 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
190 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
reviewed millions of lines of computer code and worked, not 
always with cooperation, with police in Thailand, Bulgaria, and 
Britain. They had to wait until Panin left Russia before they could 
arrest him. Let’s take a closer look at how Panin was brought to 
justice. 
In February 2011, the FBI targeted a SpyEye server allegedly 
operated by one of Panin’s collaborators. The agency seized this 
server, located near Atlanta, Georgia, which is a command-and­
control server. (Note: A command-and-control server is a computer 
that controls a botnet.) The FBI claims that Hamza Bendelladj, 
working with Panin, operated the server remotely from his home 
in Algeria. The server controlled SpyEye-infected computers in the 
United States, including some linked to more than 250 banks in 
New York, California, Virginia, and North Carolina. 
In the summer of 2011, FBI informants, posing as cybercrimi­
nals, paid $8,500 to Panin on www.darkode.com to buy a SpyEye 
package. Panin instructed them to transfer the payment electroni­
cally to a digital account at a Costa Rica-based money processor 
called Liberty Reserve (which was shut down by federal agents the 
next year). By December, agents had collected enough evidence— 
two hard drives and more than 1 terabyte of data—to secure a 
23-count indictment against Bendelladj. However, they still did not 
know the identity of the creator of SpyEye. As a result, a grand jury 
indicted “John Doe.” 
Federal agents then sought the assistance of “white-hat hack­
ers.” This term refers to ethical computer system hackers who spe­
cialize in testing organizational information systems to identify 
weaknesses and thus improve security. The FBI and the Justice 
Department worked with TrendMicro (www.trendmicro.com), a 
Dallas-based computer security firm, that employs 1,200 white-hat 
hackers who identify and stop malware attacks. 
TrendMicro’s initial step was to identify the digital characteris­
tics of SpyEye’s computer code and map the malware’s infrastruc­
ture (i.e., IP addresses and the location of command-and-control 
computers). The company then monitored an online hacking forum 
frequently visited by Panin and his customers. 
Fortunately for the investigators, Panin and a computer pro­
grammer he worked with who was known online as “bx1” occa­
sionally demonstrated poor judgment. Specifically, they gave up 
information about e-mail addresses and instant messenger ac­
counts, which TrendMicro followed to discover actual identities. 
For instance, on one SpyEye server, TrendMicro analysts 
analyzed the computer code. In addition to discovering the name 
“bx1,” one of Panin’s collaborators, analysts found an e-mail ad­
dress and login information for Virtest, a service used by hackers to 
detect malware. The researchers compared that information with 
names in the underground forum to link the computer code to one 
of Panin’s collaborators. TrendMicro then gave this information to 
law enforcement off icials. 
The case wasn’t over yet, though. Because Russia and the 
United States do not have an extradition treaty, federal off icials 
had to wait until Panin left Russia to arrest him. The indictment 
against him remained sealed for two years so that he would not get 
word that he’d been found out. 
The Capture It wasn’t until January 5, 2013, that the first arrest 
in the case was made. Bendelladj was travelling from Malaysia to 
Egypt and was arrested by Thai authorities during a stopover in 
Bangkok. In May 2013, he was extradited to the United States to 
face charges, and he pleaded not guilty. 
Then, on July 1, 2013, FBI agents arrested Panin when he flew 
through Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. Panin 
had been visiting a friend in the Dominican Republic and was fly­
ing back to Russia. In January 2014, Panin pleaded guilty to bank 
and wire fraud. In April 2016, Panin was sentenced to 9 and one-half 
years in prison. 
The capture and conviction of Panin is a textbook case of how 
the war on cybercrime can be won. But it’s often an uphill battle 
to protect U.S. consumers, banks, retailers, and other victims of 
cybercrime. Law authorities must dig through layers of encryption 
and anonymous user names, as well as fight with authorities in for­
eign countries, to bring hackers to justice. In essence, law enforce­
ment officials must chase digital footprints. 
Sources: P. Mishra, “Creators of SpyEye Trojan Alsksandr Panin, Hamza 
Bendelladj Sentenced,” www.hackread.com, April 22, 2016; “Russian 
National To Be Sentenced in SpyEye Malware Case in March 2015,” 
Russian Legal Information Agency, November 14, 2014; “SpyEye Hacker 
Arrested,” Cyberwarzone, May 24, 2014; “SpyEye-Using Cybercriminal 
Arrested in Britain,” TrendMicro Blog, May 22, 2014; K. Eichenwald, “The 
$500,000,000 Cyber-Heist,” Newsweek, March 13, 2014; D. Leger and A. 
Arutunyan, “How the Feds Brought Down a Notorious Russian Hacker,” 
USA Today, March 5, 2014; D. Neal, “FBI Bests SpyEye Banking Botnet 
Coder,” The Inquirer, January 29, 2014; A. Grossman and D. Yadron, 
“Island Vacation Costs Russian Hacker Aleksandr Panin,” The Wall Street 
Journal, January 28, 2014; “Cyber Criminal Pleads Guilty to Developing 
and Distributing Nororious SpyEye Malware,” U.S. Department of Justice 
News, January 28, 2014; D. Kerr, “SpyEye Malware Inventor Pleads 
Guilty to Bank Fraud,” CNET News, January 28, 2014. 
Questions 
1. Why did the FBI need to “argue with law enforcement off i­
cials in various countries”? 
2. Describe the difficulties that investigators encounter in 
bringing cybercriminals to justice. Can you propose any ad­
ditional strategies they should consider? 
Organizations spend a great deal of time and money protecting their information resources. 
Before doing so, they perform risk management. 
A risk is the probability that a threat will impact an information resource. The goal of risk 
management is to identify, control, and minimize the impact of threats. In other words, risk 
management seeks to reduce risk to acceptable levels. Risk management consists of three pro­
cesses: risk analysis, risk mitigation, and controls evaluation. 
Organizations perform risk analyses to ensure that their IS security programs are cost 
eff ective. Risk analysis involves three steps: (1) assessing the value of each asset being pro­
tected, (2) estimating the probability that each asset will be compromised, and (3) comparing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Security Controls 191 
the probable costs of the asset’s being compromised with the costs of protecting that asset. 
The organization then considers how to mitigate the risk. 
In risk mitigation, the organization takes concrete actions against risks. Risk mitigation 
has two functions: (1) implementing controls to prevent identified threats from occurring, and 
(2) developing a means of recovery if the threat becomes a reality. There are several risk mitiga­
tion strategies that organizations can adopt. The three most common are risk acceptance, risk 
limitation, and risk transference: 
1.  Risk acceptance: Accept the potential risk, continue operating with no controls, and ab­
sorb any damages that occur. 
2.  Risk limitation: Limit the risk by implementing controls that minimize the impact of the 
threat. 
3.  Risk transference: Transfer the risk by using other means to compensate for the loss, 
such as by purchasing insurance. 
Finally, in controls evaluation, the organization examines the costs of implementing ade­
quate control measures against the value of those control measures. If the costs of implement­
ing a control are greater than the value of the asset being protected, the control is not cost 
effective. In the next section, you will study the various controls that organizations use to pro­
tect their information resources. 
Before you go on…
 1. Describe several reasons why it is difficult to protect information resources.
 2. Compare and contrast risk management and risk analysis. 
Apply the Concept 7.4 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 7.4 Describe the three risk 
where your home is located. For example, a home on the beach is 
mitigation strategies and examples of each one in the context of 
much more susceptible to hurricanes than is a home in Nebraska. 
owning a home. 
However, the home in Nebraska is (perhaps) more susceptible to 
tornadoes than is the home on the beach.  
STEP 1: Background 
STEP 2: Activity 
Section 7.4 has discussed at length the ways businesses deal with 
Imagine that you own your home. What risks do you need to 
risk. Risk management is so important that companies frequently 
manage? What property do you need to assess? What is the 
assign an entire department to oversee risk analysis and 
probability that any asset will be compromised? (Note: You 
mitigation. When companies address risk they have three basic 
will need to assess the risk to each asset.) What are the costs 
methods to choose from: risk acceptance, risk limitation, and risk 
associated with each asset being compromised?    
transference. Significantly, we do the same thing when it comes 
to our personal assets.  
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Like businesses, homeowners face intentional and unintentional 
In a document, define the three risk management strategies and 
threats. To mitigate against these threats, almost all homeowners 
provide an example of each one in the context of owning a home. 
take certain actions. These actions reflect, among other things, 
Submit your document to your instructor. 
7.5 
Information Security Controls 
To protect their information assets, organizations implement controls, or defense mechanisms 
(also called countermeasures). These controls are designed to protect all of the components of 
an information system, including data, software, hardware, and networks. Because there are so 
many diverse threats, organizations utilize layers of controls, or defense-in-depth. 

 
 
 
 
192 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
Controls are intended to prevent accidental hazards, deter intentional acts, detect prob­
lems as early as possible, enhance damage recovery, and correct problems. Before you study 
controls in more detail, it is important to emphasize that the single most valuable control is 
user education and training. Effective and ongoing education makes every member of the 
organization aware of the vital importance of information security. 
In this section, you will learn about three major types of controls: physical controls, access 
controls, and communications controls. Figure 7.2 illustrates these controls. In addition to 
applying controls, organizations plan for business continuity in case of a disaster, and they 
periodically audit their information resources to detect possible threats. You will study these 
topics in this section as well. 
Physical Controls 
Physical controls prevent unauthorized individuals from gaining access to a company’s facili­
ties. Common physical controls include walls, doors, fencing, gates, locks, badges, guards, and 
alarm systems. More sophisticated physical controls include pressure sensors, temperature 
sensors, and motion detectors. One shortcoming of physical controls is that they can be incon­
venient to employees. 
Guards deserve special mention because they have very difficult jobs, for at least two rea­
sons. First, their jobs are boring and repetitive and generally do not pay well. Second, if guards 
perform their jobs thoroughly, the other employees harass them, particularly if they slow up 
the process of entering the facility. 
Organizations also implement physical security measures that limit computer users to 
acceptable login times and locations. These controls also limit the number of unsuccessful 
login attempts, and they require all employees to log off their computers when they leave for Figure illustrating the defense mechanism where the physical controls include company's gate, human guard, and building door. Access controls include ID system (card or biometric), authentication, access password, and personal ID. Communication controls include denial-of-service protection, intrusion detection system, and anti-malware software.
Where defense mechanisms are located. 
FIGURE 7.2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Security Controls 193 
the day. In addition, they set the employees’ computers to automatically log off the user aft er 
a certain period of disuse. 
Access Controls 
Access controls restrict unauthorized individuals from using information resources. These 
controls involve two major functions: authentication and authorization. Authentication con­
firms the identity of the person requiring access. After the person is authenticated (identified), 
the next step is authorization. Authorization determines which actions, rights, or privileges 
the person has, based on his or her verified identity. Let’s examine these functions more closely. 
Authentication. To authenticate (identify) authorized personnel, an organization can use 
one or more of the following methods: something the user is, something the user has, some­
thing the user does, and/or something the user knows. 
Something the user is, also known as biometrics, is an authentication method that exam­
ines a person’s innate physical characteristics. Common biometric applications are fingerprint 
scans, palm scans, retina scans, iris recognition, and facial recognition. Of these applications, 
fingerprints, retina scans, and iris recognition provide the most definitive identification. A huge 
biometric identification project in India provides an example of the power of biometrics. 
India has vast numbers of anonymous poor citizens. The Indian government does not off i­
cially acknowledge the existence of these citizens because they do not possess birth certifi­
cates and other official documentation. Therefore, they cannot access government services to 
which they are entitled, nor can they open bank accounts. 
To address these problems, the nation instituted its Unique Identification Project, also 
known as Aadhaar, which means “the foundation” in several Indian languages. The goal of the 
project is to issue identification numbers linked to the fingerprints and iris scans of all 1.2 bil­
lion Indian citizens. The biometrics and the Aadhaar identification number will serve as a ver­
ifiable, portable, and unique national ID. The Aadhaar project should enable millions of poor 
Indian citizens to access government services that previously were out of reach to them. As of 
April 2016, Aadhaar had enrolled over one billion million people. 
Something the user has is an authentication mechanism that includes regular identifica­
tion (ID) cards, smart ID cards, and tokens. Regular ID cards, or dumb cards, typically have the 
person’s picture and often his or her signature. Smart ID cards have an embedded chip that 
stores pertinent information about the user. (Smart ID cards used for identification diff er from 
smart cards used in electronic commerce, which you learn about in Chapter 9. Both types of 
card have embedded chips, but they are used for diff erent purposes.) Tokens have embedded 
chips and a digital display that presents a login number that the employees use to access the 
organization’s network. The number changes with each login. 
Something the user does is an authentication mechanism that includes voice and signature 
recognition. In voice recognition, the user speaks a phrase (e.g., his or her name and department) 
that has been previously recorded under controlled conditions. The voice recognition system 
matches the two voice signals. In signature recognition, the user signs his or her name, and the 
system matches this signature with one previously recorded under controlled, monitored con­
ditions. Signature recognition systems also match the speed and the pressure of the signature. 
Something the user knows is an authentication mechanism that includes passwords and 
passphrases. Passwords present a huge information security problem in all organizations. 
Most of us have to remember numerous passwords for different online services, and we typi­
cally must choose complicated strings of characters to make them harder to guess. Passwords 
must effectively manage the trade-off between convenience and security. For example, if pass­
words are 50 characters in length and include special symbols, they might keep your computer 
and its files safe, but they would be impossible to remember. 
We have all bought into the idea that a password is sufficient to protect our data, as long as 
it is sufficiently elaborate. In reality, however, passwords by themselves can no longer protect 
us, regardless of how unique or complex we make them. 
Attackers employ a number of strategies to obtain our passwords, no matter how strong 
they are. They can guess them, steal them (with phishing or spear phishing attacks), crack them 

 
 
 
 
 
 
194 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
using brute force computation, or obtain them online. Given these problems with passwords, 
what are users and businesses supposed to do? 
To identify authorized users more efficiently and effectively, organizations are implement­
ing more than one type of authentication, a strategy known as multifactor authentication. This 
system is particularly important when users log in from remote locations. 
Single-factor authentication, which is notoriously weak, commonly consists simply of a 
password. Two-factor authentication consists of a password plus one type of biometric iden­
tification (e.g., a fingerprint). Three-factor authentication is any combination of three authen­
tication methods. In most cases, the more factors the system utilizes, the more reliable it is. 
However, stronger authentication is also more expensive, and, as with strong passwords, it can 
be irritating to users. 
Several initiatives are underway to improve the authentication process under the auspices 
of the Fast Identity Online (FIDO) Alliance (https://fidoalliance.org). FIDO is an industry con­
sortium to address the lack of interoperability among strong authentication devices and the 
problems that users face in creating and remembering multiple usernames and passwords. 
The concept underlying FIDO is that identifiers such as a person’s fingerprint, iris scan, 
and the unique identifier of any USB device or contactless ring will not be sent over the Inter­
net. Rather, they will be checked locally. The only data that will be transferred over the Inter­
net are cryptographic keys that cannot be reverse-engineered to steal a person’s identify. Let’s 
consider two types of examples, security systems using biometrics and security systems using 
physical devices: 
• Nok Nok Labs (www.noknok.com) employs tools on user devices, such as a camera, touch­
screen, and microphone, to provide voice recognition, facial recognition, and fingerprints. 
• The Nymi (www.nymi.com) wristband verifies users’ identities by the unique signals gen­
erated by their heartbeat. 
• Eyelock (www.eyelock.com) manufactures the Myris, a device that scans the iris of users’ 
eyes for authentication. 
• Apple (www.apple.com) provides its TouchID feature on certain devices. It analyzes users’ 
fingerprints. 
• Hoyos Labs (www.hoyoslabs.com) has developed the 1U, an app and subscription-based 
service that employs facial recognition. 
• The NFC Ring (http://nfcring.com) contains contactless RFID technology that can automat­
ically unlock an NFC-capable phone when a person picks it up. In addition, the ring can 
operate other RFID devices such as door locks. 
• Yubico (www.yubico.com) manufactures the YubiKey, a physical token used in combina­
tion with a username and password for two-factor authentication. 
• The Google security key (www.google.com) is a physical USB device that users insert into 
their computers. Users then tap the key when prompted by Chrome. 
If you must use passwords, make them strong passwords, which are more difficult for hack­
ers to discover. The basic guidelines for creating strong passwords are: 
• They should be difficult to guess. 
• They should be long rather than short. 
• They should have uppercase letters, lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters. 
• They should not be recognizable words. 
• They should not be the name of anything or anyone familiar, such as family names or 
names of pets. 
• They should not be a recognizable string of numbers, such as a Social Security number or 
a birthday. 
Unfortunately, strong passwords are more difficult to remember than weak ones. Con­
sequently, employees frequently write them down, which defeats their purpose. The ideal 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Security Controls 195 
solution to this dilemma is to create a strong password that is also easy to remember. To 
achieve this objective, many people use passphrases. 
A passphrase is a series of characters that is longer than a password but is still easy to 
memorize. Examples of passphrases are “maytheforcebewithyoualways” and “goaheadmake­
myday.” A passphrase can serve as a password itself, or it can help you create a strong pass­
word. You can turn a passphrase into a strong password in this manner. Starting with the last 
passphrase above, take the first letter of each word. You will have “gammd.” Then, capitalize 
every other letter to create “GaMmD.” Finally, add special characters and numbers to create 
“9GaMmD//*.” You now have a strong password that you can remember. 
One company provides a new type of authentication. IT’s About Business 7.3 shows how 
Trustev analyzes customer behavior to help merchants combat online fraud. 
IT’s About Business 7.3 
Trustev: Helping to Prevent Credit 
Card Fraud 
Many millions of people have been the victim of credit card fraud 
but with thankfully minimal damage. The reason is that, for the 
most part, these people are not liable for fraudulent use of their 
cards. 
Industry analysts claim that electronic commerce is unfair 
to merchants because they assume all of the risk in credit card 
transactions. Merchants also suffer most, if not all, of the financial 
damages in fraudulent transactions. The overall effect is that many 
online retailers fear fraud so much that they limit their business op­
portunities. In fact, the analysts note that merchants reject approx­
imately 2 percent of legitimate customers. This number is more 
damaging than it might appear, because merchants suff er hidden 
costs as well. The cost to acquire an online customer is about $51 
per customer. If merchants block a legitimate customer, then they 
lose the $51. More significantly, they lose the lifetime value of that 
customer because he or she is not likely to return to the Web site 
after being denied. 
Going further, some merchants block transactions from en­
tire countries. For example, in Europe only 6 percent of online 
merchants permit electronic transactions from another country. 
And then there is China, which has a huge demand for high-end 
merchandise. Since 2010, Chinese citizens have been issued three 
billion credit cards. Nevertheless, Chinese consumers oft en cannot 
shop on foreign retailers’ Web sites because few merchants accept 
payments from China due to fraud concerns. 
This problem provides the rationale for startup company, 
Trustev (www.trustev.com), which enables online retailers to ac­
cept more online transactions. The company helps reduce fraud 
by analyzing customer behavior while they browse and buy online. 
Using this analysis, Trustev takes roughly two-tenths of a second 
to decide whether to accept each transaction. In essence, Trustev 
validates the shoppers themselves, not just their payment method. 
When first launching the service, merchants give Trustev ac­
cess to its systems. Trustev then crafts a profile for a regular online 
customer by observing transactions for a period of time. It collects 
MIS 
data on 80 variables including the customer’s device (e.g., desktop, 
laptop, smartphone), Internet Protocol address, shipping address, 
physical location, e-mail address, and other relevant data. In es­
sence, Trustev creates a digital picture of the customer at the point 
in time of a transaction. To protect data security, the company by 
law must erase all data after 90 days. 
Trustev is growing rapidly. One company in the United King­
dom tried out Trustev for four weeks. The company’s goal was to 
stop fraudulent online transactions while letting through real cus­
tomers who may be accidentally blocked. In just four weeks, the 
company noted a 5 percent revenue increase from blocking fraudu­
lent transactions and another 6 percent increase from accepting 
customers who previously would have been blocked. In another 
example, in September 2014, RadioShack (www.radioshack.com) 
announced that it would install Trustev in its 4,000 stores in the 
United States in a multimillion-dollar deal. 
And the results? In Trustev’s first year of operation, the com­
pany was named Europe’s Top Technology Startup by the European 
Union Commission as well as one of Forbes Hottest Global Startups. 
Sources: Compiled from “Are You Who You Say You Are?” University 
of New South Wales Business Think, April 22, 2015; R. Bradbury, “How 
5% of Online Revenues Are Tossed Away,” Trustev Blog, April 22, 2015; 
K. Russell, “Trustev Uses Fraud Detection Software to Crack Down on 
Internet Trolls,” TechCrunch, December 9, 2014; J. Temperton, “Digital 
Fingerprinting Could Stop Web Trolls for Good,” Wired, December 18, 
2014; J. Kennedy, “Cork’s Trustev in Multimillion-Dollar Security Deal 
with RadioShack,” Silicon Republic, September 5, 2014; J. McManus, 
“Catching Credit Card Cheats from Cork to China,” The Irish Times, July 
11, 2014; “Trustev Taps Datameer Big Data Analytics for E-Commerce 
ID Verification,” Finextra, March 5, 2014; www.trustev.com, accessed 
July 29, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Describe how Trustev’s authentication method diff ers from 
other authentication methods. 
2. What are potential disadvantages with Trustev’s authentica­
tion method? 
Authorization. After users have been properly authenticated, the rights and privileges 
to which they are entitled on the organization’s systems are established in a process called 
authorization. A privilege is a collection of related computer system operations that a user 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
196 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
FIGURE 7.3 (a) Basic firewall for 
home computer. (b) Organization 
with two firewalls and a demilita­
rized zone. 
is authorized to perform. Companies typically base authorization policies on the principle of 
least privilege, which posits that users be granted the privilege for an activity only if there is a 
justifiable need for them to perform that activity. 
Communications Controls 
Communications controls (also called network controls) secure the movement of data 
across networks. Communications controls consist of firewalls, anti-malware systems, whitelis­
ting and blacklisting, encryption, virtual private networks (VPNs), transport layer security (TLS), 
and employee monitoring systems. 
Firewalls. A firewall is a system that prevents a specific type of information from moving be­
tween untrusted networks, such as the Internet, and private networks, such as your company’s 
network. Put simply, firewalls prevent unauthorized Internet users from accessing private net­
works. All messages entering or leaving your company’s network pass through a firewall. The 
firewall examines each message and blocks those that do not meet specified security rules. 
Firewalls range from simple, for home use, to very complex for organizational use. 
Figure 7.3(a) illustrates a basic firewall for a home computer. In this case, the firewall is imple­
mented as software on the home computer. Figure 7.3(b) shows an organization that has 
implemented an external firewall, which faces the Internet, and an internal firewall, which faces 
the company network. Corporate firewalls typically consist of software running on a computer 
dedicated to the task. A demilitarized zone (DMZ) is located between the two firewalls. Mes­
sages from the Internet must first pass through the external firewall. If they conform to the 
defined security rules, they are then sent to company servers located in the DMZ. These servers 
typically handle Web page requests and e-mail. Any messages designated for the company’s 
internal network (e.g., its intranet) must pass through the internal firewall, again with its own 
defined security rules, to gain access to the company’s private network. 
The danger from viruses and worms is so severe that many organizations are placing 
firewalls at strategic points inside their private networks. In this way, if a virus or worm 
does get through both the external and internal firewalls, then the internal damage may be 
contained. 
Anti-malware Systems. Anti-malware systems, also called antivirus, or AV, soft ware, are 
software packages that attempt to identify and eliminate viruses and worms, and other mali­
cious software. AV software is implemented at the organizational level by the IS department. 
Hundreds of AV software packages are currently available. Among the best known are Norton 
AntiVirus (www.symantec.com), McAfee VirusScan (www.mcafee.com), and Trend Micro PC­
cillin (www.trendmicro.com). (a) Figure depicting basic firewall for home computer. From left to right it includes internet followed by internet service provider, broadband connection (DSL, cable modem, 3G, 4G), and home computer consisting of software firewall. (b) Figure depicting firewalls for organization.  From left to right it includes internet, external firewall, demilitarized zone, internal firewall, and corporate LAN (intranet).

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Security Controls 197 
Anti-malware systems are generally reactive. Whereas firewalls filter network traff ic 
according to categories of activities that are likely to cause problems, anti-malware systems 
filter traffic according to a database of specific problems. These systems create definitions, or 
signatures, of various types of malware and then update these signatures in their products. 
The anti-malware software then examines suspicious computer code to determine whether it 
matches a known signature. If the software identifies a match, then it removes the code. For 
this reason, organizations regularly update their malware definitions. 
Because malware is such a serious problem, the leading vendors are rapidly developing 
anti-malware systems that function proactively as well as reactively. These systems evaluate 
behavior rather than relying entirely on signature matching. In theory, therefore, it is possible 
to catch malware before it can infect systems. 
Whitelisting and Blacklisting. A report by the Yankee Group (www.yankeegroup.com), a 
technology research and consulting firm, stated that 99 percent of organizations had installed 
anti-malware systems, but 62 percent still suffered malware attacks. As we have seen, anti­
malware systems are usually reactive, and malware continues to infect companies. 
One solution to this problem is whitelisting. Whitelisting is a process in which a company 
identifies the software that it will allow to run on its computers. Whitelisting permits acceptable 
software to run, and it either prevents any other software from running or lets new soft ware run 
only in a quarantined environment until the company can verify its validity. 
Whereas whitelisting allows nothing to run unless it is on the whitelist, blacklisting allows 
everything to run unless it is on the blacklist. A blacklist, then, includes certain types of soft ­
ware that are not allowed to run in the company environment. For example, a company might 
blacklist peer-to-peer file sharing on its systems. In addition to software, people, devices, and 
Web sites can also be whitelisted and blacklisted. 
Encryption. Organizations that do not have a secure channel for sending information use 
encryption to stop unauthorized eavesdroppers. Encryption is the process of converting an 
original message into a form that cannot be read by anyone except the intended receiver. 
All encryption systems use a key, which is the code that scrambles and then decodes the mes­
sages. The majority of encryption systems use public-key encryption. Public-key encryption— 
also known as asymmetric encryption—uses two different keys: a public key and a private key (see 
Figure 7.4). The public key (locking key) and the private key (the unlocking key) are created simul­
taneously using the same mathematical for­
mula or algorithm. Because the two keys are 
mathematically related, the data encrypted 
with one key can be decrypted by using the 
other key. The public key is publicly available 
in a directory that all parties can access. The 
private key is kept secret, never shared with 
anyone, and never sent across the Internet. 
In this system, if Hannah wants to send a 
message to Harrison, she first obtains Harri­
son’s public key (locking key), which she uses 
to encrypt her message (put the message in 
the “two-lock box”). When Harrison receives 
Hannah’s message, he uses his private key to 
decrypt it (open the box). 
Although this arrangement is adequate 
for personal information, organizations that 
conduct business over the Internet require a 
more complex system. In these cases, a third 
party, called a certificate authority, acts as 
a trusted intermediary between the compa­
nies. The certificate authority issues digital 
How public-key encryption works. 
certificates and verifies the integrity of the 
FIGURE 7.4 

 
 
 
 
198 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security Figure depicting working of digital certificate between Sony and Dell. Sony requests digital certificate from VeriSign. VeriSign creates digital certificate for Sony and transmits digital certificate to Sony. Sony presents digital certificate to Dell for authentication purposes.
FIGURE 7.5 How digital certificates work. Sony and Dell, business partners, use a digital certificate from VeriSign for authentication. 
certificates. A digital certificate is an electronic document attached to a file that certifies that 
the file is from the organization it claims to be from and has not been modified from its original 
format. As you can see in Figure 7.5, Sony requests a digital certificate from VeriSign, a certifi­
cate authority, and it uses this certificate when it conducts business with Dell. Note that the dig­
ital certificate contains an identification number, the issuer, validity dates, and the requester’s 
public key. For examples of certificate authorities, see www.entrust.com, www.verisign.com, 
www.cybertrust.com, www.secude.com, and www.thawte.com. 
Virtual Private Networking. A virtual private network (VPN) is a private network that 
uses a public network (usually the Internet) to connect users. VPNs essentially integrate the 
global connectivity of the Internet with the security of a private network and thereby extend 
the reach of the organization’s networks. VPNs are called virtual because they have no separate 
physical existence. They use the public Internet as their infrastructure. They are created by us­
ing logins, encryption, and other techniques to enhance the user’s privacy, which we defined in 
Chapter 6 as the right to be left alone and to be free of unreasonable personal intrusion. 
VPNs have several advantages. First, they allow remote users to access the company net­
work. Second, they provide flexibility. That is, mobile users can access the organization’s net­
work from properly configured remote devices. Third, organizations can impose their security 
policies through VPNs. For example, an organization may dictate that only corporate e-mail 
applications are available to users when they connect from unmanaged devices. 
To provide secure transmissions, VPNs use a process called tunneling. Tunneling encrypts 
each data packet to be sent and places each encrypted packet inside another packet. In this 
manner, the packet can travel across the Internet with confidentiality, authentication, and 
integrity. Figure 7.6 illustrates a VPN and tunneling. 
Transport Layer Security (TLS). Transport layer security, formerly called secure 
socket layer, is an encryption standard used for secure transactions such as credit card pur­
chases and online banking. TLS encrypts and decrypts data between a Web server and a brows­
er end to end. 
TLS is indicated by a URL that begins with “https” rather than “http,” and it oft en displays 
a small padlock icon in the browser’s status bar. Using a padlock icon to indicate a secure con­
nection and placing this icon in a browser’s status bar are artifacts of specific browsers. Other 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Security Controls 199 
Figure depi cting two boxes on t
he left- and right-hand side denoting your organization's intranet and your business partner's intranet, respectively, connected by a tunnel. The area of tunnel is covered by a cloud denoting internet and a bidirectional arrow in the tunnel denotes data.
browsers use different icons (e.g., a key that is either broken or whole). The important thing to 
remember is that browsers usually provide visual confirmation of a secure connection. 
Employee Monitoring Systems. Many companies are taking a proactive approach to pro­
tecting their networks against what they view as one of their major security threats, namely, 
employee mistakes. These companies are implementing employee monitoring systems, 
which scrutinize their employees’ computers, e-mail activities, and Internet surfing activities. 
These products are useful to identify employees who spend too much time surfing on the In­
ternet for personal reasons, who visit questionable Web sites, or who download music illegally. 
Vendors that provide monitoring soft ware include SpectorSoft (www.spectorsoft .com) and 
Websense (www.websense.com). 
Business Continuity Planning 
A basic security strategy for organizations is to be prepared for any eventuality. A critical ele­
ment in any security system is a business continuity plan, also known as a disaster recovery plan. 
Business continuity is the chain of events linking planning to protection and to recovery. 
The purpose of the business continuity plan is to provide guidance to people who keep the 
business operating after a disaster occurs. Employees use this plan to prepare for, react to, and 
recover from events that affect the security of information assets. The objective is to restore the 
business to normal operations as quickly as possible following an attack. The plan is intended 
to ensure that critical business functions continue. 
In the event of a major disaster, organizations can employ several strategies for business 
continuity. These strategies include hot sites, warm sites, and cold sites. A hot site is a fully 
configured computer facility with all of the company’s services, communications links, and 
physical plant operations. A hot site duplicates computing resources, peripherals, telephone 
systems, applications, and workstations. A warm site provides many of the same services and 
options as the hot site. However, it typically does not include the actual applications the com­
pany needs. A warm site includes computing equipment such as servers, but it often does not 
include user workstations. A cold site provides only rudimentary services and facilities, such 
as a building or a room with heating, air conditioning, and humidity control. This type of site 
provides no computer hardware or user workstations. 
Hot sites reduce risk to the greatest extent, but they are the most expensive option. Con­
versely, cold sites reduce risk the least, but they are the least expensive option. 
Information Systems Auditing 
Companies implement security controls to ensure that information systems function properly. 
These controls can be installed in the original system, or they can be added after a system 
is in operation. Installing controls is necessary but not sufficient to provide adequate secu­
rity. In addition, people responsible for security need to answer questions such as: Are all con­
trols installed as intended? Are they effective? Has any breach of security occurred? If so, what 
actions are required to prevent future breaches? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
200 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
These questions must be answered by independent and unbiased observers. Such observ­
ers perform the task of information systems auditing. In an IS environment, an audit is an exam­
ination of information systems, their inputs, outputs, and processing. 
Types of Auditors and Audits. There are two types of auditors and audits: internal and 
external. IS auditing is usually a part of accounting internal auditing, and it is frequently per­
formed by corporate internal auditors. An external auditor reviews the findings of the internal 
audit as well as the inputs, processing, and outputs of information systems. The external audit 
of information systems is frequently a part of the overall external auditing performed by a certi­
fied public accounting (CPA) firm. 
IS auditing considers all of the potential hazards and controls in information systems. It 
focuses on issues such as operations, data integrity, software applications, security and pri­
vacy, budgets and expenditures, cost control, and productivity. Guidelines are available to 
assist auditors in their jobs, such as those from the Information Systems Audit and Control 
Association (www.isaca.org). 
How Is Auditing Executed? IS auditing procedures fall into three categories: (1) auditing 
around the computer, (2) auditing through the computer, and (3) auditing with the computer. 
Auditing around the computer means verifying processing by checking for known outputs 
using specific inputs. This approach is most effective for systems with limited outputs. In audit­
ing through the computer, auditors check inputs, outputs, and processing. They review program 
logic, and they test the data contained within the system. Auditing with the computer means using 
a combination of client data, auditor software, and client and auditor hardware. This approach 
enables the auditor to perform tasks such as simulating payroll program logic using live data. 
Before you go on…
 1. What is the single most important information security control for organizations?
 2. Differentiate between authentication and authorization. Which of these processes is always per­
formed first?
 3. Compare and contrast whitelisting and blacklisting.
 4. What is the purpose of a disaster recovery plan?
 5. What is information systems auditing? 
Apply the Concept 7.5 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 7.5 Identify the three major 
link will take you to an article about the 2004 movie National 
types of controls that organizations can use to protect their 
Treasure. Watching the actual film is preferable, but you may 
information resources along with an example of each one. 
not have access to it. For this activity, reading about it will 
suff ice. 
STEP 1: Background 
In this movie, Ben Gates (played by Nicholas Cage) steals one 
Security controls are designed to protect all components of an 
of our nation’s most sacred documents—the Declaration of 
information system, including data, software, hardware, and 
Independence. In the process, you see how the thief breaches all 
networks. Because there are so many diverse threats, organizations 
three of the major types of controls.  
utilize layers of controls. One security feature discussed in this 
chapter is public key encryption. This feature requires a public key 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
and a private key. The public key is shared and is used to encrypt a 
message that only the individual’s private key can decrypt. 
Identify the three major types of controls that the National 
Archives employs—and that Gates ultimately penetrates—and 
STEP 2: Activity 
provide examples of them from the movie. Prepare a document 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
with the three types of controls and examples from the movie 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 7.5. The 
and submit it to your instructor. 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Summary 201 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For the Accounting Major 
Public companies, their accountants, and their auditors have sig­
nificant information security responsibilities. Accountants are now 
being held professionally responsible for reducing risk, assuring 
compliance, eliminating fraud, and increasing the transparency of 
transactions according to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 
(GAAP). The SEC and the Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board (PCAOB), among other regulatory agencies, require informa­
tion security, fraud prevention and detection, and internal controls 
over financial reporting. Forensic accounting, a combination of ac­
counting and information security, is one of the most rapidly growing 
areas in accounting today. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
Because information security is essential to the success of organiza­
tions today, it is no longer just the concern of the CIO. As a result of 
global regulatory requirements and the passage of Sarbanes–Oxley 
Act, responsibility for information security lies with the CEO and CFO. 
Consequently, all aspects of the security audit, including the security 
of information and information systems, are a key concern for finan­
cial managers. 
In addition, CFOs and treasurers are increasingly involved 
with investments in information technology. They know that a se­
curity breach of any kind can have devastating financial eff ects on 
a company. Banking and financial institutions are prime targets for 
computer criminals. A related problem is fraud involving stocks and 
bonds that are sold over the Internet. Finance personnel must be 
aware of both the hazards and the available controls associated with 
these activities. 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major 
Marketing professionals have new opportunities to collect data 
on their customers, for example, through business-to-consumer 
electronic commerce. Customers expect their data to be properly 
secured. However, profit-motivated criminals want those data. 
Therefore, marketing managers must analyze the risk of their op­
erations. Failure to protect corporate and customer data will cause 
significant public relations problems, make customers very angry, 
may lead to lawsuits, and may result in losing customers to competi­
tors. CRM operations and tracking customers’ online buying habits 
can expose data to misuse (if they are not encrypted) or result in pri­
vacy violations. 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
Every process in a company’s operations—inventory purchasing, re­
ceiving, quality control, production, and shipping—can be disrupted 
by an information technology security breach or an IT security 
breach at a business partner. Any weak link in supply chain manage­
ment or enterprise resource management systems puts the entire 
chain at risk. Companies may be held liable for IT security failures 
that impact other companies. 
HRM For the Human Resource Management Major 
HR managers have responsibilities to secure confidential employee 
data. In addition, they must ensure that all employees explicitly ver­
ify that they understand the company’s information security policies 
and procedures. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
The MIS function provides the security infrastructure that protects 
the organization’s information assets. This function is critical to the 
success of the organization, even though it is almost invisible until an 
attack succeeds. All application development, network deployment, 
and introduction of new information technologies have to be guided 
by IT security considerations. MIS personnel must customize the risk 
exposure security model to help the company identify security risks 
and prepare responses to security incidents and disasters. 
Senior executives of publicly held companies look to the MIS 
function for help in meeting Sarbanes–Oxley Act requirements, par­
ticularly in detecting “significant deficiencies” or “material weak­
nesses” in internal controls and remediating them. Other functional 
areas also look to the MIS function to help them meet their security 
responsibilities. 
Summary 
1.  Identify the five factors that contribute to the increasing vulnerability 
of information resources, and specific examples of each factor. 
The five factors are the following: 
•  Today’s interconnected, interdependent, wirelessly networked business 
environment. 
•  Example: The Internet 
•  Smaller, faster, cheaper computers and storage devices 
•  Examples: Netbooks, thumb drives, iPads. 
•  Decreasing skills necessary to be a computer hacker. 
•  Example: Information system hacking programs circulating on the 
Internet 
•  International organized crime taking over cybercrime. 
•  Example: Organized crime has formed transnational cybercrime car­
tels. Because it is difficult to know exactly where cyberattacks origi­
nate, these cartels are extremely hard to bring to justice. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
202 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
•  Lack of management support. 
•  Example: Suppose that your company spent $10 million on informa­
tion security countermeasures last year, and they did not experience 
any successful attacks on their information resources. Short-sighted 
management might conclude that the company could spend less 
during the next year and obtain the same results. Bad idea. 
2.  Compare and contrast human mistakes and social engineering, 
along with specific examples of each one. 
Human mistakes are unintentional errors. However, employees can also 
make unintentional mistakes as a result of actions by an attacker, such as 
social engineering. Social engineering is an attack where the perpetrator 
uses social skills to trick or manipulate a legitimate employee into provid­
ing confidential company information. 
An example of a human mistake is tailgating. An example of social engi­
neering is when an attacker calls an employee on the phone and imperson­
ates a superior in the company. 
3.  Discuss the 10 types of deliberate attacks. 
The 10 types of deliberate attacks are the following: 
Espionage or trespass occurs when an unauthorized individual attempts to 
gain illegal access to organizational information. 
Information extortion occurs when an attacker either threatens to steal, or 
actually steals, information from a company. The perpetrator demands 
payment for not stealing the information, for returning stolen informa­
tion, or for agreeing not to disclose the information. 
Sabotage and vandalism are deliberate acts that involve defacing an organ­
ization’s Web site, possibly causing the organization to lose its image 
and experience a loss of confidence by its customers. 
Theft of equipment and information is becoming a larger problem because 
computing devices and storage devices are becoming smaller yet more 
powerful with vastly increased storage, making these devices easier and 
more valuable to steal. 
Identity theft is the deliberate assumption of another person’s identity, usu­
ally to gain access to his or her financial information or to frame him or 
her for a crime. 
Preventing compromises to intellectual property is a vital issue for 
people who make their livelihood in knowledge fields. Protecting 
intellectual property is particularly difficult when that property is in 
digital form. 
Soft ware attacks occur when malicious software penetrates an organiza­
tion’s computer system. Today, these attacks are typically profit-driven 
and Web-based. 
Alien soft ware is clandestine software that is installed on your com­
puter through duplicitous methods. It typically is not as malicious as 
viruses, worms, or Trojan horses, but it does use up valuable system 
resources. 
Supervisory control and data acquisition refers to a large-scale, distributed 
measurement and control system. SCADA systems are used to monitor 
or control chemical, physical, and transport processes. A SCADA attack 
attempts to compromise such a system in order to cause damage to the 
real-world processes that the system controls. 
With both cyberterrorism and cyberwarfare, attackers use a target’s com­
puter systems, particularly via the Internet, to cause physical, real-world 
harm or severe disruption, usually to carry out a political agenda. 
4.  Describe the three risk mitigation strategies and examples of each 
one in the context of owning a home. 
The three risk mitigation strategies are the following: 
Risk acceptance, where the organization accepts the potential risk, contin­
ues operating with no controls, and absorbs any damages that occur. If 
you own a home, you may decide not to insure it. Thus, you are practic­
ing risk acceptance. Clearly, this is a bad idea. 
Risk limitation, where the organization limits the risk by implementing con­
trols that minimize the impact of threats. As a homeowner, you practice 
risk limitation by putting in an alarm system or cutting down weak trees 
near your house. 
Risk transference, where the organization transfers the risk by using other 
means to compensate for the loss, such as by purchasing insurance. The 
vast majority of homeowners practice risk transference by purchasing 
insurance on their houses and other possessions. 
5.  Identify the three major types of controls that organizations can use to 
protect their information resources along with an example of each one. 
Physical controls prevent unauthorized individuals from gaining access to 
a company’s facilities. Common physical controls include walls, doors, 
fencing, gates, locks, badges, guards, and alarm systems. More sophisti­
cated physical controls include pressure sensors, temperature sensors, 
and motion detectors. 
Access controls restrict unauthorized individuals from using information 
resources. These controls involve two major functions: authentication 
and authorization. Authentication confirms the identity of the person 
requiring access. An example is biometrics. After the person is authen­
ticated (identified), the next step is authorization. Authorization deter­
mines which actions, rights, or privileges the person has, based on 
his or her verified identity. Authorization is generally based on least 
privilege. 
Communications (network) controls secure the movement of data across 
networks. Communications controls consist of firewalls, anti-malware 
systems, whitelisting and blacklisting, encryption, virtual private net­
working, secure socket layer, and vulnerability management systems. 
Chapter Glossary 
access controls Controls that restrict unauthorized individuals 
adware Alien software designed to help pop-up advertisements appear 
from using information resources and are concerned with user 
on your screen. 
identification. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Glossary 203 
alien software Clandestine software that is installed on your computer 
through duplicitous methods. 
anti-malware systems (antivirus software) Soft ware packages 
that attempt to identify and eliminate viruses, worms, and other 
malicious soft ware. 
audit An examination of information systems, their inputs, outputs, 
and processing. 
authentication A process that determines the identity of the person 
requiring access. 
authorization A process that determines which actions, rights, or 
privileges the person has, based on verified identity. 
back door Typically a password, known only to the attacker, that 
allows the attacker to access the system without having to go 
through any security procedures. 
biometrics The science and technology of authentication (i.e., 
establishing the identity of an individual) by measuring the subject’s 
physiological or behavioral characteristics. 
blacklisting A process in which a company identifies certain types of 
software that are not allowed to run in the company environment. 
bot A computer that has been compromised by, and under the control 
of, a hacker. 
botnet A network of computers that have been compromised by, and 
under control of, a hacker, who is called the botmaster. 
business continuity The chain of events linking planning to protection 
and to recovery. 
certifi cate authority A third party that acts as a trusted intermediary 
between computers (and companies) by issuing digital certificates 
and verifying the worth and integrity of the certificates. 
communications controls (also network controls) Controls that 
deal with the movement of data across networks. 
controls Defense mechanisms (also called countermeasures). 
cookie Small amounts of information that Web sites store on your 
computer, temporarily or more or less permanently. 
copyright A grant that provides the creator of intellectual property 
with ownership of it for a specified period of time, currently the life of 
the creator plus 70 years. 
cybercrime Illegal activities executed on the Internet. 
cyberterrorism Can be defined as a premeditated, politically 
motivated attack against information, computer systems, computer 
programs, and data that results in violence against noncombatant 
targets by subnational groups or clandestine agents. 
cyberwarfare War in which a country’s information systems could be 
paralyzed from a massive attack by destructive soft ware. 
demilitarized zone (DMZ) A separate organizational local area 
network that is located between an organization’s internal network 
and an external network, usually the Internet. 
denial-of-service attack A cyberattack in which an attacker sends 
a flood of data packets to the target computer, with the aim of 
overloading its resources. 
digital certifi cate An electronic document attached to a file certifying 
that this file is from the organization it claims to be from and has not 
been modified from its original format or content. 
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack A denial of-service 
attack that sends a flood of data packets from many compromised 
computers simultaneously. 
employee monitoring systems Systems that monitor employees’ 
computers, e-mail activities, and Internet surfing activities. 
encryption The process of converting an original message into a form 
that cannot be read by anyone except the intended receiver. 
exposure The harm, loss, or damage that can result if a threat 
compromises an information resource. 
fi rewall A system (either hardware, software, or a combination of both) 
that prevents a specific type of information from moving between 
untrusted networks, such as the Internet, and private networks, such 
as your company’s network. 
identity theft Crime in which someone uses the personal information 
of others to create a false identity and then uses it for some fraud. 
information security Protecting an organization’s information and 
information systems from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, 
disruption, modification, or destruction. 
intellectual property The intangible property created by individuals 
or corporations, which is protected under trade secret, patent, and 
copyright laws. 
least privilege A principle that users be granted the privilege for some 
activity only if there is a justifiable need to grant this authorization. 
logic bombs Segments of computer code embedded within an 
organization’s existing computer programs. 
malware Malicious software such as viruses and worms. 
network controls See communications controls. 
password A private combination of characters that only the user 
should know. 
patent A document that grants the holder exclusive rights on an 
invention or process for a specified period of time, currently 20 years. 
phishing attack An attack that uses deception to fraudulently acquire 
sensitive personal information by masquerading as an off icial­
looking e-mail. 
physical controls Controls that restrict unauthorized individuals from 
gaining access to a company’s computer facilities. 
piracy Copying a software program (other than freeware, demo 
software, etc.) without making payment to the owner. 
privilege A collection of related computer system operations that can 
be performed by users of the system. 
public-key encryption (also called asymmetric encryption) A type of 
encryption that uses two different keys, a public key and a private key. 
risk The likelihood that a threat will occur. 
risk acceptance A strategy in which the organization accepts the 
potential risk, continues to operate with no controls, and absorbs 
any damages that occur. 
risk analysis The process by which an organization assesses the value 
of each asset being protected, estimates the probability that each 
asset might be compromised, and compares the probable costs of 
each being compromised with the costs of protecting it. 
risk limitation A strategy in which the organization limits its risk by 
implementing controls that minimize the impact of a threat. 
risk management A process that identifies, controls, and minimizes 
the impact of threats, in an effort to reduce risk to manageable 
levels. 
risk mitigation A process whereby the organization takes concrete 
actions against risks, such as implementing controls and developing 
a disaster recovery plan. 
risk transference A process in which the organization transfers the 
risk by using other means to compensate for a loss, such as by 
purchasing insurance. 
secure socket layer (SSL)  (also known as transport layer security) An 
encryption standard used for secure transactions such as credit card 
purchases and online banking. 
security The degree of protection against criminal activity, danger, 
damage, and/or loss. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
204 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
social engineering Getting around security systems by tricking 
computer users inside a company into revealing sensitive 
information or gaining unauthorized access privileges. 
spam Unsolicited e-mail. 
spamware Alien software that uses your computer as a launch 
platform for spammers. 
spyware Alien software that can record your keystrokes and/or capture 
your passwords. 
threat Any danger to which an information resource may be exposed. 
trade secret Intellectual work, such as a business plan, that is a 
company secret and is not based on public information. 
transport layer security (TLS) See secure socket layer. 
trap doors See back door. 
Trojan horse A software program containing a hidden function that 
presents a security risk. 
tunneling A process that encrypts each data packet to be sent and 
places each encrypted packet inside another packet. 
virtual private network (VPN) A private network that uses a public 
network (usually the Internet) to securely connect users by using 
encryption. 
viruses Malicious software that can attach itself to (or “infect”) other 
computer programs without the owner of the program being aware 
of the infection. 
vulnerability The possibility that an information resource will be 
harmed by a threat. 
whitelisting A process in which a company identifies acceptable 
software and permits it to run, and either prevents anything else 
from running or lets new software run in a quarantined environment 
until the company can verify its validity. 
worms Destructive programs that replicate themselves without 
requiring another program to provide a safe environment for 
replication. 
zombie computer See bot. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  Why are computer systems so vulnerable? 
7. Discuss why the Sarbanes–Oxley Act is having an impact on information 
security. 
2.  Why should information security be a prime concern to management? 
8.  What types of user authentication are used at your university and/or 
3.  Is security a technical issue? A business issue? Both? Support your answer. 
place of work? Do these measures seem to be effective? What if a high­
4.  Compare information security in an organization with insuring a 
er level of authentication were implemented? Would it be worth it, or 
house. 
would it decrease productivity? 
5. Why are authentication and authorization important to e-commerce? 
9.  Why are federal authorities so worried about SCADA attacks? 
6.  Why is cross-border cybercrime expanding rapidly? Discuss possible 
solutions. 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  A critical problem is assessing how far a company is legally obligated to 
go in order to secure personal data. Because there is no such thing as 
perfect security (i.e., there is always more that you can do), resolving 
this question can significantly aff ect cost. 
a.  When are security measures that a company implements suff icient 
to comply with its obligations? 
b.  Is there any way for a company to know if its security measures are 
sufficient? Can you devise a method for any organization to deter­
mine if its security measures are suff icient? 
2.  Assume that the daily probability of a major earthquake in Los Angeles 
is 0.07 percent. The chance that your computer center will be damaged 
during such a quake is 5 percent. If the center is damaged, the estimat­
ed damage to the computer center will be $4.0 million. 
a.  Calculate the expected loss in dollars. 
b.  An insurance agent is willing to insure your facility for an annual fee 
of $25,000. Analyze the offer, and discuss whether to accept it. 
3.  Enter www.scambusters.org. Find out what the organization does. 
Learn about e-mail scams and Web site scams. Report your findings. 
4.  Visit www.dhs.gov/dhspublic (Department of Homeland Security). 
Search the site for “National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace” and write 
a report on their agenda and accomplishments to date. 
5.  Enter www.alltrustnetworks.com and other vendors of biometrics. Find 
the devices they make that can be used to control access into informa­
tion systems. Prepare a list of products and major capabilities of each 
vendor. 
6.  Software piracy is a global problem. Access the following Web sites: 
www.bsa.org and www.microsoft.com/piracy/. What can organizations 
do to mitigate this problem? Are some organizations dealing with the 
problem better than others? 
7.  Investigate the Sony PlayStation Network hack that occurred in 
April 2011. 
a.  What type of attack was it? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 1 205 
b. 
c. 
Was the success of the attack due to technology problems at Sony, 
management problems at Sony, or a combination of both? Provide 
specific examples to support your answer. 
Which Sony controls failed? 
d. 
e. 
f. 
Could the hack have been prevented? If so, how? 
Discuss Sony’s response to the hack. 
Describe the damages that Sony incurred from the hack. 
Closing Case 1 
The Sony Pictures Entertainment Hack 
MIS 
The Problem 
On November 24, 2014, a hacker group called the “Guardians of Peace” 
or GOP successfully attacked Sony Pictures Entertainment (www.son­
ypictures.com; SPE). The attackers obtained personally identifiable 
information about 47,000 current and former SPE employees and their 
dependents. These materials included numerous sensitive e-mails 
among top SPE executives concerning actors, financial deals, and cre­
ative disagreements; executive salaries; and complete copies of unre­
leased Sony films. The information included names, addresses, social 
security numbers, driver’s license numbers, passport numbers, bank 
account information, credit card information used for corporate travel 
and expenses, usernames and passwords, and compensation and 
other employment-related information. The hackers claimed to have 
stolen more than 100 terabytes of data from SPE. 
The GOP initially released the most damaging information over 
the Internet. This information consisted of digital copies of SPE films 
that had been released (e.g., Fury) or were yet to be released (e.g., 
Annie). In addition, the attackers announced they would continue to 
release more interesting SPE information. 
Although the specific motives for the attack had not been revealed 
as of mid-2016, the hack has been linked to the planned release of the SPE 
film The Interview. In this movie, producers of a tabloid television show 
learn that North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong Un, is a big fan of the show, and 
they set up an interview with him. While the show’s team is preparing for 
the interview, the CIA recruits them to assassinate Kim Jong Un. 
Prior to the Sony hack, North Korean officials had expressed con­
cerns about the film to the United Nations. The officials stated that “to 
allow the production and distribution of such a film on the assassina­
tion of an incumbent head of a sovereign state should be regarded as 
the most undisguised sponsoring of terrorism as well as an act of war.” 
On December 16, 2014, the GOP mentioned The Interview by 
name, and they threatened to take terrorist actions against the film’s 
New York City premiere at Sunshine Cinema on December 18. The GOP 
also threatened similar actions on the film’s America-wide release date 
of December 25 (Christmas). 
On December 18, two messages allegedly from the GOP appeared. 
The first claimed that the GOP would not release any further informa­
tion if SPE agreed not to release The Interview and to remove it com­
pletely from the Internet. The second stated that SPE had “suff ered 
enough” and it could release the film, but only if Kim Jong Un’s death 
scene was not “too happy.” 
In the aftermath of the attack, the studio was forced to use fax 
machines, to communicate through hard-copy posted messages, and 
to pay its employees with paper checks. Employees worked with pen 
and paper, and shops located on Sony property accepted only cash. 
The Law Enforcement Response 
Meanwhile, the FBI launched an investigation into the incident. In 2014, 
the bureau announced it had connected the North Korean government 
to the attack. The FBI’s statement was based on intelligence gathered 
during a 2010 U.S. hack of North Korea’s networks. In that action, the 
United States had tracked the internal operations of North Korean 
computers and networks. North Korea responded to the charges by 
denying any responsibility for the hack. Although most of the specula­
tion about the attack has focused on North Korea, the authorities are 
investigating alternative scenarios, including the possibility that an 
SPE employee or former employee was involved. 
The Sony Response 
As a result of the attack, SPE shut down its entire network on Novem­
ber 25, 2014, and pulled the theatrical release of The Interview on 
December 17. Two days later, President Obama labeled the attack 
as “cybervandalism” and not an act of war. He also charged that that 
Sony’s decision to pull the film from release rather than defy the hack­
ers was a mistake because the company appeared to have capitulated 
to the hackers’ demands. 
Following initial threats made towards theaters that showed The 
Interview, several cinema chains, including Carmike Cinemas, Bow Tie 
Cinemas, Regal Entertainment Group, AMC Theaters, and Cinemark 
Theaters, announced they would not screen the film. On December 
23, 2014, SPE authorized 300 largely independent theaters to show the 
movie on Christmas Day. The following day SPE released The Interview 
to Google Play, Xbox Video, and YouTube. 
Sony defended its decision to pull the film by claiming they were 
a blameless victim. Specifically, because the attackers came from a 
foreign government, they had far more resources to attack than Sony 
had to defend. Therefore, the studio concluded that the attack was 
unstoppable. Significantly, both the FBI and security company FireEye 
acknowledged that the malicious software used in the Sony hack was 
“undetectable by industry standard antivirus soft ware.” 
At the same time, however, Sony apparently failed to employ 
basic information security countermeasures. For example, the com­
pany’s e-mail retention policy left up to seven years of old, unen­
crypted messages on company servers. Sony was using e-mail for 
long-term storage of business records, contracts, and documents it 
saved in case of litigation. Also, sensitive information—including user 
names and passwords for IT administrators—was stored in unen­
crypted spreadsheets and Word files with names such as “Computer 
Passwords.” 
Sony has since implemented its “secure rebuild” information 
security strategy. The plan’s fundamental idea is zero trust. Its objec­
tives are to keep attackers from entering the company’s networks, to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
206 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
prevent them from accessing information if they do get in, and to block 
them from stealing information if they actually manage to access it. 
Specifically: 
•  Internet access will be tightly restricted. 
•  Sony will keep as little information as possible on its active net­
work. The remainder will be stored securely, encrypted, and cut 
off from the Internet. 
•  E-mails will be archived after a few weeks. System administrators 
will have access only to areas required to do their jobs. 
•  Employees will be able to install only preapproved applications. 
•  All users must use two-step login (multifactor authentication) 
procedures. 
•  Firewalls will be placed on their most restrictive settings. 
The Results 
Beginning on December 22, 2014, North Korea experienced an Internet 
failure, for which the government blamed the United States, identify­
ing the disruptions as an attack in retaliation for the SPE hack. The U.S. 
government denied any role in the disruptions. 
Interestingly, North Korea’s only Internet connections run 
through servers in China. Therefore, China could interdict any hacking 
attempts originating in North Korea. However, China and the United 
States are embroiled in a dispute over bilateral hacking, so it does not 
seem likely that China will police North Korean hacking attempts. 
The SPE attack had serious repercussions for Sony, for the U.S. 
government, and for every organization. Consider the damage to SPE. 
Analysts estimate that the costs of the attack could exceed $150 mil­
lion. Such costs include business disruption, loss of information and 
revenue, decreased customer confidence, and many others. However, 
the damage done to SPE’s reputation (via very sensitive e-mails) could 
be incalculable. 
In fact, several former SPE employees are suing the company for 
failing to adequately protect their personal data. (SPE offered one year 
of free credit monitoring and fraud protection to current and former 
employees.) In July 2015, seven cases were consolidated into a pro­
posed class action lawsuit in a Los Angeles federal court. 
In October 2015, Sony agreed to pay up to $10,000 to each claim­
ant for identity theft losses and up to $1,000 each to cover the cost 
of credit-fraud protection services in connection with the cyberattack. 
The total settlement was expected to cost Sony approximately $8 
million. 
The U.S. government is faced with a serious problem. By presi­
dential directive, the U.S. military has the responsibility to help pro­
tect and defend the nation’s critical infrastructure, such as its power 
grid, banking system, and communications networks. However, U.S. 
and international entertainment companies are not part of that infra­
structure. The question is: If a foreign government is attacking U.S. cor­
porations, what is the federal government’s responsibility? A related 
question is: If the U.S. government had known of an impending cyber-
attack on SPE, why didn’t the government warn SPE? 
And the lessons to be learned? SPE’s inability to protect its infor­
mation from hackers serves as a reminder to corporations and indi­
viduals that if you are connected to the Internet, your information is 
simply not safe. Further, no one should commit anything on e-mail 
that he or she would not want to see on the front page of a newspa­
per. The likelihood of serious breaches is increasing, as is the damage 
these breaches can cause. Therefore, the time, effort, and money that 
organizations spend on information security needs to increase as well. 
One final note: In February 2016, cybersecurity companies 
Kaspersky (www.kaspersky.com) and Alienvault (www.alienvault.com) 
announced that they had found new evidence linking the SPE attack 
with ongoing malware attacks directed at South Korea. The security 
firms did not definitively specify where the attacks originated, but 
noted only that their evidence pointed to a group operating out of 
North Korea. 
Sources: Compiled from A. Tarantola, “Study Links North Korea to Sony 
Hack and Malware Campaign,” Engadget, February 12, 2016; W. Ashford, 
“Sony $8M Breach Settlement Underlines Need to Secure Personal Data,” 
Computer Weekly, October 22, 2015; P. Elkind, “Inside the Hack of the 
Century,” Fortune, July 1, 2015; N. Perlroth, “Jolted by Sony Hacking, 
Hollywood Is Embracing Digital Security,” The New York Times, March 
30, 2015; W. Ashford, “Sony Data Breach Claims First Scalp as Co-Chair 
Steps Down,” Computer Weekly, February 6, 2015; A. David, “Security 
Think Tank: Sony Employee Lawsuit over Data Breach Marks Watershed 
Moment,” Computer Weekly, February, 2015; W. Ashford, “U.S. Blamed 
North Korea for Sony Attack Based on Data from 2010 U.S. Hack,” 
Computer Weekly, January 20, 2015; “North Korea Slams ‘Hostile’ U.S. 
Sanctions over Sony Cyber Attack,” Computer Weekly, January 5, 2015; 
M. Fackler, “North Korea Accuses U.S. of Staging Internet Failure,” The 
New York Times, December 27, 2014; “Sony Hack: The Consequences of 
Mocking Kim Jong Un,” The Week, December 26, 2014; B. Barnes and M. 
Cieply, “Sony, in About-Face, Will Screen ‘The Interview’ in a Small Run,” 
The New York Times, December 23, 2014; M. Williams, “Sony Looking for 
Ways to Distribute ‘The Interview’ Online,” IDG News Service, December 
21, 2014; B. Tau, “Obama Calls Sony Hack ‘Cybervandalism’ Not Act of 
War,” Washington Wire, December 21, 2014; M. Elgan, “The Sony Pictures 
Hack Changes Everything,” Baseline Magazine, December 19, 2014; A. 
Bacle, “White House Is Treating Sony Hack as ‘Serious National Security 
Matter,’” Entertainment Weekly, December 18, 2014; D. Yadron, D. Barrett, 
and J. Barnes, “U.S. Struggles for Response to Sony Hack,” The Wall 
Street Journal, December 18, 2014; E. Weise, “Experts: Sony Hackers 
‘Have Crossed the Line’,” USA Today, December 17, 2014; D. Sanger and 
N. Perlroth, “U.S. Links North Korea to Sony Hacking,” The New York 
Times, December 17, 2014; M. Williams, “Sony Hackers Release More Data, 
Promise ‘Christmas Gift’,” IDG News Service, December 14, 2014; B. Child, 
“Hackers Demand Sony Cancel Release of Kim Jong-un-Baiting Comedy,” 
The Guardian, December 9, 2014; W. Ashford, “North Korea Denies 
Sony Hack That Exposed 47,000 Personal Records,” Computer Weekly, 
December 5, 2014; B. Fritz and D. Yadron, “Sony Hack Exposed Personal 
Data of Hollywood Stars,” The Wall Street Journal, December 5, 2014; B. 
Barnes and N. Perlroth, “Sony Pictures and F.B.I. Widen Hack Inquiry,” The 
New York Times, December 3, 2014; W. Ashford, “Films Leaked Online After 
Sony Pictures Hack,” Computer Weekly, December 1, 2014; “Sony’s New 
Movies Leak Online Following Hack Attack,” Variety, November 29, 2014; 
www.sonypictures.com, accessed July 29, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Was Sony’s response to the breach adequate? Why or why not? 
2.  Should the U.S. government help private organizations that are 
attacked (or allegedly attacked) by foreign governments? Why or 
why not? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Closing Case 2 207 
Closing Case 2 
The Office of Personnel Management Breach 
MIS 
The Problem 
Despite high-profile security breaches in the past, many U.S. govern­
ment agencies have not made cybersecurity a priority. In fact, govern­
ment officials noted that there were 10 times as many security-related 
incidents at federal agencies in 2014 as there were in 2006. Audits of 
federal agencies have demonstrated the seriousness of this lack of 
security. Consider the following cases: 
•  A January 2015 audit of the Federal Aviation Administration 
cited “significant security control weaknesses” in the agency’s 
network, placing the operation of the nation’s air traff ic control 
system at risk. 
•  Federal auditors found numerous security problems with the De­
partment of Energy’s network, which contains sensitive information 
on nuclear propulsion and critical nuclear infrastructure. The au­
ditors criticized the Energy Department for poor security controls, 
lack of encryption, and a failure to repair known vulnerabilities. 
•  Federal auditors identified 69 security vulnerabilities at the In­
ternal Revenue Service. Then, when IRS officials informed Gov­
ernment Accountability Office auditors that the agency had fixed 
24 of the problems, the auditors found that only 14 had been re­
paired. In May 2015, the IRS conceded that hackers had gained 
access to the tax returns of 100,000 U.S. citizens. 
In June 2015, the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM; 
www.opm.gov) announced that it had been the target of two data 
breaches that stole the personal records of approximately 22 million 
people. U.S. government officials have described the breaches as 
among the largest thefts of government data in U.S. history. 
Evidence of the breaches appears to have been discovered 
accidentally during a product demonstration by network security 
company CyTech Services (www.cytechservices.com). CyTech’s team 
was demonstrating the company’s product, CyFIR, and the soft ware 
tool identified the previously unknown malware associated with the 
breaches. 
Information stolen in the OPM breaches affected not only OPM 
employees, but contractors, applicants, and family members as well. 
The stolen information included personally identifiable information 
such as social security numbers, names, dates and places of birth, 
residency and educational history, and addresses. Also stolen was 
information about immediate family and other personal and business 
acquaintances, as well as health, criminal, and financial histories. The 
attackers also stole detailed security-clearance-related background 
information that included more than one million fingerprints. 
Significantly, the OPM had been warned multiple times of security 
vulnerabilities. In 2008, the Inspector General’s off ice recommended 
that OPM eliminate the unnecessary use of social security numbers 
(SSNs). By 2014, OPM had stopped using SSNs for some systems, but 
not all. A subsequent 2014 audit of OPM’s cloud computing contracts 
found that OPM did not follow best practices for moving soft ware and 
data to the cloud. (We discuss cloud computing in Plug IT In 4.) It fur­
ther discovered that OPM had failed to keep up with required testing 
and certification to ensure that its systems met security standards. 
These authorizations must be conducted every three years. In 2014, 
11 of 47 major systems due for authorization were operating without 
it, including systems in human resources, finance, and investigative 
services. A March 2015 Inspector General report to Congress warned of 
persistent deficiencies in OPM’s security programs. 
The IT Solution (?) 
To improve the cybersecurity of federal agencies, U.S. Chief Informa­
tion Officer Tony Scott launched a 30-day “Cybersecurity Sprint.” Scott 
instructed federal agencies to take carefully defined steps to improve 
cybersecurity: 
•  Immediately patch critical security vulnerabilities. 
•  Tighten policies and procedures for privileged users by limiting 
the number of user accounts. 
•  Dramatically accelerate the implementation of multifactor au­
thentication, especially for privileged users. 
By July 2015, the most advanced defenses had not been fully 
implemented. In fact, major agencies will not have these defenses 
until 2017, and smaller agencies could take even longer. Further, legal, 
political, and bureaucratic roadblocks still make it difficult for cyber-
security officials to act quickly. In particular, bureaucratic obstacles 
hindered efforts by the Department of Homeland Security to compete 
in the highly competitive market for cybersecurity specialists. Federal 
agencies also note that as difficult as it is to hire top cybersecurity 
talent, government bureaucracy makes it even more difficult to fire 
underperforming government personnel. 
The Results 
At some federal agencies, 100 percent of users are, for the first time, 
logging in with two-factor authentication. Security problems that have 
existed for years are being patched. Thousands of low-level employees 
and contractors with access to the nation’s most sensitive secrets now 
have very limited access privileges. 
Unfortunately, many federal agencies remain highly vulnerable to 
sophisticated cybercriminals, who are often sponsored by other coun­
tries. The government is still facing obstacles in procuring the most 
current cybersecurity systems and attracting digital security experts. 
Further, senior cybersecurity officials maintain that the 30-day Sprint, 
although helpful, had limited long-range usefulness because federal 
systems still use out-of-date equipment and security soft ware. 
Security experts noted that the breaches have created a signifi­
cant threat to U.S. national security that will last for decades and cost 
billions of dollars to monitor. Specifically, the stolen data constitute a 
counterintelligence threat that could easily last 40 years, or until the 
youngest members of the federal workforce retire. The security experts 
further contend that the OPM can do little to reverse the damage that 
has already been done. 
Lawmakers have introduced legislation that would provide 
affected employees with free lifetime identity protection and $5 mil­
lion in identity theft insurance. Meanwhile, Katherine Archuleta, the 
director of the OPM, claimed that her agency suffered from an old 
technology infrastructure that she was working to improve. Director 
Archuleta resigned her position in July 2015. 
In September 2015, acting OPM Director Beth Cobert announced 
that the agency had awarded a contract to Identity Theft Guard 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
208 
CHAPTER 7 Information Security 
Solutions LLC (www.identityguard.com) to provide identity theft and 
credit protection for those aff ected by the OPM breach. The contract 
is valued at approximately $133 million and will provide up to three 
years of protection for the people affected by the breach, as well as any 
dependents who were still minors as of July 1, 2015. 
The fallout from the OPM breach continued in early February 
2016, when OPM’s chief information officer, Donna Seymour, also 
resigned. 
Sources: Compiled from E. Kelly, “OPM’s Cybersecurity Chief Resigns 
in Wake of Massive Data Breach,” USA Today, February 22, 2016; M. 
Heller, “OPM Breach Protection Services on the Way for 21.5M Victims,” 
TechTarget, September 3, 2015; C. Bennett, “White House Hands Out 
‘Cyber Sprint’ Grades,” The Hill, July 31, 2015; M. Shear and N. Perlroth, 
“U.S. vs. Hackers: Still Lopsided Despite Years of Warnings and a Recent 
Push,” The New York Times, July 18, 2015; J. Rogers,” Why the OPM Hack 
Is an Ongoing Cyber Headache,” Fox News, July 14, 2015; K. Corbin, “How 
OPM Data Breach Could Have Been Prevented,” CIO, July 13, 2015; D. 
Verton, “Impact of OPM Breach Could Last More than 40 Years,” Fedscoop, 
July 12, 2015; S. Norton and C. Boulton, “Years of Tech Mismanagement 
Led to OPM Breach, Resignation of Chief,” CIO Journal, July 10, 2015; J. 
Sciutto, “OPM Government Data Breach Impacted 21.5 Million,” CNN, 
July 10, 2015; P. Zengerle and M. Cassella, “Millions More Americans Hit 
by Government Personnel Data Hack,” Reuters, July 9, 2015; D. Paletta, 
“Personnel Data Breach a ‘Huge Deal’,” The Wall Street Journal, July 
9, 2015; J. Davidson, “New OPM Data Breach Numbers Leave Federal 
Employees Anguished, Outraged,” The Washington Post, July 9, 2015; M. 
Heller, “Stolen Passwords to Blame for OPM Breach; Director May Take 
the Fall,” TechTarget, June 25, 2015; S. Vaughan-Nichols, “It Gets Worse: 
Two Federal OPM Hacks Affected Up to 18 Million,” ZDNet, June 23, 2015; 
A. Boyd, “Second OPM Hack Exposed Higly Personal Background Info,” 
Federal Times, June 16, 2015; A. Boyd, “Feds on ‘3-Day Sprint’ to Better 
Cybersecurity,” Federal Times, June 15, 2015; “Officials: Second Hack 
Exposed Military and Intel Data,” Associated Press, June 12, 2015; R. 
Hackett, “A Product Demo May Have Revealed What Could Be the Biggest 
Ever Government Data Breach,” Fortune, June 12, 2015; www.opm.gov, 
accessed July 31, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  What actions should the OPM have taken to prevent the breaches? 
Provide specific examples in your answer. 
2.  Should the U.S. government do anything more for the victims of the 
breaches? If so, what? 
3.  Place yourself as a victim in the OPM breaches. What should you do 
when you are notified that your personal data have been compro­
mised? 
4  Does this case really have an IT solution? Why or why not? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 8 
Alex Slobodkin/iStockphoto 
Social Computing  
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
8.1  Web 2.0 
8.2  Fundamentals of Social Computing 
in Business 
8.3  Social Computing in Business: 
Shopping 
8.4  Social Computing in Business: 
Marketing 
8.5  Social Computing in Business: 
Customer Relationship Management 
8.6  Social Computing in Business: 
Human Resource Management 
Opening Case 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
8.1  Describe six Web 2.0 tools and two major types of Web 2.0 sites. 
8.2  Describe the benefits and risks of social commerce to companies. 
8.3  Identify the methods used for shopping socially. 
8.4  Discuss innovative ways to use social networking sites for advertising and market 
research. 
8.5  Describe how social computing improves customer service. 
8.6  Discuss different ways in which human resource managers make use of social 
computing. 
MIS 
POM Social Commerce Company Teespring 
Plans to Become a Platform 
Social commerce company Teespring (http://teespring.com) is one 
of the leading T-shirt manufacturers and sellers in the United States. 
In 2014, the company printed more than seven million T-shirts. 
Regardless of the T-shirt design, social commerce Web site Teespring 
either has a design, or it will help independent contractors design and 
make the T-shirt, sell it, and take a percentage. In fact, hundreds of 
people made more than $100,000 in 2014 selling tees through the com­
pany’s Web site and 20 earned more than $1 million. Teespring says 
that about 60 percent of its sales come through ads on social media, 
with approximately 20 percent of the people who buy Teespring tees 
sharing their purchases on Facebook. 
209 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
210 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
Teespring’s full-time employees serve as the back-off ice staff 
for independent designers, operating their online sales, making and 
shipping the tees, processing payments, and managing customer 
service. Teespring charges designers about $9 per shirt, depending 
on the quality of the cotton and the complexity of the design. The 
designers set the retail price and earn the difference. Teespring prints 
shirts only when a customer has placed an online order. As a result, 
the company and its designers are not left with unsold inventory. This 
process is an excellent example of mass customization, or make-to­
order production. 
Independent designers use Facebook extensively because the 
social network’s 1.5 billion users provide such a vast amount of data on 
what its users like and dislike. In addition, designers use free tools such 
as Google Trends (www.google.com/trends) and Reddit (www.reddit 
.com) to identify current trends in specific niches that allows them to 
identify potential audiences. 
For example, one designer noticed hundreds of thousands 
of shares and social engagement regarding images and sayings 
related to the U.S. women’s soccer team. She then went to Face-
book, identified current active groups following the team, and 
created a large list of people from those groups. She created vari­
ous designs, uploaded them to Teespring, worked with Teespring 
designers, and marketed the T-shirts that Teespring produced to 
this passionate audience. 
Teespring’s annual revenue exceeds $100 million. In 2014, the 
firm raised approximately $55 million in venture funding and built a 
105,000-square-foot printing factory in Kentucky. The company is 
planning to contract out as little production as possible to other com­
panies, thereby keeping its production costs to a minimum. Further, 
Teespring wants to have customer service and production in the same 
facility. If shoppers have questions about an order, or have a problem 
with an order, it is more efficient for customer service to be co-located 
with production. 
What’s next for Teespring? Its production and payments systems 
could prove invaluable for many more types of entrepreneurs. One of 
Teespring’s founders noted, “T-shirts are to Teespring what books are 
to Amazon.” The company’s next step is to go beyond shirts into hats, 
stickers, posters, and smartphone cases. Essentially, Teespring plans 
to become a platform for entrepreneurs to create and sell all types of 
merchandise online. 
Compare a platform with a traditional business model. A tradi­
tional business produces one or more closely related products or 
services, then uses marketing to attract customers. By contrast, busi­
nesses using the platform model integrate an increasing number of 
customers and partners into their ecosystems. A business ecosystem 
is a network of organizations—including suppliers, distributors, cus­
tomers, competitors, government agencies, and others—involved in 
the delivery of products and services through both competition and 
cooperation. 
Building a powerful platform enables a company’s ecosystem to 
contribute to innovation. The platform enables other businesses to 
easily connect their businesses to yours, build products and services 
on top of your products and services, thus co-creating value. Let’s look 
at several examples: 
•  In 1998, Google was an excellent search engine, but not yet a 
platform. By adding features such as Gmail, Google Maps, Google 
Docs, YouTube, and many others, Google has become a very pow­
erful platform. 
•  By inviting thousands of users to develop apps for its iPhone and 
iPad, Apple has become a platform and generated billions of dol­
lars in new revenue. 
•  Facebook began as a social networking Web site for college stu­
dents. The firm has become a powerful platform by expanding 
its offerings to include business and marketing sites, community 
gaming sites, e-mail, instant messaging, groups, blogs, advertis­
ing, consumer data mining, and many others. 
•  Uber developed a mobile app that allows customers with smart-
phones to submit a trip request that is then sent to Uber drivers 
who use their own cars. Uber is rapidly becoming a platform as it 
begins to offer new services such as postal, gift, and grocery deliv­
ery, as well as limousine and even medical services. 
Consider this example of Teespring becoming a platform. In May 2015, 
the firm formed a partnership with music merchandise company Man-
head Merchandising (www.manheadmerch.com) to deliver custom 
clothing for its portfolio of music artists. The partnership enables Man-
head to leverage Teespring’s innovative production and payment sys­
tem to expand its electronic commerce business. In addition, artists 
can sell their own merchandise online with no upfront costs or inven­
tory risk. 
For example, Manhead artist Fall Out Boy used Teespring to 
launch a limited-edition T-shirt in a special 24-hour sale. The band pro­
moted this shirt exclusively through its social media channels, gener­
ating $40,000 in sales in a single day. 
One caveat: Teespring’s expenses are increasing at the same time 
that Facebook ad rates are rising. Further, the company has to deal 
with a number of legal complaints about tees that use copyrighted 
images from movies or sports teams, or images that copy existing top 
sellers. The company says that its staff members review all designs to 
avoid incurring liability. 
Sources: Compiled from S. Perez, “Teespring Eliminates 70 Jobs in 
Providence as Company Restructures,” TechCrunch, June 24, 2015; 
K. Mulvaney, “R.I. Startup Teespring Moving Jobs to Kentucky, San 
Francisco,” Providence Journal, June 24, 2015; “Is Teespring and Facebook 
Marketing Still Viable in 2015?” CNN News Center, May 28, 2015; “Teespring & 
Manhead Merchandising Team Up to Create Social Commerce Opportunities 
for Musicians,” PRNewswire, May 12, 2015; A. Satariano, “How Your T-Shirt 
Can Make You Rich,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, April 16, 2015; S. Perez, 
“Teespring Raises $35 Million Series B from Khosla Ventures as It Prepares 
to Expand Beyond Apparel,” TechCrunch, November 18, 2014; A. Konrad, 
“Teespring Says It’s Minting New Millionaires Selling Its T-Shirts, Raises $35 
Million of Its Own,” Forbes, November 18, 2014; A. Taub, “Teespring: Is This 
Rhode Island Based Startup the Future of Custom Apparel?” Forbes, January 
3, 2013; http://teespring.com, accessed August 3, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Discuss the relationship between social computing and Teespring’s 
business model. 
2.  Explain this statement: “T-shirts are to Teespring what books are to 
Amazon.” 
3.  What other products and services can Teespring off er to truly be­
come a platform? 

 
 
 
 
Introduction 211 
Introduction  
Humans are social individuals. Therefore, human behavior is innately social. Humans typically 
orient their behavior around other members of their community. As a result, people are sen­
sitive to the behavior of people around them, and their decisions are generally influenced by 
their social context. 
Traditional information systems support organizational activities and business processes, 
and they concentrate on cost reductions and productivity increases. A variation of this tradi­
tional model, social computing, is a type of IT that combines social behavior and information 
systems to create value. Social computing is focused on improving collaboration and interac­
tion among people and on encouraging user-generated content, as you see in this chapter’s 
opening case. 
Significantly, in social computing, social information is not anonymous. Rather, it is impor­
tant precisely because it is linked to particular individuals, who in turn are linked to their own 
networks of individuals. 
Social computing makes socially produced information available to everyone. This infor­
mation may be provided directly, as when users rate a movie (e.g., at Rotten Tomatoes), or 
indirectly (as with Google’s PageRank algorithm, which sequences search results). 
In social computing, users, rather than organizations, produce, control, use, and manage 
content via interactive communications and collaboration. As a result, social computing is 
transforming power relationships within organizations. Employees and customers are empow­
ered by their ability to use social computing to organize themselves. Thus, social computing 
can influence people in positions of power to listen to the concerns and issues of “ordinary peo­
ple.” Organizational customers and employees are joining this social computing phenomenon, 
with serious consequences for most organizations. 
Significantly, most governments and companies in modern developed societies are not pre­
pared for the new social power of ordinary people. Today, managers, executives, and govern­
ment officials can no longer control the conversation around policies, products, and other issues. 
In the new world of business and government, organizational leaders will have to demon­
strate authenticity, even-handedness, transparency, good faith, and humility. If they do not, 
then customers and employees may distrust them, to potentially disastrous effects. For exam­
ple, customers who do not like a product or service can quickly broadcast their disapproval. 
Another example is that prospective employees do not have to take their employers at their 
word for what life is like at their companies—they can find out from people who already work 
there. A final example is that employees now have many more options to start their own com­
panies, which could compete with their former employers. 
As you see from these examples, the world is becoming more democratic and reflective 
of the will of ordinary people, enabled by the power of social computing. On the one hand, 
social power can help keep a company vital and can enable customers and employee activists 
to become a source of creativity, innovation, and new ideas that will move a company forward. 
On the other hand, companies that show insensitivity toward customers or employees quickly 
find themselves on a downward slide. 
For instance, Kenneth Cole came under fire for suggesting on Twitter that news of its spring 
collection led to riots in Egypt, and American Apparel was blasted online for offering a Hurri­
cane Sandy sale. Lesson to be learned: If companies want to win the favor and loyalty of cus­
tomers, they should refrain from making comments that may suggest that they were trying to 
profit from other people’s misery. 
Social computing is exploding worldwide, with China having the world’s most active social 
media population. In one McKinsey survey, 91 percent of Chinese respondents reported that 
they had visited a social media site in the previous six months, compared with 70 percent in 
South Korea, 67 percent in the United States, and 30 percent in Japan. Interestingly, the survey 
found that social media has a greater influence on purchasing decisions for Chinese consumers 
than for consumers anywhere else in the world. 
Social computing is also increasing dramatically in Africa. Facebook, YouTube, and Insta­
gram are the leading social networks in African countries. However, Facebook does have rivals 

 
 
 
 
 
212 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
in Africa, one of which is Mxit (www.mxit.com). Although Mxit’s active users have fallen to about 
five million, the social network is among the most engaged in Africa, with the average user sign­
ing in five times per day and spending 105 minutes per day on the site. 
The chapter opening case illustrates how businesses today are using social computing 
in a variety of innovative ways, including marketing, production, customer relationship man­
agement, and human resource management. In fact, so many organizations are competing to 
use social computing in as many new ways as possible that an inclusive term for the use of 
social computing in business has emerged: social commerce. Because social computing is facil­
itated by Web 2.0 tools and sites, you begin this chapter by examining these technologies. You 
then turn your attention to a diverse number of social commerce activities, including shop­
ping, advertising, market research, customer relationship management, and human resource 
management. 
When you complete this chapter, you will have a thorough understanding of social com­
puting and the ways in which modern organizations use this technology. You will be familiar 
with the advantages and disadvantages of social computing as well as the risks and rewards it 
can bring to your organization. For example, most of you already have pages on social network­
ing sites, so you are familiar with the positive and negative features of these sites. This chapter 
will enable you to apply this knowledge to your organization’s efforts in the social computing 
arena. You will be in a position to contribute to your organization’s policies on social comput­
ing. You will also be able to help your organization create a strategy to utilize social computing. 
Finally, social computing off ers incredible opportunities for entrepreneurs who want to start 
their own businesses. 
8.1  Web 2.0 
The World Wide Web, which you learned about in Chapter 4, first appeared in 1990. Web 1.0 was 
the first generation of the Web. We did not use this term in Chapter 4 because there was no need 
to say “Web 1.0” until Web 2.0 emerged. 
The key developments of Web 1.0 were the creation of Web sites and the commercializa­
tion of the Web. Users typically had minimal interaction with Web 1.0 sites. Rather, they pas­
sively received information from those sites. 
Web 2.0 is a popular term that has proved difficult to define. According to Tim O’Reilly, a 
noted blogger, Web 2.0 is a loose collection of information technologies and applications, plus 
the Web sites that use them. These Web sites enrich the user experience by encouraging user 
participation, social interaction, and collaboration. Unlike Web 1.0 sites, Web 2.0 sites are not 
so much online places to visit as Web locations that facilitate information sharing, user-cen­
tered design, and collaboration. Web 2.0 sites often harness collective intelligence (e.g., wikis); 
deliver functionality as services, rather than packaged software (e.g., Web services); and fea­
ture remixable applications and data (e.g., mashups). 
In the following sections, we discuss five Web 2.0 information technology tools: tagging, 
Really Simple Syndication, blogs, microblogs, and wikis. We then turn our attention to the two 
major types of Web 2.0 sites: social networking sites and mashups. 
Tagging 
A tag is a keyword or term that describes a piece of information, for example, a blog, a picture, 
an article, or a video clip. Users typically choose tags that are meaningful to them. Tagging 
allows users to place information in multiple, overlapping associations rather than in rigid cat­
egories. For example, a photo of a car might be tagged with “Corvette,” “sports car,” and “Chev­
rolet.” Tagging is the basis of folksonomies, which are user-generated classifications that use 
tags to categorize and retrieve Web pages, photos, videos, and other Web content. 
One specific form of tagging, known as geotagging, refers to tagging information on maps. 
For example, Google Maps allows users to add pictures and information, such as restaurant or 

 
 
 Web 2.0 213 
hotel ratings, to maps. Therefore, when users access Google Maps, their experience is enriched 
because they can see pictures of attractions, reviews, and things to do, posted by everyone, 
and all related to the map location they are viewing. 
Really Simple Syndication 
Really Simple Syndication (RSS) is a Web 2.0 feature that allows you to receive the informa­
tion you want (customized information), when you want it, without having to surf thousands 
of Web sites. RSS allows anyone to syndicate (publish) his or her blog, or any other content, 
to anyone who has an interest in subscribing to it. When changes to the content are made, 
subscribers receive a notification of the changes and an idea of what the new content contains. 
Subscribers can then click on a link that will take them to the full text of the new content. 
For example, CNN.com provides RSS feeds for each of its main topic areas, such as world 
news, sports news, technology news, and entertainment news. NBC uses RSS feeds to allow 
viewers to download the most current version of shows such as Meet the Press and NBC Nightly 
News. Figure 8.1 illustrates how to search an RSS and locate RSS feeds. 
To use RSS, you can utilize a special newsreader that displays RSS content feeds from the 
Web sites you select. Many such readers are available, several of them for free (see Feedspot; 
www.feedspot.com). In addition, most browsers have built-in RSS readers. For an excellent RSS 
tutorial, visit www.mnot.net/rss/tutorial. 
Blogs 
A weblog (blog for short) is a personal Web site, open to the public, in which the site creator 
expresses his or her feelings or opinions via a series of chronological entries. Bloggers—people 
who create and maintain blogs—write stories, convey news, and provide links to other articles A screenshot image depicting the Web site of National Public Radio (NPR) with RSS toolbar aggregator and search function.
FIGURE 8.1 The Web site of 
National Public Radio (NPR) with 
RSS toolbar aggregator and search 
function. 

 
 
 
 
 
214 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
and Web sites that are of interest to them. The simplest method of creating a blog is to sign 
up with a blogging service provider, such as www.blogger.com (now owned by Google), www. 
xanga.com, and www.sixapart.com. The blogosphere is the term for the millions of blogs on 
the Web. 
Many companies listen to consumers in the blogosphere who express their views on the 
companies’ products. Marketers refer to these views as consumer-generated media. For exam­
ple, Nielsen (www.nielsen-online.com) “mines” the blogosphere to provide information for its 
clients in several areas. Nielsen helps clients find ways to serve potential markets, ranging from 
broad-based to niche markets. The company also helps clients detect false rumors before these 
rumors appear in the mainstream media, and it gauges the potency of a marketing push or the 
popularity of a new product. 
Blogs often provide incredibly useful information, often before the information becomes 
available in traditional media outlets (e.g., television, newspapers). Although blogs can be very 
useful, they also have shortcomings. Perhaps the primary value of blogs is their ability to bring 
current, breaking news to the public in the fastest time possible. Unfortunately, in doing so, 
bloggers sometimes cut corners, and their blogs can be inaccurate. Regardless of their various 
problems, however, blogs have transformed the ways in which people gather and consume 
information. 
Microblogging 
Microblogging is a form of blogging that allows users to write short messages (or capture an 
image or embedded video) and publish them. These messages can be submitted via text mes­
saging from mobile phones, instant messaging, e-mail, or simply over the Web. The content of 
a microblog differs from that of a blog because of the limited space per message (usually up to 
140 characters). A popular microblogging service is Twitter. 
Twitter is a free microblogging service that allows its users to send messages and read 
other users’ messages and updates, known as tweets. Tweets are displayed on the user’s pro­
file page and delivered to other users who have signed up to receive them. 
Twitter is becoming a very useful business tool. It allows companies to quickly share infor­
mation with people interested in their products, thereby creating deeper relationships with 
their customers. Businesses also use Twitter to gather real-time market intelligence and cus­
tomer feedback. As an individual user, you can use Twitter to inform companies about your 
experiences with their business, offer product ideas, and learn about great off ers. 
Microblogging is very popular in China, with Weibo (www.weibo.com) being the most pop­
ular microblogging service in that country. Weibo has over 200 million monthly active members. 
Wikis 
A wiki is a Web site made up entirely of content posted by users. Wikis have an “edit” link 
on each page that allows any user to add, change, or delete material, thus fostering easy 
collaboration. 
Wikis take advantage of the combined input of many individuals. Consider Wikipedia 
(www.wikipedia.org), an online encyclopedia that is the largest existing wiki. Wikipedia con­
tains almost five million articles in English (as of mid-2015), which attract some 500 million 
views every day. Wikipedia relies on volunteer administrators who enforce a neutral point of 
view, and it encourages users to delete copy that displays a clear bias. Nevertheless, there are 
still major debates over the reliability of Wikipedia articles. Many educators will not allow stu­
dents to cite references from Wikipedia because Wikipedia content is of uncertain origin. More­
over, Wikipedia does not provide any quality assessment or fact checking by experts. Therefore, 
academics and other professionals have major concerns about the accuracy of user-provided 
content. 
POM 
MKT 
Organizations use wikis in several ways. In project management, for example, wikis pro­
vide a central repository for capturing constantly updated product features and specifications, 
tracking issues, resolving problems, and maintaining project histories. In addition, wikis enable 
MIS 
MKT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Web 2.0 215 
companies to collaborate with customers, suppliers, and other business partners on projects. 
Wikis are also valuable in knowledge management. For example, companies use wikis to keep 
enterprisewide documents, such as guidelines and frequently asked questions, accurate and 
current. 
Social Networking Web Sites 
A social network is a social structure composed of individuals, groups, or organizations linked 
by values, visions, ideas, financial exchange, friendship, kinship, conflict, or trade. Social
 networking refers to activities performed using social software tools (e.g., blogging) or social 
networking features (e.g., media sharing). Social networking allows convenient connections to 
those of similar interest. 
A social network can be described as a map of all relevant links or connections among 
the network’s members. For each individual member that map is his or her social graph. Mark 
Zuckerberg of Facebook originally coined this term to refer to the social network of relation­
ships among Facebook users. The idea was that Facebook would take advantage of relation­
ships among individuals to offer a richer online experience. 
Social networks can also be used to determine the social capital of individual participants. 
Social capital refers to the number of connections a person has within and between social 
networks. 
Participants congregate on social networking Web sites where they can create their own 
profile page for free and on which they can write blogs and wikis; post pictures, videos, or 
music; share ideas; and link to other Web locations they find interesting. Social networkers chat 
using instant messaging and Twitter, and they tag posted content with their own key words, 
making content searchable and facilitating interactions and transactions. Social networkers 
converse, collaborate, and share opinions, experiences, knowledge, insights, and perceptions 
with one another. They also use these Web sites to find like-minded people online, either to 
pursue an interest or a goal or just to establish a sense of community among people who may 
never meet in the real world. 
Participants who post on social networking sites tend to reveal a great deal of personal 
information. As a result, if they are not careful, bad things can happen. 
Table 8.1 displays the variety of online social networking platforms. Social networking 
Web sites allow users to upload their content to the Web in the form of text, voice, images, and 
videos. 
These social networking sites produce a massive amount of information uploaded by their 
users. As you see in IT’s About Business 8.1, startup Banjo has developed software to integrate 
and analyze all this information. 
IT’s About Business 8.1 
MIS Banjo Organizes the World’s Social Media 
We all encounter “noise” generated by social media. In this context, 
noise consists of the massive amounts of unstructured data gener­
ated from tweets, Facebook updates, images, and full motion video 
clips, uploaded to various social media Web sites. Within this noise, 
there are important signals that need to be noted, collected, and an­
alyzed. The problem is clear: How can we make sense of all the noise? 
Startup Banjo (http://ban.jo) has developed soft ware that 
functions as an event-detection engine. The software organizes the 
world’s social signals by location, enabling an unprecedented level 
of understanding of events that occur anywhere in the world, in 
real time. As such, Banjo has developed an information-gathering 
and -disseminating system that works anywhere in the world. 
Banjo displays data from geolocated posts uploaded from 
mobile devices, through a user-friendly Web site. Banjo integrates 
uploads from more than a dozen social networks, including 
Twitter (www.twitter.com), Instagram (https://instagram.com), 
Vine (https://vine.co), Facebook (www.facebook.com), Russia’s 
VKontakte (https://vk.com), and China’s Weibo (www.weibo.com), 
among others. 
How Banjo Works. In 2011, Banjo released a consumer news app 
(called Banjo 1.0), which integrated various social media feeds. 
According to AppData (www.appdata.com), approximately 7.5 mil­
lion people downloaded the app. Banjo 1.0 still exists, but the com­
pany no longer actively supports it. 
The next generation of Banjo, Banjo 2.0, benefits from the 
fact that users of Banjo 1.0 signed up through a social network. 
Banjo can access the posts of its 7.5 million users but also those of 
all their approximately 1.2 billion friends on their social networks. 
Banjo 2.0 harnesses the power of its reach of 1.2 billion people and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
216 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
their ability to capture images, videos, and text through their mo­
bile devices. 
Banjo maps a grid over the whole world, consisting of more 
than 35 billion squares, each about the size of a football field. Since 
2011, Banjo has constantly monitored every square in real time, 
overlaying every mobile public post onto its grid. The soft ware 
knows what the usual state is for each square: this square is in a 
wheat field; this square is in a war zone with smoke and fire; this 
square is in Disneyland, and so on. 
Every minute, Banjo’s software analyzes thousands of geo­
located mobile posts, examining data on linguistics and location, 
and classifying photos and videos. When the data indicate an ab­
normality from the baseline, such as unusual activity in a normally 
quiet area, Banjo alerts company staff, who investigate the alert 
and either ignore it or notify users. As Banjo’s soft ware accumulates 
more data and can “learn,” staff need to intervene less oft en. 
Banjo’s analytics include not only the ability to identify loca­
tions and photos, but to “rewind” each social media network. (The 
rewind function means that users can see what happened before a 
particular event occurred, for example just before an earthquake.) 
Rather than users trying to make sense of their social media 
feeds via hashtags and keywords, they can have an integrated view 
of their feeds, from any location on earth. Users enter their location 
(plus any desired keywords), and the Banjo maps resizes to scale. 
All the relevant public posts for that location are shown as pins on 
the map, with links to text, photos, and video. This process occurs 
in real time. 
Traditionally, users have asked, “How do we mine social me­
dia?” Banjo integrates social media from the perspective of mobile 
phones, which are in specific locations in the real world. As a result, 
Banjo asks, “How can we know what is going on in a specific place 
at a specific time?” 
Naturally, such a treasure trove of data could be a privacy 
minefield. Banjo has tried to protect users’ data by developing a 
patented method of automatically searching its database and re­
moving any posts that have been made private or deleted by users. 
When users change their privacy settings, Banjo deletes all infor­
mation retroactively. The information is no longer in Banjo’s sys­
tem and no longer in Banjo’s users’ systems, immediately. 
Banjo Applications. Banjo’s technology has implications for 
diverse industries, including news and media, financial services, 
marketing, insurance, public health, and many others. 
Banjo isn’t just a way to locate an impromptu street party— 
it can also save lives. It was credited with alerting authorities to 
a shooting on a Florida campus, thanks to a tweet sent by one of 
the witnesses. Just after 12:30 AM on November 20, 2014, a single 
tweet was sent from a location near the Florida State University 
(FSU; www.fsu.edu) campus in Tallahassee. The tweet contained 
no hashtag, but Banjo picked up on the words “scared to death,” 
and noted an increase in the number of Twitter and Instagram 
posts coming from that location. The software noted the deviation 
in that grid square and alerted Banjo employees, who notified the 
local CBS affiliate in Tallahassee. That channel investigated and 
was the first on the scene to report the wounding of three people in 
a shooting in an FSU library. Media companies, including NBC and 
ESPN, are among Banjo’s longest customers. 
Here are more applications of Banjo by media outlets. Sinclair 
Broadcasting Group (www.sbgi.net), which owns 162 television sta­
tions in 79 markets, uses Banjo as a sort of remote reporting team. 
Banjo alerts its newsrooms to a breaking story. A news director can 
travel virtually to the scene, following a real-time stream of all the 
posts of photos, videos, and commentary from users at that loca­
tion. The newsroom can then contact the authors of those posts 
without needing to tweet or email, and get permission to use their 
content on air, without having to send a reporter to the scene. Sin­
clair can use Banjo to create a timeline of events leading up a cer­
tain activity, such as an album of images and videos that happened 
just before the Charlie Hebdo attacks in Paris in January 2015. The 
technology allows Sinclair to syndicate its newscasts to licensees in 
a cost-eff ective manner. 
Banjo technology is also disrupting the business world. In No­
vember 2014, Banjo analyzed images of a fire at a diesel pipeline in 
Saudi Arabia. Its photo classification algorithms flagged the inci­
dent. Customers working in the finance field used the information 
when trading on oil in under an hour after the photos were flagged. 
Two hours after the initial Banjo alert, by the time the media picked 
up on the story, the price of oil futures rose by $2 a barrel. Clearly, 
traders could make huge amounts of money with the lead times 
provided by Banjo alerts. 
Banjo is quick to point out that its goal is not to gather all the 
personal information about users and sell it to advertisers. Instead, 
it generates and sells intelligence from the content that users will­
ingly provide. 
In 2014, Banjo Enterprise generated revenue of less than 
$1 million. However, the company generated the entire amount 
through word of mouth, with no marketing effort and no sales team. 
Social media is not the be-all and end-all source of informa­
tion; it doesn’t provide all the data needed for Banjo’s intelligence 
gathering. Therefore, the startup is adding new data sources, such 
as weather data from various countries, including the National 
Weather Service (which has approached Banjo about constructing 
an alert system) as well as satellite imagery. Further, Banjo notes 
that in an Internet of Things environment, sensors in physical 
objects such as vehicles and buildings could also emit data worth 
collecting. 
Sources: Compiled from J. Paduda, “Will Banjo Be the Social Media 
App that Revolutionizes Insurance?” joepaduda.com, June 3, 2015; 
D. MacMillan, “Banjo Raises $100 Million to Detect World Events 
in Real Time,” Wall Street Journal Digits, May 6, 2015; A. Talbert, 
“How a Social Media Company You’ve Never Heard Of Is Primed to 
Revolutionize Customer Service,” Zoho Blogs, April 27, 2015; 
W. Schmidt, “What Would You Do If You Had a Crystal Ball?” Tech.co, 
April 22, 2015; H. Clancy, “Why Social Media Startup Banjo Will Strike 
a Chord with Marketers,” Fortune, April 2, 2015; W. Bourne, “The Most 
Important Social Media Company You’ve Never Heard Of,” Inc, April, 
2015; O. Williams, “Banjo Updates Mobile Apps to Create TiVO for 
Social Media,” TheNextWeb, March 8, 2014; D. Etherington, “Banjo Puts 
News and Live Events Front and Center with Version 4.0 of Its Mobile 
App,” TechCrunch, January 16, 2014; M. Butcher, “New Banjo App Aims 
to Become a True Browser for Location, A Much Bigger Opportunity,” 
TechCrunch, November 15, 2012; T. Geron, “Banjo App Connects 
with the Nearby Social World,” Forbes, June 22, 2011; http://ban.jo, 
accessed August 15, 2015. 
Questions 
1. What are potential disadvantages of Banjo? (Hint: What 
about privacy concerns?) 
2. How would marketing managers use Banjo? Provide an 
example to support your answer. 
3. How would insurance companies use Banjo? Provide an ex­
ample to support your answer. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Web 2.0 217 
TABLE 8.1
 Categories of Social Networking Web Sites 
Socially oriented: Socially focused public sites, open to anyone: 
• Facebook (www.facebook.com) 
• Google+ (https://plus.google.com) 
• Hi5 (www.hi5.com) 
Professional networking: Focused on networking for business professionals: 
• LinkedIn (www.linkedin.com) 
Media sharing: 
•  Netcasting includes podcasting (audio) and videocasting (audio and video). For example, educa­
tional institutions use netcasts to provide students with access to lectures, lab demonstrations, and 
sports events. In 2007, Apple launched iTunes U, which offers free content provided by major U.S. 
universities such as Stanford and MIT. 
•  Web 2.0 media sites allow people to come together and share user-generated digital media, such as 
pictures, audio, and video:  
Video (Amazon Video on Demand, YouTube, Hulu, Facebook)  
°  
Music (Amazon MP3, Last.fm, Rhapsody, Pandora, Facebook, iTunes)  
°  
Photographs (Photobucket, Flickr, Shutterfly, Picasa, Facebook)  
° 
Communication: 
•  Blogs: Blogger, LiveJournal, TypePad, WordPress, Vox, Xanga 
• Microblogging/Presence applications: Twitter, Tumblr, Yammer 
Collaboration: Wikis (Wikimedia, PBworks, Wetpaint) 
Social bookmarking (or social tagging): Focused on helping users store, organize, search, and 
manage bookmarks of Web pages on the Internet: 
• Delicious (www.delicious.com) 
• StumbleUpon (www.stumbleupon.com) 
• Google Reader (http://reader.google.com) 
• CiteULike (www.citeulike.com) 
Social news: Focused on user-posted news stories that are ranked by popularity based on user 
voting: 
• Digg (www.digg.com) 
•  Chime.in (http://chime.in) 
• Reddit (www.reddit.com)  
Events: Focused on alerts for relevant events, people you know nearby, etc.:  
• Eventful (www.eventful.com)  
• Meetup (www.meetup.com)  
• Foursquare (www.foursquare.com)  
Virtual meeting place: Sites that are essentially three-dimensional worlds, built and owned by the 
residents (the users): 
• Second Life (www.secondlife.com) 
Discovery: 
•  Foursquare (http://foursquare.com) helps its members discover and share information about busi­
nesses and attractions around them. 
Online marketplaces for microjobs: For example, TaskRabbit (www.taskrabbit.com) and Zaarly 
(www.zaarly.com) enable people to farm out chores to a growing number of temporary personal 
assistants. Thousands of unemployed and underemployed workers use these sites. The part-time or 
full-time tasks are especially popular with stay-at-home moms, retirees, and students. Workers choose 
their jobs and negotiate their rates. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
218 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
MIS 
FIGURE 8.2  GoogleMaps (www 
.googlemaps.com) is a classic 
example of a mashup. In this case, 
GoogleMaps is pulling in informa­
tion from public transportation Web 
sites to provide the customer with 
transit directions. 
Enterprise Social Networks 
Business-oriented social networks can be public, such as LinkedIn.com. As such, they are 
owned and managed by an independent company. 
However, an increasing number of companies have created in-house, private social net­
works for their employees, former employees, business partners, and/or customers. Such net­
works are “behind the firewall” and are often referred to as corporate social networks. Employees 
utilize these networks to create connections that allow them to establish virtual teams, bring 
new employees up to speed, improve collaboration, and increase employee retention by creat­
ing a sense of community. Employees are able to interact with their coworkers on a level that is 
typically absent in large organizations or in situations where people work remotely. 
Corporate social networks are used for many processes, including: 
• Networking and community building, both inside and outside an organization 
•  Social collaboration: Collaborative work and problem solving using wikis, blogs, instant 
messaging, collaborative office, and other special-purpose Web-based collaboration plat­
forms; for example, see Laboranova (www.laboranova.com) 
•  Social publishing: Employees and others creating, either individually or collaboratively, and 
posting contents—photos, videos, presentation slides, and documents—into a member’s or a 
community’s accessible-content repository such as YouTube, Flickr, SlideShare, and DocStoc 
• Social views and feedback 
•  Social intelligence and social analytics: Monitoring, analyzing, and interpreting conver­
sations, interactions, and associations among people, topics, and ideas to gain insights. 
Social intelligence is useful for examining relationships and work patterns of individuals 
and groups and for discovering people and expertise. 
Mashups 
A mashup is a Web site that takes different content from a number of other Web sites and mixes 
them together to create a new kind of content. The launch of Google Maps is credited with pro­
viding the start for mashups. A user can take a map from Google, add his or her data, and then 
display a map mashup on his or her Web site that plots crime scenes, cars for sale, or anything 
else (see Figure 8.2). There are many examples of mashups (for a complete list of mashups, see 
www.programmableweb.com): 
• Craigslist developed a dynamic map of all available apartments in the United States that 
are listed on their Web site (www.housingmaps.com). A screenshot image displaying GoogleMaps. The map fetches information from public transportation Web sites to provide the customer with transit directions.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fundamentals of Social Computing in Business 219 
•  Everyblock.com is a mashup of Web services that integrates content from newspapers, 
blogs, and government databases to inform citizens of cities such as Chicago, New York, 
and Seattle about what is happening in their neighborhoods. This information includes 
criminal activities, restaurant inspections, and local photos posted on Flickr. 
Before you go on…
 1. Differentiate between blogs and wikis.
 2. Differentiate between social networking Web sites and corporate social networks. 
Apply the Concept 8.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 8.1 Describe five Web 2.0 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.) 
tools and the two major types of Web 2.0 sites. 
Create a table similar to the one shown below that displays the 
following information about 5 of the top 10 companies on the 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
CNN Money rankings: 
This section differentiates Web 1.0, which consists of places to 
• The company’s name 
visit, from Web 2.0, where users interact and share information. 
• The company’s rank 
Whether or not you have thought of these media in these terms, 
• The industry (e.g., retail, consulting services, 
you are familiar with these differences. No doubt you are much 
communications) 
more accustomed to Web 2.0, and businesses have begun to 
• A description of the Web 2.0 technologies/applications that 
integrate information sharing into their public sites. 
each company uses 
• A description of the Web 2.0 tools the company does not use 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you are doing.) 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the link for Apply the Concept 8.1. This video 
provides a valuable overview of Web 2.0 technologies. Take notes 
Name 
Rank 
Industry 
Web 2.0 
Used 
Web 2.0 
Not Used 
of the various features that Web 2.0 makes available, and then 
click on the second link. This link will take you to a CNN Money 
Web page that provides a rank-order list of the Fortune 500 
companies. Visit the Web sites of the top 10 firms, and identify the 
Web 2.0 technologies they employ on their site. 
Submit your table to your professor. 
8.2 
Fundamentals of Social Computing 
in Business 
Social computing in business, or social commerce, refers to the delivery of electronic com­
merce activities and transactions through social computing. Social commerce also supports 
social interactions and user contributions, allowing customers to participate actively in the 
marketing and selling of products and services in online marketplaces and communities. With 
social commerce, individuals can collaborate online, obtain advice from trusted individuals, 
and find and purchase goods and services. A few examples of social commerce include: 
• Disney allows people to book tickets on Facebook without leaving the social network. 
• PepsiCo provides a live notification when its customers are close to physical stores (gro­
cery, restaurants, gas stations) that sell Pepsi products. The company then uses Four­
square to send them coupons and discount information. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
220 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
• Mountain Dew attracts video game lovers and sports enthusiasts via Dewmocracy con­
tests. The company also encourages the most dedicated community members to contrib­
ute ideas on company products. 
• Levi’s advertises on Facebook by enabling consumers to populate a “shopping cart” based 
on what their friends think they would like. 
Benefits and Risks of Social Commerce 
Social commerce offers numerous benefits to both customers and vendors, as described in 
Table 8.2. 
Despite all of its benefits, social computing does involve risks. It is problematic, for 
example, to advertise a product, brand, or company on social computing Web sites where 
content is user generated and is not edited or filtered. Companies that employ this strategy 
must be willing to accept negative reviews and feedback. Of course, negative feedback can 
be some of the most valuable information that a company receives, if it utilizes this informa­
tion properly. 
Companies that engage in social computing are always concerned with negative posts. For 
example, when a company creates a Facebook business page, by default the site allows other 
members of the Web site—potentially including disgruntled customers or unethical competi­
tors—to post notes on the firm’s Facebook Wall and to comment on what the firm has posted. 
Going further, if the company turns off the feature that lets other users write on its Wall, 
people may wonder what the company is afraid of. The company will also be eliminating its 
opportunity to engage in customer conversations, particularly conversations that could market 
the firm’s products and services better than the company could do itself. Similarly, the com­
pany could delete posts. However, that policy only encourages the post author to scream even 
louder about being censored. 
Another risk is the 20–80 rule of thumb, which posits that a minority of individuals (20 per­
cent) contribute most of the content (80 percent) to blogs, wikis, social computing Web sites, 
and so on. For example, in an analysis of thousands of submissions to the news voting site Digg 
over a three-week time frame, the Wall Street Journal reported that roughly 33 percent of the 
stories that made it to Digg’s homepage were submitted by 30 contributors (out of 900,000 
registered members). 
TABLE 8.2
 Potential Benefits of Social Commerce 
Benefits to Customers 
• Better and faster vendor responses to complaints, because customers can air their complaints in 
public (on Twitter, Facebook, YouTube) 
• Customers can assist other customers (e.g., in online forums). 
• Customers’ expectations can be met more fully and quickly. 
• Customers can easily search, link, chat, and buy while staying on a social network’s page. 
Benefits to Businesses 
• Can test new products and ideas quickly and inexpensively 
• Learn a lot about their customers 
• Identify problems quickly and alleviate customer anger 
• Learn about customers’ experiences via rapid feedback 
• Increase sales when customers discuss products positively on social networking sites 
• Create more effective marketing campaigns and brand awareness 
• Use low-cost user-generated content, for example, in marketing campaigns 
• Obtain free advertising through viral marketing 
• Identify and reward influential brand advocates 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fundamentals of Social Computing in Business 221 
Other risks of social computing include: 
• Information security concerns 
• Invasion of privacy 
• Violation of intellectual property and copyright 
• Employees’ reluctance to participate 
• Data leakage of personal information or corporate strategic information 
• Poor or biased quality of users’ generated content 
• Cyberbullying/cyberstalking and employee harassment 
Consider Rosetta Stone (www.rosettastone.com), which produces software for language trans­
lation. To obtain the maximum possible mileage out of social computing and limit the firm’s 
risks on social media, Rosetta Stone implemented a strategy to control its customer interaction 
on Facebook. The strategy involves both human intervention and software to help monitor the 
firm’s Facebook presence. Specifically, the software helps to monitor Wall posts and respond 
to them constructively. 
Fans of facebook.com/RosettaStone who post questions on its Wall are likely to receive a 
prompt answer because the Facebook page is integrated with customer service soft ware from 
Parature (www.parature.com). The software scans Wall posts and flags those posts that require 
a company response, as opposed to those in which fans of the company are talking among 
themselves. Rosetta Stone customer service representatives are also able to post responses to 
the Wall that are logged in the Parature issue-tracking database. 
A new business model has emerged, enabled by social computing and environmental con­
cerns. This business model is called collaborative consumption. 
Collaborative Consumption 
Collaborative consumption is an economic model based on sharing, swapping, trading, or 
renting products and services, enabling access over ownership. The premise of collaborative 
consumption is that having access to goods and services is more important than owning them. 
This new model is transforming social, economic, and environmental practices. 
Collaborative consumption is a broad term that includes many collaborative practices, 
such as collaborative production, crowdfunding, peer-to-peer lending, and others. In collab­
orative production, users sell the extra power generated from their solar panels back to the 
utility company’s grid to help power someone else’s home. Crowdfunding is the practice of 
funding a project by raising money from a large number of people, typically via the Internet. 
Peer-to-peer lending is the practice of lending money to unrelated individuals without using a 
traditional financial institution such as a bank. 
Collaborative consumption is a very old concept. We have been bartering and cooperating 
throughout human history. If we did not have money, we traded time, meals, favors, or per­
sonal belongings, and many cultures today do the same. On the Web, the peer-to-peer model 
started with eBay (www.ebay.com) in 1995. Then Craigslist (www.craigslist.com) began in the 
late 1990s, followed by Zipcar (www.zipcar.com) in 2000 and Airbnb (www.airbnb.com) in 2007. 
Trust is the greatest concern of this new economic model. Sharing works well only when 
the participants’ reputations are involved. Most sharing platforms try to address this issue by 
creating a self-policing community. Almost all platforms require profiles of both parties, and 
they feature community rating systems. 
Startups such as TrustCloud (http://trustcloud.com) are trying to become the portable 
reputation system of this new economy. The company has developed an algorithm that collects 
(if you choose to opt in) your online “data exhaust”—the trail you leave as you engage with oth­
ers on Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, commentary-filled sites like TripAdvisor, and others. It then 
calculates your reliability, consistency, and responsiveness. The result is a contextual badge 
that you carry to any Web site, a trust rating similar to the credit rating you have in the “off line” 
world. 

222 
CHAPTER 8  Social Computing
Collaborative consumption does have advantages. Participants cite advantages that 
include self-management, variety, and the flexibility that comes from being able to set their 
own schedules. The model can be beneficial for part-time workers, young people such as stu-
dents, the unemployed, stay-at-home parents, and retired persons. The model allows people 
to share their underused assets and earn income.
For example, over half of Airbnb hosts in San Francisco said that the service helps them pay 
their rent and the average RelayRides member makes an extra $250 per month. Forbes maga-
zine estimated that through collaborative consumption, people will earn more than $3.5 billion 
in 2015, a growth rate of 25 percent.
Collaborative consumption has positive environmental impacts. As our population grows, 
we are using valuable resources—water, food, oil—in a way that is not sustainable. The new 
model helps us to utilize our natural resources more wisely, by sharing, not owning.
On the other hand, collaborative consumption does have disadvantages. The law and reg-
ulatory agencies are trying to keep abreast of the rapidly growing companies in this economy. 
Consider these examples: 
• Without a permit, residents in San Francisco are prohibited from renting for under 30 days 
(although the practice still occurs). 
• New York City passed an “illegal hotel law” in 2010 that prevents people from subletting 
apartments for less than 29 days, which is preventing Airbnb from expanding its market in 
the city.
• Uber and Lyft  oft en function as taxi companies, but do not have to follow worker regula-
tions or laws that apply to existing taxi companies because, the services consider their 
employees to be independent contractors rather than employees. 
People working for collaborative consumption services oft en work seven-day weeks, perform-
ing a series of one-off  tasks. They have little recourse when the services for which they work 
change their business models or pay rates. To reduce the risks, workers typically sign up for 
multiple services. Another disadvantage is that the pay may be less than expected when par-
ticipants factor in the time spent, expenses, insurance costs, and taxes on self-employment 
earnings. 
Participants have no basic employee benefits or protections. As independent contrac-
tors, they do not qualify for employee benefits such as health insurance, disability insurance, 
payroll deductions for Social Security, retirement savings plans, or unemployment benefits. 
They do not have the right to organize into a union, meaning that they do not have access to 
union-based collective bargaining processes. They also do not have the right to due process 
should a services remove them from its platform. For example, in June 2015, the California 
labor commission ruled that an Uber driver was an employee and entitled to expenses. Inter-
estingly, the same commission had ruled in 2012 that another Uber driver was an independ-
ent contractor.
There are numerous, diverse companies in the collaborative consumption market 
including:
• Uber (www.uber.com) operates the Uber mobile app, which allows consumers with smart-
phones to submit a trip request that is sent to Uber drivers who use their own cars.
• Airbnb (www.airbnb.com) is a Web site for people to list, find, and rent lodgings.
• Zipcar (www.zipcar.com) and RelayRides (http://relayrides.com) are car-sharing services. 
• Yerdle (https://yerdle.com) is a smartphone app that helps people give and get things for 
free. They gain credits by giving things away and spend those credits on whatever they 
need (e.g., clothes, kitchen appliances and tools). 
• Skillshare (www.skillshare.com) provides access to top-class tutors very cheaply.
• Tradesy (www.tradesy.com) lets users sell and buy used clothes from well-known brands. 
The service takes 9 percent of profits.
• JustPark (www.justpark.com) is a London startup that allows users to charge people to 
use their driveways as a safe, secure parking spot.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fundamentals of Social Computing in Business 223 
• Bla Bla Car (www.blablacar.com) lets you rent out extra seats in your car when you go on 
a trip. 
• Left over Swap (http://left overswap.com) is an app where users can find left over food to 
share. This service is important in the United States, where we waste some 30 percent of 
our food. 
• Streetbank (www.streetbank.com) allows users to lend things to your neighbors or borrow 
things you need to use for a set amount of time. 
• Feastly (https://eatfeastly.com) gives users a way to share any type of meal with people in 
their area. 
• Cookening (www.cookening.com), a service available throughout Europe and in New York 
City, allows travelers to pay to eat with a local person or family to make your trip more 
authentic. 
• Marriott International (www.marriott.com) offers meeting spaces on LiquidSpace (https:// 
liquidspace.com). LiquidSpace is an online marketplace that allows people to rent off ice 
space by the hour or the day. Hundreds of Marriott hotels now list meeting spaces, and 
the program has expanded the company’s reach by attracting local businesspeople from 
surrounding areas. 
• FLOOW2 (www.floow2.com), based in the Netherlands, calls itself a “business-to-busi­
ness sharing marketplace where companies and institutions can share equipment, as well 
as the skills and knowledge of personnel.” The company lists more than 25,000 types of 
equipment and services in industries such as construction, agriculture, transportation, 
real estate, and healthcare. 
The economic model of collaborative consumption is growing around the world. IT’s About 
Business 8.2 discusses Tujia, the leading vacation-rental Web site in China. 
IT’s About Business 8.2 
MIS Is Tujia the Airbnb of China? 
Vacation-rental Web sites are growing in popularity among travel­
ers around the world as they look for cheaper alternatives to ho­
tels, while property owners gain a new source of income. In recent 
years, tourism has increased rapidly in China, driven by rising per­
sonal incomes. To accommodate this trend, Tujia (www.tujia.com) 
is a Chinese online holiday rentals Web site. There are more than 
50 million vacant properties in China, due in part to a growing econ­
omy, rapid urbanization, and low borrowing costs. This situation 
makes China a prime market for Tujia’s business model. 
Tujia, founded in 2010, lists almost 300,000 properties in 250 
locations in China. The startup manages approximately 10,000 
properties themselves, with third-party property managers han­
dling the remainder. For example, in Beijing, one Tujia property 
manager looks after about two dozen apartments in the Central 
Business District. If someone applies to Tujia to list their property 
in that area, then the company has its local manager inspect the 
property, take photos, and then Tujia lists that property. When a 
customer books a property, Tujia receives a percentage of the 
rental income. 
The company is expanding globally, with approximately 
15,000 properties overseas in more than 100 destinations. It sim­
ply follows Chinese tourists to their favorite destinations. The most 
popular overseas destinations for Chinese tourists are Thailand, 
Indonesia, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Korea, and Japan. As a result, Tujia 
concentrates on these areas first. 
Airbnb (www.airbnb.com) and Tujia have similar business 
models, connecting home owners with travelers looking for a place 
to stay. However, there are differences between the two companies. 
Specifically, the Chinese consumer, and to a larger extent the Asian 
consumer, is different from Western consumers. For example, Asian 
consumers tend to think much longer before staying in a stranger’s 
house. Further, Airbnb targets foreigners traveling to China, where 
Tujia focuses on Chinese travelers traveling within China or out of 
the country. Another difference is that Tujia works directly with 
home owners, cleaning and inspecting their properties, and helps 
real estate developers rent out their surplus inventory. 
Tujia has picked up on key differences between Chinese and 
other Asian travelers and Western travelers. The first is the trust is­
sue. Trust is critical for Chinese and Asian travelers, as the vacation-
rental market is in its infancy relative to the United States and other 
countries. 
Virtually no two Tujia vacation properties are the same, unlike 
hotels, which have a certain amount of standardization that regular 
guests can trust. To manage the trust issue, Tujia has local teams 
handling check-in and check-out, as well as inspecting the prop­
erties. The teams ensure that all photos of a property are current 
and accurate. Tujia also reassures its users that when they reserve 
a property, it will indeed be available. If a property is not available 
for any reason, Tujia will find other accommodation for that guest. 
The second is the expectation on the level of service provided. 
When Asians travel, they like to be served. Therefore, Tujia tailors 
its services to Chinese guests. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
224 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
To compete with hotels, almost all Tujia properties have cer­
tain services, such as cleaning. Some properties, such as villas in 
Qiandao Hu, close to Shanghai that rent for $1,000 per night, off er 
services rivaling five-star hotels, such as a dedicated butler in each 
villa. 
Tujia lists other properties in tourist locales, such as one prop­
erty close to Tai Hu, a famous lake in Suzhou. Chinese visit there on 
vacation, so Tujia offers them bicycles and tours. Many of Tujia’s 
customers travel with families, so the company lists larger proper­
ties such as villas that have activities for children. In addition, many 
Chinese love to cook, so Tujia lists properties with kitchens. 
Tujia follows very specific criteria that determine the kind 
of properties that are listed. In addition to personal inspections, 
Tujia monitors customer comments very closely and operates an 
around-the-clock call center for any complaints. Tujia encourages 
its customers to provide feedback. 
The company takes an especially close look at reviews with 
three stars or less (out of five stars) and at reviews where the cus­
tomer said “I’m not going to recommend Tujia to my friends” or 
“I’m not coming back again.” In these cases, Tujia tries to follow 
up with customers, but the company definitely follows up with 
property owners and managers. Sometimes, Tujia delists such 
properties or moves them down in the Tujia rankings system. The 
company tells these owners and managers that if they correct the 
problems, then their ranking will improve. 
Competitor Web sites such as Maiyi and Xiaozhu list less 
expensive properties, while Tujia focuses on mid- to high-end 
properties. 
Tujia works with Ctrip (http://english.ctrip.com), China’s larg­
est online travel agency. If customers access the Chinese version of 
Ctrip, there is a tab that drives traffic to Tujia’s Web site. In addition, 
Tujia offers car rentals to its customers via Ctrip. 
Companies are engaged in many types of social commerce activities, including shop­
ping, advertising, market research, customer relationship management, and human resource 
management. In the next sections of this chapter, you will learn about each social commerce 
activity. 
Before you go on…
 1. Briefly describe the benefits of social commerce to customers.
 2. Briefly describe the risks of social commerce to businesses.
 3. What are the benefits of collaborative consumption to customers?
 4. What are the benefits and risks of collaborative consumption to participants (i.e., workers)? 
Apply the Concept 8.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 8.2 Describe the benefits and 
risks of social commerce to companies. 
STEP 1: Background 
Collaborative consumption has been fueled by social networks 
because it allows owners to share their goods with those who 
From its founding, Tujia has had to cooperate closely with the 
Chinese government. In fact, the company has signed agreements 
with over 160 local governments across the country. For example, 
Tujia created the vacation rental association in Sanya by working 
with the government. Therefore, Tujia help set standards for vaca­
tion rental properties in the region. In addition, Tujia is hoping that 
the wish of Chinese Prime Minister Li Keqiang, who said that China 
should ease restrictions on e-commerce, will come true. 
In another round of funding, Tujia raised $300 million in 
August 2015, bringing its value to approximately $1.3 billion. 
Sources: Compiled from N. Mahajan, “How Tujia, ‘China’s Airbnb’, Is 
Different from Airbnb,” CKGSB Knowledge, August 12, 2015; 
L. Davidson, “Cracking China Just Got Harder for Airbnb as Rival Tujia 
Lands $300M Funding,” The Telegraph, August 3, 2015; S. Millward, 
“China’s Airbnb-esque Tujia Is a New Startup Unicorn after $300M 
Funding,” Techinasia, August 3, 2015; A. Tsiang, “Chinese Property-
Rental Site Tujia Raises $300 Million,” The New York Times, August 3, 
2015; L. Chen and E. Chan, “China’s Airbnb Valued at More than 
$1 Billion after Funding,” Bloomberg Business, August 2, 2015; 
J. Osawa, “‘China’s Airbnb’ Rests Easy over $1.3 Billion Valuation,” 
AsiaOne Business News, July 30, 2015; “Tujia.com, The Chinese Airbnb, 
Seeks International Growth,” Hospitality, April 8, 2015; S. Cheung, 
“China’s Answer to Airbnb, Tujia.com, Raises $100M,” Venture Capital 
Dispatch, June 18, 2014; www.tujia.com, accessed August 13, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Visit Airbnb’s Web site and learn about the company’s ser­
vices. Now, describe the differences in the services provided 
by Airbnb and Tujia. 
2. As Airbnb attempts to expand in China and Tujia attempts 
to expand internationally, describe which company might be 
more successful and why. 
would rather rent something than permanently own it. Sharing 
also makes it cheaper to own because the cost of ownership is 
spread across many users. 
Uber (www.uber.com) allows vehicle owners to share their 
vehicles with others. In the beginning, Uber involved giving 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Computing in Business: Shopping 225 
someone a ride for a fee, but today Uber is also delivering goods 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
using their UberRUSH service. 
At the time of this writing, UberRUSH is available only San 
Francisco, Chicago, and New York. Why do you think they started 
in such heavily populated areas? What advantages would a 
STEP 2: Activity 
collaborative consumption business model have in a heavily 
Vi sit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept 
populated area? What disadvantages would they face? In what 
and read over Uber’s information about the UberRUSH delivery 
ways might a college campus be a prime location to introduce 
service. There is an introductory video on their homepage. If it is 
users to collaborative consumption services such as Uber or 
unavailable, you can find it on YouTube at http://www.wiley.com/ 
UberRUSH? Create a table that compares the advantages and 
go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept. Watch the video about the 
disadvantages of collaborative consumption for delivery services. 
service and take note of the applications they present in the video. 
Submit your table to your instructor. 
8.3 Social Computing in Business: 
Shopping 
Social shopping is a method of electronic commerce that takes all of the key aspects of social 
networks—friends, groups, voting, comments, discussions, reviews, and others—and focuses 
them on shopping. Social shopping helps shoppers connect with one another based on tastes, 
location, age, gender, and other selected attributes. 
The nature of shopping is changing, especially shopping for brand-name clothes and 
related items. For example, popular brands such as Gap, Shopbop, InStyle, and Lisa Klein 
are joining communities on Stylehive (www.stylehive.com) to help promote the season’s lat­
est fashion collections. Shoppers are using sites like ThisNext (www.thisnext.com) to create 
profiles and blogs about their favorite products in social communities. Shoppers can tag each 
item, so that all items become searchable. Moreover, searching within these Web sites can yield 
results targeted specifically to individual customers. 
There are several methods to shop socially. You will learn about each of them in the next 
section. 
Ratings, Reviews, and Recommendations 
Prior to making a purchase, customers typically collect information such as what brand to buy, 
from which vendor, and at what price. Online customers obtain this information via shopping 
aids such as comparison agents and Web sites such as Epinions (www.epinions.com). Today, 
customers also use social networking to guide their purchase decisions. They are increasingly 
utilizing ratings, reviews, and recommendations from friends, fans, followers, and experienced 
customers. 
Ratings, reviews, and recommendations are usually available in social shopping. In addition 
to seeing what is already posted, shoppers have an opportunity to contribute their own ratings 
and reviews and to discuss ratings and reviews posted by other shoppers (see Figure 8.3). The 
ratings and reviews come from the following sources: 
•  Customer ratings and reviews: Integrated into the vendor’s Web page, a social network page,  
a customer review site, or in customer feeds (e.g., Amazon, iTunes, Buzzillions, Epinions).  
•  Expert ratings and reviews: Views from an independent authority (e.g., Metacritic). 
•  Sponsored reviews: Paid-for reviews (e.g., SponsoredReviews, PayPerPost). 
•  Conversational marketing: Individuals converse via e-mail, blog, live chat, discussion  
groups, and tweets. Monitoring these conversations yields rich data for market research  
and customer service.  
As one example, Maui Jim (www.mauijim.com), the sunglass company, employed favorable 
MKT 
word-of-mouth marketing as a key sales driver. The company uses Bazaarvoice’s Ratings & 

 
 
226 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
FIGURE 8.3  Epinions (www 
.epinions.com) is a Web site that 
allows customers to rate anything 
from cars to music. In this screen-
shot, customers review a popular 
children’s film. 
Reviews to allow customers to contribute five-point ratings and authentic product reviews on 
the company’s entire line of sunglasses and accessories. In effect, Maui Jim extended custom­
ers’ word-of-mouth reviews across the Web. 
Maui Jim encourages its customers to share their candid opinions on the style, fit, and 
performance of all of its sunglass models. To accomplish this goal, the company integrates cus­
tomer reviews into its Web site search function to ensure that shoppers who are interested in a 
particular product will see that product’s rating in the search results. Customer response to this 
rating system has been overwhelmingly positive. 
Social recommendation Web sites such as ShopSocially (www.shopsocially.com), Blippy 
(www.blippy.com), and Swipely (www.swipely.com) encourage conversations about pur­
chases. The product recommendations are submitted by users’ friends and acquaintances and 
arguably are more trustworthy than reviews posted by strangers. 
ThisNext (www.thisnext.com) is a Web site where people recommend their favorite prod­
ucts to others. The site blends two powerful elements of real-world shopping: word-of-mouth 
recommendations from trusted sources and the ability to browse products in a way that natu­
rally leads to discovery. 
Regarding recommendations, a filter bubble is a result of a search in which a Web site algo­
rithm guesses what a user would like to see based on information about that user, such as loca­
tion and past searches. As a result, users see information that reinforces their viewpoints. For 
example, one user who searched Google for “BP” received investment news for British Petro­
leum. Another user searched for that exact term and received information about the Deepwa­
ter Horizon oil spill. 
We must be careful when our search results begin to reflect only our thinking on a subject. 
For example, if you search Amazon for only best-selling books in science fiction, you may miss 
out on best-selling books in many other genres. 
Group Shopping 
Group shopping Web sites such as Groupon (www.groupon.com) and LivingSocial (www.living­
social.com, see Figure 8.4) off er major discounts or special deals during a short time frame. 
Group buying is closely associated with special deals (flash sales). 

 
 
 
  
 
Social Computing in Business: Shopping 227 
"A screenshot image of web site LivingSocial (popular example
of a group shopping web site)."
  LivingSocial (www 
.livingsocial.com"A screenshot image 
of web site LivingSocial (popular example
of a group shopping web site)."
People who sign up with LivingSocial receive e-mails that offer deals at, for example, a 
restaurant, a spa, or an event in a given city. They can click on either “Today’s Deal” or “Past 
Deal” (some past deals can still be active). They can also click on an icon and receive the deal 
the next day. Customers who purchase a deal receive a unique link to share with their friends. If 
a customer convinces three or more people to buy that specific deal using his or her link, then 
the customer’s deal is free. 
Individuals can also shop together virtually in real time. In this process, shoppers log on to 
a Web site and then contact their friends and family. Everyone then shops online at the same 
time. Some real-time shopping providers, such as DoTogether (www.dotogether.com) and Wet 
Seal (www.wetseal.com), have integrated their shopping service directly into Facebook. Cus­
tomers log in to Facebook, install the firm’s app, and then invite their friends to join them on a 
virtual retail shopping experience. 
Shopping Communities and Clubs 
Shopping clubs host sales for their members that last just a few days and usually feature luxury 
brands at heavily discounted prices. Club organizers host three to seven sales per day, usually 
via e-mail messages that entice club members to shop at more than 70 percent off retail—but 
quickly, before supplies run out. 
Luxury brands effectively partner with online shopping clubs to dispose of special-run, 
sample, overstock, or liquidation goods. These clubs are rather exclusive, which prevents the 
brands’ images from being diminished. Examples are Beyond the Rack (www.beyondtherack. 
com), Gilt Groupe (www.gilt.com), Rue La La (www.ruelala.com), and One King’s Lane (www 
.onekingslane.com). 
Kaboodle (www.kaboodle.com) is another example of a shopping community. Kaboodle 
is a free service that lets users collect information from the Web and store it on a Kaboodle list 
that they can share with other shoppers. Kaboodle simplifies shopping by making it easier for 
people to find items they want in a catalog and by allowing users to share recommendations 

 
 
228 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
with one another using Kaboodle lists and groups. People can also use Kaboodle lists for plan­
ning vacations, sharing research for work and school, sharing favorite bands with friends, and 
basically everything else they might want to collect and share information about. 
Social Marketplaces and Direct Sales 
Social marketplaces act as online intermediaries that harness the power of social networks 
for introducing, buying, and selling products and services. A social marketplace helps members 
market their own creations (see Etsy in Figure 8.5). Other examples are as follows: 
• Craigslist (www.craigslist.com) provides online classifieds in addition to supporting social 
activities such as meetings and events. 
• Fotolia (www.fotolia.com) is a social marketplace for the community of creative people 
who enjoy sharing, learning, and expressing themselves through images, forums, and 
blogs; members provide royalty-free stock images that other individuals and professionals 
can legally buy and share. 
• Flipsy (www.flipsy.com) can be used by anyone to list, buy, and sell books, music, movies, 
and games. 
Before you go on…
 1. Prior to making a purchase, customers typically Why are ratings, reviews, and recommendations so 
important to potential customers?
 2. Define collaborative consumption, and describe how collaborative consumption is a “green” 
phenomenon. 
FIGURE 8.5  Etsy (www.etsy.com) 
is a social marketplace for all hand­
made or vintage items. A screenshot image depicting a page of Etsy (a social marketplace for all handmade or vintage items).

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Computing in Business: Marketing 229 
Apply the Concept 8.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 8.3 Identify the methods used 
the Denver Post. Both articles deal with the issue of falsified 
for shopping socially. 
recommendations and ratings. 
Talk to some of your classmates about this topic, and record their 
STEP 1: Background 
feedback. How did they respond to the fact that product ratings 
Section 8.3 defines shopping socially as taking the key aspects 
may not be legitimate? Ask them the following questions: 
of social networks (e.g., groups, reviews, discussions) and 
• What star rating do you rely on when you are considering a 
applying them to shopping. This phenomenon is not new. 
product? 
People have shopped socially for years, through general 
• Do you read reviews or simply notice the number of stars? 
conversation. 
• If you read reviews, do you read only the good ones, only the 
Today, most consumers conduct a lot of research before they 
bad ones, or a mixture of both? 
make a purchase by reading reviews posted by other customers. 
• Do you rely on reviews more than a third-party company 
Recently, however, the validity of these reviews has been 
such as Consumer Reports? 
questioned. As you learn about social shopping, you should also 
become aware of the potential fraud that takes place online. 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Considering the material you have read and your conversations 
STEP 2: Activity 
with your classmates, identify various methods of shopping 
Go to http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
socially and discuss the role that trust plays in each method. 
and click on the link for Apply the Concept 8.3. This link will 
Prepare a paper or presentation for your professor documenting 
take you to an article from the New York Times and one from 
what you have learned. 
8.4 Social Computing in Business: 
Marketing 
Marketing can be defined as the process of building profitable customer relationships by creat-
MKT 
ing value for customers and capturing value in return. There are many components to a market­
ing campaign, including (1) define your target audience; (2) develop your message (i.e., how 
you will solve their problem); (3) decide on how you will deliver your message (e.g., e-mail, snail 
mail, Web advertising, social networks); and (4) follow up. Social computing is particularly 
useful for two marketing processes: advertising and market research. 
Advertising 
Social advertising refers to advertising formats that make use of the social context of the user 
viewing the ad. Social advertising is the first form of advertising to leverage forms of social 
influence such as peer pressure and friend recommendations and likes. 
Many experts believe advertising is the solution to the challenge of making money from 
social networking sites and social commerce sites. Advertisers have long noted the large num­
ber of visitors on social networks and the amount of time they spend there. As a result, they are 
willing to pay to place ads and run promotions on social networks. Advertisers now post ads on 
all major social networking Web sites. 
Most ads in social commerce consist of branded content paid for by advertisers. These ads 
belong to two major categories: social advertisements (or social ads) and social apps. Social 
advertisements are ads placed in paid-for media space on social media networks. Social apps are 
branded online applications that support social interactions and user contributions (e.g., Nike+). 
Viral marketing—that is, word-of-mouth advertising—lends itself especially well to social 
networking. For example, Stormhoek Vineyards (www.stormhoek.com) initiated a marketing 
campaign by off ering bloggers a free bottle of wine. Within six months, roughly 100 of these 
bloggers had posted voluntary comments—the majority of them positive—about the wine on 
their blogs. In turn these comments were read by other bloggers. 

 
 
230 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
MKT 
FIGURE 8.6  Customers share 
their ideas and feedback with Dell 
via IdeaStorm (www.ideastorm 
.com). 
There are other innovative methods to advertise in social media. Consider the following: 
• Use a company Facebook page, including a store that attracts fans and lets them “meet” 
other customers. Then, advertise in your Facebook store. 
• Tweet business success stories to your customers. 
• Integrate ads into YouTube videos. 
• Use native advertising. Native advertising is a sales pitch that fits into the flow of the infor­
mation being shown. Many publishers view native advertising as risky because it has the 
potential to erode the public’s trust. (See Closing Case 2). 
Market Research 
Traditionally, marketing professionals used demographics compiled by market research firms 
as one of their primary tools to identify and target potential customers. Obtaining this informa­
tion was time-consuming and costly, because marketing professionals had to ask potential 
customers to provide it. Today, however, members of social networks provide this information 
voluntarily on their pages! (Think about all the information that you provide on your favorite 
social networking Web sites.) Because of the open nature of social networking, merchants can 
easily find their customers, see what they do online, and learn who their friends are. 
This information provides a new opportunity to assess markets in near real time. Word-of­
mouth has always been one of the most powerful marketing methods—more often than not, 
people use products that their friends like and recommend. Social media sites can provide this 
type of data for numerous products and services. 
Companies are utilizing social computing tools to obtain feedback from customers. This 
trend is referred to as conversational marketing. These tools enable customers to supply feed­
back via blogs, wikis, online forums, and social networking sites. Again, customers are provid­
ing much of this feedback to companies voluntarily and for free. 
Social computing not only generates faster and cheaper results than traditional focus 
groups but also fosters closer customer relationships. For example, Dell Computer operates 
a feedback Web site called IdeaStorm that allows customers to suggest and vote on improve­
ments in its off erings (see Figure 8.6). A screenshot image of IdeaStrom where customers share their ideas and feedback with Dell.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Computing in Business: Marketing 231 
Retailers are aware that customers, especially younger ones, not only want to be heard 
but also want to know whether other customers agree with them. Consequently, retailers are 
increasingly opening up their Web sites to customers, allowing them to post product reviews, 
ratings, and, in some cases, photos and videos. 
As a result of this strategy, customer reviews are emerging as prime locations for online 
shoppers to visit. Approximately one-half of consumers consult reviews before making an 
online purchase, and almost two-thirds are more likely to purchase from a site that off ers rat­
ings and reviews. 
Using social computing for market research is not restricted to businesses. Customers also 
enjoy the capabilities that social computing offers when they are shopping. 
Conducting Market Research Using Social Networks 
Customer sentiment expressed on Twitter, Facebook, and similar sites represents an incredibly 
valuable source of information for companies. Customer activities on social networking sites 
generate huge amounts of data that must be analyzed, so that management can conduct bet­
ter marketing campaigns and improve their product design and their service off erings. The 
monitoring, collection, and analysis of socially generated data, and the resultant strategic deci­
sions are combined in a process known as social intelligence. 
An example of social intelligence is Wendy’s International (www.wendys.com), which uses 
software to sift through the more than 500,000 customer messages the fast-food chain collects 
each year. Using Clarabridge (www.clarabridge.com) text analytics software, Wendy’s analyzes 
comments from its online notes, e-mails, receipt-based surveys, and social media. Prior to adopt­
ing this software, the company used a combination of spreadsheets and keyword searches to 
review comments in what it describes as a slow and expensive manual approach. In contrast, the 
new software enables Wendy’s to track customer experiences at the store level within minutes. 
Social networks provide excellent sources of valuable information for market research. In 
this section you will see illustrative examples of how to use Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn for 
market research. 
Using Facebook for Market Research. There are several ways to use Facebook for mar­
ket research. Consider the following examples: 
• Obtain feedback from your Facebook fans (and their friends if possible) on advertising  
campaigns, market research, and so on. It is the equivalent of holding a free focus group.  
• Test-market your messages. Provide two or three options, and ask fans which one they  
prefer and why.  
• Use Facebook for survey invitations (i.e., to recruit participants). Essentially, turn Facebook  
into a giant panel, and ask users to participate in a survey. Facebook offers a self-service  
model for displaying ads, which can function as invitations to take a survey. Facebook also  
allows you to target your audience very specifically based on traditional demographic cri­
teria such as age and gender.  
Using Twitter for Market Research. Your customers, your prospects, and industry 
thought leaders all use Twitter, making it a rich source of instantly updated information. Con­
sider the following examples: 
• Visit Twitter Search (www.twitter.com/search). Enter a company’s Twitter name. Not only  
can you follow what the company is saying, you can also follow what everyone is saying to  
them. Monitoring replies to your competitors and their employees will help you develop  
your own Twitter strategy by enabling you to observe (a) what your competitors are doing  
and, more importantly, (b) what people think about them. You can also follow the compa­
ny’s response to this feedback.  
• Take advantage of the tools that enable you to find people in the industries in which they  
operate. Use search.twitter.com to monitor industry-specific keywords. Check out Twellow  
MKT 
MIS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
232 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
(www.twellow.com). This site automatically categorizes a Twitter user into one to three 
industries based on that person’s bio and tweets. 
• Do you want to know what topic is on most people’s minds today? If so, then review the 
chart on TweetStats (www.tweetstats.com). It will show you the most frequently used 
words in all of Tweetdom, so you can be a part of those conversations. 
• An increasing number of companies are utilizing Twitter to solicit information from cus­
tomers and to interact with them. Examples are Dell (connecting with customers), JetBlue 
(learning about customers), Teusner Wines (gathering feedback, sharing information), and 
Pepsi (rapid response time in dealing with complaints). 
Using LinkedIn for Market Research. Post a question (e.g., solicit advice) regarding the 
topic or issue you are interested in. You may obtain a better result if you go to a specific Linke­
dIn group. 
Before you go on…
 1. Is social advertising more effective than advertising without a social component? Why or why not?
 2. Describe how marketing professionals use social networks to perform marketing research. 
Apply the Concept 8.4 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 8.4 Discuss innovative ways 
Should Be Following on Social Media.” Some of these companies 
to use social networking sites for advertising and market research. 
are not specifically related to advertising or market research, but 
you will still enjoy learning about them. Next, read the article on 
STEP 1: Background 
Digimind.com about the innovative ways people are using social 
media as a rich pool of information. 
Section 8.4 presented the major uses of social computing in 
advertising and market research. Social advertising is simply a 
way of presenting information to potential customers via a social 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
platform. Social market research makes use of these same social 
After reviewing the examples in the articles linked in Step 2, 
platforms to examine the ongoing communication between the 
prepare a discussion of the top three innovative ways that 
company and its customer community for information that the 
these companies are using social networking for advertising 
company can use to improve products or services. 
and the top three innovative ways that companies are using the 
information available on social networks as a mechanism for 
learning about their customers. Submit your discussion to your 
STEP 2: Activity 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept and 
instructor. 
find the two links. First, read the article about “20 Companies You 
8.5 Social Computing in Business: 
Customer Relationship Management 
The customer service profession has undergone a significant transformation, both in the ways 
that customer service professionals conduct business and in the ways that customers adapt 
to interacting with companies in a newly connected environment. Social computing has vastly 
altered both the expectations of customers and the capabilities of corporations in the area of 
customer relationship management. (We discuss customer relationship management in detail 
in Chapter 12.) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Computing in Business: Customer Relationship Management 233 
Customers are now incredibly empowered. Companies are closely monitoring social com­
puting not only because they are mindful of the negative comments posted by social network 
members but also because they perceive an opportunity to involve customers proactively to 
reduce problems through improved customer service. 
Empowered customers know how to use the wisdom and power of crowds and commu­
nities to their benefit. These customers choose how they interact with companies and brands, 
and they have elevated expectations concerning their experiences with a company. They are 
actively involved with businesses, not just as purchasers but also as advocates and influenc­
ers. As a result, businesses must respond to customers quickly and appropriately. Fortunately, 
social computing provides many opportunities for businesses to do just that, thereby off ering 
businesses the opportunity to turn disgruntled customers into champions for the firm. 
Consider this example: Papa John’s Pizza fired a cashier at one of its New York restaurants 
and apologized to an Asian-American customer for a receipt that identified her as “lady chinky 
eyes.” Minhee Cho, a communications manager at the nonprofit investigative journalism group 
ProPublica, posted a photo of the receipt on her Twitter account, and it was viewed almost 
200,000 times in a single day. John Schnatter, chairman and CEO of Papa John’s, immediately 
posted an apology on Facebook. In his apology, he asserted that he had apologized personally 
to Ms. Cho as well. 
An interesting way to empower customers is occurring in the publishing industry. IT’s 
About Business 8.3 shows how Wattpad enables readers to actually participate in the develop­
ment of a work of fiction. 
IT’s About Business 8.3 
MIS Wattpad Empowers Readers 
Today’s authors have many options to publish their work. Two of 
the most common are traditional publishing and self-publishing. 
In traditional publishing, authors complete their manuscripts 
and submit proposal letters to publishing houses (or have a literary 
agent do this for them, if they can obtain the services of an agent.) 
An editor reads the manuscript and decides to either reject it, leav­
ing the author free to offer it to another publisher), or to publish 
it. If the decision is to publish the manuscript, the house buys the 
rights from the author and puts up the money to edit, design, and 
market the book. The publishing house pays authors royalties on 
the number of books sold. 
The Internet then enabled authors to publish their own books. 
One of the most common ways to self-publish is through Amazon, 
through its self-publishing platform, Kindle Direct. Authors upload 
their books digitally to Amazon’s Web site. The Amazon team, ana­
lyzing the company’s massive customer databases, designs e-mail 
and Kindle marketing campaigns and selects key words for Ama­
zon’s search engine. In most cases, Amazon handles distribution 
and payment processing. Amazon sells the majority of its books 
as e-books through Kindle, but also prints paperback books on 
demand. 
Typically, self-published authors upload their books for free to 
the Amazon site. Authors receive a percentage of the sale price of 
each book, which is usually 70 percent. 
Now, technology is enabling a new way to write and mar­
ket works of fiction. Serialized fiction is a work published in se­
quential installments. Serialized fiction is writing repurposed for 
a mobile world, where readers’ attention is fragmentary. Story­
telling app Wattpad (www.wattpad.com), the leader in this new 
storytelling environment, has more than two million authors 
who create an average of 100,000 items per day for 20 million 
readers. 
Wattpad is a social reading platform and writing community 
in which authors post articles, stories, fiction, and poems, either 
online or through the mobile app. This process enables authors to 
make their creative works available to a larger number of readers. 
Readers are able to comment and like stories. Wattpad is free to 
readers and does not pay its authors. 
The primary goal for Wattpad authors is to gain a fan base. Af­
ter that, the writer must keep them coming back for more. The writ­
ers accomplish this goal by regularly uploading new work and by 
communicating directly with readers. Having many fans is critical 
because traditional publishers look more favorably on an author 
with a manuscript and 15,000 fans, than on an author with only a 
manuscript. Wattpad has caught the attention of the traditional 
publishing industry, which is looking for the next J. K. Rowling in its 
midst. Publishers are also picking up tips from Wattpad on how to 
boost engagement with readers. 
Sometimes the fans help shape the story. Readers can send a 
private message to the author, become an official fan, vote in favor 
of a work, or suggest actors to play the roles of certain characters if 
the story were turned into a movie. 
Another way in which Wattpad differs from the traditional 
publishing industry is that the stories are often first drafts, not hav­
ing been smoothed with rewriting or editing. There are practical 
reasons for this process. For one thing, the prose is written as spon­
taneously as possible, to take advantage of the immediacy of the 
electronic medium. For another thing, English is a second language 
for much of Wattpad’s international audience, so the spontaneous 
prose is more direct and therefore easier to understand. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
234 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
There are few Hemingways among Wattpad authors, who ad­
mit they do not make sacrifices for their art or spend hours coming 
up with just the right word or phrase. Young women are the target 
audience for the most popular categories of works, which include 
romance, vampire fiction, and mysteries. Wattpad writers are not 
paid for their work. 
Two examples show the value of Wattpad to its authors. Basi­
cally, if authors are successful enough on Wattpad, they might be 
considered by traditional publishing houses. Consider Wattpad au­
thor, Anna Todd. Several times a week, she uses Wattpad to publish 
a new installment of “After,” the story of Tessa and Harry. Within 
seconds of posting, readers are already commenting on the new 
episode. By the next day, there are usually some 10,000 comments. 
One of the ways that Wattpad can make money is by representing 
popular authors as their agent. Wattpad is shopping for book and 
movie deals for “After” on behalf of Ms. Todd. 
Another Wattpad author, Ali Novak, has published four nov­
els on the app. She was so overwhelmed with fan support that 
she’s had to cut back on engaging with readers. Ms. Novak hit 
the self-publishing jackpot in 2015 when a traditional publisher, 
Sourcebooks, published her most popular novel, “My Life with the 
Walter Boys,” whose heroine moves in with a family with 12 boys, 
in paperback. 
Wattpad generates a little revenue, mostly from advertising, 
although it has received $46 million in venture capital funding. 
Sources: Compiled from N. Shapiro, “The Perks, Pitfalls, and 
Paradoxes of Amazon Publishing,” Seattle Weekly News, November 4, 
2014; D. Jacobs, “How to Self-Publish Your Book Through Amazon,” 
Forbes, April 25, 2014; J. Koetsier, “Social Reading Platform Wattpad 
Announces Massive $46M Financing Round,” Venturebeat, April 8, 
2014; D. Streitfeld, “Web Fiction, Serialized and Social,” The New York 
Times, March 23, 2014; G. Bello, “PW Select December 2012: Wattpad 
Revolutionizes Online Storytelling,” Publishers Weekly, December 21, 
2012; P. Sansevieri, “Understanding How the Traditional Publishing 
Model Works,” The Huffington Post, July 5, 2011; www.wattpad.com, 
accessed August 12, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Describe the social computing aspects of Wattpad. 
2. What are other ways that Wattpad might generate revenue? 
3. What are possible disadvantages for Wattpad authors? 
Before you go on…
 1. Discuss why social computing is so important in customer relationship management.
 2. Describe how social computing improves customer service. 
Apply the Concept 8.5 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 8.5 Describe how social 
also develops a sense of trust with all of its customers, who are 
computing improves customer service. 
confident they would receive the same treatment. 
STEP 1: Background 
STEP 2: Activity 
Social customer relationship management involves using social 
Go to http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
networks to maintain customer loyalty. One company that 
and click on the link to ZAGG’s Web site. At the bottom of the 
employs this strategy quite skillfully is ZAGG (Zealous About Great 
page you will find a link to all of the company’s social networks. 
Gadgets; www.zagg.com). ZAGG makes and sells accessories 
Visit their Facebook page and review their timeline. Search for 
for mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets. To help sell 
customer complaints and for how the company deals with them. 
its products, the company has developed one of the best social 
Did you find a customer representative present on the social 
customer relationship management plans around. 
networking site? Does the site offer any competitions? Polls? Give­
aways? Can you reverse-engineer the company’s social customer 
When ZAGG develops a new product, it not only posts notes about 
relationship management methodology? 
the product on its social networking page, but it also involves 
customers in the process. For example, when ZAGG was releasing 
its ZAGGFolio for the iPad, the company allowed fans to vote on 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
the colors of the new product. 
Imagine that you are a marketing manager, and you have been 
ZAGG is also proficient at monitoring the social network for 
selected to present a report to the president to describe how 
product-related issues. It is not uncommon for a customer to 
social computing improves customer service. Create the outline 
complain and then receive feedback from a ZAGG employee. Not 
that you would use to make your points and present it to the 
only does the company retain that individual customer, but it 
class and to your instructor. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.6 
Social Computing in Business: Human Resource Management 235 
HRM 
Social Computing in Business: 
Human Resource Management 
Human resource (HR) departments in many organizations use social computing applications 
outside their organizations (recruiting) and inside their organizations (employee develop­
ment). For example, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu (www.deloitte.com) created a social network to 
assist its HR managers in downsizing and regrouping teams. 
Recruiting 
Both recruiters and job seekers are moving to online social networks as recruiting platforms. 
Enterprise recruiters are scanning online social networks, blogs, and other social resources to 
identify and find information about potential employees. If job seekers are online and active, 
there is a good chance that they will be seen by recruiters. In addition, on social networks there 
are many passive job seekers—people who are employed but would take a better job if one 
appeared. So, it is important that both active and passive job seekers maintain online profiles 
that accurately reflect their background and skills. Closing Case 1 takes a look at the rewards 
and the difficulties inherent in the online recruiting process. It also provides some tips to assist 
you in a job search. 
In another example, one HR director uses the HR social media management soft ware Bull­
horn Reach (www.bullhornreach.com), which allows her to post jobs to eight diff erent social 
networks simultaneously. Bullhorn Reach also enables her to analyze metrics that measure the 
effectiveness of her social recruiting eff orts. 
Onboarding 
Onboarding is how new employees acquire the necessary knowledge, skills, and behaviors to 
become effective members of the organization. Through the use of social media, new hires can 
learn what to expect in their first few days on the job and find answers to common questions. 
Because they are available inside the company’s firewall, these social communities can provide 
detailed information about corporate policies, as well as giving employees the opportunity to 
complete necessary forms online. These communities also provide introductory training, such 
as workplace safety information and how to use enterprise applications. 
Employee Development 
Human resource managers know that the best strategy to enable, encourage, and promote 
employee development is to build relationships with employees. To this end, a number of HR 
professionals are using enterprise social tools such as Chatter (www.salesforce.com/chat­
ter), Yammer (www.yammer.com), and Tibbr (www.tibbr.com) to tap into the wisdom of every 
employee. These tools help connect employees to work efficiently across organizations and 
to collaborate on sales opportunities, campaigns, and projects. They help companies simplify 
workflows and capture new ideas. They enable HR managers to find subject matter experts 
within the organization, recommending relevant people for every project team, sales team, and 
other functions. 
As HR managers learn more about employees’ skills, expertise, and passions through such 
tools, they can better motivate them, thereby helping them become more engaged and excited 
about their work. Employees can then be better rewarded for their expertise. 
Another area of employee development is training. A large percentage of the time and 
expense of employee education and learning management can be minimized by utilizing 
e-learning and interactive social learning tools. These tools help create connections among 
learners, instructors, and information. Companies find that these tools facilitate knowledge 

 
 
 
 
 
236 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
transfer within departments and across teams. Examples of these tools are Moodle (http:// 
moodle.com), Joomia (www.joomia.org), and Bloomfire (www.bloomfire.com). 
In 2015, LinkedIn acquired Lynda.com (www.lynda.com), an online education company 
offering thousands of video courses in software, creative, and business skills. The company 
produces video tutorials taught by industry experts. Members of Lynda have unlimited access 
to watch the videos. 
With this acquisition, LinkedIn plans to incorporate job certifications and training into its 
offerings. One LinkedIn executive noted that a LinkedIn user could be looking for a job, imme­
diately see the skills necessary for that job, and then be prompted to take the relevant and 
accredited course on Lynda that will help him or her acquire those skills and land the job. 
Finding a Job 
The other side of organizational recruiting are those people looking for jobs. Let’s say you want 
to find a job. Like the majority of job hunters, you will probably conduct at least part of your 
search online because the vast majority of entry-level positions in the United States are now 
listed only online. Job sites are the fastest, least expensive, and most efficient method to con­
nect employers with potential employees. 
Today, job searchers use traditional job sites and social networks such as LinkedIn. Appli­
cants like you have helped LinkedIn raise its market share in job searches from 4.7 percent in 
2010 to more than 12 percent by early 2015. 
To find a job, your best bet is to begin with LinkedIn (www.linkedin.com), which has 
roughly 165 million members. You should definitely have a profile on LinkedIn, which, by the 
way, is free. (See the bulleted list that follows for mistakes to avoid on your LinkedIn profile.) 
LinkedIn’s success comes from its ability to accurately identify its market segment. The 
company’s automated approach does not lend itself well to the upper tier of the job market— 
for example, CEO searches—where traditional face-to-face searches continue to be the pre­
ferred strategy. At the other end of the spectrum—that is, low-paying, low-skill jobs such as 
cashiers and truck drivers—job boards provide faster results. LinkedIn targets the vast sweet 
spot between these two extremes, helping to fill high-skill jobs that pay anywhere from $50,000 
to $250,000 or more per year. This is the spot you will likely occupy when you graduate. 
A number of job-search companies are competing with LinkedIn. These companies are try­
ing to create better-targeted matching systems that leverage social networking functionality. 
These companies include Monster (www.monster.com), Simply Hired (www.simplyhired.com), 
Career Builder (www.careerbuilder.com), Indeed (www.indeed.com), Jobvite (http://recruit­
ing.jobvite.com), Dice Open Web (www.dice.com/openweb), and many others. 
The most important secret to making online job search sites work for you is to use them 
carefully. Job coaches advise you to spend 80 percent of your day networking and directly 
contacting the people in charge of jobs you want. Devote another 10 percent to headhunters. 
Spend only the remaining 10 percent of your time online. 
Here is how to make your time online count. To start with, as you saw above, you should 
have a profile on LinkedIn. The following list shows you the mistakes NOT to make on your 
LinkedIn profile. 
• Do have a current, professional picture. (No dogs, no spouses, no babies, etc.) 
• Do make certain your LinkedIn Status is correct and current. 
• Do join groups related to your field of study or even to your personal interests. 
• Do list an accurate skill set. Do not embellish. 
• Do not use the standard connection request. Do some research on that person and tailor 
your connection request to that person. 
• Do not neglect LinkedIn’s privacy settings. When you have a job and are looking for another 
one, you will want to be discreet. You can set your privacy settings so that your boss does 
not see that you are looking for opportunities. 
• Do not skip the Summary. The Summary is a concise way of selling yourself. Write it in the 
first person. 

 
 
 
 
 
Social Computing in Business: Human Resource Management 237 
• Do not eliminate past jobs or volunteer work. 
• Do not say you have worked with someone when you have not. 
Next, access the job sites such as those listed above. These sites list millions of jobs and they 
make it easy to narrow your search using filters. These filters include title, company name, loca­
tion, and many others. Indeed allows you to search within a specific salary range. SimplyHired 
lets you sort for friendly, socially responsible, and even dog-friendly workplaces. 
These sites have advanced search options. Try plugging in the name of a company you 
might want to work for or an advanced degree that qualifies you for specialized work. For 
example, you could enter “CFA” if you are a certified financial analyst or “LEED” if you are a 
building engineer with expertise in environmental eff iciency. 
SimplyHired has a useful tool called “Who do I know.” If you have a LinkedIn profile, then 
this tool will instantly display your LinkedIn contacts with connections to various job listings. 
“Who do I know” also syncs with Facebook. 
One more trick to using the aggregators: Configure them to deliver listings to your inbox. 
Set up an e-mail alert that delivers new job postings to you every day. 
You should also search for niche sites that are specific to your field. For technology-related 
jobs, for instance, Dice (www.dice.com) has a strong reputation. For nonprofit jobs, try Idealist 
(www.idealist.org). For government jobs, the U.S. government’s site is an excellent resource: 
www.usajobs.gov. 
One more great online resource is Craigslist (www.craigslist.com). It is one site the aggre­
gators do not tap. Craigslist focuses on local listings, and it is especially useful for entry-level 
jobs and internships. 
Beyond locating listings for specific jobs, career coaches contend that job sites can be a 
resource for keywords and phrases that you can pull from job descriptions and include in your 
résumé, cover letters, and e-mails. Use the language from a job description in your cover letter. 
Web sites like Vault (www.vault.com), Monster, and CareerBuilder provide some helpful 
career tips. Vault, in particular, offers very useful career guides. 
The bottom line: It is critical to extend most of your eff orts beyond an online search. 
Before you go on…
 1. Explain why LinkedIn has become so important in the recruiting process.
 2. If you are looking for a job, what is the major problem with restricting your search to social networks? 
Apply the Concept 8.6 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 8.6 Discuss different ways in 
take you to LinkedIn, a professional social network. Create a 
which human resource managers make use of social computing. 
profile that includes the college you currently attend. Connect 
to your classmates as they also complete this activity. You never 
STEP 1: Background 
know when you will need to call on one of these individuals. 
Social human resource management is redefining the ways 
Next, search the Web for “Job Search Websites,” and see which 
we search and apply for jobs and make hiring decisions. Going 
ones will allow you to connect with your LinkedIn profile. As you 
digital was a natural step, but it was also an awkward one. 
connect with these professional sites, consider the diff erences 
When position announcements went from the bulletin board 
between a professional and a personal social network. 
and local newspaper to Monster.com, the number of positions 
and applicants exploded. We are so connected today, that it is 
impossible to go back. After you graduate, you will no doubt use 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
social networks to find and apply for jobs. 
In a paper, discuss the various ways in which human resources 
managers can make use of social computing and how you 
STEP 2: Activity 
can best present yourself online. Present your paper to your 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
instructor. 
and click on the first link for Apply the Concept 8.6. This link will 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
238 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For the Accounting Major 
Audit teams use social networking technologies internally to stay 
in touch with team members who are working on multiple projects. 
These technologies serve as a common channel of communications. 
For example, an audit team manager can create a group, include his 
or her team members as subscribers, and then push information re­
garding projects to all members at once. Externally, these technolo­
gies are useful in interfacing with clients and other third parties for 
whom the firm and its staff provide services. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
Many of the popular social networking sites have users who sub­
scribe to finance-oriented subgroups. Among these groups are fi­
nance professionals who collaborate and share knowledge as well as 
nonfinancial professionals who are potential clients. 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major 
Social computing tools and applications enable marketing profes­
sionals to become closer to their customers in a variety of ways, 
including blogs, wikis, ratings, and recommendations. Marketing 
professionals now receive almost real-time feedback on products. 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
Social computing tools and applications allow production personnel 
to “enlist” business partners and customers in product development 
activities. 
HRM For the Human Resource Management Major 
Social networks off er tremendous benefits to human resource pro­
fessionals. HR personnel can perform a great deal of their recruiting 
activities by accessing such sites as LinkedIn. They can also check 
out potential new hires by accessing a large number of social net­
working sites. Internally, HR personnel can utilize private, internal 
social networks for employee expertise and experience in order to 
find the best person for a position or project team. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
The MIS department is responsible for two aspects of social comput­
ing usage: (1) monitoring employee usage of social computing ap­
plications while at work, both time and content, and (2) developing 
private, internal social networks for company employees and then 
monitoring the content of these networks. 
Summary 
1. Describe five Web 2.0 tools and two major types of Web 2.0 sites. 
A tag is a keyword or term that describes a piece of information (e.g., a 
blog, a picture, an article, or a video clip).  
Really Simple Syndication allows you to receive the information you want  
(customized information), when you want it, without having to surf thou­
sands of Web sites.  
A weblog (blog for short) is a personal Web site, open to the public, in which  
the site creator expresses his or her feelings or opinions with a series of  
chronological entries.  
Microblogging is a form of blogging that allows users to write short mes­
sages (or capture an image or embedded video) and publish them.  
A wiki is a Web site on which anyone can post material and make changes  
to already posted material. Wikis foster easy collaboration and they har­
ness the collective intelligence of Internet users.  
Social networking Web sites allow users to upload their content to the Web  
in the form of text (e.g., blogs), voice (e.g., podcasts), images, and videos  
(e.g., videocasts).  
A mashup is a Web site that takes different content from a number of other  
Web sites and mixes them together to create a new kind of content.  
2. Describe the benefits and risks of social commerce to companies. 
Social commerce refers to the delivery of electronic commerce activities 
and transactions through social computing. 
Benefits of social commerce to customers include the following: better 
and faster vendors’ response to complaints; customers can assist other 
customers; customers’ expectations can be met more fully and quickly; 
customers can easily search, link, chat, and buy while staying in the social 
network’s page. 
Benefits of social commerce to vendors include the following: can test new 
products and ideas quickly and inexpensively; learn much about their 
customers; identify problems quickly and alleviate anger; learn from cus­
tomers’ experiences with rapid feedback; increase sales when custom­
ers discuss products positively on social networking site; create better 
marketing campaigns and brand awareness; use low-cost user-gener­
ated content, for example, in marketing campaigns; get free advertising 
through viral marketing; identify influential brand advocates and reward 
them. 
Risks of social computing include information security concerns; invasion of 
privacy; violation of intellectual property and copyright; employees’ reluc­
tance to participate; data leakage of personal information or corporate 
strategic information; poor or biased quality of users’ generated content; 
cyberbullying/cyberstalking and employee harassment. 
3. Identify the methods used for shopping socially. 
Social shopping is a method of electronic commerce that takes all of the 
key aspects of social networks—friends, groups, voting, comments, discus­
sions, reviews, and others—and focuses them on shopping. 
Methods for shopping socially include what other shoppers say; group 
shopping; shopping communities and clubs; social marketplaces and 
direct sales; and peer-to-peer shopping. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Glossary 239 
4.  Discuss innovative ways to use social networking sites for 
advertising and market research. 
Social advertising represents advertising formats that employ the social 
context of the user viewing the ad. 
Innovative ways to advertise in social media include the following: create 
a company Facebook page; tweet business success stories to your custom­
ers; integrate ads into YouTube videos; add a Facebook “Like” button with 
its sponsored story to your product; use sponsored stories. 
•  Using Facebook for market research: Get feedback from your Face-
book fans (and their friends if possible) on advertising campaigns, 
market research, etc.; test-market your messages; use Facebook for 
survey invitations. 
•  Using Twitter for market research: Use Twitter Search; use Twellow; 
look at the chart on TweetStats. 
•  Using LinkedIn for market research: Post a question (e.g., solicit 
advice) regarding the topic or issue you are interested in. 
5.  Describe how social computing improves customer service. 
Customers are now incredibly empowered. Companies are closely moni­
toring social computing not only because they are mindful of the negative 
comments posted by social network members but also because they see 
an opportunity to involve customers proactively to reduce problems by 
improved customer service. 
Chapter Glossary 
blog (weblog) A personal Web site, open to the public, in which the 
site creator expresses his or her feelings or opinions with a series of 
chronological entries 
blogosphere The term for the millions of blogs on the Web 
collaborative consumption An economic model based on sharing, 
swapping, trading, or renting products and services, enabling access 
over ownership 
microblogging A form of blogging that allows users to write short 
messages (or capture an image or embedded video) and publish 
them 
Really Simple Syndication A technology that allows users to receive 
the information they want, when they want it, without having to surf 
thousands of Web sites 
social advertising Advertising formats that make use of the social 
context of the user viewing the ad 
social capital The number of connections a person has within and 
between social networks 
social commerce The delivery of electronic commerce activities and 
transactions through social computing 
social computing A type of information technology that combines 
social behavior and information systems to create value 
social graph A map of all relevant links or connections for one member 
of a social network 
social intelligence The monitoring, collection, and analysis of socially 
generated data and the resultant strategic decisions 
Empowered customers know how to use the wisdom and power of crowds 
and communities to their benefit. These customers choose how they inter­
act with companies and brands, and they have elevated expectations. They 
are actively involved with businesses, not just as purchasers but also as 
advocates and influencers. As a result, businesses must respond to custom­
ers quickly and accurately. Fortunately, social computing provides many 
opportunities for businesses to do just that, thereby giving businesses the 
opportunity to turn disgruntled customers into champions for the firm. 
6. Discuss different ways in which human resource managers make use 
of social computing. 
•  Recruiting: Both recruiters and job seekers are moving to online 
social networks as new recruiting platforms. Enterprise recruit­
ers are scanning online social networks, blogs, and other social 
resources to identify and find information about potential employ­
ees. If job seekers are online and active, there is a good chance that 
they will be seen by recruiters. In addition, on social networks there 
are many passive job seekers—people who are employed but would 
take a better job if it appeared. So, it is important that both active 
and passive job seekers maintain profiles online that truly reflect 
them. 
•  Employee development: HR managers are using social tools to build 
relationships with employees. As HR managers learn more about 
employees, they can help them become more engaged and excited 
about their work. 
social marketplaces These act as online intermediaries that harness 
the power of social networks for introducing, buying, and selling 
products and services 
social network A social structure composed of individuals, groups, 
or organizations linked by values, visions, ideas, financial exchange, 
friendship, kinship, conflict, or trade social networking Activities 
performed using social soft ware tools (e.g., blogging) or social 
networking features (e.g., media sharing) 
social shopping A method of electronic commerce that takes all 
of the key aspects of social networks (friends, groups, voting, 
comments, discussions, reviews, etc.) and focuses them on 
shopping 
tag A keyword or term that describes a piece of information 
tweet Messages and updates posted by users on Twitter 
Twitter A free microblogging service that allows its users to send 
messages and read other users’ messages and updates 
Web 2.0 A loose collection of information technologies and 
applications, plus the Web sites that use them 
Web 2.0 media Any Web site that provides user-generated media 
content and promotes tagging, rating, commenting, and other 
interactions among users and their media contributions 
weblog (see blog) 
wiki A Web site on which anyone can post material and make changes 
to other material 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
240 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
Discussion Questions  
1.  How would you describe Web 2.0 to someone who has not taken a 
course in information systems? 
2.  If you were the CEO of a company, would you pay attention to blogs 
about your company? Why or why not? If yes, would you consider some 
blogs to be more important or more reliable than are others? If so, 
which ones? How would you find blogs relating to your company? 
3.  Do you have a page on a social networking Web site? If yes, why? If no, 
what is keeping you from creating one? Is there any content that you 
definitely would not post on such a page? 
4.  How can an organization best employ social computing technologies 
and applications to benefit its business processes? 
5.  What factors might cause an individual, an employee, or a company to 
be cautious in the use of social networks? 
6.  Why are advertisers so interested in social networks? 
7.  What sorts of restrictions or guidelines should firms place on the use 
of social networks by employees? Are social computing sites a threat 
to security? Can they tarnish a firm’s reputation? If so, how? Can they 
enhance a firm’s reputation? If so, how? 
8.  Why are marketers so interested in social networks? 
9.  Why are human resource managers so interested in social networks? 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  Enter www.programmableweb.com and study the various services that 
5. Using a search engine, look up the following: 
the Web site offers. Learn how to create mashups and then propose a 
•  Most popular or most visited blogs. Pick two and follow some of the 
mashup of your own. Present your mashup to the class. 
posts. Why do you think these blogs are popular? 
2.  Go to Amazon’s Mechanical Turk Web site (www.mturk .com). View the 
•  Best blogs (try www.bloggerschoiceawards.com). Pick two and con-
available Human Intelligence Tasks (HITs). Are there any HITs that you 
sider why they might be the “best blogs.” 
would be interested in to make some extra money? Why or why not? 
6.  Research how to be a successful blogger. What does it take to be a suc­
3.  Access Pandora (www.pandora.com). Why is Pandora a social network­
cessful blogger? What time commitment might be needed? How fre­
ing site? 
quently do successful bloggers post? 
4.  Access ChatRoulette (www.chatroulette.com). What is interesting 
about this social networking site? 
Closing Case 1 
Pinterest’s Business Model for Generating Revenue 
The Problem 
Founded in 2010, social computing Web site Pinterest (www.pinter­
est.com) is a visual discovery social network where people create and 
share image collections of anything that interests them on their smart-
phones, tablets, and computers. Pinterest is particularly popular with 
women, who make up more than 80 percent of its users. Interestingly, 
Pinterest doubled the number of active male users in 2014. 
Pinterest users upload, save, sort, and manage images using 
visual bookmarks—known as pins—from anywhere on the Web to the­
matically organized boards, using the “Pin It” button. Users can have 
several boards for various themes or topics. Users can also browse the 
content of others and repin, meaning that they can pin another user’s 
pin to their own board. The most popular categories on Pinterest are 
food and drink, do-it-yourself and crafts, fashion, home décor, and 
travel. 
In 2014, Pinterest’s user base increased to over 70 million users in 
the United States, and the company opened offices in London, Paris, 
Berlin, and Tokyo during that year. International users make up nearly 
one-half of new sign-ups. By August 2015, Pinterest users had created 
more than 750 million boards made up of more than 30 billion individ­
ual pins, with 54 million new pins added each day. 
In 2014, Pinterest decided to monetize their impressive usage sta­
tistics. The problem was: How best to accomplish this goal? 
The IT Solution 
Pinterest presents an interesting opportunity for marketing 
MKT 
managers regarding how users interact with the app. Let’s 
compare Pinterest to Facebook and Twitter along the time dimension. 
Facebook users volunteer a vast amount of historical information such 
as birthplace, alma mater, vacations, connections, events, and memo­
ries, which the company uses to precisely target its ad offerings. In con­
trast, Twitter collects current information that is limited to 140 
characters per tweet. Therefore, Twitter cannot offer Facebook’s level 
of detail, which is why its revenue per user is only half that of 
Facebook’s. 
Therefore, if Facebook collects data on its users’ past and Twitter 
on its users’ present, then Pinterest collects data on its users’ future. 
That is, Pinterest collects data about what its users want to do in the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 1 241 
future, which is exactly what marketers want to know. When a user 
pins an image of a wedding dress or a coffee table to one of her boards, 
she is sending a signal to merchandisers who want to sell her that wed­
ding dress or that coffee table. In essence, there is intent around a pin. 
Now let’s compare Pinterest to Google along the discovery 
dimension. Pinterest executives state that, in the e-commerce arena, 
Google is useful only if users already know what they are looking for. 
On the other hand, Pinterest exposes people to possibilities that they 
never would have known existed. 
As a result, Pinterest introduced two programs to help businesses 
leverage the forward-looking nature of user information on Pinterest. 
The advertising program is called Promoted Pins and the e-commerce 
program is called Buyable Pins. 
The Advertising Program. Promoted Pins are a form of paid advertis­
ing. They are native advertisements, meaning that they show up in 
users’ Pinterest boards just like any other pin. That is, like Facebook’s 
Sponsored Posts and Twitter’s Promoted Tweets, Promoted Pins take 
the same form as the user-generated content around it. Businesses can 
target Promoted Pins at specific users in various demographic, geo­
graphic, and other behavior- and interest-based groups. 
Let’s compare native advertising on Pinterest with native advertis­
ing on Facebook. Facebook may know that you are a fan of your univer­
sity and that you wear a size L (large). However, when you see an ad for 
a university T-shirt in your News Feed, it can be an interruption, because 
you probably did not go on Facebook looking to buy your university’s 
T-shirt. On the other hand, Pinterest users are in the mode of planning 
how to spend their money. If a user is browsing for European vacation 
ideas, then an Expedia pin showing vacation ideas for Prague or Paris 
is not an intrusion. On the contrary, the pin is just more information. 
Pinterest conducts workshops for the partners in its Promoted 
Pins program (i.e., its advertising clients). After a workshop, participants 
typically see the interaction rate on their pins increase by 25 percent. It 
is important for these advertising clients to see this increase because 
they are paying $30 to $40 per thousand impressions. This rate is sev­
eral times higher than the rate that Facebook advertisers pay. (The cost 
per thousand impressions refers to the expense incurred for every thou­
sand potential customers who view an advertisement.) 
Instead of choosing to pay for views or click on their Promoted 
Pins, advertisers can choose to pay with a “cost-per-engagement” (CPE) 
model or a “cost-per-action” model (CPA). With the CPE model, adver­
tisers will only pay when users engage with their Pins, such as repining. 
With the CPA model, advertisers will only pay when users download their 
app or actually click through to their Web site and make a purchase. 
Pinterest provides a suite of tools to help retailers quantify the 
return on their time and dollars and is collaborating with them to 
develop new ones tailored to their needs. After implementing Pro­
moted Pins, retailers have reported increases in Web traff ic, number 
of new users, audience reach, and audience engagement. One analysis 
of data from 25,000 retailers showed that users driven to e-commerce 
sites from Pinterest are 10 percent likelier to buy something than those 
coming from other social sites. 
The E-Commerce Program. Pinterest has advantages in 
MIS 
e-commerce, as industry analysts find that its users are more 
likely to share product links and make big purchases than users of oth­
er social platforms. In June 2015, Pinterest added Buyable Pins to its 
app. (At this time, both Facebook and Twitter are conducting tests of 
“Buy” buttons for frictionless shopping.) 
Buyable Pins allow Pinterest to enter the e-commerce business, 
rather than just driving traffic to retailer’s Web sites. They provide a 
method for merchants to sell products through Pinterest. These pins 
make it possible for users to purchase a product directly from the pin. 
Unlike Promoted Pins, Buyable Pins are free to use. That is, Pinterest 
does not charge merchants or users a fee when they buy through a 
Buyable Pin. 
Buyable Pins are blue “Buy It” buttons that appear next to the 
site’s familiar red “Pin It” buttons. After viewing the Pin and tapping 
the Buy It button, Pinterest users securely check out using Apple Pay or 
their credit card, without ever leaving the Pinterest app. 
Pinterest is not the merchant of record in transactions that occur 
through its app. That is, users will not see a charge from Pinterest on 
credit card statements. The charge will come from the retailer, even 
though users will not have visited the retailer’s Web site or mobile app 
in the process of making a purchase on Pinterest. 
The reason is that Pinterest is using Braintree (www.braintree­
payments.com) and Stripe (https://stripe.com) to vault, or securely 
store, cards. That process means that Pinterest does not have to store 
card numbers, but it can still keep credit card information for future 
purchases. In addition, Pinterest users do not have to remember their 
card numbers every time they click the Buy It button. 
The Results 
In 2014, Pinterest generated its first revenue, when the company began 
charging advertisers to promote their products and services. Analysts 
estimate that ads on the site could generate as much as $500 million 
in 2016. Many industry analysts believe that, on the basis of average 
revenue per users, it is only a matter of time before Pinterest exceeds 
Facebook. 
Before 2013, Pinterest accounted for approximately 2 percent 
of global social-mediated sales. By 2014, the site accounted for some 
23 percent of such sales. During the 2014 holiday season, Pinterest 
accounted for almost one quarter of all social sharing activity. Among 
social networks, only Facebook, with its 1.5 billion users, drives more 
traffic to Web publishers. 
In May 2015, Fortune magazine listed Pinterest in eighth position 
on its Unicorn List, which ranks startup companies that have a market 
valuation exceeding $1 billion. By August 2015, Pinterest had a market 
valuation of approximately $11 billion. 
Sources: Compiled from O. Thomas, “Who’s Making Money with Pinterest’s 
Buyable Pins?” ReadWrite, June 11, 2015; J. Guynn, “Pinterest to Launch 
‘Buy’ Buttons,” USA Today, June 2, 2015; T. Simonite, “Pinterest’s Bid to 
Reinvent Online Shopping,” MIT Technology Review, June 1, 2015; E. Baig, 
“Pinterest’s Silbermann: We Are Not a Social Network,” USA Today, May 
28, 2015; J. D’Onfro, “Why $11 Billion Pinterest Thinks It Has the ‘Best 
Kind of Business Model’,” Business Insider, May 19, 2015; E. Griffith, “The 
Unicorn List,” Fortune, May 15, 2015; J. Boorstin, “Pinterest’s Big Plan to 
‘Pin’ Profits,” CNBC, February 17, 2015; J. Bercovici, “Social Media’s New 
Mad Men,” Forbes, November 3, 2014; J. Bercovici, “Inside Pinterest: The 
Coming Ad Colossus that Could Dwarf Twitter and Facebook,” Forbes, 
October 15, 2014; J. Brandon, “Pinterest Links Up with Salesforce, Others 
to Monetize Data,” Business Cloud News, May 21, 2014; J. Marshall, 
“Pinterest Opens Up Data Firehose for Marketers,” The Wall Street Journal, 
May 20, 2014; D. MacMillan, “Pinterest CEO Lays Out Growth Plan, Sees 
Revenue in 2014,” The Wall Street Journal, January 21, 2014; www.pinter­
est.com, accessed August 9, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Discuss why Pinterest’s model of user engagement might be more 
valuable to marketers than Google’s model, Facebook’s model, or 
Twitter’s model. 
2.  Describe the social computing aspects of Pinterest’s model of user 
engagement. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
242 
CHAPTER 8 Social Computing 
Closing Case 2 
MKT 
MIS 
POM The General Motors Recall and Its Aft ermath 
The Problem 
On February 7, 2014, General Motors (GM; www.gm.com) 
began a series of recalls of its small cars due to faulty ignition 
switches, totaling (in August 2015) 2.6 million Chevrolet Cobalts and 
other small cars. The switches could shut off the engine during driving, 
causing the car to stall and preventing the airbags from inflating. GM 
had known about the ignition switch fault for at least ten years. 
The parts needed to repair the ignition switches were scheduled 
to become available on April 7, 2014, with repairs to begin the same 
day. However, as of June 2014, the replacement switches had only 
been delivered intermittently to dealerships as demand far exceeded 
the supply. 
As of July 2015, GM’s faulty ignition switches were responsible 
for at least 124 deaths and 266 injuries, according to a fund set up to 
compensate victims. The fund, run by attorney Kenneth Feinberg, had 
finished processing the 4,342 claims it had received. 
The Multipart Solution 
Although there is no “solution” to the deaths and injuries caused by the 
faulty ignition switches, we feel that it is instructive to study the vari­
ous ways in which General Motors attempted to address the disaster. 
The Personal Approach. First, Mary Barra, CEO of GM, gave a speech to 
the company’s employees. She apologized for the defect-and-recall di­
saster and announced the firing of 15 employees, some of them execu­
tives. She also said that GM would compensate consumers rather than 
fight pending lawsuits. Further, in testimony before the U.S. Congress, 
Barra apologized to GM customers and promised to make safety the 
number one issue at the automaker. She also said, “Today’s GM will do 
the right thing.” 
The Repair Approach. By the end of 2014, GM had repaired over 1.3 mil­
lion of the cars with defective ignition switches. The automaker said 
that it had contacted an additional 2.4 million owners of recalled cars 
who had not had their cars repaired. GM efforts to contact these own­
ers included: 
•  Contacting every identified owner at least six times by letter or 
phone call in English and in Spanish. 
•  Sending 5.3 million letters to known current and former owners 
of the recalled vehicles informing them of the GM Ignition Switch 
Compensation Fund. 
• Creating a national call center staffed by 72 people. 
The Information Technology approach. As noted above, GM is primarily 
using conventional methods, such as letters to customers, blogs, a call 
center, and the news media to get its recall messages to the public. But 
social media has also become an important tool for the company to 
show its commitment to making things right, even as it tries to show off 
its newest models and build enthusiasm among customers who were 
unaffected by the recall. The automaker does face problems on social 
media, where a customer’s perceptions of a brand are shaped by both 
what the company does and what other people say about it. 
GM has a team of about 20 people based in Detroit that man­
ages its social media presence. Team members monitor about 100 
independent automobile forums and respond to inquiries and com­
plaints seven days per week. 
One challenge has been to tell customers that the cars are safe to 
drive while they wait for repairs. Despite assurances, many customers 
have requested loaner cars or free rentals. GM did provide more than 
6,000 loaner vehicles, and in some cases paid for non-GM vehicles pro­
vided by rental car companies. 
Consider the Facebook page of General Motors, which promotes 
jobs and features new cars. However, the page also contains comments 
from disgruntled GM customers who feel strongly that GM knowingly 
sold them unsafe automobiles. On the other hand, there are numer­
ous messages from GM representatives to those commenting, trying 
to answer their questions about the recall and engage them in private 
messages to clear up individual problems. 
Let’s look at a specific example of how social media is helping 
GM deal with the recall disaster. One GM customer in Alaska turned to 
Twitter after spending an hour on the phone with GM trying to get help 
with her 2006 Saturn Ion. Those Ions, along with five other models, 
were recalled because of a defective ignition switch that, if bumped or 
weighed down by a heavy key ring, could turn off, shutting down the 
engine and disabling the air bags. 
The customer publicly tweeted, “@GM your agents keep telling 
me to take my car to a GM dealer for the recall, after I’ve explained I live 
on an island in Alaska! Help!!!” After a series of private messages with 
a member of GM’s Twitter team, the company agreed to pay the $600 
cost of a round-trip ferry to ship her car to the nearest dealer, about 
300 miles away in Juneau, and pay for a rental car for the time she is 
without the Saturn. 
Despite the number of headlines about federal investigations 
into GM’s decade-long failure to issue the recall, the overall sentiment 
about GM and its brands on Twitter remained the same during the cri­
sis. Rather than tweeting about the recalls, many car owners are using 
social media to trade tips and put public pressure on the company on 
issues such as giving affected customers loaner cars until their vehicles 
could be fixed. 
In a refinement of its social media strategy, GM is now analyzing 
social media and blogs to spot potential problems with its cars. In that 
way, the automaker can catch problems much earlier, perhaps when 
they affect as few as 10 cars. 
The Results 
In September 2015, GM agreed to pay $900 million to settle criminal 
charges related to its recall. Prosecutors had charged GM with wire 
fraud and scheming to conceal material facts from a U.S. regulator. GM 
admitted to failing to disclose a potentially lethal safety defect with 
the switches that kept some air bags from deploying. The automaker 
also admitted to misleading consumers about the safety of aff ected 
vehicles. GM’s $900 million payment will be treated as a penalty, and 
the company cannot treat it as a deductible expense. 
Sources: Compiled from J. White, J. Stempel, and N. Raymond, “Recall 
Settlement Frees GM CEO to Confront New Challenges,” Reuters, 
September 17, 2015; D. Durbin, “GM Ignition Switch Deaths Total 124 
as Fund Nears Completion,” CBS News, July 13, 2015; A. Bourque, “How 
Social Data Helped Jaguar and GM Navigate Troubling Brand Sentiment,” 
Social Media Today, June 26, 2015; A. Sharman, “GM Uses Tiny Recalls 
to Head Off Bigger Problems over Car Faults,” Financial Times, May 31, 

 
 
 
 
Closing Case 2 243 
2015; “GM Ignition Switches Now Linked to 90 Deaths, 163 Total Injuries,” 
Autoblog, April 29, 2015; G. Gardner, “GM Outreach Extensive, But Doesn’t 
Reach All Owners,” Detroit Free Press, November 15, 2014; J. Twentyman, 
“Using Social Media to Drive Change at General Motors,” Diginomica, 
October 17, 2014; P. Valdes-Dapena, “GM: Steps to a Recall Nightmare,” 
CNN Money, June 30, 2014; R. Cook, “General Motors Announces 30th 
Recall of Year,” CBS News/Associated Press, May 23, 2014; T. Lachapelle, 
“GM Investors Unshaken as Recall Cuts $3 Billion in Value,” Bloomberg 
BusinessWeek, April 6, 2014; K. Naughton, “GM Dealers Turn Therapists 
for Anxious Recall Customers,” Bloomberg News, April 4, 2014; T. Spangler, 
“Families Put Human Face on Massive GM Recall,” USA Today, April 1, 
2014; V. Goel, “G.M. Uses Social Media to Manage Customers and Its 
Reputation,” The New York Times, March 24, 2014; J. McDermott, “Why GM 
Is Bringing Its Social Media In-House,” Digiday, March 13, 2014; V. Bond, 
“GM Uses Social Media to Respond to Customer Gripes,” Automotive News, 
March 10, 2014; www.gm.com, accessed August 12, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  What else could GM do, in general, to manage its recall crisis? Pro­
vide specific examples to support your answer. 
2.  What else could GM do with social media to help manage its recall 
crisis? Provide specific examples to support your answer. 
3.  Refer to Chapter 2. Would GM’s use of social media be a strategic 
information system for the automaker? Why or why not? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 9 
Tom Nulens/iStockphoto 
E-Business and E-Commerce  
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
9.1  Overview of E-Business and 
E-Commerce 
9.2  Business-to-Consumer (B2C) 
Electronic Commerce 
9.3  Business-to-Business (B2B) 
Electronic Commerce 
9.4  Ethical and Legal Issues in 
E-Business 
Opening Case  
MIS 
Thumbtack 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
9.1  Describe the six common types of electronic commerce. 
9.2  Describe the various online services of business-to-consumer (B2C) commerce, along 
with specific examples of each. 
9.3  Describe the three business models for business-to-business electronic commerce. 
9.4  Discuss the ethical and legal issues related to electronic commerce, along with 
examples. 
Sometimes finding a nearby professional to do a job for you 
MKT 
can be challenging. Think of plumbers, moving services, paint­
ers, personal trainers, chefs, caterers, cleaning and domestic services, 
photographers, construction workers, among others. These profession­
als all belong to a very large industry called local commerce or local ser­
vices. This industry is diff icult to define; however, estimates of its size 
range from $400 billion to $800 billion per year. Despite its large size, 
local commerce remains an inefficient market that depends on phone 
calls, the Yellow Pages, and, when things go wrong, small claims court. 
It is difficult not only for customers to find local professionals but 
also for local professionals to find customers. In fact, every year pro­
fessionals spend approximately $65 billion on local ads to generate 
business leads. Now, a company called Thumbtack is striving to create 
efficiencies in the local commerce marketplace. 
Founded in 2009, Thumbtack (www.thumbtack.com) is a mar­
ketplace that connects customers with local service professionals. 
244 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 245 
On Thumbtack, the providers bid on the customer. Customers fill 
out an extensive questionnaire, and Thumbtack’s soft ware forwards 
the request to relevant and nearby professionals, who respond with 
a price for, and description of, their services. The average job request 
on Thumbtack is $600, and businesses are charged a small fee for the 
leads. Thumbtack divides its jobs into four categories: 
1.  Home improvement and repair (e.g., plumbing and painting 
services); 
2.  Event services (e.g., wedding photographers and catering services); 
3.  Instruction (e.g., tutoring and music lessons); 
4.  Wellness (e.g., personal training and chiropractors) 
When Thumbtack entered this marketplace, it faced two major prob­
lems. First, the company had to list enough suppliers (local profes­
sionals) on its Web site to attract demand (customers). Significantly, 
Thumbtack did not cold-call anyone. Rather, they analyzed billions of 
Web pages to create a database of information on local profession­
als. This process helped them learn where service providers searched 
online for new business. The company bought targeted Web ads on 
those pages—specifically Google, Facebook, and Bing—to attract pro­
fessionals to sign up for Thumbtack. As of mid-2016, Thumbtack still 
did not employ a dedicated sales team to attract new business. 
Thumbtack’s second problem was how to get paid. The com­
pany’s initial policy was to charge fees after projects were com­
pleted. However, that process relied on the participating businesses 
self-reporting based on the honor system. This policy ultimately was 
unsuccessful. Thumbtack next implemented a subscription model in 
which professionals would pay a set price for an unlimited number 
of introductions. Unfortunately, that process led to customers being 
spammed. Not surprisingly, this system did not provide a positive cus­
tomer experience. Finally, Thumbtack decided on a pay-per-lead busi­
ness model, which helped to ensure that professionals would bid only 
on projects they could complete. This model generated a 500 percent 
increase in revenue in 2014; the company now makes about $30 mil­
lion per year. 
Consider the case of a photographer in Colorado. She tried dif­
ferent online ads to attract customers, but she received few responses 
because there were so many photographers in her area. She then 
turned to Thumbtack, where she pays about $4.50 per lead. Now, 
roughly one in five ads results in a job, which average about $250. She 
estimated that she formerly spent $75 per month on Google ads to 
achieve the same result. 
Thumbtack is competing in the local commerce arena with Yelp 
(www.yelp.com), Angie’s List (www.angieslist.com), Zaarly (www 
.zaarly.com), TaskRabbit (www.taskrabbit.com), HomeAdvisor (www 
.homeadvisor.com), eBay (with eBay Hire), and Amazon (with Amazon 
Home Services; www.amazon.com/services). Let’s take a closer look at 
Yelp and Angie’s List, as well as Amazon. 
•  Yelp and Angie’s List address different questions and problems 
than Thumbtack. Specifically, Yelp and Angie’s List allow custom­
ers to go to almost any local professional for services (haircuts, 
Introduction  
Chinese food, etc.). By contrast, Thumbtack enables local profes­
sionals to come to the customer. Yelp and Angie’s List might be 
considered as directories, where Thumbtack goes a step further 
and actually matches customers and local professionals. 
•  Amazon announced in 2015 that it was entering the local services 
business, initially launching its home services to customers in 15 
metropolitan areas including Chicago, Houston, and Miami. The 
Internet giant maintains it thoroughly screens service providers 
and individual contractors. It further claims that fewer than 3 per­
cent of applicants survive the vetting process. Amazon charges a 
10 to 20 percent referral fee to contractors, and it provides cus­
tomer support and refunds to dissatisfied customers. 
Some professionals have set up anti-Thumbtack groups on Face-
book, complaining that unqualified professionals are using the site 
to challenge them for business. In fact, Thumbtack does not have rat­
ings and reviews, which both customers and professionals rely on to 
make informed decisions. As a result, the company is building upon its 
485-person quality control team to verify the credentials of the service 
professionals who advertise on their site. The firm is also experiment­
ing with displaying average pricing data on their site so customers can 
see how much a job should cost in their area. 
With more than 75,000 unique paying professionals and 3 million 
successful job leads in 700 job categories per year, Thumbtack sends 
some $2 billion of business to local firms in the United States. The com­
pany has raised $150 million in venture capital funding, and industry 
analysts estimate their valuation to exceed $800 million. 
Sources: Compiled from S. Mitra, “Angie’s List Faces Tougher 
Competition,” sramanamitra.com, July 29, 2015; “Amazon Expands 
Local Services Marketplace in U.S. Cities,” Reuters, July 22, 2015; H. 
Stout, “Buying a Faucet from Amazon? Add a Handyman,” The New 
York Times, April 13, 2015; C. Pritchard, “Google Inc, Amazon.com Enter 
Home Services Market,” Business Finance News, April 13, 2015; H. Stout, 
“Amazon, Google, and More Are Drawn to Home Services Market,” The 
New York Times, April 12, 2015; D. Evans, “Why eBay and Amazon Will 
Redefine Local Commerce,” Clickz, April 8, 2015; T. Lee, “Can Amazon 
Make Hiring a Plumber As Easy As Buying an iPad?” Vox, March 30, 2015; 
S. Loeb, “How Does Thumbtack Make Money?” VatorNews, March 27, 2015; 
R. Mac, “Where Belly Dancers Bid for You,” Forbes, September 8, 2014; 
C. Taylor, “12 Questions with the CEO of Thumbtack, Google Capital’s New 
$100 Million Bet,” TechCrunch, August 20, 2014; R. Mac, “Amazon Chases 
Local Services, the New E-commerce Battleground,” Forbes, June 10, 
2014; www.thumbtack.com, accessed August 19, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Consider the highly competitive nature of the local services mar­
ketplace. Which of the companies discussed in this case has 
the best chance of “winning” in this marketplace? Support your 
answer. 
2.  What competitive advantages does Thumbtack have in the local 
services marketplace? Provide examples to support your answer. 
3.  What competitive advantages does Amazon have in the local ser­
vices marketplace? Provide examples to support your answer. 
One of the most profound changes in the modern world of business is the emergence of elec­
tronic commerce. Electronic commerce (EC or e-commerce) describes the process of buying, 

 
 
 
246 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
selling, transferring, or exchanging products, services, or information via computer networks, 
including the Internet. E-commerce is transforming all of the business functional areas we 
discussed in Chapter 1 as well as their fundamental tasks, from advertising to paying bills. 
Its impact is so pervasive that it is affecting almost every modern organization. Regardless of 
where you land a job, your organization likely will be practicing electronic commerce. 
Electronic commerce influences organizations in many significant ways. First, it increases 
an organization’s reach, defined as the number of potential customers to whom the company 
can market its products. In fact, e-commerce provides unparalleled opportunities for compa­
nies to expand worldwide at a small cost, to increase market share, and to reduce costs. By 
utilizing electronic commerce, many small businesses can now operate and compete in market 
spaces that formerly were dominated by larger companies. 
Another major impact of electronic commerce has been to remove many of the barriers 
that previously impeded entrepreneurs seeking to start their own businesses. E-commerce 
offers amazing opportunities for you to open your own business by developing an e-commerce 
Web site. 
As illustrated in the opening case, electronic commerce is also fundamentally transforming 
the nature of competition through the development of new online companies, new business 
models, and the diversity of EC-related products and services. Recall your study of competitive 
strategies in Chapter 2, particularly the impact of the Internet on Porter’s five forces. You learned 
that the Internet can both endanger and enhance a company’s position in a given industry. 
It is important for you to have a working knowledge of electronic commerce because your 
organization almost certainly will be employing e-commerce applications that will aff ect its 
strategy and business model. This knowledge will make you more valuable to your organiza­
tion, and it will enable you to quickly contribute to the e-commerce applications employed in 
your functional area. As you read What’s in IT for Me? at the end of the chapter, envision yourself 
performing the activities discussed in your functional area. 
Going further, you may decide to become an entrepreneur and start your own business, as 
illustrated in the chapter opening case. If you start your own business, it is even more essential 
for you to understand electronic commerce, because e-commerce, with its broad reach, will 
more than likely be critical for your business to survive and thrive. On the other hand, giant, 
well-known electronic commerce companies utilize the Internet to compete all over the world, 
as you see in IT’s About Business 9.1. 
IT’s About Business 9.1 
Japan’s Largest E-Commerce Company, Rakuten, 
Competes Globally 
Rakuten (www.rakuten.com) is a Japanese electronic commerce 
company. (The Japanese word rakuten means optimism.) Since it 
began in 1997, the company has moved into sports, banking, in­
surance, and even wedding planning. Rakuten is so pervasive in 
Japan that one in four online purchases in the country occurs on 
the company’s B2C and B2B e-commerce platform, Ichiba. Further, 
the company’s loyalty program has 90 million members. (Japan’s 
population in mid-2016 was approximately 127 million.) The diver­
sified company owns: 
•  A professional baseball team and a professional soccer team; 
•  The Rakuten Bank; 
•  Rakuten Broadband Service; 
•  Rakuten Beauty, a chain of beauty salons; 
•  A vehicle inspection service; 
•  Rakuten Insurance; 
•  Rakuten Wedding, where couples plan their weddings; and 
•  The Rakuten smartphone app BeautyC Navigator, which helps 
couples predict the best time to try to conceive a child. 
Despite its national prominence, Rakuten is not as successful out­
side Japan. The company is not well known in the United States 
and Europe, and Alibaba controls the majority of e-commerce in 
China. Rakuten’s limited global presence is a barrier to growth 
given Japan’s decreasing population and its poorly performing 
economy. As a result, the e-commerce giant is expanding overseas, 
purchasing several foreign companies and investing in others. 
In just a little over a year, Rakuten spent $2.6 billion on inter­
national deals. Company CEO Hiroshi Mikitani has stated that his 
firm cannot operate exclusively in Japan. Rather, it simply needs 
to defend its market position there. Among the firm’s major foreign 
activities are the following: 
•  In early 2014, Rakuten purchased the Cyprus-based messaging 
app Viber (www.viber.com) for $905 million. 
•  In September 2014, Rakuten bought Ebates (www.ebates.com), 
an online coupon service based in San Francisco, for $3 billion. 
Rakuten customers who sign up for Ebates can use Rakuten’s 
Web portal to browse the selections of other e-commerce sites, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview of E-Business and E-Commerce 247 
including Amazon, and earn cash back on their purchases. In 
2014, this discount service had $5 billion in transactions and 
generated about $20 million in operating profit. 
•  In March 2015, Rakuten purchased OverDrive (www.overdrive 
.com), a major e-book distributor based in Cleveland, Ohio. 
•  In March 2015, Rakuten led a $530 million round of funding 
for Lyft (www.lyft .com/drive), spending $300 million of its own 
money for 12 percent of the car-service app. 
•  Rakuten acquired Fits.Me (https://fits.me), a London-based 
startup that creates virtual fitting rooms. The firm’s technology 
enables online buyers to virtually view how clothing looks on 
them without visiting a physical store. 
•  Rakuten has purchased a stake in Pinterest (www.pinterest 
.com). 
•  Rakuten acquired French e-commerce portal PriceMinister 
(www.priceminister.com). 
•  The Rakuten Institute of Technology opened locations in New 
York, Tokyo, Paris, Boston, and Singapore. The institute’s mis­
sion is to support both the company’s research and develop­
ment and its global expansion. 
•  Rakuten expanded its financial services into the United States, 
offering a credit card through a subsidiary of First National Bank 
of Omaha. 
Not all of Rakuten’s acquisitions have been successful. As one ex­
ample, the electronic bookstore Kobo (www.kobo.com), which 
Rakuten purchased in 2011 for $315 million, had not generated a 
profit as of August 2015. Nevertheless, by the end of 2014, the book­
store boosted its users by 25 percent, with 23 million customers. 
Further, Kobo helped stem the tide of red ink by concentrating on 
its mobile app to sell e-books. 
One key element of Rakuten’s strategy of global diversification 
has been to encourage its employees to become fluent in English. 
And they succeeded. The average employee scored 802.6 points 
out of 990 on the Test of English for International Communication 
(TOEIC) in 2015. According to TOEIC, a score above 800 indicates 
advanced proficiency. 
Rakuten now has an English-only policy, which it calls 
“Englishnization.” CEO Mikitani made Englishnization a key platform 
in Rakuten’s global expansion. Virtually all company communication 
and interaction—from meetings to internal e-mails—is conducted 
in English. 
As of mid-2016, Rakuten’s attempts to expand its business 
globally were still in their early stages, and there are risks to that 
strategy. Specifically, Rakuten may not have the financial resources 
to compete with Amazon and Alibaba. For example, Rakuten 
reported $5.66 billion in revenue for 2015. By contrast, Alibaba 
reported $12.3 billion, and Amazon reported $107 billion. 
Sources: Compiled from J. Russell, “Rakuten Launches Its Own 
Security-Enhanced Android App Store in Japan,” TechCrunch, August 
19, 2015; “Rakuten’s Research Centers Focused on Mobile,” PYMNTS. 
com, July 30, 2015; C. Shu, “Rakuten Opens New Research Centers 
in Boston and Singapore,” TechCrunch, July 29, 2015; E. Brooke, 
“Amazon Competitor Rakuten Acquires Virtual Try-On Service Fits. 
Me,” Fashionista, July 13, 2015; I. Lunden and N. Lomas, “Rakuten 
Buys Virtual Fitting Room Startup Fits.Me in a Fashion Commerce 
Play,” TechCrunch, July 12, 2015; D. Loo, “Rakuten to Raise $1.5 Billion 
in Japan, Overseas Share Sale,” BloombergBusiness, June 3, 2015; 
“Rakuten Forges Ahead in English,” The Japan Times, May 23, 2015; 
S. Buhr, “Rakuten Is Looking to Acquire PopSugar for $580 Million,” 
TechCrunch, April 13, 2015; B. Einhorn, “Japan’s Amazon Has Bigger 
Dreams,” BloombergBusiness, April 9, 2015; www.rakuten.com, ac­
cessed August 21, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Discuss the reasons why founder and CEO Mikitani feels it is 
imperative for Rakuten to expand beyond the boundaries of 
Japan. Provide examples to support your answer. 
2. How should Amazon and Alibaba combat the global expan­
sion of Rakuten? Provide examples to support your answer. 
3. Describe any competitive advantages that Rakuten has in its 
competition with Amazon and Alibaba. 
In this chapter, you will discover the major applications of e-business, and you will be able to 
identify the services necessary for its support. You will then study the major types of electronic 
commerce: business-to-consumer (B2C), business-to-business (B2B), consumer-to-consumer 
(C2C), business-to employee (B2E), and government-to-citizen (G2C). You will conclude by 
examining several legal and ethical issues that have arisen as a result of the rapid growth of 
e-commerce. 
9.1 Overview of E-Business and E-Commerce 
Any entrepreneur or company that decides to practice electronic commerce must develop a 
strategy to do so effectively. The first step is to determine exactly why you want to do business 
over the Internet using a Web site. There are several reasons for employing Web sites, including: 
• To sell goods and services 
• To induce people to visit a physical location 
• To reduce operational and transaction costs 
• To enhance your reputation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
248 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
A Web site can accomplish any of these goals. Unless a company (or you) has substantial 
resources, it is difficult to accomplish all of them at the same time. The appropriate Web site for 
achieving each goal will be somewhat different. As you set up your Web site, you must consider 
how the site will generate and retain traffic, as well as a host of other issues. The point here is 
that when you are studying the various aspects of electronic commerce, you should keep in 
mind the strategy of the organization or entrepreneur. This will help you determine the type of 
Web site to use. 
This section examines the basics of e-business and e-commerce. First, we define these 
two concepts. You then become familiar with pure and partial electronic commerce. You then 
examine the various types of electronic commerce. Next, you focus on e-commerce mecha­
nisms, which are the ways that businesses and people buy and sell over the Internet. You con­
clude this section by considering the benefits and limitations of e-commerce. 
Definitions and Concepts 
Recall that electronic commerce describes the process of buying, selling, transferring, or 
exchanging products, services, or information via computer networks, including the Internet. 
Electronic business (e-business) is a somewhat broader concept. In addition to the buying 
and selling of goods and services, e-business refers to servicing customers, collaborating with 
business partners, and performing electronic transactions within an organization. 
Electronic commerce can take several forms depending on the degree of digitization 
involved. The degree of digitization is the extent to which the commerce has been transformed 
from physical to digital. This concept can relate to both the product or service being sold and 
the delivery agent or intermediary. In other words, the product can be either physical or digital, 
and the delivery agent can also be either physical or digital. 
In traditional commerce, both dimensions are physical. Purely physical organizations are 
referred to as brick-and-mortar organizations. (You may also see the term bricks-and-mortar.) 
In contrast, in pure EC all dimensions are digital. Companies engaged only in EC are consid­
ered virtual (or pure-play) organizations. All other combinations that include a mix of dig­
ital and physical dimensions are considered partial EC (but not pure EC). Clicks-and-mortar 
organizations conduct some e-commerce activities, yet their primary business is carried out 
in the physical world. A common alternative to the term clicks-and-mortar is clicks-and-bricks. 
You will encounter both terms. Clicks- and-mortar organizations are examples of partial EC. 
E-commerce is now so well established that people generally expect companies to off er this 
service in some form. 
Purchasing a shirt at Walmart Online or a book from Amazon.com is an example of par­
tial EC because the merchandise, although bought and paid for digitally, is physically deliv­
ered by FedEx or UPS. In contrast, buying an e-book from Amazon.com or a soft ware product 
from Buy.com constitutes pure EC because the product itself as well as its delivery, payment, 
and transfer are entirely digital. We use the term electronic commerce to denote both pure 
and partial EC. 
Types of E-Commerce 
E-commerce can be conducted between and among various parties. In this section, you will 
identify the six common types of e-commerce, and you will learn about three of them—C2C, 
B2E, and e-government—in detail. We discuss B2C and B2B in separate sections because they 
are very complex. We discuss mobile commerce in detail in Chapter 10. 
•  Business-to-consumer electronic commerce (B2C): In B2C, the sellers are organizations, and 
the buyers are individuals. You will learn about B2C electronic commerce in Section 9.2. 
•  Business-to-business electronic commerce (B2B): In B2B transactions, both the sellers and 
the buyers are business organizations. B2B comprises the vast majority of EC volume. You 
will learn more about B2B electronic commerce in Section 9.3. Look back to Figure 1.5 for 
an illustration of B2B electronic commerce. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview of E-Business and E-Commerce 249 
•  Consumer-to-consumer electronic commerce (C2C): In C2C (also called customer-to­
customer), an individual sells products or services to other individuals. The major strate­
gies for conducting C2C on the Internet are auctions and classified ads. 
In dozens of countries, the volume of C2C selling and buying on auction sites is exploding. Most 
auctions are conducted by intermediaries such as eBay (www.ebay.com). Consumers can also 
select general sites such as www.auctionanything.com, a company that sells software and ser­
vices that help individuals and organizations conduct their own auctions. In addition, many 
individuals are conducting their own auctions. 
The major categories of online classified ads are similar to those found in print ads: vehicles, 
real estate, employment, pets, tickets, and travel. Classified ads are available through most Inter­
net service providers (AOL, MSN, etc.), at some portals (Yahoo!, etc.), and from Internet directories 
and online newspapers. Many of these sites contain search engines that help shoppers narrow 
their searches. Craigslist (www.craigslist.org) is the largest online classified ad provider. 
Internet-based classified ads have one major advantage over traditional types of classified 
ads: They provide access to an international, rather than a local, audience. This wider audience 
greatly increases both the supply of goods and services and the number of potential buyers. It 
is important to note that the value of expanded geographical reach depends greatly on what is 
being bought or sold. For example, you might buy software from a company located 1,000 miles 
from you, but you would not buy firewood from someone at such a distance. 
•  Business-to-employee (B2E): In B2E, an organization uses EC internally to provide informa­
tion and services to its employees. For example, companies allow employees to manage 
their benefits and to take training classes electronically. In addition, employees can buy dis­
counted insurance, travel packages, and tickets to events on the corporate intranet. They can 
also order supplies and materials electronically. Finally, many companies have electronic 
corporate stores that sell the company’s products to its employees, usually at a discount. 
•  E-government: E-government is the use of Internet technology in general and e-commerce 
in particular to deliver information and public services to citizens (called government-to­
citizen or G2C EC) and to business partners and suppliers (called government-to-business 
or G2B EC). G2B EC is much like B2B EC, usually with an overlay of government procure­
ment regulations. That is, G2B EC and B2B EC are similar conceptually. However, the func­
tions of G2C EC are conceptually different from anything that exists in the private sector 
(e.g., B2C EC). 
E-government is also an efficient way of conducting business transactions with citizens 
and businesses and within the governments themselves. E-government makes govern­
ment more efficient and effective, especially in the delivery of public services. An example 
of G2C electronic commerce is electronic benefits transfer, in which governments trans­
fer benefits, such as Social Security and pension payments, directly to recipients’ bank 
accounts. 
•  Mobile commerce (m-commerce): The term m-commerce refers to e-commerce that is con­
ducted entirely in a wireless environment. An example is using cell phones to shop over the 
Internet. You will learn about m-commerce in Chapter 10. 
Each type of EC is executed in one or more business models. A business model is the method 
by which a company generates revenue to sustain itself. Table 9.1 summarizes the major EC 
business models. 
Major E-Commerce Mechanisms 
Businesses and customers can buy and sell on the Internet through a number of mechanisms. 
The most widely used mechanisms are as follows: 
• Electronic catalogs 
• Electronic auctions 

 
 
250 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
• E-storefronts 
• E-malls 
• E-marketplaces 
Let’s look at each one more closely. 
Catalogs have been printed on paper for generations. Today, however, they are available 
over the Internet. Electronic catalogs consist of a product database, a directory and search 
capabilities, and a presentation function. They are the backbone of most e-commerce sites. 
An auction is a competitive buying and selling process in which prices are determined 
dynamically by competitive bidding. Electronic auctions (e-auctions) generally increase reve­
nues for sellers by broadening the customer base and shortening the cycle time of the auction. 
Buyers generally benefit from e-auctions because they can bargain for lower prices. In addition, 
they do not have to travel to an auction at a physical location. 
The Internet provides an efficient infrastructure for conducting auctions at lower adminis­
trative costs and with a greater number of involved sellers and buyers. Both individual consum­
ers and corporations can participate in auctions. 
There are two major types of auctions: forward and reverse. In forward auctions, sellers 
solicit bids from many potential buyers. Usually, sellers place items at sites for auction, and 
buyers bid continuously for them. The highest bidder wins the items. Both sellers and buyers 
TABLE 9.1
 E-Commerce Business Models 
Online direct marketing 
Manufacturers or retailers sell directly to customers. Very efficient 
for digital products and services. Can allow for product or service 
customization (www.dell.com) 
Electronic tendering system  
Businesses request quotes from suppliers. Uses B2B with a reverse 
auction mechanism 
Name-your-own-price  
Customers decide how much they are willing to pay. An intermedi­
ary tries to match a provider (www.priceline.com) 
Find-the-best-price  
Customers specify a need; an intermediary compares providers 
and shows the lowest price. Customers must accept the offer in a 
short time, or they may lose the deal (www.hotwire.com) 
Affiliate marketing  
Vendors ask partners to place logos (or banners) on partner’s site. 
If customers click on logo, go to vendor’s site, and make a pur­
chase, then the vendor pays commissions to the partners 
Viral marketing  
Recipients of your marketing notices send information about your 
product to their friends 
Group purchasing (e-coops)  
Small buyers aggregate demand to create a large volume; the 
group then conducts tendering or negotiates a low price 
Online auctions  
Companies run auctions of various types on the Internet. Very 
popular in C2C, but gaining ground in other types of EC as well 
(www.ebay.com) 
Product customization  
Customers use the Internet to self-configure products or services. 
Sellers then price them and fulfill them quickly (build-to-order) 
(www.jaguar.com) 
Electronic marketplaces and 
Transactions are conducted efficiently (more information to buy-
exchanges 
ers and sellers, lower transaction costs) in electronic marketplaces 
(private or public) 
Bartering online  
Intermediary administers online exchange of surplus products 
and/or company receives “points” for its contribution, which it can 
use to purchase other needed items (www.bbu.com) 
Deep discounters  
Company offers deep price discounts. Appeals to customers who 
consider only price in their purchasing decisions (www.half.com) 
Membership 
Only members can use the services provided, including access to 
certain information, conducting trades, etc. (www.egreetings.com) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview of E-Business and E-Commerce 251 
can be either individuals or businesses. The popular auction site eBay.com is a forward 
auction. 
In reverse auctions, one buyer, usually an organization, wants to purchase a product or 
a service. The buyer posts a request for quotation (RFQ) on its Web site or on a third-party site. 
The RFQ provides detailed information on the desired purchase. Interested suppliers study the 
RFQ and then submit bids electronically. Everything else being equal, the lowest-price bidder 
wins the auction. The reverse auction is the most common auction model for large purchases 
(in terms of either quantities or price). Governments and large corporations frequently use this 
approach, which may provide considerable savings for the buyer. 
Auctions can be conducted from the seller’s site, the buyer’s site, or a third party’s site. For 
example, eBay, the best-known third-party site, offers hundreds of thousands of diff erent items 
in several types of auctions. Overall, more than 300 major companies, including Amazon.com 
and Dellauction.com, sponsor online auctions. 
An electronic storefront is a Web site that represents a single store. An electronic mall, also 
known as a cybermall or an e-mall, is a collection of individual shops consolidated under one 
Internet address. Electronic storefronts and electronic malls are closely associated with B2C 
electronic commerce. You will study each one in more detail in Section 9.2. 
An electronic marketplace (e-marketplace) is a central, virtual market space on the Web 
where many buyers and many sellers can conduct e-commerce and e-business activities. Elec­
tronic marketplaces are associated with B2B electronic commerce. You will learn about elec­
tronic marketplaces in Section 9.3. 
Electronic Payment Mechanisms 
Implementing EC typically requires electronic payments. Electronic payment mechanisms 
enable buyers to pay for goods and services electronically, rather than writing a check or using 
cash. Payments are an integral part of doing business, whether in the traditional manner or 
online. Traditional payment systems have typically involved cash and/or checks. 
In most cases, traditional payment systems are not effective for EC, especially for B2B. 
Cash cannot be used because there is no face-to-face contact between buyer and seller. Not 
everyone accepts credit cards or checks, and some buyers do not have credit cards or checking 
accounts. Finally, contrary to what many people believe, it may be less secure for the buyer to 
use the telephone or mail to arrange or send payments, especially from another country, than 
to complete a secured transaction on a computer. For all of these reasons, a better method is 
needed to pay for goods and services in cyberspace. This method is electronic payment sys­
tems. Let’s take a closer look at three types of electronic payment: electronic checks, electronic 
cards, and digital wallets. 
Electronic Checks. Electronic checks (e-checks), which are used primarily in B2B, are similar 
to regular paper checks. A customer who wishes to use e-checks must first establish a checking 
account with a bank. Then, when the customer buys a product or a service, he or she e-mails an 
encrypted electronic check to the seller. The seller deposits the check in a bank account, and 
the funds are transferred from the buyer’s account into the seller’s account. 
Like regular checks, e-checks carry a signature (in digital form) that can be verified (see 
www.authorize.net). Properly signed and endorsed e-checks are exchanged between finan­
cial institutions through electronic clearinghouses. (For example, see www.eccho.org for 
details.) 
Electronic Cards. There are a variety of electronic cards, and they are used for diff erent 
purposes. The most common types are electronic credit cards, purchasing cards, stored-value 
money cards, and smart cards. 
Electronic credit cards allow customers to charge online payments to their credit card 
account. These cards are used primarily in B2C and in shopping by small-to-medium enter­
prises (SMEs). Here is how e-credit cards work (see Figure 9.1). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
252 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
1.  When you purchase a book from Amazon, for example, your 
credit card information and purchase amount are encrypted 
in your browser. This procedure ensures the information is 
safe while it is “traveling” on the Internet to Amazon. 
2.  When your information arrives at Amazon, it is not opened. 
Rather, it is transferred automatically (in encrypted form) to 
a clearinghouse, where it is decrypted for verification and au­
thorization. 
3.  The clearinghouse asks the bank that issued you your credit 
card (the card issuer bank) to verify your credit card informa­
tion. 
4.  Your card issuer bank verifies your credit card information and 
reports this to the clearinghouse. 
FIGURE 9.1 
5.  The clearinghouse reports the result of the verification of your 
credit card to Amazon. 
6. Amazon reports a successful purchase and amount to you. 
7. Your card issuer bank sends funds in the amount of the purchase to Amazon’s bank. 
8.  Your card issuer bank notifies you (either electronically or in your monthly 
statement) of the debit on your credit card. 
9. Amazon’s bank notifies Amazon of the funds credited to its account. 
Purchasing cards are the B2B equivalent of electronic credit cards (see Figure 9.2). 
In some countries, purchasing cards are the primary form of payment between com­
panies. Unlike credit cards, where credit is provided for 30–60 days (for free) before 
payment is made to the merchant, payments made with purchasing cards are set­
tled within a week. 
Stored-value money cards allow you to store a fixed amount of prepaid 
money and then spend it as necessary. These cards are used to pay for photocopies 
in your library, for transportation, and for telephone calls. Each time you use the 
card, the amount is reduced by the amount you spent. Figure 9.3 illustrates a New 
York City Metro (subway and bus) card. 
FIGURE 9.2 
Finally, smart cards contain a chip that can store a large amount of informa­
tion (see Figure 9.4). Smart cards are frequently multipurpose—that is, you can use 
them as a credit card, a debit card, a stored-value money card, or a loyalty card. 
Smart cards are ideal for micropayments, which are small payments of a few dollars 
or less. 
Digital Wallets. A digital wallet is an application (app) used for making financial 
transactions. These apps can be on users’ desktops or on their smartphones. When 
the app is on a smartphone, it becomes a mobile payment system. Digital wallets re-
FIGURE 9.3 The New York City Metro Card. 
place the need to carry physical credit and debit cards, gift cards, and loyalty cards, 
as well as boarding passes and other forms of identification. Digital wallets may also 
store insurance and loyalty cards, drivers’ licenses, ID cards, Web site passwords, 
and login information. Further, digital wallets eliminate having to enter shipping, 
billing, and credit card data each time you make a purchase at a Web site. The data 
are encrypted in the user’s machine, and the wallet contains a digital certificate that 
identifies the authorized cardholder. Because smartphones know their current loca­
tion, nearby stores can send offers to users, and the wallet ensures the appropriate 
discounts are taken if a purchase is made. 
A digital wallet allows the user to pay for merchandise in a store by tapping the 
phone on the merchant’s terminal or by scanning a QR code. Security is provided by 
FIGURE 9.4  
the phone’s fingerprint reader or by entering a PIN. The wallet transmits user data to 
Smart cards are frequently 
the terminal using Bluetooth or near field communication (NFC). 
multipurpose. 
How e-credit cards work. (The numbers 1–9 indicate 
the sequence of activities.) A photograph depicting an example of purchasing card.
Example of purchasing card. A photograph depicting a New York City Metro (subway and bus) card.
A photograph of a Smart card having a chip that can be used as a credit card, a debit card, a stored-value money card, or a loyalty card.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview of E-Business and E-Commerce 253 
Examples of digital wallets include PayPal (www.paypal.com), Google Wallet (https:// 
www.google.com/wallet), and Apple Pay (www.apple.com). The competition in this field is 
intense. 
For example, the adoption of Apple Pay has been slowed by the Merchant Customer 
Exchange (MCX; www.mcx.com). MCX is a company created by a consortium of U.S. retail com­
panies to develop a merchant-owned mobile payment system, which will be called “CurrentC.” 
The company is led by merchants such as 7-Eleven, Alon Brands, Best Buy, CVS Health, Darden 
Restaurants, HMSHost, Hy-Vee, Lowe’s, Michaels, Publix, Sears Holdings, Shell Oil Products US, 
Sunoco, Target Corporation, and Walmart. MCX’s flagship product is CurrentC, a digital wallet. 
CurrentC is designed primarily to prevent merchants from paying credit card transaction fees. 
Shortly after CurrentC was launched in early 2015, Best Buy and Walmart explicitly stated that 
they would not accept Apple Pay, while in October 2014, CVS Pharmacy and Rite-Aid disabled 
all NFC payment systems. On the other hand, Walt Disney World began accepting Apple Pay 
beginning December 24, 2014. 
On February 23, 2015, Google acquired the Softcard digital wallet’s intellectual property 
and integrated it into Google Wallet. The Softcard digital wallet was a joint venture between 
AT&T (www.att.com), T-Mobile (www.t-mobile.com), and Verizon (www.verizon.com). 
Bitcoin. Bitcoin is a type of digital currency in which encryption techniques are used to regu­
late the generation of units of currency and verify the transfer of funds, operating indepen­
dently of any central bank. Bitcoin can be used to buy things electronically. In that sense, it re­
sembles conventional dollars, euros, or yen, which are also traded digitally. However, bitcoin’s 
most important characteristic, which makes it different from conventional money, is that it is 
decentralized. No single institution controls the bitcoin network. 
Benefits and Limitations of E-Commerce 
Few innovations in human history have provided as many benefits to organizations, individ­
uals, and society as e-commerce has. E-commerce benefits organizations by making national 
and international markets more accessible and by lowering the costs of processing, distribut­
ing, and retrieving information. Customers benefit by being able to access a vast number of 
products and services, around the clock. The major benefit to society is the ability to easily and 
conveniently deliver information, services, and products to people in cities, rural areas, and 
developing countries. 
Despite all these benefits, EC has some limitations, both technological and nontechnolog­
ical, that have restricted its growth and acceptance. One major technological limitation is the 
lack of universally accepted security standards. Also, in less-developed countries, telecommu­
nications bandwidth often is insufficient, and accessing the Web is expensive. Nontechnolog­
ical limitations include the perceptions that EC is insecure, has unresolved legal issues, and 
lacks a critical mass of sellers and buyers. As time passes, these limitations, especially the tech­
nological ones, will diminish or be overcome. 
Before you go on…
 1. Define e-commerce and distinguish it from e-business.
 2. Differentiate among B2C, B2B, C2C, and B2E electronic commerce.
 3. Define e-government.
 4. Discuss forward and reverse auctions.
 5. Discuss the various online payment mechanisms.
 6. Identify some benefits and limitations of e-commerce. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
254 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
Apply the Concept 9.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 9.1 Describe the six common 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you are doing.) 
types of electronic commerce. 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept and 
click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 9.1. This link will 
take you to PayPal’s Web site. Click on the business link at the top 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are 
of the page. You will find that PayPal offers easy solutions for both 
learning.) 
businesses and customers. 
Today there are many companies that specialize in making 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.) 
e-commerce a reality for small businesses. Amazon, Yahoo!, 
PayPal, and other entities offer services that provide everything 
Create and submit a table that lists and describes the six common 
a small business needs to sell products and accept payment over 
types of e-commerce. Which ones are supported by PayPal and 
the Internet. In fact, many consumers prefer for their transactions 
which are not? For the second group, can you explain why they 
to go through these larger global companies because they trust 
are not supported? Should PayPal move into these areas of 
these companies’ security. 
e-commerce as well? 
9.2 Business-to-Consumer (B2C) Electronic 
Commerce 
B2B EC is much larger than B2C EC by volume, but B2C EC is more complex. The reason is that 
B2C involves a large number of buyers making millions of diverse transactions per day from a 
relatively small number of sellers. As an illustration, consider Amazon, an online retailer that 
offers thousands of products to its customers. Each customer purchase is relatively small, but 
Amazon must manage every transaction as if that customer were its most important one. The 
company needs to process each order quickly and efficiently, and ship the products to the cus­
tomer in a timely manner. In addition, it has to manage returns. Multiply this simple example 
by millions, and you get an idea of how complex B2C EC can be. Overall, B2B complexities tend 
to be more business related, whereas B2C complexities tend to be more technical and volume 
related. IT’s About Business 9.2 illustrates how Swipely helps businesses better understand 
their customers. That is, Swipely is an example of B2C commerce. 
IT’s About Business 9.2 
MKT Swipely 
MIS 
Founded in 2009, Swipely (www.swipely.com) is a ser­
vice that processes credit card transactions for mer­
chants. The online software works with point-of-sale systems and 
terminals used by independent businesses, including restaurants, 
salons, boutiques, and grocers, without the need for additional 
hardware. Merchants in the Swipely network use the product to in­
tegrate customer spending, social media, and other data to obtain 
valuable insights into customer behavior. 
Swipely’s competitive advantage lies in giving vendors a 
clearer picture of their customers’ buying habits. As its name im­
plies, Swipely’s cloud servers (we describe cloud computing in 
detail in Plug IT In 4) analyze information left by card swipes. To 
protect customer information, Swipely deletes personally identify­
ing data, and then presents the data to merchants in the form of 
customer dashboards that reveal which goods each card number 
purchased and when. The dashboards are capable of performing 
very finely tuned analyses, such as how a certain weather condition 
on a certain day affects sales. Swipely also works with vendors’ so­
cial media accounts so stores and restaurants can track the success 
of things like Facebook promotions or Yelp reviews. 
Swipely becomes even more effective if customers provide 
merchants with their name and e-mail address, which 20 percent 
are willing to do. In this way, Swipely’s dashboards can display cus­
tomer responses to e-mail or coupon offers—a service that oft en 
costs hundreds of dollars a month, which Swipely provides for free. 
Swipely competes with numerous payment-processing ser­
vices including Square (www.squareup.com), Heartland Payment 
Systems (www.heartlandpaymentsystems.com), and Chase Pay­
mentech (www.chasepaymentech.com). Many companies are 
competing in this arena because consumer spending information 
is extremely valuable. Square (www.squareup.com), for example, 
is competing for the same customers as Swipely. One of these 
customers—the Blue Bottle Coff ee Company (www.bluebottlecoff ee 
.com), which has more than a dozen locations in Oakland, San 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business-to-Consumer (B2C) Electronic Commerce 255 
Francisco, and New York—recently moved from Swipely to Square 
May 6, 2015; T. Nesi, “Providence Tech Startup Swipely Lays Off 
at its registers. It would not take much for Square to expand its ser-
Workers,” WPRI.com, May 5, 2015; M. Seekamp, “A Better Way to 
Approach Brand-Level Sales Reporting,” Swipely, January 6, 2015; 
vices to offer customer analytics as well. 
“Swipely Announces Managing $4B in Annual Sales,” QSR Magazine, 
Swipely’s competitive advantage over Square, for now, is 
November 21, 2014; E. Ducoff, “Swipely Reveals How Menu and Server 
price. Swipely takes an average of 2.65 percent of its merchants’ 
Performance Impact Sales,” Swipely, February 11, 2014; “Swipely 
customer transactions, whereas Square’s average charge is 2.75 
Release Helps Operators Track Behavior,” QSR Magazine, January 24, 
percent. Furthermore, chances are good that merchants will not 
2014; A. Wilhelm, “Now Processing $1B Annually, Swipely Announces 
have to purchase additional equipment, as long as their registers 
a Partner Network to Support Growth,” TechCrunch, September 24, 
are one of more than 50 systems that are compatible with the 
2013; E. Carlyle, “Plastic Insights,” Forbes, May 27, 2013; O. Thomas, 
Swipely cloud-based service. 
“When Hurricane Sandy Struck, This Company Changed Its Entire 
Sales Plan—In Minutes,” Business Insider, January 19, 2013; L. 
So, how is Swipely doing? In November 2014, Swipely an-
Baverman, “Swipely Brings Big Data to Small Biz,” Upstart Business 
nounced that it was processing more than $4 billion of customer 
Journal, November 8, 2012; T. Geron, “Swipely Expands Credit 
transactions annually with its participating merchants. 
Card-Based Loyalty Service,” Forbes, December 15, 2011; L. Gannes, 
In May 2015, Swipely CEO Angus David announced an unspeci­
“Swipely Aims to (Politely) Turn Purchases into Conversations,” 
fied number of layoffs for “organizational reasons.” However, he 
GigaOM, May 10, 2010; www.swipely.com, accessed August 20, 2015. 
added that Swipely had tripled its number of customers to 3,000 
and also had tripled its recurring revenue. 
Questions
By August 2015, Swipely had raised $40.5 million in venture 
1. Describe the advantages that Swipely offers merchants that 
capital. 
help it maintain a competitive advantage in the marketplace. 
Sources: Compiled from K. Bramson, “CEO Says Swipely Layoffs Due 
2. Refer back to Chapter 2. Does Swipely function as a strategic 
to Sales Shift, But Company Is Still Growing,” Providence Journal, 
information system for a merchant? Why or why not? 
This section addresses the primary issues in B2C EC. We begin by studying the two basic mech­
anisms that customers utilize to access companies on the Web: electronic storefronts and elec­
tronic malls. In addition to purchasing products over the Web, customers also access online 
services. Therefore, the next section covers several online services, such as banking, securities 
trading, job searching, and travel. The complexity of B2C EC creates two major challenges for 
sellers: channel conflict and order fulfillment. We examine these two topics in detail. Finally, 
companies engaged in B2C EC must “get the word out” to prospective customers. This section 
concludes with a look at online advertising. 
Electronic Storefronts and Malls 
For several generations, home shopping from catalogs, and later from television shopping 
channels, has attracted millions of customers. Today, shopping online offers an alternative to 
catalog and television shopping. Electronic retailing (e-tailing) is the direct sale of products 
and services through electronic storefronts or electronic malls, usually designed around an 
electronic catalog format and/or auctions. 
Like any mail-order shopping experience, e-commerce enables you to buy from home and 
to do so 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Compared with mail order, however, EC offers a wider 
variety of products and services, including the most unique items, often at lower prices. Fur­
thermore, within seconds, shoppers can access very detailed supplementary product informa­
tion. In addition, they can easily locate and compare competitors’ products and prices. Finally, 
buyers can find hundreds of thousands of sellers. Two popular online shopping mechanisms 
are electronic storefronts and electronic malls. 
Electronic Storefronts. As we saw earlier in the chapter, an electronic storefront is a Web 
site that represents a single store. Today, Internet shoppers can access hundreds of thousands 
of electronic storefronts. Each storefront has a unique uniform resource locator (URL), or Inter­
net address, at which buyers can place orders. Some electronic storefronts are extensions of 
physical stores such as Hermes, The Sharper Image, and Walmart. Others are new businesses 
started by entrepreneurs who discovered a niche on the Web (e.g., Restaurant.com and Alloy 
.com). Manufacturers (e.g., www.dell.com) and retailers (e.g., www.officedepot.com) also use 
storefronts. 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
256 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
Electronic Malls. Whereas an electronic storefront represents a single store, an electronic 
mall, also known as a cybermall or an e-mall, is a collection of individual shops grouped under 
a single Internet address. The basic idea of an electronic mall is the same as that of a regu­
lar shopping mall: to provide a one-stop shopping place that offers a wide range of products 
and services. A cybermall may include thousands of vendors. For example, Microsoft Shopping 
(now Bing shopping, www.bing.com/shopping) includes tens of thousands of products from 
thousands of vendors. 
There are two types of cybermalls. In the first type, known as referral malls (e.g., www 
.hawaii.com), you cannot buy anything. Instead, you are transferred from the mall to a partici­
pating storefront. In the second type of mall (e.g., http://shopping.google.com), you can actu­
ally make a purchase. At this type of mall, you might shop from several stores, but you make 
only one purchase transaction at the end. You use an electronic shopping cart to gather items 
from various vendors and then pay for all of them in a single transaction. The mall organizer, 
such as Google, takes a commission from the sellers for this service. 
Online Service Industries 
In addition to purchasing products, customers can also access needed services via the Web. 
Selling books, toys, computers, and most other products on the Internet can reduce vendors’ 
selling costs by 20–40 percent. Further reduction is difficult to achieve because the products 
must be delivered physically. Only a few products, such as software and music, can be digitized 
and then delivered online for additional savings. In contrast, services, such as buying an airline 
ticket and purchasing stocks or insurance, can be delivered entirely through e-commerce, oft en 
with considerable cost reduction. Not surprisingly, then, online delivery of services is growing 
very rapidly, with millions of new customers being added each year. 
One of the most pressing EC issues relating to online services (as well as in marketing 
tangible products) is disintermediation. Intermediaries, also known as middlemen, have 
two functions: (1) they provide information, and (2) they perform value-added services such 
as consulting. The first function can be fully automated and most likely will be assumed by 
e-marketplaces and portals that provide information for free. When this development occurs, 
the intermediaries who perform only (or primarily) this function are likely to be eliminated. The 
process whereby intermediaries are eliminated is called disintermediation. 
In contrast to simply providing information, performing value-added services requires 
expertise. Unlike the information function, then, this function can be only partially automated. 
Thus, intermediaries who provide value-added services not only are likely to survive but they 
may also actually prosper. The Web helps these employees in two situations: (1) when the num­
ber of participants is enormous, as with job searches, and (2) when the information that must 
be exchanged is complex. 
In this section, you will examine some leading online service industries: banking, trading of 
securities (stocks, bonds), job matching, travel services, and advertising. 
Cyberbanking. Electronic banking, also known as cyberbanking, involves conducting vari­
ous banking activities from home, at a place of business, or on the road instead of at a physical 
bank location. Electronic banking has capabilities ranging from paying bills to applying for a 
loan. For customers, it saves time and is convenient. For banks, it offers an inexpensive alter­
native to branch banking—for example, about 2 cents cost per transaction versus $1.07 at a 
physical branch. Cyberbanking also enables banks to attract remote customers. In addition to 
regular banks with added online services, Internet-only banks, which are dedicated solely to 
Internet transactions, are emerging. 
International banking and the ability to handle trading in multiple currencies are critical 
for international trade. Transfers of electronic funds and electronic letters of credit are vital 
services in international banking. An example of support for EC global trade is provided by Tra­
deCard, in conjunction with MasterCard. TradeCard is an international company that provides 
a secure method for buyers and sellers to make digital payments anywhere on the globe (see 
the demo at www.tradecard.com). In another example, banks and companies such as Oanda 
(www.oanda.com) provide conversions of more than 160 currencies. 
FIN 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business-to-Consumer (B2C) Electronic Commerce 257 
FIN
Online Securities Trading. Millions of Americans use computers to trade stocks, bonds, 
and other financial instruments. In fact, several well-known securities companies, including 
E*Trade, Ameritrade, and Charles Schwab, offer only online trading. In Korea, more than half of 
stock traders are already using the Internet for that purpose. Why? Because it is cheaper than 
a full-service or discount broker. On the Web, investors can find a considerable amount of in­
formation regarding specific companies or mutual funds in which to invest (e.g., http://money 
.cnn.com and www.bloomberg.com). 
Let’s say, for example, that you have an account with Scottrade. You access Scottrade’s Web 
site (www.scottrade.com) from your personal computer or your Internet-enabled mobile device, 
enter your account number and password to access your personalized Web page, and then click 
on “stock trading.” Using a menu, you enter the details of your order—buy or sell, margin or cash, 
price limit, market order, and so on. The computer informs you of the current “ask” and “bid” prices, 
much as a broker would do over the telephone. You can then approve or reject the transaction. 
The Online Job Market. The Internet offers a promising new environment for job seekers and 
for companies searching for hard-to-find employees. Thousands of companies and government 
agencies advertise available positions, accept resumes, and take applications via the Internet. 
Job seekers use the online job market to reply online to employment ads, to place resumes 
on various sites, and to use recruiting firms (e.g., www.monster.com, www.simplyhired.com, 
www.linkedin.com, and www.truecareers.com). Companies that have jobs to off er advertise 
these openings on their Web sites, and they search the bulletin boards of recruiting firms. In 
many countries (including the United States), governments must advertise job openings on the 
Internet. 
Travel Services. The Internet is an ideal place to plan, explore, and arrange almost any trip 
economically. Online travel services allow you to purchase airline tickets, reserve hotel rooms, 
and rent cars. Most sites also offer a fare-tracker feature that sends you e-mail messages about 
low-cost flights. Examples of comprehensive online travel services are Expedia.com, Traveloci­
ty.com, and Orbitz.com. Online services are also provided by all major airline vacation services, 
large conventional travel agencies, car rental agencies, hotels (e.g., www.hotels.com), and tour 
companies. In a variation of this process, Priceline.com allows you to set a price you are willing 
to pay for an airline ticket or hotel accommodations. It then attempts to find a vendor that will 
match your price. 
One costly problem that e-commerce can cause is “mistake fares” in the airline industry. 
For example, on August 6, 2012, El Al (www.elal.com), Israel’s national airline, offered flights to 
Israel worth up to $1,600 for as little as some $300. This price was incorrect; the actual price was 
higher. By the time El Al noticed the mistake and pulled the fare, however, several tickets had 
been sold, thanks in part to online travel discussion groups. 
Online Advertising. Advertising is the practice of disseminating information in an attempt 
to influence a buyer–seller transaction. Traditional advertising on TV or in newspapers involves 
impersonal, one-way mass communication. In contrast, direct response marketing, or telemar­
keting, contacts individuals by direct mail or telephone and requires them to respond in order 
to make a purchase. The direct response approach personalizes advertising and marketing. At 
the same time, however, it can be expensive, slow, and ineffective. It can also be extremely an­
noying to the consumer. 
Internet advertising redefines the advertising process, making it media rich, dynamic, and 
interactive. It improves on traditional forms of advertising in a number of ways. First, Internet 
ads can be updated any time at minimal cost and therefore can be kept current. In addition, 
these ads can reach very large numbers of potential buyers all over the world. Furthermore, 
they are generally cheaper than radio, television, and print ads. Finally, Internet ads can be 
interactive and targeted to specific interest groups and/or individuals. 
Online Advertising Methods. The most common online advertising methods are banners, 
pop-ups, and e-mail. Banners are simply electronic billboards. Typically, a banner contains a 
short text or a graphical message to promote a product or a vendor. It may even contain video 
MKT 
HRM 
MKT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
258 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
clips and sound. When customers click on a banner, they are transferred to the advertiser’s 
home page. Banner advertising is the most commonly used form of advertising on the Internet. 
A major advantage of banners is that they can be customized to the target audience. If the 
computer system knows who you are or what your profile is, it might send you a banner that is 
specifically intended to match your interests. A major disadvantage of banners is that they can 
convey only limited information because of their small size. Another drawback is that many 
viewers simply ignore them. 
Pop-up and pop-under ads are contained in a new browser window that is automatically 
launched when you enter or exit a Web site. A pop-up ad appears in front of the current browser 
window. A pop-under ad appears underneath the active window; when users close the active 
window, they see the ad. Many users strongly object to these ads, which they consider intrusive. 
Modern browsers let users block pop-up ads, but this feature must be used with caution because 
some Web sites depend on pop-up capabilities to present content other than advertising. 
E-mail is emerging as an Internet advertising and marketing channel. It is generally cost- 
eff ective to implement, and it provides a better and quicker response rate than other adver­
tising channels. Marketers develop or purchase a list of e-mail addresses, place them in a 
customer database, and then send advertisements via e-mail. A list of e-mail addresses can 
be a very powerful tool because the marketer can target a group of people or even individuals. 
As you have probably concluded by now, there is a potential for misuse of e-mail advertis­
ing. In fact, some consumers receive a flood of unsolicited e-mail, or spam. Spamming is the 
indiscriminate distribution of electronic ads without the permission of the receiver. Unfortu­
nately, spamming is becoming worse over time. 
Two important responses to spamming are permission marketing and viral marketing. 
Permission marketing asks consumers to give their permission to voluntarily accept online 
advertising and e-mail. Typically, consumers are asked to complete an electronic form that 
asks what they are interested in and requests permission to send related marketing informa­
tion. Sometimes, consumers are offered incentives to receive advertising. 
Permission marketing is the basis of many Internet marketing strategies. For example, 
millions of users periodically receive e-mails from airlines such as American and Southwest. 
Users of this marketing service can ask to be notified of low fares from their hometown or to 
their favorite destinations. Significantly, they can easily unsubscribe at any time. Permission 
marketing is also extremely important for market research (e.g., search for “Media Metrix” at 
www.comscore.com). 
Viral marketing refers to online word-of-mouth marketing. The strategy behind viral mar­
keting is to have people forward messages to friends, family members, and other acquaintances 
suggesting they “check this out.” For example, a marketer can distribute a small game program 
embedded with a sponsor’s e-mail that is easy to forward. The marketer releases only a few 
thousand copies, with the expectation that the recipients in turn will forward the program to 
many more thousands of potential customers. In this way, viral marketing enables companies to 
build brand awareness at a minimal cost without having to spam millions of uninterested users. 
Issues in E-Tailing 
Despite e-tailing’s increasing popularity, many e-tailers continue to face serious issues that can 
restrict their growth. Perhaps the two most significant issues are channel conflict and order 
fulfillment. 
Clicks-and-mortar companies may face a conflict with their regular distributors when they 
sell directly to customers online. This situation, known as channel conflict, can alienate the dis­
tributors. Channel conflict has forced some companies to avoid direct online sales. For example, 
Walmart, Lowe’s, and Home Depot would rather have customers come to their stores. Therefore, 
although all three companies maintain e-commerce Web sites, their sites place more emphasis 
on providing information—products, prices, specials, and store locations—than on online sales. 
Channel conflict can arise in areas such as pricing and resource allocation—for example, 
how much money to spend on advertising. Another potential source of conflict involves the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business-to-Consumer (B2C) Electronic Commerce 259 
logistics services provided by the offline activities to the online activities. For example, how 
should a company handle returns of items purchased online? Some companies have com­
pletely separated the “clicks” (the online portion of the organization) from the “mortar” or 
“bricks” (the traditional bricks-and-mortar part of the organization). However, this approach 
can increase expenses, reduce the synergy between the two organizational channels, and 
alienate customers. As a result, many companies are integrating their online and off line chan­
nels, a process known as multichanneling. In fact, many companies are calling this process 
omni-channeling, as you see in IT’s About Business 9.3. 
IT’s About Business 9.3 
The Omni-Channel Customer Experience 
In recent years, the traditional bricks-and-mortar strategy 
for large retailers, with its accompanying high overhead 
costs, has become a barrier to competitiveness. Amazon (www 
.amazon.com), which does not maintain any physical stores, has 
achieved major market share—and has evolved into the world’s 
largest Internet retailer—through a combination of lower prices 
and huge selection. But traditional retailers with stores have the 
upper hand over e-commerce for shoppers who want to try in 
person before they buy. 
To compete with Amazon, the world’s largest retailers are adopt­
ing an omni-channel strategy that enables customers to seamlessly 
combine their experience of online shopping on any device with in-
store shopping. This strategy is becoming increasingly important as 
Amazon builds its own fulfillment centers closer to customers. 
Big-box retailers are rethinking their distribution systems, 
which are often based on centralized warehouses. Many of them 
are now filling online orders from the store nearest the customer 
instead of hundreds of miles away. Staff pluck items from the sales 
floor, box them up, and send them on their way via FedEx and UPS. 
This new order fulfillment model, called ship-from-store, ben­
efits customers by speeding up delivery. It benefits the retailers by 
reducing shipping costs and cutting down on sales-floor overstocks 
that result in big markdowns. Most importantly, it helps retailers go 
head to head with Amazon. 
Let’s consider four retailers: Gap (www.gap.com), Walmart 
(www.walmart.com), and Best Buy (www.bestbuy.com) in the 
United States and John Lewis (www.johnlewis.com) in Great Britain. 
Gap stores were the first to implement ship-from-store, and 
the retailer has added this service to the e-commerce systems of 
two Gap-owned chains, Banana Republic and Athleta. Not coinci­
dentally, Gap’s annual revenue increased by $500 million in 2013. 
Nearly 70 percent of Americans live within five miles of a 
Walmart. Therefore, the company is using its stores to fulfill online 
orders, along with its storage warehouses and specific fulfillment 
centers. By late 2015, roughly 10 percent of the items ordered on 
Walmart.com were shipped from 35 stores. Most of those orders 
were delivered within two days. Walmart charges a $10 fee for 
same-day delivery service. In some cases, the company uses third-
party carriers to ship items from its stores. In addition, Walmart 
employees sometimes deliver products by car. This ship-from-store 
strategy exceeded expectations, and Walmart was planning to 
expand the service to hundreds of its stores. 
Best Buy, the biggest U.S. consumer electronics retailer, has 
deployed ship-from-store in about 50 stores. About one billion vis­
its are made to the Best Buy Web site each year, but up to 4 percent 
MKT 
POM 
of visitors cannot complete their transaction because the compa­
ny’s online distribution system is out of stock. But 8 times out of 10, 
the product is available in a Best Buy store, so the company wants 
to expand its ship-from-store system to more locations. 
John Lewis (www.johnlewis.com), a chain of 43 department 
stores that operates throughout England, Scotland, and Wales, has 
implemented a different version of the omni-channel strategy with 
its click-and-collect process. Click-and-collect is similar to ship-
from-store, except online customers have to pick up their packages 
themselves at a John Lewis store—they are not shipped from the 
store. John Lewis charges two British pounds for click-and-collect 
orders valued at less than 30 pounds. 
Click-and-collect has been a tremendous success for John 
Lewis. In fact, for the 2014 holiday season, click-and-collect sales 
surpassed home deliveries. In addition, online sales increased by 
19 percent, accounting for more than 30 percent of the retailer’s 
gross revenue. Further, more than half the firm’s online orders were 
of the click-and-collect type. 
Sources: Compiled from C. Tode, “Traditional Retailers Crush 
Ecommerce Giants in Omnichannel Shopping,” Mobile Commerce 
Daily, July 1, 2015; D. Schutz, “Top 100 Retailers 2015,” National 
Retail Federation, July 1, 2015; R. Smithers, “John Lewis to Charge for 
‘Click and Collect’,” The Guardian, July 1, 2015; “Department Store 
Boosts IT Investment to Create Seamless Omni-Channel Experience,” 
Computer Weekly, May 2-8, 2015; T. Team, “Why Is Omni-Channel 
Retailing So Important for Bed Bath & Beyond?” Forbes, February 
12, 2015; “The Omni-Channel Opportunity for Retailers: What’s the 
Story?” The Guardian, January 14, 2015; J. Popovec, “Nordstrom, 
Walgreens Praised for Omni-Channel Strategies,” National Real Estate 
Investor, October 9, 2014; D. Newman, “The Omni-Channel Experience: 
Marketing Meets Ubiquity,” Forbes, July 22, 2014; J. Green, “Why and 
How Brands Must Go Omni-Channel in 2014, Marketing Land, January 
27, 2014; A. Barr, “Retail Stores Become Shipping Hubs to Battle 
Amazon,” USA Today, October 6, 2013.H. Wallop, “Click and Collect – 
The New Way to Go Shopping,” The Telegraph, January 8, 2013. 
Questions 
1. Why is an “omni-channel” strategy such an important com­
ponent of retailers’ missions today? 
2. Describe the problems retailers face in implementing a ship-
from-store strategy. 
3. Identify some strategies that Amazon could employ to coun­
ter the ship-from-store strategy from traditional bricks-and­
mortar retailers. 
4. Discuss the differences between the ship-from-store and 
click-and-collect processes. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
260 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
POM 
Multichanneling has created the opportunity for showrooming. Showrooming occurs when 
shoppers visit a brick-and-mortar store to examine a product in person. They then conduct 
research about the product on their smartphones. Often, they purchase the product from the 
Web site of a competitor of the store they are visiting. Showrooming is causing problems for 
brick-and-mortar retailers, such as Target, Best Buy, and others. At the same time, showroom­
ing benefits Amazon, eBay, and other online retailers. 
The second major issue confronting e-commerce is order fulfillment, which can create 
problems for e-tailers. Any time a company sells directly to customers, it is involved in various 
order-fulfillment activities. It must perform the following activities: quickly find the products to 
be shipped; pack them; arrange for the packages to be delivered speedily to the customer’s 
door; collect the money from every customer, either in advance, by COD, or by individual bill; 
and handle the return of unwanted or defective products. 
It is very difficult to accomplish these activities both effectively and efficiently in B2C, 
because a company has to ship small packages to many customers and do it quickly. For this 
reason, companies involved in B2C activities often experience difficulties in their supply chains. 
In addition to providing customers with the products they ordered and doing it on time, 
order fulfillment provides all related customer services. For example, the customer must 
receive assembly and operation instructions for a new appliance. In addition, if the customer is 
unhappy with a product, the company must arrange an exchange or a return. 
In the late 1990s, e-tailers faced continuous problems in order fulfillment, especially dur­
ing the holiday season. These problems included late deliveries, delivering wrong items, high 
delivery costs, and compensation to unsatisfied customers. For e-tailers, taking orders over 
the Internet is the easy part of B2C e-commerce. Delivering orders to customers’ doors is the 
hard part. In contrast, order fulfillment is less complicated in B2B. These transactions are much 
larger, but they are fewer in number. In addition, these companies have had order fulfillment 
mechanisms in place for many years. 
Before you go on…
 1. Describe electronic storefronts and malls.
 2. Discuss various types of online services, such as cyberbanking, securities trading, job searches, travel 
services, and so on.
 3. Discuss online advertising, its methods, and its benefits.
 4. Identify the major issues related to e-tailing.
 5. What are spamming, permission marketing, and viral marketing? 
Apply the Concept 9.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 9.2 Describe the various 
online services of business-to-consumer (B2C) commerce, along 
with specific examples of each. 
STEP 1: Background 
At this point in your “buying” career, you have probably 
purchased something online, visited an auction site (and possibly 
won a bid), and engaged in some form of online banking. Your 
generation is very comfortable with the retail side of e-commerce. 
While you were engaging in B2C e-commerce, you probably 
created an account with a few vendors and received some e-mail 
advertisements. No doubt you have also received some pop-up 
ads promoting products during your Internet searches. 
Another aspect of modern business that has changed is that 
companies now want you to do their advertising for them. The 
text refers to this development as viral marketing. 
STEP 2: Activity 
Imagine that you and some friends decide to start a new online 
thrift store. To become a member, an individual has to donate 
to the thrift. For every ten items a person donates, he or she is 
awarded a two-month membership. However, you have no IT 
platform for e-commerce. After some research, you determine 
that Shopify is your best provider. Shopify is an e-commerce 
platform that enables individuals and businesses to create online 
stores. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business-to-Business (B2B) Electronic Commerce 261 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 9.2. This link 
will take you to Shopify’s Web site. Near the top of the page you 
will see a link to “Examples” of other providers. Look through the 
examples to identify ideas you would like to incorporate into your 
store. 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
After reviewing the Shopify site, prepare a presentation or a 
document that describes the various online services of B2C 
commerce provided by Shopify. Provide specific examples of 
services that attracted your attention and discuss how you would 
apply these services to your store. 
9.3 Business-to-Business (B2B) Electronic 
Commerce 
In business to business (B2B) e-commerce, the buyers and sellers are business organizations. 
B2B comprises about 85 percent of EC volume. It covers a broad spectrum of applications that 
enable an enterprise to form electronic relationships with its distributors, resellers, suppliers, 
customers, and other partners. Organizations can use B2B to restructure their supply chains 
and their partner relationships. 
B2B applications utilize any of several business models. The major models are sell-side 
marketplaces, buy-side marketplaces, and electronic exchanges. 
Sell-Side Marketplaces 
In the sell-side marketplace model, organizations attempt to sell their products or services to 
other organizations electronically from their own private e-marketplace Web site and/or from 
a third-party Web site. This model is similar to the B2C model in which the buyer is expected 
to come to the seller’s site, view catalogs, and place an order. In the B2B sell-side marketplace, 
however, the buyer is an organization. 
The key mechanisms in the sell-side model are forward auctions and electronic catalogs 
that can be customized for each large buyer. Sellers such as Dell Computer (www.dellauction 
.com) use auctions extensively. In addition to conducting auctions from their own Web sites, 
organizations can use third-party auction sites, such as eBay, to liquidate items. Companies 
such as Ariba (www.ariba.com) are helping organizations to auction old assets and inventories. 
The sell-side model is used by hundreds of thousands of companies. It is especially power­
ful for companies with superb reputations. The seller can be either a manufacturer (e.g., Dell or 
IBM), a distributor (e.g., www.avnet.com), or a retailer (e.g., www.bigboxx.com). The seller uses EC 
to increase sales, reduce selling and advertising expenditures, increase delivery speed, and lower 
administrative costs. The sell-side model is especially suitable to customization. Many companies 
allow their customers to configure their orders online. For example, at Dell (www.dell.com), you can 
determine the exact type of computer that you want. You can choose the type of chip, the size of the 
hard drive, the type of monitor, and so on. Similarly, the Jaguar Web site (www.jaguar.com) allows 
you to customize the Jaguar you want. Self-customization greatly reduces any misunderstandings 
concerning what customers want, and it encourages businesses to fill orders more quickly. 
Buy-Side Marketplaces 
Procurement is the overarching function that describes the activities and processes to acquire 
goods and services. Distinct from purchasing, procurement involves the activities necessary to 
establish requirements, sourcing activities such as market research and vendor evaluation, and 
negotiation of contracts. Purchasing refers to the process of ordering and receiving goods and 
services. It is a subset of the procurement process. 
The buy-side marketplace is a model in which organizations attempt to procure needed 
products or services from other organizations electronically. A major method of procuring 
goods and services in the buy-side model is the reverse auction. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
262 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
The buy-side model uses EC technology to streamline the procurement process. The goal 
is to reduce both the costs of items procured and the administrative expenses involved in pro­
curing them. In addition, EC technology can shorten the procurement cycle time. 
Procurement by using electronic support is referred to as e-procurement. E-procurement 
uses reverse auctions, particularly group purchasing. In group purchasing, multiple buyers 
combine their orders so that they constitute a large volume and therefore attract more seller 
attention. In addition, when buyers place their combined orders on a reverse auction, they can 
negotiate a volume discount. Typically, the orders of small buyers are aggregated by a third-
party vendor, such as the United Sourcing Alliance (www.usa-llc.com). 
Electronic Exchanges 
Private exchanges have one buyer and many sellers. Electronic marketplaces (e-marketplaces), 
called public exchanges or just exchanges, are independently owned by a third party, and 
they connect many sellers with many buyers. Public exchanges are open to all business organ­
izations. They are frequently owned and operated by a third party. Public exchange managers 
provide all of the necessary information systems to the participants. Thus, buyers and sellers 
merely have to “plug in” in order to trade. B2B public exchanges are often the initial point of 
contacts between business partners. Once the partners make contact, they may move to a pri­
vate exchange or to private trading rooms provided by many public exchanges to conduct their 
subsequent trading activities. 
Electronic exchanges deal in both direct and indirect materials. Direct materials are inputs 
to the manufacturing process, such as safety glass used in automobile windshields and win­
dows. Indirect materials are those items, such as office supplies, that are needed for mainte­
nance, operations, and repairs (MRO). 
There are three basic types of public exchanges: vertical, horizontal, and functional. All 
three types offer diversified support services, ranging from payments to logistics. 
Vertical exchanges connect buyers and sellers in a given industry. Examples of vertical 
exchanges are www.plasticsnet.com in the plastics industry and www.papersite.com in the 
paper industry. The vertical e-marketplaces offer services that are particularly suited to the 
community they serve. Vertical exchanges are frequently owned and managed by a consortium, 
a term for a group of major players in an industry. For example, Marriott and Hyatt own a pro­
curement consortium for the hotel industry, and Chevron owns an energy e-marketplace. 
Horizontal exchanges connect buyers and sellers across many industries. They are used 
primarily for MRO materials. Examples of horizontal exchanges are TradersCity (www.traderscity 
.com), Globalsources (www.globalsources.com), and Alibaba (www.alibaba.com). 
Finally, in functional exchanges, needed services such as temporary help or extra off ice 
space are traded on an “as-needed” basis. For example, Employease (www.employease.com) 
can find temporary labor by searching employers in its Employease Network. 
We have looked closely at B2B electronic commerce in this section. IT’s About Business 9.4 
shows how Amazon has entered the B2B marketplace. 
IT’s About Business 9.4 
POM Amazon Moves into the B2B Marketplace 
MKT 
Amazon Business (www.amazon.com/business) is Ama­
zon’s e-commerce Web site that targets the wholesale 
and distribution business-to-business (B2B) marketplace. Amazon 
Business does for business customers what Amazon.com does for 
individual shoppers (B2C). 
Amazon’s B2B efforts began with AmazonSupply, which 
launched in 2012 with 500,000 items for sale. By 2014, the product 
list had expanded to more than 2.25 million items, including tools, 
home improvement goods, janitorial supplies, steel pipes, and a 
host of other products. 
In 2015, Amazon created Amazon Business and folded 
AmazonSupply into it. Amazon Business uses a hybrid business 
model, selling both products directly from its own warehouses, as 
well as those from third-party vendors. The outside vendors, which 
still have to compete with Amazon products, receive a commission 
of between 6 and 15 percent for their items sold, based on the prod­
uct category and order size. 
Amazon Business customers, who will be approved to buy 
and sell based on their tax ID, will be able to access hundreds of 
millions of business-only products, obtain bulk discounts, set up a 
corporate credit line, and receive free two-day shipping on orders 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business-to-Business (B2B) Electronic Commerce 263 
over $49. Clients can also chat with manufacturer representatives 
about product specifications. This process is crucial when dealing 
with complex technical products. 
Amazon Business offers several useful features for sellers. For 
example: 
•  The site lists products, along with any accompanying quality 
credentials such as ISO 9000 certifications. 
•  Amazon Business account holders can qualify for special off ers 
not available to consumers on the Amazon.com site. This helps 
vendors meet requirements not to sell products that are forbid­
den to be sold directly to consumers, such as high-tech health-
care equipment. 
•  Customers can search for products by both manufacturer and 
distributor part numbers. 
•  The site has the ability to demonstrate products in Web videos and 
to post downloadable computer-aided design (CAD) drawings. 
Amazon Business also offers useful features for buyers. For 
example: 
•  Both single and multiple buyers can create business accounts, 
and groups of buyers can share payment methods and shipping 
addresses. 
•  Multiple offers from sellers are displayed on a single product 
page, making it easier to compare pricing and seller ratings 
issued by Amazon. 
•  Buyers can view other buyers’ product reviews. 
•  Amazon Business is integrated with buyers’ procurement soft ­
ware, enabling buyers to include Amazon on their list of author­
ized sellers within their procurement system. 
Wholesalers are taking Amazon’s threat seriously. The wholesale 
industry in the United States is almost twice the size of the retail 
industry. In 2014, wholesale sales totaled $7.2 trillion, compared 
with more than $4 trillion for retail sales. America’s 35,000 distribu­
tors are largely regional, family-run companies with annual sales of 
$50 million or less. Only 160 of these businesses report annual sales 
exceeding $1 billion. In contrast, Amazon reported more than $89 
billion in revenues in 2014, selling goods in both the B2C and B2B 
marketplaces. The average wholesaler offers approximately 50,000 
products online, compared to Amazon Business’s hundreds of mil­
lions of products. 
Amazon Business is competitive even in niche markets. Take 
scientific equipment as an example. Items such as centrifuges and 
Bunsen burners are usually only available from specialty distribu­
tors. But you can get one at the click of a mouse through Amazon 
Business. Few specialty distributors can compete with Amazon’s 
huge inventory, its easy-to-navigate Web site, two-day delivery, 
physical infrastructure (fulfillment centers in the United States), and 
information technology infrastructure (e.g., Amazon Web Services). 
To acquire and maintain competitive advantage, Amazon 
Business keeps inventory that will not necessarily sell quickly, in 
order to avoid stockouts that plague other distributors of specialty 
items. Industry analysts estimate that Amazon stocks more than 50 
percent of what it offers on the Web site at any given time. 
B2B has very small margins, typically 2 to 4 percent. Ama­
zon’s scale allows it to make money through high volumes. And it 
achieves these high volumes through—what else—beating com­
petitors’ prices by about 25 percent on common items, according 
to a Boston Consulting Group (www.bcg.com) study. 
Despite its success, Amazon Business does have competition. 
Consider W.W. Grainger (www.grainger.com), in business since 
1927, which controls about 6 percent of the entire U.S. B2B market. 
The company, which sells tools for maintenance and repair, now 
operates more than 700 regional sales branches and 33 distribution 
centers. The company recorded $10 billion in revenue in 2014, most 
of which it still generated offline. Nevertheless, in 2014, it had more 
than $3 billion in online sales. 
One area that Amazon Business may not be able to penetrate 
is the close partnerships that some distributors have with insti­
tutional clients. For example, medical supplier Cardinal Health 
(www.cardinalhealth.com) has taken over the entire supply chain 
at the Nebraska Medical Center. Cardinal handles everything from 
truck to patient. It orders products from suppliers, tracks product 
distribution, handles loading dock workers, and deals with supplier 
invoicing. 
The challenge confronting the nation’s 35,000 wholesalers 
and distributors is to compete with Amazon Business. Industry 
analysts identify two possibilities: 
1. Provide value-added, personalized services to customers. For 
example, Valin Corporation (www.valinonline.com) has focused 
on the oil and gas sector, dispatching engineers to oil fields to 
help deploy the company’s products that manage output at sur­
face oil wells. 
2. Go into areas Amazon may fear to tread. Amazon may not want 
to meet every customer’s needs in a complex, highly segmented 
business environment. For instance, will Amazon want to sell ox­
ygen tanks or soda pumps? Further, Amazon might not want to 
manage products that are dangerous or exotic, such as dentists’ 
chairs, or that require specialists. 
Sources: Compiled from E. Smith, “Can Amazon ‘Uber’ Distributors?” 
Modern Distribution Management, June 17, 2015; E. Smith, 
“Recommended Reading: Amazon Business Open to Distributors,” 
Modern Distribution Management, June 9, 2015; D. Buss, “New Amazon 
Business Marketplace Goes after B2B Dollars,” Brand Channel, May 1, 
2015; E. Smith, “Amazon Reinvents B2B Model,” Modern Distribution 
Management, April 29, 2015; S. Soper, “Amazon Business Aims for 
$1 Trillion Corporate-Spending Market,” BloombergBusiness, April 
28, 2015; P. Demery, “Say Hello To Amazon Business, Good-Bye to 
AmazonSupply,” Internet Retailer, April 28, 2015; C. O’Connor, “Amazon 
Launches Amazon Business Marketplace, Will Close AmazonSupply,” 
Forbes, April 28, 2015; C. O’Connor, “Amazon’s Wholesale Slaughter: 
Jeff Bezos’ $8 Trillion B2B Bet,” Forbes, May 7, 2014; J. Hans, “Q&A: 
How Amazon Could Change ‘B2B’,” Manufacturing.net, February 3, 
2014; www.amazon.com/business, accessed August 18, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Consider Tulsa Community College (www.tulsacc.edu), 
which is using Amazon Business to order test tubes, bas­
ketballs, office supplies, and other goods instead of having 
employees buy them from local retailers or specialty sellers. 
The daily needs of the college’s 15,000 students translate 
into about $10,000 of orders per month. 
What is the impact of Amazon Business on local wholesalers 
and retailers in Tulsa?  
How could local businesses in Tulsa compete with Amazon  
Business?  
2. Provide other methods for wholesalers to compete with 
Amazon Business. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
264 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
Before you go on…
 1. Briefly differentiate between the sell-side marketplace and the buy-side marketplace.
 2. Briefly differentiate among vertical exchanges, horizontal exchanges, and functional exchanges. 
Apply the Concept 9.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 9.3 Describe the three 
STEP 2: Activity 
business models for business-to-business electronic commerce. 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 9.3. This link 
STEP 1: Background 
will take you to one of the horizontal exchanges (an exchange for 
many buyers and sellers across industries) listed in the section. 
Section 9.3 describes forward auctions, reverse auctions, and 
As you examine the available products, you should get a better 
exchanges. Forward auctions are used when a seller is trying to 
understanding of the breadth of a horizontal exchange. 
reach several buyers, and reverse auctions are used when a buyer 
is soliciting from several sellers. In an exchange, both buyers and 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
sellers come to a central Web site to quickly and easily establish 
a B2B relationship. Some of these Web sites or exchanges are for 
Describe the three business models for B2B e-commerce by 
materials involved in manufacturing a product; others involve 
comparing and contrasting them to Globalsource. Submit your 
materials that help run the business. 
description to your professor. 
9.4 Ethical and Legal Issues in E-Business 
Technological innovation often forces a society to reexamine and modify its ethical standards. 
In many cases, the new standards are incorporated into law. In this section, you will learn about 
two important ethical considerations—privacy and job loss—as well as various legal issues aris­
ing from the practice of e-business. 
Ethical Issues 
Many of the ethical and global issues related to IT also apply to e-business. Here you will learn 
about two basic issues: privacy and job loss. 
By making it easier to store and transfer personal information, e-business presents some 
threats to privacy. To begin with, most electronic payment systems know who the buyers are. It 
may be necessary, then, to protect the buyers’ identities. Businesses frequently use encryption 
to provide this protection. 
Another major privacy issue is tracking. For example, individuals’ activities on the Inter­
net can be tracked by cookies (discussed in Chapter 7). Cookies store your tracking history on 
your personal computer’s hard drive, and any time you revisit a certain Web site, the server 
recognizes the cookie. In response, antivirus software packages routinely search for potentially 
harmful cookies. 
In addition to compromising individual privacy, the use of EC may eliminate the need for 
some of a company’s employees, as well as brokers and agents. The manner in which these 
unneeded workers, especially employees, are treated can raise ethical issues: How should the 
company handle the layoffs? Should companies be required to retrain employees for new posi­
tions? If not, how should the company compensate or otherwise assist the displaced workers? 
Legal and Ethical Issues Specific to E-Commerce 
Many legal issues are related specifically to e-commerce. A business environment in which buy­
ers and sellers do not know one another and cannot even see one another creates opportunities 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ethical and Legal Issues in E-Business 265 
for dishonest people to commit fraud and other crimes. During the first few years of EC, the 
public witnessed many such crimes. These illegal actions ranged from creating a virtual bank 
that disappeared along with the investors’ deposits to manipulating stock prices on the Inter­
net. Unfortunately, fraudulent activities on the Internet are increasing. In the following section, 
you explore some of the major legal issues that are specific to e-commerce. 
Fraud on the Internet. Internet fraud has grown even faster than Internet use itself. In one 
case, stock promoters falsely spread positive rumors about the prospects of the companies they 
touted in order to boost the stock price. In other cases, the information provided might have 
been true, but the promoters did not disclose that they were paid to talk up the companies. 
Stock promoters specifically target small investors who are lured by the promise of fast profits. 
Stocks are only one of many areas where swindlers are active. Auctions are especially con­
ducive to fraud, by both sellers and buyers. Other types of fraud include selling bogus invest­
ments and setting up phantom business opportunities. Because of the growing use of e-mail, 
financial criminals now have access to many more potential victims. The U.S. Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) (www.ftc.gov) regularly publishes examples of scams that are most likely to 
be spread via e-mail or to be found on the Web. Later in this section, you will see some ways in 
which consumers and sellers can protect themselves from online fraud. 
Domain Names. Another legal issue is competition over domain names. Domain names are 
assigned by central nonprofit organizations that check for conflicts and possible infringement 
of trademarks. Obviously, companies that sell goods and services over the Internet want cus­
tomers to be able to find them easily. In general, the closer the domain name matches the 
company’s name, the easier the company is to locate. 
A domain name is considered legal when the person or business who owns the name has 
operated a legitimate business under that name for some time. Companies such as Christian 
Dior, Nike, Deutsche Bank, and even Microsoft have had to fight or pay to acquire the domain 
name that corresponds to their company’s name. Consider the case of Delta Air Lines. Delta 
originally could not obtain the Internet domain name delta.com because Delta Faucet had 
already purchased it. Delta Faucet had been in business under that name since 1954, so it 
had a legitimate business interest in using the domain name. Delta Air Lines had to settle for 
delta-airlines.com until it bought the domain name from Delta Faucet. Delta Faucet is now at 
deltafaucet.com. Several cases of disputed domain names are currently in court. 
Cybersquatting. Cybersquatting refers to the practice of registering or using domain 
names for the purpose of profiting from the goodwill or the trademark that belongs to some­
one else. The Anti-Cybersquatting Consumer Protection Act (1999) permits trademark owners 
in the United States to sue for damages in such cases. 
However, some practices that could be considered cybersquatting are not illegal, although 
they may well be unethical. Perhaps the more common of these practices is “domain tasting.” 
Domain tasting lets registrars profit from the complex money trail of pay-per-click advertising. 
The practice can be traced back to the policies of the organization responsible for regulating 
Web names, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) (www.icann 
.org). In 2000, ICANN established the “create grace period, “ a five-day period during which a 
company or person can claim a domain name and then return it for a full refund of the $6 reg­
istry fee. ICANN implemented this policy to allow someone who mistyped a domain to return it 
without cost. In some cases, companies engage in cybersquatting by registering domain names 
that are very similar to their competitors’ domain names in order to generate traffic from peo­
ple who misspell Web addresses. 
Domain tasters exploit this policy by claiming Internet domains for five days at no cost. 
These domain names frequently resemble those of prominent companies and organizations. 
The tasters then jam these domains full of advertisements that come from Yahoo! and Google. 
Because this process involves zero risk and 100 percent profit margins, domain tasters register 
millions of domain names every day—some of them over and over again. Experts estimate that 
registrants ultimately purchase less than 2 percent of the sites they sample. In the vast majority 
of cases, they use the domain names for only a few days to generate quick profits. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
266 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
Taxes and Other Fees. In offline sales, most states and localities tax business transactions 
that are conducted within their jurisdiction. The most obvious example is sales taxes. Feder­
al, state, and local authorities are now scrambling to create some type of taxation policy for 
e-business. This problem is particularly complex for interstate and international e-commerce. 
For example, some people claim that the state in which the seller is located deserves the entire 
sales tax (in some countries, it is a value-added tax (VAT)). Others contend that the state in 
which the server is located should also receive some of the tax revenues. 
In addition to the sales tax, there is a question about where—and in some cases, whether— 
electronic sellers should pay business license taxes, franchise fees, gross receipts taxes, excise 
taxes, privilege taxes, and utility taxes. Furthermore, how should tax collection be controlled? 
Legislative efforts to impose taxes on e-commerce are opposed by an organization named the 
Internet Freedom Fighters. 
In December 2013, the U.S. Supreme Court declined to get involved in state efforts to force 
Web retailers such as Amazon to collect sales tax from customers even in places where the 
companies do not have a physical presence. The court’s decision to stay out of the issue may 
put pressure on Congress to come up with a national solution, as both online and traditional 
retailers complain about a patchwork of state laws and conflicting lower court decisions. As of 
mid-2016, all but five states impose sales taxes on online purchases, and an increasing number 
have passed legislation to force online retailers to begin collecting those taxes from customers. 
Even before electronic commerce over the Internet emerged, the basic law was that as 
long as a retailer did not have a physical presence in the state where the consumer was shop­
ping, that retailer did not have to collect a sales tax. Shoppers are supposed to track such pur­
chases and then pay the taxes owed in their annual tax filings. Few people, however, do this or 
are even aware of it. 
The result is that online retailers have been able to undercut the prices of their non-
Internet (e.g., brick-and-mortar stores) competitors for years. As state and local governments 
have increasingly experienced large cash shortcomings since the recession, they have fought 
back. As of mid-2016, some 25 states required Amazon to collect sales taxes. 
Copyright. Recall from Chapter 6 that intellectual property is protected by copyright laws 
and cannot be used freely. This point is significant because many people mistakenly believe 
that once they purchase a piece of software, they have the right to share it with others. In fact, 
what they have bought is the right to use the software, not the right to distribute it. That right 
remains with the copyright holder. Similarly, copying material from Web sites without permis­
sion is a violation of copyright laws. Protecting intellectual property rights in e-commerce is ex­
tremely difficult, however, because it involves hundreds of millions of people in 200 countries 
with differing copyright laws who have access to billions of Web pages. 
Before you go on…
 1. List and explain some ethical issues in EC.
 2. Discuss the major legal issues associated with EC.
 3. Describe buyer protection and seller protection in EC. 
Apply the Concept 9.4 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 9.4 Discuss the ethical and 
legal issues related to electronic commerce, along with examples. 
STEP 1: Background 
Amazon.com is the world’s largest online retailer. In fact, it is one 
of a kind in many ways. It competes with Apple, Google, Microsoft , 
and Walmart, some of the biggest names in the tech and retail 
universe (online and in-store). 
However, there is a huge controversy surrounding Amazon. 
Specifically, the retailer does not collect sales tax in all states. No 
big deal, right? Not exactly. A quick Web search for “Amazon Sales 
Tax” will quickly bring you up to speed on this issue. Of course, 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Amazon considers their tax-free status to be their competitive 
advantage. Not surprisingly, the retailer has used its considerable 
power to discourage state governments from revising their tax 
policies to alter this status. 
From the opposite perspective, if you purchase something 
online and do not pay sales tax, you are supposed to include this 
purchase on your income tax statement and pay the taxes at that 
time. But, do you? Do you think anybody does? 
STEP 2: Activity 
Search the Web to find out if Amazon collects sales tax in your 
state. If it doesn’t, then it is likely that the issue has been raised. 
Ethical and Legal Issues in E-Business 267 
Imagine that Amazon has fulfillment centers in your state, meaning 
it operates in your state and therefore should collect sales tax. How 
would you feel if the retailer charges you tax but doesn’t charge 
consumers in other states? Next, suppose a business in your state 
uses Amazon’s fulfillment services and does not collect sales tax. 
Should Amazon’s partnership with that company require it to 
collect tax on every purchase in your state? 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Take a little time to consider this controversy. Then, create a list of 
arguments for and against requiring Amazon.com to collect sales 
tax in all states. Make certain your argument identifies both the 
ethical and legal aspects of this issue. 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For the Accounting Major 
Accounting personnel are involved in several EC activities. Design­
ing the ordering system and its relationship with inventory manage­
ment requires accounting attention. Billing and payments are also 
accounting activities, as are determining cost and profit allocation. 
Replacing paper documents with electronic means will aff ect many 
of the accountant’s tasks, especially the auditing of EC activities and 
systems. Finally, building a cost-benefit and cost-justification system 
to determine which products/services to take online and creating a 
chargeback system are critical to the success of EC. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
The worlds of banking, securities and commodities markets, and 
other financial services are being reengineered because of EC. On­
line securities trading and its supporting infrastructure are growing 
more rapidly than any other EC activity. Many innovations already in 
place are changing the rules of economic and financial incentives for 
financial analysts and managers. Online banking, for example, does 
not recognize state boundaries, and it may create a new framework 
for financing global trades. Public financial information is now ac­
cessible in seconds. These innovations will dramatically change the 
manner in which finance personnel operate. 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major 
A major revolution in marketing and sales is taking place because of 
EC. Perhaps its most obvious feature is the transition from a physical 
to a virtual marketplace. Equally important, however, is the radical 
transformation to one-on-one advertising and sales and to custom­
ized and interactive marketing. Marketing channels are being com­
bined, eliminated, or recreated. The EC revolution is creating new 
products and markets and significantly altering existing ones. Digi­
tization of products and services also has implications for marketing 
and sales. The direct producer-to-consumer channel is expanding 
rapidly and is fundamentally changing the nature of customer ser­
vice. As the battle for customers intensifies, marketing and sales 
personnel are becoming the most critical success factor in many 
organizations. Online marketing can be a blessing to one company 
and a curse to another. 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
EC is changing the manufacturing system from product-push mass 
production to order-pull mass customization. This change requires a 
robust supply chain, information support, and reengineering of pro­
cesses that involve suppliers and other business partners. Suppliers 
can use extranets to monitor and replenish inventories without the 
need for constant reorders. In addition, the Internet and intranets 
help reduce cycle times. Many production/operations problems that 
have persisted for years, such as complex scheduling and excess in­
ventories, are being solved rapidly with the use of Web technologies. 
Companies can now use external and internal networks to find and 
manage manufacturing operations in other countries much more 
easily. Also, the Web is reengineering procurement by helping com­
panies conduct electronic bids for parts and subassemblies, thus 
reducing cost. All in all, the job of the progressive production/opera­
tions manager is closely tied in with e-commerce. 
HRM For the Human Resource Management Major 
HR majors need to understand the new labor markets and the im­
pacts of EC on old labor markets. Also, the HR department may use 
EC tools for such functions as procuring office supplies. Moreover, 
becoming knowledgeable about new government online initiatives 
and online training is critical. In addition, HR personnel must be fa­
miliar with the major legal issues related to EC and employment. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
The MIS function is responsible for providing the information tech­
nology infrastructure necessary for electronic commerce to function. 
In particular, this infrastructure includes the company’s networks, 
intranets, and extranets. The MIS function is also responsible for en­
suring that electronic commerce transactions are secure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
268 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce 
Summary  
1.  Describe the six common types of electronic commerce.
 In business-to-consumer (B2C) electronic commerce, the sellers are organi­
zations and the buyers are individuals.  
In business-to-business (B2B) electronic commerce, the sellers and the buy­
ers are businesses.  
In consumer-to-consumer (C2C) electronic commerce, an individual sells  
products or services to other individuals.  
In business-to-employee (B2E) electronic commerce, an organization uses  
EC internally to provide information and services to its employees.  
E-government is the use of Internet technology in general and e-commerce  
in particular to deliver information and public services to citizens (called  
government-to-citizen or G2C EC) and business partners and suppliers  
(called government-to-business or G2B EC).  
Mobile commerce refers to e-commerce that is conducted entirely in a wire­
less environment.  
We leave the examples of each type to you.  
2.  Describe the various online services of business-to-consumer (B2C) 
commerce, along with specific examples of each. 
Electronic banking, also known as cyberbanking, involves conducting var­
ious banking activities from home, at a place of business, or on the road  
instead of at a physical bank location.  
Online securities trading involves buying and selling securities over the  
Web.  
Online job matching over the Web off ers a promising environment for job  
seekers and for companies searching for hard-to-find employees. Thou­
sands of companies and government agencies advertise available posi­
tions, accept resumes, and take applications via the Internet.  
Online travel services allow you to purchase airline tickets, reserve hotel  
rooms, and rent cars. Most sites also offer a fare-tracker feature that sends  
you e-mail messages about low-cost flights. The Internet is an ideal place  
to plan, explore, and arrange almost any trip economically.  
Online advertising over the Web makes the advertising process media-rich,  
dynamic, and interactive.  
We leave the examples to you.  
3.  Describe the three business models for business-to-business 
electronic commerce. 
In the sell-side marketplace model, organizations attempt to sell their prod­
ucts or services to other organizations electronically from their own private 
e-marketplace Web site and/or from a third-party Web site. Sellers such as 
Dell Computer (www.dellauction.com) use sell-side auctions extensively. 
In addition to auctions from their own Web sites, organizations can use 
third-party auction sites, such as eBay, to liquidate items. 
The buy-side marketplace is a model in which organizations attempt to buy 
needed products or services from other organizations electronically. 
E-marketplaces, in which there are many sellers and many buyers, are 
called public exchanges, or just exchanges. Public exchanges are open to 
all business organizations. They are frequently owned and operated by a 
third party. There are three basic types of public exchanges: vertical, hori­
zontal, and functional. Vertical exchanges connect buyers and sellers in 
a given industry. Horizontal exchanges connect buyers and sellers across 
many industries. In functional exchanges, needed services such as tempo­
rary help or extra office space are traded on an “as-needed” basis. 
4.  Discuss the ethical and legal issues related to electronic commerce, 
along with examples. 
E-business presents some threats to privacy. First, most electronic payment 
systems know who the buyers are. It may be necessary, then, to protect the 
buyers’ identities with encryption. Another major privacy issue is tracking, 
where individuals’ activities on the Internet can be tracked by cookies. 
The use of EC may eliminate the need for some of a company’s employees, 
as well as brokers and agents. The manner in which these unneeded work­
ers, especially employees, are treated can raise ethical issues: How should 
the company handle the layoffs? Should companies be required to retrain 
employees for new positions? If not, how should the company compensate 
or otherwise assist the displaced workers? 
We leave the examples to you. 
Chapter Glossary 
auction A competitive process in which either a seller solicits 
consecutive bids from buyers or a buyer solicits bids from sellers, 
and prices are determined dynamically by competitive bidding. 
banner Electronic billboards, which typically contain a short text or 
graphical message to promote a product or a vendor. 
brick-and-mortar organizations Organizations in which the product, 
the process, and the delivery agent are all physical. 
business model The method by which a company generates revenue 
to sustain itself. 
business-to-business electronic commerce (B2B) Electronic 
commerce in which both the sellers and the buyers are business 
organizations. 
business-to-consumer electronic commerce (B2C) Electronic 
commerce in which the sellers are organizations and the buyers are 
individuals; also known as e-tailing. 
business-to-employee electronic commerce (B2E) An organization 
using electronic commerce internally to provide information and 
services to its employees. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discussion Questions 269 
buy-side marketplace B2B model in which organizations buy needed 
products or services from other organizations electronically, oft en 
through a reverse auction. 
channel confl ict The alienation of existing distributors when a 
company decides to sell to customers directly online. 
clicks-and-mortar organizations Organizations that do business in 
both the physical and digital dimensions. 
consumer-to-consumer electronic commerce (C2C) Electronic 
commerce in which both the buyer and the seller are individuals (not 
businesses). 
cyberbanking Various banking activities conducted electronically 
from home, a business, or on the road instead of at a physical bank 
location; also known as electronic banking. 
cybersquatting Registering domain names in the hope of selling them 
later at a higher price. 
disintermediation Elimination of intermediaries in electronic 
commerce. 
e-government The use of electronic commerce to deliver information 
and public services to citizens, business partners, and suppliers of 
government entities, and those working in the public sector. 
electronic business (e-business) A broader definition of electronic 
commerce, including buying and selling of goods and services, 
and servicing customers, collaborating with business partners, 
conducting e-learning, and conducting electronic transactions 
within an organization. 
electronic commerce (EC or e-commerce) The process of 
buying, selling, transferring, or exchanging products, services, or 
information via computer networks, including the Internet. 
electronic mall A collection of individual shops under one Internet 
address; also known as a cybermall or an e-mall. 
electronic marketplace A virtual market space on the Web where 
many buyers and many sellers conduct electronic business activities. 
electronic payment mechanisms Computer-based systems that 
allow customers to pay for goods and services electronically, rather 
than writing a check or using cash. 
electronic retailing (e-tailing) The direct sale of products and 
services through storefronts or electronic malls, usually designed 
around an electronic catalog format and/or auctions. 
electronic storefront The Web site of a single company, with its own 
Internet address, at which orders can be placed. 
Discussion Questions 
 1.  Discuss the major limitations of e-commerce. Which of these limita­
tions are likely to disappear? Why?
 2.  Discuss the reasons for having multiple EC business models.
 3.  Distinguish between business-to-business forward auctions and 
buyers’ bids for RFQs.
 4.  Discuss the benefits to sellers and buyers of a B2B exchange.
 5.  What are the major benefits of G2C electronic commerce?
 6.  Discuss the various ways to pay online in B2C. Which method(s) would 
you prefer and why?
 7.  Why is order fulfillment in B2C considered diff icult?
e-procurement Purchasing by using electronic support. 
exchanges (see public exchanges) 
forward auctions Auctions that sellers use as a selling channel to 
many potential buyers; the highest bidder wins the items. 
group purchasing The aggregation of purchasing orders from many 
buyers so that a volume discount can be obtained. 
mobile commerce (m-commerce) Electronic commerce conducted 
in a wireless environment. 
multichanneling A process in which a company integrates its online 
and off line channels. 
permission marketing Method of marketing that asks consumers to give 
their permission to voluntarily accept online advertising and e-mail. 
person-to-person payments A form of electronic cash that enables 
the transfer of funds between two individuals, or between an 
individual and a business, without the use of a credit card. 
pop-under ad An advertisement that is automatically launched by 
some trigger and appears underneath the active window. 
pop-up ad An advertisement that is automatically launched by some 
trigger and appears in front of the active window. 
public exchanges (or exchanges) Electronic marketplaces in which 
there are many sellers and many buyers, and entry is open to all; 
frequently owned and operated by a third party. 
reverse auctions Auctions in which one buyer, usually an organization, 
seeks to buy a product or a service, and suppliers submit bids; the 
lowest bidder wins. 
sell-side marketplace B2B model in which organizations sell to other 
organizations from their own private e-marketplace and/or from a 
third-party site. 
smart cards Cards that contain a microprocessor (chip) that enables 
the card to store a considerable amount of information (including 
stored funds) and to conduct processing. 
spamming Indiscriminate distribution of e-mail without the receiver’s 
permission. 
stored-value money cards A form of electronic cash on which a fixed 
amount of prepaid money is stored; the amount is reduced each time 
the card is used. 
viral marketing Online word-of-mouth marketing. 
virtual (or pure play) organizations Organizations in which the 
product, the process, and the delivery agent are all digital.
 8.  Discuss the reasons for EC failures.
 9.  Should Mr. Coffee sell coff eemakers online? Hint: Take a look at the 
discussion of channel conflict in this chapter. 
10.  In some cases, individuals engage in cybersquatting so that they 
can sell the domain names to companies expensively. In other 
cases, companies engage in cybersquatting by registering domain 
names that are very similar to their competitors’ domain names in 
order to generate traffic from people who misspell Web address­
es. Discuss each practice in terms of its ethical nature and legali­
ty. Is there a difference between the two practices? Support your
 answer. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
270 
CHAPTER 9 E-Business and E-Commerce
11. Do you think information technology has made it easier to do busi­
ness? Or has it only raised the bar on what is required to be able to 
do business in the 21st century? Support your answer with specific 
examples. 
12. With the rise of electronic commerce, what do you think will happen 
to those without computer skills, Internet access, computers, smart-
phones, and so on? Will they be able to survive and advance by hard 
work? 
Problem-Solving Activities  
 1.  Assume you are interested in buying a car. You can find information 
about cars at numerous Web sites. Access five Web sites for informa­
tion about new and used cars, financing, and insurance. Decide which 
car you want to buy. Configure your car by going to the car manu­
facturer’s Web site. Finally, try to find the car from www.autobytel 
.com. What information is most supportive of your decision-making 
process? Write a report about your experience.
 2.  Compare the various electronic payment methods. Specifically, col­
lect information from the vendors cited in this chapter and find ad­
ditional vendors using Google.com. Pay attention to security level, 
speed, cost, and convenience.
 3.  Conduct a study on selling diamonds and gems online. Access such 
sites as www.bluenile.com, www.diamond.com, www.thaigem.com, 
www.tiffany.com, and www.jewelryexchange.com. 
a.  What features do these sites use to educate buyers about 
gemstones? 
b.  How do these sites attract buyers? 
c.  How do these sites increase customers’ trust in online purchasing? 
d.  What customer service features do these sites provide?
 4.  Access www.nacha.org. What is NACHA? What is its role? What is the 
ACH? Who are the key participants in an ACH e-payment? Describe the 
“pilot” projects currently underway at ACH.
 5.  Access www.espn.com. Identify at least five different ways the site 
generates revenue.
 6.  Access www.queendom.com. Examine its offerings and try some of 
them. What type of electronic commerce is this? How does this Web 
site generate revenue?
 7.  Access www.ediets.com. Prepare a list of all the services the company 
provides. Identify its revenue model.
 8.  Access www.theknot.com. Identify the site’s revenue sources.
 9.  Access www.mint.com. Identify the site’s revenue model. What are 
the risks of giving this Web site your credit and debit card numbers, as 
well as your bank account number? 
10.  Research the case of www.nissan.com. Is Uzi Nissan cybersquatting? 
Why or why not? Support your answer. How is Nissan (the car company) 
reacting to the www.nissan.com Web site? 
11.  Enter www.alibaba.com. Identify the site’s capabilities. Look at the 
site’s private trading room. Write a report. How can such a site help a 
person who is making a purchase? 
12.  Enter www.grubhub.com. Explore the site. Why is the site so success­
ful? Could you start a competing site? Why or why not? 
13.  Enter www.dell.com, go to “Desktops,” and configure a system. Reg­
ister to “My Cart” (no obligation). What calculators are used there? 
What are the advantages of this process as compared with buying a 
computer in a physical store? What are the disadvantages? 
14.  Enter www.checkfree.com and www.lmlpayment.com to identify 
their services. Prepare a report. 
15.  Access various travel sites such as www.travelocity.com, www.orbitz 
.com, www.expedia.com, www.kayak.com, and www.pinpoint.com. 
Compare these Web sites for ease of use and usefulness. Note diff er­
ences among the sites. If you ask each site for the itinerary, which one 
gives you the best information and the best deals? 
16.  Access www.outofservice.com, and answer the musical taste and per­
sonality survey. When you have finished, click on “Results” and see 
what your musical tastes say about your personality. How accurate 
are the findings about you? 
17.  Tips for safe electronic shopping: 
•  Look for reliable brand names at sites such as Walmart Online, 
Disney Online, and Amazon. Before purchasing, make sure that 
the site is authentic by entering the site directly and not from an 
unverified link. 
•  Search any unfamiliar selling site for the company’s address and 
phone and fax numbers. Call up and quiz the employees about 
the seller. 
•  Check out the vendor with the local Chamber of Commerce or 
Better Business Bureau (www.bbbonline.org). Look for seals of 
authenticity such as TRUSTe. 
•  Investigate how secure the seller’s site is by examining the securi­
ty procedures and by reading the posted privacy policy. 
•  Examine the money-back guarantees, warranties, and service 
agreements. 
•  Compare prices with those in regular stores. Too low prices are 
too good to be true and some catch is probably involved. 
•  Ask friends what they know. Find testimonials and endorsements 
on community Web sites and well-known bulletin boards. 
•  Find out what your rights are in case of a dispute. Consult con­
sumer protection agencies and the National Consumer League’s 
Fraud Center (www.fraud.org). 
•  Check Consumerworld (www.consumerworld.org) for a collection 
of useful resources. 
•  For many types of products, www.resellerratings.com is a useful 
resource. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 1 271 
Closing Case 1 
MKT 
The Alibaba Group 
The Problem 
Chinese consumers traditionally have shopped at stores close to their 
homes, with merchants they knew, and they paid in cash. This process 
limited their selection of goods and services. If they wanted to find a 
wider selection, then they had to travel to China’s larger cities. 
As China’s citizens have become increasingly aff luent, their demand 
for a greater variety of goods and services has increased accordingly. 
However, Chinese citizens still had to travel to larger cities to satisfy their 
needs. Given China’s huge population, there was a massive, untouched 
market for goods and services. The problem was how to provide Chinese 
shoppers with variety and convenience. Enter Jack Ma. 
The Solution 
In 1998, Ma and 17 colleagues started the Alibaba Group (http:// 
alibabagroup.com), an e-commerce company that provides consumer­
to-consumer, business-to-consumer, and business-to-business  services 
via Web portals. The company links its Web portals via its third-party 
payment platform, Alipay. 
Consumer-to-Consumer. Taobao (www.taobao.com) opened in 2003 
as Alibaba’s response to eBay. Taobao’s rapid growth was the conse­
quence of offering free registration and commission-free transactions 
using a free third-party payment platform. By adopting this strategy, 
Taobao undercut eBay’s standard 15 percent fees. The startup collected 
money only when sellers chose to advertise their products with banner 
ads and search ads and when they used Alibaba’s payment tools. These 
strategies succeeded, and Taobao became Alibaba’s largest business. 
Taobao offers a vast selection of products, ranging from clothes, 
furniture, and packaged foods to bamboo birdcages and rental “boy­
friends” to accompany you to a social event. Although most trans­
actions on Taobao connect buyers and sellers within China, the site 
reaches international customers as well. 
Business-to-Consumer. Alibaba opened Tmall (www.tmall.com), a vir­
tual shopping center, in 2008. Tmall provides international companies 
with access to Chinese buyers, in exchange for 5 percent of all sales. 
For example, the online shoe retailer Sneakerhead.com spent 13 years 
trying to increase its annual revenue beyond $20 million. In 2014, the 
company accomplished its goal when it doubled its revenues by open­
ing a store on Tmall. This process enabled Sneakerhead to avoid having 
to use the conventional brokers who were traditionally required to im­
port goods into China. In another example, Premium Australia Foods, a 
startup company headquartered in Melbourne, sells delicacies such as 
macadamia nuts, olive oil, honey, and raisins to Chinese shoppers us­
ing Tmall, without establishing physical operations in mainland China. 
In both cases, Alibaba disintermediated the retail process, enabling 
Sneakerhead and Premium Australia Foods to retain a larger portion 
of their sales revenues. Combined daily sales on Tmall and Taobao can 
total more than $7.5 billion. 
Business-to-Business. Alibaba.com (www.alibaba.com), the company’s 
original marketplace, connects Chinese manufacturers with small busi­
nesses around the world. The portal manages sales between importers 
and exporters from more than 240 countries and regions. Alibaba.com 
developed the Chinese portal 1688.com for domestic B2B commerce. 
As one example, the cosmetics retailer 100% Pure uses Alibaba. 
com to source key ingredients and packaging materials from whole­
salers that list their products on the site. Before Alibaba, Pure manag­
ers would have to travel to China and Taiwan several times per year 
to meet with suppliers and negotiate contracts. With Alibaba, if one 
supplier is not reliable, then Pure managers can pick another supplier 
and shop competitively for prices. 
Alibaba.com also provides a retail Web site, AliExpress.com, that 
consists primarily of small Chinese businesses that offer products to 
international online buyers. AliExpress has become the most visited 
e-commerce Web site in Russia. 
Alipay. Alibaba’s various Web sites are linked via Alipay 
FIN 
(http://global.alipay.com), an online third-party payment 
processor that does not charge transaction fees. Alipay serves as an es­
crow service, and it guarantees every transaction. Alipay creates trust 
in a country where people historically have not conducted business 
with someone they did not know personally. 
Alibaba has placed links to its Alipay service on the Web sites of 
large retailers that work with ShopRunner (www.shoprunner.com), a 
logistics company in which Alibaba owns a 40 percent stake. ShopRun­
ner has formed ties with thousands of Western retail brands such as 
Neiman Marcus, Tommy Hilfiger, and Toys “R” Us to enable two-day 
shipping for an annual fee, a service that resembles Amazon Prime. 
The Alibaba links, visible only to Chinese shoppers, will allow these 
shoppers to receive expedited shipments from U.S. retailers. 
The Results 
Analysts envision Alibaba’s future as one in which consumers every­
where can make purchases from retailers everywhere. Alibaba does 
have advantages as a global enterprise over Amazon and eBay because 
it facilitates such a large volume of sales into and out of China. 
Alibaba does face international challenges, however. Most West­
ern shoppers are not familiar with Alibaba’s brand, where they already 
have relationships with retail Web sites in their home countries. 
Alibaba also faces intense competition from Chinese companies. 
For example, while Tmall controls approximately 50 percent of Chinese 
e-commerce, JD (http://en.jd.com) has 17 percent, according to iRe­
search (www.iresearchchina.com). Further, whereas Alibaba’s e-com­
merce is performed primarily on desktops, JD may have an advantage 
in mobile commerce in a country that now has more than 500 million 
mobile phone users. JD stocks its own goods, and it employs a highly 
sophisticated delivery system. This arrangement is in contrast to Alib­
aba, which facilitates direct sales by other enterprises and then con­
tracts out the delivery. 
Tencent (www.tencent.com), another large Chinese e-commerce 
company, provides the popular communications platform called 
WeChat as well as a competing online-payments platform called Ten-
pay that is popular on smartphones. In 2014, Tencent purchased a 15 
percent stake in JD, and the two companies formed a strategic part­
nership. They will provide a formidable competitive challenge to Alib­
aba in electronic commerce. 
Despite the competition, by mid-2015 approximately 80 percent 
of all Chinese online shopping sales were flowing through Alibaba’s 
various Web portals. In 2014, the company facilitated the delivery of 
5 billion packages from transactions on its retail Web sites. More than 

272 
CHAPTER 9  E-Business and E-Commerce
half of that total was sent by delivery companies in China, accord-
ing to Alibaba’s registration documents with the U.S. Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC). By comparison, UPS (www.ups.com) sent 
about 4.3 billion packages and documents that same year. 
Alibaba’s overall strategic direction appears to be expansion in 
the West, because U.S. consumers spend more money online than 
anyone else in the world. Ma has invested in many U.S. companies, 
including the ride-sharing service Lyft  (www.lyft .com); Kabam, a maker 
of online strategy games (www.kabam.com); mobile search engine 
Quixey.com (www.quixey.com); and mobile messaging app Tango 
(www.tango.me). 
In 2014, Alibaba’s initial public off ering in the United States raised 
$25 billion, making it the largest IPO on record in the world. Further, 
Alibaba’s financial reports for its fiscal year ending in March 2016 
revealed that the company’s revenue was approximately $15.7 billion.
Sources: Compiled from K. Chu and G. Wong, “Alibaba Feels Heat from 
New Rivals,” The Wall Street Journal, August 17, 2015; M. Reeves, M. Zeng, 
and A. Venjara, “The Self-Tuning Enterprise,” Harvard Business Review, 
June, 2015; “Alibaba Group Announces March Quarter 2015 and Full Fiscal 
Year 2015 Results,” Business Wire, May 7, 2015; C. Larson, “Alipay Leads a 
Digital Finance Revolution in China,” MIT Technology Review, January 26, 
2015; R. Mac, “Bezos vs. Ma, Holiday Edition,” Forbes, December 15, 2014; 
L. Chen, R. Mac, and B. Solomon, “Alibaba Claims Title for Largest Global 
IPO Ever with Extra Share Sales,” Forbes, September 22, 2014; C. Larson, 
“In China, It’s Meet Me at Tmall,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, September 
15-21, 2014; B. Stone, “The Alibaba Invasion,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, 
August 11-24, 2014; “Alibaba Continues Quest to Own the Chinese 
Internet,” CNN Money, June 11, 2014; R. Mac, “Alibaba Launches 11 Main 
to Grow U.S. Presence Before Its Record American IPO,” Forbes, June 
11, 2014; D. Talbot, “Alibaba’s Big Rivals May Have a Mobile Edge,” MIT 
Technology Review, May 12, 2014; A. Lee, “How Did Alibaba Capture 80% 
of Chinese E-Commerce?” Forbes, May 8, 2014; www.alibabagroup.com, 
accessed August 20, 2015.
Questions
1. Discuss the reasons why Chinese consumers have been so eager to 
embrace electronic commerce.
2. Discuss Alibaba’s entry into the business-to-consumer, consumer 
-to-consumer, and business-to-business e-commerce marketplaces.
3. Why is Alipay so important to the Alibaba Group?
Personalized Pricing (also known as Dynamic Pricing)
The Problem
Today, consumers are accustomed to standardized pricing, which 
means that when a product is sold via multiple channels, the cost 
should not vary by more than the diff erence in shipping, taxation, 
and distribution costs. If the price is higher for a product at a certain 
retailer, then customers can easily use the Internet to compare prices 
and features among a huge number of retailers to purchase that prod-
uct from another retailer.
In theory, charging all consumers the same price is ineff ective for 
merchants, because some customers would have been willing to pay 
more, and others who opted not to buy would have bought at a lower 
price. Economic theory states that personalized pricing—also called 
dynamic pricing—can save companies this lost revenue.
Personalized pricing is the practice of pricing items at a point 
determined by a particular customer’s perceived ability to pay. This 
practice has been in existence as long as commerce itself. Consider 
shopkeepers in the past, who were experts on evaluating prospec-
tive customers based on a wide variety of signals—how they spoke, 
how they dressed, how they acted (e.g., did they look the shopkeeper 
straight in the eyes), how courteous they were, how much of a hurry 
they were in, and many other variables. In that way, the shopkeeper 
could quickly decide on a price for that customer at that time. 
The optimal outcome of personalized pricing for the merchant 
is maximizing the price that each customer will pay. This situation is 
diff icult to achieve because the means of determining the maximum 
amount a customer will pay has not yet been developed. Or has it?
The Solution (for the Merchant)
Some online retailers (e-tailers) are attempting to return to the strat-
egies of yesterday’s shopkeeper. They are analyzing the data (see 
Chapter 3) that all consumers generate with online activities and trans-
actions to set diff erent prices for diff erent customers. 
E-tailers can now virtually assess each customer who visits their 
Web site. Specifically, when a customer accesses an e-tailer’s site, the 
merchant may know where the customer is located based on his or her 
Internet Protocol address. Merchants also may know the customer’s 
ZIP code. In that case they can determine the customer’s socioeco-
nomic status based on data from the most recent federal census.
When merchants combine these data with cookies (see Chapter 7), 
they can learn a significant amount about individual customers, 
including some of the Web sites the customers have visited, how regu-
larly they have visited them, how long they stayed on those sites, and 
which products they inspected and purchased. Further, cookies store 
information that customers volunteer in online forms – for example, 
shipping addresses and other profile data. Based on these data, mer-
chants can predict the products a customer is interested in purchasing, 
when he or she is likely to purchase them, and, critically, the price he or 
she would be willing to pay. By analyzing customer data, a merchant 
can estimate customers’ reservation price—the maximum amount 
they would be willing to pay for a specific product, before they had 
“reservations” about buying it—and then charge them that amount. 
Currently, many retailers use these data to target individual shop-
pers with personalized off ers and promotions. The analyses that ena-
ble retailers to send customized off ers to customers also enable them 
to determine personalized pricing. In addition, with e-commerce, 
merchants can easily adjust prices for diff erent customers simply by 
changing them in the system in real time. They therefore avoid the has-
sle of physically changing the prices on thousands of products. 
Let’s review some prominent examples of personalized pricing.
• According to The Wall Street Journal, Orbitz (www.orbitz.com) 
used its knowledge of its customers’ demographics to charge 
Closing Case 2
MKT
FIN

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 2 273 
certain customers more for hotels. Orbitz discovered that users 
who browsed on Apple Mac computers were willing to pay up to 
30 percent more for a hotel than Windows users. 
•  Delta Airlines (www.delta.com) uses personalized pricing to 
charge frequent flyers more than they charge infrequent trave­
lers. The reason was that people who travel often are probably 
doing so out of necessity, most likely for business purposes. They 
therefore are willing (however begrudgingly) to pay more to get 
where they need to be. 
• Safeway, the grocery chain, sends offers to select customers who 
have exhibited certain purchasing patterns. For example, one 
woman received an offer for discounted eggs because the data 
revealed that her household purchased quantities of high-pro­
tein items. With personalized pricing, Safeway can aff ord to sell 
the eggs to this customer at a lower price because the store will 
charge less health-conscious customers more for the same prod­
uct. 
•  In 2000, Amazon (www.amazon.com) was found to be charging 
its regular customers higher prices for some products, aft er one 
shopper deleted the cookies on his computer that identified him 
as a regular Amazon customer and noted that the price of a DVD 
dropped. Amazon, which attributed the diff erences in price to a 
random price test, refunded customers who had paid higher pric­
es. In addition, Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos asserted the company 
“never will test prices based on customer demographics.” 
•  Staples (www.staples.com) shows customers diff erent prices 
based on “a range of characteristics that could be discovered 
about the user.” For instance, one customer saw a lower price for 
a computer on the company’s Web site than another customer 
who lived a few miles further from the store. Staples’ reasoning 
was that if someone is already close to the store, then he or she 
may be enticed to make a quick drive to purchase the “discount­
ed” item. 
•  The National Football League (NFL; www.nfl.com) is allowing 
teams to use personalized pricing for tickets. The Seattle Sea-
hawks (www.seahawks.com) became the first team to employ 
the practice. The team worked out a deal with ticket brokers to 
“redistribute” 4,000 season tickets. Half of the tickets were sold as 
individual tickets to fans on the Blue Pride wait list. The remain­
ing tickets are subject to personalized pricing – the higher the 
demand at the moment of purchase, the higher the ticket price. 
• Lift opia (www.liftopia.com) uses personalized pricing in the ski 
business. In the past, a day on the slopes cost the same regard­
less of when it was purchased. Liftopia works with ski resorts to 
crunch data on historical and real-time supply and demand to 
vary pricing. Customers who buy tickets early receive discounts. 
Liftopia raises prices as the ticket’s date approaches. The compa­
ny’s pricing appeals to skiers who might not visit a resort based 
on the rising cost of lift tickets. At Mammoth Mountain Ski Area in 
California, for example, Liftopia’s personalized pricing contributed 
to a 15 percent increase in advance lift ticket sales during the 
2014-2015 ski season. 
Companies such as Wiser (www.wiser.com), Dunnhumby (www 
.dunnhumby.com), and Blue Yonder (www.blue-yonder.com) off er soft ­
ware and data solutions to retailers that employ personalized pricing, 
where prices change over time in response to variables such as inven­
tory, demand, and/or the prices offered by competitors. Blue Yonder 
claims it can optimize prices not only according to the region but also 
to the channel in which the customer is interacting with the retailer. 
The Results 
Most companies remain hesitant to utilize personalized pricing 
because it remains to be seen whether consumers will accept the prac­
tice. Typically, when consumers hear about the practice, they react 
negatively, and companies employing the practice experience cus­
tomer dissatisfaction. It is not easy for consumers to detect when they 
are being targeted with personalized prices. 
For luxury brands in particular, personalized pricing could be 
damaging because it raises questions concerning the intrinsic value of 
their products. For example, brands such as Louis Vuitton do not dis­
count their products so as not to undermine the consumer perception 
of their value. Consumers of luxury goods frequently associate higher 
prices with higher quality, and vice versa. 
Sources: Compiled from S. Soper and L. Rupp, “Stores Try Fixed Prices 
That Aren’t So Fixed,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, July 27 – August 2, 2015; 
A. Leviton, “Delta Causes More Headaches with Skymiles Changes,” USA 
Today, July 16, 2015; N. Payton, “Why Do Dynamic Pricing Programs 
Flop?” OPower, July 2, 2015; D. Horne, “Seahawks Announce ‘Dynamic 
Pricing’ Ticket Policy,” KIRO TV, June 29, 2015; S. Lipsey, “How Airlines 
Might Gouge You in the Future: Personalized Pricing,” Yahoo! News, 
June 16, 2015; R. Thomaselli, “Democrats Take On Airline ‘Personalized 
Pricing’,” Travel Pulse, April 28, 2015; G. Petro, “Dynamic Pricing: Which 
Customers Are Worth the Most? Amazon, Delta Airlines, and Staples 
Weigh In,” Forbes, April 17, 2015; A. Valentine, “How Dynamic Pricing 
Is Disrupting Online Retail in 2015,” Ecommerce, April 10, 2015; E. 
Deprez, “Skiing Gets Online, and Lift Tickets Get Cheaper,” Bloomberg 
BusinessWeek, March 9-15, 2015; K. Abnett, “Will Personalized Pricing 
Take E-Commerce Back to the Bazaar?” The Business of Fashion, March 20, 
2015; B. Snyder, “Report Analyzes Amazon’s Dynamic Pricing Strategy,” 
CIO, January 16, 2015; A. Farnham, “Prices Now Pegged to Your Buying 
History at Some Markets,” ABC News, December 2, 2013; D. Mattioli, “On 
Orbitz, Mac Users Steered to Pricier Hotels,” The Wall Street Journal, 
August 23, 2012. 
Questions 
1.  How would you feel if you knew that you were being subjected to 
personalized pricing? 
2.  Describe the advantages of personalized pricing for merchants. 
3.  Does personalized pricing provide any advantages for customers? 
Provide examples to support your answer. 
4.  Discuss the contributions of information technology to the practices 
of personalized pricing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 10 
Floresco Productions/Getty Images, Inc. 
Wireless, Mobile Computing, and 
Mobile Commerce 
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
10.1  Wireless Technologies 
10.2  Wireless Computer Networks and 
Internet Access 
10.3  Mobile Computing and Mobile 
Commerce 
10.4  The Internet of Things 
Opening Case  
MIS 
Google’s Project Fi 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
10.1  Identify advantages and disadvantages of each of the four main types of wireless 
transmission media. 
10.2  Explain how businesses can use short-range, medium-range, and long-range 
wireless networks. 
10.3  Provide a specific example of how each of the five major m-commerce applications 
can benefit a business. 
10.4  Describe the Internet of Things, along with examples of how organizations can utilize 
the Internet of Things. 
In April 2015, Google announced its new wireless service, Project Fi 
(http://fi.google.com), a prepaid phone service that provides users 
with mobile data service on two mobile networks, Sprint (www.sprint 
.com) and T-Mobile (www.tmobile.com), as well as on Wi-Fi networks. 
Project Fi automatically and seamlessly routes customers’ data 
between available Wi-Fi networks and the 4G LTE networks of Sprint 
and T-Mobile, depending on which network provides the strongest sig­
nal in the user’s location. Project Fi utilizes approximately one million 
free, open Wi-Fi hotspots that Google has verified as fast and reliable. 
In an effort to protect passwords and personal data, Project Fi encrypts 
data when a customer uses public Wi-Fi. 
Project Fi provides many features. Customers can call, text, and 
check voicemail on their Web and Android devices, using Google Hang­
outs. They can also access the history of calls, messages, and voice-
mail. Project Fi is a prepaid service that allows customers to pay only 
for the amount of data they actually use each month. This process is 
274 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 275 
the opposite of traditional carriers, which bill customers aft er they use 
.republicwireless.com) and Scratch Wireless (www.scratchwireless 
the service. In addition, Project Fi does not require an annual contract. 
.com) offer usage-based models. Further, major carriers such as 
Rather, the service charges $20 per month for unlimited calls, texts, 
T-Mobile and AT&T (www.att.com) allow subscribers to roll over data. 
Wi-Fi tethering, and coverage in 120 countries (although customers 
Google’s pricing strategy for its Project Fi service could also 
have to pay 20 cents per minute for calls outside the United States). In 
put pressure on the industry’s prevailing pricing model, which is to 
addition, it charges $10 per gigabyte of data. 
purchase expensive wireless spectrum and then sell expensive wire-
Customers have access to a dashboard where they can change 
less Internet service. (All wireless communications signals travel 
the size of their data plans whenever they want. Further, once a month, 
over the air via radio frequencies, which are known as spectrum.) In 
customers can decide to put their service on pause. They then lose the 
fact, Google’s entry into the wireless market has the potential to dis­
ability to forward calls with their Google Voice numbers, and they can-
rupt the wireless industry in much the same way that Google Fiber 
not access mobile data, make calls, or send text messages. However, 
(http://fiber.google.com) transformed the cable and broadband 
they receive a credit to their accounts for each day that they keep the 
industries. 
service deactivated. They also receive a credit for the cost of the data 
they purchased but did not use over the course of the month. 
Sources: Compiled from D. Orf, “My Time with Google’s Cellular Service 
As of September 2015, Project Fi operated only on Google’s Nexus 
Was Mostly a Disaster,” Gizmodo, August 21, 2015; D. Bohn, “Google’s 
6 smartphones. Customers can set up their phones as a mobile Wi-Fi 
Project Fi Cell Phone Service Is Simple, Until It’s Not,” The Verge, August 
8, 2015; A. Pressman, “Google’s Project Fi a New Option for Cheap Phone 
router and allow their laptops or tablets to surf the Internet on their 
Plans,” Yahoo! Finance, August 5, 2015; A. Martonik, “What Is Project Fi, 
phone’s data connection, at no extra charge. This process is called 
How Does It Work, and Why Do I Want It?” Android Central, July 9, 2015;
wireless tethering. Once customers have activated tethering, any 
B. Fung, “Project Fi Review: The Most Remarkable Feature of Google’s 
device with a wireless connection can connect to the Internet via their 
New Cell Service,” The Washington Post, July 8, 2015; “5 Things to Know 
smartphone’s connection unless they set up password protection. If 
about Google’s Project Fi,” CBS News, May 4, 2015; “Google’s Project Fi 
they select this option, then only people with access to the password 
Aims to Speed Up Mobile Communications by Tapping into Free WiFi 
can connect to their smartphones. 
Hotspots,” Kurzweilai.net, April 23, 2015; M. Aguilar, “Project Fi: Google’s 
Plan to Fix Your Wireless Service Is Here,” Gizmodo, April 22, 2015; R. Metz, 
Project Fi puts pressure on wireless carriers to do away with lucra­
“Google’s New Wireless Service Should Make Verizon and AT&T Squirm,” 
tive “breakage.” Breakage is a term used in the telecommunications 
MIT Technology Review, April 22, 2015; R. Knutson and A. Barr, “Google Set 
industry to indicate unused data at the end of a month. Many traditional 
to Unveil Wireless Service, The Wall Street Journal, April 22, 2015; http://
wireless plans require subscribers to pay for certain amounts of data 
fi.google.com, accessed September 14, 2015. 
that expire at the end of each month. A study by Validas (www.validas 
.com), a company that analyzes consumers’ bills to help them choose the 
Questions
most appropriate wireless plan, noted that smartphone users typically 
1. Describe how Google’s Project Fi works. 
waste $28 each month on unused data. The $28 represents breakage. 
The practice of breakage is coming under pressure from 
2. Assume that you are the CEO of Verizon Wireless (www.verizonwireless 
other companies as well. Startups such as Republic Wireless (www 
.com). How would you compete with Project Fi? 
Introduction 
The traditional working environment that required users to come to a wired computer is inef­
fective and inefficient. The solution was to build computers that are small enough to carry or 
wear and that can communicate via wireless networks. The ability to communicate anytime 
and anywhere provides organizations with a strategic advantage by increasing productivity 
and speed and improving customer service. The term wireless is used to describe telecom­
munications in which electromagnetic waves, rather than some form of wire or cable, carry the 
signal between communicating devices such as computers, smartphones, and iPads. 
Before you continue, it is important to distinguish between the terms wireless and mobile— 
they can mean different things. The term wireless means exactly what it says: without wires. In 
contrast, mobile refers to something that changes its location over time. Some wireless net­
works, such as MiFi (discussed later in this chapter), are also mobile. Others, however, are fixed. 
For example, microwave towers form fixed wireless networks. 
Wireless technologies enable individuals and organizations to conduct mobile computing, 
mobile commerce, and the Internet of Things. We define these terms here, and then we discuss 
each one in detail later in the chapter. 
Mobile computing refers to a real-time, wireless connection between a mobile device and 
other computing environments, such as the Internet or an intranet. Mobile commerce—also 
known as m-commerce—refers to e-commerce (EC) transactions (see Chapter 9) conducted 
with a mobile device. The Internet of Things means that virtually every object has processing 
power with either wireless or wired connections to a global network. 

 
 
 
 
 
276 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
Wireless technologies and mobile commerce are spreading rapidly, replacing or supple­
menting wired computing. Cisco (www.cisco.com) predicts that the volume of mobile Web traf­
fic will continue to increase rapidly over the next decade. 
Almost all (if not all) organizations utilize wireless computing. Therefore, when you begin 
your career, you likely will be assigned a company smartphone and a wirelessly enabled com­
puter. Clearly, then, it is important for you to learn about wireless computing not only because 
you will be using wireless applications but also because wireless computing will be important 
to your organization. In your job, you will be involved with customers who conduct wireless 
transactions, with analyzing and developing mobile commerce applications, and with wireless 
security. And the list goes on. 
Simply put, an understanding of wireless technology and mobile commerce applications 
will make you more valuable to your organization. When you look at “What’s in IT for Me?” at 
the end of the chapter, envision yourself performing the activities discussed in your functional 
area. In addition, for those of you who are entrepreneurally inclined, an understanding of wire­
less technology can help you start and grow your own business. 
The wireless infrastructure upon which mobile computing is built may reshape the entire 
IT field. The technologies, applications, and limitations of mobile computing and mobile com­
merce are the focus of this chapter. You begin the chapter by learning about wireless devices, 
wireless transmission media, and wireless security. You continue by examining wireless com­
puter networks and wireless Internet access. You then look at mobile computing and mobile 
commerce, which are made possible by wireless technologies. Next, you turn your attention to 
the Internet of Things. You conclude by familiarizing yourself with a critical component of the 
wireless environment—namely, wireless security. 
10.1  Wireless Technologies 
Wireless technologies include both wireless devices, such as smartphones, and wireless trans­
mission media, such as microwave, satellite, and radio. These technologies are fundamentally 
changing the ways organizations operate. 
Individuals are finding wireless devices convenient and productive to use, for several rea­
sons. First, people can make productive use of time that was formerly wasted—for example, 
while commuting to work on public transportation. Second, because people can take these 
devices with them, their work locations are becoming much more flexible. Third, wireless 
technology enables people to schedule their working time around personal and professional 
obligations. 
Wireless Devices 
Wireless devices provide three major advantages to users: 
1. They are small enough to easily carry or wear. 
2. They have sufficient computing power to perform productive tasks. 
3. They can communicate wirelessly with the Internet and other devices. 
Modern smartphones exhibit a process called dematerialization. Essentially, dematerialization 
occurs when the functions of many physical devices are included in one other physical device. 
Consider that your smartphone includes the functions of digital cameras for images and video, 
radios, televisions, Internet access via Web browsers, recording studios, editing suites, movie 
theaters, GPS navigators, word processors, spreadsheets, stereos, flashlights, board games, 
card games, video games, an entire range of medical devices, maps, atlases, encyclopedias, 
dictionaries, translators, textbooks, watches, alarm clocks, books, calculators, address books, 
credit card swipers, magnifying glasses, money and credit cards, car keys, hotel keys, cellular 
telephony, Wi-Fi, e-mail access, text messaging, a full QWERTY keyboard, and many, many oth­
ers. Figure 10.1 illustrates the process of dematerialization with smartphones. 

 
 
 
 
 Wireless Technologies 277 
Figure depi c ting the demateria
lization with smartphones that includes the functions of digital cameras for images and video, radios, compass, encyclopedia, books, typewriter, wireline telephone, flash light, television, CD player, movie theater, and calculator.
Our smartphones have come a long, long way in a short period of time. Consider these 
smartphone capabilities (as of mid-2016): 
• In the United States alone, Verizon (www.verizon.com) and AT&T (www.att.com) off er 4G 
LTE to over 300 million people. (4G LTE can reach speeds of 50 Mbps.) Therefore, modern 
smartphones are about 500 times faster than the first iPhone which was released in 2007. 
• Many high-end smartphones can take video in ultra-high definition 4K. 4K resolution refers 
to a display device having horizontal resolution on the order of 4,000 pixels. Pixels are the 
dots that make up on-screen images. The more pixels there are, the sharper and more 
realistic that images and video look. 
• Smartphones can function as mobile (digital) wallets. 
• Some smartphones can be charged without plugging them in. For example, Google’s Nexus 
4, 5, 6, and 7 and Samsung’s Galaxy 6 all include built-in wireless charging. 
• While not all smartphones have wireless charging built-in yet, many of them have fast 
charging. Motorola (www.motorola.com) says that its Moto X Pure Edition can obtain 
8 hours of battery life from a 15-minute charge. 
• Smartphones are employing biometrics (discussed in Chapter 7). Apple has fingerprint 
scanners on its devices with its Touch ID feature. Google has facial recognition on its 
Android smartphones in the form of its Face Unlock feature. The Android “Smart Lock” fea­
ture can use other methods to recognize you and keep you from having to re-authenticate 
constantly. You can activate “on-body detection” which knows if you have your phone in 
your hand or in your pocket, “trusted voice” which enables voice recognition, and “trusted 
devices” which can use Bluetooth to authenticate you when connected to your smart-
watch or your car. 
• The Nextbit Robin (http://nextbit.com) uses an intelligent method of cloud storage (dis­
cussed in Plug IT In 4) to give its Android smartphone virtually unlimited storage. Essentially, 
the service takes the content that you do not use oft en and automatically stores it in the 
cloud, and then silently re-downloads it in the background when you use the content again. 
One downside of smartphones is that people can use them to copy and pass on confidential 
information. For example, if you were an executive at Intel, would you want workers snapping 

 
 
 
278 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
pictures of their colleagues with your secret new technology in the background? After all, one of 
the functions of a smartphone is that of a digital camera that can transmit wirelessly. New jam­
ming devices are being developed to counter the threat. Some companies, such as Samsung 
(www.samsung.com), have recognized the danger and have banned these devices from their 
premises altogether. Regardless of any disadvantages, however, cell phones, and particularly 
smartphones, have had a far greater impact on human society than most of us realize. 
Consider Africa, for example. One in six of Africa’s one billion inhabitants now use a cell 
phone. These phones are transforming healthcare across the continent in many ways: 
• Medical personnel are obtaining high-quality data that can inform them of who is dying 
and from what causes, who is sick, and where clusters of disease are occurring. 
• Cell phones are now making it possible for parents to register the birth of a child very easily 
and for governments to more accurately plan healthcare interventions, such as vaccina­
tion schedules. 
• Cell phones are improving vaccine supply chains, preventing unnecessary stockouts, 
and ensuring that vaccines are available when children are brought into clinics to be 
immunized. 
• Healthcare workers in the field can access health records and schedule appointments with 
patients. 
Smartphones are also instrumental in other ways. IT’s About Business 10.1 illustrates how they 
are driving the growth of electronic commerce in Vietnam. 
IT’s About Business 10.1 
MIS 
Smartphones Drive Growth of Electronic 
Commerce in Vietnam 
Historically, the Vietnamese economy has been based on cash. The 
norm has been to borrow money informally from a trusted circle 
of family and friends. Most merchants do not offer any other op­
tion than to pay in cash. At the same time, however, the majority of 
merchants believe that they would benefit from mobile payments 
because they could handle less cash and avoid possible counter­
feit bills. Meanwhile, Vietnamese consumers are interested in using 
mobile “wallets” to deposit, withdraw, and save money for safety 
reasons and to pay for goods and services for convenience. Enter 
wireless communications and devices. 
Wireless communication has had a significant impact in Viet­
nam. In a country where few people have a landline phone, millions 
of Vietnamese are moving directly into wireless technologies. In the 
past, e-commerce companies were not successful in Vietnam be­
cause few people had a landline to be able to access the Internet, 
particularly in outlying areas. 
Telecommunications companies such as Viettel Mobile 
(http://vietteltelecom.vn), which has Vietnam’s largest number of 
subscribers, and Mobiphone (www.mobiphone.vn), owned by Viet­
nam Mobile Telecom Services Company (http://vnpt.vn), have de­
ployed wireless communications throughout much of the country. 
Even though data is typically expensive in developing countries, 
data prices in Vietnam are among the lowest in the world, at just 
over $3 per gigabyte. In just 10 years, the number of people with an 
Internet connection went from 12 percent in 2005 to 44 percent in 
2015. This growth has been largely thanks to smartphones, which 
have helped drive a rapid increase in electronic commerce. 
In just one year, the number of active mobile social media 
accounts in Vietnam rose 41 percent by January 2015, a faster in­
crease than in China, India, or Brazil. E-commerce is being buoyed 
by social networks, which are used by consumers and businesses 
alike. Nearly one-quarter of Vietnamese firms state that they con­
duct business via social networks. Facebook is one of the most 
popular, with 30 million active Vietnamese users in the first quarter 
of 2015, up from 8.5 million in 2012. Vietnam is one of Facebook’s 
fastest-growing markets. 
Electronic commerce in Vietnam generated revenue of $4 bil­
lion in 2015, compared with $700 million in 2012. Much of this com­
merce will be mobile commerce. Popular products for Vietnamese 
online shoppers include furniture, electronics, fashion, cosmetics, 
appliances, and books. Nearly 70 percent of these online shoppers 
pay in cash, with the remainder paying with electronic wallets. 
In 2015, Lazada (www.lazada.vn), one of Vietnam’s largest on­
line retailers, had approximately 500,000 customers. The company 
continues to boost the number of products and to improve its de­
livery. For example, motorcycle riders in Lazada uniforms deliver 
all types of goods to Lazada customers. Lazada sales in January 
2015 were seven times higher than in the same period just one year 
earlier. 
Short video clips are especially popular among Vietnam’s mo­
bile users, who like to share clips easily. Yan.vn, an MTV-style music 
and entertainment organization, is capitalizing on that trend. Yan. 
vn is using the Web to popularize its television shows, which are 
carried over cable networks to approximately five million house­
holds as well as to many of Ho Chi Minh City’s cafés and bars. The 
company is also posting unedited excerpts of celebrity interviews 
online before the complete interviews are approved by government 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wireless Technologies 279 
censors for television. The company has also launched a free soap 
“E-Commerce and Retail in Vietnam: Growing Momentum vs 
opera on YouTube. 
Restrictions,” LinkedIn.com, Mary 26, 2015; N. Ngoc, “Lazada, Sendo 
Top Vietnam’s E-Commerce Market in 2014,” DealStreetAsia, February 
Just like in the West, the mobile Web in Vietnam is helping 
25, 2015; J. Hookway, “Vietnam’s Mobile Revolution Catapults 
some people achieve celebrity status. For example, farmer Nguyen 
Millions Into the Digital Age,” The Wall Street Journal, June 15, 2015;
Duc Hau shot to fame as a TV actor aft er his off-key renditions of 
“Vietnam E-Commerce Report 2014,” Ministry of Industry and Trade 
Vietnamese love ballads became a YouTube sensation. Similarly, 
of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, May 7, 2015; N. Uy, “Surge in 
comedian JVevermind has more than 1.5 million subscribers to his 
Smartphones Spurs Likely M-Commerce Boom in Vietnam,” HKTDC 
channel on YouTube, building his audience by sharing clips via so-
Research, September 19, 2014; “Mobile Commerce in Emerging Asia,” 
Ericsson, August 2014; J. Dung, “Vietnam E-Commerce Overview and 
cial media sites such as Facebook, Twitter, Google+, and Instagram. 
Market Size,” eCommerce MILO, April 9, 2014; www.lazada.vn, accessed 
Even state-owned media outlets, such as the newspaper Tuoi 
September 15, 2015. 
Tre (Youth), have launched Web sites as content providers vie to be­
come Vietnam’s most popular social and entertainment site. There  
is much at stake. Media Partners Asia, a research and consulting 
Questions  
firm, projected that advertising in Vietnam would total $1.2 billion  
1. Discuss the impact of wireless communications technologies 
by 2017, nearly double the amount in 2014. 
on the growth of electronic commerce in Vietnam. 
2. Describe the advantages of wireless connections over land-
Sources: Compiled from “Mobile Commerce Grows Fast in Vietnam,” 
line connections. 
VietnamNet NEW, July 23, 2015; “Mobile Commerce Growing Fast 
in Asia Pacific with Half of Smartphone Users Now Shopping on 
3. Discuss the implications of Vietnam “skipping” wireline com-
Their Device,” The Engagement Bureau, June 17, 2015; J. Campbell, 
munications by moving directly to wireless communications. 
Wireless Transmission Media 
Wireless media, or broadcast media, transmit signals without wires. The major types of wire­
less media are microwave, satellite, and radio. Table 10.1 lists the advantages and disadvan­
tages of each type. 
Microwave. Microwave transmission systems transmit data via electromagnetic waves. 
These systems are used for high-volume, long-distance, line-of-sight communication. Line-of­
sight means that the transmitter and receiver are in view of each other. This requirement cre­
ates problems because the Earth’s surface is curved rather than flat. For this reason, microwave 
towers usually cannot be spaced more than 30 miles apart. 
Clearly, then, microwave transmissions offer only a limited solution to data communi­
cations needs, especially over very long distances. In addition, microwave transmissions are 
susceptible to environmental interference during severe weather such as heavy rain and snow­
storms. Although long-distance microwave data communications systems are still widely used, 
they are being replaced by satellite communications systems. 
Satellite. Satellite transmission systems make use of communication satellites. Currently, 
there are three types of satellites circling Earth: geostationary-earth-orbit (GEO), medium-
TABLE 10.1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Wireless Media 
Channel 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Microwave 
High bandwidth 
Relatively inexpensive 
Must have unobstructed line of sight 
Susceptible to environmental interference 
Satellite 
High bandwidth 
Expensive 
Large coverage area 
Must have unobstructed line of sight 
Signals experience propagation delay 
Must use encryption for security 
Radio 
High bandwidth 
Signals pass through walls 
Inexpensive and easy to install 
Creates electrical interference problems 
Susceptible to snooping unless encrypted 

 
 
 
 
 
 
280 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
TABLE 10.2 Three Basic Types of Telecommunications Satellites 
Type 
Characteristics 
Orbit 
Number 
Use 
GEO 
Satellites stationary relative to point on Earth 
Few satellites needed for global coverage 
Transmission delay (approximately 
0.25 second) 
Most expensive to build and launch 
Longest orbital life (many years) 
22, 300 miles 
8 
TV signal 
MEO  
Satellites move relative to point on Earth 
6, 434 miles 
10–12 
GPS 
Moderate number needed for global coverage 
Requires medium-powered transmitters 
Negligible transmission delay 
Less expensive to build and launch 
Moderate orbital life (6–12 years) 
LEO 
Satellites move rapidly relative to point on 
Earth 
Large number needed for global coverage 
Requires only low-power transmitters 
Negligible transmission delay 
Least expensive to build and launch 
Shortest orbital life (as low as 5 years) 
400–700 miles 
Many 
Telephone Figure depicting the comparision of the footprints of GEO, MEO, and LEO satellites.
FIGURE 10.2 Comparison of satellite 
footprints. 
earth-orbit (MEO), and low-earth-orbit (LEO). Each type has a different orbit, with GEO be­
ing farthest from Earth and LEO the closest. In this section, you examine the three types of 
satellites and then discuss two major satellite applications: global positioning systems and 
Internet transmission via satellites. Table 10.2 compares and contrasts the three types of 
satellites. 
As with microwave transmission, satellites must receive and transmit data via line-of­
sight. However, the enormous footprint—the area of Earth’s surface reached by a satellite’s 
transmission—overcomes the limitations of microwave data relay stations. The most basic 
rule governing footprint size is simple: The higher a satellite orbits, the larger its footprint. 
Thus, medium-earth-orbit satellites have a smaller footprint than geostationary satellites, 
and low-earth-orbit satellites have the smallest footprint of all. Figure 10.2 compares the 
footprints of the three types of satellites. 
There are an incredible number of applications of satellites, one of which is commer­
cial images from orbit, using nanosatellites. Very small satellites, called nanosatellites, are 
built in a standard format known as a CubeSat. CubeSats are 4-inch cubes weighing about 
3 pounds. A nanosatellite typically costs between $150,000 and $1 million to develop and 
launch, compared to $200 million to $1 billion for a full-sized satellite. 
Several companies are involved in launching nanosatellites for scientific and commer­
cial purposes. Planet Labs (www.planet.com) take pictures of the Earth more frequently 
than traditional satellites and at a small fraction of the cost. However, the images from the 
company’s nanosatellites are at a lower resolution. 
Spire (http://spire.com) nanosatellites contain sensors and carry out various missions. 
One of these missions is locating objects. For example, more than 250,000 ships broadcast 
an automatic identification signal. A fleet of nanosatellites in low earth orbit could pick up 
these signals and provide frequent updates of the ships’ positions without the vessels hav­
ing to use expensive dedicated satellite communications. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wireless Technologies 281 
Skybox’s (www.skyboximaging.com) small satellites are larger than the other two compa­
nies’ satellites, weighing about 220 pounds. Skybox satellites are able to capture high-resolution 
imaging data. 
In contrast to line-of-sight transmission with microwave, satellites use broadcast transmis­
sion, which sends signals to many receivers at one time. So, even though satellites are line-of­
sight like microwave, they are high enough for broadcast transmission, thus overcoming the 
limitations of microwave. 
Types of Orbits. Geostationary-earth-orbit satellites orbit 22,300 miles directly above the 
equator. These satellites maintain a fixed position above Earth’s surface because, at their 
altitude, their orbital period matches the 24-hour rotational period of Earth. For this reason, 
receivers on Earth do not have to track GEO satellites. GEO satellites are excellent for sending 
television programs to cable operators and for broadcasting directly to homes. 
One major limitation of GEO satellites is that their transmissions take a quarter of a second 
to send and return. This brief pause, one kind of propagation delay, makes two-way telephone 
conversations difficult. Also, GEO satellites are large and expensive, and they require substan­
tial amounts of power to launch. 
Medium-earth-orbit satellites are located about 6,000 miles above Earth’s surface. MEO 
orbits require more satellites to cover Earth than GEO orbits because MEO footprints are 
smaller. MEO satellites have two advantages over GEO satellites: They are less expensive, and 
they do not have an appreciable propagation delay. However, because MEO satellites move 
with respect to a point on Earth’s surface, receivers must track these satellites. (Think of a sat­
ellite dish slowly turning to remain oriented to a MEO satellite.) 
Low-earth-orbit satellites are located 400 to 700 miles above Earth’s surface. Because LEO 
satellites are much closer to Earth, they have little, if any, propagation delay. Like MEO satel­
lites, however, LEO satellites move with respect to a point on Earth’s surface and therefore must 
be tracked by receivers. Tracking LEO satellites is more difficult than tracking MEO satellites 
because LEO satellites move much more quickly relative to a point on Earth. 
Unlike GEO and MEO satellites, LEO satellites can pick up signals from weak transmitters. 
This feature makes it possible for satellite telephones to operate via LEO satellites, because 
they can operate with less power using smaller batteries. Another advantage of LEO satellites is 
that they consume less power and cost less to launch. 
At the same time, however, the footprints of LEO satellites are small, which means that 
many satellites are needed to cover the planet. For this reason, a single organization oft en 
produces multiple LEO satellites, known as LEO constellations. Two examples are Iridium and 
Globalstar. 
Iridium (www.iridium.com) has placed a LEO constellation in orbit that consists of 66 satel­
lites and 12 in-orbit spare satellites. The company claims it provides complete satellite commu­
nications coverage of Earth’s surface, including the polar regions. Globalstar (www.globalstar 
.com) also has a LEO constellation in orbit. 
Global Positioning Systems. The global positioning system 
(GPS) is a wireless system that utilizes satellites to enable users to deter­
mine their position anywhere on Earth. GPS is supported by 24 MEO sat­
ellites that are shared worldwide. The exact position of each satellite is 
always known because the satellite continuously broadcasts its position 
along with a time signal. By using the known speed of the signals and the 
distance from three satellites (for two-dimensional location) or four sat­
ellites (for three-dimensional location), it is possible to find the location 
of any receiving station or user within a range of 10 feet. GPS soft ware 
can also convert the user’s latitude and longitude to an electronic map. 
Most of you are probably familiar with GPS in automobiles, which 
“talks” to drivers when giving directions. Figure 10.3 illustrates two 
ways for drivers to obtain GPS information in a car: a dashboard naviga­
tion system and a GPS app (in this case, TomTom; www.tomtom.com) on 
FIGURE 10.3 Obtaining GPS information in an automobile. 
an iPhone. Photograph depicting two ways for drivers to obtain GPS information in a car: a dashboard navigation system and a GPS app on an iPhone.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
282 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
Commercial use of GPS for activities such as navigating, mapping, and surveying has 
become widespread, particularly in remote areas. Cell phones in the United States now must 
have a GPS embedded in them so that the location of a person making an emergency call—for 
example, 911, known as wireless 911—can be detected immediately. 
Three other global positioning systems are either planned or operational. The Russian 
GPS, GLONASS, was completed in 1995. However, the system fell into disrepair with the collapse 
of the Russian economy. In 2010, however, GLONASS achieved 100 percent coverage of Russian 
territory. The European Union GPS is called Galileo. The first determination of a position relying 
on Galileo satellites occurred in March 2013. The entire Galileo system is expected to be com­
pleted by 2019. China expects to complete its GPS, Beidou, by 2020. 
GPS technology is used in digital pricing displays. IT’s About Business 10.2 shows how 
many retailers are benefiting from these displays. 
IT’s About Business 10.2 
Digital Pricing Displays 
A growing number of U.S. retailers are investing in digital pricing 
displays, for several reasons. First, these businesses have to ac­
commodate frequent price changes in order to compete with on­
line merchants. Second, their customers are using showrooming 
tactics in their stores. Showrooming occurs when shoppers use 
their smartphones inside physical stores to scan Amazon, eBay, 
and other Web sites to compare prices for the same product from 
several merchants. Third, the rapid growth of online retailing has 
shortened the shelf life of prices in brick-and-mortar stores. There­
fore, rather than setting prices that provide them with desired 
profit margins, retailers increasingly have to use price-matching 
to honor the prices of their online competitors. Some retailers are 
even using software that uses algorithms to beat their competitors’ 
prices and bump up their placement on Web sites that show side-
by-side cost comparisons. 
Pricer (www.pricer.com), the top provider of in-store digital-
pricing displays, notes that this technology is not widely utilized in 
the United States. This reality might be changing, however. Pricer’s 
U.S. business almost tripled in the first quarter of 2015 from the first 
quarter of 2014, to $11.6 million. Significantly, equipping a single 
store with digital displays for a big-box retailer (Walmart, Lowes, 
etc.) can cost more than $100,000. 
Pricer’s digital displays not only allow retailers to quickly 
changes their prices in stores, but the technology can be integrated 
with smartphone apps and GPS systems to lead customers to par­
ticular items. The system allows a customer to trigger the price 
display to flash as they approach a shelf. Pricer also off ers brick-
and-mortar retailers so-called “click-and-collect” services, where 
members of the staff walk through a store to gather items that cus­
tomers ordered online for in-store pickup. 
It’s easy to change product prices online, but much more dif­
ficult and costly to do it in-store. The digital displays help greatly 
in this regard. For example, digital displays eliminate the problem 
of having the price on the shelf not match the price in the regis­
ter at the checkout, which cuts down on customer complaints and 
transaction cancellations. Employees no longer have to spend time 
posting thousands of price changes on the shelves by hand—some 
large stores can make up to 6,000 price changes every month. The 
digital displays can change 3,000 prices on the floor every hour. The 
elimination of manual price changes frees up staff to help custom­
ers, especially during busy times. 
MKT 
Consider the case of Nebraska Furniture Mart (www.nfm 
.com), a chain of four furniture stores. In the past, employees had 
manually changed prices on the shop floor at each of its stores ev­
ery morning. This effort enabled the store to offer the lowest prices 
on televisions, dishwashers, sofas, and flooring. However, it was ex­
tremely time consuming. To expedite this process, the store made 
a major investment in digital-price displays. Now, a single worker 
in one location can quickly change prices on thousands of products 
in all of its stores to match or beat those at Home Depot, Sears, and 
other rivals. 
Another retailer, Kohl’s (www.kohls.com), has installed Al­
tierre (www.altierre.com) displays in almost 1,200 stores. These 
displays utilize wireless transmission equipment, sensors, and 
software to automate thousands of pricing displays on shelves 
throughout their stores. 
Digital pricing displays cannot solve all of the price problems 
that confront brick-and-mortar establishments. For example, Ne­
braska Furniture Mart generally only changes the price for any item 
once a day before the store opens. The reason is that the store does 
not want the price of an item to change from the time the customer 
takes the item off the shelf or from the showroom to the time he or 
she gets to the cash register. 
Sources: Compiled from “The Military Has Led Kohl’s into Electronic 
Shelf Labels,” Huntingdon Marketing, August 12, 2015; S. Soper and 
L. Rupp, “Stores Try Fixed Prices That Aren’t So Fixed,” Bloomberg 
BusinessWeek, July 27 – August 2, 2015; J. Renfrow, “Sears, Kohl’s, 
Home Depot Using Digital Price Displays to Combat Showrooming,” 
FierceRetail, July 21, 2015; C. Morran,”Retailers Turn to Electronic 
Price Tags to Combat Amazon,” Consumerist, July 17, 2015; S. Soper, 
“Amazon Showrooming Forces Stores to Go Digital on Price Displays,” 
Bloomberg BusinessWeek, July 17, 2015; R. Pincus, “Supermarket 
Ditches Paper Price Tags for Digital Ones,” PSFK, March 6, 2015; 
“Sainsbury’s Tests Self-Updating E-Ink Price Labels,” Digital Strategy 
Consulting, February 20, 2015; R. Stross, “Digital Tags Help Ensure 
the Price Is Right,” The New York Times, February 9, 2013; www.pricer 
.com, www.nfm.com, www.kohls.com, www.altierre.com, accessed 
September 15, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Why are brick-and-mortar retailers beginning to implement 
digital pricing displays? 
2. What are possible disadvantages to digital pricing displays? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wireless Technologies 283 
Internet over Satellite. In many regions of the world, Internet over Satellite (IoS) is the 
only option available for Internet connections because installing cables is either too expensive 
or physically impossible. IoS enables users to access the Internet via GEO satellites from a dish 
mounted on the side of their homes. Although IoS makes the Internet available to many people 
who otherwise could not access it, it has its drawbacks. Not only do GEO satellite transmissions 
involve a propagation delay, but they also can be disrupted by environmental influences such 
as thunderstorms. 
Radio. Radio transmission uses radio-wave frequencies to send data directly between trans­
mitters and receivers. Radio transmission has several advantages. First, radio waves travel eas­
ily through normal office walls. Second, radio devices are fairly inexpensive and easy to install. 
Third, radio waves can transmit data at high speeds. For these reasons, radio increasingly is 
being used to connect computers to both peripheral equipment and local area networks (LANs; 
discussed in Chapter 6). (Note: Wi-Fi and cellular also use radio frequency waves.) 
As with other technologies, however, radio transmission has its drawbacks. First, radio 
media can create electrical interference problems. Also, radio transmissions are susceptible to 
snooping by anyone who has similar equipment that operates on the same frequency. 
Another problem with radio transmission is that when you travel too far away from the 
source station, the signal breaks up and fades into static. Most radio signals can travel only 
30 to 40 miles from their source. However, satellite radio overcomes this problem. Satellite 
radio (or digital radio) offers uninterrupted, near CD-quality transmission that is beamed to 
your radio, either at home or in your car, from space. In addition, satellite radio offers a broad 
spectrum of stations, including many types of music, news, and talk. 
XM Satellite Radio and Sirius Satellite Radio were competitors that launched satellite radio 
services. XM broadcast its signals from GEO satellites, while Sirius used MEO satellites. In July 
2008, the two companies merged to form Sirius XM (www.siriusxm.com). Listeners subscribe to 
the service for a monthly fee. 
Wireless Security 
Clearly, wireless networks provide numerous benefits for businesses. However, they also pres­
ent a huge challenge to management—namely, their inherent lack of security. Wireless is a 
broadcast medium, and transmissions can be intercepted by anyone who is close enough and 
has access to the appropriate equipment. There are four major threats to wireless networks: 
rogue access points, war driving, eavesdropping, and radio-frequency jamming. 
A rogue access point is an unauthorized access point into a wireless network. The rogue 
could be someone in your organization who sets up an access point meaning no harm but fails 
to inform the IT department. In more serious cases, the rogue is an “evil twin”—someone who 
wishes to access a wireless network for malicious purposes. 
In an evil twin attack, the attacker is in the vicinity with a Wi-Fi-enabled computer and a 
separate connection to the Internet. Using a hotspotter—a device that detects wireless networks 
and provides information on them (see www.canarywireless.com)—the attacker simulates a 
wireless access point with the same wireless network name, or SSID, as the one that authorized 
users expect. If the signal is strong enough, users will connect to the attacker’s system instead 
of the real access point. The attacker can then serve them a Web page asking for them to pro­
vide confidential information such as usernames, passwords, and account numbers. In other 
cases, the attacker simply captures wireless transmissions. These attacks are more eff ective 
with public hotspots (e.g., McDonald’s and Starbucks) than with corporate networks. 
War driving is the act of locating WLANs while driving (or walking) around a city or else­
where. To war drive or walk, you simply need a Wi-Fi detector and a wirelessly enabled com­
puter. If a WLAN has a range that extends beyond the building in which it is located, then an 
unauthorized user might be able to intrude into the network. The intruder can then obtain a 
free Internet connection and possibly gain access to important data and other resources. 
Eavesdropping refers to efforts by unauthorized users to access data that are traveling over 
wireless networks. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
284 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
Finally, in radio-frequency (RF) jamming, a person or a device intentionally or unintention­
ally interferes with your wireless network transmissions. 
Before you go on…
 1. Describe the most common types of wireless devices.
 2. Describe the various types of transmission media.
 3. Describe four threats to the security of wireless transmissions. 
Apply the Concept 10.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 10.1 Identify advantages 
STEP 2 : Activity (Here is what you are doing.) 
and disadvantages of each of the four main types of wireless 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
transmission media. 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 10.1. There 
are three links. One will take you to Vislink’s website, another 
to Rajant’s website, and the last to a YouTube video in which 
Vislink demonstrates how they can provide live video feed to law 
STEP 1 : Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
As stated in this section, mobile communication has changed our 
enforcement agencies using Rajant’s wireless mesh network. 
world more rapidly and dramatically than any other technology. 
Although several wireless transmission media are available, rarely 
STEP 3 : Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.) 
will one technology meet all of a business’s needs by itself. Vislink 
is a global technology firm that collects and delivers high-quality 
As you watch the video, listen for the wireless transmission 
video broadcasts. These broadcasts are utilized in sports, news, 
media they mention and pay attention to how many of them are 
law enforcement, and other areas. Although Vislink specializes in 
discussed in this section of the book. Write and submit a summary 
video, they rely on multiple mobile transmission media to obtain 
of your findings that highlights the advantages and disadvantages 
live feeds from multiple locations. Rajant is one of the providers 
of the transmission media types and explains why they were or 
that Vislink has utilized for their wireless media. 
were not used in the product that Vislink/Rajant demonstrated. 
10.2 Wireless Computer Networks and 
Internet Access 
You have learned about various wireless devices and how these devices transmit wireless 
signals. These devices typically form wireless computer networks, and they provide wireless 
Internet access. In this section, you will study wireless networks, which we organize by their 
effective distance: short range, medium range, and wide area. 
Short-Range Wireless Networks 
Short-range wireless networks simplify the task of connecting one device to another. In addi­
tion, they eliminate wires, and they enable users to move around while they use the devices. 
In general, short-range wireless networks have a range of 100 feet or less. In this section, you 
consider three basic short-range networks: Bluetooth, ultra-wideband (UWB), and near-field 
communications (NFC). 
Bluetooth. Bluetooth (www.bluetooth.com) is an industry specification used to create 
small personal area networks. A personal area network is a computer network used for commu­
nication among computer devices (e.g., telephones, personal digital assistants, smartphones) 
located close to one person. Bluetooth 1.0 can link up to eight devices within a 10-meter area 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wireless Computer Networks and Internet Access 285 
(about 30 feet) with a bandwidth of 700 kilobits per second (Kbps) using low-power, radio-
based communication. Bluetooth 4.0 can transmit up to approximately 25 megabits per sec­
ond (Mbps) up to 100 meters (roughly 300 feet). Ericsson, the Scandinavian mobile handset 
company that developed this standard, called it Bluetooth after the tenth-century Danish King 
Harald Blatan (Blatan means “Bluetooth”). Ericsson selected this name because Blatan unified 
previously separate islands into the nation of Denmark. 
Common applications for Bluetooth are wireless handsets for cell phones and portable 
music players. Advantages of Bluetooth include low power consumption and the fact that it 
uses omnidirectional radio waves—that is, waves that are emitted in all directions from a trans­
mitter. For this reason, you do not have to point one Bluetooth device at another to create a 
connection. 
Bluetooth low energy, marketed as Bluetooth Smart, enables applications in the health-
care, fitness, security, and home entertainment industries. Compared to “classic” Bluetooth, 
Bluetooth Smart is less expensive and consumes less power, although it has a similar commu­
nication range. Bluetooth Smart is fueling the “wearables” (wearable computer) development 
and adoption. 
Ultra-Wideband. Ultra-wideband is a high-bandwidth wireless technology with transmis­
sion speeds in excess of 100 Mbps. This very high speed makes UWB a good choice for applica­
tions such as streaming multimedia from, say, a personal computer to a television. 
Time Domain (www.timedomain.com), a pioneer in UWB technology, has developed many 
UWB applications. One interesting application is the PLUS Real-Time Location System (RTLS). 
An organization can utilize PLUS to locate multiple people and assets simultaneously. Employ­
ees, customers, and/or visitors wear the PLUS Badge Tag. PLUS Asset Tags are placed on equip­
ment and products. PLUS is extremely valuable for healthcare environments, where knowing 
the real-time location of caregivers (e.g., doctors, nurses, technicians) and mobile equipment 
(e.g., laptops, monitors) is critical. 
Near-Field Communications. Near-field communications has the smallest range of any 
short-range wireless networks. It is designed to be embedded in mobile devices such as cell 
phones and credit cards. For example, using NFC, you can wave your device or card within a few 
centimeters of POS terminals to pay for items. 
Medium-Range Wireless Networks 
Medium-range wireless networks are the familiar wireless local area networks (WLANs). The 
most common type of medium-range wireless network is Wireless Fidelity, or Wi-Fi. WLANs 
are useful in a variety of settings, some of which may be challenging. 
Wireless Fidelity is a medium-range WLAN, which is a wired LAN but without the cables. 
In a typical configuration, a transmitter with an antenna, called a wireless access point (see 
Figure 10.4), connects to a wired LAN or to satellite dishes that provide an Internet connec­
tion. A wireless access point provides service to a number of users within a small geographical 
perimeter (up to approximately 300 feet), known as a hotspot. Multiple wireless access points 
are needed to support a larger number of users across a larger geographical area. To commu­
nicate wirelessly, mobile devices, such as laptop PCs, typically have a built-in wireless network 
interface capability. 
Wi-Fi provides fast and easy Internet or intranet broadband access from public hotspots 
located at airports, hotels, Internet cafés, universities, conference centers, offices, and homes. 
Users can access the Internet while walking across a campus, to their office, or through their 
homes. In addition, users can access Wi-Fi with their laptops, desktops, or PDAs by adding a 
wireless network card. Most PC and laptop manufacturers incorporate these cards in their 
products. 
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has established a set of stand­
ards for wireless computer networks. The IEEE standard for Wi-Fi is the 802.11 family. As of mid­
FIGURE 10.4  Wireless access 
2016, there were many standards in this family., including Examples include: 
point. Photograph depicting wireless access point.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
286 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
• 802.11a: supports wireless bandwidth up to 54 Mbps; high cost; short range; diff iculty pen­
etrating walls. 
• 802.11b: supports wireless bandwidth up to 11 Mbps; low cost; longer range. 
• 802.11g: supports wireless bandwidth up to 54 Mbps; high cost; longer range. 
• 802.11n: supports wireless bandwidth exceeding 600 Mbps; higher cost than 802.11g; 
longer range than 802.11g. 
• 802.11ac: will support wireless bandwidth of 1.3 Gbps (1.3 billion bits per second); will 
provide the ability to fully support a “multimedia home” in which high-definition video can 
be streamed simultaneously to multiple devices. Essentially, you will be able to wirelessly 
network your TV, DVR, smartphone, and sound system for complete on-demand access 
through any Internet-enabled device. 
• 802.11 ad: supports wireless bandwidth up to 7 Gbps; targeted to the “wireless off ice” as 
opposed to the “wireless home.” 
The major benefits of Wi-Fi are its low cost and its ability to provide simple Internet access. It 
is the greatest facilitator of the wireless Internet—that is, the ability to connect to the Internet 
wirelessly. 
Corporations are integrating Wi-Fi into their strategies. For example, Starbucks, McDon­
ald’s, Panera, and Barnes & Noble offer customers Wi-Fi in many of their stores, primarily for 
Internet access. As you see in IT’s About Business 10.3, Bobbejaanland, a family theme park in 
Belgium, deployed a Wi-Fi network to improve its guest experience. 
MKT 
IT’s About Business 10.3 
MKT Wi-Fi Network Provides Advantages to a 
Belgian Theme Park 
POM 
Founded in 1960, Bobbejaanland Family Park (www.bobbejaanland 
.be) is one of Belgium’s most popular theme parks, boasting a 
56-acre campus, 40 rides, and approximately 800,000 visitors per 
year. To manage all the facilities, the park has various devices in­
stalled around the campus, including various computers and 
point-of-sale (PoS) devices. The management team also wanted its 
visitors to have free Wi-Fi. 
To help accomplish these goals, the park deployed a Wi-Fi 
network from Fortinet (www.fortinet.com), a California-based pro­
vider of network security solutions that consists of 30 hotspots that 
cover more than 90 percent of the park’s area. The wireless network 
is protected by Fortinet’s FortiGate firewall. (We discussed firewalls 
in Chapter 7.) The park also deployed Fortinet’s FortiPresence sys­
tem, which gathers information from connected devices. Using lo­
cation information from these devices, FortiPresence can estimate 
a device’s location and place it on a dynamic map of the park. 
Gathering data on visitors was valuable to park managers. 
They utilize the FortiPresence system to map the traffic flow of visi­
tors, to analyze the location and the length of the lines at the park’s 
rides and concession stands, and to develop profiles of new and re­
turning visitors. Managers can learn how visitors come to the park, 
when and where they eat lunch, which exhibits and rides they visit, 
how long they remain in specific areas, and which shops they ac­
cess, to name just a few areas of interest. Basically, park managers 
wanted to know more about what visitors did in order to increase 
their enjoyment and to entice them to spend more money. For ex­
ample, what if the park could attract visitors to specific attractions 
or specific shops? 
To collect visitor information, the park invites guests to regis­
ter on its Web site via an e-mail address or Facebook. Visitors must 
accept a disclaimer that clearly explains that their mobile devices 
will be tracked while they are inside the park. Guests have the op­
tion of having their data erased after they leave the park. 
At almost no cost, the park’s registration system creates a cus­
tomer database. During the offseason, the park contacts customers 
on the list with offers and news regarding season passes, upcoming 
events, and new attractions. With repeat visitors, Bobbejaanland 
combines location data with analytics to provide increasingly tar­
geted offers to them. 
Bobbejaanland doesn’t just customize offers to guests before 
their visit; it targets them while on site through portal access points 
at certain locations throughout the park. As an example, if a guest 
accesses the portal near a pizza stand, the portal can display a pro­
motion regarding offers at that stand. 
The park tracks visitors’ locations not just to send promotional 
notifications to them, but to alert staff to possible problems before 
they happen. For instance, a higher number of guests in a particu­
lar area could signal the need to refill drinks or vending machines, 
although the machines themselves send signals over an Internet 
of Things sensor when they’re almost empty. Park staff may also 
determine that an increase in guests in a certain location requires 
sending cleaning teams or security guards. Conversely, if the track­
ing indicates a decrease in guests in an area, then managers can 
do various things to save money, such as delaying the opening of a 
ride, operating the ride less often, or closing the ride early. 
In implementing its Wi-Fi network, Bobbejaanland had to 
take data privacy into consideration, because under Belgian law, 
the park is considered an Internet service provider and therefore 
it must abide by the country’s ISP regulations. That means that it 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wireless Computer Networks and Internet Access 287 
must collect a certain amount of their customers’ data as they go 
August 17, 2015; X. Mertens, “Wi-Fi Enhances Guest Experience and 
through the park in order to investigate potential incidents. 
Profitability for Belgian Theme Park,” Computer Weekly, July 3, 
2015; “Bobbejaanland Selects Fortinet to Deploy Park-Wide Wi-Fi 
Besides visitors to the park, Fortinet created two other types 
Infrastructure for Visitors and Staff,” www.fortinet.com, March 25, 2015; 
of profiles for park Wi-Fi users. One is for park off ice staff and the 
D. Mumpower, “6 Huge Ways That Theme Parks Will Change by 2020,” 
other is for employees who move throughout the park. All three 
Theme Park Tourist, April 12, 2015; E. Alton, “What the Internet of 
types of users have distinctive encryption levels and firewalls. 
Things Might Mean for Theme Parks, Museums, and Other Fun Places,” 
The park notes that the Wi-Fi system paid for itself in only 
Entertainment Designer, January 21, 2015; “Theme Parks Are Trying to 
one season. Visitors can download a park app and use the Wi-Fi on 
Incorporate Tech to Lure You off the Couch,” Mashable, November 21, 
2014; www.bobbejaanland.be, accessed September 22, 2015. 
site to find their way around, look up prices, and chat with friends. 
Bobbejaanland was looking into other technologies to help guests, 
such as Bluetooth low-energy beacons and radio-frequency identi-
Questions 
fication (RFID). 
1. Describe the advantages of the Wi-Fi network to Bobbejaan­
land Family Park. 
Sources: Compiled from S. Sclafane, “The IoT Revolution: Coming 
2. Describe potential disadvantages of the Wi-Fi network to 
to a Warehouse and a Theme Park Near You,” Carrier Management, 
Bobbejaanland Family Park. 
Although Wi-Fi has become extremely popular, the technology does have problems. Three fac­
tors are preventing the commercial Wi-Fi market from expanding even further: roaming, secu­
rity, and cost: 
1.  At this time, users cannot roam from hotspot to hotspot if the hotspots use diff erent Wi-Fi 
network services. Unless the service is free, users have to log on to separate accounts and, 
where required, pay a separate fee for each service. (Some Wi-Fi hotspots offer free service, 
while others charge a fee.) 
2.  Security is the second barrier to greater acceptance of Wi-Fi. Because Wi-Fi uses radio 
waves, it is difficult to shield from intruders. 
3.  The final limitation to greater Wi-Fi expansion is cost. Even though Wi-Fi services are rela­
tively inexpensive, many experts question whether commercial Wi-Fi services can survive 
when so many free hotspots are available to users. 
Wi-Fi Direct. Until late 2010, Wi-Fi could operate only if the hotspot contained a wireless an­
tenna. Because of this limitation, organizations have typically used Wi-Fi for communications 
of up to about 800 feet. For shorter, peer-to-peer connections they have used Bluetooth. 
This situation changed following the introduction of a new iteration of Wi-Fi known as Wi-Fi 
Direct. Wi-Fi Direct enables peer-to-peer communications, so devices can connect directly. It 
allows users to transfer content among devices without having to rely on a wireless antenna. It 
can connect pairs or groups of devices at Wi-Fi speeds of up to 250 Mbps and at distances of up 
to 800 feet. Further, devices with Wi-Fi Direct can broadcast their availability to other devices 
just as Bluetooth devices can. Finally, Wi-Fi Direct is compatible with the more than one billion 
Wi-Fi devices currently in use. 
Wi-Fi Direct will probably challenge the dominance of Bluetooth in the area of device-to­
device networking. It offers a similar type of connectivity but with greater range and much 
faster data transfer. 
MiFi. MiFi is a small, portable wireless device that provides users with a permanent Wi-Fi 
hotspot wherever they go. Thus, users are always connected to the Internet. The range of the 
MiFi device is about 10 meters (roughly 30 feet). Developed by Novatel, the MiFi device is also 
called an intelligent mobile hotspot. Accessing Wi-Fi through the MiFi device allows up to five 
persons to be connected at the same time, sharing the same connection. MiFi also allows users 
to use voice-over-IP technology (discussed in Chapter 6) to make free (or cheap) calls, both lo­
cally and internationally. 
MiFi provides broadband Internet connectivity at any location that offers 3G cellular net­
work coverage. One drawback is that MiFi is expensive both to acquire and to use. 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure depicting a web for smartphone and GPS system.
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 10.5 Smartphone and GPS system. (Sources: Image Source; 
© Engine Images-Fotolia.com; © AP/Wide World Photos) 
288 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
Super Wi-Fi. The term Super Wi-Fi was coined by the U.S. Federal Communications Commis­
sion (FCC) to describe a wireless network proposal that creates long-distance wireless Internet 
connections. (Despite the name, Super Wi-Fi is not based on Wi-Fi technology.) Super Wi-Fi uses 
the lower-frequency “white spaces” between broadcast TV channels. These frequencies enable 
the signal to travel further and penetrate walls better than normal Wi-Fi frequencies. 
Super Wi-Fi is already in use in Houston, Texas; Wilmington, North Carolina; and the Uni­
versity of West Virginia. The technology threatens cell phone carriers’ 3G technology, and it 
could eventually bring broadband wireless Internet access to rural areas. 
Wide-Area Wireless Networks 
Wide-area wireless networks connect users to the Internet over a geographically dispersed ter­
ritory. These networks typically operate over the licensed spectrum—that is, they use portions 
of the wireless spectrum that are regulated by the government. In contrast, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, 
and Super Wi-Fi operate over the unlicensed spectrum and are therefore more prone to inter­
ference and security problems. In general, wide-area wireless network technologies fall into 
two categories: cellular radio and wireless broadband. 
Cellular Radio. Cellular telephones (cell phones) provide two-way radio communications 
over a cellular network of base stations with seamless handoffs. Cellular telephones diff er from 
cordless telephones, which offer telephone service only within a limited range through a single 
base station attached to a fixed landline—for example, within a home or an off ice. 
The cell phone communicates with radio antennas, or towers, placed within adjacent geo­
graphic areas called cells (see Figure 10.5). A telephone message is transmitted to the local 
cell—that is, the antenna—by the cell phone and then is passed from cell to cell until it reaches 
the cell of its destination. At this final cell, the message either is transmitted to the receiving 
cell phone or it is transferred to the public switched telephone system to be transmitted to 
a wireline telephone. This is why you can use a cell phone to call other cell phones as well as 
standard wireline phones. 
Cellular technology is quickly evolving, moving toward higher transmission speeds and 
richer features. The technology has progressed through a number of stages: 
•  First generation  (1G) cellular networks used analog signals and had low bandwidth 
(capacity). 
•  Second generation  (2G) used digital signals pri­
marily for voice communication; it provided data 
communication up to 10 Kbps. 
•  2.5G used digital signals and provided voice and 
data communication up to 144 Kbps. 
•  Third generation (3G) uses digital signals and can 
transmit voice and data up to 384 Kbps when the 
device is moving at a walking pace, 128 Kbps when 
it is moving in a car, and up to 2 Mbps when it is in 
a fixed location. 3G supports video, Web browsing, 
and instant messaging. 
3G does have disadvantages. Perhaps the most 
fundamental problem is that cellular companies in 
North America use two separate technologies: Verizon 
and Sprint use Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA), 
while AT&T and T-Mobile use Global System for Mobile 
Communications (GSM). CDMA companies are cur­
rently using Evolution-Data Optimized  (EV-DO) tech­
nology, which is a wireless broadband cellular radio 
standard. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wireless Computer Networks and Internet Access 289 
In addition, 3G is relatively expensive. In fact, most carriers limit how much information 
you can download and what you can use the service for. For instance, some carriers prohibit 
you from downloading or streaming audio or video. If you exceed the carriers’ limits, they 
reserve the right to cut off your service. 
•  Fourth generation (4G) is not one defined technology or standard. The International Tele­
communications Union (ITU) has specified speed requirements for 4G: 100 Mbps (million 
bits per second) for high-mobility communications such as cars and trains, and 1 Gbps (bil­
lion bits per second) for low-mobility communications such as pedestrians. A 4G system is 
expected to provide a secure all-IP-based mobile broadband system to all types of mobile 
devices. Many of the current 4G offerings do not meet the ITU specified speeds, but they 
call their service 4G nonetheless. See “IT’s Personal” for more information. 
Long-term evolution (LTE) is a wireless broadband technology designed to support roam­
ing Internet access via smartphones and handheld devices. LTE is approximately 10 times 
faster than 3G networks. 
XLTE (advanced LTE) is designed to handle network congestion when too many people 
in one area try to access an LTE network. XLTE is designed to provide all users with no 
decrease in bandwidth. 
•  Fift h generation (5G) is expected to be deployed by 2020. 5G networks are predicted to be 
faster and more intelligent than previous generations of cellular networks. With 5G, weara­
ble computers (e.g., Fitbit), smartphones, tablets, and other devices with sensors that are 
location- and context-aware will work together with apps and services that you use. 
Wireless Broadband or WiMAX. Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access, popu­
larly known as WiMAX, is the name for IEEE Standard 802.16. WiMAX has a wireless access range 
of up to 31 miles, compared to 300 feet for Wi-Fi. WiMAX also has a data transfer rate of up to 
75 Mbps. It is a secure system, and it offers features such as voice and video. WiMAX antennas 
can transmit broadband Internet connections to antennas on homes and businesses located 
miles away. For this reason, WiMAX can provide long-distance broadband wireless access to 
rural areas and other locations that are not currently being served. 
Consider this example of the use of WiMAX. On April 1, 2015, a fire broke out in the under­
ground electrical cable ducts in a tunnel under a major highway in London. The fire burned 
for 36 hours and caused major disruptions to broadband service in the area. With fiber- soptic, 
broadband access to the Internet not available, businesses turned to WiMAX from Liminet 
(http://luminet.co.uk). One business owner noted that Luminet helped his company get its 
main office back online in less than 24 hours. Further, Luminet’s broadband service helped the 
company quickly move its staff back from its disaster recovery site. 
It’s Personal: Wireless and Mobile 
What the GSM3GHSDPA+4GLTE??? This chapter explains the many mobile platforms that 
are available to you as a consumer. Specifically, it discusses cellular, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, satellite, 
and other wireless options. Within the cellular area, however, things get confusing because the 
telecommunications companies use so many acronyms these days. Have you ever wondered 
if Verizon 3G was equivalent to AT&T 3G? What about 4G and 4G LTE? Of course, most people 
assume that 4G is faster than 3G, but by how much? 
To appreciate this confusion, consider that when Apple released one update to its mobile 
operating system (iOS), AT&T suddenly began to display 4G rather than 3G on the iPhone— 
despite the fact that the phone had not been upgraded! Pretty nice, right? Wrong. In this 
instance, the “upgrade” simply consisted of a new terminology for the existing technology. The 
speed of the 3G/4G network had not changed. (Note: AT&T “4G LTE” is a diff erent technology 
that does offer significantly higher speeds than AT&T 3G or 4G.) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
290 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
Actual connection speeds are described in bit rates, meaning how many bits (1s or 0s) a 
device can transmit in 1 second. For example, a speed listed as 1.5 Mbps translates to 1.5 mil­
lion bits per second. That sounds like a tremendous rate. Knowing the bits per second, how­
ever, is only part of understanding the actual speed. In reality, connection speed is not the same 
as throughput, which is the amount of bandwidth actually available for you to use. Throughput 
will always be less than the connection speed. 
To understand this point, consider how your car operates. It is probably capable of driving 
more than 100 mph. However, you are “throttled down” by various speed limits, so you never 
reach this potential speed. Your actual speed varies depending on the route you take, the speed 
limits imposed along that route, the weather, the amount of traffic, and many other factors. In 
the same way, even though AT&T, Verizon, Sprint, and other companies boast incredible wire­
less speeds (“Up to 20 Mbps!”), they will always say “up to” because they know that you will 
never actually download a file at that rate. 
The best method for determining the actual speeds of the various networks is to go to your 
local wireless store and run a speed test using the demo model they have on display. This test 
will give you first-hand experience of the actual throughput speed you can expect from their 
network. The result is much more realistic than terms such as 3G, 4G, and 4G LTE. 
Here is how to perform the test: First, make certain the unit is connected only to a cel­
lular network (not Wi-Fi). Then go to http://speedtest.net, and click “Begin Test.” I just ran 
this test from my iPhone 4S on AT&T’s 4G (not 4G LTE) network. My download speed was 
3.80 Mbps, and my upload speed was 1.71 Mbps. These numbers are more informative than 
any name they are given (3G, 4G, etc.) because they indicate exactly what I can expect from 
my wireless connection. Run this test at competing stores (AT&T, Verizon, Sprint, T-Mobile, 
etc.), and you will have real data to compare. As names change, you can always run a test 
to find the facts. 
Before you go on…
 1. What is Bluetooth? What is a WLAN?
 2. Describe Wi-Fi, cellular service, and WiMAX. 
Apply the Concept 10.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 10.2 Explain how businesses 
STEP 2: Activity 
can use technology employed by short-range, medium-range, and 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
long-range networks, respectively. 
and view the video demonstration by Serial IO. There is also a 
link to their Web site, where you will find several examples of 
wireless products intended for business use. Although most of 
STEP 1: Background  
these products are short-range devices, you must assume they 
will be connected to some mid-range and/or wide-range wireless 
Many cellular phones today contain multiple radios. Both the 
network. In fact, these devices support Windows, Mac, Android, 
iPhone 6s (and 6s Plus) and the Galaxy S6 contain three radio 
iOS, BlackBerry, and other platforms. 
transceivers and one radio receiver. The radio transceivers are 
Cellular (4G LTE, 4G, or 3G depending on your carrier), Bluetooth, 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
and Wi-Fi. GPS is the radio receiver. The Samsung S6 also includes 
infrared and an NFC chip. With all of these radios embedded in a 
Based on the video and the Serial IO Web site, create and submit 
small mobile device, the possibilities of connectivity are nearly 
a table to explain how businesses can use the technologies 
endless because one device can utilize short-range, mid-range, 
employed by short-range, medium-range, and long-range 
and wide-range connectivity. 
networks to achieve their business purposes. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Computing and Mobile Commerce 291 
10.3 Mobile Computing and Mobile 
Commerce 
In the traditional computing environment, users come to a computer, which is connected with 
wires to other computers and to networks. Because these networks need to be linked by wires, 
it is difficult or even impossible for people on the move to use them. In particular, salespeople, 
repair people, service employees, law enforcement agents, and utility workers can be more 
effective if they can use IT while in the field or in transit. Mobile computing was designed for 
workers who travel outside the boundaries of their organizations as well as for anyone traveling 
outside his or her home. 
Mobile computing refers to a real-time connection between a mobile device and other 
computing environments, such as the Internet or an intranet. This innovation is revolutionizing 
how people use computers. It is spreading at work and at home; in education, healthcare, and 
entertainment; and in many other areas. 
Mobile computing has two major characteristics that differentiate it from other forms of 
computing: mobility and broad reach. Mobility means that users carry a device with them and 
can initiate a real-time contact with other systems from wherever they happen to be. Broad 
reach refers to the fact that when users carry an open mobile device, they can be reached 
instantly, even across great distances. 
Mobility and broad reach create five value-added attributes that break the barriers of 
geography and time: ubiquity, convenience, instant connectivity, personalization, and local­
ization of products and services. A mobile device can provide information and communica­
tion regardless of the user’s location (ubiquity). With an Internet-enabled mobile device, users 
can access the Web, intranets, and other mobile devices quickly and easily, without booting 
up a PC or placing a call via a modem (convenience and instant connectivity). A company can 
customize information and send it to individual consumers as a short message service (SMS) 
(customization). And, knowing a user’s physical location helps a company advertise its products 
and services (localization). Mobile computing provides the foundation for mobile commerce 
(m-commerce). 
Mobile Commerce 
In addition to affecting our everyday lives, mobile computing is also transforming the way 
organizations conduct business by allowing businesses and individuals to engage in mobile 
commerce. As you saw at the beginning of this chapter, mobile commerce (or m-commerce) 
refers to electronic commerce (EC) transactions that are conducted in a wireless environment, 
especially via the Internet. Like regular EC applications, m-commerce can be transacted via the 
Internet, private communication lines, smart cards, and other infrastructures. M- commerce 
creates opportunities for businesses to deliver new services to existing customers and to attract 
new customers. 
The development of m-commerce is driven by the following factors: 
•  Widespread availability of mobile devices. By mid-2016, some six billion cell phones were 
in use throughout the world. Cell phones are spreading more quickly in the developing 
world than the developed world. Experts estimate that within a few years about 70 percent 
of cell phones in developed countries will have Internet access. Mobile Internet access in 
developing countries will increase rapidly as well. Thus, a mass market has developed for 
mobile computing and m-commerce. 
•  Declining prices. The price of wireless devices is declining and will continue to decline. 
•  Bandwidth improvement. To properly conduct m-commerce, you need suff icient band­
width for transmitting text, voice, video, and multimedia. Wi-Fi, 4G cellular technology, 
and WiMAX all provide the necessary bandwidth. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
292 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
Mobile computing and m-commerce include many applications, which result from the capabil­
ities of various technologies. You will examine these applications and their impact on business 
activities in the next section. 
Mobile Commerce Applications 
Mobile commerce applications are many and varied. The most popular applications include 
location-based applications, financial services, intrabusiness applications, accessing infor­
mation, and telemetry. The rest of this section examines these various applications and their 
effects on the ways people live and do business. 
Mobile Wallets. Instead of swiping a plastic card at the checkout counter, consumers merely 
wave their phones a few inches above a payment terminal. This process uses a contact-free 
technology called near-field communications (NFC). This technology, known as the mobile 
wallet, is being employed with millions of phones both in the United States and overseas. 
There are a number of mobile wallets from which to choose: 
•  Soft card (formerly Isis Mobile Wallet) was a joint venture between AT&T, T-Mobile and 
Verizon. Softcard uses near-field communications technology to make secure payments 
with credit and debit card credentials stored on their smartphones. In February 2015, 
Google acquired Softcard’s intellectual property and integrated it into its Google Wallet 
service. 
•  Google Wallet is a mobile wallet that uses near-field communications to allow its users to 
store debit cards, credit cards, loyalty cards, and gift cards on their smartphones. Google 
Wallet provided a tap-to-pay feature where users simply tap their smartphones on sup­
ported terminals to pay for items. With Google Wallet, users launch an app, then type in 
a pin so Google can access their stored card credentials. Google Wallet also provides a 
peer-to-peer payment system that can send money to a real, physical Google Wallet card. 
Google says that the Google Wallet will continue as a peer-to-peer payment system. 
•  Android Pay is a digital wallet that also provides a tap-to-pay feature. With Android Pay, 
users do not need an app and do not have to enter a pin. The wallet’s functionality is built 
into the operating system. 
•  MasterCard’s Contactless, American Express’s ExpressPay, and Visa’s PayWave are EMV-com­
patible, contactless payment features. EMV (which stands for Europay, MasterCard, and 
Visa, the three companies which originally created the standard) is a technical standard 
for smart payment cards. EMV cards are smart cards that store their data on chips rather 
than on magnetic stripes. They can be contact cards that must be physically inserted into 
a reader, or contactless cards that can be read over a short distance using radio frequency 
identification technology. EMV cards are also called chip-and-pin cards. 
•  Apple Pay is a mobile wallet that uses near-field communications to enable users to make 
payments using various Apple devices. Apple Pay does not require Apple-specific con-
tactless payment terminals and will work with Visa’s PayWave, Mastercard’s PayPass, and 
American Express’s ExpressPay terminals. The wallet is similar to other wallets with the 
addition of two-factor authentication. To pay at points of sale, users hold their authenti­
cated Apple device to the point-of-sale system. iPhone users authenticate by holding their 
fingerprint to the phone’s Touch ID sensor, where Apple Watch users authenticate by dou­
ble clicking a button on the device. 
The stakes in this competition are enormous because the small fees generated every time con­
sumers swipe their cards add up to tens of billions of dollars annually in the United States alone. 
The potential for large revenue streams is real because mobile wallets have clear advantages. 
For example: Which are you more likely to have with you at any given moment—your phone or 
your physical wallet? Also, keep in mind that if you lose your phone, it can be located on a map 
and remotely deactivated. Plus, your phone can be password protected. Your physical wallet, 
however, cannot perform these functions. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Computing and Mobile Commerce 293 
Location-Based Applications and Services. M-commerce B2C applications include 
location-based services and location-based applications. Location-based mobile commerce is 
called location-based commerce (or L-commerce). 
Location-based services provide information that is specific to a given location. For exam­
ple, a mobile user can (1) request the nearest business or service, such as an ATM or a restau­
rant; (2) receive alerts, such as a warning of a traffic jam or an accident; and (3) find a friend. 
Wireless carriers can provide location-based services such as locating taxis, service personnel, 
doctors, and rental equipment; scheduling fleets; tracking objects such as packages and train 
boxcars; finding information such as navigation, weather, traffic, and room schedules; target­
ing advertising; and automating airport check-ins. 
Consider, for example, how location-based advertising can make the marketing process 
more productive. Marketers can use this technology to integrate the current locations and pref­
erences of mobile users. They can then send user-specific advertising messages concerning 
nearby shops, malls, and restaurants to consumers’ wireless devices. 
Apple’s iBeacon app is an interesting location-based service. The app provides loca­
tion-aware, contextual information to users. iBeacon uses a collection of beacons, which are 
Bluetooth Smart transmitters. The iBeacons locate a smartphone’s location by broadcasting 
Bluetooth signals. 
The beacons, which can be placed anywhere that contextual information would be valu­
able, are tiny discs about the size of a quarter. The purpose of iBeacons is to allow advertisers 
and business partners to deliver information, coupons, and other content relevant to a person’s 
location. 
Mobile Advertising. Mobile advertising is a form of advertising via cell phones, smart-
phones, or other mobile devices. Analysts estimate that mobile advertising revenue will reach 
approximately $7 billion by 2020. IT’s About Business 10.4 illustrates the effectiveness of mobile 
advertising by taking a look at the practice in rural India. 
IT’s About Business 10.4 
MKT Mobile Advertising in Rural India 
In the developed world, many businesses market to customers via 
their Web-connected smartphones. In the developing world, how­
ever, many people do not have smartphones. As a result, compa­
nies are using mobile campaigns to attract customers who have 
“basic” cell phones and who live in locations where cable television 
or even newspapers have limited reach. 
For example, in India most people do not live in big cities. 
Of the 400 million mobile phones used by rural residents, some 
90  percent are not “smart.” Further complicating this situation, 
many villages do not have access to traditional media such as tele­
vision, radio, and print. Some villages have intermittent electricity. 
Despite these limitations, advertisers in India see some benefits to 
reaching rural consumers via mobile phones rather than traditional 
mass media campaigns. For one thing, ads on mobile phones cost 
less and are more targeted. For another thing, consumer spend­
ing among India’s rural villagers is increasing at a faster rate than 
among India’s urban centers. 
Many advertisers are starting to use mobile as a cost-eff ective 
strategy to reach areas with a poor infrastructure. For example, 
250,000 rupees ($4,100) buys only a 10-second advertisement dur­
ing the mythological drama Mahabharat on India’s Star Plus televi­
sion network, which attracts 6.3 million viewers per week. It would 
cost advertisers roughly the same amount to reach approximately 
21,000 people with a 15-minute phone call—a much longer period 
in which to engage with consumers. 
Consider the case of Unilever (www.unilever.com), the 
world’s second-largest consumer company, which markets a 
range of food, hygiene, and cleansing products including Hell­
man’s mayonnaise, Caress soap, Lipton tea, and Axe deodorant. 
Unilever wanted to reach India’s 833 million rural villagers. The 
company therefore implemented a marketing campaign that op­
erates as follows: A user places a call using a basic cell phone to a 
special number that disconnects after two rings so that the con­
sumer does not have to pay. The cell phone user then receives a 
15-minute pre-recorded selection of Bollywood music and jokes, 
interspersed with four ads for various Unilever health and beauty 
products. All users listen to the same recorded segment, which 
changes each week. In March 2014, at least two million people 
subscribed to the free service. 
Unilever’s mobile campaign in India for its Axe men’s deodor­
ant takes a similar approach, using free calls to customers. When 
a consumer buys Axe, he can enter a code on the package into a 
drawing to win a ticket to a party on a yacht. After registering, the 
man regularly receives a call on his cell with a woman’s prerecorded 
voice, urging him to buy more Axe to boost his chances of winning. 
Unilever maintains that its mobile ads have gained eight mil­
lion listeners. Advertising via mobile phones can reach massive 
numbers of people, measure their response, and constantly en­
gage them, claims the CEO of NetCore (www.netcore.in), the com­
pany that manages Unilever’s mobile service. Mobile advertising is 
able to obtain information on each subscriber, which helps to tar­
get campaigns. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
294 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
Several companies, including Cadbury, the chocolate-making 
Sources: Compiled from J. Voight, “For Unilever’s CMO, Global 
subsidiary of Mondelez (www.mondelezinternational.com), have  
Growth and Social Responsibility Are Now Inseparable Goals,” 
AdWeek, March 23, 2015; G. Jarboe, “Mobile Marketing Done Right: 
adopted a different strategy in which they offer free mobile air­
2 Masterful Case Studies,” Momentology, April 23, 2015; L. Gonzalez, 
time credit to customers. In India, 97 percent of mobile users have 
“Radio Station Reaches Remote Areas through Cell Phones, PSFK,
phones with prepaid SIM cards. Buyers of Cadbury’s 5-Star choco-
June 24, 2014; N. Mortimer, “Unilever’s Indian Mobile Entertainment 
late bar can enter a code on the package to get free airtime credits. 
Channel Reaches 60% of Non-TV Households,” The Drum, June 
Similarly, PepsiCo (www.pepsico.com) offers 15 rupees of free air-
3, 2014; A. Narayan, “Pick Up. Your Ad Is Calling,” Bloomberg 
time for buying various beverages and snacks. And what can Indian 
BusinessWeek, April 21-27, 2014; “Unilever Woos Indian Villagers 
with Free Mobile Music,” Digital Strategy Consulting, April 22, 2014;
consumers do with their free airtime? They can take advantage of 
S. Malviya, “Hindustan Unilever Runs Bihar’s Most Popular Radio on 
an offer from Marico (www.marico.com), India’s largest seller of 
Mobile Phones,” The Economic Times, March 4, 2014; www.unilever 
hair oil, which provides mobile customers with prerecorded calls 
.com, accessed September 10, 2015. 
offering basic English lessons. 
An advantage to digital marketing is being able to measure 
so much consumer data. But it’s hard for advertisers to determine 
Questions 
whether their mobile advertising campaigns directly result in prod-
1. Why is it so important to adapt business strategies to exist­
uct sales. In a country with over a billion people, advertising costs 
ing technologies? Provide examples from this case in your 
in India can rapidly reach unsustainable levels if millions of users 
answer. 
opt in to the free services. There are also concerns about the shelf 
2. Describe the impacts of wireless technologies on various 
life of such ad campaigns: Consumers could become bored with the 
companies’ marketing campaigns in India. 
same, or similar, ads. 
3. Discuss the limitations that “basic” cell phones can place on 
And the bottom line? Companies spent approximately  
marketing campaigns.  
$60 million on mobile advertising in India in 2015 and were pro­
jected to spend more than $100 million in 2016. 
FIN 
Financial Services. Mobile financial applications include banking, wireless payments and 
micropayments, money transfers, wireless wallets, and bill payment services. The bottom line 
for mobile financial applications is to make it more convenient for customers to transact busi­
ness regardless of where they are or what time it is. Harried customers are demanding such 
convenience. 
In many countries, banks increasingly offer mobile access to financial and account infor­
mation. For example, Citibank (www.citibank.com) alerts customers on their digital cell phones 
about changes to their account information. 
If you took a taxi ride in Frankfurt, Germany, you could use your cell phone to pay the taxi 
driver. Such very small purchase amounts (generally less than $10) are called micropayments. 
Web shoppers historically have preferred to pay with credit cards. Because credit card 
companies sometimes charge fees on transactions, however, credit cards are an ineff icient way 
to make very small purchases. The growth of relatively inexpensive digital content, such as 
music (e.g., iTunes), ring tones, and downloadable games, is driving the growth of micropay­
ments, as merchants seek to avoid paying credit card fees on small transactions. 
Ultimately, however, the success of micropayment applications will depend on the costs 
of the transactions. Transaction costs will be small only when the volume of transactions is 
large. One technology that can increase the volume of transactions is wireless mobile wallets 
(m-wallets). Various companies offer m-wallet technologies that enable cardholders to make 
purchases with a single click from their mobile devices. 
In China, SmartPay allows people to use their mobile phones to pay their phone bills 
and utility bills, buy lottery tickets and airline tickets, and make other purchases. SmartPay 
launched 172.com (see www.172.com), a portal that centralizes the company’s mobile, tele­
phone, and Internet-based payment services for consumers. The company designed the portal 
to provide a convenient, centralized source of information for all of these transactions. 
Intrabusiness Applications. Although business-to-consumer (B2C) m-commerce receives 
considerable publicity, most of today’s m-commerce applications actually are used within or­
ganizations. In this section, you will see how companies use mobile computing to support their 
employees. 
POM 
Mobile devices increasingly are becoming an integral part of workflow applications. For 
example, companies can use non-voice mobile services to assist in dispatch functions—that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Computing and Mobile Commerce 295 
is, to assign jobs to mobile employees, along with detailed information about the job. Target 
areas for mobile delivery and dispatch services include transportation (delivery of food, oil, 
newspapers, cargo; courier services; tow trucks; taxis), utilities (gas, electricity, phone, water); 
field service (computers, office equipment, home repair); healthcare (visiting nurses, doctors, 
social services); and security (patrols, alarm installation). 
Accessing Information. Another vital function of mobile technology is to help users ob­
tain and utilize information. Two types of technologies—mobile portals and voice portals— 
are designed to aggregate and deliver content in a form that will work within the limited 
space available on mobile devices. These portals provide information to users anywhere and 
at any time. 
A mobile portal aggregates and provides content and services for mobile users. These ser­
vices include news, sports, and e-mail; entertainment, travel, and restaurant information; com­
munity services; and stock trading. The world’s best-known mobile portal—i-mode from NTT 
DoCoMo (www.nttdocomo.com)—has more than 40 million subscribers, primarily in Japan. 
Major players in Europe are Vodafone, O2, and T-Mobile. Some traditional portals—for example, 
Yahoo!, AOL, and MSN—have mobile portals as well. 
A voice portal is a Web site with an audio interface. Voice portals are not Web sites in the 
normal sense because they can also be accessed through a standard phone or a cell phone. A 
phone number connects you to a Web site, where you can request information verbally. The 
system finds the information, translates it into a computer-generated voice reply, and tells you 
what you want to know. Most airlines utilize voice portals to provide real-time information on 
flight status. 
Another example of a voice portal is the voice-activated 511 travel-information line devel­
oped by Tellme.com. This technology enables callers to inquire about weather, local restau­
rants, current traffic, and other valuable information. In addition to retrieving information, 
some sites provide true interaction. For example, iPing (www.iping.com) is a reminder and 
notification service that allows users to enter information via the Web and receive reminder 
calls. This service can even call a group of people to notify them of a meeting or conference call. 
Telemetry Applications. Telemetry is the wireless transmission and receipt of data gath­
ered from remote sensors. Telemetry has numerous mobile computing applications. For ex­
ample, technicians can use telemetry to identify maintenance problems in equipment and 
doctors can monitor patients and control medical equipment from a distance. Car manufac­
turers use telemetry applications for remote vehicle diagnosis and preventive maintenance. 
For instance, drivers of many General Motors cars use its OnStar system (www.onstar.com) in 
numerous ways. 
An interesting telemetry application for individuals is an iPhone app called Find My iPhone. 
Find My iPhone is a part of the Apple iCloud (www.apple.com/icloud). This app provides several 
very helpful telemetry functions. If you lose your iPhone, for example, it offers two ways to find 
its approximate location on a map. First, you can sign into the Apple iCloud from any computer. 
Second, you can use the Find My iPhone app on another iPhone, iPad, or iPod touch. 
If you remember where you left your iPhone, you can write a message and display it on 
your iPhone’s screen. The message might say, “Left my iPhone. Please call me at 301-555-1211.” 
Your message appears on your iPhone, even if the screen is locked. And, if the map indicates 
that your iPhone is nearby—perhaps in your office under a pile of papers—you can tell Find My 
iPhone to play a sound that overrides the volume or silent setting. 
If you left your iPhone in a public place, you may want to protect its contents. You can 
remotely set a four-digit passcode lock to prevent people from using your iPhone, accessing 
your personal information, or tampering with your settings. Going further, you can initiate a 
remote wipe (erase all contents) to restore your iPhone to its factory settings. If you eventually 
find your phone, then you can connect it to your computer and use iTunes to restore the data 
from your most recent backup. 
If you have lost your iPhone and you do not have access to a computer, you can download 
the Find My iPhone app to a friend’s iPhone, iPad, or iPod touch and then sign in to access all 
the Find My iPhone features. 

 
 
 
 
296 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
Before you go on…
 1. What are the major drivers of mobile computing?
 2. Describe mobile portals and voice portals.
 3. Describe wireless financial services.
 4. Discuss some of the major intrabusiness wireless applications. 
Apply the Concept 10.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 10.3 Provide a specific 
you use a mobile wallet? Has using a mobile wallet replaced your 
example of how each of the five major m-commerce applications 
traditional wallet? What location-based services do you allow 
can benefit a business. 
on your mobile device? Do you freely share your location or are 
you more private? What type of intrabusiness applications do 
STEP 1: Background 
you utilize as an employee or customer of an organization? What 
Section 10.3 introduced you to five of the most popular mobile 
type of information do you access on a regular basis? Do you 
commerce applications. These applications are location-based 
utilize any telemetry information (such as a wireless connection 
applications, financial services, intrabusiness applications, 
to your vehicle computer to record information on your mobile 
accessing information, and telemetry. Although you may not 
phone)? 
have had experience with each of these, it is likely that you have 
experienced some. 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Based on your answers to the questions in Step 2, build a table 
STEP 2: Activity 
that provides a brief discussion of how each of the five major 
Read (or reread) the section and consider the following questions 
m-commerce applications benefit businesses and provide your 
related to your personal experiences with mobile commerce. Do 
personal experiences with each. 
10.4 The Internet of Things 
The Internet of Things (IoT), also called the Internet of Everything, the Internet of Anything, 
the Industrial Internet, and machine-to-machine (M2M) communication, is a system in which 
any object, natural or manmade, has a unique identity (i.e., its own IP address) and is able to 
send and receive information over a network (i.e., the Internet) without human interaction. The 
adoption of IPv6 (discussed in Chapter 6), which created a vast number of IP addresses, has 
been an important factor in the development of the IoT. In fact, there are enough IP addresses 
to uniquely identify every object on the earth. 
The IoT can be considered as invisible “everywhere computing” that is embedded in the 
objects around us. Examples of objects are your clock radio, your kitchen appliances, your ther­
mostat, your clothing, your smartphone, a cardiac patient’s heart monitor, a chip in a farm 
animal, and automobile sensors that alert a driver when tire pressure is low or the gas tank 
needs to be refilled. 
Wireless sensors are an underlying technology of the Internet of Things. A wireless sen­
sor is an autonomous device that monitors its own condition, as well as physical and environ­
mental conditions around it, such as temperature, sound, pressure, vibration, and movement. 
Sensors can also control physical systems; for example, opening and closing a valve and con­
trolling the fuel mixture in your car. Wireless sensors can be as small as a grain of rice. 
Wireless sensors collect data from many points over an extended space. A sensor contains 
processing, storage, and radio-frequency antennas for sending and receiving messages. Each 
sensor “wakes up” or activates for a fraction of a second when it has data to transmit. It then 
relays those data to its nearest neighbor. So, rather than every sensor transmitting its data to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The Internet of Things 297 
a remote computer, the data travel from sensor to sensor until they reach a central 
computer where they are stored and analyzed. An advantage of this process is that 
if one sensor fails, then another one can pick up the data. This process is eff icient, 
reliable, and extends battery life of the sensor. Also, if the network requires additional 
bandwidth, then operators can boost performance by placing new sensors when and 
where they are required. 
Wireless sensors provide information that enables a central computer to inte­
grate reports of the same activity from different angles within the network. This sys­
tem enables the network to determine with much greater accuracy myriad types of 
information such as the direction in which a person is moving, the weight of a vehi­
cle, and the amount of rainfall over a field of crops. One type of wireless sensor uses 
radio-frequency identification (RFID) technology, which we discuss next. 
Radio-Frequency Identification 
Radio-frequency identification (RFID) technology allows manufacturers to attach 
tags with antennas and computer chips on goods and then track their movement via 
radio signals. RFID was developed to replace bar codes. 
A typical bar code, known as the Universal Product Code (UPC), is made up of 
12 digits that are batched in various groups. Bar codes have worked well, but they 
have limitations. First, they require a line-of-sight to the scanning device. This system 
works well in a store, but it can pose substantial problems in a manufacturing plant or 
a warehouse or on a shipping/receiving dock. Second, because bar codes are printed 
on paper, they can be ripped, soiled, or lost. Third, the bar code identifies the manu­
facturer and product but not the actual item. 
FIGURE 10.6 Bar codes, RFID tags, and 
Quick response (QR) codes are also used in place of bar codes. A QR code is a 
QR codes. 
two-dimensional code, readable by dedicated QR readers and camera phones. Figure 
10.6 illustrates bar codes, QR codes, and an RFID tag. QR codes have several advantages over 
bar codes: 
• QR codes can store much more information. 
• Data types stored in QR codes include numbers, text, URLs, and even Japanese characters. 
• QR codes are smaller because they store information both horizontally and vertically. 
• QR codes can be read from any direction or angle, so they are less likely to be misread. 
• QR codes are more resistant to damage. 
RFID systems use tags with embedded microchips, which contain data, and antennas to trans­
mit radio signals over a short distance to RFID readers. The readers pass the data over a net­
work to a computer for processing. The chip in the RFID tag is programmed with information 
that uniquely identifies an item. It also contains information about the item such as its location 
and where and when it was made. (See Figure 10.7.) 
There are two basic types of RFID tags: active and passive. Active RFID tags use internal 
batteries for power, and they broadcast radio waves to a reader. Because active tags contain 
batteries, they are more expensive than passive RFID tags, and they can be read over greater 
distances. Therefore, they are used primarily for more expensive items. In contrast, passive 
RFID tags rely entirely on readers for their power. They are less expensive than active tags, 
but they can be read only up to 20 feet. For these reasons, they are generally applied to less 
expensive merchandise. Problems with RFID include expense and the comparatively large size 
of the tags. 
Examples of the Internet of Things in Use 
FIGURE 10.7 
and RFID tag. (Source: © Ecken, 
There are numerous examples of how the Internet of Things is being deployed. We discuss just 
Dominique/Keystone Pressedienst/ 
a few of them here: 
Zuma Press) Figure depicting bar codes (bottom), RFID tags (middle), and QR codes (top).
Photograph depicting small RFID reader and RFID tag fitted in the super market trolley.
Small RFID reader 

 
 
 
298 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
POM 
•  The Smart Home: In a smart home, your home computer, television, lighting and heating 
controls, home security system (including smart window and door locks), thermostats, and 
appliances have embedded sensors and can communicate with one another via a home 
network. You control these networked objects through various devices, including your 
pager, smartphone, television, home computer, and even your automobile. Appropriate 
service providers and homeowners can access the devices for which they are authorized. 
Smart home technology can be applied to any building, turning it into a smart building. 
Consider Nest Labs (www.nest.com; now owned by Google), which produces a digital ther­
mostat that combines sensors and Web technology. The thermostat senses not only air 
temperature, but also the movements of people in a house. It then adjusts room tempera­
tures accordingly to save energy. 
•  Healthcare: Patients with nonlife-threatening conditions can wear sensors, or have them 
implanted—for example, to monitor blood pressure or glucose levels—that are monitored 
by medical staff. In many cases, the patients can be shown how to interpret the sensor data 
themselves. Also, consumer-oriented sensors such as the Fitbit can encourage people to 
adopt healthier lifestyles. 
•  Automotive: Modern cars have many sensors that monitor functions such as engine oper­
ation, tire pressure, fluid levels, and many others. Cars can warn drivers of impending 
mechanical or other problems and automatically summon roadside assistance or emer­
gency services when necessary. Further, cars can detect vehicles in other lanes to help 
eliminate blindspots. 
•  Supply Chain Management: The IoT can make a company’s supply chain much more trans­
parent. A company can now track, in real time, the movement of raw materials and parts 
through the manufacturing process to finished products delivered to the customer. Sen­
sors in fleet vehicles (e.g., trucks) can monitor the condition of sensitive consignments 
(e.g., the temperature of perishable food). In addition, they can trigger automatic security 
alerts if a container is opened unexpectedly. 
•  Environmental Monitoring: Sensors monitor air and water quality, atmospheric and soil 
conditions, and the movements of wildlife. 
•  Infrastructure Management: Sensors monitor infrastructures such as bridges, railway 
tracks, and roads. They can identify and report changes in structural conditions that can 
compromise safety. 
•  Energy Management: Sensors will be integrated into all forms of energy-consuming 
devices; for example, switches, power outlets, light bulbs, and televisions. They will be 
able to communicate directly with utility companies via smart meters to balance power 
generation and energy usage. Another valuable application of sensors is to use them in 
smart electrical meters, thereby forming a smart grid. Smart meters monitor electricity 
usage, and they transmit those data in real time to the utility companies. In turn, the utili­
ties can utilize these data to match power demand with production. This process can lead 
to fewer brownouts and blackouts during periods of peak usage, such as air conditioning 
during hot summer days. 
•  Agriculture: Sensors monitor, in real time, air temperature, humidity, soil temperature, soil 
moisture, leaf wetness, atmospheric pressure, solar radiation, trunk/stem/fruit diameter, 
wind speed and direction, and rainfall. The data from these sensors are used in precision 
agriculture. (Precision agriculture is a farming technique based on observing, measuring, 
and responding to inter- and intra-field variability in crops.) 
•  Transportation: Sensors placed on complex transportation machines such as jet engines 
and locomotives can provide critical information on their operations. Consider General 
Electric (GE; www.ge.com), which embeds “intelligence” in the form of 250 sensors in each 
of its giant locomotives. The sensors produce nine million data points every hour. How can 
these sensors improve the performance of such a huge machine? 
One of the biggest problems on locomotives is faulty bearings. If a bearing fails, then an 
axle might freeze, leaving a train marooned on the tracks. In remote areas, this situation could 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Internet of Things 299 
be disastrous, not to mention expensive, because other trains would back up for miles behind 
the stalled one. In this situation, the company would have to send a crane to lift the locomotive 
off the track and transport it back to a shop. 
To avoid this type of scenario, GE embeds one sensor inside each locomotive’s gear case 
that transmits data on oil levels and contaminants. By examining these data, GE can predict the 
conditions that cause bearings to fail and axles to freeze. GE data analysts claim that sensors 
that predict part failures before they occur will translate into billions of dollars of savings for 
GE’s rail customers. 
GE also uses locomotive sensors to optimize the entire network of U.S. trains. Today, the 
average velocity of a freight train operating between U.S. cities ranges from 20-25 miles per 
hour. Why is this number so low? The reason is a combination of factors: congestion in the train 
yards, breakdowns (see above), and the frequent necessity of letting other trains pass. GE has 
developed a software tool called Movement Planner that gathers and integrates sensor data on 
velocity, traffic, and location from many locomotives. This analysis increases the average speed 
of its customers’ trains. One of GE’s customers, Norfolk Southern, states that an average speed 
increase of 1 mile per hour for its trains would be worth $200 million. GE’s goal is to increase 
average train speeds by 4 miles per hour. 
IT’s About Business 10.5 provides another example, where FedEx implemented its EDEN 
system to improve the efficiency of its dock operations. 
IT’s About Business 10.5 
The Internet of Things Improves FedEx’s 
Dock Operations 
A critical part of FedEx’s operations is the cooperation among su­
pervisors, forklift drivers, and truck drivers to load and unload 
items at its freight distribution centers. In the past, dock opera­
tions were performed manually, and they were highly ineff icient. 
Supervisors would hand out assignments to dockworkers at their 
workstations and manually plan workloads and shift schedules, 
and produce a log of hours actually worked. These and other 
manualized processes meant that estimated driver arrival times 
were usually a guess, and supervisors never knew if a dock 
was occupied unless that dock’s computer had been manually 
updated. 
To improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its dock opera­
tions, FedEx implemented a scheduling and messaging system that 
the company calls EDEN (Equipment Detection, Event Notification) 
Dock/Yard. Employees throughout the FedEx logistics chain have 
mobile devices and touchscreen displays so the EDEN soft ware 
can send messages between them, whether they’re in a truck, on a 
forklift, or anywhere in the freight dock. The system also works with 
handheld devices and computers used by office workers, automat­
ing dock assignments and schedules almost in real time. 
Perhaps the most impressive automation happens using In­
ternet of Things applications. Even before a truck arrives at the 
freight distribution center, its every move is tracked and the rele­
vant processes swing into action. Tractor-trailers have sensors that 
send GPS information to each truck’s onboard EDEN-connected 
computer. Dockworkers use the EDEN information from each truck 
to know what it’s carrying and its location. Each dock door has 
sensors that tell EDEN which one will be available when the truck 
POM 
arrives. This system ensures that all workers have the same infor­
mation. Supervisors can get in on the game by assigning a particu­
lar dock to a particular truck by clicking on its icon on their EDEN 
computer. 
Millions of actions are made through EDEN each day, and it 
is intuitive to use. In fact, EDEN is so user-friendly that FedEx was 
able to roll out the application to 12,000 users in 250 locations in 
a matter of just a few months. The training for the system involved 
watching a short video and reading a reference guide. 
FedEx expects that EDEN will save more than $9 million a year 
from improvements in dock and trailer yard planning and manage­
ment and estimated-time-of-arrival accuracy. 
Sources: Compiled from J. Manyika, M. Chui, P. Bisson, J. Woetzel, 
R. Dobbs, J. Bughin, and D. Aharon, “Unlocking the Potential of the 
Internet of Things,” McKinsey & Company, June 2015; B. Franks, “How 
Disney, FedEx Create Value at the Corner of Customer Experience 
and the Internet of Things,” Forbes, March 13, 2015; J. Twentyman, 
“Internet of Things Is Ready to Deliver,” FT.com, October 21, 2014; 
“FedEx Uses Real-Time Messaging and Interconnected Devices to 
Improve Dock Activities,” Datamark Incorporated, May 6, 2014; 
S. O’Neill, “How FedEx Streamlines Operations at Freight Docks,” 
InformationWeek, April 2, 2014; T. Leung, “FedEx Rides the IoT Wave 
with Near Real-Time Tracking,” Computerworld, September 10, 2013; 
www.fedex.com, accessed September 17, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Describe the problems faced by FedEx that led to the compa­
ny’s decision to implement the EDEN system. 
2. Discuss the advantages of the EDEN system. 
3. Discuss potential disadvantages of the EDEN system. 

300 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce
Before you go on…
 1. Define the Internet of Things and RFID.
 2. Provide two examples (other than those mentioned in this section) of how the Internet of Things ben-
efits organizations (public sector, private sector, for-profit, or not-for-profit). 
 3. Provide two specific business uses of RFID technology.
Apply the Concept 10.4
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 10.4 Describe the Internet of 
Things, along with examples of how organizations can utilize the 
Internet of Things.
STEP 1: Background
Section 10.4 has introduced the concept of the Internet of Things 
(IoT) and provided several examples. There is no doubt that the 
IoT will continue to grow and shape our lives. Many industries will 
change from reactive (correcting problems aft er they happen) to 
proactive (acting to prevent problems before they happen based 
on IoT data).
STEP 2: Activity
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept 
and watch the YouTube video link. It describes examples of 
personal applications of IoT and professional uses of IoT. Aft er 
watching the video, let your mind wander into the future to a time 
when everything is connected via the IoT. Not just the devices 
mentioned in the video (like your car) but your coff ee pot, bed, 
clothes, closet door, front door, toothbrush, and so much more 
are all connected to the IoT.
STEP 3: Deliverable
Write a paragraph or two to first describe the IoT, then provide 
current examples of how it has impacted your life and is currently 
making a diff erence for businesses and industries. Finally, provide 
a few ideas of how the IoT will shape the future. 
What’s in IT for me?
For the Accounting Major
Wireless applications help accountants to count and audit inven-
tory. They also expedite the flow of information for cost control. 
Price management, inventory control, and other accounting-related 
activities can be improved with the use of wireless technologies.
FIN  For the Finance Major
Wireless services can provide banks and other financial institutions 
with a competitive advantage. For example, wireless electronic pay-
ments, including micropayments, are more convenient (anywhere, 
anytime) than traditional means of payment, and they are less ex-
pensive. Electronic bill payment from mobile devices is becoming 
more popular, increasing security and accuracy, expediting cycle 
time, and reducing processing costs.
MKT  For the Marketing Major
Imagine a whole new world of marketing, advertising, and selling, 
with the potential to increase sales dramatically. Such is the promise 
of mobile computing. Of special interest for marketing are location-
based advertising as well as the new opportunities resulting from 
the Internet of Things and RFID. Finally, wireless technology also 
provides new opportunities in sales force automation (SFA), enabling 
faster and better communications with both customers (CRM) and 
corporate services.
ACCT

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 301 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
Wireless technologies offer many opportunities to support mobile 
employees of all kinds. Wearable computers enable off -site employ­
ees and repair personnel working in the field to service customers 
faster, better, and less expensively. Wireless devices can also increase 
productivity within factories by enhancing communication and col­
laboration as well as managerial planning and control. In addition, 
mobile computing technologies can improve safety by providing 
quicker warning signs and instant messaging to isolated employees. 
HRM For the Human Resource Management Major 
Mobile computing can improve HR training and extend it to any 
place at any time. Payroll notices can be delivered as SMSs. In 
addition, wireless devices can make it even more convenient for 
employees to select their own benefits and update their personal 
data. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
MIS personnel provide the wireless infrastructure that enables all 
organizational employees to compute and communicate anytime, 
anywhere. This convenience provides exciting, creative, new appli­
cations for organizations to reduce expenses and improve the eff i­
ciency and effectiveness of operations (e.g., to achieve transparency 
in supply chains). Unfortunately, as you saw earlier, wireless applica­
tions are inherently insecure. This lack of security is a serious prob­
lem with which MIS personnel must contend. 
Summary 
1.  Identify advantages and disadvantages of each of the three main 
types of wireless transmission media. 
Microwave transmission systems are used for high-volume, long-distance, 
line-of-sight communication. One advantage is the high volume. A disad­
vantage is that microwave transmissions are susceptible to environmental 
interference during severe weather such as heavy rain and snowstorms. 
Satellite transmission systems make use of communication satellites, and 
they receive and transmit data via line-of-sight. One advantage is that the 
enormous footprint—the area of Earth’s surface reached by a satellite’s 
transmission—overcomes the limitations of microwave data relay stations. 
Like microwaves, satellite transmissions are susceptible to environmental 
interference during severe weather. 
Radio transmission systems use radio-wave frequencies to send data 
directly between transmitters and receivers. An advantage is that radio 
waves travel easily through normal office walls. A disadvantage is that 
radio transmissions are susceptible to snooping by anyone who has similar 
equipment that operates on the same frequency. 
2.  Explain how businesses can use short-range, medium-range, and 
long-range wireless networks, respectively. 
Short-range wireless networks simplify the task of connecting one device to 
another, eliminating wires, and enabling people to move around while they 
use the devices. In general, short-range wireless networks have a range of 
100 feet or less. Short-range wireless networks include Bluetooth, ultra-wide­
band, and near-field communications. A business application of ultra-wide­
band is the PLUS Real-Time Location System from Time Domain. Using PLUS, 
an organization can locate multiple people and assets simultaneously. 
Medium-range wireless networks include Wi-Fi networks. Wi-Fi provides 
fast and easy Internet or intranet broadband access from public hotspots 
located at airports, hotels, Internet cafés, universities, conference centers, 
offices, and homes. 
Wide-area wireless networks connect users to the Internet over geograph­
ically dispersed territory. They include cellular telephones and wireless 
broadband. Cellular telephones provide two-way radio communications 
over a cellular network of base stations with seamless handoff s. Wireless 
broadband has a wireless access range of up to 31 miles and a data transfer 
rate of up to 75 Mbps. WiMAX can provide long-distance broadband wire­
less access to rural areas and remote business locations. 
3.  Provide a specific example of how each of the five major 
m-commerce applications can benefit a business. 
Location-based services provide information specific to a location. For 
example, a mobile user can (1) request the nearest business or service, 
such as an ATM or restaurant; (2) receive alerts, such as a warning of a traf­
fic jam or an accident; and (3) find a friend. With location-based advertising, 
marketers can integrate the current locations and preferences of mobile 
users. They can then send user-specific advertising messages about nearby 
shops, malls, and restaurants to wireless devices. 
Mobile financial applications include banking, wireless payments and micropay­
ments, money transfers, wireless wallets, and bill payment services. The bot­
tom line for mobile financial applications is to make it more convenient for 
customers to transact business regardless of where they are or what time it is. 
Intrabusiness applications consist of m-commerce applications that are 
used within organizations. Companies can use non-voice mobile services 
to assist in dispatch functions—that is, to assign jobs to mobile employees, 
along with detailed information about the job. 
When it comes to accessing information, mobile portals and voice portals 
are designed to aggregate and deliver content in a form that will work 
within the limited space available on mobile devices. These portals provide 
information anywhere and anytime to users. 
Telemetry is the wireless transmission and receipt of data gathered from 
remote sensors. Company technicians can use telemetry to identify main­
tenance problems in equipment. Car manufacturers use telemetry applica­
tions for remote vehicle diagnosis and preventive maintenance. 
4.  Describe the Internet of Things along with examples of how various 
organizations can utilize the Internet of Things. 
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a system where any object, natural or 
manmade, has a unique identity (using IPv6) and the ability to send and 
receive information over a network (i.e., the Internet) without human 
interaction. 
We leave the examples of various uses of the IoT to the student. 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
302 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
Chapter Glossary 
Bluetooth Chip technology that enables short-range connection (data 
and voice) between wireless devices. 
cellular telephones (cell phones) Phones that provide two way 
radio communications over a cellular network of base stations with 
seamless handoff s. 
global positioning system (GPS) A wireless system that uses 
satellites to enable users to determine their position anywhere on 
Earth. 
hotspot A small geographical perimeter within which a wireless access 
point provides service to a number of users. 
Internet of Things (IoT) A scenario in which objects, animals, 
and people are provided with unique identifiers and the ability 
to automatically transfer data over a network without requiring 
human-to-human or human-to-computer interaction. 
location-based commerce (L-commerce) Mobile commerce 
transactions targeted to individuals in specific locations, at specific 
times. 
microwave transmission A wireless system that uses microwaves for 
high-volume, long-distance, point-to-point communication. 
mobile commerce (or m-commerce) Electronic commerce 
transactions that are conducted with a mobile device. 
mobile computing A real-time connection between a mobile device 
and other computing environments, such as the Internet or an 
intranet. 
mobile portal A portal that aggregates and provides content and 
services for mobile users. 
mobile wallet (m-wallet) A technology that allows users to 
make purchases with a single click from their mobile 
devices. 
near-field communications (NFC) The smallest of the short range 
wireless networks that is designed to be embedded in mobile 
devices such as cell phones and credit cards. 
Discussion Questions 
 1.  Given that you can lose a cell phone as easily as a wallet, which do 
you feel is a more secure way of carrying your personal data? Support 
your answer.
 2.  If mobile computing is the next wave of technology, would you ever 
feel comfortable with handing a waiter or waitress your cell phone to 
make a payment at a restaurant the way you currently hand over your 
credit or debit card? Why or why not?
 3.  What happens if you lose your NFC-enabled smartphone or it is sto­
len? How do you protect your personal information?
 4.  In your opinion, is the mobile (or digital) wallet a good idea? Why or 
why not?
 5.  Discuss how m-commerce can expand the reach of e-business.
personal area network A computer network used for communication 
among computer devices close to one person. 
propagation delay Any delay in communications from signal 
transmission time through a physical medium. 
radio-frequency identifi cation (RFID) technology A wireless 
technology that allows manufacturers to attach tags with antennas 
and computer chips on goods and then track their movement 
through radio signals. 
radio transmission Uses radio-wave frequencies to send data directly 
between transmitters and receivers. 
satellite radio (or digital radio) A wireless system that off ers 
uninterrupted, near CD-quality music that is beamed to your radio 
from satellites. 
satellite transmission A wireless transmission system that uses 
satellites for broadcast communications. 
telemetry The wireless transmission and receipt of data gathered from 
remote sensors. 
ultra-wideband (UWB) A high-bandwidth wireless technology with 
transmission speeds in excess of 100 Mbps that can be used for 
applications such as streaming multimedia from, say, a personal 
computer to a television. 
voice portal A Web site with an audio interface. 
wireless Telecommunications in which electromagnetic waves carry 
the signal between communicating devices. 
wireless 911 911 emergency calls made with wireless devices. 
wireless access point An antenna connecting a mobile device to a 
wired local area network. 
Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi) A set of standards for wireless local area 
networks based on the IEEE 802.11 standard. 
wireless local area network (WLAN) A computer network in 
a limited geographical area that uses wireless transmission for 
communication. 
 6.  Discuss how mobile computing can solve some of the problems of the 
digital divide.
 7.  List three to four major advantages of wireless commerce to consum­
ers and explain what benefits they provide to consumers.
 8.  Discuss the ways in which Wi-Fi is being used to support mobile com­
puting and m-commerce. Describe the ways in which Wi-Fi is aff ecting 
the use of cellular phones for m-commerce.
 9.  You can use location-based tools to help you find your car or the 
closest gas station. However, some people see location-based 
tools as an invasion of privacy. Discuss the pros and cons of loca­
tion-based tools. 
10. Discuss the benefits of telemetry in healthcare for the elderly. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 1 303 
11.  Discuss how wireless devices can help people with disabilities. 
13. Which of the applications of the Internet of Things do you think are 
likely to gain the greatest market acceptance over the next few years? 
12.  Some experts say that Wi-Fi is winning the battle with 3G cellular ser-
Why?
vice. Others disagree. Discuss both sides of the argument and support  
each one.  
Problem-Solving Activities 
 1.  Investigate commercial applications of voice portals. Visit several 
vendors, for example, Microsoft and Nuance. What capabilities and 
applications do these vendors off er?
 2.  Using a search engine, try to determine whether there are any com­
mercial Wi-Fi hotspots in your area.
 3.  Examine how new data-capture devices such as RFID tags help organ­
izations accurately identify and segment their customers for activities 
such as targeted marketing. Browse the Web, and develop five poten­
tial new applications not listed in this chapter for RFID technology. 
What issues would arise if a country’s laws mandated that such devices 
be embedded in everyone’s body as a national identification system?
 4.  Investigate commercial uses of GPS. Start with www.neigps.com. Can 
some of the consumer-oriented products be used in industry? Pre­
pare a report on your findings.
 5.  Access www.bluetooth.com. Examine the types of products being en­
hanced with Bluetooth technology. Present two of these products to 
the class and explain how they are enhanced by Bluetooth technology.
 6.  Explore www.nokia.com. Prepare a summary of the types of mobile 
services and applications Nokia currently supports and plans to sup­
port in the future.
 7.  Enter www.ibm.com. Search for “wireless e-business.” Research the 
resulting stories to determine the types of wireless capabilities and 
applications IBM’s software and hardware support. Describe some of 
the ways these applications have helped specific businesses and in­
dustries.
 8.  Research the status of 3G and 4G cellular service by visiting various 
links. Prepare a report on the status of 3G and 4G based on your 
findings.
 9.  Enter Pitney Bowes Business Insight (www.pbinsight.com). Click on 
“MapInfo Professional,” then click on the “Resources” tab, then on the 
“Demos” tab. Look for the location-based services demos. Try all the 
demos. Summarize your findings. 
10.  Enter www.packetvideo.com. Examine the demos and products and 
list their capabilities. 
11.  Enter www.onstar.com. What types of fleet services does OnStar pro­
vide? Are these any different from the services OnStar provides to in­
dividual car owners? (Play the movie.) 
12.  Access various search engines to find articles about the “Internet of 
Things.” What is the “Internet of Things”? What types of technologies 
are necessary to support it? Why is it important? 
Closing Case 1 
How to Find a Parking Place? 
POM The Problem 
The size of the parking industry in the United States is estimated to 
be $18 billion, and finding a parking space in cities remains a major 
challenge. Although many cities have witnessed an increase in the 
number of residents who are utilizing public transportation, bicycles, 
or carpools, the number of available parking spaces has not increased. 
Studies have revealed that motorists can spend as much as 45 minutes 
searching for an open parking space. Further, parking experts state that 
as much as 30 percent of traffic in U.S. cities consists of drivers looking 
for a vacant parking space. As a consequence of inadequate parking, 
local businesses lose customers and emissions increase significantly. 
A Variety of Solutions 
Several technologies have emerged in recent years to help alleviate the 
parking problem. Peer-to-peer parking apps such as MonkeyParking, 
Parkmodo, and Haystack (www.haystackmobile.com) allow drivers to 
sell the rights to parking spaces on streets. Drivers who are about to 
leave a space use the apps to connect with a client who is willing to pay 
them to wait and give the client the space. The app company helps set 
the price, and it takes a commission. 
Another app, PocketParker, turns smartphones into passive sen­
sors that track the location and movements of other users who have 
installed the app. The app integrates parking lot data from Open-
StreetMap (www.openstreetmap.org) and data from combined user 
actions to determine the likelihood that a particular parking lot has an 
open parking space. 
ParkWhiz (www.parkwhiz.com), SpotHero (www.spothero.com), 
and JustPark (www.justpark.com) are e-parking services that allow 
users to check the availability of parking spaces in participating park­
ing lots and garages and to book guaranteed spaces before reaching 
their destination. 
Valet companies Zirx (http://zirx.com), Luxe Valet (www.luxe 
.com), and Caarbon (www.caarbon.com) allow drivers to click on an 
app so that when they arrive at their destination a valet takes their 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
304 
CHAPTER 10  Wireless, Mobile Computing, and Mobile Commerce 
cars for as long as they need. When drivers are ready for their cars, they 
simply click on the app again. The three companies view their business 
model as an entry point to providing a suite of services, such as gas, car 
washes, and oil changes. 
Cities are employing a variety of other methods to address 
their parking problems. Some cities are attempting to reduce traff ic 
through “consumption pricing” in which they charge everyone enter­
ing city limits a flat fee. Other cities are reducing the availability of 
on-street parking by renting hundreds of city-owned spots to car­
-sharing services such as Zipcar (www.zipcar.com) and Getaround 
(www.getaround.com). 
Some cities are beginning to charge market rates for all street 
parking. These rates change according to the time of day and the loca­
tion of the space. According to economists, such pricing should keep 
15 to 20 percent of spaces available at any time, and the money earned 
would go to the city. Although the public might criticize this practice, 
cities such as Pasadena, California, won public support for the practice 
by reinvesting the revenue into street maintenance. 
Other cities, including San Francisco and Boston, are installing 
networks of sensors in parking spaces. The sensors, which cost approx­
imately $225 each, provide motorists with information about available 
spaces while also providing cities with data to develop pricing that 
takes demand into account. Installing a limited number of sensors in 
areas where parking will bring high prices would quickly pay for their 
installation while reducing traffic. Critics of the plan note that the sen­
sors do not work in parking spaces in residential neighborhoods that 
have no parking meters. 
The Results 
In mid-2014, cities including Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Boston 
banned MonkeyParking, ParkModo, and Haystack. The cities charged 
that the companies’ business model was illegal because they were 
making money from free public parking. In essence, the apps were 
selling something they did not own. The cities also approved ordi­
nances making it illegal for any company similar to these three firms to 
conduct business within city limits. 
In March 2015, MonkeyParking (now an app in the Apple 
iStore) returned to San Francisco with a new business model that 
complies with the city’s laws. Rather than enable users to sell public 
property, the company is now focused on private property, namely 
users’ driveways. The opportunity for MonkeyParking users is really 
the space in front of the driveway. (Few city driveways are actually 
large enough to accommodate a car without blocking the sidewalk.) 
Drivers who wish to park their cars are matched with driveways or 
driveway spots in the vicinity. The cost to the driver is a $10 flat fee, 
and the driveway owner determines how long the car may remain. 
MonkeyParking takes 20 percent of the flat fee. 
Sources: Compiled from D. Streitfeld, “Parking Apps Face Obstacles at 
Every Turn,” The New York Times, June 10, 2015; C. Woodward, “The 
Endless Sage of Haystack, an Illegal App that Tried to Sell Public Parking,” 
beta Boston, June 10, 2015; J. Brasuell, “MonkeyParking App Is Back – This 
Time It’s Legal,” Planetizen, March 24, 2015; J. Eskenazi, “MonkeyParking 
Is Back and Ready to Disrupt Your Driveway,” San Francisco Magazine, 
March 23, 2015; C. Mims, “No ‘Free Parking’ for an App that Tried,” The 
Wall Street Journal, January 25, 2015; “MonkeyParking App Could Soon Be 
Banned in L.A.,” ABC News, January 7, 2015; K. Rector, “Canton Resident’s 
Haystack Parking App No Longer Operating,” The Baltimore Sun, 
November 24, 2014; A. Vaccaro, “In a Post-Haystack Boston, City Exploring 
More Parking Technology,” Boston.com, September 24, 2014; G. Maddaus, 
“Kicked Out of San Francisco, MonkeyParking App Plans a Fresh Start in 
Santa Monica,” LA Weekly, September 24, 2014; C. Garling, “Smartphone 
Movements Could Reveal Empty Parking Spots,” MIT Technology Review, 
September 15, 2014; J. Brustein, “How Much Would You Pay for a Parking 
Spot?” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, August 11-24, 2014; J. Lowensohn, 
“Parking Spot Startup Vows to Fight San Francisco’s Plan to Shut It Down,” 
The Verge, June 27, 2014; S. Larson, “San Francisco Tells Parking Apps to 
Stop Auctioning Spaces,” ReadWrite, June 23, 2014. 
Questions 
1.  Describe how the e-parking apps use wireless communications. 
2.  The developers of the e-parking apps argued that they were only 
selling information about parking places and not the parking plac­
es themselves. Was this a valid argument? Why or why not? 
3.  Were the reactions of San Francisco, Los Angeles, and Boston to the 
e-parking apps appropriate? Why or why not? 
4.  Were the cities inhibiting entrepreneurship? Why or why not? 
Closing Case 2 
Pacific Gas & Electric Turns to Smart Meters 
POM The Problem 
Peak demand—defined as the hourly period that represents the high­
est point of customer consumption of electricity—is the major chal­
lenge confronting electrical utilities. This period usually occurs around 
5:30 PM. It is driven by a combination of office and domestic demand and, 
at certain times of the year, by the onset of darkness. When peak demand 
arrives, electric utilities must have the power available to meet it. 
One strategy to meet peak demand is to build enough power 
plants to satisfy every possible supply-and-demand scenario. How­
ever, the costs and environmental impacts of this approach would be 
far too high to make it a realistic solution. 
Another strategy is to implement demand-response programs, 
which are designed to be both fiscally and environmentally responsible. 
These programs offer incentives (typically in the form of rebates) to 
businesses that volunteer to temporarily reduce their electricity use at 
times when demand could outpace supply. These businesses turn off 
unnecessary lighting and office equipment, raise thermostat settings, 
and delay using electric appliances until evening hours. 
The IT Solution 
In addition to implementing demand-response programs, Pacific Gas 
& Electric (PGE; www.pge.com) was the first California utility and the 
largest utility in the United States to install smart meters in customers’ 
homes in an effort to meet peak demand. The utility now captures four 
readings per hour from 9.4 million customers instead of the standard 
one reading per month. 
The smart meters are capable of taking 12 readings per min­
ute. However, even collecting data every 15 minutes has generated 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 2 305 
concerns among homeowners. For example, demonstrators in Marin 
County (just north of San Francisco), fearing an invasion of their pri­
vacy, blocked PGE installation trucks. 
Smart meters capture how much energy is being consumed at 
each site and then broadcast those data over radio frequency to a 
PGE neighborhood area network. In turn, each area network reports 
the data to a central data center. The meters do not have the intelli­
gence to know which types of home devices are consuming energy or 
how much energy each device is using. They simply collect raw usage 
data. Even so, PGE can now analyze much more data that it could in 
the past. Significantly, the company is utilizing those data to upgrade 
its operations. 
The smart meters feed two terabytes of data per month into a 
PGE data warehouse. PGE replicates the data for each division and 
makes them available for analysis without any personal identifying 
information, in order to protect the privacy of its customers. 
Using those data, PGE has launched an analytics service, called 
PG&E Interval Data Analytics, that has helped the utility integrate the 
functions of energy generation in PGE power plants with energy dis­
tribution to customers. These formerly isolated functions—known 
as silos—are now integrated with near-real-time usage data from the 
smart meters. 
The first analysis identified those customers who were using the 
most electricity. These customers could be two heavy industries in a 
neighborhood. Alternatively, demand in a residential neighborhood 
could increase when children get home from school and turn on tele­
visions, computers, and game consoles. In any case, the utility has cre­
ated a long list of energy-conservation and efficiency incentives that it 
can offer contributors to peak demand. (One incentive is the utility’s 
demand-response program noted previously.) 
For example, on a hot day PGE can utilize the smart meter data 
to identify which customers are using the most air conditioning, 
which at one time was causing rolling brownouts in California. Some 
California homeowners now allow PGE to install a switch on their air 
conditioners that dials down the air conditioning (increases the ther­
mostat temperature) as peak demand approaches and dials the air 
conditioning back up (decreases the thermostat temperature) aft er 
the demand passes. 
The Results 
“Shaving peak demand” has been critically important to the utility 
industry for many years. However, without smart meters and Interval 
Data Analytics, utility executives lacked the capacity to manage their 
systems so as to meet customer demand with suff icient precision. 
The data from smart meters have enabled them to achieve this 
precision. 
PGE now reports usage data directly to consumers over the My 
Energy section on its Web site. Customers must register to view the 
data, which includes a graph of each month’s energy consumption, 
with one line comparing similar homes and another line comparing 
eff icient homes. 
Further, PGE has added a button to its My Energy page that allows 
consumers to download the data to their own spreadsheets with a sin­
gle click. Customers are able to send those data to a third party, such 
as Opower (www.opower.com). Opower is a soft ware-as-a-service 
(SaaS; discussed in Plug IT In 4) company that provides cloud-based 
software to roughly 100 utilities and their customers. Opower’s soft ­
ware provides customers with better information about their energy 
consumption patterns, along with personalized methods to save 
both energy and money. Customers using Opower have reduced their 
energy usage by an average of 2.5 percent. 
Sources: Compiled from T. Turkel, “Consumers Still Waiting for Smart 
Meters to Pay Off,” Portland Press Herald, July 19, 2015; K. Tweed, 
“Opower Books $90M Contract with PG&E – It Biggest Ever,” Greentech 
Media, May 13, 2015; C. Mooney, “Why 50 Million Smart Meters Still 
Haven’t Fixed America’s Energy Habits,” Washington Post, January 29, 
2015; “Assessment of Demand Response and Advanced Metering,” Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission, December, 2014; “Smart Meters Lay 
Foundation for Understanding Energy Costs,” Nationwide Energy Partners, 
December 18, 2014; B. Spiller and K. Mohlin, “Smart Meters Need Effective 
Electricity Pricing to Deliver Their Full Benefits,” Environmental Defense 
Fund, December 16, 2014; M. Wald, “Power Savings of Smart Meters Prove 
Slow to Materialize,” The New York Times, December 5, 2014; C. Babcock, 
“PG&E Delivers on Promise of Smart Meters,” InformationWeek, April 1, 
2014; E. Howland, “Smart Meters Are Here. So Why Isn’t Dynamic Pricing?” 
Utility Dive, January 8, 2014; Y. Maskrey and E. Ifuku, “Demonstrating 
Fast Demand Response and Integrating Intermittent Renewable Energy,” 
Electric Light and Power, August 22, 2013; C. King, “How Smart Meters 
Fight Power Outages,” GigaOM, July 5, 2012; www.pge.com, www.opower 
.com, accessed September 22, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  What is the role of wireless technologies in smart-metering sys­
tems? 
2.  Describe the potential disadvantages of smart-metering systems. 
3.  Discuss the advantages of smart meters to utility companies. 
4.  Discuss the advantages of smart meters to the customers of utility 
companies. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 11 
jsmith/iStockphoto 
Information Systems within the 
Organization 
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
11.1 Transaction Processing Systems 
11.1 Explain the purpose of transaction processing systems. 
11.2 Functional Area Information 
11.2 Explain the types of support that information systems can provide for each 
Systems 
functional area of the organization. 
11.3 Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) 
11.3 Identify advantages and drawbacks to businesses implementing an enterprise 
Systems 
resource planning system. 
11.4 ERP Support for Business Processes 
11.4 Describe the three main business processes supported by ERP systems. 
eventually leveled off, however, as newer musicals such as The Produc­
ers (2001) became hot attractions. To reverse this trend, Disney actu-
The Lion King Continues Its Box Off ice 
ally discounted tickets to The Lion King for a period of time. 
In 2006, Disney moved The Lion King from the New Amsterdam 
Opening Case 
FIN 
MKT 
MIS 
Dominance 
Theater to the slightly smaller Minskoff Theater to make way for its 
The Lion King opened on Broadway in 1997 to critical acclaim. 
Mary Poppins musical. At this time, Disney executives were occupied 
The play went on to win six Tony Awards, including best musi-
with opening new musicals such as The Little Mermaid. The entertain­
cal. Like many Broadway hit shows, The Lion King enjoyed increasing 
ment giant made the mistake of bundling those shows with The Lion 
ticket sales early on, often grossing $1 million per week. Earnings 
King in their ads, even though the target audiences for the two shows 
306 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 307 
were different. Ticket sales for The Lion King remained uneven, both 
Based on the results Disney obtained from its YMS, the company 
before and after the 2008 recession. By March 2009, weekly gross reve-
abandoned the traditional strategy of charging one price for entire sec­
nues had declined to $813,000. 
tions of seats. Instead, the producers raise prices for busy weeks by 
To reinvigorate ticket sales, in 2011 the show’s producers, Disney 
making predictions based on the show’s historical data. An interactive 
Theatrical Productions, implemented a proprietary yield management 
seating map accompanies the YMS that allows customers to visually 
system (YMS)—also known as dynamic pricing—to recommend the 
pick their seats. Disney has discovered that customers oft en choose 
highest ticket prices that audiences would be likely to pay for each of 
better, pricier seats when they examine the seating chart. 
the 1,700 seats at every performance at the Minskoff. Although other 
How successful was Disney’s yield management system? In 2013, 
shows employ YMSs to increase seat prices during tourist-heavy hol-
The Lion King stunned Broadway by replacing Wicked as the Number 1 
iday weeks, only Disney has reached the level of yield management 
earner, a position it had not enjoyed for 10 years. By March 2014, the play 
sophistication achieved by the airline and hotel industries. Disney uses 
was grossing $1.5 million per week. Additionally, consumer demand has 
its system to analyze and set prices based on demand and ticket pur-
grown. In 2013, the show attracted 700,000 theater goers, which was 
chasing patterns. 
50,000 more than in 2008. By early 2015, The Lion King had become the 
Yield management systems enable businesses to implement a 
highest-grossing Broadway play of all time, with $6.2 billion in world-
variable pricing strategy, based on understanding, anticipating, and 
wide ticket sales. 
influencing consumer behavior to maximize revenue from a fixed, per­
ishable resource (e.g., airline seats, hotel rooms, theater seats). YMSs 
Sources: Compiled from “‘The Lion King’ Musical Breaks Box Office Record 
are designed to sell inventory to the right customer at the right time 
with $6.2 Billion Worldwide,” Associated Press, September 22, 2014; 
for the right price. 
A. Phadnis, “SpiceJet Revenue Management GM Quits Two Days After 
Discount Sale,” Business Standard, April 3, 2014; J. Gereben, “Dynamic 
In the case of The Lion King, Disney’s YMS analyzes historical data 
Ticket Pricing,” San Francisco Classical Voice, March 18, 2014; S. Sluis, 
for 11.5 million audience members. It then recommends prices for dif­
“Dynamic Pricing Finds a Seat on Broadway,” Destination CRM, March 17, 
ferent types of performances—for example, peak dates such as Christ­
2014; P. Healy, “Ticket Pricing Puts ‘Lion King’ Atop Broadway’s Circle 
mas, off-peak dates such as a weeknight in February, and periods in 
of Life,” New York Times, March 17, 2014; L. Homer, “3 Rules for Pricing 
between. Historical ticket demand for a particular week, for instance, 
Right,” TRG Arts, October 16, 2013; C. Jones, “How Theater Ticket Prices 
will influence price recommendations for that week in subsequent 
Are Changing Like Airline Fares,” Chicago Tribune, October 22, 2012; 
years. 
“Marriott Takes Revenue Management to the Next Level,” Marriott Press 
Release, June 4, 2012; P. Healy, “Broadway Hits Make Most of Premium 
To help keep audience demand strong, Disney has made a highly 
Pricing,” New York Times, November 24, 2011; www.lionking.com, ac­
unusual choice among Broadway hit shows. The company has fac­
cessed April 8, 2015. 
tored in an upper ticket price limit of $227 in its YMS. This price is well 
below the top prices for blockbuster shows such as The Book of Mor-
Questions 
mon ($477), Kinky Boots ($349), and Wicked ($300). This pricing strategy 
1. Why are yield management systems so important to the producers 
provides at least three benefits: (1) It makes The Lion King relatively 
of Broadway shows? (Hint: What is the value of an unsold seat once 
affordable for large groups and families; (2) it reduces the chance of 
the curtain goes up?) 
buyer’s remorse (the sense of regret after having made a purchase), 
2. Describe potential disadvantages of Disney’s yield management 
which can generate negative word-of-mouth feedback; and (3) it off ers 
system. 
Disney the flexibility to raise prices over the long term. 
Introduction 
The opening case illustrates the integral part that information systems (IS) play in an organi­
zation’s success. As you noted in the case, Disney employed information systems to increase 
ticket sales for The Lion King. IS are everywhere, and they affect organizations in countless 
ways. Although IS are frequently discussed within the context of large organizational settings, 
they also play a critical role in small organizations. 
It is important to note that “systems within organizations” do not have to be owned by the 
organization itself. Instead, organizations can deploy very productive IS that are owned by an 
external vendor. The key point here is that “systems within an organization” are intended to 
support internal processes, regardless of who actually owns the systems. 
It is important for you to have a working knowledge of IS within your organization for a 
variety of reasons. First, your job will require you to access corporate data that are supplied 
primarily by your firm’s transaction processing systems and enterprise resource planning sys­
tems. Second, you will have a great deal of input into the format and content of the reports 
that you receive from these systems. Third, you will utilize the information contained in these 
reports to perform your job more productively. 
This chapter will teach you about the various information systems that modern organiza­
tions utilize. We begin by considering transaction processing systems, the most fundamental 

 
 
 
308 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization 
MIS 
ACCT 
FIGURE 11.1  How transaction 
processing systems manage data. 
organizational information systems. We continue with the functional area management infor­
mation systems, and we conclude with enterprise resource planning systems. 
11.1 Transaction Processing Systems 
Millions (sometimes billions) of transactions occur in large organizations every day. A transac­
tion is any business event that generates data worthy of being captured and stored in a data­
base. Examples of transactions are a product manufactured, a service sold, a person hired, and 
a payroll check generated. In another example, when you are checking out of Walmart, each 
time the cashier swipes an item across the bar code reader is one transaction. 
A transaction processing system (TPS) supports the monitoring, collection, storage, and 
processing of data from the organization’s basic business transactions, each of which generates 
data. The TPS collects data continuously, typically in real time—that is, as soon as the data are 
generated—and it provides the input data for the corporate databases. The TPSs are critical to 
the success of any enterprise because they support core operations. 
In the modern business world, TPSs are inputs for the functional area information systems 
and business intelligence systems, as well as business operations such as customer relation­
ship management, knowledge management, and e-commerce. TPSs have to eff iciently handle 
both high volumes of data and large variations in those volumes (e.g., during periods of peak 
processing). In addition, they must avoid errors and downtime, record results accurately and 
securely, and maintain privacy and security. Figure 11.1 illustrates how TPSs manage data. 
Consider these examples of how TPSs handle the complexities of transactional data: 
• When more than one person or application program can access the database at the same 
time, the database has to be protected from errors resulting from overlapping updates. 
The most common error is losing the results of one of the updates. 
• When processing a transaction involves more than one computer, the database and all 
users must be protected against inconsistencies arising from a failure of any component at 
any time. For example, an error that occurs at some point in an ATM withdrawal can enable 
a customer to receive cash, although the bank’s computer indicates that he or she did not. 
(Conversely, a customer might not receive cash, although the bank’s computer indicates 
that he or she did.) 
• It must be possible to reverse a transaction in its entirety if it turns out to have been entered 
in error. It is also necessary to reverse a transaction when a customer returns a purchased 
item. For example, if you return a sweater that you have purchased, then the store must 
credit your credit card for the amount of the purchase, refund your cash, or offer you an 
in-store credit to purchase another item. In addition, the store must update its inventory. 
• It is frequently important to preserve an audit trail. In fact, for certain transactions an audit 
trail may be legally required. 
These and similar issues explain why organizations spend millions of dollars on expensive main­
frame computers. In today’s business environment, firms must have the dependability, reliability, 
and processing capacity of these computers to handle their transaction processing loads. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functional Area Information Systems 309 
Regardless of the specific data processed by a TPS, the actual process tends to be stand­
ard, whether it occurs in a manufacturing firm, a service firm, or a government organization. 
As the first step in this procedure, people or sensors collect data, which are entered into the 
computer via any input device. Generally speaking, organizations try to automate the TPS data 
entry as much as possible because of the large volume involved, a process called source data 
automation (discussed in Plug IT In 2). 
Next, the system processes data in one of two basic ways: batch processing and online 
processing. In batch processing, the firm collects data from transactions as they occur, placing 
them in groups or batches. The system then prepares and processes the batches periodically 
(say, every night). 
In online transaction processing (OLTP), business transactions are processed online as 
soon as they occur. For example, when you pay for an item at a store, the system records the 
sale by reducing the inventory on hand by one unit, increasing sales figures for the item by one 
unit, and increasing the store’s cash position by the amount you paid. The system performs 
these tasks in real time by means of online technologies. 
Before you go on…
 1. Define TPS.
 2. List the key functions of a TPS. 
Apply the Concept 11.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 11.1 Explain the purpose of 
This link will take you to a Web page that describes the process 
transaction processing systems. 
of creating data flow diagrams (DFDs). The page uses the 
example of a college student application to demonstrate the 
STEP 1: Background 
flow of data through a university. Review this description, 
and identify the transactions that take place throughout the 
Section 11.1 has explained that transaction processing systems 
process. 
(TPS) capture data and then automatically transmit those data to 
the various functional area systems. Most TPS are designed based 
on an organization’s existing processes. To better understand 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
how a TPS operates, you should consider the flow of data through 
Consider your student application process. Are there any pieces 
the student application process. 
of your application that you feel were handled diff erently than 
the example described? Prepare a short description of the 
STEP 2: Activity 
application process described in the video and discuss the 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept 
purpose of the TPS for this process. 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 11.1. 
Functional Area Information Systems  
Each department or functional area within an organization has its own collection of application 
programs, or information systems. Each of these functional area information systems (FAIS) 
supports a particular functional area in the organization by increasing each area’s internal eff i­
ciency and effectiveness. FAISs often convey information in a variety of reports, which you will 
see later in this chapter. Examples of FAISs are accounting IS, finance IS, production/operations 
management (POM) IS, marketing IS, and human resources IS. 
As illustrated in Figure 11.1, the FAIS access data from the corporate databases. The follow­
ing sections discuss the support that FAISs provide for these functional areas. 
FIN 
ACCT 
11.2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
310 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization 
Information Systems for Accounting and Finance 
A primary mission of the accounting and finance functional areas is to manage money flows 
into, within, and out of organizations. This mission is very broad because money is involved 
in all organizational functions. Therefore, accounting and finance information systems are 
very diverse and comprehensive. In this section, you focus on certain selected activities of the 
accounting/finance functional area. 
Financial Planning and Budgeting. Appropriate management of financial assets is a ma­
jor task in financial planning and budgeting. Managers must plan for both acquiring and utiliz­
ing resources, for example: 
•  Financial and economic forecasting: Knowledge about the availability and cost of money 
is a key ingredient for successful financial planning. Cash flow projections are particu­
larly important because they inform organizations what funds they need, when they need 
them, and how they will acquire them. 
Funds for operating organizations come from multiple sources, including stockhold­
ers’ investments, bond sales, bank loans, sales of products and services, and income from 
investments. Decisions concerning funding for ongoing operations and for capital invest­
ment can be supported by decision support systems and business intelligence applica­
tions (discussed in Chapter 5), as well as expert systems (discussed in Plug IT In 5). In 
addition, numerous software packages for conducting economic and financial forecast­
ing are available. Many of these packages can be downloaded from the Internet, some of 
them for free. 
•  Budgeting: An essential component of the accounting/finance function is the annual 
budget, which allocates the organization’s financial resources among participants and 
activities. The budget allows management to distribute resources in the way that best 
supports the organization’s mission and goals. 
Several soft ware packages are available to support budget preparation and control 
and to facilitate communication among participants in the budget process. These pack­
ages can reduce the time involved in the budget process. Furthermore, they can automat­
ically monitor exceptions for patterns and trends. 
Managing Financial Transactions. Many accounting/finance soft ware packages are in­
tegrated with other functional areas. For example, Peachtree by Sage (www.peachtree.com) 
off ers a sales ledger, a purchase ledger, a cash book, sales order processing, invoicing, stock 
control, a fixed assets register, and more. 
Companies involved in electronic commerce need to access customers’ financial data (e.g., 
credit line), inventory levels, and manufacturing databases (to determine available capacity 
and place orders). For example, Microsoft Dynamics GP (formerly Great Plains Soft ware) off ers 
50 modules that meet the most common financial, project, distribution, manufacturing, and 
e-business needs. 
Organizations, business processes, and business activities operate with, and manage, 
financial transactions. Consider these examples: 
•  Global stock exchanges: Financial markets operate in global, 24/7/365, distributed elec­
tronic stock exchanges that use the Internet both to buy and sell stocks and to broadcast 
real-time stock prices. 
•  Managing multiple currencies: Global trade involves financial transactions that are car­
ried out in different currencies. The conversion ratios of these currencies are constantly in 
flux. Financial and accounting systems utilize financial data from different countries, and 
they convert the currencies from and to any other currency in seconds. Reports based on 
these data, which formerly required several days to generate, can now be produced in only 
seconds. In addition to currency conversions, these systems manage multiple languages 
as well. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Functional Area Information Systems 311 
•  Virtual close: Companies traditionally closed their books (accounting records) quarterly,  
usually to meet regulatory requirements. Today, many companies want to be able to close  
their books at any time, on very short notice. Information systems make it possible to close  
the books quickly in what is called a virtual close. This process provides almost real-time  
information on the organization’s financial health.  
•  Expense management automation: Expense management automation (EMA) refers to sys­
tems that automate the data entry and processing of travel and entertainment expenses.  
EMA systems are Web-based applications that enable companies to quickly and consist­
ently collect expense information, enforce company policies and contracts, and reduce  
unplanned purchases as well as airline and hotel expenses. They also allow companies to  
reimburse their employees more quickly because expense approvals are not delayed by  
poor documentation.  
Investment Management. Organizations invest large amounts of money in stocks, bonds, 
real estate, and other assets. Managing these investments is a complex task, for several reasons. 
First, organizations have literally thousands of investment alternatives dispersed throughout 
the world to choose from. In addition, these investments are subject to complex regulations 
and tax laws, which vary from one location to another. 
Investment decisions require managers to evaluate financial and economic reports pro­
vided by diverse institutions, including federal and state agencies, universities, research insti­
tutions, and financial services firms. In addition, thousands of Web sites provide financial data, 
many of them for free. 
To monitor, interpret, and analyze the huge amounts of online financial data, financial 
analysts employ two major types of IT tools: Internet search engines and business intelligence 
and decision support soft ware. 
Control and Auditing. One major reason why organizations go out of business is their inabil­
ity to forecast and/or secure a sufficient cash flow. Underestimating expenses, overspending, 
engaging in fraud, and mismanaging financial statements can lead to disaster. Consequently, it 
is essential that organizations effectively control their finances and financial statements. Let’s 
examine some of the most common forms of financial control: 
•  Budgetary control: Aft er an organization has finalized its annual budget, it divides those  
monies into monthly allocations. Managers at various levels monitor departmental  
expenditures and compare them against the budget and the operational progress of cor­
porate plans.  
•  Auditing: Auditing has two basic purposes: (1) to monitor how the organization’s monies  
are being spent and (2) to assess the organization’s financial health. Internal audits are  
performed by the organization’s accounting/finance personnel. These employees also pre­
pare for periodic external audits by outside CPA firms.  
•  Financial ratio analysis: Another major accounting/finance function is to monitor the com­
pany’s financial health by assessing a set of financial ratios, including liquidity ratios (the  
availability of cash to pay debt), activity ratios (how quickly a firm converts noncash assets  
to cash assets), debt ratios (measure the firm’s ability to repay long-term debt), and prof­
itability ratios (measure the firm’s use of its assets and control of its expenses to generate  
an acceptable rate of return).  
Information Systems for Marketing  
MKT 
It is impossible to overestimate the importance of customers to any organization. Therefore, 
any successful organization must understand its customers’ needs and wants and then develop 
its marketing and advertising strategies around them. Information systems provide numerous 
types of support to the marketing function. Customer-centric organizations are so important 
that we devote Chapter 12 to this topic. 

 
 
 
 
 
312 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization Figure depicting a seal of quality guarantee.
A “Quality Guarantee” requires data collec­
tion and analysis throughout production to 
maintain standards. 
POM Information Systems for Production/Operations 
Management 
The production/operations management (POM} function in an organization is responsi­
ble for the processes that transform inputs into useful outputs as well as for the overall 
operation of the business. The POM function is responsible for managing the organiza­
tion’s supply chain. Because supply chain management is vital to the success of modern 
organizations, we address this topic in detail in Chapter 13. Because of the breadth and 
variety of POM functions, we discuss only four here: in-house logistics and materials 
management, planning production and operation, computer-integrated manufacturing 
(CIM), and product lifecycle management (PLM). 
In-House Logistics and Materials Management. Logistics management deals 
with ordering, purchasing, inbound logistics (receiving), and outbound logistics (shipping) ac­
tivities. Related activities include inventory management and quality control. 
Inventory Management. As the name suggests, inventory management determines how 
much inventory an organization should maintain. Both excessive inventory and insuff icient 
inventory create problems. Overstocking can be expensive because of storage costs and the 
costs of spoilage and obsolescence. However, keeping insufficient inventory is also expensive 
because of last-minute orders and lost sales. 
Operations personnel make two basic decisions: when to order and how much to order. 
Inventory models, such as the economic order quantity (EOQ) model, support these decisions. 
A large number of commercial inventory soft ware packages are available that automate the 
application of these models. 
Many large companies allow their suppliers to monitor their inventory levels and ship 
products as they are needed. This strategy, called vendor-managed inventory (VMI), eliminates 
the need for the company to submit purchasing orders. We discuss VMI in Chapter 13. 
Quality Control. Quality control systems used by manufacturing units provide information 
about the quality of incoming material and parts, as well as the quality of in-process semifin­
ished and finished products. These systems record the results of all inspections and then com­
pare these results with established metrics. They also generate periodic reports that contain in­
formation about quality—for example, the percentage of products that contain defects or that 
need to be reworked. Quality control data, collected by Web-based sensors, can be interpreted 
in real time. Alternatively, they can be stored in a database for future analysis. 
Planning Production and Operations. In many firms, POM planning is supported by IT. 
POM planning has evolved from material requirements planning (MRP) to manufacturing re­
source planning (MRP II), to enterprise resource planning (ERP). We briefly discuss MRP and 
MRP II here, and we examine ERP in detail later in this chapter. 
Inventory systems that use an EOQ approach are designed for items for which demand 
is completely independent—for example, the number of identical personal computers a com­
puter manufacturer will sell. In manufacturing operations, however, the demand for some 
items is interdependent. Consider, for example, a company that makes three types of chairs, all 
of which use the same screws and bolts. In this case, the demand for screws and bolts depends 
on the total demand for all three types of chairs and their shipment schedules. The planning 
process that integrates production, purchasing, and inventory management of interdependent 
items is called material requirements planning (MRP). 
MRP deals only with production scheduling and inventories. More complex planning also 
involves allocating related resources, such as money and labor. For these cases, more complex, 
integrated soft ware, called manufacturing resource planning (MRP II), is available. MRP II inte­
grates a firm’s production, inventory management, purchasing, financing, and labor activities. 
Thus, MRP II adds functions to a regular MRP system. In fact, MRP II has evolved into enterprise 
resource planning (ERP). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functional Area Information Systems 313 
Computer-Integrated Manufacturing. Computer-integrated manufacturing 
(CIM) (also called digital manufacturing) is an approach that integrates various au­
tomated factory systems. CIM has three basic goals: (1) to simplify all manufacturing 
technologies and techniques, (2) to automate as many of the manufacturing processes 
as possible, and (3) to integrate and coordinate all aspects of design, manufacturing, 
and related functions via computer systems. 
Product Lifecycle Management. Even within a single organization, designing 
and developing new products can be expensive and time consuming. When multiple 
organizations are involved, the process can become very complex. Product lifecycle 
management (PLM) is a business strategy that enables manufacturers to share prod­
uct-related data that support product design and development and supply chain op­
erations. PLM applies Web-based collaborative technologies to product development. 
By integrating formerly disparate functions, such as a manufacturing process and the logistics 
that support it, PLM enables these functions to collaborate, essentially forming a single team 
that manages the product from its inception through its completion. 
Information Systems for Human Resource Management 
HRM 
Initial human resource information system (HRIS) applications dealt primarily with transaction 
processing systems, such as managing benefits and keeping records of vacation days. As organ­
izational systems have moved to intranets and the Web, so have HRIS applications. 
Many HRIS applications are delivered via an HR portal. (See our discussion of LinkedIn in 
Chapter 8.) For example, numerous organizations use their Web portals to advertise job open­
ings and to conduct online hiring and training. In this section, you consider how organizations 
are using IT to perform some key HR functions: recruitment, HR maintenance and develop­
ment, and HR planning and management. 
Recruitment. Recruitment involves finding potential employees, evaluating them, and de­
ciding which ones to hire. Some companies are flooded with viable applicants; others have 
difficulty finding the right people. IT can be helpful in both cases. In addition, IT can assist in 
related activities such as testing and screening job applicants. 
With millions of resumes available online (in particular, LinkedIn), it is not surprising that 
companies are trying to find appropriate candidates on the Web, usually with the help of spe­
cialized search engines. Companies also advertise hundreds of thousands of jobs on the Web. 
Online recruiting can reach more candidates, which may bring in better applicants. In addition, 
the costs of online recruitment are usually lower than traditional recruiting methods such as 
advertising in newspapers or in trade journals. 
Human Resources Development. After employees are recruited, they become part of the 
corporate human resources pool, which means they must be evaluated and developed. IT pro­
vides support for these activities. 
Most employees are periodically evaluated by their immediate supervisors. In addition, in 
some organizations, peers or subordinates also evaluate other employees. Evaluations are typically 
digitized, and they are used to support many decisions, ranging from rewards to transfers to layoff s. 
IT also plays an important role in training and retraining. Some of the most innovative 
developments are taking place in the areas of intelligent computer-aided instruction and the 
application of multimedia support for instructional activities. For example, companies conduct 
much of their corporate training over their intranet or via the Web. 
Human Resources Planning and Management. Managing human resources in large 
organizations requires extensive planning and detailed strategy. IT support is particularly valu­
able in the following three areas: 
1.  Payroll and employees’ records: The HR department is responsible for payroll preparation.  
This process is typically automated, meaning that paychecks are printed or money is trans­
ferred electronically into employees’ bank accounts.  Figure depicting a plot between sales and time for product lifecycle, where four vertical columns are denoting introduction, growth, maturity, and decline.
Product lifecycle. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
314 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization 
2.  Benefits administration: In return for their work contributions to their organizations, em­
ployees receive wages, bonuses, and various benefits. These benefits include healthcare 
and dental care, pension contributions (in a decreasing number of organizations), 401K 
contributions, wellness centers, and child care centers. 
Managing benefits is a complex task because multiple options are available and organ­
izations typically allow employees to choose and trade off their benefits. In many organiza­
tions, employees can access the company portal to self-register for specific benefits. 
3.  Employee relationship management: In their efforts to better manage employees, compa­
nies are developing employee relationship management (ERM) applications, for example, a 
call center for employees’ to discuss problems. 
Table 11.1 provides an overview of the activities that the FAIS support. Figure 11.2 shows 
many of the information systems that support these five functional areas. 
TABLE 11.1 
Accounting and Finance 
Activities Supported by Functional Area Information Systems 
Financial planning and cost of money 
Budgeting—allocates financial resources among participants and activities 
Capital budgeting—financing of asset acquisitions 
Managing financial transactions 
Handling multiple currencies 
Virtual close—the ability to close the books at any time on short notice 
Investment management—managing organizational investments in stocks, bonds, real estate, and 
other investment vehicles 
Budgetary control—monitoring expenditures and comparing them against the budget 
Auditing—ensuring the accuracy of the organization’s financial transactions and assessing the condi­
tion of the organization’s financial health 
Payroll 
Marketing and Sales 
Customer relations—knowing who customers are and treating them appropriately 
Customer profiles and preferences 
Salesforce automation—using software to automate the business tasks of sales, thereby improving 
the productivity of salespeople 
Production/Operations and Logistics 
Inventory management—when to order new inventory, how much inventory to order, and how much 
inventory to keep in stock 
Quality control—controlling for defects in incoming materials and goods produced 
Materials requirements planning—planning process that integrates production, purchasing, and 
inventory management of interdependent items (MRP) 
Manufacturing resource planning—planning process that integrates an enterprise’s production, inven­
tory management, purchasing, financing, and labor activities (MRP II) 
Just-in-time systems—a principle of production and inventory control in which materials and parts 
arrive precisely when and where needed for production (JIT) 
Computer-integrated manufacturing—a manufacturing approach that integrates several computerized 
systems, such as computer-assisted design (CAD), computer-assisted manufacturing (CAM), MRP, and JIT 
Product lifecycle management—business strategy that enables manufacturers to collaborate on prod­
uct design and development efforts, using the Web 
Human Resource Management 
Recruitment—finding employees, testing them, and deciding which ones to hire 
Performance evaluation—periodic evaluation by superiors 
Training 
Employee records 
Benefits administration—retirement, disability, unemployment, and so on 

 
 
A table depicting the examples of information systems supporting the functional areas, where strategic, tactical, and operational are represented in the rows. Accounting, finance, human resources, production/operations, and marketing are represented in the columns.
 
 
 
FIGURE 11.2 Examples of information systems supporting the functional areas. 
Functional Area Information Systems 315 
Reports 
All information systems produce reports: transaction processing systems, functional area infor­
mation systems, ERP systems, customer relationship management systems, business intelli­
gence systems, and so on. We discuss reports here because they are so closely associated with 
FAIS and ERP systems. These reports generally fall into three categories: routine, ad hoc (on- 
demand), and exception. 
Routine reports are produced at scheduled intervals. They range from hourly quality 
control reports to daily reports on absenteeism rates. Although routine reports are extremely 
valuable to an organization, managers frequently need special information that is not included 
in these reports. At other times, they need the information that is normally included in routine 
reports, but at different times (“I need the report today, for the last three days, not for one 
week”). 
Such out-of-the routine reports are called ad hoc (on-demand) reports. Ad hoc reports 
can also include requests for the following types of information: 
•  Drill-down reports display a greater level of detail. For example, a manager might exam­
ine sales by region and decide to “drill down” by focusing specifically on sales by store and  
then by salesperson.  
•  Key indicator reports summarize the performance of critical activities.  
For example, a chief financial officer might want to monitor cash flow and  
cash on hand.  
•  Comparative reports compare, for example, the performances of diff er­
ent business units or of a single unit during diff erent times.  
Some managers prefer exception reports. Exception reports include only 
information that falls outside certain threshold standards. To implement man­
agement by exception, management first establishes performance standards. 
The company then creates systems to monitor performance (via the incoming 
data about business transactions such as expenditures), to compare actual 
performance to the standards, and to identify exceptions to the standards. The 
system alerts managers to the exceptions via exception reports. 
Let’s use sales as an example. First, management establishes sales quo­
tas. The company then implements a FAIS that collects and analyzes all of 
Monthly sales report. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
316 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization 
the sales data. An exception report would identify only those cases where sales fell outside 
an established threshold—for example, more than 20 percent short of the quota. It would 
not report expenditures that fell within the accepted range of standards. By leaving out all 
“acceptable” performances, exception reports save managers time, thus helping them focus 
on problem areas. 
Before you go on…
 1. Define a functional area information system and list its major characteristics.
 2. How do information systems benefit the finance and accounting functional area?
 3. Explain how POM personnel use information systems to perform their jobs more eff ectively and 
eff iciently.
 4. What are the most important HRIS applications?
 5. Compare and contrast the three basic types of reports. 
11.3 Enterprise Resource Planning Systems 
Historically, the functional area information systems were developed independent of one 
another, resulting in information silos. These silos did not communicate well with one another, 
and this lack of communication and integration made organizations less efficient. This ineff i­
ciency was particularly evident in business processes that involve more than one functional 
area, such as procurement and fulfillment. 
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems are designed to correct a lack of commu­
nication among the functional area IS. ERP systems resolve this problem by tightly integrating 
the functional area IS via a common database. For this reason, experts credit ERP systems with 
greatly increasing organizational productivity. ERP systems adopt a business process view of 
the overall organization to integrate the planning, management, and use of all of an organiza­
tion’s resources, employing a common software platform and database. 
The major objectives of ERP systems are to tightly integrate the functional areas of the 
organization and to enable information to flow seamlessly across them. Tight integration 
means that changes in one functional area are immediately reflected in all other pertinent 
functional areas. In essence, ERP systems provide the information necessary to control the 
business processes of the organization. 
It is important to understand that ERP systems are an evolution of FAIS. That is, ERP sys­
tems have much the same functionality as FAIS, and they produce the same reports. As you see 
in IT’s About Business 11.1, ERP systems simply integrate the functions of the individual FAIS. 
IT’s About Business 11.1 
FIN 
The Army Transitions from Legacy Systems 
ACCT to Enterprise Resource Planning Tools 
Almost every organization that is more than 20 years old has some 
type of legacy information system—an outdated IT system that 
was usually developed with a specific focus and designed without 
considering future needs. In essence, legacy systems were devel­
oped as silos. (Silos refer to functional area information systems 
that do not communicate with other FAIS or organizational infor­
mation systems.) Further, each legacy system was typically created 
with its own data in a specific format. Unfortunately, these formats 
are often incompatible within the same organization. In these sce­
narios, one legacy system cannot use the data from other systems. 
The U.S. Army (www.army.mil) is one of the oldest national or­
ganizations in our country. Information technology plays a critical 
role in all of the Army’s processes. It is no surprise that the Army 
has numerous legacy information systems that, while successfully 
supporting various operations over the years, nonetheless do not 
share data efficiently or eff ectively. 
Today, however, the Army must pass audits as part of a fed­
erally mandated Department of Defense (www.dod.gov; DOD) fi­
nancial audit scheduled for 2017. The Army’s legacy systems, while 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems 317 
proficient within their specific areas, were not able to produce the 
The GFEBS is designed to create accountability and audit trails 
necessary documentation required by the DOD. 
for the Army’s business operations. It is a Web-based tool, meaning 
Many organizations, when they retire their separate legacy 
it is accessible anywhere with Internet access. The GFEBS standard-
systems, merge the relevant functions into one enterprise resource 
izes, streamlines, and shares critical data across all Army divisions. 
planning (ERP) system. The migration to an ERP is very diff icult, 
This will help decision makers analyze business processes, cost 
however, oft en taking several years and costing large amounts of 
structures, and inventories. It will also provide support for the 
money. Large organizations such as the Army cannot simply turn 
DOD’s greater transparency initiative. As of late 2015, the Army had 
off one or more legacy systems until the organization is certain that 
passed several audits by outside auditing firms. This is a sign that 
the new ERP system will work and that employees are trained to 
the implementation is moving the right direction. 
utilize the new system. 
Other branches of the military have transitioned to ERP sys-
Sources: Compiled from H. Kenyon, “Army ERP System Enables 
tems. Some of the implementations failed, and some succeeded. 
Financial Transparency,” InformationWeek, April 15, 2014; D. Perera, 
In 2012, for example, the Air Force cancelled an ERP system im-
“ERP Implementation Continues to Challenge the Military,” fiercegov­
ernmentit.com, March 31, 2013; H. Kenyon, “DOD Pushes Toward Joint 
plementation (the Expeditionary Combat Support System) aft er 
Information Environment,” InformationWeek, March 26, 2014; 
spending more than $1 billion on the project. In that same year, 
D. Perera, “Air Force Cancels ECSS,” fiercegovernmentit.com, November
a Navy ERP system was deemed a “qualified” success because it 
29, 2012; D. Perera, “Navy ERP a ‘Qualified Success’,” fiercegovern­
did work, but it cost over 30 percent more than originally esti­
mentit.com, September 9, 2012; T. Weiss, “Accenture wins $537M Army 
mated, and it took more than two years longer to implement than 
Financial Services Contract,” Computerworld, June 28, 2005. 
scheduled. 
In 2005, the Army began working with Accenture (www 
Questions
.accenture.com) to develop a SAP-based (www.sap.com) ERP sys­
1. Why do you think the U.S. Army’s legacy systems were not as 
tem called the General Fund Enterprise Business System (GFEBS). 
useful today as they were when they were developed? 
By 2012 (seven years later!), the Army had begun phasing in the 
new system. As of late 2015, the Army was still phasing out its leg-
2. How does this military example parallel large businesses like 
acy systems, some of which are more than 40 years old. The ERP 
Sears and Walmart that have had to maintain their own leg-
rollout is scheduled to be completed in 2018. 
acy systems? 
Although some companies have developed their own ERP systems, most organizations use 
commercially available ERP software. The leading ERP software vendor is SAP (www.sap.com). 
Other major vendors include Oracle (www.oracle.com) and PeopleSoft (www.peoplesoft .com), 
now an Oracle company. (With more than 700 customers, PeopleSoft is the market leader in 
higher education). For up-to-date information on ERP software, visit http://erp.ittoolbox.com. 
ERP II Systems 
ERP systems were originally deployed to facilitate business processes associated with manu­
facturing, such as raw materials management, inventory control, order entry, and distribution. 
However, these early ERP systems did not extend to other functional areas, such as sales and 
marketing. They also did not include any customer relationship management (CRM) capabili­
ties that enable organizations to capture customer-specific information. Finally, they did not 
provide Web-enabled customer service or order fulfillment. 
Over time, ERP systems evolved to include administrative, sales, marketing, and human 
resources processes. Companies now employ an enterprisewide approach to ERP that utilizes 
the Web and connects all facets of the value chain. (You might want to review our discussion of 
value chains in Chapter 2.) These systems are called ERP II. 
ERP II systems are interorganizational ERP systems that provide Web-enabled links 
among a company’s key business systems—such as inventory and production—and its cus­
tomers, suppliers, distributors, and other relevant parties. These links integrate internal-facing 
ERP applications with the external-focused applications of supply chain management and cus­
tomer relationship management. Figure 11.3 illustrates the organization and functions of an 
ERP II system. 
The various functions of ERP II systems are now delivered as e-business suites. The major 
ERP vendors have developed modular, Web-enabled soft ware suites that integrate ERP, cus­
tomer relationship management, supply chain management, procurement, decision sup­
port, enterprise portals, and other business applications and functions. Examples are Oracle’s 

 
 
 
 
 
318 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization Figure depicting the organization and functions of an ERP II system.
ERP II system. 
FIGURE 11.3 
e-Business Suite and SAP’s mySAP. The goal of these systems is to enable companies to execute 
most of their business processes using a single Web-enabled system of integrated soft ware 
rather than a variety of separate e-business applications. 
ERP II systems include a variety of modules that are divided into core ERP modules—finan­
cial management, operations management, and human resource management—and extended 
ERP modules—customer relationship management, supply chain management, business intel­
ligence, and e-business. If a system does not have the core ERP modules, then it is not a legiti­
mate ERP system. The extended ERP modules, in contrast, are optional. Table 11.2 describes 
each of these modules. 
Benefits and Limitation of ERP Systems 
ERP systems can generate significant business benefits for an organization. The major benefits 
fall into the following three categories: 
1.  Organizational flexibility and agility: As you have seen, ERP systems break down many for­
mer departmental and functional silos of business processes, information systems, and 
information resources. In this way, they make organizations more flexible, agile, and adap­
tive. The organizations can therefore respond quickly to changing business conditions and 
capitalize on new business opportunities. 
2.  Decision support: ERP systems provide essential information on business performance 
across functional areas. This information significantly improves managers’ ability to make 
better, more timely decisions. 
3.  Quality and eff iciency: ERP systems integrate and improve an organization’s business pro­
cesses, generating significant improvements in the quality of production, distribution, and 
customer service. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems 319 
TABLE 11.2 ERP Modules 
Core ERP Modules 
Financial Management. These modules support accounting, financial reporting, performance man­
agement, and corporate governance. They manage accounting data and financial processes such as 
general ledger, accounts payable, accounts receivable, fixed assets, cash management and forecast­
ing, product-cost accounting, cost-center accounting, asset accounting, tax accounting, credit man­
agement, budgeting, and asset management. 
Operations Management. These modules manage the various aspects of production planning and 
execution such as demand forecasting, procurement, inventory management, materials purchasing, 
shipping, production planning, production scheduling, materials requirements planning, quality con­
trol, distribution, transportation, and plant and equipment maintenance. 
Human Resource Management. These modules support personnel administration (including work­
force planning, employee recruitment, assignment tracking, personnel planning and development, 
and performance management and reviews), time accounting, payroll, compensation, benefits 
accounting, and regulatory requirements. 
Extended ERP Modules 
Customer Relationship Management. (Discussed in detail in Chapter 12.) These modules support all 
aspects of a customer’s relationship with the organization. They help the organization to increase cus­
tomer loyalty and retention, and thus improve its profitability. They also provide an integrated view of 
customer data and interactions, helping organizations to be more responsive to customer needs. 
Supply Chain Management. (Discussed in detail in Chapter 13.) These modules manage the infor­
mation flows between and among stages in a supply chain to maximize supply chain efficiency and 
effectiveness. They help organizations plan, schedule, control, and optimize the supply chain from the 
acquisition of raw materials to the receipt of finished goods by customers. 
Business Intelligence. (Discussed in detail in Chapter 5.) These modules collect information used 
throughout the organization, organize it, and apply analytical tools to assist managers with decision 
making. 
E-Business. (Discussed in detail in Chapter 9.) Customers and suppliers demand access to ERP infor­
mation including order status, inventory levels, and invoice reconciliation. Furthermore, they want 
this information in a simplified format that can be accessed via the Web. As a result, these modules 
provide two channels of access into ERP system information—one channel for customers (B2C) and 
one for suppliers and partners (B2B). 
Despite all of their benefits, however, ERP systems do have drawbacks. The major limitations of 
ERP implementations include the following: 
• The business processes in ERP software are often predefined by the best practices that 
the ERP vendor has developed. Best practices are the most successful solutions or prob­
lem-solving methods for achieving a business objective. As a result, companies may need 
to change their existing business processes to fit the predefined business processes incor­
porated into the ERP software. For companies with well-established procedures, this 
requirement can create serious problems, especially if employees do not want to abandon 
their old ways of working and therefore resist the changes. 
• At the same time, however, an ERP implementation can provide an opportunity to improve 
and in some cases completely redesign ineff icient, ineffective, or outdated procedures. 
In fact, many companies benefit from implementing best practices for their accounting, 
finance, and human resource processes, as well as other support activities that companies 
do not consider a source of competitive advantage. 
Recall from Chapter 2, however, that different companies organize their value chains 
in different configurations to transform inputs into valuable outputs and achieve compet­
itive advantage. Therefore, although the vendor’s best practices, by definition, are appro­
priate for most organizations, they might not be the “best” one for your company if they 
change those processes that give you competitive advantage. 
• ERP systems can be extremely complex, expensive, and time consuming to implement. 
(We discuss the implementation of ERP systems in detail in the next section.) In fact, the 
costs and risks of failure in implementing a new ERP system are substantial. Quite a few 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
320 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization 
companies have experienced costly ERP implementation failures. Specifically, they have 
suffered losses in revenue, profits, and market share when core business processes and 
information systems failed or did not work properly. In many cases, orders and shipments 
were lost, inventory changes were not recorded correctly, and unreliable inventory levels 
caused major stock outs. Companies such as Hershey Foods, Nike, A-DEC, and Connecticut 
General sustained losses in amounts up to hundreds of millions of dollars. In the case of 
FoxMeyer Drugs, a $5 billion pharmaceutical wholesaler, the ERP implementation was so 
poorly executed that the company had to file for bankruptcy protection. 
In almost every ERP implementation failure, the company’s business managers and IT profes­
sionals underestimated the complexity of the planning, development, and training that were 
required to prepare for a new ERP system that would fundamentally transform their business 
processes and information systems. The following are the major causes of ERP implementation 
failure: 
• Failure to involve affected employees in the planning and development phases and in 
change management processes 
• Trying to accomplish too much too fast in the conversion process 
• Insufficient training in the new work tasks required by the ERP system 
• Failure to perform proper data conversion and testing for the new system 
Implementing ERP Systems 
Companies can implement ERP systems by using either on-premise software or soft ware-as-a­
service (SaaS). We differentiate between these two methods in detail in Plug IT In 4. 
On-Premise ERP Implementation. Depending on the types of value chain processes 
managed by the ERP system and a company’s specific value chain, there are three strategic 
approaches to implementing an on-premise ERP system: 
1.  The vanilla approach: In this approach, a company implements a standard ERP package, 
using the package’s built-in configuration options. When the system is implemented in this 
way, it will deviate only minimally from the package’s standardized settings. The vanilla 
approach can enable the company to perform the implementation more quickly. Howev­
er, the extent to which the software is adapted to the organization’s specific processes is 
limited. Fortunately, a vanilla implementation provides general functions that can support 
the firm’s common business processes with relative ease, even if they are not a perfect fit 
for those processes. 
2.  The custom approach: In this approach, a company implements a more customized ERP 
system by developing new ERP functions designed specifically for that firm. Decisions con­
cerning the ERP’s degree of customization are specific to each organization. To utilize the 
custom approach, the organization must carefully analyze its existing business process­
es to develop a system that conforms to the organization’s particular characteristics and 
processes. In addition, customization is expensive and risky because computer code must 
be written and updated every time a new version of the ERP software is released. Going 
further, if the customization does not perfectly match the organization’s needs, then the 
system can be very difficult to use. 
3.  The best-of-breed approach: This approach combines the benefits of the vanilla and cus­
tomized systems while avoiding the extensive costs and risks associated with complete 
customization. Companies that adopt this approach mix and match core ERP modules 
as well as other extended ERP modules from diff erent software providers to best fit their 
unique internal processes and value chains. Thus, a company may choose several core 
ERP modules from an established vendor to take advantage of industry best practices—for 
example, for financial management and human resource management. At the same time, 
it may also choose specialized software to support its unique business processes—for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems 321 
example, for manufacturing, warehousing, and distribution. Sometimes companies arrive 
at the best of breed approach the hard way. For example, Dell wasted millions of dollars 
trying to customize an integrated ERP system from a major vendor to match its unique 
processes before it realized that a smaller, more flexible system that integrated well with 
other corporate applications was the answer. 
Software-as-a-Service ERP Implementation. Companies can acquire ERP systems 
without having to buy a complete software solution (i.e., on-premise ERP implementation). 
Many organizations are utilizing software-as-a-service (SaaS) (discussed in Chapter 14 and Plug 
IT In 4) to acquire cloud-based ERP systems. (We discuss cloud computing in Plug IT In 4). 
In this business model, the company rents the soft ware from an ERP vendor who off ers 
its products over the Internet using the SaaS model. The ERP cloud vendor manages soft ware 
updates and is responsible for the system’s security and availability. 
Cloud-based ERP systems can be a perfect fit for some companies. For instance, 
companies that cannot afford to make large investments in IT, yet already have relatively 
structured business processes that need to be tightly integrated, might benefit from cloud 
computing. 
The relationship between the company and the cloud vendor is regulated by contracts and 
by service level agreements (SLAs). The SLAs define the characteristics and quality of service; 
for instance, a guaranteed uptime, or the percentage of time that the system is available. Cloud 
vendors that fail to meet these conditions can face penalties. 
The decision about whether to use on-premise ERP or SaaS ERP is specific to each organi­
zation, and it depends on how the organization evaluates a series of advantages and disadvan­
tages. The following are the three major advantages of using a cloud-based ERP system: 
1.  The system can be used from any location that provides Internet access. Consequently, 
users can work from any location using online shared and centralized resources (data and 
databases). Users access the ERP system via a secure virtual private network (VPN) connec­
tion (discussed in Chapter 4) with the provider. 
2.  Companies using cloud-based ERP avoid the initial hardware and software expenses that 
are typical of on-premise implementations. For instance, to run SAP on-premise, a com­
pany must purchase SAP software as well as a license to use SAP. The magnitude of this 
investment can hinder small- to medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) from adopting ERP. 
3.  Cloud-based ERP solutions are scalable, meaning it is possible to extend ERP support to 
new business processes and new business partners (e.g., suppliers) by purchasing new 
ERP modules. 
There are also disadvantages of adopting cloud-based ERP systems that a company must care­
fully evaluate. The following are the three major disadvantages of using a cloud-based ERP 
system: 
1.  It is not clear whether cloud-based ERP systems are more secure than on-premise systems. 
In fact, a survey conducted by North Bridge Venture Partners indicated that security was 
the primary reason why organizations did not adopt cloud-based ERP. 
2.  Companies that adopt cloud-based ERP systems sacrifice their control over a strategic IT 
resource. For this reason, some companies prefer to implement an on-premise ERP sys­
tem, utilizing a strong in-house IT department that can directly manage the system. 
3.  A direct consequence of the lack of control over IT resources occurs when the ERP system 
experiences problems, for example, some ERP functions are temporarily slow or are not 
available. In such cases, having an internal IT department that can solve problems im­
mediately rather than dealing with the cloud vendor’s system support can speed up the 
system recovery process. 
This situation is particularly important for technology-intensive companies. In such 
companies, IT is crucial to conduct any kind of business with customers. Examples are 
e-commerce companies, banks, and government organizations that manage emergencies 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
322 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization 
or situations that might involve individual and national security (e.g., healthcare organiza­
tions, police, homeland security department, antiterrorism units, and others). 
Finally, slow or unavailable software from a cloud-based ERP vendor creates business conti­
nuity problems for the client. (We discuss business continuity in Chapter 7.) That is, a sudden 
system problem or failure makes it impossible for the firm to operate. Companies lose money 
when they lose business continuity because customers cannot be serviced and employees can­
not do their jobs. A loss of business continuity also damages the company’s reputation because 
customers lose trust in the firm. 
Enterprise Application Integration 
For some organizations, integrated ERP systems are not appropriate. This situation is particu­
larly true for companies that find the process of converting from their existing system too diff i-
cult or time consuming. 
Such companies, however, may still have isolated information systems that need to be 
connected with one another. To accomplish this task, these companies can use enterprise 
application integration. An enterprise application integration (EAI) system integrates exist­
ing systems by providing soft ware, called middleware, that connects multiple applications. In 
essence, the EAI system allows existing applications to communicate and share data, thereby 
enabling organizations to utilize existing applications while eliminating many of the problems 
caused by isolated information systems. EAI systems also support implementation of best-of­
breed ERP solutions by connecting software modules from diff erent vendors. 
Before you go on…
 1. Define ERP and describe its functions.
 2. What are ERP II systems?
 3. Differentiate between core ERP modules and extended ERP modules.
 4. List some drawbacks of ERP soft ware.
 5. Highlight the differences between ERP configuration, customization, and best-of-breed implementa­
tion strategies. 
11.4 ERP Support for Business Processes 
ERP systems effectively support a number of standard business processes. In particular, ERP 
systems manage end-to-end, cross-departmental processes. A cross-departmental process is 
one that (1) originates in one department and ends in a different department or (2) originates 
and ends in the same department but involves other departments. 
The Procurement, Fulfillment, and Production Processes 
The following are the three prominent examples of cross-departmental processes: 
1.  The procurement process, which originates in the warehouse department (need to buy) 
and ends in the accounting department (send payment) 
2.  The fulfillment process, which originates in the sales department (customer request to buy) 
and ends in the accounting department (receive payment) 
3.  The production process, which originates and ends in the warehouse department (need to 
produce and reception of finished goods) but involves the production department as well 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ERP Support for Business Processes 323 
These three processes are examined in more detail in the following sections, focusing on the 
steps that are specific to each one. 
The Procurement Process. The procurement process originates when a company needs 
to acquire goods or services from external sources, and it concludes when the company receives 
and pays for them. Let’s consider a procurement process where the company needs to acquire 
physical goods (see Figure 11.4). This process involves three main departments—Warehouse, 
Purchasing, and Accounting—and it consists of the following steps: 
1.  The process originates in the Warehouse department, which generates a purchase requisi­
tion to buy the needed products. 
2.  The Warehouse forwards the requisition to the Purchasing department, which creates a 
purchase order (PO) and forwards it to a vendor. Generally, companies can choose from a 
number of vendors, and they select the one that best meets their requirements in terms of 
convenience, speed, reliability, and/or other characteristics. 
3.  After the company places the order, it receives the goods in its Warehouse department, 
where someone physically checks the delivery to make certain that it corresponds to what 
the company ordered. He or she performs this task by comparing a packing list attached to 
the shipment against the PO. 
4.  If the shipment matches the order, then the Warehouse issues a goods receipt document. 
5.  At the same time or shortly thereafter, the Accounting department receives an invoice from 
the vendor. Accounting then checks that the PO, the goods receipt document, and the in­
voice match. This process is called the three-way-match. 
6.  After Accounting verifies the match, it processes the payment and sends it to the vendor. 
The Order Fulfillment Process. In contrast to procurement, in which the company pur­
chases goods from a vendor, in the order fulfillment process, also known as the order-to­
cash process, the company sells goods to a customer. Fulfillment originates when the company 
receives a customer order, and it concludes when the company receives a payment from the 
customer. 
The fulfillment process can follow two basic strategies: sell-from-stock and configure-to-or­
der. Sell-from-stock involves fulfilling customer orders directly using goods that are in the ware­
house (stock). These goods are standard, meaning that the company does not customize them 
for buyers. In contrast, in configure-to-order, the company customizes the product in response 
to a customer request. 
A fulfillment process involves three main departments: Sales, Warehouse, and Accounting. 
This process includes the following steps: 
1.  The Sales department receives a customer inquiry, which essentially is a request for infor­
mation concerning the availability and price of a specific good. (We restrict our discussion 
here to fulfilling a customer order for physical goods rather than services.) 
2.  After Sales receives the inquiry, it issues a quotation that indicates availability and price. 
3.  If the customer agrees to the price and terms, then Sales creates a customer purchase 
order (PO) and a sales order. Figure depicting the departments and documents flow in the procurement process, where department is classified into warehouse, purchasing, warehouse and accounting.
FIGURE 11.4  Departments and 
documents flow in the procurement 
process. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
324 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization 
FIGURE 11.5  Departments and 
documents flow in the fulfillment 
process. 
4.  Sales forwards the sales order to the Warehouse. The sales order is an interdepartmental 
document that helps the company keep track of the internal processes that are involved 
in fulfilling a specific customer order. In addition, it provides details of the quantity, price, 
and other characteristics of the product. 
5.  The Warehouse prepares the shipment and produces two other internal documents: the 
picking document, which it uses to remove goods from the Warehouse, and the packing 
list, which accompanies the shipment and provides details about the delivery. 
6.  At the same time, Accounting issues an invoice for the customer. 
7.  The process concludes when Accounting receives a payment that is consistent with the 
invoice. 
Figure 11.5 shows the fulfillment process. Note that it applies to both sell-from-stock and con­
figure-to-order because the basic steps are the same for both strategies. 
The Production Process. The production process does not occur in all companies be­
cause not all companies produce physical goods. In fact, many businesses limit their activities 
to buying (procurement) and selling products (e.g., retailers). 
The production process can follow two different strategies: make-to-stock and make-to­
order. (See the discussion of the pull model and the push model in Chapter 13.) Make-to-stock 
occurs when the company produces goods to create or increase an inventory; that is, finished 
products that are stored in the warehouse and are available for sales. In contrast, make-to-or­
der occurs when production is generated by a specific customer order. 
Manufacturing companies that produce their own goods manage their interdepartmental 
production process across the Production and Warehouse departments. The production pro­
cess involves the following steps: 
1.  The Warehouse department issues a planned order when the company needs to produce a 
finished product, either because the Warehouse has insufficient inventory or because the 
customer placed a specific order for goods that are not currently in stock. 
2.  Once the planned order reaches Production, the production controller authorizes the or­
der and issues a production order, which is a written authorization to start the production 
of a certain amount of a specific product. 
3.  To assemble a finished product, Production requires a number of materials (or parts). To 
acquire these materials, Production generates a material withdrawal slip, which lists all of 
the needed parts, and forwards it to the Warehouse. 
4.  If the parts are available in the Warehouse, then the Warehouse delivers them to Produc­
tion. If the parts are not available, then the company must purchase them via the procure­
ment process. 
5.  After Production has created the products, it updates the production order specifying that, 
as planned, a specific number of units of product can now be shipped to the Warehouse. 
6.  As soon as the Warehouse receives the finished goods, it issues a goods receipt document 
that certifies how many units of a product it received that are available for sales. 
This overview of the Production process is a highly simplified one. In reality, the process is very 
complex, and it frequently involves additional steps. In addition, ERP systems collect a number Figure depicting the departments and documents flow in the fulfillment process, where department is classified into sales (customer inquiry, quotation), sales (customer purchase order, sales order), warehouse (picking document, packing list), and accounting (invoice, payment).

 
 
 
 
ERP Support for Business Processes 325 
Figure depi c ting the departm
ents and documents flow in the pr
oduction process, where department is classified into warehouse (planned order), production (production order, material withdrawal slip), warehouse (material withdrawal slip), production (production order), and warehouse (goods receipt).
of other documents and pieces of information such as the bill of materials (a list of all materials 
needed to assemble a finished product), the list of work centers (locations where the produc­
tion takes place), and the product routing (production steps). All of these topics require an 
in-depth analysis of the production process and are therefore beyond the scope of our discus­
sion here. Figure 11.6 illustrates the production process. 
A number of events can occur that create exceptions or deviations in the procurement, 
fulfillment, and production processes. Deviations may include the following: 
• A delay in the receipt of products 
• Issues related to an unsuccessful three-way-match regarding a shipment and its associ­
ated invoice (procurement) 
• Rejection of a quotation 
• A delay in a shipment 
• A mistake in preparing the shipment or in invoicing the customer (fulfillment) 
• Overproduction of a product 
• Reception of parts that cannot be used in the production process 
• Unavailability of certain parts from a supplier 
Companies use ERP systems to manage procurement, fulfillment, and production because 
these systems track all of the events that occur within each process. Furthermore, the system 
stores all of the documents created in each step of each process in a centralized database, 
where they are available as needed in real time. Therefore, any exceptions or mistakes made 
during one or more interdepartmental processes are handled right away by simply querying 
the ERP system and retrieving a specific document or piece of information that needs to be 
revised or examined more carefully. Therefore, it is important to follow each step in each pro­
cess and to register the corresponding document 
into the ERP system. 
Figure 11.7 portrays the three cross-func­
tional business processes we just discussed. 
It specifically highlights the integration of the 
three processes, which is made possible by ERP 
systems. 
Interorganizational Processes: 
ERP with SCM and CRM 
Although the procurement and the fulfillment 
processes involve suppliers and customers, they 
are considered (together with the production pro­
cess) intraorganizational processes because they 
originate and conclude within the company. How­
ever, ERP systems can also manage processes 
that originate in one company and conclude in 
FIGURE 11.7 Integrated processes with ERP systems. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
326 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization 
another company. These processes are called interorganizational processes, and they typically 
involve supply chain management (SCM) and customer relationship management (CRM) sys­
tems. You can find a more detailed description of CRM (see Chapter 12) and SCM (see Chapter 
13). Here, we focus on the integration of these processes within a firm’s industry value chain. 
SCM and CRM processes help multiple firms in an industry coordinate activities such as the 
production-to-sale of goods and services. Let’s consider a chain of grocery stores whose supply 
chain must properly manage perishable goods. On the one hand, store managers need to stock 
only the amount of perishable products that they are reasonably sure they will sell before the 
products’ expiration dates. On the other hand, they do not want to run out of stock of any prod­
ucts that customers need. 
ERP SCM systems have the capability to place automatic requests to buy fresh perishable 
products from suppliers in real time. That is, as each perishable product is purchased, the sys­
tem captures data on that purchase, adjusts store inventory levels, and transmits these data 
to the grocery chain’s warehouse as well as the products’ vendors. The system executes this 
process by connecting the point-of-sale barcode scanning system with the Warehouse and 
Accounting departments, as well as with the vendors’ systems. In addition, SCM systems utilize 
historical data to predict when fresh products need to be ordered before the store’s supply 
becomes too low. 
ERP CRM systems also benefit businesses by generating forecasting analyses of product 
consumption based on critical variables such as geographical area, season, day of the week, 
and type of customer. These analyses help grocery stores coordinate their supply chains to 
meet customer needs for perishable products. Going further, CRM systems identify particu­
lar customer needs and then utilize this information to suggest specific product campaigns. 
These campaigns can transform a potential demand into sales opportunities, and convert 
sales opportunities into sales quotations and sales orders. This process is called the demand-
to- order process. 
Before you go on…
 1. What are the three main intraorganizational processes that are typically supported by ERP systems?
 2. Why is it important that all steps in each process generate a document that is stored in the ERP 
system?
 3. What is the difference between intraorganizational and interorganizational processes?
 4. What are the two main ES systems that support interorganizational processes? 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For the Accounting Major 
Understanding the functions and outputs of TPSs effectively is a ma­
jor concern of any accountant. It is also necessary to understand the 
various activities of all functional areas and how they are intercon­
nected. Accounting information systems are a central component in 
any ERP package. In fact, all large CPA firms actively consult with cli­
ents on ERP implementations, using thousands of specially trained 
accounting majors. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
IT helps financial analysts and managers perform their tasks bet­
ter. Of particular importance is analyzing cash flows and securing 
the financing required for smooth operations. In addition, financial 
applications can support such activities as risk analysis, investment 
management, and global transactions involving diff erent currencies 
and fiscal regulations. 
Finance activities and modeling are key components of ERP 
systems. Flows of funds (payments), at the core of most supply 
chains, must be executed efficiently and effectively. Financial ar­
rangements are especially important along global supply chains, 
where currency conventions and financial regulations must be 
considered. 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major 
Marketing and sales expenses are usually targets in a cost-reduction 
program. Also, sales force automation improves not only salespeo­
ples’ productivity (and thus reduces costs) but also customer service. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Glossary 327 
POM
 For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
Managing production tasks, materials handling, and inventories in 
short time intervals, at a low cost, and with high quality is critical 
for competitiveness. These activities can be achieved only if they are 
properly supported by IT. In addition, IT can greatly enhance inter­
action with other functional areas, especially sales. Collaboration 
in design, manufacturing, and logistics requires knowledge of how 
modern information systems can be connected. 
HRM For the Human Resource Management Major 
Human resources managers can increase their efficiency and ef­
fectiveness by using IT for some of their routine functions. Human 
resources personnel need to understand how information flows be­
tween the HR department and the other functional areas. Finally, the 
integration of functional areas via ERP systems has a major impact 
on skill requirements and scarcity of employees, which are related to 
the tasks performed by the HRM department. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
The MIS function is responsible for the most fundamental informa­
tion systems in organizations: the transaction processing systems. 
The TPSs provide the data for the databases. In turn, all other infor­
mation systems use these data. MIS personnel develop applications 
that support all levels of the organization (from clerical to executive) 
and all functional areas. The applications also enable the firm to do 
business with its partners. 
Summary 
1.  Explain the purpose of transaction processing systems. 
TPSs monitor, store, collect, and process data generated from all business 
transactions. These data provide the inputs into the organization’s database. 
2.  Explain the types of support that information systems can provide 
for each functional area of the organization. 
The major business functional areas are production/operations manage­
ment, marketing, accounting/finance, and human resources management. 
Table 11.1 provides an overview of the many activities in each functional 
area supported by FAIS. 
3.  Identify advantages and drawbacks to businesses of implementing 
an ERP system. 
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems integrate the planning, man­
agement, and use of all of the organization’s resources. The major objective 
of ERP systems is to tightly integrate the functional areas of the organiza­
tion. This integration enables information to flow seamlessly across the 
various functional areas. 
The following are the major benefits of ERP systems: 
•  Because ERP systems integrate organizational resources, they make 
organizations more flexible, agile, and adaptive. The organizations can 
therefore react quickly to changing business conditions and capitalize 
on new business opportunities. 
•  ERP systems provide essential information on business performance 
across functional areas. This information significantly improves manag­
ers’ ability to make better, more timely decisions. 
•  ERP systems integrate organizational resources, resulting in signifi­
cant improvements in the quality of customer service, production, and 
distribution. 
The following are the major drawbacks of ERP systems: 
•  The business processes in ERP software are often predefined by the best 
practices that the ERP vendor has developed. As a result, companies 
may need to change existing business processes to fit the predefined 
business processes of the software. For companies with well-established 
procedures, this requirement can be a huge problem. 
•  ERP systems can be extremely complex, expensive, and time consuming 
to implement. In fact, the costs and risks of failure in implementing a 
new ERP system are substantial. 
4.  Describe the three main business processes supported by ERP 
systems. 
The procurement process, which originates in the warehouse depart­
ment (need to buy) and ends in the accounting department (send 
payment). 
The fulfillment process that originates in the sales department (cus­
tomer request to buy) and ends in the accounting department (receive 
payment). 
The production process that originates and ends in the warehouse depart­
ment (need to produce and reception of finished goods), but involves the 
production department as well. 
We leave the details of the steps in each of these processes to you. 
Chapter Glossary 
ad hoc (on-demand) reports Nonroutine reports that oft en contain 
batch processing Transaction processing system (TPS) that processes 
special information that is not included in routine reports. 
data in batches at fixed periodic intervals. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
328 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization 
comparative reports Reports that compare performances of diff erent 
business units or times. 
computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) An information system 
that integrates various automated factory systems; also called 
digital manufacturing. 
cross-departmental process A business process that originates 
in one department and ends in another department, and/or 
originates and ends in the same department while involving other 
departments. 
drill-down reports Reports that show a greater level of details than is 
included in routine reports. 
enterprise application integration (EAI) system A system that 
integrates existing systems by providing layers of soft ware that 
connect applications together. 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems Information systems 
that take a business process view of the overall organization 
to integrate the planning, management, and use of all of an 
organization’s resources, employing a common soft ware platform 
and database. 
ERP II systems Interorganizational ERP systems that provide Web-
enabled links among key business systems (e.g., inventory and 
production) of a company and its customers, suppliers, distributors, 
and others. 
exception reports Reports that include only information that exceeds 
certain threshold standards. 
functional area information systems (FAIS) Systems that provide 
information to managers (usually midlevel) in the functional areas, 
in order to support managerial tasks of planning, organizing, and 
controlling operations. 
key indicator reports Reports that summarize the performance of 
critical activities. 
online transaction processing (OLTP) Transaction processing 
system (TPS) that processes data after transactions occur, frequently 
in real time. 
order fulfi llment process A cross-functional business process that 
originates when the company receives a customer order, and it 
concludes when it receives a payment from the customer. 
procurement process A cross-functional business process that 
originates when a company needs to acquire goods or services from 
external sources, and it concludes when the company receives and 
pays for them. 
production process A cross-functional business process in which a 
company produces physical goods. 
routine reports Reports produced at scheduled intervals. 
transaction Any business event that generates data worth capturing 
and storing in a database. 
transaction processing system (TPS) Information system that 
supports the monitoring, collection, storage, and processing of data 
from the organization’s basic business transactions, each of which 
generates data. 
Discussion Questions 
1. Why is it logical to organize IT applications by functional areas? 
6.  Describe the benefits of integrated accounting soft ware packages. 
2. Describe the role of a TPS in a service organization. 
7.  Discuss the role that IT plays in support of auditing. 
3. Describe the relationship between TPS and FAIS. 
8.  Investigate the role of the Web in human resources management. 
4.  Discuss how IT facilitates the budgeting process. 
9. What is the relationship between information silos and enterprise re­
source planning? 
5.  How can the Internet support investment decisions? 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  Finding a job on the Internet is challenging as there are almost too 
many places to look. Visit the following sites: www.careerbuilder.com, 
www.craigslist.org, www.linkedin.com, www.jobcentral.com, and 
www.monster.com. What does each of these sites provide you as a job 
seeker? 
2.  Enter www.sas.com and access revenue optimization there. Explain how 
the software helps in optimizing prices. 
3.  Enter www.eleapsoftware.com and review the product that helps with 
online training (training systems). What are the most attractive features 
of this product? 
4.  Examine the capabilities of the following (and similar) financial soft ­
ware packages: Financial Analyzer (from Oracle) and CFO Vision (from 
SAS Institute). Prepare a report comparing the capabilities of the soft ­
ware packages. 
5.  Surf the Net and find free accounting software. (Try www.cnet.com, 
www.rkom.com, www.tucows.com, www.passtheshareware.com, and 
www.freeware-guide.com.) Download the software and try it. Compare 
the ease of use and usefulness of each soft ware package. 
6.  Examine the capabilities of the following financial soft ware pack­
ages: TekPortal (from www.tekknowledge.com), Financial Analyzer 
(from www.oracle.com), and Financial Management (from www.sas 
.com). Prepare a report comparing the capabilities of the soft ware 
packages. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 2 329 
7.  Find Simply Accounting Basic from Sage Soft ware (http://www.sage 
9. Enter www.iemployee.com and find the support it provides to human 
.com/us/sage-50-accounting). Why is this product recommended for 
resources management activities. View the demos and prepare a report 
small businesses? 
on the capabilities of the products. 
8.  Enter www.halogensoftware.com and www.successfactors.com. Exam­
ine their software products and compare them. 
Closing Case 1 
National Australian Bank Adapts to Global 
FIN 
Performance Measures 
The Problem 
Bad decisions often have a ripple effect. Really bad decisions are like 
a tsunami wave that forces people to take action. Such was the case 
after the global financial crisis of 2007-2009. Financial institutions were 
subject to increased scrutiny from regulatory agencies. Banks around 
the world had to adapt to the new regulatory environment, and they 
were held to more stringent standards. In fact, asset management 
firms and auditors began requesting updated performance measures. 
Unfortunately, it became obvious that National Australian Bank (www 
.nab.com.au; NAB) was not able to comply because their information 
systems were unable to provide asset management reports that con­
tained newly required information or newly required levels of detail. 
NAB maintained several legacy systems that supported asset 
management. It lacked any mechanism, however, to integrate infor­
mation from multiple systems in order to create the necessary reports. 
Rather, creating a report involved extracting data from multiple 
sources and then manually analyzing the data. NAB needed real-time 
data and specific calculations. However, the bank’s legacy systems 
could not provide them. 
The Technology Solution 
In 2011, NAB began searching for a new IT solution to meet the bank’s 
reporting requirements. NAB decided to adopt Eagle Investment Sys­
tems’ (www.eagleinvsys.com; EIS) Performance Management solution 
to be able to comply with the new regulatory environment. The EIS 
solution provided NAB with the tools the bank needed to track its $600 
billion (Australian dollars) in assets. The EIS also provided a robust 
Web portal for its asset management clients. (A portal is a gateway that 
allows non-employees to access information stored inside the propri­
etary information system.) 
NAB chose an implementation team that represented a cross-sec­
tion of stakeholders, who included representatives from NAB’s per­
formance, risk, and IT functional areas, NAB consultants, Eagle (the 
solution provider), and IBM (NAB’s infrastructure provider). Bringing 
together this wide variety of team members helped ensure that NAB 
would be able to appropriately navigate the difficulties of a large sys­
tem implementation. 
The Results 
NAB’s new Eagle tool required the bank’s clients to update their sys­
tems to work with Eagle. For example, in mid-2014 NAB provided two 
clients with access to the new system through the EIS client portal, 
and these clients were very pleased. The new system not only helped 
the clients comply with regulations, but it also enabled them to cre­
ate custom dashboards, generate routine reports, and run complex 
calculations within the system rather than having to download the 
data and perform analysis in a different system. Clients were also able 
to access the asset data necessary to create the reports they needed 
directly through the client portal. This process reduced NAB’s over­
head expense because the bank did not have to find their clients’ data 
for them. 
The remainder of NAB’s clients are scheduled to migrate to the 
new EIS Performance Management tool by 2016. Ultimately, NAB will 
continue to work with EIS to develop the system to support dynamic, 
real-time dashboards and mobile access to further support the inte­
gration of this tool into the culture of NAB and NAB’s clients. 
Sources: Compiled from J. Thomases, “Australia’s Largest Custodian 
Picks Eagle for Performance Management,” waterstechnology.com, April 
29, 2014; A. Rawland, “How NAB Boosted Its Performance Management 
Capabilities,” InformationWeek, December 30, 2014; S. Durham, “NAB 
Deploys New Analytics System,” assetservicingtimes.com, May 6, 2014; 
W. Klijn, “NAB Custody Unit Implements New Risk System,” theinstoreport 
.com, May 8, 2014; http://www.eagleinvsys.com/solutions/performance­
measurement.cfm accessed December 16, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  How did the global financial crisis impact NAB’s decision to adopt 
performance management tools? 
2.  Why did NAB’s choice of a solution create its own ripple eff ect with 
their clients? 
Closing Case 2 
IBM and CVS Partner to Bring Watson to Doctor’s Off ice Visits 
POM The Problem 
In today’s healthcare system, physicians typically react to, or treat, 
symptoms that patients present to them. In treating those symptoms, 
physicians develop treatment plans. Unfortunately, treatment plans 
are rarely foolproof. The reason is that there are so many variables that 
impact the way a patient responds to treatment including allergies, 
existing conditions, genetics, and lifestyle. Further, in many situations, 
physicians must make decisions based on incomplete information. 
Either the patient has not divulged all of the necessary information or 
another physician has not shared patient information. Additionally, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
330 
CHAPTER 11 Information Systems within the Organization 
insurance plans do not always provide benefits that correspond to the 
treatment options provided by physicians. 
Ideally, proactive (or preventive) healthcare is the best possible 
solution for our healthcare system. Technology could help enable pro­
active healthcare if it could be used as a tool to help physicians diag­
nose patients, develop treatment plans, and encourage patients to 
stay on the prescribed treatment plan, make positive lifestyle choices, 
take their medications on schedule, and track their progress. 
The IT Solution 
Today’s technology can help physicians deal with these problems and 
provide these advantages. For example, physicians can now share a 
single database to obtain a more complete picture of the patient’s 
health before creating a treatment plan. Imagine if a physician were 
able to access a patient’s entire health history and find patients with 
similar histories to include their responses to various treatment plans. 
Medical practice would then become data-driven. Combine data from 
health-tracking devices—for example, wearable devices such as the 
Fitbit—that display weight fluctuations, activity levels, blood pressure 
changes, and blood sugar patterns over time, and physicians would 
have much better data on which to prescribe treatment. 
Despite all of these benefits, there are several problems with this 
type of data sharing. To begin with, the government enforces HIPAA 
regulations, which protect patients’ privacy. In addition, special inter­
est groups fear the government’s involvement from a “Big Brother” 
perspective, physicians may have concerns about sharing patient 
data, and individuals have various reasons for not wanting their health 
histories to be shared. Still, the potential benefits have led IBM (www 
.ibm.com) and CVS (www.cvs.com) to team up to provide a workable 
technology solution, at least in part, for healthcare. 
In July 2015, the two companies announced that they were work­
ing on a predictive analytics project that will bring IBM’s Watson into 
the physician’s office. (IBM Watson is an information technology plat­
form that uses natural language processing and machine learning to 
reveal insights from large amounts of unstructured data. Recall the 
Watson is the IT system that won Jeopardy! in 2011.) The ultimate goal 
is to identify markers—such as the combination of increased blood 
pressure and weight gain that may be related to heart disease—that 
point to the onset of obesity, heart disease, and hypertension (high 
blood pressure), because these chronic conditions are the leading 
causes of death in the United States. 
Watson’s predictive analytics tools will be available at CVS Minute 
Clinics to help physician’s assistants and nurses make better decisions 
regardless of whether they have ever seen a particular patient. (CVS 
Minute Clinics are walk-in clinics at staffed by certified nurse practi­
tioners and physician assistants who provide treatments and health 
screenings.) Patients will also be able to reduce the number of off ice 
visits required for treatment because most of the data captured at phy­
sicians’ offices would now be recorded on an ongoing basis by weara­
ble technology that automatically shares data with the clinic. 
The adoption of this type of automatic data collection would 
drastically transform the nature of the patient-physician discussion 
in the physician’s office. Rather than spending time asking questions 
to gather data, the results of the data analysis would be the topic of 
conversation. Treatment plans would be revised based on data that 
IBM’s Watson had analyzed and compared to other patients with 
similar symptoms. This process would completely transform the way 
physicians are able to apply their expertise and would enable them to 
provide more concrete directions to their patients. 
The Results 
This partnership is just beginning, so there are no reportable out­
comes. However, the potential exists to identify subtle changes in 
health that could point to the onset of a chronic illness or a life-threat­
ening disease. It is highly likely that predictive analytics will someday 
change the nature of your visits to your physician. 
Annual physicals could become a thing of the past if data are col­
lected and shared with doctors on a daily (perhaps hourly) basis. Doc­
tors could send you an annual report rather than require you to come 
in for an annual visit. These improvements sound very positive. But, 
what if the system notices from your meal tracking app that you had 
three slices of chocolate cake and you are already borderline obese 
and a candidate for heart disease? What if your insurance drops your 
coverage because you are not complying with your treatment plan and 
your personal health tracker sent your data to them? 
There are several potential consequences of automatic data shar­
ing, both positive and negative. As with most technological advances, 
we strive to achieve the positive and navigate the negative. This rela­
tionship between CVS and IBM’s Watson will be no diff erent. 
Sources: Compiled from B. Japsen, “CVS and IBM’s Watson Cloud Pursue 
Ways to Predict Patient Health,” Forbes, July 30, 2015; G. Laurer, “IBM 
Hopes CVS  Watson Partnership Leads to More Connections in Cloud,” 
CaliforniaHealthLine.org, August 6, 2015; Z. Seigel, “IBM’s Watson Wants 
Your Health Data,” TheDailyBeast.com, August 3, 2015; A. Kaufman, “IBM 
Watson Is Helping CVS Fight Chronic Disease,” The Huffington Post, July 
30, 2015; J. Calfas, “CVS, IBM Partner for Technology- Based Health Care,” 
USA Today, July 30, 2015; D. Reisinger, “IBM’s Watson Wants to Make You 
Healthier with Deal with CVS Health,” CNET.com, July 30, 2015; S. Buhr, 
“CVS Health Taps IBM’s Watson to Predict Patient Health Decline Before It 
Happens,” techcrunch.net, July 30, 2015; A. Cha, “IBM Watson, CVS Deal: 
How the Smartest Computer on Earth Could Shake Up Health Care for 
70 M Pharmacy Customers,” The Washington Post, July 30, 2015; L. Loeb, 
“IBM, CVS Partner on Watson Based Patient Care,” InformationWeek, 
July 30, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  What will the impact be of the CVS Minute Clinic obtaining access to 
this software within their clinical setting? How will their daily oper­
ations change? 
2.  If you were the physician, would you like to adopt and use this type 
of technology in your practice? Why or why not? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Neustockimages/iStockphoto 
Customer Relationship 
Management 
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
12.1  Defining Customer Relationship 
Management 
12.2  Operational Customer Relationship 
Management 
12.3  Other Types of Customer Relation­
ship Management Systems 
Opening Case 
CHAPTER 12  
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
12.1  Identify the primary functions of both customer relationship management (CRM) and 
collaborative CRM strategies. 
12.2  Describe how businesses might utilize applications of each of the two major compo­
nents of operational CRM systems. 
12.3  Explain the advantages and disadvantages of mobile CRM systems, on-demand CRM 
systems, open-source CRM systems, social CRM systems, and real-time CRM systems. 
stay logged in longer (e.g., manipulating social media news feeds on 
Facebook). 
Marketing professionals argue that persuasive technologies can
MKT Do Persuasive Technologies Go Too Far? 
benefit consumers, who want better service and more suitable offer-
Persuasive technologies are designed to influence people’s behavior 
ings. The marketers note that the best persuasive technologies are 
and change their attitudes. These technologies, which include apps, 
those that gently influence people to do something they wish they had 
Web sites, video games, social media, and others, integrate traditional 
been doing anyway. 
methods of persuasion—the use of information and incentives, for 
Today, many companies are using technologies that measure cus­
example—with capabilities of information technology to modify user 
tomer behavior in order to design products that are not only persuasive 
behavior. Persuasive technologies can be found in mobile downloads 
but are specifically intended to create new habits. In addition to the tech-
and on Web sites where behavior-oriented design persuades consum-
nologies themselves, companies use data generated by these technolo­
ers to purchase more items (e.g., one-click checkout at Amazon) or to 
gies to further refine persuasive and perhaps habit-forming strategies. 
331
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
332 
CHAPTER 12  Customer Relationship Management 
Many companies have included habit formation as a business 
model (for example, casinos, cigarette manufacturers, alcohol produc­
ers, fast food establishments, and many others.) Persuasive technolo­
gies have provided that option to a broad range of companies. Insights 
from psychology and behavioral economics concerning how and why 
people make certain choices, combined with information technolo­
gies, have enabled designers of Web sites, apps, and many other prod­
ucts to create sophisticated persuasive technologies. 
Persuasive technologies raise many ethical issues, particularly 
the line between persuasion and manipulation. Manipulation implies 
persuasion with the intent to fool or control people into doing some­
thing, believing something, or buying something that either harms 
them or provides no benefit to them. The question is: Given the depth 
of information about consumers that persuasive technologies gener­
ate, coupled with companies’ increasingly sophisticated attempts to 
influence consumer behavior, what are the appropriate limits for these 
technologies, which can be so well designed that they are essentially 
invisible? 
Let’s consider several examples of companies that are using per­
suasive technologies: 
•  GSN Games (www.gsn.com) designs mobile games such as pok­
er and bingo. The company collects billions of data points each 
day from its players’ smartphones and tablets. These data re­
veal everything from the time of day that users play, to the type 
of game they prefer, to how they deal with failure. Insights from 
these data are so effective that, if two people were to download a 
game into the same type of smartphone simultaneously, in as lit­
tle as five minutes their games would begin to diverge, with each 
game automatically tailored to its user’s style of play. 
Significantly, GSN does more than simply track customers’ 
preferences and customize its offerings accordingly. To induce 
players to play longer and to try more games, the company uses 
the data to watch for signs that players are tiring. By measuring 
how frequently and how quickly players press on their screens, 
GSN can predict when they are likely to lose interest. It then sug­
gests other games before players reach that point. The games are 
free, but GSN displays ads and sells virtual items that are useful to 
players. Therefore, the longer the company can persuade some­
one to play, the more money it makes. 
•  Rocket Fuel (www.rocketfuel.com) uses artificial intelligence to 
predict the best ad to present to a given customer who is visit­
ing a particular Web page, taking into account multiple types of 
information, such as: (a) data gathered from Web sites; (b) the 
browsing, advertising, and purchase history associated with a 
given shopper’s Internet Protocol address; and (c) insights into 
what style of ad works best on a particular Web site. The company 
claims that its targeted ads generate revenue for clients amount­
ing to 2 to 8 times what clients spend on the ads. 
•  Opower (www.opower.com) is a software company that promotes 
home energy efficiency. Instead of showing customers the usual 
power bill, Opower collects data from the home and displays the 
data in a chart that compares a homeowner’s energy use to the 
average energy use of his or her neighbors. 
•  Companies have been working for years on strategies to help 
people remember to take their medicines on time. GlowCaps 
(www.glowcaps.com) produces a special cap that fits on top of a 
standard pill bottle. The cap lights up when patients need to take 
their medicine. The caps are also wirelessly enabled, and they 
can send reports about how well patients are adhering to their 
medication schedule. 
•  In hybrid cars, including the Toyota Prius and Ford Fusion hybrid, 
display panels inform drivers of how efficiently they are driving 
at any given moment. The Prius plots this information on a bar 
graph that indicates current miles per gallon. The Fusion displays 
a virtual plant growing (or dying) on the dashboard screen as a 
person’s driving efficiently increases or decreases.  
•  Approximately 1.6 million people in the African country of 
Mozambique live with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
Unfortunately, only 74 percent of patients who begin HIV treat­
ment are still taking their medication one year later. In November 
2011, the British-based international children’s charity Ark began 
sending text messages to HIV-positive people in one of Mozam­
bique’s provinces to remind them about treatments and appoint­
ments. The messages helped urban and recently diagnosed HIV 
patients continue with their treatment regimens. Results at rural 
treatment centers were disappointing, possibly due to transpor­
tation issues or limited cellular coverage. 
Sources: Compiled from E. Tucker, “Can an App Really Persuade Children 
to Go to Sleep?” The Guardian, May 19, 2015; S. Wolf, “A Brief Look at 
Persuasive Technology,” kachwanya.com, April 30, 2015; E. Howell, “Using 
Tech to Persuade Us to Pay Attention, Just a Little Longer,” Herox, April 21, 
2015; P. Newton, “The Persuasive Power of Technology,” IntelligentHQ, 
April 11, 2015; K. Majcher, “Persuasive Texting in Mozambique,” MIT 
Technology Review, March 23, 2015; N. Byrnes, “Technology and Persuasion,” 
MIT Technology Review, March 23, 2015; J. Larson, “The Invisible, 
Manipulative Power of Persuasive Technology,” Pacific Standard, May 14, 
2014; “Do Persuasive Technologies Persuade?” Gamification Research 
Network, April 8, 2014; T. Fritz, E. Huang, G. Murphy, and T. Zimmerman, 
“Persuasive Technology in the Real World: A Study of Long-Term Use of 
Activity Sensing Devices for Fitness,” CHI Conference Proceedings, Toronto, 
Canada, 2014; J. Sutter, “Tech Guilt: 5 ‘Persuasive’ Technologies to Help You 
Be Good,” CNN News, August 13, 2010; www.gsn.com, www.rocketfuel.com, 
www.opower.com, www.glowcaps.com, accessed October 23, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of persuasive technolo­
gies to companies. 
2.  Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of persuasive technolo­
gies to consumers. 
3.  Debate the ethical nature of persuasive technologies. (Hint: Refer 
to Chapter 6 for ethical frameworks.) 
4.  Do persuasive technologies take customer relationship manage­
ment too far? Why or why not? Support your answer. 
Introduction  
Organizations increasingly are emphasizing a customer-centric approach to their business 
practices because they realize that long-term customer relationships provide sustainable value 
that extends beyond an individual business transaction. Significantly, customer relationship 

 
 
 
 
 
Defining Customer Relationship Management 333 
management (CRM) is not important solely for large enterprises. Rather, it is essential for small 
organizations as well. 
The chapter opening case points out that perhaps an organization’s customer relationship 
management efforts can go too far. With today’s sophisticated information technology, organi­
zations must be careful not to breach ethical guidelines in how they manage relationships with 
their customers. 
In Chapter 11, you learned about information systems that supported organizational 
activities within the organization. In this chapter, you study information systems that support 
organizational activities that extend outside the organization to customers. 
An organization’s CRM system includes two major components: operational CRM systems 
and analytical CRM systems. You learn about operational CRM systems in Section 12.2. We dis­
cuss analytical CRM systems very briefly here because we provided an in-depth discussion of 
business analytics (including analytical CRM systems) in Chapter 5. 
Analytical CRM systems provide business intelligence by analyzing customer behavior 
and perceptions. For example, analytical CRM systems typically provide information concern­
ing customer requests and transactions, as well as customer responses to the organization’s 
marketing, sales, and service initiatives. These systems also create statistical models of cus­
tomer behavior and the value of customer relationships over time, as well as forecasts about 
acquiring, retaining, and losing customers. 
Important technologies in analytical CRM systems include data warehouses, data mining, 
decision support, and other business intelligence technologies. After these systems have com­
pleted their various analyses, they supply information to the organization in the form of reports 
and digital dashboards. 
Analytical CRM systems analyze customer data for a variety of purposes, including: 
• Designing and executing targeted marketing campaigns 
• Increasing customer acquisition, cross-selling, and upselling 
• Providing input into decisions relating to products and services (e.g., pricing and product 
development) 
• Providing financial forecasting and customer profitability analysis 
At this point, you might be asking yourself: Why should I learn about CRM? The answer, as you 
will see in this chapter, is that customers are supremely important to all organizations. Regard­
less of your job, you will have an impact, whether direct or indirect, on managing your firm’s 
customers. When you read the What’s in IT for Me? section at the end of the chapter, you will 
learn about opportunities to make immediate contributions on your job. Therefore, it is essen­
tial that you acquire a working knowledge of CRM and CRM systems. 
12.1 Defining Customer Relationship 
Management 
Before the supermarket, the mall, and the automobile, people purchased goods at their neigh­
borhood store. The owners and employees recognized customers by name and knew their pref­
erences and wants. For their part, customers remained loyal to the store and made repeated 
purchases. Over time, however, this personal customer relationship became impersonal as 
people moved from farms and small towns to cities, consumers became mobile, and supermar­
kets and department stores achieved economies of scale through mass marketing. Although 
prices were lower and products were more uniform in quality, the relationship with customers 
became nameless and impersonal. 
The customer relationship has become even more impersonal with the rapid growth of 
the Internet and the World Wide Web. In today’s hypercompetitive marketplace, customers 
are increasingly powerful; if they are dissatisfied with a product and/or a service from one 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
334 
CHAPTER 12  Customer Relationship Management 
organization, a competitor is often just one mouse click away. Furthermore, as more and more 
customers shop on the Web, an enterprise does not even have the opportunity to make a good 
first impression in person. 
Customer relationship management returns to personal marketing. That is, rather than 
market to a mass of people or companies, businesses market to each customer individu­
ally. By employing this approach, businesses can use information about each customer— 
for example, previous purchases, needs, and wants—to create highly individualized offers 
that customers are more likely to accept. The CRM approach is designed to achieve cus­
tomer intimacy. 
Customer relationship management is a customer-focused and customer-driven organi­
zational strategy. That is, organizations concentrate on assessing customers’ requirements for 
products and services and then providing a high-quality, responsive customer experience. CRM 
is not a process or a technology per se; rather, it is a customer-centric way of thinking and act­
ing. The focus of modern organizations has shifted from conducting business transactions to 
managing customer relationships. In general, organizations recognize that customers are the 
core of a successful enterprise, and the success of the enterprise depends on eff ectively man­
aging relationships with them. 
The CRM approach is enabled by information technology in the form of various systems 
and applications. However, CRM is not only about the software. Sometimes the problem with 
managing relationships is simply time and information. Old systems may contain the needed 
information, but this information may take too long to access and may not be usable across 
a variety of applications. The result is that companies have less time to spend with their 
customers. 
In contrast, modern CRM strategies and systems build sustainable long-term customer 
relationships that create value for the company as well as for the customer. That is, CRM helps 
companies acquire new customers and to retain and expand their relationships with profitable 
existing customers. Retaining customers is particularly important because repeat customers 
are the largest generator of revenue for an enterprise. Also, organizations have long understood 
that winning back a customer who has switched to a competitor is vastly more expensive than 
keeping that customer satisfied in the first place. 
Figure 12.1 depicts the CRM process. The process begins with marketing efforts, where the 
organization solicits prospects from a target population of potential customers. A certain num­
ber of these prospects will make a purchase and thus become customers. A certain number 
of these customers will become repeat customers. The organization then segments its repeat 
customers into low- and high-value repeat customers. An organization’s overall goal is to max­
imize the lifetime value of a customer, which is that customer’s potential revenue stream over 
a number of years. 
Over time all organizations inevitably lose a certain percentage of customers, a process 
called customer churn. The optimal result of the organization’s CRM efforts is to maximize the 
number of high-value repeat customers while minimizing customer churn. 
CRM is a fundamentally simple concept: Treat different customers diff erently because their 
needs differ and their value to the company may also differ. A successful CRM strategy not only 
improves customer satisfaction but also makes the company’s sales and service employees 
more productive, which in turn generates increased profits. Researchers at the National Quality 
Research Center at the University of Michigan discovered that a 1 percent increase in customer 
satisfaction can lead to as much as a 300 percent increase in a company’s market capitalization, 
defined as the number of shares of the company’s stock outstanding multiplied by the price per 
share of the stock. Put simply, a minor increase in customer satisfaction can generate a major 
increase in a company’s overall value. 
Up to this point, you have been looking at an organization’s CRM strategy. It is important to 
distinguish between a CRM strategy and CRM systems. Basically, CRM systems are information 
systems designed to support an organization’s CRM strategy. For organizations to pursue excel­
lent relationships with their customers, they need to employ CRM systems that provide the 
infrastructure needed to support those relationships. Because customer service and support 
are essential to a successful business, organizations must place a great deal of emphasis on 
both their CRM strategy and their CRM systems. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Defining Customer Relationship Management 335 
Figure 12.1  depicting the
 CRM process that begins with marketing efforts, where the organization solicits prospects from a target population of potential customers. A certain number of customers become repeat customers. The organization then segments its repeat customers into low- and high-value repeat customers.
Broadly speaking, CRM systems lie along a continuum, from low-end CRM systems— 
designed for enterprises with many small customers—to high-end CRM systems—for enter­
prises with a few large customers. An example of a low-end system is Amazon, which uses its 
CRM system to recommend products to returning customers. An example of a high-end system 
is Boeing, which uses its CRM system to coordinate staff activities in a campaign to sell its new 
787 aircraft to Delta Airlines. As you study the cases and examples in this chapter, consider 
where on the continuum a particular CRM system would fall. 
Although CRM varies according to circumstances, all successful CRM policies share two 
basic elements: (1) The company must identify the many types of customer touch points, and 
(2) it needs to consolidate data about each customer. Let’s examine these two elements in 
more detail. 
Customer Touch Points 
Organizations must recognize the numerous and diverse interactions they have with their 
customers. These interactions are referred to as customer touch points. Traditional customer 
touch points include telephone contact, direct mailings, and actual physical interactions with 
customers during their visits to a store. Organizational CRM systems, however, must manage 
many additional customer touch points that occur through the use of popular personal tech­
nologies. These touch points include e-mail, Web sites, and communications via smartphones 
(see Figure 12.2). 
The business–customer relationship is constantly evolving. As personal technology 
usage changes, so too must the methods that businesses use to interface with their custom­
ers. It is now possible to physically locate customers via their smartphones. As a result, loca­
tion information can now provide another customer touch point, as you see in IT’s About 
Business 12.1. 

 
 
336 
CHAPTER 12  Customer Relationship Management 
Figure depi c ting the custom
er touch
 points, where customer is represented in the center. Smartphone, World Wide Web, computer, physical store, sales representative, field service technician, direct mail, email, service center, and call center are inter-connected with the customer with by-directional arrows.
MKT Location-Based Systems in Customer 
Relationship Management 
The Golden State Warriors (www.nba.com/warriors) won the NBA 
championship in June 2015. Significantly, technology increased 
the enjoyment of fans who were on hand to enjoy the victory at 
Oracle Arena, the team’s current home court in Oakland, California. 
The arena sends personalized messages to fans’ smartphones 
about merchandise deals at the team store. They can also receive 
notifications that they can upgrade their seats while at the arena for 
a game. Warriors fans—called members of Dub Nation—can sign up 
for an app that detects their location in the arena and alerts them 
to which entrances are less busy. The technology uses a beacon, a 
wireless hardware device that pinpoints the app users through the 
geolocation-based technology. 
The idea behind the Warriors’ apps is that location is an im­
portant way to add value for customers who are essentially a cap­
tive audience. Specifically, location-based services (LBS) enable 
the Warriors to provide better service and to deepen customer loy­
alty. LBS can target customers where they are in real time, giving 
them offers they can take advantage of right away. 
The Warriors have experienced mixed results from their loca­
tion-based services. On the positive side, LBS notifications were 
credited with making it easier for fans to upgrade seats, generating 
approximately 15 percent of arena seat upgrades. In contrast, fans 
largely ignored the LBS notifications about free popcorn with the 
purchase of a pizza slice. 
Even if technology can do something, it doesn’t always make 
practical sense. For example, the Warrior app has the ability to de­
liver instant replays to fans in the arena. But the organization nixed 
that idea, figuring the game already moved too fast for replays to 
be of value. However, the team was considering making instant re­
plays available to fans not attending the game. 
The LBS data on its own won’t give the Warriors the complete 
picture of their fans and enable them to provide experiences in 
context. The team must integrate that data with information from 
CRM, inventory management, and workforce management appli­
cations. Fan behavior also varies whether they are in the arena, on 
the phone, or online. 
There are other interesting examples of location-based ser­
vices employed in customer relationship management. In Brazil, 
Nivea, the maker of skin care products, embeds a beacon in maga­
zine ads that parents can tear out and make into a wristband for 
their children. A smartphone app can track how far the children are 
from their parents in public places. The app alerts parents when 
the child strays beyond a certain range. As a result of this CRM tool, 
Brazilians now perceive Nivea as a brand that cares about its cus­
tomers’ children. 
As another example, 313 Somerset, a mall in Singapore, has 
deployed a beacon-based mobile advertising service. The Tring313 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Defining Customer Relationship Management 337 
app detects when users who opted in to the service are within a 
M. Rao, “Mobile + Creativity: 8 Innovative Examples of Location-Based 
predefined distance from the mall. That triggers the sending of cou-
Marketing,” YourStory.com, June 4, 2015; L. Alton, “10 Ways Location-
Based Marketing Will Evolve in 2015,” Huffington Post, January 7, 2015; 
pons and other offers to their smartphones. Retailers have enjoyed 
P. Britt, “Consumers Love Mobile Marketing, Location-Based Services,” 
a 46 percent sales conversion rate thanks to the app. (The sales 
Enterprise Apps Today, November 11, 2014; L. Johnson, “4 Location-
conversion rate is the percentage of prospective customers who 
Based Marketing Tactics That Are Working,” AdWeek, August 4, 2014; 
actually make a purchase.) 
R. Goodrich, “Location-Based Services: Definition & Examples,” 
LBS does have downsides. Critics feel that some companies 
Business News Daily, October 30, 2013; www.nba.com/warriors, 
use the brute-force approach, sending so many messages that con-
accessed October 27, 2015. 
sumers either ignore them or turn off their phones. Even worse, 
customers may be so irritated and feel the messages are so irrel-
Questions 
evant that they delete the app entirely. For LBS to succeed with 
1. Describe the advantages of location-based services for cus­
empowered customers, companies must offer true value to their 
tomers and for businesses. 
customers at the right moment. 
2. Describe the disadvantages of location-based services for 
customers and for businesses. 
Sources: Compiled from L. Horwitz, “Where the Customer Leads,”  
Business Information, October, 2015; J. Nyland, “Five Ways to Use 
3. What are other location-based services that the Golden State  
Location-Based Marketing Right Now,” MarketingProfs, June 29, 2015; 
Warriors could provide for their fans?  
Data Consolidation 
Data consolidation is also critical to an organization’s CRM efforts. The organization’s CRM 
systems must manage customer data effectively. In the past, customer data were stored in 
isolated systems (or silos) located in different functional areas across the business—for exam­
ple, in separate databases in the finance, sales, logistics, and marketing departments. Con­
sequently, data for individual customers were difficult to share across the various functional 
areas. 
As you saw in Chapter 3, modern interconnected systems built around a data warehouse 
now make all customer-related data available to every unit of the business. This complete data 
set on each customer is called a 360º view of that customer. By accessing this view, a company 
can enhance its relationship with its customers and ultimately make more productive and prof­
itable decisions. 
Data consolidation and the 360º view of the customer enable the organization’s func­
tional areas to readily share information about customers. This information sharing leads to 
collaborative CRM. Collaborative CRM systems provide effective and eff icient interactive 
communication with the customer throughout the entire organization. That is, they integrate 
communications between the organization and its customers in all aspects of marketing, 
sales, and customer support. Collaborative CRM systems also enable customers to provide 
direct feedback to the organization. As you read in Chapter 8, social media applications 
such as social networks, blogs, microblogs, and Wikis are very important to companies that 
value customer input into their product and service offerings, as well as into new product 
development. 
Recall that an organization’s CRM system contains two major components: operational 
CRM systems and analytical CRM systems. You will learn about operational CRM systems in the 
next section. We covered analytical CRM systems in Chapter 5. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What is the definition of customer relationship management?
 2. Why is CRM so important to any organization?
 3. Define and provide examples of customer touch points. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
338 
CHAPTER 12  Customer Relationship Management 
Apply the Concept 12.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 12.1 Identify the primary 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you are doing.) 
functions of both customer relationship management (CRM) and 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
collaborative CRM strategies. 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 12.1. 
This link will take you to a YouTube video that illustrates how 
Recreational Equipment Incorporated (REI) uses CRM to service 
their customers.  
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
Section 12.1 introduced the concept of a CRM system, and it 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you submit.) 
suggested that it is better to focus on relationships than on 
In a report, identify the primary functions of both customer 
transactions. The idea is that relationships create transactions, 
relationship management (CRM) and collaborative CRM strategies. 
so if you grow the relationship, you keep the customers (and the 
What are REI’s approaches to CRM? Can you make any suggestions 
transactions)! 
to help them improve? Submit your report to your professor. 
12.2 Operational Customer Relationship 
Management Systems 
Operational CRM systems support front-office business processes. Front-office processes are 
those that directly interact with customers; that is, sales, marketing, and service. The two major 
components of operational CRM systems are customer-facing applications and  customer-
touching applications (discussed below). Operational CRM systems provide the following 
benefits: 
• Efficient, personalized marketing, sales, and service 
• A 360º view of each customer 
• The ability of sales and service employees to access a complete history of customer inter­
action with the organization, regardless of the touch point 
An example of an operational CRM system involves Caterpillar, Inc. (www.cat.com), an interna­
tional manufacturer of industrial equipment. Caterpillar uses its CRM tools to accomplish the 
following objectives: 
• Improve sales and account management by optimizing the information shared by multiple 
employees and by streamlining existing processes (e.g., taking orders using mobile devices) 
• Form individualized relationships with customers, with the aim of improving customer 
satisfaction and maximizing profits 
• Identify the most profitable customers, and provide them with the highest level of service 
• Provide employees with the information and processes necessary to know their customers 
• Understand and identify customer needs, and effectively build relationships among the 
company, its customer base, and its distribution partners 
Customer-Facing Applications 
In customer-facing CRM applications, an organization’s sales, field service, and customer 
interaction center representatives interact directly with customers. These applications include 
customer service and support, salesforce automation, marketing, and campaign management. 
Customer Service and Support. Customer service and support refers to systems that 
automate service requests, complaints, product returns, and requests for information. Today, 
organizations have implemented customer interaction centers (CIC), where organizational 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operational Customer Relationship Management Systems 339 
representatives use multiple channels such as the Web, telephone, fax, and face-to-face inter­
actions to communicate with customers. The CIC manages several different types of customer 
interaction. 
One of the best known customer interaction centers is the call center, a centralized off ice 
set up to receive and transmit a large volume of requests by telephone. Call centers enable com­
panies to respond to a large variety of questions, including product support and complaints. 
Organizations also use the CIC to create a call list for the sales team, whose members con­
tact sales prospects. This type of interaction is called outbound telesales. In these interactions, 
the customer and the sales team collaborate in discussing products and services that can sat­
isfy customers’ needs and generate sales. 
Customers can communicate directly with the CIC to initiate a sales order, inquire about 
products and services before placing an order, and obtain information about a transaction they 
have already made. These interactions are referred to as inbound teleservice. Teleservice repre­
sentatives respond to requests either by utilizing service instructions stored in an organizational 
knowledge base or by noting incidents that can be addressed only by field service technicians. 
The CIC also provides the Information Help Desk. The Help Desk assists customers with 
their questions concerning products or services, and it also processes customer complaints. 
Complaints generate follow-up activities such as quality control checks, delivery of replace­
ment parts or products, service calls, generation of credit memos, and product returns. New 
technologies are extending the traditional CIC’s functionality to include e-mail and Web inter­
action. For example, Epicor (www.epicor.com) provides software solutions that combine Web 
channels, such as automated e-mail reply, with Web knowledge bases. The information the 
software provides is available to CIC representatives and field service personnel. Another new 
technology, live chat, allows customers to connect to a company representative and conduct 
an instant messaging session. The advantage of live chat over a telephone conversation is that 
live chat enables the participants to share documents and photos (see www.livechatinc.com 
and www.websitealive.com). Some companies conduct the chat with a computer using natural 
language processing rather than with a real person. IT’s About Business 12.2 provides an exam­
ple of Priceline.com’s new customer call center. 
IT’s About Business 12.2 
Priceline.com’s New Customer Contact 
MKT 
Center 
MIS 
Priceline.com (www.priceline.com) is an American 
POM company that helps its customers obtain discounts on 
travel-related services such as airline tickets and hotel stays. The 
company is not a direct supplier of these services; rather, it helps 
its suppliers provide travel services to its customers. 
Immediately before the online travel industry’s rapid growth, 
Priceline was using customer management software that it de­
veloped in-house. The proprietary applications could not provide 
360-degree views of customers. Customer service agents had lim­
ited access to transaction histories, which severely limited their 
knowledge of the customers with whom they were speaking. 
As the online travel industry blossomed and pricing became 
cutthroat, Priceline had to be able to react quickly. It needed 
to keep its customers informed of fast-moving price changes, 
new products, and changing travel regulations, no matter which 
method they used to contact the company. The new contact center 
had to grow as fast as the firm’s customer base was growing while 
supporting significantly higher levels of interaction with each cus­
tomer. Agents needed access to a list of frequently asked questions, 
among other content. To accomplish these goals, Priceline moved 
the process of information management away from its information 
technology staff to the firm’s marketing and product management 
teams so they could update the customer knowledge database and 
FAQs directly. 
Priceline developed its new contact center using KANA Soft ­
ware (www.kana.com), which provides on-premise and cloud 
computing customer relationship management products. (We dis­
cuss on-premise and cloud computing in Plug IT In 4.) The contact 
center provides customer service agents with the ability to quickly 
manage high volumes of e-mails. The center also links customer 
contacts and Priceline’s internal systems, which include several 
Oracle databases. This link enables Priceline agents to respond 
quickly and consistently by having access to a 360-degree view of 
each customer. The contact center has predefined business rules 
that streamline the process of responding to customer requests, 
ensuring that specific questions are handled by the most appropri­
ate customer service representative. 
Visitors to Priceline’s Web site can also help themselves to a 
knowledge base to answer the most common questions. Using the 
self-service option is often faster for customers, and it reduces the 
number of calls to customer service agents, who can focus on more 
complex phone enquiries. 
Sources: Compiled from S. Sachs, “Contact Center Automation Takes 
Flight,” TechTarget March 2015; B. Stackpole, “Contact Center Strives 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
340 
CHAPTER 12  Customer Relationship Management 
for Strategic Role in Customer Experience Management,” TechTarget, 
Questions 
October 14, 2015; L. Klie, “5 Hot Customer Service Technologies,” 
1. Discuss the reasons why Priceline needed a new customer 
DestinationCRM.com, December 2014; “Priceline.com,” KANA Case 
contact center. 
Study, 2014; P. Greenberg, “The Customer Experience Challenge Met:  
KANA Responds,” ZDNet, January 9, 2013; www.priceline.com, www 
2. Describe the benefits of the KANA solution to customers and  
.kana.com, accessed October 27, 2015.  
to Priceline. 
MKT 
Salesforce Automation. Salesforce automation (SFA) is the component of an opera­
tional CRM system that automatically records all of the components in a sales transaction 
process. SFA systems include a contact management system, which tracks all communications 
between the company and the customer, the purpose of each communication, and any nec­
essary follow-up. This system eliminates duplicated contacts and redundancy, which in turn 
reduces the risk of irritating customers. SFA also includes a sales lead tracking system, which 
lists potential customers or customers who have purchased related products; that is, products 
similar to those that the salesperson is trying to sell to the customer. 
Other elements of an SFA system can include a sales forecasting system, which is a math­
ematical technique for estimating future sales, and a product knowledge system, which is a 
comprehensive source of information regarding products and services. More-developed SFA 
systems also have online product-building features, called configurators, that enable custom­
ers to model the product to meet their specific needs. For example, you can customize your 
own running shoe at NikeID (http://nikeid.nike.com). Finally, many current SFA systems enable 
the salesperson in the field to connect remotely with customers and the home office via Web-
based interfaces on their smart phones. 
Marketing. Thus far, you have focused primarily on how sales and customer service person­
nel can benefit from CRM systems. However, CRM systems have many important applications 
for an organization’s marketing department as well. For example, they enable marketers to 
identify and target their best customers, to manage marketing campaigns, and to generate 
quality leads for the sales teams. Additionally, CRM marketing applications can sift through 
volumes of customer data—a process known as data mining (discussed in Chapter 5)—to de­
velop a purchasing profile; that is, a snapshot of a consumer’s buying habits that may lead to 
additional sales through cross-selling, upselling, and bundling. 
Cross-selling is the marketing of additional related products to customers based on 
a previous purchase. This sales approach has been used very successfully by banks. For 
example, if you have a checking and savings account at your bank, then a bank off icer will 
recommend other products for you, such as certificates of deposit (CDs) or other types of 
investments. 
Upselling is a strategy in which the salesperson provides customers with the opportunity 
to purchase related products or services of greater value in place of, or along with, the consum­
er’s initial product or service selection. For example, if a customer goes into an electronics store 
to buy a new television, a salesperson may show him a pricey 1080i HD LED television placed 
next to a less expensive LCD television in the hope of selling the more expensive set (assuming 
that the customer is willing to pay more for a sharper picture). Other common examples of 
upselling are warranties on electronics merchandise and the purchase of a carwash aft er buy­
ing gas at the gas station. 
Finally, bundling is a form of cross-selling in which a business sells a group of products 
or services together at a lower price than their combined individual prices. For example, your 
cable company might bundle cable TV, broadband Internet access, and telephone service at a 
lower price than you would paid for each service separately. 
Campaign Management. Campaign management applications help organizations plan 
campaigns that send the right messages to the right people through the right channels. Orga­
nizations manage their campaigns very carefully to avoid targeting people who have opted 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operational Customer Relationship Management Systems 341 
out of receiving marketing communications. Furthermore, companies use these applications 
to personalize individual messages for each particular customer. 
Customer-Touching Applications 
Corporations have used manual CRM systems for many years. In the mid-1990s, for exam­
ple, organizations began to utilize the Internet, the Web, and other electronic touch points 
(e.g., e-mail, point-of-sale terminals) to manage customer relationships. In contrast with 
customer-facing applications, where customers deal with a company representative, cus­
tomers who utilize these technologies interact directly with the applications themselves. 
For this reason, these applications are called customer-touching CRM applications or 
electronic CRM (e-CRM) applications. Customers typically can use these applications to 
help themselves. There are many types of e-CRM applications. Let’s examine some of the 
major ones. 
Search and Comparison Capabilities. It is oft en difficult for customers to find what they 
want from the vast array of products and services available on the Web. To assist customers, 
many online stores and malls offer search and comparison capabilities, as do independent 
comparison Web sites (see www.mysimon.com). 
Technical and Other Information and Services. Many organizations off er personal­
ized experiences to induce customers to make purchases or to remain loyal. For example, Web 
sites often allow customers to download product manuals. One example is General Electric’s 
Web site (www.ge.com), which provides detailed technical and maintenance information and 
sells replacement parts to customers who need to repair outdated home appliances. Another 
example is Goodyear’s Web site (www.goodyear.com), which provides information about tires 
and their use. 
Customized Products and Services. Another customer-touching service that many on­
line vendors use is mass customization, a process in which customers can configure their own 
products. For example, Dell (www.dell.com) allows customers to configure their own computer 
systems. The Gap (www.gap.com) enables customers to “mix and match” an entire wardrobe. 
Web sites such as Hitsquad (www.hitsquad.com) and Apple iTunes (www.apple.com/itunes) 
allow customers to pick individual music titles from a library and customize a CD, a feature that 
traditional music stores do not off er. 
In addition, customers can now view account balances or check the shipping status of 
orders at any time from their computers or smartphones. If you order books from Amazon, for 
example, you can look up the anticipated arrival date. Many other companies, including FedEx 
and UPS, provide similar services (see www.fedex.com and www.ups.com). 
Personalized Web Pages. Many organizations permit their customers to create personal­
ized Web pages. Customers use these pages to record purchases and preferences, as well as 
problems and requests. For example, American Airlines generates personalized Web pages for 
each of its registered travel-planning customers. 
FAQs. Frequently asked questions (FAQs) are a simple tool for answering repetitive customer 
queries. Customers may find the information they need by using this tool, thereby eliminating 
the need to communicate with an actual person. 
E-mail and Automated Response. The most popular tool for customer service is e-mail. 
Inexpensive and fast, companies use e-mail not only to answer customer inquiries but also to 
disseminate information, send alerts and product information, and conduct correspondence 
on any topic. 

 
 
 
 
342 
CHAPTER 12  Customer Relationship Management 
Loyalty Programs. Loyalty programs recognize customers who repeatedly use a vendor’s 
products or services. Loyalty programs are appropriate when two conditions are met: a high 
frequency of repeat purchases, and limited product customization for each customer. 
Although loyalty programs are frequently referred to as “rewards programs,” their actual 
purpose is not to reward past behavior, but, rather, to influence future behavior. Significantly, 
the most profitable customers are not necessarily those whose behavior can be most easily 
influenced. As one example, most major U.S. airlines provide some “elite” benefits to anyone 
who flies 25,000 miles with them and their partners over the course of a year. Customers who 
fly first class pay much more for a given flight than those who fly in economy. 
Nevertheless, these customers reach elite status only 1.5–2 times faster than economy-
class passengers. Why is this true? The reason is that, although first-class passengers are far 
more profitable than discount seekers, they also are less influenced by loyalty programs. Dis­
count flyers respond much more enthusiastically to the benefits of frequent flyer programs. 
Therefore, airlines award more benefits to discount flyers than to first-class flyers (relative to 
their spending). 
The airlines’ frequent flyer programs are probably the best-known loyalty programs. Other 
popular loyalty programs are casino players’ clubs, which reward frequent players, and super­
markets, which reward frequent shoppers. Loyalty programs use a database or data warehouse 
to maintain a record of the points (or miles) a customer has accrued and the rewards to which 
he or she is entitled. The programs then use analytical tools to mine the data and learn about 
customer behavior. 
We have now completed our discussion of operational CRM systems. Recall that we briefly 
looked at analytical CRM systems in the chapter Introduction. Figure 12.3 illustrates the rela­
tionship between operational CRM systems and analytical CRM systems. Figure depicting the relationship between operational CRM systems (left) and analytical CRM systems (right).
FIGURE 12.3 The relationship between operational CRM and analytical CRM. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Differentiate between customer-facing applications and customer-touching applications.
 2. Provide examples of cross-selling, upselling, and bundling (other than the examples presented in 
the text). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other Types of Customer Relationship Management Systems 343 
Apply the Concept 12.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 12.2 Describe how businesses 
Make certain to select a company that has both an Internet site 
might utilize applications of each of the two major components of 
and a physical store so you can compare the two channels. 
operational CRM systems. 
As you walked through the store, did you notice any cues that 
could tie a customer to a CRM?  Did the business have a customer 
STEP 1: Background 
loyalty programs? Are there any significant advantages to joining 
Section 12.2 has introduced you to the concept of customer-
the program? Is the in-store membership tied to anything online? 
facing and customer-touching CRM applications, the two major 
If so, how? Or, does the store seem to have separate in-store and 
components of operational CRM systems. Many organizations use 
online memberships? 
a combination of both types of systems to establish, develop, and 
maintain relationships with consumers. This activity will help you 
to see these systems in action when you do business on a Web 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
site or in a brick-and-mortar business. 
After considering the points mentioned in Step 2, describe how 
businesses might utilize both the customer-facing and customer-
STEP 2: Activity 
touching applications of a CRM to integrate the online and 
Visit a physical store where you like to shop (or recall a recent visit 
traditional shopping experiences. Prepare a report and submit it 
and discuss it with some friends), and visit the store’s Web site. 
to your instructor. 
12.3 Other Types of Customer Relationship 
Management Systems 
Now that you have examined operational and analytical CRM systems, let’s shift our 
focus to other types of CRM systems. Five exciting developments in this area are on-
demand CRM systems, mobile CRM systems, open-source CRM systems, social CRM, and 
real-time CRM. 
On-Demand CRM Systems 
Customer relationship management systems may be implemented as either on-premise or 
on-demand. Traditionally, organizations utilized on-premise CRM systems, meaning that they 
purchased the systems from a vendor and then installed them on site. This arrangement was 
expensive, time consuming, and inflexible. Some organizations, particularly smaller ones, 
could not justify the costs of these systems. 
On-demand CRM systems became a solution for the drawbacks of on-premise CRM sys­
tems. An on-demand CRM system is one that is hosted by an external vendor in the vendor’s 
data center. This arrangement spares the organization the costs associated with purchasing the 
system. In addition, because the vendor creates and maintains the system, the organization’s 
employees need to know only how to access and utilize it. The concept of on-demand is also 
known as utility computing or soft ware-as-a-service (SaaS) (see Plug IT In 4). 
Salesforce (www.salesforce.com) is the best-known on-demand CRM vendor. The compa­
ny’s goal is to provide a new business model that allows companies to rent the CRM soft ware 
instead of buying it. The secret to their success appears to be that CRM has common require­
ments across many customers. Consequently, Salesforce’s product meets the demands of its 
customers without a great deal of customization. 
One Salesforce customer is Babson College (www.babson.edu) in Wellesley, Massachu­
setts. Babson’s goal is to deliver the best applicant experience possible. To accomplish this 
mission, the school decided to use Salesforce to bring together all of the information on pro­
spective students in a single location. All personnel who are involved with admissions have 
immediate access to candidate contact information, applications, and reports that indicate the 
status of each applicant within the enrollment process. This system makes it easy for adminis­
trators to deliver valuable information to applicants at the right time. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
344 
CHAPTER 12  Customer Relationship Management 
Using the Salesforce platform, Babson built an admissions portal with a fully personalized 
user experience for prospective students. The portal consolidates all of the information that 
potential students need. Furthermore, it displays different information to students at diff erent 
points in the application process. 
Despite their benefits, on-demand CRM systems have potential problems. First, the vendor 
could prove to be unreliable, in which case the client company would have no CRM functional­
ity at all. Second, hosted software is difficult or impossible to modify, and only the vendor can 
upgrade it. Third, vendor-hosted CRM software may be difficult to integrate with the organiza­
tion’s existing software. Finally, giving strategic customer data to vendors always carries secu­
rity and privacy risks. 
Mobile CRM Systems 
A mobile CRM system is an interactive system that enables an organization to conduct commu­
nications related to sales, marketing, and customer service activities through a mobile medium 
for the purpose of building and maintaining relationships with its customers. Simply put, 
mobile CRM systems involve interacting directly with consumers through portable devices such 
as smartphones. Many forward-thinking companies believe that mobile CRM systems have tre­
mendous potential to create personalized customer relationships that may be accessed any­
where and at any time. In fact, the opportunities offered by mobile marketing appear so rich 
that many companies have already identified mobile CRM systems as a cornerstone of their 
future marketing activities. 
Open-Source CRM Systems 
As explained in Plug IT In 2, the source code for open-source software is available at no cost. 
Open-source CRM systems, therefore, are CRM systems whose source code is available to 
developers and users. 
Open-source CRM systems provide the same features or functions as other CRM soft ware, 
and they may be implemented either on-premise or on-demand. Leading open-source CRM 
vendors include SugarCRM (www.sugarcrm.com), Concursive (www.concursive.com), and Vti­
ger (www.vtiger.com). 
The benefits of open-source CRM systems include favorable pricing and a wide variety of 
applications. In addition, these systems are easy to customize. This is an attractive feature for 
organizations that need CRM software that is designed for their specific needs. Finally, updates 
and bug (software error) fixes for open-source CRM systems are rapidly distributed, and exten­
sive support information is available free of charge. 
Like all software, however, open-source CRM systems have certain risks. The most serious 
risk involves quality control. Because open-source CRM systems are created by a large commu­
nity of unpaid developers, there sometimes is no central authority responsible for overseeing 
the quality of the product. (We discuss open-source software in Plug IT In 2). Furthermore, for 
best results, companies must have the same IT platform in place as the one on which the open-
source CRM system was developed. 
Social CRM 
Social CRM is the use of social media technology and services to enable organizations to 
engage their customers in a collaborative conversation in order to provide mutually beneficial 
value in a trusted and transparent manner. Social CRM is the company’s response to the cus­
tomers’ ownership of this two-way conversation. In social CRM, organizations monitor services 
such as Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn (among many others) for relevant mentions of their 
products, services, and brand, and they respond accordingly. 
Social media are also providing methods that customers are using to obtain faster, bet­
ter customer service. IT’s About Business 12.3 recounts how one customer was pleasantly sur­
prised when Morton’s Steakhouse responded to his tweet. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other Types of Customer Relationship Management Systems 345 
IT’s About Business 12.3 
Morton’s Steakhouse Surprises a Customer 
Businessperson Peter Shankman was in meetings all day, and he 
had to take a later flight home that caused him to miss his dinner. So, 
he jokingly tweeted Morton’s Steakhouse (www.mortons.com) and 
requested that the restaurant show up with a steak when he landed. 
Morton’s saw the Tweet, discovered that the tweeter was a 
frequent customer (and frequent tweeter—Shankman has 100,000 
Twitter followers), pulled data on what he typically ordered, identi­
fied the flight he was on, and then sent a delivery person to Newark 
Airport (New Jersey) to serve him his dinner. When Shankman got 
to the reception lobby at the airport, he noticed a man in a tuxedo 
holding a card with Shankman’s name. The man was also carrying 
a bag that contained a Porterhouse steak, shrimp, potatoes, bread, 
two napkins, and silverware. 
The nearest Morton’s restaurant was 24 miles from the airport, 
and Shankman’s flight took only two hours. This scenario says a 
lot about both Morton’s customer service and the speed of social 
media. Admittedly, the entire scenario was a publicity stunt that 
MKT 
went explosively viral over the Internet. This is not the point, how­
ever. The questions that businesses should be asking themselves 
are: Would your company even consider doing something like this? 
If not, why not? 
Sources: C. Chan, “Morton’s Steakhouse Met a Man at the Airport with 
a Steak After He Asked for One on Twitter,” Gizmodo, August 19, 2011; 
M. Flacy, “After a Single Tweet, Air Traveler Gets a Morton’s Surprise 
at Newark Airport,” Digital Trends, August 18, 2011; “Peter Shankman 
Tweet Joke Leads to Morton’s Surprise Steak Dinner at Newark Airport 
(TWEETS),” The Huffington Post, August 11, 2011; www.mortons.com, 
accessed March 31, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Explain how Morton’s monitoring of social media illustrates 
how CRM is reviving personal marketing. 
2. Do you see any disadvantages in such close monitoring of 
social media? Provide specific examples to support your 
answer. 
Real-Time CRM 
Organizations are implementing real-time customer relationship management in order to pro­
vide a superior level of customer satisfaction for today’s always-on, always-connected, more 
knowledgeable, and less loyal customers. Real-time CRM means that organizations are able 
to respond to customer product searches, requests, complaints, comments, ratings, reviews, 
and recommendations in near real-time, 24/7/365. Southwest Airlines provides an excellent 
example of real-time CRM. 
A passenger was in her seat on a Southwest Airlines flight about to take off, when the plane 
turned back to the gate. A flight attendant asked her to get off the plane. When she checked 
with the Southwest agent at the desk inside the terminal, he told her that her son was in a coma 
aft er suffering a head injury and to call her husband. 
Even before she had disembarked, Southwest had rebooked her on the next nonstop 
flight to her son’s city—free of charge. The airline offered her a private waiting area, rerouted 
her luggage, allowed her to board first, and packed a lunch for her. Moreover, the airline deliv­
ered her luggage to where she was going to stay and called her to ask about her son. The 
woman said that her son was recovering and that she could not be more grateful for the way 
she was treated. 
Southwest Airlines went above and beyond their responsibilities after they learned of the 
son’s accident. Details were not available about how the airline learned of the son’s accident, 
but it is clear that Southwest brought customer relationship management to a new level. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Describe on-demand CRM.
 2. Describe mobile CRM.
 3. Describe open-source CRM.
 4. Describe social CRM.
 5. Describe real-time CRM. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
346 
CHAPTER 12  Customer Relationship Management 
Apply the Concept 12.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 12.3 Explain the 
One link will take you to a YouTube video that describes an 
advantages and disadvantages of mobile CRM systems, 
on-demand CRM system (Salesforce). Another will take you to 
on-demand CRM systems, open-source CRM systems, social CRM 
a video that highlights an open-source CRM (Sugar CRM). The 
systems, and real-time CRM systems. 
final link will illustrate a hybrid approach, Sales Cloud (mobile­
cloud CRM). Watch these videos, paying special attention to 
the advantages and disadvantages of each approach. The 
STEP 1: Background 
advantages will be easy to spot (these are promotional videos). 
Section 12.3 has outlined different CRM systems—not operational 
The disadvantages of each one will become obvious as you 
or analytical—but, instead, the different ways you can actually 
compare the advantages of the others because you may notice 
implement a CRM system. For example, you can run mobile CRM, 
particular functions that system one cannot perform but the 
open-source CRM, on-demand CRM (cloud), and more. You will 
others can. 
have most—if not all—of these options with any system you plan 
to implement! 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Build a table that highlights the advantages and disadvantages 
STEP 2: Activity 
of each approach. Do the differences reside in the capabilities of 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
the software or in the user experience? Submit your table to your 
and click on the links provided for Apply the Concept 12.3. 
instructor. 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For the Accounting Major 
CRM systems can help companies establish controls for financial 
reporting related to interactions with customers in order to sup­
port compliance with legislation. For example, Sarbanes–Oxley 
requires companies to establish and maintain an adequate set of 
controls for accurate financial reporting that can be audited by a 
third party. Other sections [302 and 401(b)] have implications for 
customer activities, including the requirements that sales figures 
reported for the prior year be correct. Section 409 requires compa­
nies to report material changes to financial conditions, such as the 
loss of a strategic customer or significant customer claims about 
product quality. 
CRM systems can track document flow from a sales opportu­
nity to a sales order, to an invoice, to an accounting document, thus 
enabling finance and accounting managers to monitor the entire 
flow. CRM systems that track sales quotes and orders can be used 
to incorporate process controls that identify questionable sales 
transactions. CRM systems can provide exception-alert capabilities 
to identify instances outside defined parameters that put companies 
at risk. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
CRM systems allow companies to track marketing expenses, col­
lecting appropriate costs for each individual marketing campaign. 
These costs then can be matched to corporate initiatives and finan­
cial objectives, demonstrating the financial impact of the marketing 
campaign. 
Pricing is another key area that impacts financial reporting. For 
example, what discounts are available? When can a price be overrid­
den? Who approves discounts? CRM systems can put controls into 
place for these issues. 
MKT For the Marketing Major 
CRM systems are an integral part of every marketing professional’s 
work activities. CRM systems contain the consolidated customer data 
that provides the foundation for making informed marketing deci­
sions. Using these data, marketers develop well-timed and targeted 
sales campaigns with customized product mixes and established 
price points that enhance potential sales opportunities and there­
fore increase revenue. CRM systems also support the development of 
forecasting models for future sales to existing clients through the use 
of historical data captured from previous transactions. 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
Production is heavily involved in the acquisition of raw materials, 
conversion, and distribution of finished goods. However, all of these 
activities are driven by sales. Increases or decreases in the demand 
for goods result in a corresponding increase or decrease in a com­
pany’s need for raw materials. Integral to a company’s demand is 
forecasting future sales, an important part of CRM systems. Sales 
forecasts are created from the historical data stored in CRM systems. 
This information is critically important to a production manager 
who is placing orders for manufacturing processes. Without an accu­
rate future sales forecast, production managers may face inventory 
problems (discussed in detail in this chapter). The use of CRM sys­
tems for production and operational support is critical to eff iciently 
managing the resources of the company. 
HRM For the Human Resources Major 
Companies trying to enhance their customer relationships must 
recognize that employees who interact with customers are critical 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Glossary 347 
to the success of CRM strategies. Essentially, the success of CRM is 
based on the employees’ desire and ability to promote the company 
and its CRM initiatives. In fact, research analysts have found that cus­
tomer loyalty is based largely on employees’ capabilities and their 
commitment to the company. 
As a result, human resource managers know that a company 
that desires valued customer relationships needs valued relation­
ships with its employees. Therefore, HR managers are implementing 
programs to increase employee satisfaction and are training employ­
ees to execute CRM strategies. 
MIS For the MIS Major 
The IT function in the enterprise is responsible for the corporate da­
tabases and data warehouse, as well as the correctness and com­
pleteness of the data in them. That is, the IT department provides 
the data used in a 360º view of the customer. Furthermore, IT per­
sonnel provide the technologies underlying the customer interac­
tion center. 
Summary 
1.  Identify the primary functions of both customer relationship 
management (CRM) and collaborative CRM. 
Customer relationship management (CRM) is an organizational strategy 
that is customer focused and customer driven. That is, organizations con­
centrate on assessing customers’ requirements for products and services 
and then on providing high-quality, responsive services. CRM functions 
include acquiring new customers, retaining existing customers, and grow­
ing relationships with existing customers. 
Collaborative CRM is an organizational CRM strategy where data consolida­
tion and the 360º view of the customer enable the organization’s functional 
areas to readily share information about customers. The functions of col­
laborative CRM include integrating communications between the organi­
zation and its customers in all aspects of marketing, sales, and customer 
support processes, and enabling customers to provide direct feedback to 
the organization. 
2.  Describe how businesses might use applications of each of the two 
major components of operational CRM systems. 
Operational CRM systems support the front-office business processes that 
interact directly with customers (i.e., sales, marketing, and service). The 
two major components of operational CRM systems are customer-facing 
applications and customer-touching applications. 
Customer-facing CRM applications include customer service and support, 
sales force automation, marketing, and campaign management. Cus­
tomer-touching applications include search and comparison capabilities, 
technical and other information and services, customized products and 
services, personalized Web pages, FAQs, e-mail and automated response, 
and loyalty programs. 
3.  Explain the advantages and disadvantages of mobile CRM systems, 
on-demand CRM systems, open-source CRM systems, social CRM 
systems, and real-time CRM systems. 
On-demand CRM systems are those hosted by an external vendor in the ven­
dor’s data center. Advantages of on-demand CRM systems include lower 
costs and a need for employees to know only how to access and utilize 
the software. Drawbacks include possibly unreliable vendors, diff iculty in 
modifying the software, and difficulty in integrating vendor-hosted CRM 
software with the organization’s existing soft ware. 
Mobile CRM systems are interactive systems where communications related 
to sales, marketing, and customer service activities are conducted through 
a mobile medium for the purpose of building and maintaining customer 
relationships between an organization and its customers. Advantages of 
mobile CRM systems include convenience for customers and the chance 
to build a truly personal relationship with customers. A drawback could 
be difficulty in maintaining customer expectations; that is, the company 
must be extremely responsive to customer needs in a mobile, near-real­
time environment. 
Open-source CRM systems are those whose source code is available to 
developers and users. The benefits of open-source CRM systems include 
favorable pricing, a wide variety of applications, easy customization, rapid 
updates and bug (software error) fixes, and extensive free support informa­
tion. The major drawback of open-source CRM systems is quality control. 
Social CRM is the use of social media technology and services to enable organ­
izations to engage their customers in a collaborative conversation in order to 
provide mutually beneficial value in a trusted and transparent manner. 
Real-time CRM means that organizations are able to respond to customer 
product searches, requests, complaints, comments, ratings, reviews, and 
recommendations in near real-time, 24/7/365. 
Chapter Glossary 
analytical CRM system CRM system that analyzes customer 
bundling A form of cross-selling where an enterprise sells a group of 
behavior and perceptions in order to provide actionable business 
products or services together at a lower price than the combined 
intelligence. 
individual price of the products. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
348 
CHAPTER 12  Customer Relationship Management 
campaign management applications CRM applications that 
help organizations plan marketing campaigns that send the right 
messages to the right people through the right channels. 
collaborative CRM system A CRM system where communications 
between the organization and its customers are integrated across all 
aspects of marketing, sales, and customer support processes. 
cross-selling The practice of marketing additional related products to 
customers based on a previous purchase. 
customer-facing CRM applications Areas where customers directly 
interact with the organization, including customer service and support, 
sales force automation, marketing, and campaign management. 
customer interaction center (CIC) A CRM operation where 
organizational representatives use multiple communication 
channels to interact with customers in functions such as inbound 
teleservice and outbound telesales. 
customer relationship management (CRM) A customer focused 
and customer-driven organizational strategy that concentrates on 
addressing customers’ requirements for products and services, and 
then providing high-quality, responsive services. 
customer-touching CRM applications (also called electronic CRM 
or e-CRM) Applications and technologies with which customers 
interact and typically help themselves. 
customer touch point Any interaction between a customer and an 
organization. 
electronic CRM (e-CRM) See customer-touching CRM applications. 
front-offi ce processes Those processes that directly interact with 
customers; that is, sales, marketing, and service. 
interorganizational information system (IOS) An information 
system that supports information flow among two or more 
organizations. 
loyalty program Programs that offer rewards to customers to 
influence future behavior. 
mobile CRM system An interactive CRM system where 
communications related to sales, marketing, and customer service 
activities are conducted through a mobile medium for the purpose 
of building and maintaining customer relationships between an 
organization and its customers. 
on-demand CRM system A CRM system that is hosted by an external 
vendor in the vendor’s data center. 
open-source CRM system CRM software whose source code is 
available to developers and users. 
operational CRM system The component of CRM that supports the 
front-office business processes that directly interact with customers 
(i.e., sales, marketing, and service). 
real-time CRM system A CRM system enabling organizations to 
respond to customer product searches, requests, complaints, 
comments, ratings, reviews, and recommendations in near real-time, 
24/7/365. 
salesforce automation (SFA) The component of an operational 
CRM system that automatically records all the aspects in a sales 
transaction process. 
social CRM The use of social media technology and services to 
enable organizations to engage their customers in a collaborative 
conversation in order to provide mutually beneficial value in a 
trusted and transparent manner. 
upselling A sales strategy where the organizational representative 
provides to customers the opportunity to purchase higher-
value related products or services in place of, or along with, the 
consumer’s initial product or service selection. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  How do customer relationship management systems help organiza­
tions achieve customer intimacy? 
2.  What is the relationship between data consolidation and CRM systems? 
3.  Discuss the relationship between CRM and customer privacy. 
4.  Distinguish between operational CRM systems and analytical CRM 
 systems. 
5.  Differentiate between customer-facing CRM applications and customer- 
touching CRM applications. 
6.  Explain why Web-based customer interaction centers are critical for 
successful CRM systems. 
7.  Why are companies so interested in e-CRM applications? 
8.  Discuss why it is difficult to justify CRM applications. 
9.  You are the CIO of a small company with a rapidly growing customer 
base. Which CRM system would you use: an on-premise CRM system, an 
on-demand CRM system, or an open-source CRM system? Remember 
that open-source CRM systems may be implemented either on-premise 
or on-demand. Discuss the pros and cons of each type of CRM system 
for your business. 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  Access www.ups.com and www.fedex.com. Examine some of the 
2. Enter www.anntaylor.com, www.hermes.com, and www.tiff any.com. 
IT-supported customer services and tools provided by the two compa-
Compare and contrast the customer service activities off ered by 
nies. Compare and contrast the customer support provided on the two 
these companies on their Web sites. Do you see marked similarities? 
companies’ Web sites. 
 Diff erences? 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 1 349 
3.  Access your university’s Web site. Investigate how your university pro-
5. Access www.ups.com and www.fedex.com. Examine some of the IT-
vides for customer relationship management. (Hint: First decide who 
supported customer services and tools provided by the two companies. 
your university’s customers are.) 
Write a report on how the two companies contribute to supply chain 
improvements. 
4.  Access www.sugarcrm.com, and take the interactive tour. Prepare a 
report on SugarCRM’s functionality to the class. 
Closing Case 1 
MKT SugarCRM Is More Than Just a CRM Package 
The Problem 
The Redglaze Group (www.redglazegroup.com) is an architectural and 
engineering group with a technology background whose companies 
provide products and services to the construction industry. The firm 
consists of eight businesses. Five are in the construction industry and 
two are in the technology field. The Redglaze Group provides opera­
tional business support services to the other companies. 
With specialties ranging from branding and marketing to tech­
nology and construction, Redglaze Group companies assist architects, 
designers, and property owners in planning, constructing, and main­
taining their commercial buildings. Due to the length of commercial 
construction projects, the company’s customer relationships can last 
for years. 
Redglaze was being limited by its existing customer relationship 
management soft ware. The firm was trying to use this CRM package 
for multiple functions throughout its business units, but the soft ware 
was very rigid. As a result, Redglaze developers had to extensively cus­
tomize the soft ware. Then, when the vendor upgraded the soft ware, 
Redglaze had to spend time and money to ensure that all Redglaze 
customizations were compatible with the newest version. 
The overall challenge was to implement an IT solution to achieve 
consistent customer interactions across all business units, create cost 
efficiencies, and share data instantly among headquarters and sat­
ellite offices. Specifically, the new CRM solution had to integrate the 
core functions of accounting, marketing, human resources, project 
management, and information technology to facilitate staff crossover; 
create a data-sharing platform that securely provides project-specific 
information to internal staff members; and establish a uniform cus­
tomer-facing presence throughout all of the Redglaze business units. 
The objective was to deliver superior customer service and make bet­
ter use of resources in a highly competitive industry with extremely 
tight margins. 
The IT Solution 
Redglaze could have purchased a new software package that might 
work for some but not all of its companies. Instead, the firm chose to 
implement Sugar, a product of SugarCRM (www.sugarcrm.com). Sug­
arCRM is a software company that produces an open-source, customer 
relationship management product called Sugar. 
POM The Results 
One of Redglaze’s companies, RGI Image (www.rgiimage.com), 
maintains showroom exteriors for approximately 150 automobile 
dealerships across the United States. RGI project managers super­
vise maintenance schedules and multiple work crews. They have 
to know many details about each project, including building height, 
dealers’ preferences regarding cleaning days, equipment placement 
restrictions, and many others. Previously they had no eff ective method 
to access all of the relevant information regarding dealerships when 
they planned maintenance crew schedules. Today, project managers 
can access this information via Sugar dashboards. In addition, they 
can integrate Google Maps with Sugar dashboards to have an aerial 
view of each dealership next to their notes about a project. 
Another of Redglaze’s companies, SGH (www.sghinc.com),
POM handles the production and installation of architectural 
metal products. Prior to Sugar, when SGH project managers were 
assigned a new project, they would receive information that frequently 
had no relevance to their projects. Further, the information that they 
did receive was scattered: Spreadsheets and memos were in Google 
Docs, photos were in Dropbox, and e-mails were forwarded via Out­
look. The process of integrating the relevant information was time-con­
suming. Today, Sugar enables SGH project managers to have all 
relevant information at their fingertips. 
Sugar also helps SGH project managers resolve field problems. 
Managers are able to share documents (such as digitally rendered 
plans) with subcontractors through a Sugar portal developed by 
 Redglaze software engineers. The managers and subcontractors can 
view the plans together, identify the source of the problem, and resolve 
issues quickly. In addition, subcontractors can use the portal to upload 
photos, so SGH project managers remotely receive instant views of job 
progress or potential problems. 
The Redglaze development team extended Sugar to include 
ACCT the accounting and human resources functions. In account­
ing, for example, the developers wrote a new invoicing module that 
stores all of the relevant forms pertaining to each contract. These 
forms include the industry standard American Institute of Architects 
documents, lien waivers, insurance certificates, and others. Sugar dig­
itally attaches the necessary forms to each project so that the project 
can be billed correctly.   
The team also implemented a new human resources module. 
HRM For example, because staff members are shared across busi­
ness units so frequently, the HR solution continuously updates organi­
zational charts for each project, and it adjusts staff access to internal 
project data and customer data accordingly. The HR solution also 
includes a portal for employees who want to request time off or update 
personal details. 
Redglaze’s CEO has a customized SugarCRM dashboard that pro­
vides him with a high-level view across all of the firm’s business units. 
The dashboard shows him just the information he needs, freeing up 
his time to pursue new business opportunities. His view includes items 
such as financials from each business unit, cash on hand, employee 
count, sales to budget projections, and project tracking. 
Redglaze’s involvement in a single project often spans years, so 
building trust with clients and prospects is critical. SugarCRM empow­
ers the company’s salespeople, project managers, and engineers by 
providing the right information to the right people at the right time. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
350 
CHAPTER 12  Customer Relationship Management 
This information includes plan details, photos, case studies, and engi­
neering data on a project or a product. 
Photographs are particularly essential in helping staff  members 
in their interactions with current and potential customers. In meetings 
with current or prospective clients, Redglaze salespeople use Sugar 
to access photos of the company’s previous projects. With a click or 
a swipe, the salesperson can drill down from the image to identify the 
building materials, the square footage, the architect or general con­
tractor, as well as other key pieces of information about the job. Sales­
people are paid only on what they sell, so having better and quicker 
information results in better productivity for the salesforce. 
Today nearly 75 percent of Redglaze employees rely on direct 
access to the SugarCRM system to help them do their jobs more eff i­
ciently and effectively. The organization notes ongoing gains in staff 
empowerment, an improved company image, and easily customized 
SugarCRM modules that make employees’ jobs easier. 
By consolidating documents in Sugar, Redglaze has reduced 
server space by 60 percent while continuing to grow its business by 
30 percent. Further, because all of the data are stored in a single loca­
tion and are easily shared, all concerned parties have the necessary 
information for their clients or contractors. 
Sources: Compiled from “SugarCRM Scores 2015 Customer Magazine 
Product of the Year Award,” SugarCRM Press Release, October, 2015; 
“The List: Disruptor 50: SugarCRM,” CNBC News, May 12, 2015; P. 
Greenberg, “SugarCon 2015: SugarCRM Continues Its Own Journey,” 
ZDNet, May 12, 2015; C. Wood, “The 10 Best Free and Open Source CRM 
Software Solutions, Capterra.com, May 1, 2015; “SugarCRM Honored 
for CRM Excellence and Innovation by CRM Magazine,” SugarCRM Press 
Release, August 18, 2014; “Redglaze Group Deploys SugarCRM to Drive 
Business Optimization and Deliver a Superior Customer Experience, 
Business Wire, February 25, 2014; “This Is How iCRM: Redglaze Group 
Aligns the Entire Team to Deliver Customer Success,” SugarCRM Case 
Study, 2014; www.redglazegroup.com, www.sugarcrm.com, accessed 
October 23, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Discuss the reasons why Redglaze decided to implement SugarCRM 
rather than an on-premise CRM solution. 
2.  Describe how Redglaze extended the functionality of SugarCRM 
beyond customer relationship management. 
3.  Refer to your answer to Question #2. If you were a SugarCRM mar­
keting manager, how would you market your product? 
Closing Case 2 
MKT Eli Lilly Provides a Better CRM System for Its Reps 
The Problem 
Physicians are arguably the most important component in pharmaceu­
tical sales because they write the prescriptions that determine which 
drugs their patients will use. Therefore, influencing the physician is the 
key to success for pharmaceutical sales representatives. Historically, 
large pharmaceutical salesforces, called drug reps, have been respon­
sible for these marketing efforts. Their strategies have involved physi­
cally visiting physicians’ offices and providing drug samples. 
As of October 2015, there were more than 80,000 drug reps in the 
United States, marketing to some 830,000 physicians. Drug reps typi­
cally try to see a given physician every few weeks. However, the num­
ber and persistence of drug reps has placed a burden on physicians’ 
time. 
The problem has become so acute that half of all physicians 
require an appointment before they see a drug rep, and another one-
fourth will not see a drug rep at all. In addition, the Pharmaceutical 
Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA; www.phrma.org) 
provides voluntary ethics guidelines called Interactions with Health-
care Professionals. These guidelines prohibit drug reps from providing 
restaurant meals to physicians and from giving physicians small gift s 
and reminder items such as pens and notepads.   
Pharmaceutical companies, therefore, have customer-manage­
ment needs that are more complex than those of other industries. 
These firms have to deal with tightening restrictions on salesper­
sons’ access to physicians and other healthcare decision makers. This 
changing environment has caused the pharmaceuticals to shift their 
CRM strategies from frequency-based interactions to technology-sup­
ported methods. Let’s consider Eli Lilly as an example. 
Eli Lilly and Company (Lilly; www.lilly.com) is a global pharma­
ceutical company based in the United States that maintains off ices 
in 17 other countries plus Puerto Rico. The firm’s products are sold 
in approximately 125 countries. The company employs 16,000 sales 
representatives, medical liaisons, and account managers who call on 
healthcare professionals and administrators around the world. 
In the past, Lilly’s drug reps employed multiple sales force auto­
mation products, data management systems, and reporting tools. The 
old systems required the reps to record call comments at the end of 
the day rather than during or immediately after a meeting with a phy­
sician. This system caused the reps to keep very sparse notes, or none 
at all. It frustrated and fatigued the reps, and it ultimately led to lost 
insights concerning the physicians. 
Another problem occurred because drug reps in diff erent coun­
tries used different CRM systems. This situation made it diff icult for 
Lilly executives to obtain an accurate, integrated view of the entire 
business. Moreover, staff members had to do a great deal of work each 
month to manually produce standard, consistent business informa­
tion at headquarters. 
Exacerbating these problems, reps were calling on physicians 
with personal computers running the Windows XP operating system. 
(We discuss operating systems in Plug IT In 2.) They had to wait while 
the machines took several minutes to boot, and they had to rely on 
less-than-persuasive PowerPoint presentations. In addition, reps 
required between three and five days of training to learn the system. 
The IT Solution 
Lilly urgently needed to upgrade its CRM tools. The company there­
fore turned to Veeva Systems’ (www.veeva.com) cloud-based, mobile-
friendly CRM product. The firm’s reps now use Veeva on their iPads to 
plan physician calls, record and report on those conversations, present 
drug information, and analyze trends. 
The Veeva system also enables Lilly drug reps to perform 
eDetailing. Detailing refers to the activity of drug reps when they call 
on physicians and provide them with “details”—scientific information, 
benefits, side effects, or adverse events—related to particular drugs. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 2 351 
eDetailing means using interactive, online CRM tools in the drug pres­
entation and sales process. Two examples of eDetailing are: 
•  Virtual details: Web-based, self-guided information programs 
with no live communication between drug reps and physicians; 
•  Video details: online, live, or phone-assisted browsing through 
virtual sales presentations. 
In addition to these examples, Veeva eDetailing enables drug reps to 
conduct integrated online surveys, market segmentation, and target­
ing. Because it is becoming increasingly difficult to physically meet 
with physicians, drug reps depend on eDetailing to deliver the relevant 
information about their brands and drugs. 
The Results 
An initial benefit of the Veeva system was that Lilly sales reps could be 
trained in only half a day. The new system also enables reps to inter­
act with physicians, nurses, and administrators in a customer-centric 
manner. 
Veeva was much easier and faster to deploy than the company’s 
original on-premise CRM software. (We discuss on-premise soft ware in 
Plug IT In 4.) In fact, the Veeva system saved Lilly millions of dollars per 
year due to lower IT support costs and improved eff iciency. 
Lilly’s Veeva solution forced the company to standardize its previ­
ously separate data stores. Lilly now uses Veeva Network to integrate 
its customer data from around the world. Field reps can utilize these 
data to access Lilly’s interaction history with customers to tailor their 
presentations. These presentations can be made either in person or 
online. Further, the company can identify customers with similar pro­
files who should receive similar presentations. 
The Veeva initiative’s success resulted from close partnerships 
among Lilly’s IT group and the company’s sales operations team. The 
data standardization process also provides the potential for Lilly to 
integrate its data with public data, such as U.S. census data. This pro­
cess could lead to insights into drug prescription trends and health-
care spending across different demographic groups. 
Sources: Compiled from “Veeva Systems Wants to Give Pharma Reps 
‘Suggestions,’” Pharmaceutical Commerce, June 11, 2015; W. Looney, 
“Capturing the Cloud: A Conversation with Veeva Systems Matt Wallach,” 
PharmExec.com, May 20, 2015; L. Wijntjes, “Customer Relationship 
Management for Pharmaceuticals,” Pharmaceutical Digital Marketing, 
May 14, 2015; “Can Veeva Systems’ Software Keep Luring Big Pharma?” 
Nasdaq.com, February 17, 2015; T. Staton, “Got a Problem, Doc? In Eli 
Lilly’s Brave New Sales World, That’s a Plus,” Fierce Pharma Marketing, 
May 28, 2014; M. Endler, “Eli Lilly’s Field Reps: Armed with Better Data,” 
InformationWeek, April 2, 2014; M. Hammons and L. Trotta, “How CRM 
Can Improve Efficiencies for Pharma and Life Sciences Firms,” Infinity 
Information Systems, February, 2013; www.lilly.com, www.veeva.com, 
accessed October 25, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Describe why the Veeva CRM system was critical to Eli Lilly. 
2.  What are the potential disadvantages of Veeva eDetailing? Provide 
examples to support your answer. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13 
© nullplus/iStockphoto 
Supply Chain Management 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
13.1 Supply Chains 
13.1 Describe the three components and the three flows of a supply chain. 
13.2 Supply Chain Management 
13.2 Identify popular strategies to solving different challenges of supply chains. 
13.3 Information Technology Support 
13.3 Explain the utility of each of the three major technologies that support supply chain 
for Supply Chain Management 
management. 
Chapter Opening Case 
Munchery 
“What’s for dinner?” is a question everyone asks on a daily 
POM basis. For people who live and work in large metropolitan 
areas, the answer might become lost in the rush to and from work, 
family and personal commitments, and a desire to have something 
tasty (and perhaps healthy) at the end of the day. But, who has time 
to prepare the meal? 
In 2010, Tri Tran, founder of Munchery (www.munchery.com), 
noticed that his neighbor had an interesting answer to the “What’s for 
dinner?” question. For $700–$800 a week, a personal chef came to his 
neighbor’s home to prepare and refrigerate meals that would be ready 
to warm up on demand and enjoy. Realizing that this model was not 
financially viable to him or many other people, Tran decided to start 
a new company. His goal was to provide high-quality, chef-prepared, 
fresh, almost ready-to-eat meals, delivered right to the customer’s 
door, for $7 –$8 per entrée. 
Meal delivery is not a new concept. Many companies are in the 
business of delivering hot, ready-to-eat meals. For example, Dominos 
(www.dominos.com) delivers more than one million pizzas per day 
worldwide, and Sprig (www.sprig.com) focuses on healthy, organic 
meals. However, as hot meals cool, the quality of the meal experience 
decreases. Hot meals have a very narrow window of time for a quality 
consumption experience, which puts pressure on the delivery system. 
352 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 353 
In 1993, this delivery pressure and a desire for quality led Dominos to 
discontinue their 30-minute delivery promise in lieu of a “Total Satis­
faction Guarantee.” 
Almost ready-to-eat meals are commonly sold at the grocery 
store, but they require some preparation before they can be con­
sumed. When Munchery entered the meal delivery market, the firm 
differentiated itself by preparing an entire meal, then chilling the pre­
pared items for a cold delivery. Delivery of the almost ready-to-eat 
chilled food (with proper warming instructions) decreased the time 
pressure on the delivery, allowing the delivery team member to carry 
more meals on an optimized delivery route. This business model fue­
led Munchery’s rapid growth. 
Munchery also leveraged its business model to reduce food 
costs. Whereas a typical restaurant spends one-third of its revenue on 
food supplies, Munchery spends much less. For example, in San Fran­
cisco most restaurants pay $9–$11 per pound for salmon. In contrast, 
Munchery has successfully negotiated with its suppliers to pay $6. 
Munchery also employs technology to create very eff icient processes 
in the kitchen. 
Information technology is at the heart of Munchery’s operation. 
Customers connect to Munchery through the Web or a mobile app. 
Because the menu is available only online, Munchery can update 
it daily. This process allows Munchery to save money by preparing 
food items from ingredients that are in season (and therefore less 
expensive). The company is also able to use fresher, healthier foods. 
In another interesting use of IT, Munchery chefs use programmable, 
Wi-Fi-enabled smart ovens to prepare meals in bulk while working a 
traditional 9–5 schedule. 
Customers can use the mobile app or the Web to learn more 
about their current menu options. They can virtually “meet” the chefs 
who prepare their meals, learn about the origin of the ingredients of 
their food, place orders, and select a delivery window. Munchery’s 
proprietary software then optimizes the delivery schedule to ensure 
that customers receive their orders within their desired time window. 
In addition, customers can track their order through the entire prepa­
ration and delivery to their door. 
Introduction 
Munchery is disrupting the restaurant industry by using technol­
ogy in two ways. First, the company offers its customers a novel dining 
experience. Customers are able to enjoy chef-prepared meals at home, 
with minimal effort and planning, at a fraction of the cost of visiting a 
restaurant. Second, Munchery is able to provide a menu that changes 
daily, thus enabling it to feature fresher, healthier food. 
Although Munchery has not reached its target price point of $7–$8 
per entrée, the company is moving in that direction thanks to its use 
of information technology in its operations and along its supply chain. 
When Munchery launched in 2011, most entrées were priced at $25. By 
2016, a combination of increased demand and greater economies of 
scale had brought prices down to $10–$12 per entre. At this price point, 
the next time you ask, “What’s for dinner?” your answer just might be 
Munchery—the successful restaurant that delivers cold food to your 
door. 
Sources: Compiled from T. Lien, “Munchery Raises $85 Million in Bid to 
Make Healthy Meals Accessible to All,” Los Angeles Times, May 26, 2015; 
J. Broughton, “Munchery’s Recipe for Winning Online Food Delivery,” 
Inc., June 11, 2015; F. Elliot, “New Food Delivery App Munchery 
Launches Chef-Driven Meals on the Westside Today,” Los Angelos Eater, 
May 18, 2015; D. MacMillan, “Munchery Valued at About $300 Million 
amid Food Fight,” Wall Street Journal, Digits, May 22, 2015; M. Kosoff, 
“Food Startup Munchery Has Hired a Bunch of Gourmet Chefs to 
Answer the Most Popular Question in Your Household,” Business Insider, 
April 8, 2015; A. Wilhelm, “Munchery Rebuilds Mobile Apps, Hires 3-Star 
Chef, and Gets into Booze,” TechCrunch, October 29, 2013; S. Pishevar, 
“How Munchery Is Literally Eating the World,” www.medium.com, 
June 8, 2015; www.restaurant.org/News-Research/Research/ 
Operations-Report, accessed October 14, 2015; www.munchery.com; 
www.sprig.com; www.spoonrocket.com; www.dominos.com, accessed 
December 14, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  How does Munchery’s supply chain benefit from the simple deci­
sion to offer chilled rather than hot meals? 
2.  What role do information systems play in the communication of 
information from the ingredients to the table? 
Organizations increasingly are emphasizing a customer-centric approach to their business 
practices because they realize that long-term customer relationships provide sustainable value 
that extends beyond an individual business transaction. Significantly, supply chain manage­
ment (SCM) is vital for organizations to successfully compete in the marketplace. 
The chapter opening case about Munchery points out that an organization’s supply chain 
can provide a strategic advantage. In Chapter 11, you learned about information systems that 
supported organizational activities within the organization. In this chapter, you study infor­
mation systems that support organizational activities that extend outside the organization to 
suppliers. 
At this point, you might be asking yourself: Why should I learn about SCM? The answer, 
as you will see in this chapter, is that suppliers are supremely important to all organiza­
tions. Regardless of your job, you will have an impact, whether direct or indirect, on man­
aging your firm’s supply chain. When you read the What’s in IT for Me? section at the end of 
the chapter, you will learn about opportunities to make immediate contributions on your 
first job. Therefore, it is essential that you acquire a working knowledge of SCM and SCM 
systems. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
354 
CHAPTER 13 Supply Chain Management 
13.1  Supply Chains 
Modern organizations are increasingly concentrating on their core competencies and on 
becoming more flexible and agile. To accomplish these objectives, they rely on other compa­
nies, rather than on companies they themselves own, to supply the goods and services they 
need. Organizations recognize that these suppliers can perform these activities more eff iciently 
and effectively than they themselves can. This trend toward relying on an increasing number of 
suppliers has led to the concept of supply chains. A supply chain is the flow of materials, infor­
mation, money, and services from raw material suppliers, through factories and warehouses, 
to the end customers. A supply chain also includes the organizations and processes that create 
and deliver products, information, and services to the end customers. 
Supply chains enhance trust and collaboration among supply chain partners, thus improv­
ing supply chain visibility and inventory velocity. Supply chain visibility refers to the ability of 
all organizations within a supply chain to access or view relevant data on purchased materials as 
these materials move through their suppliers’ production processes and transportation networks 
to their receiving docks. In addition, organizations can access or view relevant data on outbound 
goods as they are manufactured, assembled, or stored in inventory and then shipped through 
their transportation networks to their customers’ receiving docks. The more quickly a company 
can deliver products and services after receiving the materials required to make them—that is, 
the higher the inventory velocity—the more satisfied the company’s customers will be. 
Supply chain information has historically been obtained by manual, labor-based tracking 
and monitoring, but is now increasingly being generated by sensors, RFID tags, meters, GPS, 
and other devices and systems. How does this transformation affect supply chain managers? 
For one thing, they now have real-time information on all products moving through their supply 
chains. Supply chains will therefore rely less on labor-based tracking and monitoring, because 
the new technology will allow shipping containers, trucks, products, and parts to report on 
their own status. The overall result is a vast improvement in supply chain visibility. 
Supply chains are a vital component of the overall strategies of many modern organiza­
tions. To utilize supply chains efficiently, a business must be tightly integrated with its sup­
pliers, business partners, distributors, and customers. A critical component of this integration 
is the use of information systems to facilitate the exchange of information among the partici­
pants in the supply chain. 
The Structure and Components of Supply Chains 
The term supply chain comes from a picture of how the partnering organizations are linked 
together. Figure 13.1 illustrates a typical supply chain. (Recall that Figure 1.5 also illustrated a 
supply chain, in a slightly different way.) Note that the supply chain involves three segments: 
1.  Upstream, where sourcing or procurement from external suppliers occurs. 
In this segment, supply chain managers select suppliers to deliver the goods and ser­
vices the company needs to produce its product or service. Furthermore, SC managers de­
velop the pricing, delivery, and payment processes between a company and its suppliers. 
Included here are processes for managing inventory, receiving and verifying shipments, 
transferring goods to manufacturing facilities, and authorizing payments to suppliers. 
2.  Internal, where packaging, assembly, or manufacturing takes place. 
SC managers schedule the activities necessary for production, testing, packaging, and 
preparing goods for delivery. In addition, they monitor quality levels, production output, 
and worker productivity. 
3.  Downstream, where distribution takes place, frequently by external distributors. 
In this segment, SC managers coordinate the receipt of orders from customers, devel­
op a network of warehouses, select carriers to deliver products to customers, and imple­
ment invoicing systems to receive payments from customers. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Supply Chains 355 
Generic supply chain.
FIGURE 13.1 
The flow of information and goods can be bidirectional. For example, damaged or unwanted 
products can be returned, a process known as reverse flows or reverse logistics. In the retail 
clothing industry, for example, reverse logistics involves clothing that customers return, either 
because the item had defects or because the customer did not like the item. 
Tiers of Suppliers. Figure 13.1 shows several tiers of suppliers. As the diagram indicates, a 
supplier may have one or more subsuppliers, a subsupplier may have its own subsupplier(s), 
and so on. For an automobile manufacturer, for example, Tier 3 suppliers produce basic prod­
ucts such as glass, plastic, and rubber; Tier 2 suppliers use these inputs to make windshields, 
tires, and plastic moldings; and Tier 1 suppliers produce integrated components such as dash­
boards and seat assemblies. 
The Flows in the Supply Chain. There are typically three flows in the supply chain: mate­
rial, information, and financial. Material flows are the physical products, raw materials, sup­
plies, and so forth that flow along the chain. Material flows also include the reverse flows dis­
cussed above. A supply chain thus involves a product life cycle approach, from “dirt to dust.” 
Information flows consist of data related to demand, shipments, orders, returns, and 
schedules, as well as changes in any of these data. Finally, financial flows involve money trans­
fers, payments, credit card information and authorization, payment schedules, e-payments, 
and credit-related data. 
Significantly, different supply chains have different numbers and types of flows. For 
instance, in service industries there may be no physical flow of materials, but frequently there 
is a flow of information, often in the form of documents (physical or electronic copies). For 
example, the digitization of software, music, and other content can create a supply chain with­
out any physical flow. Notice, however, that in such a case there are two types of information 
flows: one that replaces materials flow (digitized software), and another that provides the sup­
porting information (orders, billing, and so on). To manage the supply chain, an organization 
must coordinate all three flows among all of the parties involved in the chain, a topic we turn 
to next. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What is a supply chain?
 2. Describe the three segments of a supply chain.
 3. Describe the flows in a supply chain. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
356 
CHAPTER 13 Supply Chain Management 
Apply the Concept 13.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 13.1 Describe the three 
will take you to a YouTube video titled “Module 1: What Is Supply 
components and the three flows of a supply chain. 
Chain Management? (ASU-WPC-SCM)” by user “wpcareyschool.” 
As you watch the video, consider the data that would be 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
transferred with each product movement within the bottled water 
supply chain. Certain types of data, such as inventory updates, 
Section 13.1 has focused on supply chain flows, materials, and 
shipment information, quality checks, and supplier information, 
“positions” (upstream, internal, and downstream). It is important 
would deal just with the bottled water itself. In addition, there will 
to understand how products move in the supply chain because 
be HR information, employee data, and machine data from the 
data move along with them every step of the way. In fact, the data 
internal organization as well as from all of the suppliers! 
that travel with materials and products are more important to the 
efficiency of the operation than the products themselves! 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.) 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you are doing.) 
Using the example you learned about in Step 2, describe the three 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
components and the three flows of a water bottle supply chain in 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 13.1. This link 
a report. Submit your report to your instructor. 
13.2 Supply Chain Management 
The function of supply chain management (SCM) is to improve the processes a company uses 
to acquire the raw materials it needs to produce a product or service and then deliver that 
product or service to its customers. That is, supply chain management is the process of plan­
ning, organizing, and optimizing the various activities performed along the supply chain. There 
are five basic components of SCM: 
1.  Plan: Planning is the strategic component of SCM. Organizations must have a strategy for 
managing all the resources that are involved in meeting customer demand for their prod­
uct or service. Planning involves developing a set of metrics (measurable deliverables) to 
monitor the organization’s supply chain to ensure that it is efficient and it delivers high 
quality and value to customers for the lowest cost. 
2.  Source: In the sourcing component, organizations choose suppliers to deliver the goods 
and services they need to create their product or service. Supply chain managers develop 
pricing, delivery, and payment processes with suppliers, and they create metrics to mon­
itor and improve their relationships with their suppliers. They also develop processes for 
managing their goods and services inventory, including receiving and verifying shipments, 
transferring the shipped materials to manufacturing facilities, and authorizing supplier 
payments. 
3.  Make: This is the manufacturing component. Supply chain managers schedule the activi­
ties necessary for production, testing, packaging, and preparation for delivery. This com­
ponent is the most metric-intensive part of the supply chain, where organizations measure 
quality levels, production output, and worker productivity. 
4.  Deliver: This component, often referred to as logistics, is where organizations coordinate 
the receipt of customer orders, develop a network of warehouses, select carriers to trans­
port their products to their customers, and create an invoicing system to receive payments. 
5.  Return: Supply chain managers must create a responsive and flexible network for receiving 
defective, returned, or excess products back from their customers, as well as for support­
ing customers who have problems with delivered products. 
Like other functional areas, SCM utilizes information systems. The goal of SCM systems is 
to reduce the problems, or friction, along the supply chain. Friction can increase time, 
costs, and inventories and decrease customer satisfaction. SCM systems, therefore, reduce 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supply Chain Management 357 
uncertainty and risks by decreasing inventory levels and cycle time while improving business 
processes and customer service. These benefits make the organization more profitable and 
competitive. 
Significantly, SCM systems are a type of interorganizational information system. In an 
interorganizational information system (IOS), information flows among two or more organ­
izations. By connecting the IS of business partners, IOSs enable the partners to perform a num­
ber of tasks: 
• Reduce the costs of routine business transactions 
• Improve the quality of the information flow by reducing or eliminating errors 
• Compress the cycle time involved in fulfilling business transactions 
• Eliminate paper processing and its associated inefficiencies and costs 
• Make the transfer and processing of information easier for users 
One of the most important goals of SCM systems is to give an organization visibility into its sup­
ply chain. Supply chain visibility is the ability of an organization to track products in transit from 
the manufacturer to their final destination. The goal of SCV is to improve the supply chain by 
making data readily available to all parties in the supply chain. Supply chain visibility promotes 
quick responses to problems or changes along the supply chain by enabling companies to shift 
products to where they are needed. IT’s About Business 13.1 illustrates how Apple improved its 
supply chain visibility. 
IT’s About Business 13.1 
Apple Deals with Supply Chain Strain and 
POM 
Faulty Parts 
When Apple (www.apple.com) introduced the Apple Watch in April 
2015, industry analysts had a hard time predicting how consum­
ers would react. Their estimates ranged from 5 million to 40 million 
Watches sold in 2015. This huge range in a market forecast creates 
havoc in planning for a supply chain. In fact, industry experts call it 
supply chain strain. 
So, how did Apple’s supply chain gear up for such a high de­
gree of sales uncertainty? First, the firm allowed a certain number 
of Apple Watch preorders. Based on those preorders, Apple could 
estimate the potential market demand and alter production ac­
cordingly. Second, even after releasing the Watch, Apple accepted 
only online orders for a few months. By controlling the ordering 
and shipping itself, Apple had accurate data regarding demand. As 
a result, the company did not have to manage demand by stocking 
inventory on store shelves. 
The plan went off without a hitch, until it stumbled. Apple 
has multiple partners in its supply chain, and it holds all of them 
to extremely high standards. For Apple’s supply chain to meet the 
demand for Watches, not to mention consumer expectations of 
quality, all of its partners had to operate at peak eff iciency. With 
the Watch, one of the suppliers was not up to standards. Produc­
tion of the Watch was functioning well until the company discov­
ered that one of the key components, produced by a supplier, was 
faulty. That component was the taptic engine, which imparts forces 
or vibrations to the wearer to convey information. 
The taptic engine supplier was China-based AAC Technologies 
(AAC; www.aactechnologies.com), maker of several common com­
ponents in mobile devices. AAC was unable to meet either Apple’s 
demand or its quality standards. The discovery of the faulty parts 
caused delays and other impacts on Apple’s other suppliers as well 
as its customers. Apple reportedly threw out all of the defective 
Watches to avoid having to recall them. 
Apple then handed over production of the taptic engine to 
another partner, Nidec Corporation (www.nidec.com) of Japan. 
Nidec manufactures parts for various industries including auto­
motive, manufacturing, and consumer electronics. It took some 
time for Nidec to begin making the taptic engines. While Nidec 
was ramping up production, Apple came under considerable 
fire over the delayed Watch and extremely long-range shipping 
times. 
Once supply caught up with demand, Apple’s supply chain 
functioned as planned. Apple then lifted its Web-only sales policy 
and allowed the Watch to be sold in Apple Stores and other retail 
outlets. This shift is an indication that the firm is better able to 
manage its demand forecast as well as the Apple Watch supply 
chain. 
Overall, Apple did an excellent job of creating a new product 
with some completely new components, developing a sales and 
marketing plan that would go hand-in-hand with its supply chain, 
recovering from a faulty component from a supply chain partner, 
and still getting their device to market with great consumer fanfare. 
Although not everyone will find a use for an Apple Watch, the one 
thing you do not see is complaints about its quality. That, too, is 
proof of Apple’s ability to maintain ultra-high-quality standards in 
the face of unknown demand and supply chain strain. 
Sources: Compiled from G. Meyers, “Apple—A Supply Chain Model of 
Excellence,” Supply & Demand Chain Executive, June 4, 2015; “Apple 
Watch Shows Value of Strong Supply Chains, and Opportunity in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
358 
CHAPTER 13 Supply Chain Management 
Disruption,” supplychain247.com, May 28, 2015; “Has Supply Chain 
Strain Become the New Norm?,” supplychain247.com, May 1, 2015; 
R. Bowman, “Can Apple’s Supply Chain Handle the Apple Watch?,” 
Supply Chain Brain, April 20, 2015; A. Cunningham, “WSJ: Taptic 
Engine Component Responsible for Limited Apple Watch Supplies,” 
ArsTechnica, April 29, 2015; D. Wakabayashi and L. Luk, “Apple Watch: 
Faulty Taptic Engine Slows Rollout,” Wall Street Journal, April 29, 
2015; www.apple.com; http://www.aactechnologies.com; 
http://www.nidec.com, accessed October 2, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Discuss the importance of forecasting demand for supply 
chain planning. 
2. Explain how a defective component can disrupt the flow of 
materials through a supply chain and the impact that disrup­
tion will have on various entities upstream and downstream 
along the supply chain. 
The Push Model Versus the Pull Model 
Many SCM systems employ the push model. In this model, also known as make-to-stock, the 
production process begins with a forecast, which is simply an educated guess as to customer 
demand. The forecast must predict which products customers will want and in what quantities. 
The company then produces the amount of products in the forecast, typically by using mass 
production, and sells, or “pushes,” those products to consumers. 
Unfortunately, these forecasts are often incorrect. Consider, for example, an automo­
bile manufacturer that wants to produce a new car. Marketing managers conduct extensive 
research, including customer surveys and analyses of competitors’ cars, and then provide the 
results to forecasters. If the forecasters’ predictions are too high—that is, if they predict that 
customers will purchase a certain number of these new cars but actual demand falls below this 
amount—then the automaker has excess cars in inventory and will incur large carrying costs 
(the costs of storing unsold inventory). Furthermore, the company will probably have to sell the 
excess cars at a discount. 
From the opposite perspective, if the forecasters’ predictions are too low—that is, actual 
customer demand exceeds expectations—then the automaker probably will have to run extra 
shifts to meet the demand, thereby incurring substantial overtime costs. Furthermore, the 
company risks losing business to its competitors if the car that customers want is not available. 
Thus, using the push model in supply chain management can cause problems, as you will see 
in the next section. 
To avoid the uncertainties associated with the push model, many companies now employ 
the pull model of supply chain management, using Web-enabled information flows. In the pull 
model, also known as make-to-order, the production process begins with a customer order. 
Therefore, companies make only what customers want, a process closely aligned with mass 
customization (discussed in Chapter 1). 
A prominent example of a company that uses the pull model is Dell Computer. Dell’s pro­
duction process begins with a customer order. This order not only specifies the type of com­
puter the customer wants but also alerts each Dell supplier as to the parts of the order for 
which that supplier is responsible. That way, Dell’s suppliers ship only the parts that Dell needs 
to produce the computer. 
Not all companies can use the pull model. Automobiles, for example, are far more compli­
cated and more expensive to manufacture than computers, so automobile companies require 
longer lead times to produce new models. Automobile companies do use the pull model, but 
only for specific automobiles that some customers order (e.g., Rolls-Royce, Bentley, and other 
extremely expensive cars). 
Problems Along the Supply Chain 
As you saw earlier, friction can develop within a supply chain. One major consequence of fric­
tion is poor customer service. In some cases, supply chains do not deliver products or services 
when and where customers—either individuals or businesses—need them. In other cases, the 
supply chain provides poor quality products. Other problems associated with supply chain fric­
tion are high inventory costs and revenue loss. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supply Chain Management 359 
The problems along the supply chain arise primarily from two sources: (1) uncertainties, 
and (2) the need to coordinate multiple activities, internal units, and business partners. A 
major source of supply chain uncertainties is the demand forecast. Demand for a product 
can be influenced by numerous factors such as competition, price, weather conditions, tech­
nological developments, overall economic conditions, and customers’ general confidence. 
Another uncertainty is delivery times, which can be affected by numerous factors ranging 
from production machine failures to road construction and traffic jams. In addition, quality 
problems in materials and parts can create production delays, which also generate supply 
chain problems. 
One major challenge that managers face in setting accurate inventory levels throughout 
the supply chain is known as the bullwhip eff ect. The bullwhip eff ect refers to erratic shift s 
in orders up and down the supply chain (see Figure 13.2). Basically, the variables that aff ect 
customer demand can become magnified when they are viewed through the eyes of managers 
at each link in the supply chain. If each distinct entity that makes ordering and inventory deci­
sions places its interests above those of the chain, then stockpiling can occur at as many as 
seven or eight locations along the chain. Research has shown that in some cases such hoarding 
has led to as much as a 100-day supply of inventory that is waiting “just in case,” versus the 10- 
to 20-day supply manufacturers normally keep at hand. 
Four plots b etween order quantity and time are represented for customer sales, retailer orders to wholesaler, wholesaler orders to manufacturer, and manufacturer orders to supplier.
Solutions to Supply Chain Problems 
Supply chain problems can be very costly. Therefore, organizations are motivated to find inno­
vative solutions. During the oil crises of the 1970s, for example, Ryder Systems, a large trucking 
company, purchased a refinery to control the upstream part of the supply chain and to ensure 
it had sufficient gasoline for its trucks. Ryder’s decision to purchase a refinery is an example of 
vertical integration. Vertical integration is a business strategy in which a company purchases 
its upstream suppliers to ensure that its essential supplies are available as soon as the com­
pany needs them. Ryder later sold the refinery because it could not manage a business it did 
not understand and because oil became more plentiful. 
Ryder’s decision to vertically integrate was not the best method for managing its supply 
chain. In the remainder of this section, you will look at some other possible solutions to supply 
chain problems, many of which are supported by IT. 
Using Inventories to Solve Supply Chain Problems. Undoubtedly, the most common 
solution to supply chain problems is building inventories as insurance against supply chain un­
certainties. As you have learned, holding either too much or too little inventory can be very 
costly. Thus, companies make major attempts to optimize and control inventories. 
One widely utilized strategy to minimize inventories is the just-in-time (JIT) inventory 
system. Essentially, JIT systems deliver the precise number of parts, called work-in-process 
inventory, to be assembled into a finished product at precisely the right time. 
Although JIT offers many benefits, it has certain drawbacks as well. To begin with, suppli­
ers are expected to respond instantaneously to requests. As a result, they have to carry more 

 
 
 
 
 
 
360 
CHAPTER 13 Supply Chain Management 
inventory than they otherwise would. In this sense, JIT does not eliminate excess inventory; 
rather, it simply shift s it from the customer to the supplier. This process can still reduce the 
overall inventory size if the supplier can spread the increased inventory over several customers. 
However, that is not always possible. 
In addition, JIT replaces a few large supply shipments with a large number of smaller ones. 
In terms of transportation, then, the process is less eff icient. 
Information Sharing. Another common approach to solving supply chain problems, and 
especially to improving demand forecasts, is sharing information along the supply chain. Infor­
mation sharing can be facilitated by electronic data interchange and extranets, topics you will 
learn about in the next section. 
One notable example of information sharing occurs between large manufacturers and 
retailers. For example, Walmart provides Procter & Gamble with access to daily sales informa­
tion from every store for every item that P&G makes for Walmart. This access enables P&G to 
manage the inventory replenishment for Walmart’s stores. By monitoring inventory levels, P&G 
knows when inventories fall below the threshold for each product at any Walmart store. These 
data trigger an immediate shipment. 
Information sharing between Walmart and P&G is executed automatically. It is part of a 
vendor-managed inventory strategy. Vendor-managed inventory (VMI) occurs when the sup­
plier, rather than the retailer, manages the entire inventory process for a particular product or 
group of products. Significantly, P&G has similar agreements with other major retailers. The 
benefit for P&G is accurate and timely information on consumer demand for its products. Thus, 
P&G can plan production more accurately, minimizing the bullwhip eff ect. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Differentiate between the push model and the pull model.
 2. Describe various problems that can occur along the supply chain.
 3. Discuss possible solutions to problems along the supply chain. 
Apply the Concept 13.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 13.2 Identify popular 
The first link will take you to an article that examines how the 
strategies to solving different challenges of supply chains. 
bullwhip effect wreaks havoc on the supply chain, and the 
second will take you to an activity where you will manage a 
STEP 1: Background 
supply chain for beer. This latter task might not sound diff icult 
until you consider that there are serious timing issues due to the 
Section 13.2 has explained that managing a supply chain is not a 
perishable nature of the product. The simulation begins with your 
simple task because consumer demand is so uncertain. Although 
supply chain in equilibrium, but it then suddenly shifts. Your job is 
organizations can forecast demand with some accuracy, actual 
to put things back in order! 
demand almost inevitably will differ from the organizations’ 
predictions. To manage demand fluctuations, organizations are 
As you work through the simulation, pay attention to how much 
moving toward JIT (just-in-time) inventory models, the amount of 
information needs to be shared across the supply chain to make 
data shared along the supply chain increases. These data must be 
the entire operation function smoothly. 
shared in a timely fashion if organizations are to remain flexible 
and capable of adapting to consumer demand. 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Based on your experience, discuss how the popular strategies 
STEP 2: Activity 
for dealing with supply chain challenges (building inventory, JIT 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
inventory, vendor-managed inventory) would or would not work 
and click on the links provided for Apply the Concept 13.2. 
for this product. Write a report and submit it to your instructor. 

 
 
 
 
Information Technology Support for Supply Chain Management 361 
13.3 Information Technology Support for 
Supply Chain Management 
Clearly, SCM systems are essential to the successful operation of many businesses. As you have 
seen, these systems—and IOSs in general—rely on various forms of IT to resolve problems. 
Three technologies, in particular, provide support for IOSs and SCM systems: electronic data 
interchange, extranets, and Web services. You will learn about Web services in Plug IT In 4. In 
this section, you examine the other two technologies. 
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) 
Electronic data interchange (EDI) is a communication standard that enables business part­
ners to exchange routine documents, such as purchasing orders, electronically. EDI formats 
these documents according to agreed-upon standards (e.g., data formats). It then transmits 
messages over the Internet using a converter, called translator. 
EDI provides many benefits that are not available with a manual delivery system. To begin 
with, it minimizes data entry errors, because each entry is checked by the computer. In addi­
tion, the length of the message can be shorter, and the messages are secured. EDI also reduces 
cycle time, increases productivity, enhances customer service, and minimizes paper usage and 
storage. Figure 13.3 contrasts the process of fulfilling a purchase order with and without EDI. 
EDI does have some disadvantages. Business processes sometimes must be restructured 
to fit EDI requirements. Also, there are many EDI standards in use today, so one company might 
have to use several standards in order to communicate with multiple business partners. 
In today’s world, where every business has a broadband connection to the Internet and 
where multi-megabyte design files, product photographs, and PDF sales brochures are rou­
tinely e-mailed, the value of reducing a structured e-commerce message from a few thousand 
XML bytes to a few hundred EDI bytes is negligible. As a result, EDI is being replaced by XML-
based Web services. (You will learn about XML in Plug IT In 4.) 
Extranets 
To implement IOSs and SCM systems, a company must connect the intranets of its various busi­
ness partners to create extranets. Extranets link business partners over the Internet by provid­
ing them access to certain areas of each other’s corporate intranets (see Figure 13.4). 
The primary goal of extranets is to foster collaboration between and among business 
partners. A business provides extranet access to selected B2B suppliers, customers, and other 
partners. These individuals access the extranet through the Internet. Extranets enable people 
located outside a company to collaborate with the company’s internal employees. They also 
allow external business partners to enter the corporate intranet, via the Internet, to access data, 
place orders, check the status of those orders, communicate, and collaborate. Finally, they make 
it possible for partners to perform self-service activities such as checking inventory levels. 
Extranets use virtual private network (VPN) technology to make communication over the 
Internet more secure. The major benefits of extranets are faster processes and information 
flow, improved order entry and customer service, lower costs (e.g., for communications, travel, 
and administrative overhead), and overall improved business eff ectiveness. 
There are three major types of extranets. The type that a company chooses depends on the 
business partners involved and the purpose of the supply chain. We present each type below, 
along with its major business applications. 
A Company and Its Dealers, Customers, or Suppliers. This type of extranet centers on 
a single company. An example is the FedEx extranet, which allows customers to track the status 
of a delivery. Customers use the Internet to access a database on the FedEx intranet. Enabling 
customers to monitor deliveries saves FedEx the cost of hiring human operators to perform 

 
362 
CHAPTER 13 Supply Chain Management 
FIGURE 13.3  Comparing pur­
chase order (PO) fulfillment with 
and without EDI. 
FIGURE 13.4 The structure of an 
extranet. Figure depicting the process of fulfilling a purchase order with (bottom) and without (top) EDI.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information Technology Support for Supply Chain Management 363 
that task over the phone. IT’s About Business 13.2 illustrates how Caribou Coffee works with its 
supplier network to provide 100 percent Rainforest Alliance Certified coff ee. 
An Industry’s Extranet. Just as a single company can set up an extranet, the major play­
ers in an industry can team up to create an extranet that will benefit all of them. For example, 
ANXeBusiness (www.anx.com) enables companies to collaborate effectively through a network 
that provides a secure global medium for B2B information exchange. This network is used for 
mission-critical business transactions by leading international organizations in aerospace, au­
tomotive, chemical, electronics, financial services, healthcare, logistics, manufacturing, trans­
portation, and related industries. It offers customers a reliable extranet as well as VPN services. 
Joint Ventures and Other Business Partnerships. In this type of extranet, the part­
ners in a joint venture use the extranet as a vehicle for communication and collaboration. An 
example is Bank of America’s extranet for commercial loans. The partners involved in mak­
ing these loans include a lender, a loan broker, an escrow company, and a title company. The 
extranet connects lenders, loan applicants, and the loan organizer, Bank of America. A similar 
case is Lending Tree (www.lendingtree.com), a company that provides mortgage quotes for 
homeowners and also sells mortgages online. Lending Tree uses an extranet for its business 
partners (e.g., the lenders). 
IT’s About Business 13.2 
Caribou Coffee Brews A Strong Supply 
Chain 
Food products have complicated supply chains due to the per­
ishable nature of the raw materials. Such is the case for coff ee. A 
typical coffee supply chain includes growers, intermediaries (who 
buy directly from the growers and resell to other intermediaries, 
processors, or dealers), processors, government agencies, export­
ers, brokers, roasters, distributors, and retailers. For a startup cof­
fee-roasting company, managing the beans, seasons, regulations, 
partners, suppliers, distributors, and online store can be a daunt­
ing task. Despite this complexity, many companies begin managing 
their supply chain with a simple spreadsheet. 
Such is the case with Caribou Coff ee (www.cariboucoff ee.com), 
a coffee chain based in Minneapolis, Minnesota that has retail out­
lets as well as a wholesale business. In the early days, Caribou had 
about 200 independent stockkeeping units (SKUs), which it could 
track on a spreadsheet. As business increased, that number quickly 
reached 600 SKUs. At that point Caribou realized that it needed a 
more sophisticated soft ware. 
Part of the reason for this rapid growth was positive reaction 
from customers to the fact that Caribou Coffee was the first major 
U.S. coffeehouse to serve 100 percent Rainforest Alliance Certified 
coffee and espresso. To achieve this certification, farms must follow 
rigorous environmental, social, and economic standards to achieve 
long-term sustainability. The goal is to conserve wildlife and eco­
systems and protect workers, their families, and local communities. 
While having Rainforest Alliance-certified products boosted 
sales for Caribou, it also meant more work in the procurement pro­
cess. Caribou does not simply buy beans from a distributor without 
knowing little to nothing of the source. Instead, Caribou brokers 
must certify that they are 100 percent Rainforest Alliance Certified. 
Caribou was experiencing growing pains with its internal 
demand forecasting and subsequent downstream supply chain 
management. Caribou turned to Logility (www.logility.com) to 
POM 
implement Voyager, a cloud-based supply chain management 
system. The service provides accurate, real-time data that the 
company uses to improve their forecasting and to provide better 
customer service to their retailers. 
Logility’s Voyager was the right solution for Caribou. The com­
pany saved time and money by using an off -the-shelf cloud-based 
system that meant it didn’t have to develop in-house expertise or 
buy expensive technology. Voyager was deployed quickly with little 
upfront investment. In addition, the solution increased Caribou’s ROI. 
What were the payoffs for Caribou in ditching its spreadsheet 
for the Voyager service? It increased the accuracy of its demand 
forecasts, moved to weekly planning instead of monthly, reduced 
the spoilage of its perishable inventory, and accelerated its inven­
tory turnover by one-third. (Inventory turnover is the number of 
times that inventory is sold or used in a particular time period, usu­
ally one year. The higher the number, the better.) The implementa­
tion of this supply chain management system was a huge success 
for Caribou Coffee, which can focus on what they do best…provide 
a nice cup of coff ee! 
Sources: Compiled from A. Grackin and B. McBeath, “Caribou Coffee’s 
Supply Chain Story,” ChainLink Research, January 22, 2013; “Coffee 
– The Supply Chain,” businesscasestudies.co.uk, accessed October 3, 
2015; “Caribou Coffee Shares Its Journey to Supply Chain Success,” 
Logility, June 17, 2014; “Logility Announces 2014 Leadership Award 
Winners,” Logility, May 1, 2014; www.logility.com, accessed October 3, 
2015; www.cariboucoffee.com, accessed October 3, 2015; www 
.rainforest-alliance.org, accessed October 3, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Discuss the difficulties involved in the supply chain for any 
perishable item. 
2. Describe the complex issues Caribou Coffee dealt with to en­
sure their supply chain was not only Rainforest Alliance Cer­
tified but also meeting their business needs. 

 
 
 
 
364 
CHAPTER 13 Supply Chain Management 
Portals and Exchanges  
As you saw in Chapter 4, corporate portals offer a single point of access through a Web browser 
to critical business information in an organization. In the context of B2B supply chain manage­
ment, these portals enable companies and their suppliers to collaborate very closely. 
There are two basic types of corporate portals: procurement (sourcing) portals for a 
company’s suppliers (upstream in the supply chain), and distribution portals for a company’s 
customers (downstream in the supply chain). Procurement portals automate the business 
processes involved in purchasing or procuring products between a single buyer and multiple 
suppliers. For example, Boeing has deployed a procurement portal called the Boeing Supplier 
Portal through which it conducts business with its suppliers. Distribution portals automate 
the business processes involved in selling or distributing products from a single supplier to 
multiple buyers. For example, Dell services its business customers through its distribution por­
tal at http://premier.dell.com. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Define EDI, and list its major benefits and limitations.
 2. Define an extranet, and explain its infrastructure.
 3. List and briefly define the major types of extranets.
 4. Differentiate between procurement portals and distribution portals. 
Apply the Concept 13.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 13.3 Explain the utility of 
link will take you to a YouTube video titled “What is EDI” by user 
each of the three major technologies that support supply chain 
“hitekequipment.” You will also link to an article that defines EDI 
management. 
and discusses some of its standards. 
As you watch the video, pay attention to the important 
STEP 1: Background 
components that are necessary to share information between 
two organizations. Then, consider the fact that suppliers rarely 
Electronic data interchange (EDI) is defined in this section as 
operate in only a single supply chain. In fact, suppliers typically 
a communication standard that enables business partners 
have multiple customers, which means they are sharing 
to exchange routine documents, such as purchasing orders, 
information with many organizations via EDI. 
electronically. You should understand the need for electronic 
sharing of information if you completed the activity in Apply the 
Concept 13.2. That activity required you to manage a supply 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
chain on your own. Imagine the challenge of performing this 
Based on the content of this section and the video you watched in 
function without being able to share data electronically! 
Step 2, explain the utility of each of the three major technologies 
(EDI, extranets, and corporate portals) that support supply chain 
STEP 2: Activity 
management. In other words, how might these technologies 
interact to enable the participating parties to exchange data? Put 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
your explanation in a report and submit it to your instructor. 
and click on the links provided for Apply the Concept 13.3. The 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For Accounting Majors 
from various partners within the chain. It is up to the chief accoun­
tant, the comptroller or CFO, to prepare and review these data. 
The cost accountant will play an important role in developing and 
Going further, accounting rules and regulations and the cross-
monitoring the financial accounting information associated with in-
border transfer of data are critical for global trade. IOSs can facili­
ventory and cost of goods sold. In a supply chain, much of the data 
tate such trade. Other issues that are important for accountants are 
for these accounting requirements will flow into the organization 
taxation and government reports. In addition, creating information 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 365 
systems that rely on EDI requires the attention of accountants. Fi­
nally, fraud detection in global settings (e.g., transfers of funds) can 
be facilitated by appropriate controls and auditing. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
In a supply chain, the finance major will be responsible for analyzing 
the data created and shared among supply chain partners. In many in­
stances, the financial analyst will recommend actions to improve sup­
ply chain efficiencies and cash flow. This may benefit all the partners in 
the chain. These recommendations will be based on financial models 
that incorporate key assumptions such as supply chain partner agree­
ments for pricing. Through the use of extensive financial modeling, the 
financial analyst helps to manage liquidity in the supply chain. 
Many finance-related issues exist in implementing IOSs. For one 
thing, establishing EDI and extranet relationships involves structur­
ing payment agreements. Global supply chains may involve complex 
financial arrangements, which may have legal implications. 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major 
A tremendous amount of useful sales information can be derived 
from supply chain partners through the supporting information 
systems. For example, many of the customer support activities take 
place in the downstream portion of the supply chain. For the market­
ing manager, an understanding of how the downstream activities of 
the supply chain relate to prior chain operations is critical. 
Furthermore, a tremendous amount of data is fed from the sup­
ply chain supporting information systems into the CRM systems that 
are used by marketers. The information and a complete understand­
ing of its genesis are vital for mixed-model marketing programs. 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
The production/operations management major plays a major role in 
the supply chain development process. In many organizations, the 
production/operations management staff may even lead the supply 
chain integration process because of their extensive knowledge of 
the manufacturing components of the organization. Because they 
are in charge of procurement, production, materials control, and lo­
gistical handling, a comprehensive understanding of the techniques 
of SCM is vital for the production/operations staff . 
The downstream segment of supply chains is where marketing, 
distribution channels, and customer service are conducted. An un­
derstanding of how downstream activities are related to the other 
segments is critical. Supply chain problems can reduce customer 
satisfaction and negate marketing efforts. It is essential, then, that 
marketing professionals understand the nature of such problems 
and their solutions. Also, learning about CRM, its options, and its im­
plementation is important for designing effective customer services 
and advertising. 
As competition intensifies globally, finding new global markets 
becomes critical. Use of IOSs provides an opportunity to improve 
marketing and sales. Understanding the capabilities of these tech­
nologies as well as their implementation issues will enable the mar­
keting department to excel. 
HRM For the Human Resources Major 
Supply chains require interactions among the employees of partners 
in the chain. These interactions are the responsibility of the Human 
Resources Manager. The HR Manager must be able to address sup­
ply chain issues that relate to staffing, job descriptions, job rotations, 
and accountability. All of these areas are complex within a supply 
chain and require the HR function to understand the relationship 
among partners as well as the movement of resources. 
Preparing and training employees to work with business part­
ners (frequently in foreign countries) requires knowledge about how 
IOSs operate. Sensitivity to cultural diff erences and extensive com­
munication and collaboration can be facilitated with IT. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
The MIS staff will be instrumental in the design and support of in­
formation systems—both internal organizational and interorgani­
zational—that will underpin the business processes that are part of 
the supply chain. In this capacity, the MIS staff must have a concise 
knowledge of the business, the systems, and the points of intersec­
tion between the two. 
Summary 
1.  Describe the three components and the three flows of a supply 
chain. 
A supply chain is the flow of materials, information, money, and services 
from raw material suppliers, through factories and warehouses, to the 
end customers. A supply chain involves three segments: upstream, where 
sourcing or procurement from external suppliers occurs; internal, where 
packaging, assembly, or manufacturing takes place; and downstream, 
where distribution takes place, frequently by external distributors. 
There are three flows in the supply chain: material flows, which are the 
physical products, raw materials, supplies, and so forth; information flows, 
which consist of data related to demand, shipments, orders, returns, and 
schedules, as well as changes in any of these data; and financial flows, 
which involve money transfers, payments, credit card information and 
authorization, payment schedules, e-payments, and credit-related data. 
2.  Identify popular strategies to solving different challenges of supply 
chains. 
Two major challenges in setting accurate inventory levels throughout a 
supply chain are the demand forecast and the bullwhip eff ect. Demand 
for a product can be influenced by numerous factors such as competition, 
prices, weather conditions, technological developments, economic con­
ditions, and customers’ general confidence. The bullwhip eff ect refers to 
erratic shifts in orders up and down the supply chain. 
The most common solution to supply chain problems is building inventories 
as insurance against SC uncertainties. Another solution is the just-in-time 
(JIT) inventory system, which delivers the precise number of parts, called 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
366 
CHAPTER 13 Supply Chain Management 
work-in-process inventory, to be assembled into a finished product at pre­
cisely the right time. The third possible solution is vendor-managed inven­
tory (VMI), which occurs when the vendor, rather than the retailer, manages 
the entire inventory process for a particular product or group of products. 
3.  Explain the utility of each of the three major technologies that 
support supply chain management. 
Electronic data interchange (EDI) is a communication standard that enables 
the electronic transfer of routine documents, such as purchasing orders, 
between business partners. 
Extranets are networks that link business partners over the Internet by 
providing them access to certain areas of each other’s corporate intranets. 
The main goal of extranets is to foster collaboration among business 
partners. 
Corporate portals offer a single point of access through a Web browser to 
critical business information in an organization. In the context of busi­
ness-to-business supply chain management, these portals enable compa­
nies and their suppliers to collaborate very closely. 
Chapter Glossary 
bullwhip effect Erratic shift s in orders up and down the supply chain. 
distribution portals Corporate portals that automate the business 
processes involved in selling or distributing products from a single 
supplier to multiple buyers. 
electronic data interchange (EDI) A communication standard that 
enables the electronic transfer of routine documents between 
business partners. 
extranets Networks that link business partners over the Internet by 
providing them access to certain areas of each other’s corporate 
intranets. 
interorganizational information system (IOS) An information 
system that supports information flow among two or more 
organizations. 
just-in-time (JIT) inventory system A system in which a supplier 
delivers the precise number of parts to be assembled into a finished 
product at precisely the right time. 
procurement portals Corporate portals that automate the business 
processes involved in purchasing or procuring products between a 
single buyer and multiple suppliers. 
pull model A business model in which the production process begins 
with a customer order and companies make only what customers 
want, a process closely aligned with mass customization. 
push model A business model in which the production process 
begins with a forecast, which predicts the products that customers 
will want as well as the quantity of each product. The company 
then produces the amount of products in the forecast, typically by 
using mass production, and sells, or “pushes,” those products to 
consumers. 
supply chain The coordinated movement of resources from 
organizations through conversion to the end consumer. 
supply chain management (SCM) An activity in which the leadership 
of an organization provides extensive oversight for the partnerships 
and processes that compose the supply chain and leverages these 
relationships to provide an operational advantage. 
supply chain visibility The ability of all organizations in a supply 
chain to access or view relevant data on purchased materials 
as these materials move through their suppliers’ production 
processes. 
vendor-managed inventory (VMI) An inventory strategy where the 
supplier monitors a vendor’s inventory for a product or group of 
products and replenishes products when needed. 
vertical integration Strategy of integrating the upstream part of the 
supply chain with the internal part, typically by purchasing upstream 
suppliers, in order to ensure timely availability of supplies. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  List and explain the important components of a supply chain. 
4. Would Rolls-Royce Motorcars (www.rolls-roycemotorcars.com) use 
a push model or a pull model in its supply chain? Support your
2.  Explain how a supply chain approach may be part of a company’s over­
 answer. 
all strategy. 
5.  Why is planning so important in supply chain management? 
3.  Explain the important role that information systems play in supporting 
a supply chain strategy. 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  Enter www.supply-chain.org, www.cio.com, www.findarticles.com, and 
2. Surf the Web to find a procurement (sourcing) portal, a distribution portal, 
www.google.com, and search for recent information on supply chain 
and an exchange (other than the examples presented in this chapter). List 
management. 
the features they have in common and those features that are unique. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 1 367 
Closing Case 1  
Amazon Deals with the Weather and Its Supply 
POM 
Chain Partners 
The Problem 
More than 20 years after completing its first sale, Amazon has become 
an online retailing powerhouse that is competing with bricks-and­
mortar global retailers such as Walmart and Target. In addition, it is 
competing in the digital marketplace (e.g., ebooks, music, movies, and 
TV shows) with Apple’s iTunes store and Google’s Google Play. 
Amazon’s goal is to provide customers with the best selection, 
price, and availability. Sometimes the best price is not the lowest, 
but the one that provides the best shipping option. Amazon’s Web 
site and apps offer a simple, consistent, and reliable user experience. 
Product information, prices, customer reviews, related products, rec­
ommended products, shipping information, and more appear in the 
same location on the page. Amazon’s analytics systems use a custom­
er’s order and search history to create customized experiences for that 
customer, and Amazon’s order fulfillment process delivers products 
swiftly and accurately. 
Supply chain management is critical to Amazon’s success. In 
1995, Amazon began with two fulfillment centers. The company has 
now expanded to more than 165 distribution and fulfillment centers 
located around the world. Amazon supports this operation with a 
proprietary, in-house information system that is completely inte­
grated. When the company receives an order, the order-management, 
inventory-management, and warehouse-management systems locate 
products around the world and determine the optimal fulfillment 
plan. Fulfillment is the business term that refers to the steps involved 
in receiving, processing, and delivering orders to the end customer. 
For Amazon, a global company with many products in many distribu­
tion centers, and many orders that require cooperation across centers 
(meaning the entire order cannot be fulfilled through one distribution 
center), fulfillment requires a very high level of coordination. 
To achieve this coordination, Amazon has to know where 
MIS 
every product is located in every distribution center world­
wide. For example, when suppliers send products to be “Fulfilled by 
Amazon” (FBA), their products are immediately scanned into Amazon’s 
inventory-management system. A “stower” then places the goods in 
any available bin. Items are not organized in any logical manner. How­
ever, the product and bin location are recorded by the proprietary 
information system. When an order is received, a “picker” will walk 
through the warehouse, guided along an optimal route by a scanner 
(powered by the proprietary information system) to the proper bins 
in order to select the items. The pickers then bring the items to an 
“organizer,” who begins preparing them for delivery. Prepared boxes 
are sent down the “slam line,” where the packages are weighed and 
“slammed” with a shipping label. Finally, labeled packages are sorted 
to appropriate loading docks based on the shipping company that will 
handle the delivery. 
Despite the effectiveness of Amazon’s proprietary information 
system, several key factors, such as the weather, partner delivery com­
panies, and the competition, remain beyond the company’s control. 
For example, during the 2013 holiday season, several companies, in­
cluding Amazon, Kohl’s, and 1-800-flowers.com, promised last-minute 
delivery without taking into account the capacity of the parcel-delivery 
companies, FedEx (www.fedex.com) and UPS (www.ups.com), which 
were unable to meet the demand. In addition to the demand overload, 
inclement weather also strained the delivery system. Under normal 
conditions, parcel-delivery companies can adjust delivery to account 
for weather. During the 2013 holiday season, however, these com­
panies were already operating at capacity. As a result they could not 
make the necessary adjustments to account for inclement weather. 
After the 2013 holiday season, Amazon tried to smooth things 
over with its customers by off ering gift cards or credit. More impor­
tantly, the retailer determined that it needed to implement certain 
structural changes to expand its control over its entire supply chain 
and distribution system. 
The IT Solution 
Amazon needed to develop a method to increase its control over the 
delivery of its products. One common strategy to increase eff iciencies 
and control is to reduce the number of steps in a system. Significantly, 
Amazon adopted the opposite approach, adding more sorting centers 
to its distribution channel. Sorting centers sort pre-packaged orders 
by zip code. This process enables Amazon to control delivery along the 
entire route to the local post office for Sunday delivery (in select mar­
kets). In certain markets where Amazon owns a delivery system, the 
company can now maintain control all the way to the customer’s door. 
Adding a step in the distribution system required Amazon to 
update its proprietary information system. Previously, once the sys­
tem had “slammed” a delivery sticker onto a package, Amazon was 
basically out of the delivery loop. The retailer might maintain tracking 
(if offered by the delivery company), but it was not in control of the 
delivery. After adding the new step, the fulfillment center would main­
tain the package, and the system would direct the pre-packaged order 
to the appropriate sorting center. When packages arrived at the center, 
the information system would sort them by zip code. They were then 
delivered to the local post office or to another carrier for the “last mile” 
of delivery. In select cities, Amazon maintains its own delivery service. 
In other cities, the company has contracted with the U.S. Postal Service 
(USPS) to deliver on Sundays. 
Sunday delivery spreads the delivery service over another day 
of the week, thereby reducing the workload on the other six days. 
This shift, coupled with the use of sorting centers, enabled Amazon 
to expand its operations, increase control, and offload some delivery 
work to another day of the week. 
The Results 
The additional step and the enhanced coordination enabled by Ama­
zon’s proprietary information system increased the company’s control 
over its supply chain and reduced its dependence on parcel-delivery 
companies. Having learned from the 2013 holiday delivery debacle, 
Amazon expanded its operations and achieved a strategic advantage 
by gaining more control over its supply chain. 
Amazon’s sorting centers, updated supply chain management 
system, and agreement with the USPS helped the company achieve a 
record year in 2015. The retailer shipped to more than 185 countries, 
added more than 54 million Prime Members. In addition, Amazon 
reported no major problems with the new delivery system. Finally, the 
company reported sales revenue of $107 billion. 
Amazon’s updated system has generated some unintended con­
sequences. For example, the increased demand on Sunday delivery 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
368 
CHAPTER 13 Supply Chain Management 
through the USPS has increased the agency’s workload and caused 
some postal workers to complain about 60-hour weeks and working 21 
consecutive days. Although this problem is beyond Amazon’s control, 
it does impact the firm’s operations because it could lead to delivery 
delays. Additionally, other retailers have contracted with the USPS to 
offer Sunday delivery, putting more strain on Amazon’s ability to rely 
on the agency as a delivery option. 
Sources: Compiled from S. Soper, “Amazon Snags Sorting From FedEx 
to Avert Package Pileups,” Bloomberg.com, December 9, 2014; M. 
Schlangenstein, L. Patton, and A. Barinka, “UPS Shipping Delays Show 
Perils of Stores Overpromising,” Bloomberg.com, December 27, 2013; B. 
Bacheldor, “From Scratch: Amazon Keeps Supply Chain Close To Home,” 
Information Week, March 5, 2004; J. Del Ray, “This Is What It Looks Like 
Inside an Amazon Warehouse,” All Things Digital, December 23, 2013; B. 
Thau, “A Post-Mortem On the Holiday ’13 Retail Shipping Debacle and 
Remedies for ’14,” Forbes, January 28, 2014; J. Greene, “Amazon’s New 
Sorting Centers Aim to Help with Controlling Deliveries,” The Seattle 
Times, July 28, 2014; B. Stone, “Amazon’s Grand Plan to Avoid Holiday 
Delivery Snafus Again,” Bloomberg.com, September 26, 2014; T. Duryee, 
“Postal Workers Overwhelmed by Flood of Amazon Sunday Deliveries,” 
Geek Wire, December 16, 2014; J. D’Onfro, “Amazon: Here’s the Final Tally 
For All the Insane Shopping Everyone Did This Holiday Season,” Business 
Insider, December 26, 2014; “Amazon Global Fulfillment Center Network,” 
http://www.mwpvl.com/html/amazon_com.html, accessed October 21, 
2015; www.amazon.com, www.ups.com, www.fedex.com, www.usps.com, 
accessed October 21, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Describe the problems that Amazon faced during the 2013 holiday 
season. 
2.  Discuss how Amazon solved those problems via its supply chain 
management system. 
Closing Case 2 
POM Sustainability by the Supply Chain 
The Problem 
Sustainable business practices—including green business, environ­
mental responsibility, minimal impact on global or local environment, 
and the use of renewable clean energy sources—have become more 
than just a good idea in many industries. History has taught us that 
non-sustainable business practices—such as early settlers killing off 
bison for their hides—lead to the rapid decline of an industry. 
Tectona grandis, or teak wood, is a prized—and expensive—mate­
rial due to its elegance and durability. Teak is a tree native to the trop­
ics in the Southeast Asian nations of Thailand, Burma, Malaysia, and 
Indonesia. Historically, it has been found only in the homes of wealthy 
and powerful families. A tree takes about 80 years to reach maturity 
and be ready to harvest. Even then, only the heart of the tree contains 
the best wood for building furniture. Given the length of time required 
to replenish a forest, it is critical for the teak furniture industry to use 
sustainable practices. 
Most teak farms are independently owned, and they operate based 
on traditional practices rather than current knowledge about how to 
efficiently manage a forest. Historically, they have not been connected 
to the global supply chain. As a result, they might not understand the 
impact of their decisions on the overall industry. This situation, however, 
is beginning to change. Dipantara (http://www.en.dipantara.co.id), a 
company engaged in Sustainable Community Forest Enterprise Manage­
ment, works with the growers to emphasize the importance of maintain­
ing their natural resources. Dipantara is particularly interested in teak. 
In addition to the teak farms, several other parties are involved 
in this industry. First, there are independent, nonprofit organizations 
such as the Forestry Stewardship Council (http://us.fsc.org; FSC) that 
promote the responsible management of the world’s forests. FSC also 
provides industry certifications that a farm has pursued sustainable 
management practices. Second, European, U.S., and Australian timber 
regulations have been established to prevent companies from doing 
harm to the forests. Finally, customers want assurance that their pur­
chase is not harming the global environment. 
These sustainability issues create challenges along the supply 
chain from the retailer to the root (quite literally). They require a 
coordinated effort to develop and maintain a consistent sustainabil­
ity eff ort. 
The IT Solution 
The Forestry Trust (www.tft-earth.org; TFT) is an NGO that focuses on 
the entire supply chain ecosystem, where all needs must be consid­
ered for the industry as a whole to operate and exist sustainably. TFT 
identifies transparency as the key to establishing this sustainability. To 
support this level of communication and transparency, the NGO devel­
oped a set of tools called SURE Technology that provide its members 
with transparency dashboards, supply chain management, and prod­
uct stories. SURE is designed to help growers and companies through­
out the supply chain to plan, understand, and communicate. 
TFT members use the SURE Technology system to balance the 
interests and requirements of several external stakeholders. The only 
way any company can meet the demands of its external stakeholders 
is to obtain information about the practices of the suppliers of their 
raw materials. The SURE supply chain management module maps 
companies’ products all the way to the source to help product man­
ufacturers ensure that their orders are the products of legal, responsi­
ble, sustainable harvesting and use of the forest. 
The SURE Technology allows raw material providers (such as 
members of the Dipantara community forests in Java) to identify their 
social and environmental values and track their progress on adhering 
to those values through dashboards. This information is available to 
potential buyers, who require confirmation that the materials are pro­
vided in a manner that is consistent with their values. 
The Results 
Maisons du Monde (www.maisonsdumonde.com; MdM) is an envi­
ronmentally focused home decoration retailer based in France. As a 
member of TFT, the firm works with Dipantara community farmers in 
Java, who supply the teak for some of their furniture. MdM has access 
to information on the forestry practices of the entire supply chain 
through its TFT membership and the SURE Technology tools that are 
part of that membership. The result is that more than 50% of MdM 
products are labeled with one or more industry certifications aff irm­
ing that the product is not contributing to deforestation. Further, MdM 

 
 
 
 
 
Closing Case 2 369 
sells more than 1100 products that carry the FSC logo that confirms 
that the products were manufactured by responsible sources and can 
be traced all the way to the tree stump. 
How is this possible? The answer is the use of the industry sup­
ply chain system provided by TFT. The SURE Technology tools bring 
together all of the supply chain parties into a single platform to cre­
ate a more transparent, environmentally friendly use of our natural 
resources. 
Sources: Compiled from J. Clark, “What’s So Great about Teak Wood 
Furniture,” howstuffworks.com, accessed December 14, 2015; S. Hickman, 
“Indonesian Teak Farmers Achieve Traceability to the Tree Stump,” 
The Guardian, March 18, 2014; www.maisonsdumonde.com; www 
.onepercentfortheplanet.org, www.tft-earth.org; www.en.dipantara.co.id; 
www.us.fcs.org; www.tft-earth.org/sure; www.theevergreengroup.com; 
accessed October 26, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Describe the role of information technology along the teak wood 
supply chain. 
2.  Refer to Chapter 2. Is the SURE system a strategic information sys­
tem for Maisons du Monde? Why or why not? 
3.  Refer to Chapter 10. How would the Internet of Things help The For­
estry Trust in its mission? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 14 
adventtr/iStockphoto 
Acquiring Information Systems 
and Applications 
CHAPTER OUTLINE 
14.1  Planning for and Justifying IT 
Applications 
14.2  Strategies for Acquiring IT 
Applications 
14.3  Traditional Systems Development 
Life Cycle 
14.4  Alternative Methods and Tools for 
Systems Development 
Opening Case 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
14.1  Discuss the different cost–benefit analyses that companies must take into account 
when formulating an IT strategic plan. 
14.2  Discuss the four business decisions that companies must make when they acquire 
new applications. 
14.3  Enumerate the primary tasks and the importance of each of the six processes in­
volved in the systems development life cycle. 
14.4  Describe alternative development methods and the tools that augment these 
methods. 
MIS Peoples State Bank Transforms Its  
Information Technology  
The Business Problem 
With 15 full-service retail and commercial locations, Peoples State Bank 
(PSB; www.psbwi.com) has provided central and northern Wisconsin 
residents and locally owned businesses with traditional retail and com­
mercial banking products since 1914. Businesses this old oft en have 
information systems that have become outdated and no longer meet 
their needs. These systems, referred to as legacy systems, oft en hinder 
modern business operations. This was the case with PSB. 
PSB’s strategic goals are to provide its customers with a superb 
experience and its employees with the best possible tools and 
resources. Unfortunately the bank’s legacy systems were impeding its 
ability to accomplish those goals. 
370 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 371 
Legacy systems in banking provided the core processing neces­
sary to handle simple account transactions such as deposits, with­
drawals, and payments. These systems were expensive to build, 
because they required on-premise hardware, software, and network­
ing technologies. (We discuss on-premise computing in Plug IT In 4.) 
In general, legacy systems at banks were developed to support hard 
copy, paper-based transactions. These legacy systems became ineff ec­
tive over the years because they did not support different ways for cus­
tomers to interact with the bank (e.g., online from computers, tablets, 
and smartphones). 
Banks were very slow to respond to online business models 
because their business processes were built on legacy systems that 
were not designed to engage customers online. Specifically, PSB 
employed an excessive number of legacy systems, which did not eff ec­
tively work together. In addition, the bank’s information technology 
platform did not provide the capabilities required for a PSB customer 
to access account information via a Web browser or mobile app. 
To offer superb customer experiences and modern banking tools, 
PSB needed a new IT infrastructure that was designed to handle Web 
and mobile banking and near-real-time customer updates. The chal­
lenge was that the bank’s in-house IT expertise was able to maintain 
the legacy systems, but it lacked the capability to design or build new 
systems. For PSB to move forward with their strategic goals, it had to 
acquire an IT infrastructure that would include the necessary tools to 
operate in the modern banking environment. 
The Solution 
Leif Christianson, PSB’s Chief Operating Officer, spearheaded a com­
plete technology overhaul that moved the bank away from their leg­
acy systems. Today, when businesses decide to update their systems, 
they can consider several options. One option was on-premise com­
puting, in which PSB would develop, own, and operate all parts of its 
IT function. Alternatively, the bank could outsource the entire system. 
Both models off ered advantages. Ultimately, PSB determined that IT 
was not one of its core competencies (providing outstanding customer 
service in banking was). The bank therefore decided that outsourcing 
would allow enable it to scale its operations for growth more quickly 
than if it owned and operated the IT infrastructure. To implement this 
plan, PSB entered into a service agreement with Jack Henry & Associ­
ates (JHA; www.jackhenry.com) to gain access to the tools and tech­
nology it needed without having to develop the expertise within their 
organization. 
JHA, founded in 1976, is a leading provider of computer systems 
and ATM/debit card/ACH transaction processing services for financial 
services organizations. (ACH payments are electronic payments that 
are created when the customer gives an originating institution the 
Introduction 
authorization to debit directly from the customer’s checking or savings 
account for the purpose of bill payment.) JHA’s technology solutions 
serve more than 11,000 customers nationwide. PSB transferred all of 
their banking information system operations to JHA. 
The Results 
The conversion from PSB’s legacy system to the JHA solution was a 
success. This transition brought new core capabilities to the bank. 
With JHA, PSB is able to offer online banking, mobile banking, cus­
tomer payment solutions, and other services that were not available 
with the legacy systems. As a result, PSB’s assets grew from before the 
2010 conversion to more than $784 million in 2015. By outsourcing the 
capital expense and maintenance of on-premise information technol­
ogy, PSB was able to focus on other priorities such as cross-training 
employees to help customers in areas where they previously were not 
able to provide service. 
Managing change of this size is oft en difficult for organizations 
because employees are frequently resistant. However, PSB convinced 
its employees of the benefits of the new system. As a result the bank 
received quick employee buy-in and cooperation. Employees appre­
ciated the fact that they could now deliver services in the ways their 
customers wanted. 
Today, PSB customers are able to check account information, pay 
bills and transfer funds, view a detailed transaction history, download 
statements, deposit checks, and perform other activities through their 
mobile banking experience. These tools have enabled PSB to compete 
with much larger banks. 
Sources: Compiled from D. Verman, “Banks Face Major Pressure to 
Transform Legacy Payment Systems,” PaymentSoursce.com, July 27, 
2015; K. Flinders, “The Obstacles to Software-as-a-Service Adoption in 
Banking,” ComputerWeekly.com, July 15, 2015; P. Schaus, “Legacy Systems 
Prevent Banks From Delivering on Digital Promises,” BankInnovation.net, 
June 1, 2015; K. Burger, “Outsourcing Helps Peoples State Bank Execute 
Growth Strategy,” Information Week, December 3, 2014; J. Lankenau, “The 
Benefits of SaaS,” banktech.com, October 9, 2014; K. Flinders, “Big Banks’ 
Legacy IT Systems Could Kill Them,” ComputerWeekly.com, January, 2014; 
peoplesfinancial.com, jackhenry.com, accessed October 29, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  Discuss the problems with PSB’s legacy systems that led to the in­
formation technology conversion. 
2.  Why did PSB decide to outsource their IT rather than developing 
new systems in-house as they had in the past? 
3.  What are the potential disadvantages that PSB might encounter 
from outsourcing its IT function? 
Competitive organizations move as quickly as they can to acquire new information technolo­
gies or modify existing ones when they need to improve efficiencies and gain strategic advan­
tage. As you learned from the chapter opening case, problems and pitfalls can arise from the 
acquisition process. 
Today, acquisition goes beyond building new systems in-house, and IT resources involve 
far more than software and hardware. As you saw in the chapter opening case, the old model in 
which firms built their own systems is being replaced with a broader perspective of IT resource 

 
 
372 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications Figure depicting the flow diagram for information systems planning process.
FIGURE 14.1  The information 
systems planning process. Figure depicting the flow diagram for information systems planning process.
acquisition that provides companies with a number of options. Thus, companies now must 
decide which IT tasks will remain in-house, and even whether the entire IT resource should be 
provided and managed by outside organizations. Regardless of which approach an organiza­
tion chooses, however, it must be able to manage IT projects adeptly. 
In this chapter, you will learn about the process of acquiring IT resources from a manage­
rial perspective. This means from your perspective, because you will be closely involved in all 
aspects of acquiring information systems and applications in your organization. In fact, when 
we mention “users” in this chapter, we are talking about you. You will also study the available 
options for acquiring IT resources and how to evaluate those options. Finally, you will learn 
how organizations plan and justify the acquisition of new information systems. 
14.1 Planning for and Justifying IT 
Applications 
Organizations must analyze the need for applications and then justify each purchase in terms 
of costs and benefits. The need for information systems is usually related to organizational 
planning and to the analysis of its performance vis-à-vis its competitors. The cost–benefit justi­
fication must consider the wisdom of investing in a specific IT application versus spending the 
funds on alternative projects. This chapter focuses on the formal processes of large organiza­
tions. Smaller organizations employ less formal processes, or no processes at all. It is important 
to note, however, that even if a small organization does not have a formal process for planning 
and justifying IT applications, the steps of a formal process exist for a reason, and they have 
value. At the very least, decision makers in small organizations should consider each step when 
they are planning changes in their information systems. 
When a company examines its needs and performance, it generates a prioritized list of 
both existing and potential IT applications, called the application portfolio. These are the 
applications that have to be added, or modified if they already exist. 
IT Planning 
The planning process for new IT applications begins with an analysis of the organizational stra­
tegic plan, which is illustrated in Figure 14.1. The organization’s strategic plan identifies the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Planning for and Justifying IT Applications 373 
firm’s overall mission, the goals that follow from that mission, and the broad steps required to 
reach these goals. The strategic planning process modifies the organization’s objectives and 
resources to match its changing markets and opportunities. 
The organizational strategic plan and the existing IT architecture provide the inputs in 
developing the IT strategic plan. The IT architecture delineates the way an organization should 
utilize its information resources to accomplish its mission. It encompasses both the technical 
and the managerial aspects of information resources. The technical aspects include hardware 
and operating systems, networking, data management systems, and applications soft ware. 
The managerial aspects specify how the IT department will be managed, how the functional 
area managers will be involved, and how IT decisions will be made. 
The IT strategic plan is a set of long-range goals that describe the IT infrastructure and 
identify the major IT initiatives needed to achieve the organization’s goals. The IT strategic plan 
must meet three objectives: 
1.  It must be aligned with the organization’s strategic plan. This alignment is critical because 
the organization’s information systems must support the organization’s strategies. (Recall 
the discussion of organizational strategies and information systems in Chapter 2.) 
Consider the example of Nordstrom versus Walmart. An application that improves 
customer service at a small cost would be considered favorably at Nordstrom, but it 
would be rejected at Walmart. The reason is that the application would fit in favorably 
(i.e., align) with Nordstrom’s service-at-any-cost strategy. However, it would not fit in 
well with Walmart’s low-cost strategy. You see two department stores, same application, 
same cost and benefits—but different answers to the question “Should we develop the 
application?” 
2.  It must provide for an IT architecture that seamlessly networks users, applications, and data­
bases. 
3.  It must efficiently allocate IS development resources among competing projects so that 
the projects can be completed on time and within budget and still have the required func­
tionality. 
The existing IT architecture is a necessary input into the IT strategic plan because it acts as 
a constraint on future development efforts. It is not an absolute constraint, however, because 
the organization can change to a new IT architecture. Companies prefer to avoid this strategy, 
however, because it is expensive and time consuming. 
Consider this example. You have a Mac (Apple) system, and you need a new soft ware 
application. You search and find several such packages for both Mac and MS Windows. Unfortu­
nately, the best package runs only on Windows. How much better would this package have to 
be for you to justify switching from Mac to Windows? 
One critical component in developing and implementing the IT strategic plan is the 
IT steering committee. This committee, comprised of a group of managers and staff who rep­
resent the various organizational units, is created to establish IT priorities and to ensure that 
the MIS function is meeting the organization’s needs. The committee’s major tasks are to link 
corporate strategy with IT strategy, to approve the allocation of resources for the MIS function, 
and to establish performance measures for the MIS function and ensure they are met. The IT 
steering committee is important to you because it ensures that you get the information sys­
tems and applications that you need to do your job. 
After a company has agreed on an IT strategic plan, it next develops the IS operational 
plan. This plan consists of a clear set of projects that the IS department and the functional area 
managers will execute in support of the IT strategic plan. A typical IS operational plan contains 
the following elements: 
•  Mission: The mission of the IS function (derived from the IT strategy). 
•  IS environment: A summary of the information needs of the individual functional areas and 
of the organization as a whole. 
•  Objectives of the IS function: The best current estimate of the goals of the IS function. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
374 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications 
•  Constraints on the IS function: Technological, financial, personnel, and other resource lim­
itations on the IS function. 
•  The application portfolio: A prioritized inventory of present applications and a detailed 
plan of projects to be developed or continued during the current year. 
•  Resource allocation and project management: A listing of who is going to do what, how, 
and when. 
Evaluating and Justifying IT Investment: 
Benefits, Costs, and Issues 
Developing an IT plan is the first step in the acquisition process. Because all companies have 
limited resources, they must justify investing resources in some areas, including IT, rather than 
in others. Essentially, justifying IT investment involves calculating the costs, assessing the ben­
efits (values), and comparing the two. This comparison is frequently referred to as cost–benefit 
analysis. Cost–benefit analysis is not a simple task. 
Assessing the Costs. Calculating the dollar value of IT investments is not as simple as it 
may seem. One of the major challenges that companies face is to allocate fixed costs among 
different IT projects. Fixed costs are those costs that remain the same regardless of any change 
in the company’s activity level. Fixed IT costs include infrastructure costs and the costs associ­
ated with IT services and IT management. For example, the salary of the IT director is fixed, and 
adding one more application will not change it. 
Another complication is that the costs of a system do not end when the system is installed. 
Rather, costs for maintaining, debugging, and improving the system can accumulate over many 
years. This is a critical point because organizations sometimes fail to anticipate these costs 
when they make the investment. 
A dramatic example of unanticipated expenses was the Year 2000 (Y2K) reprogramming 
projects, which cost organizations worldwide billions of dollars. In the 1960s, computer mem­
ory was very expensive. To save money, programmers coded the “year” in the date field 19_ _, 
instead of _ _ _ _. With the “1” and the “9” hard-coded in the computer program, only the last 
two digits varied, so computer programs needed less memory. However, this process meant 
that when the year 2000 rolled around, computers would display the year as 1900. This pro­
gramming technique could have caused serious problems with financial applications, insur­
ance applications, and countless other apps. 
The Y2K example illustrates the point that database design choices tend to aff ect the 
organization for a long time. As the 21st century approached, no one still used hardware or soft ­
ware from the 1960s (other than a few legacy applications). Database design choices made in 
the 1960s, however, were often still in effect decades after the companies implemented them. 
Assessing the Benefits. Evaluating the benefits of IT projects is typically even more com­
plex than calculating their costs. Benefits may be more difficult to quantify, especially because 
many of them are intangible (for example, improved customer or partner relations and im­
proved decision making). As an employee, you will probably be asked for input about the intan­
gible benefits that an IS provides for you. 
The fact that organizations use IT for multiple purposes further complicates benefit anal­
ysis. In addition, to obtain a return from an IT investment, the company must implement the 
technology successfully. In reality, many systems are not implemented on time, within budget, 
or with all of the features originally envisioned for them. Also, the proposed system may be 
“cutting edge.” In these cases, there may be no precedent for identifying the types of financial 
payback the company can expect. 
Conducting the Cost-Benefit Analysis. After a company has assessed the costs and ben­
efits of IT investments, it must compare them. You have studied, or will study, cost–benefit 
analyses in more detail in your finance courses. The point is that real-world business problems 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Planning for and Justifying IT Applications 375 
do not come in neatly wrapped packages labeled “this is a finance problem” or “this is an IS 
problem.” Rather, business problems span multiple functional areas. 
There is no uniform strategy for conducting a cost–benefit analysis. Rather, an organiza­
tion can perform this task in several ways. Here you see four common approaches: (1) net pres­
ent value, (2) return on investment, (3) breakeven analysis, and (4) the business case approach: 
1.  Analysts use the net present value (NPV) method to convert future values of benefits to their 
present-value equivalent by “discounting” them at the organization’s cost of funds. They 
can then compare the present value of the future benefits with the cost required to achieve 
those benefits to determine whether the benefits exceed the costs. 
2.  Return on investment (ROI) measures management’s effectiveness in generating profits 
with its available assets. ROI is calculated by dividing the net income generated by a pro­
ject by the average assets invested in the project. ROI is a percentage, and the higher the 
percentage return, the better. 
3.  Breakeven analysis determines the point at which the cumulative dollar value of the bene­
fits from a project equals the investment made in the project. 
4.  In the business case approach, system developers write a business case to justify funding 
one or more specific applications or projects. IS professionals will be a major source of 
input when business cases are developed because these cases describe what you do, how 
you do it, and how a new system could better support you. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What are some problems associated with assessing the costs of IT?
 2. Why are the intangible benefits from IT so difficult to evaluate?
 3. Describe the NPV, ROI, breakeven analysis, and business case approaches. 
Apply the Concept 14.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 14.1 Discuss the diff erent 
You will watch three short videos that offer a financial 
cost/benefit analyses that companies must take into account 
explanation for net present value (NPV), return on investment 
when formulating an IT strategic plan. 
(ROI), and breakeven analysis. The business case approach 
is not a financial approach, and it does not require further 
explanation.
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
You may not realize it, but you perform cost-benefit analyses 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.) 
all the time. Imagine that you want to go to the beach for the 
Imagine you are creating a Web site to sell promotional items. 
weekend, but you decide not to because you would have to drive 
You have no experience developing a site, so you will have to 
eight hours each way and therefore would not get to spend much 
pay someone to do this for you. You research this service and 
time there. In this case, the costs outweigh the benefits. However, 
discover that the site you have in mind will cost $3,500. (For 
if you could extend your stay another day, then the benefits 
this example, assume there are no monthly hosting fees.) This 
might outweigh the costs. The difficulty in this example is that 
design will last five years, after which you will need to update 
the benefits are difficult to measure. A cost/benefit analysis is 
it. You anticipate that you can make $500 in year 1, $750 in year 
designed to quantify all of the key elements, and sometimes 
2, $750 in year 3, $1,000 in year 4, and $1,500 in year 5 from the 
there are subjective benefits for which there are no clear-cut 
site. Calculate the NPV, ROI, and breakeven analysis for this 
numerical values. 
case, and discuss which metric is most helpful. Also, explain 
how a business case analysis would be helpful beyond what the 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you are doing) 
numbers provide. Prepare a document with your figures and 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
present it to your instructor. 
and click on the links provided for Apply the Concept 14.1. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
376 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications 
14.2 Strategies for Acquiring IT Applications 
After a company has justified an IT investment, it must then decide how to pursue it. As with 
cost–benefit analyses, there are several options for acquiring IT applications. To select the best 
option, companies must make a series of business decisions. The fundamental decisions are 
the following: 
•  How much computer code does the company want to write? A company can choose to use a 
totally prewritten application (write no computer code), to customize a prewritten appli­
cation (write some computer code), or to custom-write an entire application (write all new 
computer code). 
•  How will the company pay for the application? Once the company has decided how much 
computer code to write, it must decide how to pay for it. With prewritten applications or 
customized prewritten applications, companies can buy them or lease them. With totally 
custom applications, companies use internal funding. 
•  Where will the application run? The next decision is whether to run the application on the 
company’s platform or on someone else’s platform. In other words, the company can 
employ either a software-as-a-service vendor or an application service provider. (You will 
examine these options later in this chapter.) 
•  Where will the application originate? Prewritten applications can be open-source soft ware 
or they can come from a vendor. The company may choose to customize prewritten open-
source applications or prewritten proprietary applications from vendors. Further, it may 
customize applications in-house, or it can outsource the customization. Finally, it can 
write totally custom applications in-house, or it can outsource this process. 
In the following sections, you will find more details on the variety of options that compa­
nies looking to acquire applications can select from. A good rule of thumb is that an organiza­
tion should consider all feasible acquisition methods in light of its business requirements. You 
will learn about the following acquisition methods: 
• Purchase a prewritten application. 
• Customize a prewritten application. 
• Lease the application. 
• Use application service providers and soft ware-as-a-service vendors. 
• Use open-source soft ware. 
• Use outsourcing. 
• Employ continuous development. 
• Employ custom development. 
Purchase a Prewritten Application 
Many commercial software packages contain the standard features required by IT applications. 
Therefore, purchasing an existing package can be a cost-effective and time-saving strategy 
compared with custom-developing the application in-house. Nevertheless, a company should 
carefully consider and plan the buy option to ensure that the selected package contains all of 
the features necessary to address the company’s current and future needs. Otherwise, these 
packages can quickly become obsolete. Before a company can perform this process, it must 
decide which features a suitable package must include. 
In reality, a single software package can rarely satisfy all of an organization’s needs. 
For this reason, a company sometimes must purchase multiple packages to fulfill dif­
ferent needs. It then must integrate these packages with one another as well as with 
its existing software. Table 14.1 summarizes the advantages and limitations of the buy 
option. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategies for Acquiring IT Applications 377 
 Advantages and Limitations of the Buy Option 
TABLE 14.1
Advantages 
Many different types of off-the-shelf software are available.  
The company can try out the software before purchasing it.  
The company can save much time by buying rather than building.  
The company can know what it is getting before it invests in the product.  
Purchased software may eliminate the need to hire personnel specifically dedicated to a project.  
Disadvantages 
Software may not exactly meet the company’s needs. 
Software may be difficult or impossible to modify, or it may require huge business process changes 
to implement. 
The company will not have control over software improvements and new versions. 
Purchased software can be difficult to integrate with existing systems. 
Vendors may discontinue a product or go out of business. 
Software is controlled by another company with its own priorities and business considerations. 
The purchasing company lacks intimate knowledge about how and why the software functions as it does. 
Customize a Prewritten Application 
Customizing existing software is an especially attractive option if the software vendor allows 
the company to modify the application to meet its needs. However, this option may not be 
attractive in cases where customization is the only method of providing the necessary flexibility 
to address the company’s needs. It also is not the best strategy when the software is either very 
expensive or likely to become obsolete in a short time. Further, customizing a prewritten appli­
cation can be extremely difficult, particularly for large, complex applications. 
Lease the Application 
Compared with the buy option and the option to develop applications in-house, the lease 
option can save a company both time and money. Of course, leased packages (like purchased 
packages) may not exactly fit the company’s application requirements. However, as noted, ven­
dor software generally includes the features that are most commonly needed by organizations 
in a given industry. Again, the company will decide which features are necessary. 
Interested companies commonly apply the 80/20 rule when they evaluate vendor soft ­
ware. Put simply, if the software meets 80 percent of the company’s needs, then the company 
should seriously consider modifying its business processes so that it can utilize the remaining 
20 percent. Many times this is a better long-term solution than modifying the vendor soft ware. 
Otherwise, the company will have to customize the software every time the vendor releases an 
updated version. 
Leasing can be especially attractive to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) that 
cannot afford major investments in IT software. Large companies may also prefer to lease 
packages to test potential IT solutions before committing to major investments. In addition, 
a company that does not employ sufficient IT personnel with the appropriate skills for devel­
oping custom IT applications may choose to lease instead of developing soft ware in-house. 
Even those companies that employ in-house experts may not be able to afford the long wait 
for strategic applications to be developed in-house. Therefore, they lease (or buy) applications 
from external resources to establish a quicker presence in the market. 
Leasing can be executed in one of three ways. The first way is to lease the application from 
a software developer, install it, and run it on the company’s platform. The vendor can assist 
with the installation and frequently will offer to contract for the support and maintenance of 
the system. Many conventional applications are leased this way. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure depicting an operation of an application service provider, where the ASP hosts both an application and a database for customers A, B, and C.
 
FIGURE 14.3 Operation of a 
soft ware-as-a-service vendor. Figure depicting the operation of a SaaS vendor, where the vendor hosts an application that multiple customers can use. The vendor also hosts a database that is partitioned for each customer to protect the privacy and security of each customer’s data.
FIGURE 14.2 Operation of an 
application service provider. Figure depicting an operation of an application service provider, where the ASP hosts both an application and a database for customers A, B, and C.
378 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications 
The other two options involve leasing an application and running it on the vendor’s plat­
form. Organizations can accomplish this process by using an application service provider or a 
soft ware-as-a-service vendor. 
Application Service Providers and Soft ware-as-a-Service 
Vendors 
An application service provider (ASP) is an agent or a vendor who assembles the soft ware 
needed by enterprises and then packages it with services such as development, operations, 
and maintenance. The customer then accesses these applications via the Internet. Figure 14.2 
illustrates the operation of an ASP. Note that the ASP hosts both an application and a database 
for each customer. 
Soft ware-as-a-service (SaaS) is a method of delivering software in which a vendor hosts 
the applications and provides them as a service to customers over a network, typically the 
Internet. Customers do not own the software; rather, they pay for using it. SaaS eliminates the 
need for customers to install and run the application on their own computers. Therefore, SaaS 
customers save the expense (money, time, IT staff) of buying, operating, and maintaining the 
software. For example, Salesforce (www.salesforce.com), a well-known SaaS provider for cus­
tomer relationship management (CRM) software solutions, provides these advantages for its 
customers. Figure 14.3 displays the operation of a SaaS vendor. Note that the vendor hosts 
an application that multiple customers can use. The vendor also hosts a database that is parti­
tioned for each customer to protect the privacy and security of each customer’s data. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategies for Acquiring IT Applications 379 
Both ASP and SaaS deliver software packages without requiring an installation on the end 
user’s hardware. However, the method in which they provide the backend might change dras­
tically in the near future. Containers are a method of developing applications that run inde­
pendently of the base operating system of the server. Containers allow application providers 
to develop, test, and deploy technology that will always run in practice exactly like it does in 
testing. This would allow software to be developed more rapidly. See IT’s About Business 14.1 
for more on this new technology. 
IT’s About Business 14.1 
MIS Containers 
Application developers have always been plagued with platform 
challenges. (A platform is an underlying computer system on which 
application programs can run. On personal computers, Windows 
and Mac OS X are examples of platforms.) As one example, if a 
developer built an application in a Windows environment, then it 
might not run properly if it were deployed after a Windows update. 
In addition, it probably would not work in a Linux environment, 
either. Further, multiple versions of an application need to be de­
veloped to run on different environments, and they have to be con­
tinuously tested on platform updates. 
One solution for this problem is to build and test applications 
on a virtual machine and then implement them on an identical vir­
tual machine for customers. A virtual machine is a self-contained 
operating environment that behaves as if it were a separate physi­
cal computer. Building and testing on a virtual machine ensures 
that an application developed on one platform will run on a dif­
ferent platform. But, what if you could develop an application that 
included its own environment and would run as it was developed 
regardless of the operating system on which it was deployed? That 
is exactly the idea behind a container. 
Containers are not new; in fact, they have been tested since 
2005. However, they were not widely embraced by mainstream IT 
leaders until 2014. The increased popularity of containers is largely 
due to Docker, an open-source project by Docker, Inc. (https:// 
www.docker.com/). Docker is a Linux-based product that enables 
applications to be developed and deployed in a container. Docker-
created apps will run on any platform. 
By late 2015, there were several open-source projects provid­
ing this type of container technology available. In addition, in Au­
gust 2015 Microsoft  announced container support in its Windows 
Server 2016 Technical Preview 3 release. 
In response to security concerns, in November 2015 Docker 
announced an updated set of tools that proactively scan for secu­
rity vulnerabilities of more than 90 percent of the off icial Docker 
repositories on a regular basis. In addition, CoreOS (https://coreos 
.com), an open-source competitor of Docker, Twistlock (https:// 
www.twistlock.com), a startup tech company that focuses on con­
tainer security, and Microsoft are all contributing to the develop­
ment of secure container technology. 
Containers are another step in the development of virtual tech­
nology. They might, for example, enable SaaS and ASP vendors to 
deliver products to their clients much more quickly and eff iciently. 
Sources: Compiled from C. Babcock, “Docker, CoreOS Push Containers 
to Center Stage,” InformationWeek, December 29, 2014; P. Yared, 
“Goodbye SaaS—Hello Containers-as-a-Service,” Venturebeat, May 9, 
2015; P. Rubens, “What Are Containers and Why Do You Need Them?” 
CIO.com, May 20, 2015; A. Froehlich, “Containers 101: 10 Terms To 
Know” InformationWeek, September 2, 2015; M. Schutz, “What’s New 
in Windows Server 2016 and System Center 2016 Technical Preview 3” 
blogs.technet.com, August 19, 2015; C. Babcock, “Containers 
March into Mainstream with Security, Management Updates,” 
InformationWeek, November 20, 2015; F. Lardinois, “Docker Puts 
Focus on Container Security,” TechCrunch.com, November 16, 2015; 
S. Legulalp, “Docker, Twistlock, CoreOS, and the State of Container 
Security,” InfoWorld Tech Watch, December 7, 2015; S. Vaughan-
Nichols, “Docker 1.8 Adds Serious Container Security,” ZDNet.com, 
August 13, 2015; www.docker.com, www.coreos.com, www.twistlock 
.com, accessed December 14, 2015. 
Questions 
1. What does the container technology offer developers that 
traditional deployment methodologies do not? 
2. What role do you think large companies like Microsoft and 
Docker, Inc. play in streamlining application development? 
At this point, companies have made the first three decisions and must now decide where 
to obtain the application. Recall that in general, for prewritten applications, companies can use 
open-source software or obtain the software from a vendor. For customized prewritten appli­
cations, they can customize open-source software or customize vendor software. For totally 
custom applications, they can write the software in-house, or they can outsource the process. 
Use Open-Source Soft ware 
Organizations obtain a license to implement an open-source software product and either use 
it as is, customize it, or develop applications with it. Unless the company is one of the few that 
want to tinker with their source code, open-source applications are, basically, the same as a 

380 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications
proprietary application except for licensing, payment, and support. Open-source soft ware is 
really an alternative source of applications rather than a conceptually diff erent development 
option. (We discuss open-source soft ware in Plug IT In 2.)
Outsourcing
Acquiring IT applications from outside contractors or external organizations is called 
 outsourcing. Companies can utilize outsourcing in many situations. For example, they might 
want to experiment with new IT technologies without making a substantial up-front invest-
ment. They also might use outsourcing to obtain access to outside experts. One disadvantage 
of outsourcing is that companies frequently must place their valuable corporate data under the 
control of the outsourcing vendor.
Several types of vendors off er services for creating and operating IT systems, including 
e-commerce applications. Many soft ware companies, from IBM to Oracle, off er a range of out-
sourcing services for developing, operating, and maintaining IT applications. IT outsourcers, 
such as EDS, off er a variety of services. Also, the large CPA companies and management con-
sultants—for example, Accenture—off er outsourcing services. 
For example, in September 2014, Philip Morris International (the non-U.S. operation of 
Philip Morris) outsourced its IT infrastructure management to Indian services firm Wipro. The 
companies concluded a five-year contract where Wipro manages the tobacco company’s appli-
cations and IT using Wipro’s cloud-based management platform. (We discuss cloud computing 
in Plug IT In 4.) The contract is reported to be worth some $35 million U.S. 
Some companies outsource off shore, particularly in India and China. Off shoring can save 
money, but it includes risks as well. The risks depend on which services are being off shored. If 
a company is off shoring application development, then the major risk is poor communication 
between users and developers. In response to these risks, some companies are bringing out-
sourced jobs back in-house, a process called reverse outsourcing, or insourcing. (See chapter 
closing case 1.)
Continuous Development
Continuous application development automates and improves the process of soft ware deliv-
ery. In essence, a soft ware development project is not viewed as having a defined product, 
with development stopped when the product is implemented. Rather, a soft ware development 
project is viewed as constantly changing in response to changing business conditions and in 
response to user acceptance. 
Continuous application development is the process of steadily adding new computer 
code to a soft ware project when the new computer code is written and tested. Each develop-
ment team member submits new code when it is finished. Automated testing is performed on 
the code to ensure that it functions within the soft ware project. Continuous code submission 
provides developers with immediate feedback from users and status updates for the soft ware 
on which they are working. 
Employ Custom Development
Another option is to custom-build an application. Companies can either perform this operation 
in-house or outsource the process. Although custom development is usually more time con-
suming and costly than buying or leasing, it oft en produces a better fit with the organization’s 
specific requirements.
The development process starts when the IT steering committee (discussed previously 
in this chapter), having received suggestions for a new system, decides it is worth exploring. 
These suggestions come from users (who will be you in the near future). Understanding this 
process will help you obtain the systems that you need. Conversely, not understanding this 
process will reduce your chances, because other people who understand it better will make 
suggestions that use up available resources.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Traditional Systems Development Life Cycle 381 
As the company goes through the development process, its mind-set changes. In systems 
investigation (the first stage of the traditional systems development life cycle), the organization 
is trying to decide whether to build something. Everyone knows it may or may not be built. 
In the later stages of the development process, the organization is committed to building the 
application. Although a project can be cancelled at any time, this change in attitude is still 
important. 
The basic, backbone methodology for custom development is the systems development 
life cycle (SDLC), which you will read about in the next section. Section 14.4 examines the meth­
odologies that complement the SDLC: prototyping, joint application development, integrated 
computer-assisted systems development tools, and rapid application development. You will 
also consider four other methodologies: agile development, end-user development, compo­
nent-based development, and object-oriented development. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Describe the four fundamental business decisions that organizations must make when acquiring 
information systems.
 2. Discuss each of the seven development methods in this section with regard to the four business deci­
sions that organizations must make. 
Apply the Concept 14.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 14.2 Discuss the four business 
are two videos linked there that illustrate SaaS. As you watch 
decisions that companies must make when they acquire new 
these videos, consider the types of hardware that are required on 
applications. 
both sides of the relationship. Also, give some thought to the legal 
nature of the relationship, given that the data will likely reside 
with the service provider. 
STEP 1: Background 
Section 14.2 has discussed the many options available to acquire 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
information systems. One of the more popular methods is 
Imagine that a company has decided to use a SaaS model to 
software-as-a-service (SaaS). SaaS is popular because it eliminates 
acquire a new piece of software. Prepare a paper discussing the 
the need for the company purchasing the software to maintain 
four business decisions they have made in light of this type of 
the hardware that the software will run on. They simply need an 
acquisition. Submit your paper to your instructor. 
Internet connection to access the software from the host company. 
STEP 2: Activity 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the links provided for Apply the Concept 14.2. There 
14.3 Traditional Systems Development 
Life Cycle 
The systems development life cycle is the traditional systems development method that 
organizations use for large-scale IT projects. The SDLC is a structured framework that consists 
of sequential processes by which information systems are developed. For our purposes (see 
Figure 14.4), we identify six processes, each of which consists of clearly defined tasks: 
1. Systems investigation 
2. Systems analysis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
382 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications 
Figure depic ting a six-stage sys
tems development lifecycle with sup
porting tools.
3. Systems design 
4. Programming and testing 
5. Implementation 
6. Operation and maintenance 
Alternative SDLC models contain more or fewer stages. The flow of tasks, however, remains 
largely the same. When problems occur in any phase of the SDLC, developers oft en must go 
back to previous phases. 
Systems development projects produce desired results through team eff orts. Develop­
ment teams typically include users, systems analysts, programmers, and technical specialists. 
Users are employees from all functional areas and levels of the organization who interact with 
the system, either directly or indirectly. Systems analysts are IS professionals who special­
ize in analyzing and designing information systems. Programmers are IS professionals who 
either modify existing computer programs or write new programs to satisfy user requirements. 
Technical specialists are experts on a certain type of technology, such as databases or tel­
ecommunications. The systems stakeholders include everyone who is affected by changes 
in a company’s information systems—for example, users and managers. All stakeholders are 
typically involved in systems development at various times and in varying degrees. 
Figure 14.5 indicates that users have high involvement in the early stages of the SDLC, 
lower involvement in the programming and testing stage, and higher involvement in the later 
stages. Table 14.2 discusses the advantages and disadvantages of the SDLC. 
FIGURE 14.5 Comparison of user 
and developer involvement over the 
SDLC. 

 
 Traditional Systems Development Life Cycle 383 
TABLE 14.2
Traditional Systems Development (SDLC) 
 Advantages and Disadvantages of System Acquisition Methods 
Advantages 
• Forces staff to systematically go through every step in a structured process. 
• Enforces quality by maintaining standards. 
• Has lower probability of missing important issues in collecting user requirements. 
Disadvantages 
• May produce excessive documentation. 
• Users may be unwilling or unable to study the approved specifications. 
• Takes too long to progress from the original ideas to a working system. 
• Users have trouble describing requirements for a proposed system. 
Prototyping 
Advantages 
• Helps clarify user requirements. 
• Helps verify the feasibility of the design. 
• Promotes genuine user participation. 
• Promotes close working relationship between systems developers and users. 
• Works well for ill-defined problems. 
• May produce part of the final system. 
Disadvantages 
• May encourage inadequate problem analysis. 
• Is not practical with large number of users. 
• User may not want to give up the prototype when the system is completed. 
• May generate confusion about whether the system is complete and maintainable. 
• System may be built quickly, which can result in lower quality. 
Joint Application Design 
Advantages 
• Involves many users in the development process. 
• Saves time. 
• Generates greater user support for the new system. 
• Improves the quality of the new system. 
• The new system is easier to implement. 
• The new system has lower training costs. 
Disadvantages 
• It is difficult to get all users to attend the JAD meeting. 
• The JAD approach is subject to all of the problems associated with any group meeting. 
Integrated Computer-Assisted Software Engineering 
Advantages 
• Can produce systems with a longer effective operational life. 
• Can produce systems that closely meet user requirements. 
• Can speed up the development process. 
• Can produce systems that are more flexible and adaptable to changing business conditions. 
• Can produce excellent documentation. 
Disadvantages 
• Systems are often more expensive to build and maintain. 
• The process requires more extensive and accurate definition of user requirements. 
•  It is difficult to customize the end product. 
(Continued ) 

 
 
 
 
 
384 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications 
Rapid Application Development 
Advantages 
•  Can speed up systems development. 
•  Users are intensively involved from the start. 
•  Improves the process of rewriting legacy applications. 
Disadvantages 
•  Produces functional components of final systems, but not the final systems themselves. 
End-User Development 
Advantages 
•  Bypasses the IS department and avoids delays. 
•  User controls the application and can change it as needed. 
•  Directly meets user requirements. 
•  Promotes increased user acceptance of new system. 
•  Frees up IT resources. 
Disadvantages 
•  May eventually require maintenance from IS department. 
•  Documentation may be inadequate. 
•  Leads to poor quality control. 
•  System may not have adequate interfaces to existing systems. 
•  May create lower-quality systems. 
Object-Oriented Development 
Advantages 
•  Objects model real-world entities. 
•  New systems may be able to reuse some computer code. 
Disadvantages 
•  Works best with systems of more limited scope (i.e., with systems that do not have huge numbers 
of objects). 
Systems Investigation 
The initial stage in a traditional SDLC is systems investigation. Systems development profes­
sionals agree that the more time they invest in (1) understanding the business problem to be 
solved, (2) specifying the technical options for the systems, and (3) anticipating the problems 
they are likely to encounter during development, the greater the chances of success. For these 
reasons, systems investigation addresses the business problem (or business opportunity) by 
means of the feasibility study. 
The primary task in the systems investigation stage is the feasibility study. Organizations 
have three basic solutions to any business problem relating to an information system: (1) do 
nothing and continue to use the existing system unchanged, (2) modify or enhance the existing 
system, and (3) develop a new system. The feasibility study analyzes which of these three 
solutions best fits the particular business problem. It also provides a rough assessment of the 
project’s technical, economic, and behavioral feasibility, as explained below: 
•  Technical feasibility determines whether the company can develop and/or acquire the 
hardware, software, and communications components needed to solve the business prob­
lem. Technical feasibility also determines whether the organization can use its existing 
technology to achieve the project’s performance objectives. 
•  Economic feasibility determines whether the project is an acceptable financial risk 
and, if so, whether the organization has the necessary time and money to successfully 
complete the project. You have already learned about the commonly used methods to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Traditional Systems Development Life Cycle 385 
determine economic feasibility: NPV, ROI, breakeven analysis, and the business case 
approach. 
•  Behavioral feasibility addresses the human issues of the systems development project. You 
will be heavily involved in this aspect of the feasibility study. 
After the feasibility analysis is completed, a “go/no-go” decision is reached by the steering 
committee if there is one or by top management in the absence of a committee. The go/no-go 
decision does not depend solely on the feasibility analysis. Organizations often have more fea­
sible projects than they can fund. Therefore, the firm must prioritize the feasible projects and 
pursue those with the highest priority. Unfunded feasible projects may not be presented to 
the IT department at all. These projects therefore contribute to the hidden backlog, which are 
projects that the IT department is not aware of. 
If the decision is no-go, then the project either is put on the shelf until conditions are more 
favorable or is discarded. If the decision is go, then the project proceeds, and the systems anal­
ysis phase begins. 
Systems Analysis 
Once a development project has the necessary approvals from all participants, the systems 
analysis stage begins. Systems analysis is the process whereby systems analysts examine the 
business problem that the organization plans to solve with an information system. 
The primary purpose of the systems analysis stage is to gather information about the exist­
ing system to determine the requirements for an enhanced system or a new system. The end 
product of this stage, known as the deliverable, is a set of system requirements. 
Arguably, the most difficult task in systems analysis is to identify the specific requirements 
that the system must satisfy. These requirements are oft en called user requirements, because 
users (meaning you) provide them. When the systems developers have accumulated the user 
requirements for the new system, they proceed to the systems design stage. 
Systems Design 
Systems design describes how the system will resolve the business problem. The delivera­
ble of the systems design phase is the set of technical system specifications, which specify the 
following: 
• System outputs, inputs, and user interfaces 
• Hardware, software, databases, telecommunications, personnel, and procedures 
• A blueprint of how these components are integrated 
When the system specifications are approved by all participants, they are “frozen.” That is, 
they should not be changed. Adding functions after the project has been initiated causes scope 
creep, in which the time frame and expenses associated with the project expand beyond the 
agreed-upon limits. Scope creep endangers both the project’s budget and its schedule. Because 
scope creep is expensive, successful project managers place controls on changes requested by 
users. These controls help to prevent runaway projects. 
Programming and Testing 
If the organization decides to construct the software in-house, then programming begins. 
Programming involves translating the design specifications into computer code. This process 
can be lengthy and time consuming, because writing computer code is as much an art as a sci­
ence. Large-scale systems development projects can involve hundreds of computer program­
mers who are charged with creating hundreds of thousands of lines of computer code. These 
projects employ programming teams. The teams often include functional area users, who help 
the programmers focus on the business problem. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
386 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications 
Thorough and continuous testing occurs throughout the programming stage. Testing is 
the process that assesses whether the computer code will produce the expected and desired 
results. It is also intended to detect errors, or bugs, in the computer code. 
Implementation 
Implementation (or deployment) is the process of converting from an old computer system to 
a new one. The conversion process involves organizational change. Only end users can manage 
organizational change, not the MIS department. The MIS department typically does not have 
enough credibility with the business users to manage the change process. Organizations use 
three major conversion strategies: direct, pilot, and phased. 
In a direct conversion, the old system is cut off, and the new system is turned on at a 
certain point in time. This type of conversion is the least expensive. It is also the most risky 
because, if the new system does not work as planned, there is no support from the old system. 
Because of these risks, few systems are implemented using direct conversion. 
A pilot conversion introduces the new system in one part of the organization, such as in 
one plant or one functional area. The new system runs for a period of time and is then assessed. 
If the assessment confirms that the system is working properly, then the system is implemented 
in other parts of the organization. 
A phased conversion introduces components of the new system, such as individual mod­
ules, in stages. Each module is assessed. If it works properly, then other modules are intro­
duced, until the entire new system is operational. Large organizations commonly combine the 
pilot and phased approaches. That is, they execute a phased conversion using a pilot group for 
each phase. A fourth strategy is parallel conversion, in which the old and new systems operate 
simultaneously for a time. This strategy is seldom used today. One reason is that parallel con­
version is totally impractical when both the old and new systems are online. Imagine that you 
are completing an order on Amazon, only to be told, “Before your order can be entered here, 
you must provide all the same information again, in a different form, and on a different set of 
screens.” The results would be disastrous for Amazon. Regardless of the type of implementa­
tion process that an organization uses, the new system may not work as advertised. In fact, the 
new system may cause more problems than the old system that it replaced. 
Operation and Maintenance 
After the new system is implemented, it will operate for a period of time, until (like the old 
system it replaced) it no longer meets its objectives. Once the new system’s operations are 
stabilized, the company performs audits to assess the system’s capabilities and to determine if 
it is being utilized correctly. 
Systems require several types of maintenance. The first type is debugging the program, 
a process that continues throughout the life of the system. The second type is updating the 
system to accommodate changes in business conditions. An example is adjusting to new gov­
ernmental regulations, such as changes in tax rates. These corrections and upgrades usually 
do not add any new functions. Instead, they simply help the system to continue to achieve its 
objectives. In contrast, the third type of maintenance adds new functions to the existing system 
without disturbing its operation. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Describe the feasibility study.
 2. What is the difference between systems analysis and systems design?
 3. Describe structured programming.
 4. What are the four conversion methods? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative Methods and Tools for Systems Development 387 
Apply the Concept 14.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 14.3 Enumerate the primary 
which is linked to Apply the Concept 14.3. The video conveys 
tasks and the importance of each of the six processes involved in 
a realistic (though perhaps a bit pessimistic) view of how poor 
the systems development life cycle. 
communication can severely damage the soft ware-development 
process. 
STEP 1: Background 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
The systems development life cycle uses a very systematic 
After watching the video, build an outline that specifies the 
approach in which each stage builds on work completed at 
primary tasks and the importance of each of the six processes 
an earlier stage. It is an excellent model to follow, assuming 
involved in the SDLC. Make certain to discuss the importance of 
that the right decisions are made at each stage of the SDLC 
communication from one step to the next. 
and are appropriately communicated to the next stage of the 
SDLC. 
STEP 2: Activity 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and watch the video titled “Software Development Life Cycle,” 
14.4 Alternative Methods and Tools for 
Systems Development 
Alternative methods for systems development include joint application design, rapid applica­
tion development, agile development, and end-user development. 
Joint Application Design 
Joint application design (JAD) is a group-based tool for collecting user requirements 
and creating system designs. It is most often used within the systems analysis and sys­
tems design stages of the SDLC. JAD involves a group meeting attended by the analysts 
and all of the users that can be conducted either in person or via the computer. During 
this meeting, all users jointly define and agree on the systems requirements. This process 
saves a tremendous amount of time. Table 14.2 lists the advantages and disadvantages of 
the JAD process. 
Rapid Application Development 
Rapid application development (RAD) is a systems development method that can com­
bine JAD, prototyping, and integrated computer-assisted software engineering (ICASE) 
tools (discussed later in this section) to rapidly produce a high-quality system. In the 
first RAD stage, developers use JAD sessions to collect system requirements. This strat­
egy ensures that users are intensively involved early on. The development process in RAD 
is iterative; that is, requirements, designs, and the system itself are developed and then 
undergo a series, or sequence, of improvements. RAD uses ICASE tools to quickly structure 
requirements and develop prototypes. As the prototypes are developed and refined, users 
review them in additional JAD sessions. RAD produces the functional components of a 
final system, rather than prototypes. To understand how RAD functions and how it differs 
from SDLC, see Figure 14.6. Table 14.2 highlights the advantages and disadvantages of 
the RAD process. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
388 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications 
FIGURE 14.6 A rapid prototyping 
development process versus SDLC. 
Agile Development 
Agile development is a software development methodology that delivers functionality in rapid 
iterations, which are usually measured in weeks. To be successful, this methodology requires 
frequent communication, development, testing, and delivery. Agile development focuses on 
rapid development and frequent user contact to create software that addresses the needs 
of business users. This software does not have to include every possible feature the user will 
require. Rather, it must meet only the user’s more important and immediate needs. It can be 
updated later to introduce additional functions as they become necessary. The core tenet of 
agile development is to do only what you have to do to be successful right now. 
One type of agile development uses the scrum approach. A key principle of scrum is that 
during a project users can change their minds about what they want and need. Scrum acknowl­
edges that a development problem cannot be fully understood or defined from the start. There­
fore, scrum focuses on maximizing the development team’s ability to deliver iterations quickly 
and to respond effectively to additional user requirements as they emerge. 
Scrum contains sets of practices and predefined roles. The primary roles are: 
• The Scrum Master: Maintains the processes (typically replaces a project manager). 
• The  Product Owner: Represents the business users and any other stakeholders in the 
project. 
• The Team: A cross-functional group of about seven people who perform the actual analy­
sis, design, coding, implementation, testing, and so on. 
Scrum works this way: During each sprint—typically a 2- to 4-week period—the team cre­
ates a potentially shippable product increment, such as working and tested software. The set 
of features that goes into each sprint comes from the product backlog, which is a prioritized set 
of high-level work requirements to be completed. 
The sprint planning meeting determines which backlog items will be addressed during a 
sprint. During this meeting, the Product Owner informs the team of the items in the product 
backlog that he or she wants to be completed. The team members then determine how many 
of these projects they can commit to during the next sprint, and they record this information in 
the sprint backlog. 
During a sprint, no one is allowed to change the sprint backlog, which means that the 
requirements are frozen for the sprint. Each sprint must end on time. If the requirements are 
not completed for any reason, then they are left out and returned to the product backlog. Aft er 
each sprint is completed, the team demonstrates how to use the soft ware. 
IT’s About Business 14.2 addresses an interesting type of agile development. This method­
ology is called Minimum Viable Product (MVP) development. Applications developed using MVP 
methodology have just the required amount of functionality to operate successfully. On the 
other hand, MVP applications do not have so much functionality (i.e., too many features) that 
the development process took too long and cost too much. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative Methods and Tools for Systems Development 389 
IT’s About Business 14.2 
SDLC vs. Minimum Viable Product 
Development 
As previously discussed, the SDLC is a traditional approach to soft ­
ware development that aims to produce full-function, feature-rich, 
user-driven software. The major problem with the SDLC has always 
been that the time between developing the list of user needs and 
the actual implementation of the software is too long. Oft en, the 
time-consuming nature of the SDLC means that it cannot keep up 
with the fast-paced business environment. 
In 1999, Geoff Wilson founded 352 (http://www.352inc.com), 
a successful Web design company based in Gainesville, Florida. His 
company’s mission was to bring products to market more quickly 
for his customers. He did not want to use a lengthy development 
process such as the SDLC. 
Today, 352 provides custom Web projects for customers 
within weeks using agile development and a minimum viable prod­
uct (MVP) approach. MVP focuses on developing the basic functions 
needed to bring a project to completion. After these functions are 
developed, the client is brought on board, and the product basi­
cally designs itself through a series of iterations. 
Wilson learned about MVP the hard way. As he was building 
352, he noticed several companies developing fantasy games for 
children. Specifically, Disney’s purchase of Club Penguin (http:// 
games.disney.com/club-penguin-app) sparked his interest. Wilson 
set out to build a fantasy game for children himself. 
When Wilson undertook this project, there were only a few 
competitors in this space. However, after completing an 18-month 
development process, he noticed that several of his competi­
tors had already gained loyal customers. This situation made 
MIS 
it difficult for Wilson’s game to gain traction in the marketplace, 
even though his fantasy environment was more feature-rich than 
his competitors’ environments. Ultimately, Wilson lost roughly $1 
million on his project. In the process he learned the value of rapid 
development. 
Today, development teams at 352 can bring a minimum viable 
product to customers in 90 days or less. The company’s teams are 
experts at working with clients to fully develop product features. 
Wilson recommends that developers continuously listen to their 
user community, remain focused on the long-term goals of the 
product, and maintain an open mind regarding change. 
MVP development won’t work for every business in every situ­
ation. Nevertheless, it is definitely a concept to keep in mind in rela­
tion to the SDLC, because it attempts to create a perfect, complete 
product in one attempt. 
Sources: Compiled from L. Calhoun, “The One Million Dollar 
Startup Rule Startups Should Never Break,” Inc., December 11, 
2015; J. Oakhurst, “4 Biggest Custom Software Buying Mistakes,” 
InformationWeek, February 18, 2014; G. Wilson, “Moving Beyond MVP: 
Feedback, Features, and Pricing,” www.agilealliance.org, accessed 
September 30, 2015; http://www.clubpenguin.com/, http://leanstack 
.com/minimum-viable-product/, https://www.linkedin.com/in/ 
geoffwilson, accessed December 14, 2015. 
Questions 
1. What lessons did Wilson learn in his attempt to develop a vir­
tual world for children? 
2. Compare and contrast the development styles of the SDLC 
and the agile MVP approach Wilson that promotes. 
End-User Development 
End-user development is an approach in which the organization’s end users develop their 
own applications with little or no formal assistance from the IT department. Table 14.2 lists the 
advantages and disadvantages of end-user development. Sometimes this form of IT develop­
ment and/or acquisition is called Shadow IT (also known as Stealth IT or Rogue IT). While the 
end-users bypass of the IT Department might make it easier for them to adopt the tools that 
they want to work with, it also bypasses the security measures that the IT Department is trying 
to enforce. These shadow IT systems can open systems to vulnerabilities and create avenues 
for criminals to access private company and customer data. As an employee it is important 
to carefully consider adopting something that has not been approved by your organization. If 
your Shadow IT creates a vulnerability that allows a breach, you will probably lose your job! 
Tools for Systems Development 
Several tools can be used with various systems development methods. These tools include 
prototyping, integrated computer-assisted software engineering, component-based develop­
ment, and object-oriented development. 
Prototyping. The prototyping approach defines an initial list of user requirements, builds 
a model of the system, and then refines the system in several iterations based on users’ feed­
back. Developers do not try to obtain a complete set of user specifications for the system at the 
outset, and they do not plan to develop the system all at once. Instead, they quickly develop a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
390 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications 
smaller version of the system known as a prototype. A prototype can take two forms. In some 
cases, it contains only the components of the new system that are of most interest to the users. 
In other cases, it is a small-scale working model of the entire system. 
Users make suggestions for improving the prototype, based on their experiences with it. 
The developers then review the prototype with the users and utilize their suggestions to refine 
it. This process continues through several iterations until the users approve the system or it 
becomes apparent that the system cannot meet the users’ needs. If the system is viable, then 
the developers can use the prototype to build the full system. One typical use of prototyping is 
to develop screens that a user will see and interact with. Table 14.2 describes the advantages 
and disadvantages of the prototyping approach. 
A practical problem with prototyping is that a prototype usually looks more complete 
than it is. That is, it may not use the real database, it usually does not have the necessary 
error checking, and it almost never includes the necessary security features. Users who review 
a prototype that resembles the finished system may not recognize these problems. Conse­
quently, they might have unrealistic expectations about how close the actual system is to 
completion. 
Integrated Computer-Assisted Software Engineering Tools. Computer-aided soft ­
ware engineering (CASE) refers to a group of tools that automate many of the tasks in the 
SDLC. The tools that are used to automate the early stages of the SDLC (systems investigation, 
analysis, and design) are called upper CASE tools. The tools used to automate later stages in 
the SDLC (programming, testing, operation, and maintenance) are called lower CASE tools. 
CASE tools that provide links between upper CASE and lower CASE tools are called integrated 
CASE (ICASE) tools. Table 14.2 lists the advantages and disadvantages of ICASE tools. 
Component-Based Development. Component-based development uses standard 
components to build applications. Components are reusable applications that generally have 
one specific function, such as a shopping cart, user authentication, or a catalog. Compared 
with other approaches, component-based development generally involves less programming 
and more assembly. Component-based development is closely linked with the idea of Web ser­
vices and service-oriented architectures, which you will study in Plug IT In 4. 
Many startup companies are pursuing the idea of component-based application develop­
ment. One example is Ning (www.ning.com), which allows organizations to create, customize, 
and share their own social network. 
Object-Oriented Development. Object-oriented development is based on a diff erent 
view of computer systems than the perception that characterizes traditional development ap­
proaches. Traditional approaches can produce a system that performs the original task but 
may not be suited for handling other tasks. This limitation applies even when these other tasks 
involve the same real-world entities. For example, a billing system will handle billing, but it 
probably cannot be adapted to handle mailings for the marketing department or to generate 
leads for the sales force. This is true even though the billing, marketing, and sales functions all 
use similar data, including customer names, addresses, and purchases. In contrast, an object-
oriented (OO) system begins not with the task to be performed, but with the aspects of the real 
world that must be modeled to perform that task. Therefore, in our example, if the firm has a 
good model of its customers and its interactions with them, then it can use this model equally 
well for billings, mailings, and sales leads. 
The development process for an object-oriented system begins with a feasibility study and 
an analysis of the existing system. Systems developers identify the objects in the new system— 
the fundamental elements in OO analysis and design. Each object represents a tangible, real-
world entity, such as a customer, bank account, student, or course. Objects have properties, 
or data values. For example, a customer has an identification number, a name, an address, 
an account number(s), and so on. Objects also contain the operations that can be performed 
on their properties. For example, operations that can be performed on the customer object 
may include obtain-account-balance, open-account, withdraw-funds, and so on. Operations 
are also referred to as behaviors. 

 
 
 
 
Alternative Methods and Tools for Systems Development 391 
This approach enables OO analysts to define all the relevant objects needed for the new 
system, including their properties and operations. The analysts then model how the objects 
interact to meet the objectives of the new system. In some cases, analysts can reuse existing 
objects from other applications (or from a library of objects) in the new system. This process 
saves the analysts the time they otherwise would spend coding these objects. In most cases, 
however, even with object reuse, some coding will be necessary to customize the objects and 
their interactions for the new system. 
You have studied many methods that can be used to acquire new systems. Table 14.2 pro­
vides an overview of the advantages and disadvantages of each of these methods. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Describe the tools that augment the traditional SDLC.
 2. Describe the alternate methods that can be used for systems development other than the SDLC. 
Apply the Concept 14.4 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 14.4 Describe alternative 
Imagine that you are a developer of iPhone apps. At lunch the 
development methods and the tools that augment development 
other day someone mentioned a very cool idea for a new camera 
methods. 
app that would enable users to take pictures simply by opening 
the app and saying “click” rather than having to push a button. 
STEP 1: Background  
Describe the idea to a couple of friends to develop a list of user 
needs and preferences. From this list, draw up a sketch of the 
The systems development life cycle is a very thorough method 
app. Then let the same people review your design and make 
of development. However, it is also very time consuming and 
suggestions. Use the second set of suggestions to create your 
expensive. Section 14.4 discusses several alternative methods. 
“final” drawings of the app.  
Joint application design, rapid application development, and 
agile development are used in conjunction with several tools for 
systems development. 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Write a short report documenting the alternative development 
STEP 2: Activity 
methods you have used and how the tools discussed in this 
section might help you to actually develop your app. Be sure to 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
mention how you might use different tools at different stages of 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 14.4. This link 
development. 
will take you to a Vimeo video about prototyping. 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For The Accounting Major 
Accounting personnel help perform the cost–benefit analyses on 
proposed projects. They may also monitor ongoing project costs 
to keep them within budget. Accounting personnel undoubtedly 
will find themselves involved with systems development at various 
points throughout their careers. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
Finance personnel are frequently involved with the financial issues 
that accompany any large-scale systems development project (e.g., 
budgeting). They also are involved in cost–benefit and risk analyses. 
To perform these tasks, they need to stay abreast of the emerging 
techniques used to determine project costs and ROI. Finally, because 
they must manage vast amounts of information, finance depart­
ments are also common recipients of new systems. 
MKT For the Marketing Major 
In most organizations, marketing, like finance, involves massive 
amounts of data and information. Like finance, then, marketing is 
also a hotbed of systems development. Marketing personnel will 
increasingly find themselves participating in systems development 
teams. Such involvement increasingly means helping to develop sys­
tems, especially Web-based systems that reach out directly from the 
organization to its customers. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
392 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications 
For the Production/Operations 
POM 
Management Major 
Participation in development teams is also a common role for 
production/operations people. Manufacturing is becoming in­
creasingly computerized and integrated with other allied sys­
tems, from design to logistics to customer support. Production 
systems interface frequently with marketing, finance, and hu­
man resources. In addition, they may be part of a larger, enter­
prisewide system. Also, many end users in POM either develop 
their own systems or collaborate with IT personnel on specific 
applications. 
HRM For the Human Resources Management  
Major  
The human resources department is closely involved with sev­
eral aspects of the systems acquisitions process. Acquiring new 
systems may require hiring new employees, changing job de­
scriptions, or terminating employees. Human resources staff 
performs all of these tasks. Further, if the organization hires con­
sultants for the development project, or outsources it, the hu­
man resources department may handle the contracts with these 
suppliers. 
MIS For the Mis Major 
Regardless of the approach that the organization adopts for acquir­
ing new systems, the MIS department spearheads it. If the organi­
zation chooses either to buy or to lease the application, the MIS 
department leads in examining the offerings of the various vendors 
and in negotiating with the vendors. If the organization chooses to 
develop the application in-house, then the process falls to the MIS 
department. MIS analysts work closely with users to develop their 
information requirements. MIS programmers then write the com­
puter code, test it, and implement the new system. 
Summary 
1.  Discuss the different cost–benefit analyses that companies must 
take into account when formulating an IT strategic plan. 
The four common approaches to cost–benefit analysis are the following: 
(1) The net present value method converts future values of benefits to their 
present-value equivalent by “discounting” them at the organization’s 
cost of funds. They can then compare the present value of the future 
benefits with the cost required to achieve those benefits to determine 
whether the benefits exceed the costs. 
(2) Return on investment measures management’s eff ectiveness in gener­
ating profits with its available assets. ROI is calculated by dividing net 
income attributable to a project by the average assets invested in the 
project. ROI is a percentage, and the higher the percentage return, the 
better. 
(3) Breakeven analysis determines the point at which the cumulative dollar 
value of the benefits from a project equals the investment made in the 
project. 
(4) In the business case approach, system developers write a business case 
to justify funding one or more specific applications or projects. 
2.  Discuss the four business decisions that companies must make when 
they acquire new applications. 
•  How much computer code does the company want to write? A company can 
choose to use a totally prewritten application (to write no computer code), 
to customize a prewritten application (to write some computer code), or 
to customize an entire application (write all new computer code). 
•  How will the company pay for the application? Once the company has 
decided how much computer code to write, it must decide how to pay 
for it. With prewritten applications or customized prewritten applica­
tions, companies can buy them or lease them. With totally custom appli­
cations, companies use internal funding. 
•  Where will the application run? Companies must now decide where to 
run the application. The company may run the application on its own 
platform or run the application on someone else’s platform (use either a 
software-as-a-service vendor or an application service provider). 
•  Where will the application originate? Prewritten applications can be 
open-source software or come from a vendor. Companies may choose 
to customize prewritten open-source applications or prewritten proprie­
tary applications from vendors. Companies may customize applications 
in-house or outsource the customization. They also can write totally cus­
tom applications in-house or outsource this process. 
3.  Enumerate the primary tasks and importance of each of the six 
processes involved in the systems development life cycle. 
The six processes are the following: 
(1) Systems investigation: Addresses the business problem (or business op­
portunity) by means of the feasibility study; main task in the systems 
investigation stage is the feasibility study. 
(2) Systems analysis: Examines the business problem that the organization 
plans to solve with an information system; main purpose is to gather 
information about the existing system in order to determine the re­
quirements for the new system; end product of this stage, known as the 
“deliverable, “ is a set of system requirements. 
(3) Systems design: Describes how the system will resolve the business 
problem; deliverable is the set of technical system specifications. 
(4) Programming and testing: Programming translates the design spec­
ifications into computer code; testing checks to see whether the 
computer code will produce the expected and desired results and 
detects errors, or bugs, in the computer code; deliverable is the new 
application. 
(5) Implementation: The process of converting from the old system to the 
new system via three major conversion strategies: direct, pilot, and 
phased; deliverable is properly working application. 
(6) Operation and maintenance: Types of maintenance include debugging, 
updating, and adding new functions when needed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative Methods and Tools for Systems Development 393 
4.  Describe alternative development methods and tools that augment 
development methods. 
These are the alternative methods: 
•  Joint application design is a group-based tool for collecting user require­
ments and creating system designs. 
•  Rapid application development is a systems development method that 
can combine JAD, prototyping, and ICASE tools to rapidly produce a 
high-quality system. 
•  Agile development is a software development methodology that delivers 
functionality in rapid iterations, which are usually measured in weeks. 
•  End-user development refers to an organization’s end users developing 
their own applications with little or no formal assistance from the IT 
department. 
These are the tools: 
•  The prototyping approach defines an initial list of user requirements, 
builds a model of the system, and then improves the system in several 
iterations based on users’ feedback. 
Chapter Glossary 
agile development A software development methodology that 
delivers functionality in rapid iterations, measured in weeks, requiring 
frequent communication, development, testing, and delivery. 
application portfolio The set of recommended applications 
resulting from the planning and justification process in application 
development. 
application service provider (ASP) An agent or vendor who 
assembles the soft ware needed by enterprises and packages them 
with outsourced development, operations, maintenance, and other 
services. 
component-based development A soft ware development 
methodology that uses standard components to build applications. 
computer-aided software engineering (CASE) Development 
approach that uses specialized tools to automate many of the tasks 
in the SDLC; upper CASE tools automate the early stages of the SDLC 
and lower CASE tools automate the later stages. 
containers A method of developing applications that run 
independently of the base operating system of the server. 
continuous application development The process of steadily 
adding new computer code to a software project when the new 
computer code is written and tested. 
direct conversion Implementation process in which the old system is 
cut off and the new system is turned on at a certain point in time. 
end-user development Approach in which the organization’s 
end users develop their own applications with little or no formal 
assistance from the IT department. 
feasibility study Investigation that gauges the probability of success 
of a proposed project and provides a rough assessment of the 
project’s feasibility. 
implementation The process of converting from an old computer 
system to a new one. 
•  Integrated computer-aided software engineering combines upper 
CASE tools (automate systems investigation, analysis, and design) 
and lower CASE tools (programming, testing, operation, and 
maintenance). 
•  Component-based development uses standard components to build 
applications. Components are reusable applications that generally have 
one specific function, such as a shopping cart, user authentication, or a 
catalog. 
•  Object-oriented development begins with the aspects of the real world 
that must be modeled to perform that task. Systems developers iden­
tify the objects in the new system. Each object represents a tangible, 
real-world entity, such as a customer, bank account, student, or course. 
Objects have properties, or data values. Objects also contain the opera­
tions that can be performed on their properties. 
Table 14.2 shows advantages and disadvantages of alternative methods 
and tools. 
integrated CASE (ICASE) tools CASE tools that provide links 
between upper CASE and lower CASE tools. 
IS operational plan Consists of a clear set of projects that the IS 
department and the functional area managers will execute in 
support of the IT strategic plan. 
IT steering committee A committee, comprised of a group of 
managers and staff representing various organizational units, set 
up to establish IT priorities and to ensure that the MIS function is 
meeting the needs of the enterprise. 
IT strategic plan A set of long-range goals that describe the IT 
infrastructure and major IT initiatives needed to achieve the goals of 
the organization. 
joint application design (JAD) A group-based tool for collecting user 
requirements and creating system designs. 
lower CASE tools Tools used to automate later stages in the SDLC 
(programming, testing, operation, and maintenance) 
object-oriented development A systems development methodology 
that begins with aspects of the real world that must be modeled to 
perform a task. 
outsourcing Use of outside contractors or external organizations to 
acquire IT services. 
phased conversion Implementation process that introduces 
components of the new system in stages, until the entire new system 
is operational. 
pilot conversion Implementation process that introduces the new 
system in one part of the organization on a trial basis; when the 
new system is working properly, it is introduced in other parts of the 
organization. 
programmers IS professionals who modify existing computer 
programs or write new computer programs to satisfy user 
requirements. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
394 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications 
programming The translation of a system’s design specifications into 
computer code. 
prototype A small-scale working model of an entire system or a model 
that contains only the components of the new system that are of 
most interest to the users. 
prototyping An approach that defines an initial list of user 
requirements, builds a prototype system, and then improves the 
system in several iterations based on users’ feedback. 
rapid application development (RAD) A development method that 
uses special tools and an iterative approach to rapidly produce a 
high-quality system. 
request for proposal (RFP) Document that is sent to potential 
vendors inviting them to submit a proposal describing their soft - 
ware package and how it would meet the company’s needs. 
scope creep Adding functions to an information system aft er the 
project has begun. 
service-level agreements (SLAs) Formal agreements regarding the 
division of work between a company and its vendors. 
software-as-a-service (SaaS) A method of delivering soft ware in 
which a vendor hosts the applications and provides them as a service 
to customers over a network, typically the Internet. 
systems analysis The examination of the business problem that the 
organization plans to solve with an information system. 
systems analysts IS professionals who specialize in analyzing and 
designing information systems. 
systems design Describes how the new system will resolve the 
business problem. 
systems development life cycle (SDLC) Traditional structured 
framework, used for large IT projects, that consists of sequential 
processes by which information systems are developed. 
systems investigation The initial stage in the traditional SDLC that 
addresses the business problem (or business opportunity) by means 
of the feasibility study. 
systems stakeholders All people who are affected by changes in 
information systems. 
technical specialists Experts on a certain type of technology, such as 
databases or telecommunications. 
upper CASE tools Tools that are used to automate the early stages of 
the SDLC (systems investigation, analysis, and design). 
Discussion Questions 
1.  Discuss the advantages of a lease option over a buy option. 
5. Discuss the various types of feasibility studies. Why are they all needed? 
2.  Why is it important for all business managers to understand the issues 
6. Discuss the issue of assessing intangible benefits and the proposed 
of IT resource acquisition? 
solutions. 
3.  Why is it important for everyone in business organizations to have a ba-
7. Discuss the reasons why end-user-developed information systems can 
sic understanding of the systems development process? 
be of poor quality. What can be done to improve this situation? 
4.  Should prototyping be used on every systems development project? 
Why or why not? 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  Access www.ecommerce-guide.com. Find the product review area. 
Read reviews of three software payment solutions. Assess them as pos­
sible components. 
2.  Use an Internet search engine to obtain information on CASE and ICASE 
tools. Select several vendors and compare and contrast their off erings. 
3.  Access www.ning.com. Observe how the site provides components for 
you to use to build applications. Build a small application at the site. 
4.  Enter www-01.ibm.com/software. Find its WebSphere product. 
Read recent customers’ success stories. What makes this soft ware so 
popular? 
5.  Enter the Web sites of the Gartner (www.gartner.com), 451 Research 
(https://451research.com), and CIO (www.cio.com). Search for recent 
material about ASPs and outsourcing, and prepare a report on your 
findings. 
6.  StoreFront (www.storefront.net) is a vendor of e-business soft ware. At 
its site, the company provides demonstrations illustrating the types 
of storefronts that it can create for shoppers. The site also provides 
demonstrations of how the company’s software is used to create a store. 
a.  Run the StoreFront demonstration to see how this is done. 
b.  What features does StoreFront provide? 
c.  Does StoreFront support smaller or larger stores? 
d.  What other products does StoreFront offer for creating online 
stores? What types of stores do these products support? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative Methods and Tools for Systems Development 395 
Closing Case 1 
Capital One Brings IT Home 
MIS 
The Problem 
Today, when an organization’s strategy calls for a technology acqui­
sition, there are several ownership options to consider. The company 
can build it, buy it, outsource it, or enter into a service agreement with 
a third party. Each option off ers different strategic advantages to the 
organization. One measure that executives use in decision making is 
return on investment (ROI). ROI is an accounting measure that helps 
organizations determine how efficiently their investments will return a 
financial benefit to the organization.  
For technology-related upgrades or purchases, the nature of 
the improvements often makes it is difficult to calculate an accu­
rate ROI. For example, how do you measure improved employee 
productivity from a $1,500 investment in a faster desktop com­
puter? Or, how do you measure the ROI for a $15 million invest­
ment in mobile banking? For many organizations, the unknown 
ROI, coupled with the unknown costs of ownership of information 
systems—continued development, maintenance, and future imple­
mentations—lead them to outsource their IT operation either in 
whole or in part. 
Such was the case with Capital One (CO: www.capitalone 
.com), a major U.S. bank. In fact, at one point the organization had 
outsourced more than 70 percent of their IT operation. With this 
arrangement, all service-related issues—soft ware development, 
requested changes or upgrades, and so on—had to go through the 
vendor(s). CO was actually limited because they did not have owner­
ship of their IT. The nature of the market had changed, so the former 
advantage was now a business problem. CO wanted to transform the 
customer’s banking experience into a similar experience to shopping 
with Amazon or Apple. However, the bank lacked the capability to 
achieve this goal. 
In 2011, CIO Rob Alexander decided it was time for a change. CO 
needed more control over the IT—both hardware and soft ware—that 
supported its business processes. They would achieve that only by 
reversing the outsourcing, a process known as insourcing. 
The IT Solution 
To insource the 70 percent of IT that was currently outsourced, Cap­
ital One had to purchase several technology companies and make a 
significant investment in human and physical capital.  The insourc­
ing approach aimed at improvements in three major areas: finding 
developers to develop software in-house, developing a culture of agile 
development methodologies, and purchasing a $150 million data 
center to quickly test and implement the applications they would be 
creating.  
The first step was to bring software development in-house. 
Insourcing software development was a challenge because CO needed 
talent. CO did acquire the human capital of the technology companies 
it purchased. However, the bank still had to compete with well-known 
technology companies for the best developers available on the mar­
ket. To address this problem, CO created partnerships with several col­
leges to recruit their graduates. Their objective was to acquire a new 
reputation as a technology company and not just a banking company. 
CO understood that without the best developers, it would never be a 
leading IT company.  
Next, CO’s in-house development process began to use agile 
development methodologies in which self-organizing, cross-func­
tional teams analyzed workflow; proposed solutions; and then built, 
tested, modified, improved, and ultimately implemented technology 
solutions. Because most of Capital One’s newly acquired talent came 
from other organizations, the company implemented a 24-month 
training program that helped develop the rapid agile development 
culture. 
Finally, CO bought and operated a data center to support its 
new development methodologies. Had CO relied on outsourced solu­
tions, it would have taken too long to deploy their solutions to their 
customers.  
The Results 
CO has been hard at work developing and improving their new culture. 
The company has improved their product testing time from 18 days 
before the insourcing began to less than 5 days. Their ultimate goal is 
to develop an idea and then test the product that same day. Of course, 
customers do not care about how fast a company can develop soft ­
ware.  Their only concern is that the software works when they need 
it to work.  
In 2011, only 1 percent of CO’s software development was con­
ducted in-house and used agile methodologies. By March 2014, CO had 
trained more than 3,000 software developers and business analysts to 
work together in the cross-functional environment necessary to imple­
ment the agile development method. By that time, 85 percent of new 
software was developed in-house using agile development. This devel­
opment process was producing more than 400 new product releases 
a month, including application updates, Web site improvements, and 
new features that have taken less than six months to develop. In addi­
tion, more than 95 percent of these products met expectations on 
the first release. These are significant improvements in CO’s soft ware 
development process. In just over three years, CO successfully transi­
tioned from outsourced IT to insourced IT to better support the firm’s 
strategic goals. 
Sources: Compiled from K. Burger, “CIO Rob Alexander Helps Execute 
Capital One’s Growth Strategy,” InformationWeek, September 29, 2011; 
G. MacSweeney, “Capital One Delivers 85% of Software Through Agile,” 
InformationWeek, March 31, 2014; C. Murphy, “Capital One IT Overhaul 
Powers Digital Strategy,” InformationWeek, April 2, 2014; J. Buvat and 
KVJ Subrahmanyam, “Doing Business the Digital Way: How Capital One 
Fundamentally Disrupted the Financial Services Industry,” capgemini.com, 
accessed November 7, 2015; K. Waters, “What Is Agile? (10 Key Principles 
of Agile),” allaboutagile.com February 2007; S. Stapeles, “Outsourcing vs. 
Insourcing: You Need Both,” InformationWeek, September 19, 2013; www 
.capitalone.com, accessed December 10, 2015. 
Questions 
1.  What were the key factors that drove CO to insource? 
2.  In what ways did the three major changes discussed in the case 
complement each other?  Would these changes have been success­
ful if Capital One had not changed all of them at the same time? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
396 
CHAPTER 14  Acquiring Information Systems and Applications 
Closing Case 2  
The Federal Aviation Administration’s Next Generation Air 
Transportation System 
MIS 
The Problem 
The U.S. air traffic system has achieved an impressive safety record. 
Nevertheless, many of the network’s features are so antiquated that 
experts blame them for delays and other inefficiencies that cost bil­
lions of dollars each year. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA; 
www.faa.gov) estimates that if the increasing congestion in the U.S. air 
transportation system is not addressed, it will cost the nation’s econ­
omy $22 billion annually in lost economic activity by 2022. Perhaps 
more seriously, it will also cause increasing safety issues, potentially 
endangering the flying public. 
The Solution 
To resolve these problems, the FAA began to develop the Next Gen­
eration Air Transportation System (NextGen; www.faa.gov/nextgen) 
in 2004. (Development and deployment continue in early 2016.) The 
purpose of NextGen is to transform America’s air traffic control system 
from a ground-based system to a satellite-based system. NextGen uses 
global positioning system (GPS) technologies to shorten routes, save 
time and fuel, reduce traffic delays, increase the number of planes in 
the air traffic system, and permit controllers to monitor and manage 
aircraft  with greater safety. Planes will be able to fly closer together, 
take more direct routes, and avoid delays caused when planes remain 
in holding patterns while they wait for an open runway. To implement 
NextGen, the FAA will have to transform the nation’s entire air trans­
portation system. 
The FAA planned for a 20-year, $40 billion project, including 
upgraded information systems and radar, a new communications 
network to replace radios, and a satellite-based surveillance system 
that indicates the locations of nearby planes without relying on air 
traffic controllers. The goal is to manage planes more precisely and 
automatically, thereby enabling them to fly closer together and with 
greater safety. The FAA planned to deploy NextGen across the country 
in stages between 2012 and 2025. 
The FAA estimated that by 2018, NextGen will reduce aviation fuel 
consumption by 1.4 billion gallons, reduce carbon emissions by 14 mil­
lion tons, and save billions of dollars in costs. Each mile in the air costs 
an airline about $0.10 to $0.15 per seat in operating expenses such as 
flight crew and fuel. 
Problem with NextGen’s Implementation 
Uneven progress, budget overruns, and conflicts among regulators 
and airlines demonstrate how extremely challenging the task of mod­
ernizing the world’s most complex air traffic management network 
really is. The slow pace of NextGen’s implementation has drawn harsh 
criticism. An April 2013 report by the Government Accountability Off ice 
(GAO) found that, although the project exhibited some progress, the 
implementation has been hindered by bureaucracy, delays designing 
new navigation procedures, and fear of conflicts with airport neigh­
bors and environmentalists. The report further stated that the FAA had 
failed to set realistic goals, budgets, or expectations for NextGen. The 
report raised concerns that NextGen’s completion could slip to 2035, 
and its actual costs could be three times as great as its estimated costs. 
FAA Administrator Michael Huerta responded that the agency had 
met 80 percent of its implementation goals since 2008. He asserted 
that the FAA will continue to develop NextGen despite government 
spending cuts. 
There were early problems with NextGen. The FAA initially 
designed new flight paths without much industry input. Airlines, 
which are responsible for at least $7 billion of NextGen’s total cost, 
have already invested in sophisticated computers and other cockpit 
equipment to enable pilots to fly more precise paths. Further, various 
interests have collided frequently. As just one example, simply rework­
ing air routes to and from airports can take years, partly as a result of 
environmental assessments to address local noise concerns. 
Difficulties in NextGen implementation have occurred nearly 
everywhere, from new landing procedures that were impossible for 
some planes to execute to aircraft tracking software that misidentified 
planes. Key initiatives are experiencing delays and are at risk of cost 
overruns. Further, the FAA lacks “an executable plan” for bringing Nex­
tGen fully online, according to the GAO. 
Some airline officials, frustrated because they have not seen 
promised money-saving benefits, assert they want better results 
before they spend more money to equip planes to use NextGen, a vital 
step to the system’s success. Lawmakers are also frustrated. NextGen 
has enjoyed broad bipartisan support in Congress. As the government 
faces increasing pressure to reduce spending, however, supporters 
fear that the program will not receive the necessary funding to become 
fully operational. In September 2013, a government–industry advisory 
committee recommended that, given the likelihood of budget cuts, the 
FAA should concentrate on just 11 NextGen initiatives that are ready or 
nearly ready to come online. The committee concluded that the rest of 
NextGen’s 150 initiatives can wait. 
Even the use of GPS-based procedures has been slowed by unfore­
seen problems. Developing each procedure on an airport-by-airport 
schedule takes several years. At large airports, new procedures are 
used only sporadically. During busy periods, controllers do not have 
time to switch back and forth between the new procedures, which 
most airliners can use, and older procedures that regional airliners and 
smaller planes still use. Consequently, all flights use the older proce­
dure because all planes can fly them. 
The Results so Far (Through 2015) 
NextGen—itself years behind schedule—is finally yielding results. Let’s 
examine a few of them: 
•  Atlanta-Harsfield Jackson Airport (ATL) reported a 20 percent 
boost in capacity when they implemented NextGen’s updated 
arrival and departure procedures. These new procedures allow 
for less separation between aircraft based on new research into 
wake turbulence. Aircraft can now safely take off and land closer 
to one another, with the help of NextGen. Additionally for fiscal 
year 2015, Atlanta-Hartsfield reported savings of $6.3 million in 
fuel, 2.2 million gallons of fuel, and 18.8 thousand metric tons of 
carbon. 
•  Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport (PHX) has implemented 
a computer-based “point-and-click” method of tracking aircraft 
to replace the paper strips it had used for years. Although the pa­
per strips functioned well for many years, they also created a level 
of distraction because air traffic controllers had to physically walk 
around the tower to gather data and keep the strips updated. In 
contrast, the current system enables users to share information 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alternative Methods and Tools for Systems Development 397 
electronically, remain in one place, and focus their attention on 
the safety of the aircraft they are responsible for monitoring. 
•  According to the FAA, the implementation of a surface manage­
ment (taxi) initiative in Boston saved more than 5,000 gallons of 
aviation fuel and reduced carbon dioxide emissions by 50 tons 
during one period of heavy congestion. 
•  A shared surface surveillance system combined with aircraft 
monitoring techniques reduced taxi-out time by 7,000 hours per 
year at New York’s JFK airport and by 5,000 hours in Memphis, 
Tennessee. 
•  NextGen has also been tested in Memphis with Delta Air Lines and 
FedEx (www.fedex.com). 
•  The National Air Traffic Controllers Association conducted a 
demonstration at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport of a new 
surveillance display called the Tower Flight Data Manager system. 
This system presented surveillance, flight data, weather, airport 
configuration, and other information critical to controllers. 
•  Specialized Optimized Profile Descents, also known as Initial Tai­
lored Arrivals, are in operation at airports in San Francisco, Los 
Angeles, Miami, and Denver. 
Through cooperation with the NextGen project, the FAA has ini­
tiated a new system called Aviation Safety Information Analysis and 
Sharing (ASIAS) that leverages data from 185 sources across industry 
and government, including 45 commercial air carriers and 10 corpo­
rate operators. These data include internal FAA datasets, proprietary 
airline safety data, public data, aircraft manufacturers’ data, and more. 
ASIAS enables users to create a more complete profile for each flight, 
especially those involved in some type of accident or incident. An acci­
dent is defined as anything that happens between the times when a 
person enters the aircraft and when all persons have exited. In con­
trast, incidents occur at other times such as when an aircraft is being 
moved around an airport.  
The FAA uses the ASIAS profiles to share information with other 
aircraft manufacturers and operators to help ensure the safety of the 
public. The agency has broken these profiles into three categories: 
airplane life cycle, threat categories, and common themes. The FAA 
has also utilized this information to develop more than 7,000 perfor­
mance-based navigation (PBN) procedures that help pilots descend 
into busy airports using a tighter navigation path in a safer and more 
efficient manner.  
Sources: Compiled from E. Pianin, “Congress Enraged by the FAA’s $40B 
White Elephant,” The Fiscal Times, November 19, 2014; C. Howard, 
“NextGen GA Fund Selects Banks to Help Finance General Aviation 
NextGen Installations, Accelerate FAA’s NextGen Implementation,” 
Avionics Intelligence, March 14, 2014; W. Bellamy, “NextGen Among Top 
US Transportation Issues for 2014,” Avionics Today, December 17, 2013; 
J. Lowy, “The FAA’s Next Big Issue Is Acting on Its NextGen Air Traffic  
Control Dreams,” Associated Press, November 1, 2013; J. Lowy, “Air Traffic  
Control Modernization Hits Turbulence,” Associated Press, October 31,  
2013; S. Carey, “The FAA’s $40 Billion Adventure,” The Wall Street Journal,  
August 19, 2013; W. Jackson, “What’s Keeping FAA’s NextGen Air Traffic  
Control on the Runway?” GCN.com, July 22, 2013; S. Carey, “The FAA’s  
$40 Billion Adventure,” The Wall Street Journal, March 20, 2013;  
J. Mouawad, “Alaska Airlines, Flying Above an Industry’s Troubles,”  
The New York Times, March 2, 2013; J. Hoover, “Problems Plague FAA’s  
NextGen Air Traffic Control Upgrade,” InformationWeek, October 5, 2011;  
“Fact Sheet – Next Generation Air Transportation System,” FAA News,  
May 27, 2010; www.faa.gov/nextgen, www.faa.gov, accessed  
December 14, 2015.  
Questions 
1.  Describe the many problems that have caused problems with im­
plementing NextGen. 
2.  In Plug IT In 2, you learned that hardware capabilities double 
roughly every 18 months (Moore’s law). What impact will increas­
es in hardware processing power, with accompanying decreases in 
size, have on the NextGen system? Support your answer. 
3.  Recall the discussion of cloud computing in Plug IT In 4. What im­
pact might a cloud computing solution have on the future of the 
NextGen system? Support your answer. 

 
 
 
 
 
PLUG IT IN 1  
Business Processes and 
Business Process Management 
PLUG IT IN OUTLINE 
PI1.1  Business Processes 
PI1.2  Business Process Reengineering, 
Business Process Improvement, 
and Business Process Management 
PI1.1
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
PI1.1 Discuss ways in which information systems enable cross-functional business pro­
cesses and business processes for a single functional area. 
PI1.2 Differentiate between business process reengineering, business process improve­
ment, and business process management. 
 Business Processes 
A business process is an ongoing collection of related activities that create a product or a service 
of value to the organization, its business partners, and/or its customers. The process involves three 
fundamental elements: 
•  Inputs: Materials, services, and information that flow through and are transformed as a result 
of process activities 
•  Resources: People and equipment that perform process activities 
•  Outputs: The product or a service created by the process 
If the process involves a customer, then that customer can be either internal or external to the 
organization. A manager who is the recipient of an internal reporting process is an example of an 
internal customer. In contrast, an individual or a business that purchases the organization’s prod­
ucts is the external customer of the fulfillment process. 
Successful organizations measure their process activities to evaluate how well they are exe­
cuting these processes. Two fundamental metrics that organizations employ in assessing their 
processes are efficiency and eff ectiveness. Eff iciency focuses on doing things well in the process; 
for example, progressing from one process activity to another without delay or without wasting 
money or resources. Eff ectiveness focuses on doing the things that matter; that is, creating outputs 
of value to the process customer—for example, high-quality products. 
Many processes cross functional areas in an organization. For example, product develop­
ment involves research, design, engineering, manufacturing, marketing, and distribution. Other 
processes involve only a single functional area. Table PI1.1 identifies the fundamental business 
processes performed in an organization’s functional areas. 
398 

 
 
 
 Business Processes 399 
TABLE PI1.1 Examples of Business Processes 
Accounting Business Processes 
• Managing accounts payable 
• Managing accounts receivable 
• Reconciling bank accounts 
• Managing cash receipts 
• Managing invoice billings 
• Managing petty cash 
• Producing month-end close 
• Producing virtual close 
Finance Business Processes 
• Managing account collection 
• Managing bank loan applications 
• Producing business forecasts 
• Applying customer credit approval and credit terms 
Marketing Business Processes 
• Managing post-sale customer follow-up 
• Collecting sales taxes 
• Applying copyrights and trademarks 
• Using customer satisfaction surveys 
• Managing customer service 
Production/Operations Management Business Processes 
• Processing bills of materials 
• Processing manufacturing change orders 
• Managing master parts list and files 
• Managing packing, storage, and distribution 
• Processing physical inventory 
• Managing purchasing 
Human Resources Business Processes 
• Applying disability policies 
• Managing employee hiring 
• Handling employee orientation 
• Managing files and records 
• Applying healthcare benefits 
• Managing pay and payroll 
Management Information Systems Business Processes 
• Antivirus control 
• Computer security issues incident reporting 
• Training computer users 
• Computer user/staff training 
• Applying disaster recovery procedures 
• Producing property tax assessments 
• Managing stock transactions 
• Generating financial cash flow reports 
• Handling customer complaints 
• Handling returned goods from customers 
• Producing sales leads 
• Entering sales orders 
• Training sales personnel 
• Managing quality control for finished goods 
• Auditing for quality assurance 
• Receiving, inspecting, and stocking parts and materials 
• Handling shipping and freight claims 
• Handling vendor selection, files, and inspections 
• Producing performance appraisals and salary adjustments 
• Managing resignations and terminations 
• Applying training/tuition reimbursement 
• Managing travel and entertainment 
• Managing workplace rules and guidelines 
• Overseeing workplace safety 
• Applying electronic mail policy 
• Generating Internet use policy 
• Managing service agreements and emergency services 
• Applying user workstation standards 
• Managing the use of personal software 
Cross-Functional Processes 
All of the business processes in Table PI1.1 fall within a single functional area of the company. 
However, many other business processes, such as procurement and fulfillment, cut across mul­
tiple functional areas; that is, they are cross-functional business processes, meaning that no 
single functional area is responsible for their execution. Rather, multiple functional areas col­
laborate to perform the process. For a cross-functional process to be successfully completed, 
each functional area must execute its specific process steps in a coordinated, collaborative 
way. To clarify this point, let’s take a look at the procurement and fulfillment cross-functional 
processes. We discuss these processes in greater detail in Chapter 10. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
400 
PI1 Business Processes and Business Process Management 
POM 
The procurement process includes all of the tasks involved in acquiring needed materials 
externally from a vendor. Procurement comprises five steps that are completed in three diff er­
ent functional areas of the firm: warehouse, purchasing, and accounting. 
The process begins when the warehouse recognizes the need to procure materials, per­
haps due to low inventory levels. The warehouse documents this need with a purchase requisi­
tion, which it sends to the purchasing department (step 1). In turn, the purchasing department 
identifies a suitable vendor, creates a purchase order based on the purchase requisition, and 
sends the order to the vendor (step 2). When the vendor receives the purchase order, it ships 
the materials, which are received in the warehouse (step 3). The vendor then sends an invoice, 
which is received by the accounting department (step 4). Accounting sends payment to the 
vendor, thereby completing the procurement process (step 5). 
The fulfillment process is concerned with processing customer orders. Fulfillment is trig­
gered by a customer purchase order that is received by the sales department. Sales then vali­
dates the purchase order and creates a sales order. The sales order communicates data related 
to the order to other functional areas within the organization, and it tracks the progress of the 
order. The warehouse prepares and sends the shipment to the customer. Once accounting is 
notified of the shipment, it creates an invoice and sends it to the customer. The customer then 
makes a payment, which accounting records. 
An organization’s business processes can create a competitive advantage if they enable 
the company to innovate or to execute more effectively and efficiently than its competitors. 
They can also be liabilities, however, if they make the company less responsive and produc­
tive. Consider the airline industry. It has become a competitive necessity for all of the airlines 
to offer electronic ticket purchases via their Web sites. To provide competitive advantage, 
however, these sites must be highly responsive and they must provide both current and 
accurate information on flights and prices. An up-to-date, user-friendly site that provides fast 
answers to user queries will attract customers and increase revenues. In contrast, a site that 
provides outdated or inaccurate information, or has a slow response time, will hurt rather 
than improve business. 
Clearly, good business processes are vital to organizational success. But how can organiza­
tions determine if their business processes are well designed? The first step is to document the 
process by describing its steps, its inputs and outputs, and its resources. The organization can 
then analyze the process and, if necessary, modify it to improve its performance. 
To understand this point, let’s consider the e-ticketing process. E-ticketing consists of four 
main process activities: searching for flights, reserving a seat, processing payment, and issuing 
an e-ticket. These activities can be broken down into more detailed process steps. The result 
may look like the process map in Figure PI1.1. Note that different symbols correspond to dif­
ferent types of process steps. For instance, rectangles (steps) are activities that are performed 
by process resources (reserve seats, issue e-ticket). Diamond-shaped boxes indicate decisions 
that need to be made (seats available?). Arrows are used as connectors between steps; they 
indicate the sequence of activities. 
These symbols are important in the process flowchart (which is similar to a program­
ming flowchart). Other symbols may be used to provide additional process details. For 
example, D-shaped boxes are used instead of rectangles when a waiting period is part of 
a process; ovals can show start and stop points; and process resources can be attached to 
activities with resource connector lines, or included as an annotation or property for each 
activity box. 
The customers of the process are travelers planning a trip, and the process output is an 
e-ticket. Travelers provide inputs to the process: the desired travel parameters to begin the 
search, the frequent flyer miles number, and their credit card information. In addition, a com­
puterized reservation system that stores information for many airlines also provides some of 
the process inputs—such as the seat availability and prices. The resources used in the process 
are the airline Web site, the computerized reservation system, and, if the customer calls the 
airline call center at any time during the process, the call center system and the human travel 
agents. The process creates customer value by efficiently generating an output that meets 

 
 
 
 
 Business Processes 401 
FIGURE PI1.1  Business process 
for ordering e-ticket from airline 
Web site. 
the customer search criteria—dates and prices. The performance of the process depends on 
efficiency metrics such as the time required to purchase an e-ticket, from the moment the 
customer initiates the ticket search until he or she receives the e-ticket. Eff ectiveness metrics 
include customer satisfaction with the airline Web site. Finally, the performance of the process 
may be affected if the quality or the timeliness of the inputs is low—for example, if the cus­
tomer enters the wrong dates—or if the process resources are not available—for example, if the 
Web site crashes before the purchase is finalized. 
Information Systems and Business Processes 
An information system (IS) is a critical enabler of an organization’s business processes. Infor­
mation systems facilitate communication and coordination among different functional areas, 
and allow easy exchange of, and access to, data across processes. Specifically, ISs play a vital 
role in three areas: 
• Executing the process 
• Capturing and storing process data 
• Monitoring process performance 
In this section, you will learn about each of these roles. In some cases the role is fully auto-
mated—that is, it is performed entirely by the IS. In other cases, the IS must rely on the man­
ager’s judgment, expertise, and intuition. IT’s About Business PI1.1 shows how NASCAR uses 
information technology to streamline its pre-race process. 
MIS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
402 
PI1 Business Processes and Business Process Management 
IT’S About Business PI1.1 
NASCAR Uses IT in Its Pre-Race 
Inspection 
The National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing (NASCAR; www 
.nascar.com) is a family-owned-and-operated business that gov­
erns multiple auto racing events. One of NASCAR’s key business 
processes is the pre-race inspection of the cars. The rationale for 
pre-race inspection is to ensure that all cars are as evenly matched 
as possible. 
Pre-race inspection begins two days before a race. Each car on 
the entry list for a particular race must pass a thorough inspection 
to compete. Here is how the process works. 
In the first inspection, NASCAR officials assess whether a car 
meets NASCAR requirements—for example, height off the ground 
at the front and the back of the car, weight, fuel tank capacity, and 
many other factors. Cars that meet these requirements are cleared 
to practice, and they qualify for the race. 
If a car does not pass the first inspection, then NASCAR allows 
that team to fix the problem and undergo a second inspection. 
However, the team is sent to the end of the line. This process can 
cause a backup of cars waiting to be cleared before the race. In the 
past, NASCAR would allow a team with a violation to keep its spot in 
line while it fixed the problem, essentially cutting in front of teams 
still waiting to undergo the initial inspection. That situation meant 
that crew chiefs had little incentive when trying to repair violations. 
If the repair did not fix the violation, they would simply try again. 
After the first inspection, each team has two days before the 
race to work on their cars. After each team qualifies, NASCAR con­
ducts a second, postqualifying inspection. On race morning, all 
cars are inspected one final time. 
Historically, NASCAR off icials performed the pre-race inspec­
tion by walking to each inspection station and visually observing 
each car. Moreover, they recorded their observations on paper 
forms. These forms contained more than 100 items clustered in 
categories depending on the type of inspection. The form would 
remain with each vehicle as it went through the inspection pro­
cess. Each season, NASCAR used roughly 25,000 sheets of paper for 
inspections. 
In September 2014, NASCAR implemented an app from Micro-
soft that incorporates everything from the paper-based form, but in 
POM 
a more informative format. Each vehicle is shown on a dashboard 
that tracks its stages through the inspection process. The dash­
board also uses color-coded flags to highlight violations. NASCAR 
officials can be alerted to any pending issues for each vehicle and 
they can access the NASCAR rulebook at the press of a digital but­
ton. Officials can also add digital notes and photographs to detail 
any infractions. In addition, the app enables officials to determine 
whether pre-race inspections are on time. Finally, the race direc­
tor can use his tablet to monitor each inspection station, identify 
which cars have been cited for violations, and find out the status 
of every car. 
The Microsoft app has simplified the pre-race inspection pro­
cess. Consider, for instance, that the paper form needed a NASCAR 
official’s signature on every item. In contrast, the app by default 
assumes every item’s status is good unless otherwise noted by 
off icials. 
One interesting benefit of the app is the cumulative value of 
the collected data. Information on the pre-race inspections of all 
vehicles is collected and stored in real time. Consequently, NASCAR 
executives can identify trends and patterns to help maintain a level 
playing field for all racers. 
Sources: Compiled from N. Linhart, “NASCAR App Improves Inspection 
Efficiency,” Charlotte Sun Times, February 10, 2015; J. Gluck, “App 
Improves NASCAR Inspection Process,” USA Today, February 9, 2015; 
“Going Through Inspections,” NASCAR.com, January 5, 2015; “A Day 
at the Track for a NASCAR Race,” NASCAR.com, January 5, 2015; 
J. Richter, “NASCAR Pre-Race Inspection? There’s an App for That,” Fox 
Sports, October 23, 2014; T. Bradley, “NASCAR Turns to Microsoft and 
Windows 8 to Streamline Race Operations,” Forbes, October 21, 2014; 
J. Hammond, “NASCAR Inspections a Work in Progress,” Fox Sports, 
June 6, 2014; www.nascar.com, accessed March 2, 2015. 
Questions 
1. Describe why pre-race inspection is a business process for 
NASCAR. 
2. Describe the various benefits that the app provides NASCAR. 
3. Refer back to Chapter 2. Is the app a strategic information 
system for NASCAR?  Why or why not? Support your answer. 
Executing the Process. An IS helps organizations execute processes efficiently and eff ec­
tively. ISs are typically embedded into the processes, and they play a critical role in executing 
the processes. In other words, an IS and the processes are usually intertwined. If the IS does not 
work, the process cannot be executed. IS helps execute processes by informing people when it 
is time to complete a task, by providing the necessary data to complete the task, and, in some 
cases, by providing the means to complete the task. 
In the procurement process, for example, the IS generates the purchase requisitions 
and then informs the purchasing department that action on these requisitions is needed. 
The accountant will be able to view all shipments received to match an invoice that has been 
received from a supplier and verify that the invoice is accurate. Without the IS, these steps, and 
therefore the process, cannot be completed. For example, if the IS is not available, how will the 
warehouse know which orders are ready to pack and ship? 

 
 
 
 
 Business Processes 403 
In the fulfillment process, the IS will inform people in the warehouse that orders are ready 
for shipment. It also provides them with a listing of what materials must be included in the 
order and where to find those materials in the warehouse. 
Capturing and Storing Process Data. Processes create data such as dates, times, prod­
uct numbers, quantities, prices, and addresses, as well as who did what, when, and where. 
IS captures and stores these data, commonly referred to as process data or transaction data. 
Some of these data are generated and automatically captured by the IS. These are data related 
to who completes an activity, when, and where. Other data are generated outside the IS and 
must be entered into it. This data entry can occur in various ways, ranging from manual entry 
to automated methods involving data in forms such as bar codes and RFID tags that can be read 
by machines. 
In the fulfillment process, for example, when a customer order is received by mail or over 
the phone, the person taking the order must enter data such as the customer’s name, what the 
customer ordered, and how much he or she ordered. Significantly, when a customer order is 
received via the firm’s Web site, then all customer details are captured by the IS. Data such as 
the name of the person entering the data (who), at which location the person is completing the 
task (where), and the date and time (when) are automatically included by the IS when it creates 
the order. The data are updated as the process steps are executed. When the order is shipped, 
the warehouse will provide data about which products were shipped and in what quantities, 
and the IS will automatically include data related to who, when, and where. 
An important advantage of using an IS compared to a manual system or multiple func­
tional area information systems is that the data need to be entered into the system only once. 
Further, once they are entered, other people in the process can easily access them, and there is 
no need to reenter them in subsequent steps. 
The data captured by the IS can provide immediate feedback. For example, the IS can use 
the data to create a receipt or to make recommendations for additional or alternative products. 
Monitoring Process Performance. A third contribution of IS is to help monitor the state 
of the various business processes. That is, the IS indicates how well a process is executing. The 
IS performs this role by evaluating information about a process. This information can be cre­
ated either at the instance level (i.e., a specific task or activity) or at the process level (i.e., the 
process as a whole). 
For example, a company might be interested in the status of a particular customer order. 
Where is the order within the fulfillment process? Was the complete order shipped? If so, when? 
If not, then when can we expect it to be shipped? Or, for the procurement process, when was 
the purchase order sent to the supplier? What will be the cost of acquiring the material? At the 
process level, the IS can evaluate how well the procurement process is being executed by calcu­
lating the lead time, or the time between sending the purchase order to a vendor and receiving 
the goods, for each order and each vendor over time. 
Not only can the IS help monitor a process, but it can also detect problems with the pro­
cess. The IS performs this role by comparing the information with a standard—that is, what the 
company expects or desires—to determine if the process is performing within expectations. 
Management establishes standards based on organizational goals. 
If the information provided by the IS indicates that the process is not meeting the stand­
ards, then the company assumes that some type of problem exists. Some problems can be 
routinely and automatically detected by the IS, whereas others require a person to review the 
information and make judgments. For example, the IS can calculate the expected date that a 
specific order will be shipped and determine whether this date will meet the established stand­
ard. Or, the IS can calculate the average time taken to fill all orders over the last month and 
compare this information with the standard to determine if the process is working as expected. 
Monitoring business processes, then, helps detect problems with these processes. Very 
often these problems are really symptoms of a more fundamental problem. In such cases, the IS 
can help diagnose the cause of the symptoms by providing managers with additional, detailed 
information. For example, if the average time to process a customer order appears to have 
increased over the previous month, this problem could be a symptom of a more basic problem. 

 
 
 
404 
PI1 Business Processes and Business Process Management 
A manager can then drill down into the information to diagnose the underlying problem. 
To accomplish this task, the manager can request a breakdown of the information by type of 
product, customer, location, employees, day of the week, time of day, and so on. Aft er review­
ing this detailed information, the manager might determine that the warehouse has experi­
enced an exceptionally high employee turnover rate over the last month and that the delays 
are occurring because new employees are not sufficiently familiar with the process. The man­
ager might conclude that this problem will work itself out over time, in which case there is 
nothing more to be done. Alternatively, the manager could conclude that the new employees 
are not being adequately trained and supervised. In this case, the company must take actions 
to correct the problem. The following section discusses several methodologies that managers 
can use to take corrective action when process problems are identified. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What is a business process?
 2. Describe several business processes carried out at your university.
 3. Define a cross-functional business process, and provide several examples of such processes.
 4. Pick one of the processes described in Question 2 or 3 above, and identify its inputs, outputs, cus­
tomer(s), and resources. How does the process create value for its customer(s)? 
Apply the Concept PII1.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI1.1 Discuss ways in which 
STEP 2: Activity (This is what you are doing.) 
information systems enable cross-functional business processes 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and business processes for a single functional area. 
and click on the link provided for Plug IT In 1.1. This link will take 
you to a YouTube video that focuses on workflow and business 
process management in a healthcare environment. As you watch 
the video, look for the ways that information systems enable 
STEP 1: Background (This is what you are learning.) 
This Plug IT In defines a business process as an ongoing collection 
cross-functional business processes and make the flow of data 
of related activities that create a product or a service of value 
much easier and quicker for everyone involved. 
to the organization, its business partners, and/or its customers. 
Normally, we do not see everything that goes into a process; 
STEP 3: Deliverable (This is what you turn in.) 
rather, we observe only the results of the process. For example,  
when you shop at a grocery store, you see stocked shelves. 
Based on the video from Step 2, write a brief description of how  
However, the inventory management processes that operate to 
information systems enable both cross-functional business  
keep the shelves stocked— as well as  the information systems 
processes and business processes for a single functional area.   
that support those processes —remain essentially invisible. 
Submit your description to your instructor.  
PI1.2
 Business Process Improvement, 
Business Process Reengineering, and 
Business Process Management 
Excellence in executing business processes is widely recognized as the underlying basis for all 
significant measures of competitive performance in an organization. Consider the following 
measures, for example: 
•  Customer satisfaction: The result of optimizing and aligning business processes to fulfill 
customers’ needs, wants, and desires. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Business Process Improvement, Business Process Reengineering, and Business Process Management 405 
•  Cost reduction: The result of optimizing operations and supplier processes. 
•  Cycle and fulfillment time reduction: The result of optimizing the manufacturing and logis­
tics processes. 
•  Quality: The result of optimizing the design, development, and production processes. 
•  Diff erentiation: The result of optimizing the marketing and innovation processes. 
•  Productivity: The result of optimizing each individual’s work processes. 
The question is: How does an organization ensure business process excellence? 
In their book Reengineering the Corporation, first published in 1993, Michael Hammer and 
James Champy argued that to become more competitive, American businesses needed to 
radically redesign their business processes to reduce costs and increase quality. The authors 
further asserted that information technology is the key enabler of such change. This radical 
redesign, called business process reengineering (BPR), is a strategy for making an organiza­
tion’s business processes more productive and profitable. The key to BPR is for enterprises to 
examine their business processes from a “clean sheet” perspective and then determine how 
they can best reconstruct those processes to improve their business functions. BPR’s popu­
larity was propelled by the unique capabilities of information technology, such as automation 
and standardization of many process steps and error reduction due to improved communica­
tion among organizational information silos. 
Although some enterprises have successfully implemented BPR, many organizations 
found this strategy too difficult, too radical, too lengthy, and too comprehensive. The impact on 
employees, on facilities, on existing investments in information systems, and even on organiza­
tional culture was overwhelming. Despite the many failures in BPR implementation, however, 
businesses increasingly began to organize work around business processes rather than individ­
ual tasks. The result was a less radical, less disruptive, and more incremental approach, called 
business process improvement (BPI). 
BPI focuses on reducing variation in the process outputs by searching for root causes of 
the variation in the process itself (e.g., a broken machine on an assembly line) or among the 
process inputs (e.g., a decline in the quality of raw materials purchased from a certain sup­
plier). BPI is usually performed by teams of employees that include a process expert—usu­
ally the process owner (the individual manager who oversees the process)—as well as other 
individuals who are involved in the process. These individuals can be involved directly; for 
example, the workers who actually perform process steps. Alternatively, these individu­
als can be involved indirectly; for example, customers who purchase the outputs from the 
process. 
Six Sigma is a popular methodology for BPI initiatives. Its goal is to ensure that the process 
has no more than 3.4 defects per million outputs by using statistical methods to analyze the 
process. (A defect is defined as a faulty product or an unsatisfactory service.) Six Sigma was 
developed by Motorola in the 1980s, and it is now used by companies worldwide, thanks in 
part to promotional efforts by early adopters such as GE. Six Sigma is especially appropriate 
for manufacturing environments, where product defects can be easily defined and measured. 
Over the years, the methodology has been modified so that it focuses less on defects and more 
on customer value. As a result, it can now be applied to services as well as to products. Today, 
Six Sigma tools are widely used in financial services and healthcare institutions as components 
of process-improvement initiatives. 
Regardless of the specific methodology you use, a successful BPI project generally follows 
five basic phases: define, measure, analyze, improve, and control (DMAIC). 
• In the define phase, the BPI team documents the existing “as is” process activities, process 
resources, and process inputs and outputs, usually as a graphical process map or diagram. 
The team also documents the customer and the customer’s requirements for the process 
output, together with a description of the problem that needs to be addressed. 
• In the measure phase, the BPI team identifies relevant process metrics, such as time and 
cost to generate one output (product or service), and collects data to understand how the 
metrics evolve over time. Sometimes the data already exist, in which case they can be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
406 
PI1 Business Processes and Business Process Management 
extracted from the IS that supports the process, as described in the previous section. Many 
times, however, the BPI team needs to combine operational process data already stored in 
the company’s IS systems with other data sources, such as customer and employee obser­
vations, interviews, and surveys. 
• In the analysis phase, the BPI team examines the “as is” process map and the collected 
data to identify problems with the process (e.g., decreasing efficiency or eff ectiveness) and 
their root causes. If possible, the team should also benchmark the process; that is, com­
pare its performance with that of similar processes in other companies, or other areas of 
the organization. The team can employ IT applications such as statistical analysis soft ware 
or simulation packages in this phase. 
It is often valuable to use process simulation software during the analysis phase. Utiliz­
ing this software provides two benefits. First, it enables a process manager to quickly 
simulate a real situation (e.g., with a certain number of people undertaking activities) 
for a specific amount of time (e.g., a working day, a week, or a month). The manager 
can then estimate the process performance over time without having to observe the 
process in practice. Second, it allows the manager to create multiple scenarios; for 
instance, using a different number of resources in the process and/or using a diff erent 
configuration for the process steps. In addition, process simulation software can pro­
vide a number of outputs regarding a process including the time used by all resources 
to execute specific activities, the overall cycle time of a process, the identification of 
resources that are infrequently used, and the bottlenecks in the process. Simulating a 
process is extremely valuable for process managers because it is a risk-free and inex­
pensive test of an improvement solution that does not need to be conducted with real 
resources. 
• In the improve phase, the BPI team identifies possible solutions for addressing the root 
causes, maps the resulting “to be” process alternatives, and selects and implements the 
most appropriate solution. Common ways to improve processes are eliminating process 
activities that do not add value to the output and rearranging activities in a way that 
reduces delays or improves resource utilization. The organization must be careful, how­
ever, not to eliminate internal process controls—those activities that safeguard company 
resources, guarantee the accuracy of its financial reporting, and ensure adherence to rules 
and regulations. 
• In the control phase, the team establishes process metrics and monitors the improved pro­
cess after the solution has been implemented to ensure the process performance remains 
stable. An IS system can be very useful for this purpose. 
Although BPI initiatives do not deliver the huge performance gains promised by BPR, many 
organizations prefer them because they are less risky and less costly. BPI focuses on delivering 
quantifiable results—and if a business case cannot be made, the project is not continued. All 
employees can be trained to apply BPI techniques in their own work to identify opportunities 
for improvement. Thus, BPI projects tend to be performed more from the bottom-up, in con­
trast to BPR projects, which involve top-down change mandates. BPI projects take less time 
overall, and even if they are unsuccessful, they consume fewer organizational resources than 
BPR projects. However, if incremental improvements through BPI are no longer possible, or if 
significant changes occur in the firm’s business environment, then the firm should consider 
BPR projects. One final consideration is that over time, employees can become overstretched 
or lose interest if the company undertakes too many BPI projects and does not have an eff ec­
tive system to manage and focus the improvement eff orts. 
To sustain BPI efforts over time, organizations can adopt business process management 
(BPM), a management system that includes methods and tools to support the design, analy­
sis, implementation, management, and continuous optimization of core business processes 
throughout the organization. BPM integrates disparate BPI initiatives to ensure consistent 
strategy execution. 

 
 
 
 
 
 Business Process Improvement, Business Process Reengineering, and Business Process Management 407 
Important components of BPM are process modeling, Web-enabled technologies, and 
business activity monitoring. BPM begins with process modeling, which is a graphical depiction 
of all of the steps in a process. Process modeling helps employees understand the interactions 
and dependencies among the people involved in the process, the information systems they 
rely on, and the information they require to optimally perform their tasks. Process modeling 
software can support this activity. IT’s About Business PI1.2 shows how Chevron has employed 
BPR, BPI, and BPM. 
Web-enabled technologies display and retrieve data via a Web browser. They enable an 
organization to integrate the necessary people and applications into each process, across func­
tional areas and geographical locations. 
Finally, business activity monitoring (BAM) is a real-time approach for measuring and man­
aging business processes. Companies use BAM to monitor their business processes, identify 
failures or exceptions, and address these failures in real time. Further, because BAM tracks pro­
cess operations and indicates whether they succeed or fail, it creates valuable records of pro­
cess behaviors that organizations can use to improve their processes. 
BPM activities are often supported by business process management suites (BPMS). A BPMS 
is an integrated set of applications that includes a repository of process information, such as 
process maps and business rules; tools for process modeling, simulation, execution, coordina­
tion across functions, and re-configuration in response to changing business needs; as well as 
process-monitoring capabilities. 
BPM is growing in business value. In 2012, Capgemini (www.capgemini.com), an interna­
tional consulting firm, surveyed more than 1,000 senior business executives. The majority of 
the respondents indicated that BPM would play a more prominent role in their organizations 
in 2013 and 2014. 
Further, Gartner (www.gartner.com), a leading IT research and advisory firm, stated that 
companies need to focus on developing and mastering BPM skills throughout the organiza­
tion. Gartner predicts that by 2016, high-performing companies will use BPM technologies such 
as real-time process monitoring, visualization, analytics, and intelligent automated decision 
making—all of them integrated in second-generation BPMS—to support intelligent business 
operations. 
Another promising emerging trend is social BPM. This technology enables employees to 
collaborate, using social media tools on wired and mobile platforms, both internally across 
functions and externally with stakeholders (such as customers or experts), to exchange process 
knowledge and improve process execution. 
BPM initially helps companies improve profitability by decreasing costs and increasing rev­
enues. Over time, BPM can create a competitive advantage by improving organizational flexi­
bility—making it easy to adapt to changing business conditions and to take advantage of new 
opportunities. For many companies, BPM can reduce costs, increase customer satisfaction, and 
ensure compliance with rules and regulations. In all cases, the company’s strategy should drive 
the BPM effort. The following example illustrates these benefits. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What is business process reengineering?
 2. What is business process improvement?
 3. What is business process management? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
408 
PI1 Business Processes and Business Process Management 
IT’s About Business PI1.2 
BPR, BPI, and BPM at Chevron 
within a central repository. Chevron estimates that only 20 percent 
of its processes can be fully automated—the rest involve a combi-
POM 
Chevron (www.chevron.com), one of the world’s largest oil and gas 
nation of manual and automated steps. Thus, process standardiza­
companies, and its subsidiaries are involved in exploring and pro­
tion involves not only supporting activities that can be automated 
ducing oil and natural gas, as well as in manufacturing, transport-
but also ensuring that relevant employees are familiar with the 
ing, and distributing petrochemical products, including gasoline 
standards for manual activities. To familiarize employees with all 
and refined products. In 2013, Chevron employed more than 60,000 
these processes, Chevron implemented Nimbus (nimbus.tibco. 
people worldwide, produced the equivalent of more than 2.6 mil­
com), a BPMS that acts as a repository of standard, companywide 
lion barrels of oil every day, and garnered more than $230 billion 
rules, and procedures. In addition, Nimbus can provide employees 
in sales. Chevron has initiated several process reengineering and 
with detailed work instructions. 
improvement efforts over the years, evolving from BPR to BPI and 
Take Chevron’s shipping process as an example where the 
eventually to BPM, as described below. 
BPMS could shine. Shipping was executed in different ways in loca-
In 1995, Chevron’s output was less than half of its current amount, 
tions throughout Asia, Europe, and the United States. To establish 
producing roughly 1 million barrels of oil per day across six plants. 
uniform company standards, Chevron employed a BPI approach. 
The company had three major departments: Refining, Marketing, 
The company documented its processes as they existed across dif­
and Supply and Distribution (S&D). Management determined that 
ferent geographical locations, identified best practices, and com­
they needed to improve their supply chain (see Chapter 11) to bet­
bined these practices into a common process to implement. It then 
ter integrate their multiple internal processes. A key figure in this 
detailed these new policies and procedures, which it distributed to 
initiative was Vice President Peter McCrea, who had a strong idea 
managers through the company’s Web-based BPMS. 
for dramatically improving performance. McCrea was convinced 
Chevron has a companywide management system that fo­
that Chevron had to reengineer the company’s core processes from 
cuses on operational excellence, and BPM is a key part of that sys­
beginning to end: from the acquisition of crude oil to the distribu­
tem. All Chevron operating companies and business units must 
tion of final products to Chevron customers. 
implement continuous improvement, using carefully defined 
To accomplish this task, Chevron adopted a holistic approach. 
guidelines, metrics, and targets that are reviewed and adapted ev-
The company collaborated with a consulting firm to create a model 
ery year. Chevron’s metrics focus on process efficiency, safety, risk, 
of the existing processes. The objective was to radically improve 
and the environment. The commitment to continuous improve-
these processes to align with Chevron’s business goals. In other 
ment is part of Chevron’s corporate culture. All employees par-
words, Chevron’s strategy was not to concentrate on the existing 
ticipate in operational excellence activities, and managers receive 
processes to identify specific areas to improve. Rather, the project 
specific operational excellence training. 
identified the desired outputs and then worked backward by exam-
Operational excellence is especially crucial when economic 
ining the supporting processes, utilizing BPR. As an added benefit, 
times are tough. For example, in the fourth quarter of 2014, Chev­
this holistic approach led the company to examine the interdepen­
ron’s net income was $3.5 billion, down nearly 30 percent from $4.9 
dencies among processes used in different business units. This ap­
billion for the same period in 2013. This decline resulted primar­
proach ultimately improved the company’s overall performance. In 
ily from the steep drop in crude oil prices. However, it’s likely that 
a 1996 report, Chevron claimed the BPR project saved the company 
results would have been worse without the operational excellence 
$50 million. 
initiatives. Chevron’s CEO noted that the lower crude oil prices 
This complex BPR effort was initially followed by several 
were partially offset by increased operational efficiency in the com­
smaller, employee-driven BPI initiatives. For example, in 1998, 
pany’s downstream operations—that is, refining oil products and 
six Chevron employees initiated a project to improve water treat-
delivering them to customers. This increased efficiency was a prod­
ment processes at a company plant in California. Operating costs 
uct of the company’s ongoing BPR, BPI, and BPM eff orts. 
fell by one-third. Their success inspired other employees to initiate 
BPI projects in Indonesia, Angola, and other locations around the 
Sources: Compiled from “Operational Excellence,” chevron.com,
globe by using the Six Sigma improvement methodology. Although 
March 2012; “Chevron—Using Nimbus Control Software to Manage 
some managers were able to demonstrate the benefits of BPI at the 
Processes,” Finding FindingPetroleum.com, September 23, 2010; 
local level, it wasn’t until 2006 that these efforts achieved compa-
“Chevron Wins Boston Strategies International’s 2010 Award for Lean 
nywide recognition and corporate backing. In that year, Lean Six 
Six Sigma Implementation in Oil and Gas Operations,” www.boston 
Sigma, which combines statistical process analysis with techniques 
strategies.com, September 22, 2010; E. Schmidt, “From the Bottom 
Up: Grassroots Effort Finds Footing at Chevron,” isixsigma.com,
to eliminate waste and improve process flow, became Chevron’s 
March 1, 2010; R. Parker, “Business Process Improvement: A Talk with 
preferred improvement methodology. Since Chevron implemented 
Chevron’s Jim Boots,” Ebizq.net, August 26, 2009; P. Harmon, Business 
Lean Six Sigma, company employees have initiated hundreds of 
Process Management, Elsevier, Burlington, MA, 2007; www.chevron 
BPI projects worldwide, resulting in significant savings. From 2008 
.com, accessed February 22, 2015. 
to 2010 alone, Chevron reported more than $1 billion in BPI ben­
efits. To support these internal improvement eff orts, Chevron got 
Questions 
its suppliers on board in BPI initiatives as well. 
1. Describe the main advantages of BPR at Chevron. 
To coordinate these various BPI efforts, Chevron has adopted 
2. Why did Chevron adopt BPI? 
a unified BPM approach that involves standardizing processes  
across the entire company and consolidating process information 
3. How does Chevron apply BPM in its operations today?  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 409 
Apply the Concept PI1.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI1.2 Compare and contrast 
ultimately, educated.  Do you recall the processes you went 
business process reengineering and business process management 
through to accomplish these tasks?  Did any of these processes 
to determine the advantages and disadvantages of each. 
strike you as ineff icient? 
STEP 1: Background 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
One of the most difficult decisions related to business processes 
is whether they need to be reengineered or simply managed. 
Imagine that you are a student representative on a committee 
Reengineering business processes is a “clean slate” approach 
whose task is to consider reengineering or modifying 
where you build completely new processes to accomplish current 
(managing) these business processes.  Prepare a written 
tasks.  In contrast, managing these processes involves making 
statement for the committee that will compare and contrast 
current processes more efficient.  Put simply, reengineering is 
BPR and BPM to determine the advantages and disadvantages 
radical, whereas management is incremental.  
of each strategy. Make a recommendation as to which one your 
university should follow and present your recommendation to 
your instructor. 
STEP 2: Activity 
Consider the many processes involved in getting you (as a 
student) accepted, enrolled, registered, housed, fed, and, 
What’s in IT for me? 
For All Business Majors 
All functional areas of any organization are literally composed of a 
variety of business processes, as we can see from the examples in 
this chapter. Regardless of your major, you will be involved in a va­
riety of business processes from your first day on the job. Some of 
these processes you will do by yourself, some will involve only your 
group, team, or department, while others will involve several (or all) 
functional areas of your organization. 
It is important for you to be able to visualize processes, un­
derstand the inputs and outputs of each process, and know the 
“customer” of each process. If you can do these things, you will con­
tribute to making processes more efficient and effective, which oft en 
means incorporating information technology in the process. It is also 
important for you to know how each process fits into your organiza­
tion’s strategy. 
Summary 
1.  Discuss ways in which information systems enable cross-functional 
business processes and processes for a single functional area. 
A business process is an ongoing collection of related activities that produce a 
product or a service of value to the organization, its business partners, and/or 
its customers. Examples of business processes in the functional areas include 
managing accounts payable, managing accounts receivable, managing aft er­
sale customer follow-up, managing bills of materials, managing manufactur­
ing change orders, applying disability policies, employee hiring, computer 
user/staff training, and applying Internet use policy. The procurement and 
fulfillment processes are examples of cross-functional business processes. 
2.  Compare and contrast business process reengineering and business 
process management to determine the different advantages and 
disadvantages of each. 
Business process reengineering (BPR) is a radical redesign of business 
processes that is intended to improve the efficiency and eff ectiveness of 
an organization’s business processes. The key to BPR is for enterprises to 
examine their business processes from a “clean sheet” perspective and 
then determine how they can best reconstruct those processes to improve 
their business functions. Because BPR proved difficult to implement, 
organizations have turned to business process management. Business 
process management (BPM) is a management technique that includes 
methods and tools to support the design, analysis, implementation, man­
agement, and optimization of business processes. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
410 
PI1 Business Processes and Business Process Management 
Chapter Glossary  
business process A collection of related activities that create a 
product or a service of value to the organization, its business 
partners, and/or its customers. 
business process management A management technique that 
includes methods and tools to support the design, analysis, 
implementation, management, and optimization of business 
processes. 
business process reengineering A radical redesign of a business 
process that improves its efficiency and eff ectiveness, oft en by 
beginning with a “clean sheet” (i.e., from scratch). 
cross-functional processes No single functional area is responsible 
for a process’s execution. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  Consider the student registration process at your university: 
2. Why is it so difficult for an organization to actually implement business 
process reengineering? 
•  Describe the steps necessary for you to register for your classes  
each semester.  
•  Describe how information technology is used (or is not used) in  
each step of the process.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PLUG IT IN 2  
Hardware and Soft ware  
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
PLUG IT IN OUTLINE 
PI2.1 Introduction to Hardware 
PI2.1 Discuss strategic issues that link hardware design to business strategy. 
PI2.2 Introduction to Soft ware 
PI2.2 Differentiate between the two major types of soft ware. 
Introduction 
As you begin this Plug IT In, you might be wondering, why do I have to know anything about 
hardware and software? There are several reasons why you will benefit from understanding the 
basics of hardware and software. First, regardless of your major (and future functional area in 
an organization), you will be using different types of hardware and software throughout your 
career. Second, you will have input concerning the hardware and software that you will use. In 
this capacity, you will be required to answer many questions, such as follows: 
• Is my hardware performing adequately for my needs? If not, what types of problems am I  
experiencing?   
• Does my software help me do my job? 
• Is this software easy to use? 
• Do I need more functionality, and if so, what functionality would be most helpful to me? 
Third, you will also have input into decisions when your functional area or organization 
upgrades or replaces its hardware and/or soft ware. In addition, some organizations allocate 
the hardware and software budget to functional areas or departments. In such cases, you 
might be responsible for making hardware and soft ware decisions (at least locally) yourself. 
MIS employees will act as advisors, but you will provide important input into such decisions. 
PI2.1 Introduction to Hardware 
Recall from Chapter 1 that the term hardware refers to the physical equipment used for the input, 
processing, output, and storage activities of a computer system. Decisions about hardware focus 
on three interrelated factors: appropriateness for the task, speed, and cost. The incredibly rapid 
rate of innovation in the computer industry complicates hardware decisions because computer 
technologies become obsolete more quickly than other organizational technologies. 
The overall trends in hardware are that it becomes smaller, faster, cheaper, and more powerful 
over time. In fact, these trends are so rapid that they make it difficult to know when to purchase (or 
upgrade) hardware. This difficulty lies in the fact that companies that delay hardware purchases 
411 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
412 
PI2 Hardware and Soft ware 
will, more than likely, be able to buy more powerful hardware for the same amount of money in the 
future. It is important to note that buying more powerful hardware for the same amount of money 
in the future is a trade-off. An organization that delays purchasing computer hardware gives up the 
benefits of whatever it could buy today until the future purchase date arrives. 
Hardware consists of the following: 
•  Central processing unit (CPU): Manipulates the data and controls the tasks performed by 
the other components. 
•  Primary storage: Temporarily stores data and program instructions during processing. 
•  Secondary storage: Stores data and programs for future use. 
•  Input technologies: Accept data and instructions and convert them to a form that the com­
puter can understand. 
•  Output technologies: Present data and information in a form people can understand. 
•  Communication technologies: Provide for the flow of data from external computer networks 
(e.g., the Internet and intranets) to the CPU, and from the CPU to computer networks. 
Strategic Hardware Issues 
For most businesspeople, the most important issues are what the hardware enables, how it is 
advancing, and how rapidly it is advancing. In many industries, exploiting computer hardware 
is a key to achieving competitive advantage. Successful hardware exploitation comes from 
thoughtful consideration of the following questions: 
• How do organizations keep up with the rapid price reductions and performance advance­
ments in hardware? For example, how often should an organization upgrade its computers 
and storage systems? Will upgrades increase personal and organizational productivity? 
How can organizations measure such increases? 
• How should organizations determine the need for the new hardware infrastructures, such 
as cloud computing? (We discuss cloud computing in Plug IT In 4.) 
• Portable computers and advanced communications technologies have enabled employ­
ees to work from home or from anywhere. Will these new work styles benefit employees 
and the organization? How do organizations manage such new work styles? 
• How do organizations manage employees who use their own portable devices (e.g., tablets 
and smartphones) for both personal and work purposes? That is, how do organizations 
handle the bring-your-own-device (BYOD) phenomenon? 
Computer Hierarchy 
The traditional standard for comparing classes of computers is their processing power. This 
section presents each class of computers, from the most powerful to the least powerful. It 
describes both the computers and their roles in modern organizations. 
Supercomputers. The term supercomputer does not refer to a specific technology. Rather, 
it indicates the fastest computers available at any given time. At the time of this writing (mid­
2015), the fastest supercomputers had speeds exceeding 30 petaflops (1 petaflop is 1,000 tril­
lion floating point operations per second). A floating point operation is an arithmetic operation 
that involves decimals. 
Large organizations use supercomputers to execute computationally demanding tasks 
involving very large data sets, such as military and scientific applications. In the business envi­
ronment, for example, large banks use supercomputers to calculate the risks and returns of 
various investment strategies, and healthcare organizations use them to analyze giant data­
bases of patient data to determine optimal treatments for various diseases. 
Mainframe Computers. Mainframes remain popular in large enterprises for extensive com­
puting applications that are accessed by thousands of users at one time. Examples of mainframe 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction to Hardware 413 
applications are airline reservation systems, corporate payroll programs, Web site transaction 
processing systems (e.g., Amazon and eBay), and student grade calculation and reporting. 
Today’s mainframes perform at teraflop (trillions of floating point operations per second) 
speeds and can handle millions of transactions per day. In addition, mainframes provide a 
secure, robust environment in which to run strategic, mission-critical applications. 
Microcomputers. Microcomputers—also called micros, personal computers, or PCs—are 
the smallest and least expensive category of general-purpose computers. It is important to 
point out that people frequently define a PC as a computer that utilizes the Microsoft Windows 
operating system. In fact, a variety of PCs are available, and many of them do not use Windows. 
One well-known example is Apple Mac, which uses the Mac OS X operating system (discussed 
later in this Plug IT In). The major categories of microcomputers are desktops, thin clients, note­
books and laptops, netbooks, and tablets. 
Laptop and Notebook Computers. Laptop computers (or notebook computers) are 
small, easily transportable, lightweight microcomputers that fit comfortably into a briefcase 
(Figure PI2.1). They also provide users with access to processing power and data outside an 
off ice environment. 
For example, the Google Chromebook is a thin client laptop that runs Google’s Chrome 
operating system. A thin client is a computer that does not offer the full functionality of a PC. A 
fat client is a computer that has the ability to perform many functions without a network con­
nection. Thin clients are less complex than fat clients because they do not have locally installed 
software. When thin clients need to run an application, they access it from a server over a net­
work rather than from a local disk drive. 
A thin client would not have Microsoft Off ice installed on it. Thus, thin clients are easier 
and less expensive to operate and support than fat clients. The benefits of thin clients 
include fast application deployment, centralized management, lower cost of own­
ership, and easier installation, management, maintenance, and support. The main 
disadvantage of thin clients is that if the network fails, then users can do very little 
on their computers. In contrast, if users have fat clients and the network fails, they 
can still perform some functions because they have software, such as Microsoft Off ice, 
installed on their computers. 
Tablet Computers. A tablet computer (or tablet) is a complete computer contained 
entirely in a flat touch screen that users operate via a stylus, digital pen, or fingertip 
instead of a keyboard or mouse. Examples of tablets are the Apple iPad 3 (www.apple 
.com/ipad), the HP Slate 10 (www.hp.com), the Microsoft Surface Pro 3 (www.micro­
soft.com), and many others. 
Wearable Computers. Wearable computers are miniature computers that peo­
ple wear under, with, or on top of their clothing. Key features of wearable computers 
are that there is constant interaction between the computer and the users and that 
the users can multitask, meaning they do not have to stop what they are doing to 
utilize the device. Examples of wearable computers are the Apple Watch (www.apple 
.com/watch/), the Sony SmartWatch 3 (http://www.sonymobile.com/global-en/prod­
ucts/smartwear/smartwatch-3-swr50/), Google Glass (www.google.com/glass/start/), 
and the Fitbit (www.fitbit.com) activity tracker.  
Google Glass is an excellent example of a device that provides augmented reality. 
Augmented reality is a live, direct or indirect, view of a physical, real-world environ­
ment whose elements are augmented, or enhanced, by computer-generated sensory 
input such as sound, video, graphics, or GPS data. That is, augmented reality enhances 
the user’s perception of reality. Note that, in contrast, virtual reality replaces the real 
world with a simulated world. As an example of augmented reality with Google Glass, 
let’s say that you are looking for a destination in an unfamiliar city. You ask Google 
Glass for directions, and the device will overlay your vision with a graphic display of a 
street map, with the route to your destination highlighted. 
FIGURE PI2.1 Figure depicting the photographs of laptop (top), Motorola Xoom tablet (middle), and Apple Ipad tablet (bottom) computers.
 Laptop, notebook, and 
tablet computers. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
414 
PI2 Hardware and Soft ware 
IT’s Personal: Purchasing a Computer 
One day you will purchase a computer for yourself or your job. 
When that day comes, it will be important for you to know what to 
look for. Buying a computer can be very confusing if you just read 
the box. This Plug IT In has explained the major hardware compo­
nents of a computer. There are more things you need to consider, 
however, when you purchase a computer: what you plan to do with 
it, where you plan to use it, and how long you need service from it? 
Let’s look at each question more closely. 
• What do you plan to do with your computer? Consider that 
when you buy a vehicle, your plans for using the vehicle 
determine the type of vehicle you will purchase. The same 
rules apply to purchasing a computer. You need to consider 
what you currently do with a computer and what you may 
do before you replace the one under consideration. Although 
many people simply buy as much as they can aff ord, they 
may overpay because they do not consider what they need 
the computer for. 
• Where do you plan to use your computer? If you only plan 
to use it at home at your desk, then a desktop model will be 
fine. In general, you can get more computer for your money 
in a desktop model as opposed to a laptop (i.e., you pay extra 
for mobility). However, if you think you may want to take the 
computer with you, then you will need some type of a laptop 
or tablet computer. When portability is a requirement, you 
will want to reconsider what you plan to use the computer 
for because as computers become more portable (smaller), 
their functionality changes, and you want to make sure the 
computer will meet your needs. 
• How long do you need service from this computer? Today, we 
anticipate that most of the devices we purchase will become 
outdated and need to be replaced in a few years. Therefore, 
the length of service is really more about warranty and the 
availability of repair services. In some cases, you should base 
your purchase decision on these issues rather than speed be­
cause they can extend the life of your computer. 
Input and Output Technologies 
Input technologies allow people and other technologies to enter data into a computer. The 
two main types of input devices are human data-entry devices and source-data automation 
devices. As their name implies, human data-entry devices require a certain amount of human 
effort to input data. Examples are keyboard, mouse, pointing stick, trackball, joystick, touch­
screen, stylus, and voice recognition. 
In contrast, source-data automation devices input data with minimal human intervention. 
These technologies speed up data collection, reduce errors, and gather data at the source 
of a transaction or other event. Barcode readers are an example of source-data automation. 
Table PI2.1 describes the various input devices. 
TABLE PI2.1 Input Devices 
Input Device 
Description 
Human Data-Entry Devices 
Keyboards  
Most common input device (for text and numerical data). 
Mouse  
Handheld device used to point the cursor at a point on screen, such as an icon; the 
user clicks a button on the mouse, instructing the computer to take some action. 
Optical mouse  
The mouse is not connected to computer by a cable; rather, it uses camera chip to 
take images of surface it passes over, comparing successive images to determine 
its position. 
Trackball  
User rotates a ball built into top of device to move the cursor (rather than moving 
an entire device such as a mouse). 
Pointing stick  
Small button-like device; the cursor moves in the direction of the pressure the user 
places on the stick. Located between the keys near the center of the keyboard. 
Touchpad  
User moves the cursor by sliding a finger across a sensitized pad and then can 
tap the pad when the cursor is in (also called a trackpad) the desired position to 
instruct the computer to take action (also called glide-and-tap pad). 
Graphics tablet  
A device that can be used in place of, or in conjunction with, a mouse or trackball; 
it has a flat surface for drawing and a pen or stylus that is programmed to work 
with the tablet. 

 
 Introduction to Hardware 415 
Joystick 
The joystick moves the cursor to the desired place on the screen; commonly used 
in video games and in workstations that display dynamic graphics. 
Touchscreen 
Users instruct computer to take some action by touching a particular part 
of the screen; commonly used in information kiosks such as ATM machines. 
Touchscreens now have gesture controls for browsing through photographs, mov­
ing objects around on a screen, flicking to turn the page of a book, and playing 
video games. For example, see the Apple iPhone. 
Stylus 
Pen-style device that allows user either to touch parts of a predetermined menu 
of options or to handwrite information into the computer (as with some PDAs); 
works with touch-sensitive screens. 
Digital pen 
Mobile device that digitally captures everything you write; built-in screen confirms 
that what you write has been saved; also captures sketches, figures, and so on 
with on-board flash memory. 
Web camera 
(Webcam) 
A real-time video camera whose images can be accessed via the Web or instant 
messaging. 
Voice recognition 
Microphone converts analog voice sounds into digital input for a computer; critical 
technology for physically challenged people who cannot use other input devices. 
Gesture-Based Input 
Gesture recognition refers to technologies that enable computers to interpret human gestures. These 
technologies would be the first step in designing computers that can understand human body lan­
guage. This process creates a richer interaction between machines and humans than has been pos­
sible via keyboards, graphical user interfaces, and the mouse. Gesture recognition enables humans to 
interact naturally with a computer without any intervening mechanical devices. With gesture-based 
technologies, the user can move the cursor by pointing a finger at a computer screen. These technolo­
gies could make conventional input devices (the mouse, keyboards, and touchscreens) redundant. 
Examples of gesture-based input devices are the Nintendo Wii (www.nintendo.com/wii), the Microsoft 
Kinect (www.xbox.com/kinect), and the Leap Motion Controller (www.leapmotion.com). 
Wii  
A video game console produced by Nintendo. A distinguishing feature of the Wii is 
its wireless controller, which can be used as a handheld pointing device and can 
detect movement in three dimensions. 
Microsoft Kinect  A device that enables users to control and interact with the Xbox 360 through a 
natural interface using gestures and spoken commands. Kinect eliminates the 
need for a game controller. 
Leap Motion  
A motion-sensing, matchbox-sized device placed on a physical desktop. Using 
Controller  
two cameras, the device “observes” an area up to a distance of about three feet. 
It precisely tracks fingers or items such as a pen that cross into the observed area. 
The Leap can perform tasks such as navigating a Web site, using pinch-to-zoom 
gestures on maps, performing high-precision drawing, and manipulating complex 
three-dimensional visualizations. The smaller observation area and higher resolu­
tion of the device differentiates it from the Microsoft Kinect, which is more suitable 
for whole-body tracking in a space the size of a living room. 
Source-Data Automation Input Devices 
Automated teller 
A device that includes source-data automation input in the form of a magnetic 
machine (ATM) 
stripe reader; human input via a keyboard; and output via a monitor, printer, and 
cash dispenser. 
Magnetic stripe 
A device that reads data from a magnetic stripe, usually on the back of a plastic 
reader 
card (e.g., credit and debit cards). 
Point-of-sale ter-
Computerized cash registers that also may incorporate touchscreen technology 
minals 
and barcode scanners to input data such as item sold and price. 
Barcode scan-
Devices that scan black-and-white barcode lines printed on merchandise labels. 
ners 
Optical mark 
Scanner for detecting the presence of dark marks on a predetermined grid, such 
reader 
as multiple-choice test answer sheets. 
Magnetic ink 
A device that reads magnetic ink printed on checks that identify the bank, check-
character reader 
ing account, and check number. 
Optical character 
Software that converts text into digital form for input into computer. 
recognition 

 
 
 
416 
PI2 Hardware and Soft ware 
Sensors  
Devices that collect data directly from the environment and input data directly 
into computer; examples are vehicle airbag activation sensors and radio-frequen­
cy identification tags. 
Cameras  
Digital cameras capture images and convert them into digital files. 
Radio-frequency 
identification 
(RFID) 
Uses technology that uses active or passive tags (transmitters) to wirelessly 
transmit product information to electronic readers. (We discuss RFID in detail in 
Chapter 8.) 
The output generated by a computer can be transmitted to the user via several output 
devices and media. These devices include monitors, printers, plotters, and voice. Table PI2.2 
describes the various output devices. 
TABLE PI2.2 Output Devices 
Output Device 
Description 
Monitors 
Cathode ray tubes  
Video screens on which an electron beam illuminates pixels on a 
display screen. 
Liquid crystal displays (LCDs)  
Flat displays that have liquid crystals between two polarizers to 
form characters and images on a backlit screen. 
Flexible displays  
Thin, plastic, bendable computer screens. 
Organic light-emitting diodes 
Displays that are brighter, thinner, lighter, cheaper, faster, and take 
(OLEDs) 
less power to run than LCDs. 
Retinal scanning displays  
Project image directly onto a viewer’s retina; used in medicine, air 
traffic control, and controlling industrial machines. 
Heads-up displays  
Any transparent display that presents data without requiring the 
user to look away from his or her usual viewpoint; for example, see 
Microvision (www.microvision.com). 
Printers 
Laser  
Use laser beams to write information on photosensitive drums; 
produce high-resolution text and graphics. 
Inkjet  
Shoot fine streams of colored ink onto paper; usually less expen­
sive to buy than laser printers but can be more expensive to oper­
ate; can offer resolution quality equal to laser printers. 
Thermal  
Produce a printed image by selectively heating coated thermal 
paper; when the paper passes over the thermal print head, the 
coating turns black in the areas where it is heated, producing an 
image. 
Plotters  
Use computer-directed pens for creating high-quality images, blue­
prints, schematics, drawing of new products, and so on. 
Voice output  
A speaker/headset that can output sounds of any type; voice out­
put is a software function that uses this equipment. 
Electronic book reader  
A wireless, portable reading device with access to books, blogs, 
newspapers, and magazines. Onboard storage holds hundreds of 
books (e.g., Amazon Kindle, Sony Reader). 
Pocket projector 
A projector in a handheld device that provides an alternative dis­
play method to alleviate the problem of tiny display screens in 
handheld devices. Pocket projectors will project digital images onto 
any viewing surface (e.g., see the Pico Projector). 
Multimedia technology is the computer-based integration of text, sound, still images, 
animation, and digitized motion video. It usually consists of a collection of various input and 
output technologies. Multimedia merges the capabilities of computers with televisions, CD play­
ers, DVD players, video and audio recording equipment, and music and gaming technologies. 

 
 
 
 
 
Introduction to Hardware 417 
High-quality multimedia processing requires 
powerful microprocessors and extensive memory 
capacity, including both primary and secondary 
storage. 
The Central Processing Unit 
The central processing unit performs the actual 
computation or “number crunching” inside any 
computer. The CPU is a microprocessor (e.g., 
Intel’s Core i3, i5, and i7 chips with more to come) 
made up of millions of microscopic transistors 
embedded in a circuit on a silicon wafer or chip. 
For this reason, microprocessors are commonly 
referred to as chips. 
FIGURE PI2.2 
As shown in Figure PI2.2, the microprocessor 
has different parts, which perform diff erent func­
tions. The control unit sequentially accesses program instructions, decodes them, and con­
trols the flow of data to and from the arithmetic logic unit, the registers, the caches, primary 
storage, secondary storage, and various output devices. The arithmetic logic unit (ALU) per­
forms the mathematical calculations and makes logical comparisons. The registers are high-
speed storage areas that store very small amounts of data and instructions for short periods. 
How the CPU Works 
In the CPU, inputs enter and are stored until they are needed. At that point, they are retrieved 
and processed, and the output is stored and then delivered somewhere. Figure PI2.3 illus­
trates this process, which works as follows: 
• The inputs consist of data and brief instructions about what to do with the data. These 
instructions come into the CPU from random access memory (RAM). Data might be entered 
by the user through the keyboard, for example, or read from a data file in another part of 
the computer. The inputs are stored in registers until they are sent to the next step in the 
processing. 
• Data and instructions travel in the chip via electrical pathways called buses. The size of the 
bus—analogous to the width of a highway—determines how much information can flow 
at any time. Figure depicting the parts of a microprocessor. These parts are: input, output, secondary storage, communication devices, the microprocessor (control unit, arithmetic-logic unit, registers, and primary storage.
Parts of a microprocessor. 
FIGURE PI2.3 How the CPU 
works. 

 
 
 
 
 
418 
PI2 Hardware and Soft ware 
• The control unit directs the flow of data and instructions within the chip. 
• The ALU receives the data and instructions from the registers and makes the desired com­
putation. These data and instructions have been translated into binary form—that is, only 
0s and 1s. A “0” or a “1” is called a bit. The CPU can process only binary data. All types of 
data, such as letters, decimal numbers, photographs, music, and so on, can be converted 
to a binary representation, which can then be processed by the CPU. 
• The data in their original form and the instructions are sent to storage registers and then 
are sent back to a storage place outside the chip, such as the computer’s hard drive. Mean­
while, the transformed data go to another register and then on to other parts of the com­
puter (e.g., to the monitor for display or to storage). 
Intel offers excellent demonstrations of how CPUs work: Search the web for “Intel” with “Explore 
the Curriculum” to find their demos. This cycle of processing, known as a machine instruction 
cycle, occurs billions of times per second. 
Advances in Microprocessor Design 
Innovations in chip designs are coming at a faster and faster rate, as described by Moore’s 
law. In 1965, Gordon Moore, a cofounder of Intel Corporation, predicted that microprocessor 
complexity would double approximately every 18 months. His prediction has been amazingly 
accurate. 
The advances predicted from Moore’s law arise mainly from the following changes: 
• Producing increasingly miniaturized transistors. 
• Placing multiple processors on a single chip. Chips with more than one processor are called 
multicore chips. For example, the Cell chip, produced by a consortium of Sony, Toshiba, 
and IBM, contains nine processors. Intel (www.intel.com) and AMD (www.amd.com) off er 
multicore chips (e.g., quadcore chips with four CPUs). 
• Intel’s three-dimensional (3D) chips require less power than Intel’s current chips while 
improving performance. These chips enhance the performance of all computers. However, 
they are particularly valuable in handheld devices, because they extend the device’s bat­
tery life. 
In addition to increased speeds and performance, Moore’s law has had an impact on costs. For 
example, in 1997, a desktop computer with a Pentium II microprocessor, 64 megabytes of ran­
dom access memory, a 4-gigabyte hard drive, and a 17-inch monitor cost $4,000. In early 2015, 
a desktop computer with an Intel i7 quad-core processor, 12 gigabytes of random access mem­
ory, a 1-terabyte hard drive plus 32 gigabytes of solid-state storage, and a 24-inch touchscreen 
cost approximately $1,500. 
Computer Memory 
The amount and type of memory that a computer possesses has a great deal to do with its gen­
eral utility. A computer’s memory also determines the types of programs that the computer can 
run, the work it can perform, its speed, and its cost. There are two basic categories of computer 
memory. The first is primary storage. It is called “primary” because it stores small amounts 
of data and information that the CPU will use immediately. The second category is secondary 
storage, which stores much larger amounts of data and information (e.g., an entire soft ware 
program) for extended periods. 
Memory Capacity. As you have seen, CPUs process only binary units—0s and 1s—which are 
translated through computer languages into bits. A particular combination of bits represents a 
certain alphanumeric character or a simple mathematical operation. Eight bits are needed to 
represent any one of these characters. This 8-bit string is known as a byte. The storage capacity 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction to Hardware 419 
of a computer is measured in bytes. Bits typically are used as units of measure only for telecom­
munications capacity, as in how many million bits per second can be sent through a particular 
medium. 
The hierarchy of terms used to describe memory capacity is as follows: 
•  Kilobyte. Kilo means “one thousand,” so a kilobyte (KB) is approximately 1,000 bytes. Actu­
ally, a kilobyte is 1,024 bytes. Computer designers find it convenient to work with powers 
of 2: 1,024 is 2 to the 10th power, and 1,024 is close enough to 1,000 that for kilobyte people 
use the standard prefix kilo, which means exactly 1,000 in familiar units such as the kilo­
gram or kilometer. 
•  Megabyte. Mega means “one million,” so a megabyte (MB) is approximately 1 million bytes. 
Most personal computers have hundreds of megabytes of RAM memory. 
•  Gigabyte. Giga means “one billion,” so a gigabyte (GB) is approximately 1 billion bytes. 
•  Terabyte. A terabyte is approximately 1 trillion bytes. The storage capacity of modern per­
sonal computers can be several terabytes. 
•  Petabyte. A petabyte is approximately 1,000 terabytes. 
•  Exabyte. An exabyte is approximately 1,000 petabytes. 
•  Zettabyte. A zettabyte is approximately 1,000 exabytes. 
To get a feel for these amounts, consider the following example: If your computer has one 
terabyte of storage capacity on its hard drive (a type of secondary storage), it can store 
approximately 1 trillion bytes of data. If the average page of text contains about 2,000 bytes, 
then your hard drive could store approximately 10 percent of all the print collections of 
the Library of Congress. That same terabyte can store 70 hours of standard-definition com­
pressed video. 
Primary Storage. Primary storage, or main memory, as it is sometimes called, stores 
three types of information for very brief periods of time: (1) data to be processed by the CPU, 
(2) instructions for the CPU as to how to process the data, and (3) operating system programs 
that manage various aspects of the computer’s operation. Primary storage takes place in chips 
mounted on the computer’s main circuit board, called the motherboard. These chips are locat­
ed as close as physically possible to the CPU chip. As with the CPU, all the data and instructions 
in primary storage have been translated into binary code. 
The four main types of primary storage are (1) register, (2) cache memory, (3) random 
access memory, and (4) read-only memory (ROM). You learn about each type of primary stor­
age next. 
Registers are part of the CPU. They have the least capacity, storing extremely limited 
amounts of instructions and data only immediately before and aft er processing. 
Cache memory is a type of high-speed memory that enables the computer to temporarily 
store blocks of data that are used more often and that a processor can access more rapidly than 
main memory (RAM). Cache memory is physically located closer to the CPU than RAM. Blocks 
that are used less often remain in RAM until they are transferred to cache; blocks used infre­
quently remain in secondary storage. Cache memory is faster than RAM because the instruc­
tions travel a shorter distance to the CPU. 
Random access memory is the part of primary storage that holds a software program and 
small amounts of data for processing. Compared with the registers, RAM stores more informa­
tion and is located farther away from the CPU. However, compared with secondary storage, 
RAM stores less information and is much closer to the CPU. 
RAM is temporary and, in most cases, volatile—that is, RAM chips lose their contents if the 
current is lost or turned off, as from a power surge, brownout, or electrical noise generated by 
lightning or nearby machines. 
Most of us have lost data at one time or another due to a computer “crash” or a power 
failure. What is usually lost is whatever is in RAM, cache, or the registers at the time, because 
these types of memory are volatile. Therefore, you need greater security when you are storing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
420 
PI2 Hardware and Soft ware 
FIGURE PI2.4  Primary memory 
compared with secondary storage. 
certain types of critical data or instructions. Cautious computer users frequently save data to 
nonvolatile memory (secondary storage). In addition, most modern software applications have 
autosave functions. 
Read-only memory is the place—actually, a type of chip—where certain critical instruc­
tions are safeguarded. ROM is nonvolatile, so it retains these instructions when the power to 
the computer is turned off. The read-only designation means that these instructions can only 
be read by the computer and cannot be changed by the user. An example of ROM is the instruc­
tions needed to start or “boot” the computer after it has been shut off . 
Secondary Storage. Secondary storage is designed to store very large amounts of data for 
extended periods. Secondary storage has the following characteristics: 
• It is nonvolatile. 
• It takes more time to retrieve data from it than from RAM. 
• It is cheaper than primary storage (see Figure PI2.4). 
• It can utilize a variety of media, each with its own technology. 
One secondary storage medium, magnetic tape, is kept on a large open reel or in a smaller 
cartridge or cassette. Although this is an old technology, it remains popular because it is 
the cheapest storage medium, and it can handle enormous amounts of data. As a result, 
many organizations (e.g., the U.S. Government Social Security Administration) use magnetic 
tape for archival storage. The downside is that it is the slowest method for retrieving data 
because all the data are placed on the tape sequentially. This process means that the sys­
tem might have to run through the majority of the tape before it comes to the desired piece 
of data. 
Magnetic disks (or hard drives or fixed disk drives) are the most commonly used mass 
storage devices because of their low cost, high speed, and large storage capacity. Hard disk 
drives read from, and write to, stacks of rotating (at up to 15,000 rpm) magnetic disk platters 
mounted in rigid enclosures and sealed against environmental and atmospheric contamina­
tion (see Figure PI2.5). These disks are permanently mounted in a unit that may be internal or 
external to the computer. 
Solid-state drives (SSDs) are data storage devices that serve the same purpose as a hard 
drive and store data in memory chips. Whereas hard drives have moving parts, SSDs do not. 
SSDs use the same interface with the computer’s CPU as hard drives and are therefore a seam­
less replacement for hard drives. SSDs offer many advantages over hard drives. They use less 
power, are silent and faster, and produce about one-third the heat of a hard drive. The major 
disadvantage of SSDs is that they cost more than hard drives. 
Unlike magnetic media, optical storage devices do not store data via magnetism. 
Rather, a laser reads the surface of a reflective plastic platter. Optical disk drives are slower 
than magnetic hard drives, but they are less fragile and less susceptible to damage from 
contamination. A plot between cost and size is depicted for primary memory compared with secondary storage. The speed is represented in the right hand side and parallel to the y-axis.

 
 
 
 
Introduction to Hardware 421 
Figure depic t ing the tradition
al hard drives (left) and solid
-state drives (right).
In addition, optical disks can store a great deal of information, both on a routine basis and 
when combined into storage systems. Types of optical disks include compact disk read-only 
memory and digital video disk. 
Compact disk read-only memory (CD-ROM) storage devices feature high capacity, low cost, 
and high durability. However, because a CD-ROM is a read-only medium, it cannot be written 
on. CD-R can be written to, but once this is done, what was written on it cannot be changed 
later. That is, CD-R is writable, which CD-ROM is not, but it is not rewritable, which CD-RW (com­
pact disk, rewritable) is. There are applications where not being rewritable is a plus, because it 
prevents some types of accidental data destruction. CD-RW adds rewritability to the recordable 
compact disk market. 
The digital video disk (DVD) is a 5-inch disk with the capacity to store about 135 minutes of 
digital video. DVDs can also perform as computer storage disks, providing storage capabilities 
of 17 gigabytes. DVD players can read current CD-ROMs, but current CD-ROM players cannot 
read DVDs. The access speed of a DVD drive is faster than that of a typical CD-ROM drive. 
A dual-layer Blu-ray disk can store 50 gigabytes, almost three times the capacity of a dual-
layer DVD. Development of Blu-ray technology is ongoing, with three- and four-layered Blu-ray 
disks available. 
Flash memory devices (or memory cards) are nonvolatile electronic storage devices that 
contain no moving parts and use 30 times less battery power than hard drives. Flash devices 
are also smaller and more durable than hard drives. The trade-offs are that flash devices store 
less data than hard drives. Flash devices are used with digital cameras, handheld and laptop 
computers, telephones, music players, and video game consoles. 
One popular flash memory device is the thumb drive (also called memory stick, jump drive, 
or flash drive). These devices fit into Universal Serial Bus (USB) ports on personal computers 
and other devices, and they can store many gigabytes. Thumb drives have replaced magnetic 
floppy disks for portable storage. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Decisions about hardware focus on what three factors?
 2. What are the overall trends in hardware?
 3. Define hardware and list the major hardware components.
 4. Describe the different types of computers.
 5. Distinguish between human data-input devices and source-data automation.
 6. Briefly describe how a microprocessor functions.
 7. Distinguish between primary storage and secondary storage. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
422 
PI2 Hardware and Soft ware 
Apply the Concept PI2.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI2.1 Discuss strategic  
the use of information technology.  However, in 2011 Lowe’s 
issues that link hardware design to business strategy.  
made significant improvements to its customer experience by 
implementing a type of hardware. What hardware is that?  The 
answer is—smartphones.  
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
In the modern businesses environment, computer hardware 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
components are inextricably linked to business strategy.  Put 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept PI2.1.  This 
simply, computers are tools that allow businesses to automate 
link will take you to a U.S. News and World Report article that 
some transactions and make others more efficient.  As technology 
discusses how Lowe’s implemented smartphone technology for 
evolves, businesses need to evolve the ways they use that 
their employees and their customers. 
technology to execute their business strategies.  The generally 
accepted rule is that technology should NOT drive business 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you will turn in.) 
strategy, but business strategy MUST consider how the organization 
Discuss strategic issues that link hardware design to business 
can implement new types of hardware to achieve its goals. 
strategy, using the Lowe’s case to illustrate these links. Put your 
discussion in a Word document and submit it to your professor. 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you are doing.) 
Consider Lowe’s (http://www.lowes.com). A large home 
improvement warehouse store might seem very distant from Figure depicting the systems software services as intermediary between hardware and functional applications.
FIGURE PI2.6  Systems soft ware servic­
es as intermediary between hardware and 
functional applications. 
PI2.2 Introduction to Soft ware 
Computer hardware is only as effective as the instructions you give it. Those instructions are 
contained in soft ware. The importance of computer software cannot be overestimated. The 
first software applications for computers in business were developed in the early 1950s. At that 
time, software was less costly. Today, software comprises a much larger percentage of the cost 
of modern computer systems because the price of hardware has dramatically decreased, while 
both the complexity and the price of software have dramatically increased. 
The ever-increasing complexity of software has also increased the potential for errors, or 
bugs. Large applications today may contain millions of lines of computer code, written by hun­
dreds of people over the course of several years. Thus, the potential for errors is huge, and 
testing and debugging software is expensive and time consuming. 
In spite of these overall trends—increasing complexity, cost, and numbers of 
defects—software has become an everyday feature of our business and personal lives. 
Your examination of software begins with definitions of some fundamental concepts. 
Software consists of computer programs, which are sequences of instructions for the 
computer. The process of writing or coding programs is called programming. Individu­
als who perform this task are called programmers. 
Computer programs include documentation, which is a written description of the 
program’s functions. Documentation helps the user operate the computer system, and 
it helps other programmers understand what the program does and how it accom­
plishes its purpose. Documentation is vital to the business organization. Without it, the 
departure of a key programmer or user could deprive the organization of the knowledge 
of how the program is designed and functions. 
The computer can do nothing until it is instructed by software. Computer hard­
ware, by design, is general purpose. Software enables the user to instruct the hardware 
to perform specific functions that provide business value. There are two major types of 
software: systems software and application soft ware. Figure PI2.6 illustrates the rela­
tionship among hardware, systems software, and application soft ware. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction to Software 423 
Soft ware Issues 
The importance of software in computer systems has brought new issues to the forefront for 
organizational managers. These issues include software defects (bugs), licensing, open sys­
tems, and open-source soft ware. 
Software Defects. All too often, computer program code is inefficient, poorly designed, and 
riddled with errors. The Software Engineering Institute (SEI) at Carnegie Mellon University in 
Pittsburgh defines good software as usable, reliable, defect free, cost eff ective, and maintain­
able. As our dependence on computers and networks increases, the risks associated with soft ­
ware defects are becoming more serious. 
The SEI maintains that, on average, professional programmers make between 100 and 150 
errors in every 1,000 lines of code they write. Fortunately, the software industry recognizes this 
problem. Unfortunately, however, the problem is enormous, and the industry is taking only 
initial steps to resolve it. One critical step is better design and planning at the beginning of the 
development process (discussed in Chapter 13). 
Software Licensing. Many people routinely copy proprietary software. However, making 
copies without the manufacturer’s explicit permission—a practice known as piracy—is illegal. 
The Business Software Alliance (BSA; www.bsa.org), a nonprofit trade association dedicated to 
promoting a safe and legal digital world, collects, investigates, and acts on software piracy tips. 
The BSA has calculated that piracy costs software vendors around the world billions of dollars 
annually. Most of the tips the BSA receives come from current and past employees of off ending 
companies. 
To protect their investment, software vendors must prevent their products from being cop­
ied and distributed by individuals and other software companies. A company can copyright its 
software, which means that the U.S. Copyright Office grants the company the exclusive legal 
right to reproduce, publish, and sell that soft ware. 
The number of computing devices in organizations continues to grow, and businesses 
continue to decentralize, so IS managers are finding it increasingly difficult to supervise their 
software assets. In fact, the majority of chief information officers (CIOs) are not confident that 
their companies were in compliance with software licensing agreements. For example, one 
medium-size company was fined $10,000 for unknowingly using Microsoft Exchange mailbox 
licenses that had not been purchased. Worse, the company was also fined $100,000 for not 
having the necessary licenses for Autodesk, Inc.’s AutoCAD design soft ware. 
To help companies manage their software licenses, new firms have arisen that specialize 
in tracking software licenses for a fee. For example, Cherwell (https://www.cherwell.com) will 
track and manage a company’s software licenses to ensure they are in compliance with U.S. 
copyright laws. 
Open Systems. The open systems concept refers to a group of computing products that 
work together. In an open system, the same operating system with compatible software is in­
stalled on all computers that interact within an organization. A complementary approach is 
to employ application software that will run across all computer platforms. Where hardware, 
operating systems, and application software are all designed as open systems, users can pur­
chase the best soft ware, called best of breed, for a job without worrying whether it will run on 
particular hardware. 
Open-Source Software. Organizations today are increasingly selecting open-source soft ­
ware rather than proprietary software. Proprietary software is purchased software that has re­
strictions on its use, copying, and modification. Companies that develop proprietary soft ware 
spend money and time developing their products, which they then sell in the marketplace. 
This software is labeled proprietary because the developer keeps the source code—the actual 
computer instructions—private (just as Coca-Cola does with its formula). Therefore, compa­
nies that purchase the software can utilize it in their operations, but they cannot change the 
source code themselves. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
424 
PI2 Hardware and Soft ware 
In contrast, the source code for open-source soft ware is available at no cost to both 
developers and users. This software is distributed with license terms that ensure that its source 
code will always be available. 
Open-source software is produced by worldwide “communities” of developers who write 
and maintain the code. Inside each community, however, only a small group of developers, 
called core developers, is allowed to modify the code directly. All the other developers must 
submit their suggested changes to the core developers. 
There are advantages to implementing open-source software in an organization. Accord­
ing to OpenSource (www.opensource.org), open-source development produces high-quality, 
reliable, low-cost software. This software is also flexible, meaning that the code can be changed 
to meet users’ needs. In many cases, open-source software can be more reliable than propri­
etary software. Because the code is available to many developers, more bugs are discovered 
early and quickly, and they are fixed immediately. Technical support for open-source soft ware 
is also available from firms that offer products derived from the software. An example is Red 
Hat (www.redhat.com), a major Linux vendor that supplies solutions to problems associated 
with open-source technology. Specifically, Red Hat provides education, training, and technical 
support, for a fee. 
Open-source software, however, also has disadvantages. The major drawback is that com­
panies that use open-source software depend on the continued goodwill of an army of volun­
teers for enhancements, bug fixes, and so on, even if they have signed a contract that includes 
support. Some companies will not accept this risk, although as a practical matter the support 
community for Linux, Apache, and Firefox is not likely to disappear. Further, organizations that 
do not have in-house technical experts will have to purchase maintenance–support contracts 
from a third party. In addition, open-source software poses questions concerning ease of use, 
the time and expense needed to train users, and compatibility with existing systems either 
within or outside the organization. 
There are many examples of open-source software, including the GNU (GNU’s Not UNIX) 
suite of software (www.gnu.org) developed by the Free Software Foundation (www.fsf.org); the 
Linux operating system (see www.linux.com); Apache Web server (www.apache.org); sendmail 
SMTP (Send Mail Transport Protocol) e-mail server (www.sendmail.com); the Perl program­
ming language (www.perl.org); and the Firefox browser from Mozilla (www.mozilla.com). In 
fact, more than 150,000 open-source projects are under way at SourceForge (www.sourceforge. 
net), the popular open-source hosting site. 
Open-source software is moving to the mainstream, as you see by the many major compa­
nies that use this type of software. For example, Japan’s Shinsei Bank (www.shinseibank.com) 
uses Linux on its servers; SugarCRM (www.sugarcrm.com) for certain customer relationship 
management tasks; and MySQL (www.mysql.com) open-source database management soft ­
ware. Further, the Los Angeles Times uses Alfresco (www.alfresco.com) to manage some of the 
images and video for its Web site. 
Systems Soft ware 
Systems software is a set of instructions that serves primarily as an intermediary between com­
puter hardware and application programs. Systems software performs many functions: 
• It controls and supports the computer system and its information-processing activities. 
• It enables computer systems to perform self-regulatory functions by loading itself when 
the computer is first turned on. 
• It provides commonly used sets of instructions for all applications. 
• It helps users and IT personnel program, test, and debug their own computer programs. 
• It supports application software by directing the computer’s basic functions.  
The major type of systems software with which we are concerned is the operating system. 
The operating system (OS) is the “director” of your computer system’s operations. It super­
vises the overall operation of the computer by monitoring the computer’s status, scheduling 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction to Software 425 
operations, and managing input and output processes. Well-known desktop operating sys­
tems include Microsoft Windows (www.microsoft.com), Apple Mac OS X (www.apple.com), 
Linux (www.linux.com), and Google Chrome (www.google.com/chrome). When a new version 
with new features is released, the developers often give the new version a new designation. For 
example, in early 2015, the latest version of Windows was Windows 10, and the latest version 
of OS X was Yosemite. 
The operating system also provides an interface between the user and the hardware. This 
user interface hides the complexity of the hardware from the user. That is, you do not have to 
know how the hardware actually operates; you simply have to know what the hardware will do 
and what you need to do to obtain the desired results. 
The ease or difficulty of the interaction between the user and the computer is determined 
to a large extent by the graphical user interface (GUI). The GUI allows users to directly control 
the hardware by manipulating visible objects (such as icons) and actions that replace complex 
commands. Microsoft Windows provides a widely recognized GUI. 
GUI technology incorporates features such as virtual reality, head-mounted displays, 
speech input (user commands) and output, pen and gesture recognition, animation, multi­
media, artificial intelligence, and cellular/wireless communication capabilities. These new 
interfaces, called natural user interfaces (NUIs), will combine social, haptic, and touch-enabled 
gesture-control interfaces. (A haptic interface provides tactile feedback through the sense of 
touch by applying forces, vibrations, or motions to the user.) 
A social interface guides the user through computer applications by using cartoon-like 
characters, graphics, animation, and voice commands. The cartoon-like characters can be 
puppets, narrators, guides, inhabitants, or avatars (computer-generated human-like figures). 
Social interfaces are hard to create without being corny. For example, the assistant “Clippy” 
was so annoying to users of Microsoft Office 97 that it was eliminated from Office 2003 and all 
subsequent versions. 
Motion control gaming consoles are another type of interface. Three major players cur­
rently offer this interface: the Xbox 360 Kinect, the PS3 PlayStation Move, and the Nintendo Wii. 
• Kinect tracks your movements without a physical controller, has voice recognition, and 
accommodates multiple players. 
• The PlayStation Move uses a physical controller with motion-sensing electronics, making 
it the technological “cross” between Kinect and Wii. Move requires each player to use a 
wand. 
• Wii uses a physical controller. Compared with Kinect and Move, Wii has been on the market 
longer, it has the biggest library of motion-sensing games, and it is the least expensive. 
On the negative side, Wii has the least accurate motion sensing of the three systems, and, 
unlike Kinect and Move, it is not available in high definition. 
Touch-enabled gesture-control interfaces enable users to browse through photos, “toss” 
objects around a screen, “flick” to turn the pages of a book, play video games, and watch mov­
ies. Examples of this type of interface are Microsoft  Surface and the Apple iPhone. Microsoft 
Surface is used in casinos such as Harrah’s iBar in Las Vegas and in some AT&T stores. A very 
visible use of Surface was the touch wall used by the major television networks during their 
coverage of various elections. 
Application Soft ware 
Application software is a set of computer instructions that provides specific functionality to a 
user. This functionality may be broad, such as general word processing, or narrow, such as an 
organization’s payroll program. Essentially, an application program applies a computer to a 
certain need. As you will see, modern organizations use many diff erent soft ware applications. 
Application software may be developed in-house by the organization’s information sys­
tems personnel, or it may be commissioned from a software vendor. Alternatively, the soft ­
ware can be purchased, leased, or rented from a vendor that develops applications and sells 
them to many organizations. This “off -the-shelf” software may be a standard package, or it 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
426 
PI2 Hardware and Soft ware 
may be customizable. Special-purpose programs or “packages” can be tailored for a specific 
purpose, such as inventory control and payroll. A package, or soft ware suite, is a group of 
programs with integrated functions that has been developed by a vendor and is available for 
purchase in a prepackaged form. Microsoft Office is a well-known example of a package, or 
soft ware suite. 
General-purpose, off-the-shelf application programs designed to help individual users 
increase their productivity are referred to as personal application soft ware. Table PI2.3 lists 
some of the major types of personal application soft ware. 
TABLE PI2.3 Personal Application Software 
Category of Personal 
Application Software 
Major Functions 
Examples 
Spreadsheets 
Use rows and columns to manipulate primarily 
numerical data; useful for analyzing financial 
information and for what–if and goal-seeking 
analyses 
Microsoft Excel 
Corel Quattro Pro 
Apple iWork Numbers 
Word processing 
Desktop publishing 
Data management 
Presentation 
Graphics 
Personal information man­
agement 
Personal finance 
Web authoring 
Communications 
Allow users to manipulate primarily text with 
many writing and editing features 
Extend word processing software to allow pro­
duction of finished, camera-ready documents, 
which may contain photographs, diagrams, and 
other images combined with text in different 
fonts 
Allow users to store, retrieve, and manipulate 
related data 
Allow users to create and edit graphically rich 
information to appear on electronic slides 
Allow users to create, store, and display or print 
charts, graphs, maps, and drawings 
Allow users to create and maintain calendars, 
appointments, to-do lists, and business con­
tacts 
Allow users to maintain checkbooks, track 
investments, monitor credit cards, and bank 
and pay bills electronically 
Allow users to design Web sites and publish 
them on the Web 
Allow users to communicate with other people 
over any distance 
Microsoft Word 
Apple iWork Pages 
Microsoft Publisher 
QuarkXPress 
Microsoft Access 
FileMaker Pro 
Microsoft PowerPoint 
Apple iWork Keynote 
Adobe PhotoShop 
Corel DRAW 
IBM Lotus Notes 
Microsoft Outlook 
Quicken 
Microsoft Money 
Microsoft FrontPage 
Macromedia 
Dreamweaver 
Novell Groupwise 
Speech-recognition soft ware, also called voice recognition, is an input technology, rather 
than strictly an application, that enables users to provide input to systems software and appli­
cation software. As the name suggests, this software recognizes and interprets human speech, 
either one word at a time (discrete speech) or in a conversational stream (continuous speech). 
Advances in processing power, new software algorithms, and better microphones have enabled 
developers to design extremely accurate speech-recognition software. Experts predict that, in 
the near future, voice recognition systems will be built into almost every device, appliance, 
and machine that people use. Applications for voice recognition technology abound. Consider 
these examples: 
• Call centers are using this technology. The average call costs $5 if it is handled by an 
employee, but only 50 cents with a self-service, speech-enabled system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction to Software 427 
• Apple’s OS X and Microsoft’s Windows 10 operating systems come with built-in voice 
technology. 
• Nuance’s Dragon NaturallySpeaking (www.nuance.com) enables accurate voice-to-text 
and e-mail dictation. 
Before you go on . .  .
 1. What does the following statement mean? “Hardware is useless without soft ware.”
 2. What are the differences between systems software and application soft ware?
 3. What is open-source software, and what are its advantages? Can you think of any disadvantages?
 4. Describe the functions of the operating system. 
Apply the Concept PI2.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI2.2 Diff erentiate between 
For example, this author is writing on a Mac, and the system 
the two major types of soft ware. 
recognized the Mac OS and defaulted to the Mac software page.  
Review the available software, and differentiate between the 
STEP 1: Background 
operating systems and the applications.  Within applications, 
differentiate by method of obtaining a license — some you have 
There are two types of software (systems and application), two 
to pay for, and some are available by open-source or freeware 
general ways of obtaining software licenses (proprietary vs. open-
licensing.  
source), and two general types of uses (traditional vs. mobile).  
You should be sufficiently familiar with software to be able to 
categorize programs that you use.  
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Build a table that differentiates between the two major types of 
STEP 2: Activity 
software.  To complete this task, list 10 applications you reviewed 
on the Web site mentioned in Step 2.  Use the template provided 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
below.  Turn your completed table to your instructor. 
and click on the link for Apply the Concept PI2.2.  This link will 
take you to CNET’s Download.com. At this Web site, you should 
immediately notice one of the categories mentioned above.  At 
the time of this writing, the site automatically recognized the 
type of computer operating system on the user’s computer.  
Application 
Operating System 
Licensing 
What’s in IT for me? 
Hardware 
For All Business Majors 
The design of computer hardware has profound impacts for busi­
nesspeople. Personal and organizational success can depend on an 
understanding of hardware design and a commitment to knowing 
where it is going and what opportunities and challenges hardware 
innovations will bring. Because these innovations are occurring so 
rapidly, hardware decisions both at the individual level and at the 
organizational level are diff icult. 
At the individual level, most people who have a home or of­
fice computer system and want to upgrade it, or people who are 
contemplating their first computer purchase, are faced with the de­
cision of when to buy as much as what to buy and at what cost. At the 
organizational level, these same issues plague IS professionals. How­
ever, they are more complex and more costly. Most organizations 
have many different computer systems in place at the same time. 
Innovations may come to different classes of computers at diff erent 
times or rates. Therefore, managers must decide when old hardware 
legacy systems still have a productive role in the organization and 
when they should be replaced. A legacy system is an old computer 
system or application that continues to be used, typically because 
it still functions for the users’ needs, even though newer technology 
is available. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
428 
PI2 Hardware and Soft ware 
Soft ware 
ACCT For the Accounting Major 
Accounting application software performs the organization’s ac­
counting functions, which are repetitive and performed in high vol­
umes. Each business transaction (e.g., a person hired, a paycheck 
produced, an item sold) produces data that must be captured. Ac­
counting applications capture these data and then manipulate them 
as necessary. Accounting applications adhere to relatively standard­
ized procedures, handle detailed data, and have a historical focus 
(i.e., what happened in the past). 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
Financial application software provides information about the firm’s 
financial status to persons and groups inside and outside the firm. 
Financial applications include forecasting, funds management, and 
control applications. Forecasting applications predict and project 
the firm’s future activity in the economic environment. Funds man­
agement applications use cash flow models to analyze expected 
cash flows. Control applications enable managers to monitor their 
financial performance, typically by providing information about the 
budgeting process and performance ratios. 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major 
Marketing application software helps management solve problems 
that involve marketing the firm’s products. Marketing soft ware in­
cludes marketing research and marketing intelligence applications. 
Marketing applications provide information about the firm’s prod­
ucts and competitors, its distribution system, its advertising and 
personal selling activities, and its pricing strategies. Overall, mar­
keting applications help managers develop strategies that combine 
the four major elements of marketing: product, promotion, place, 
and price. 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
Managers use production/operations management (POM) applica­
tion software for production planning and as part of the physical 
production system. POM applications include production, inventory, 
quality, and cost software. These applications help management op­
erate manufacturing facilities and logistics. Materials requirements 
planning (MRP) software also is widely used in manufacturing. This 
software identifies which materials will be needed, how much will be 
needed, and the dates on which they will be needed. This informa­
tion enables managers to be proactive. 
HRM For the Human Resources Management 
Major 
Human resources management application software provides in­
formation concerning recruiting and hiring, education and training, 
maintaining the employee database, termination, and administering 
benefits. HRM applications include workforce planning, recruiting, 
workforce management, compensation, benefits, and environmental 
reporting subsystems (e.g., equal employment opportunity records 
and analysis, union enrollment, toxic substances, and grievances). 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
If your company decides to develop its own software, the MIS func­
tion is responsible for managing this activity. If the company decides 
to buy software, the MIS function deals with software vendors in ana­
lyzing their products. The MIS function also is responsible for upgrad­
ing software as vendors release new versions. 
Summary 
1.  Discuss the strategic issues that link hardware design to business 
strategy. 
Strategic issues linking hardware design to business strategy include the 
following: How do organizations keep up with the rapid price/performance 
advancements in hardware? How often should an organization upgrade its 
computers and storage systems? How can organizations measure benefits 
gained from price/performance improvements in hardware? 
2. Differentiate between the two major types of soft ware. 
Software consists of computer programs (coded instructions) that con­
trol the functions of computer hardware. There are two main categories 
of software: systems software and application software. Systems soft ware 
manages the hardware resources of the computer system; it functions 
between the hardware and the application software. The major type of sys­
tems software is the operating system. Application software enables users 
to perform specific tasks and information-processing activities. Applica­
tion software may be proprietary or off -the-shelf. 
Glossary 
application software The class of computer instructions that directs 
arithmetic logic unit (ALU) Portion of the CPU that performs the 
a computer system to perform specific processing activities and 
mathematical calculations and makes logical comparisons. 
provide functionality for users. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Glossary 429 
augmented reality A live, direct or indirect, view of a physical,
 real-world environment whose elements are enhanced by computer-
generated sensory input such as sound, video, graphics, or GPS data. 
binary form The form in which data and instructions can be read by 
the CPU—only 0s and 1s. 
bit Short for binary digit (0s and 1s), the only data that a CPU can 
process. 
byte An 8-bit string of data, needed to represent any one alphanumeric 
character or simple mathematical operation. 
cache memory A type of high-speed memory that enables the 
computer to temporarily store blocks of data that are used more 
often and that a processor can access more rapidly than main 
memory (RAM). 
central processing unit (CPU) Hardware that performs the actual 
computation or “number crunching” inside any computer. 
computer programs The sequences of instructions for the computer, 
which comprise soft ware. 
control unit Portion of the CPU that controls the flow of information. 
documentation Written description of the functions of a soft ware 
program. 
fat clients Computers that offer full functionality without having to 
connect to a network. 
flash memory devices Nonvolatile electronic storage devices that are 
compact, are portable, require little power, and contain no moving 
parts. 
gesture recognition An input method that interprets human 
gestures, in an attempt for computers to begin to understand human 
body language. 
graphical user interface (GUI) Systems software that allows users to 
have direct control of the hardware by manipulating visible objects 
(such as icons) and actions, which replace command syntax. 
laptop computers (notebook computers) Small, easily 
transportable, lightweight microcomputers. 
magnetic disks (or hard drives or fixed disk drives) A form of 
secondary storage on a magnetized disk divided into tracks and 
sectors that provide addresses for various pieces of data. 
magnetic tape A secondary storage medium on a large open reel or in 
a smaller cartridge or cassette. 
mainframes Relatively large computers used in large enterprises for 
extensive computing applications that are accessed by thousands of 
users. 
microcomputers The smallest and least expensive category or 
general-purpose computers, also called micros, personal computers, 
or PCs. 
microprocessor The CPU, made up of millions of transistors 
embedded in a circuit on a silicon wafer or chip. 
Moore’s law Prediction by Gordon Moore, an Intel cofounder, that 
microprocessor complexity would double approximately every 2 
years. 
multimedia technology Computer-based integration of text, sound, 
still images, animation, and digitized full-motion video. 
notebook computer See laptop computers. 
open-source software Software made available in source-code form 
at no cost to developers. 
open systems Computing products that work together by using 
the same operating system with compatible software on all the 
computers that interact in an organization. 
operating system (OS) The main system control program, which 
supervises the overall operations of the computer, allocates CPU 
time and main memory to programs, and provides an interface 
between the user and the hardware. 
optical storage devices A form of secondary storage in which a laser 
reads the surface of a reflective plastic platter. 
package Common term for an integrated group of computer programs 
developed by a vendor and available for purchase in prepackaged 
form. 
personal application software General-purpose, off -the-shelf 
application programs that support general types of processing, 
rather than being linked to any specific business function. 
primary storage (also called main memory) High-speed storage 
located directly on the motherboard that stores data to be processed 
by the CPU, instructions telling the CPU how to process the data, and 
operating system programs. 
programming The process of writing or coding programs. 
proprietary software Software that has been developed 
by a company and has restrictions on its use, copying, and 
modification. 
random access memory (RAM) The part of primary storage that 
holds a software program and small amounts of data when they are 
brought from secondary storage. 
read-only memory (ROM) Type of primary storage where certain 
critical instructions are safeguarded; the storage is nonvolatile 
and retains the instructions when the power to the computer is 
turned off . 
registers High-speed storage areas in the CPU that store very small 
amounts of data and instructions for short periods. 
secondary storage Technology that can store very large amounts of 
data for extended periods. 
sequential access Data access in which the computer system must run 
through data in sequence to locate a particular piece. 
server Computers that support networks, enabling users to share files, 
software, and other network devices. 
social interface A user interface that guides the user through 
computer applications by using cartoon-like characters, graphics, 
animation, and voice commands. 
software A set of computer programs that enable the hardware to 
process data. 
software suite See package. 
solid-state drives (SSDs) Data storage devices that serve the same 
purpose as a hard drive and store data in memory chips. 
speech-recognition software Software that recognizes and 
interprets human speech, either one word at a time (discrete speech) 
or in a stream (continuous speech). 
systems software The class of computer instructions that serve 
primarily as an intermediary between computer hardware and 
application programs; provides important self-regulatory functions 
for computer systems. 
thin client A computer that does not offer the full functionality of a fat 
client. 
thumb drive Storage device that fits into the USB port of a personal 
computer and is used for portable storage. 
wearable computer A miniature computer worn by a person allowing 
the users to multitask. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
430 
PI2 Hardware and Soft ware 
Discussion Questions 
1.  What factors affect the speed of a microprocessor? 
5. Where might you find embedded computers at home, at school, and/or 
at work? 
2.  If you were the CIO of a firm, what factors would you consider when 
selecting secondary storage media for your company’s records (files)?  
6. What does this statement mean: “Hardware is useless without 
 soft ware.” 
3.  Given that Moore’s law has proved itself over the past two decades, 
speculate on what chip capabilities will be in 10 years. What might your 
7. You are the CIO of your company, and you have to develop an applica­
desktop PC be able to do? 
tion of strategic importance to your firm. What are the advantages and 
disadvantages of using open-source soft ware? 
4.  If you were the CIO of a firm, how would you explain the workings, ben­
efits, and limitations of using thin clients as opposed to fat clients? 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  Access the Web sites of the major chip manufacturers—for example, 
Intel (www.intel.com), Motorola (www.motorola.com), and Advanced 
Micro Devices (www.amd.com)—and obtain the latest information 
regarding new and planned chips. Compare performance and costs 
across these vendors. Be sure to take a close look at the various multi-
core chips. 
2.  Access “The Journey Inside” on Intel’s Web site at http://www.intel 
.com/content/www/us/en/education/k12/the-journey-inside.html. 
Prepare a presentation of each step in the machine instruction cycle. 
3.  A great deal of free software is available over the Internet. Go to http:// 
www.pcmag.com/article2/0, 2817, 2381528, 00.asp, and observe all the 
software available for free. Choose a software program, and download 
it to your computer. Prepare a brief discussion about the soft ware for 
your class. 
4.  Enter the IBM Web site (www.ibm.com), and perform a search on the term 
“software.” Click on the drop box for Products, and notice how many soft ­
ware products IBM produces. Is IBM only a hardware company? 
5.  Compare the following proprietary software packages with their open-
source software counterparts. Prepare your comparison for the class. 
Proprietary 
Open Source 
Microsoft Office 
Google Docs, OpenOffice 
Adobe Photoshop 
Picnik.com, Google Picasa 

 
 
 
 
 
PLUG IT IN 3  
Fundamentals of Relational 
Database Operations 
PLUG IT IN OUTLINE 
PI3.1 Query Languages 
PI3.2 Entity–Relationship Modeling 
PI3.3 Normalization and Joins 
Introduction 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
PI3.1 Understand the process of querying a relational database.  
PI3.2 Understand the process of entity–relationship modeling.  
PI3.3 Understand the process of normalization and the process of joins.  
There are many operations possible with relational databases. In this Plug IT In, we discuss three 
of these operations: query languages, normalization, and joins. 
As you saw in Chapter 3, a relational database is a collection of interrelated two-dimensional 
tables, consisting of rows and columns. Each row represents a record, and each column (or field) 
represents an attribute (or characteristic) of that record. Every record in the database must con­
tain at least one field that uniquely identifies that record so that it can be retrieved, updated, and 
sorted. This identifier field, or group of fields, is called the primary key. In some cases, locating a 
particular record requires the use of secondary keys. A secondary key is another field that has some 
identifying information, but typically does not uniquely identify the record. A foreign key is a field 
(or group of fields) in one table that matches the primary key value in a row of another table. A 
foreign key is used to establish and enforce a link between two tables. 
These related tables can be joined when they contain common columns. The uniqueness of 
the primary key tells the DBMS which records are joined with others in related tables. This fea­
ture allows users great flexibility in the variety of queries they can make. Despite these features, 
however, the relational database model has some disadvantages. Because large-scale databases 
can be composed of many interrelated tables, the overall design can be complex, leading to slow 
search and access times. 
PI3.1  Query Languages 
The most commonly performed database operation is searching for information. Structured 
query language (SQL) is the most popular query language used for interacting with a database. 
SQL allows people to perform complicated searches by using relatively simple statements or key 
words. Typical key words are SELECT (to choose a desired attribute), FROM (to specify the table or 
tables to be used), and WHERE (to specify conditions to apply in the query). 
To understand how SQL works, imagine that a university wants to know the names of stu­
dents who will graduate cum laude (but not magna or summa cum laude) in May 2014. (Refer to 
431 

 
 
 
 
432 
PI3 Fundamentals of Relational Database Operations 
Figure 3.3 in Chapter 3.) The university IT staff would query the student relational database 
with an SQL statement such as 
SELECT Student_Name 
FROM Student_Database 
WHERE Grade_Point_Average >= 3.40 and Grade_Point_Average < 3.60; 
The SQL query would return John Jones and Juan Rodriguez. 
Another way to find information in a database is to use query by example (QBE). In QBE, 
the user fills out a grid or template—also known as a form—to construct a sample or a descrip­
tion of the data desired. Users can construct a query quickly and easily by using drag-and-drop 
features in a DBMS such as Microsoft Access. Conducting queries in this manner is simpler than 
keying in SQL commands. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What is structured query language?
 2. What is query by example? 
Apply the Concept PI3.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI3.1 Understand the process 
tables in this database: Accidentinfo, Driverinfo, AccidentCauses, 
of querying a relational database. 
and Injuries. 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you will turn in.) 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
Write the SQL code that will answer the following questions. 
Structured query language is a type of computer code that allows 
you to ask questions of a database, much as you would ask a 
• How many accidents were caused by DUI during the summer 
question in a library. Somewhere in that library is the answer you 
months (May–August) of 2014? 
are seeking. To find it, however, you have to know how to look. 
• How many one-car accidents occurred that involved drivers 
Perhaps the correct area, row, call number, or author would help 
who were only 16 years old? 
you locate what you are looking for. Working with SQL is much 
To write these SQL queries correctly, you will need to use your 
the same. SQL is the key to unlocking many “data doors,” and you 
imagination as to the data that could be contained in each table. 
must learn how to use it. 
However, you should be able to determine which tables contain 
the appropriate data. Submit your SQL code to your instructor. 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you are doing.) 
Imagine that you have access to a database that contains data on 
the number of traffic accidents in Panama City, FL. There are four 
PI3.2  Entity–Relationship Modeling 
Designers plan and create databases through the process of entity–relationship modeling, 
using an entity–relationship (ER) diagram. There are many approaches to ER diagramming. 
You will see one particular approach here, but there are others. The good news is that if you 
are familiar with one version of ER diagramming, then you will be able to easily adapt to any 
other version. 
ER diagrams consist of entities, attributes, and relationships. To properly identify enti­
ties, attributes, and relationships, database designers first identify the business rules for the 

 
 
 
 
 
 Entity–Relationship Modeling 433 
particular data model. Business rules are precise descriptions of policies, procedures, or prin­
ciples in any organization that stores and uses data to generate information. Business rules 
are derived from a description of an organization’s operations, and help to create and enforce 
business processes in that organization. Keep in mind that you determine these business rules, 
not the MIS department. 
Entities are pictured in rectangles, and relationships are described on the line between 
two entities. The attributes for each entity are listed, and the primary key is underlined. The 
data dictionary provides information on each attribute, such as its name, if it is a key, part of a 
key, or a non-key attribute, the type of data expected (alphanumeric, numeric, dates, etc.), and 
valid values. Data dictionaries can also provide information on why the attribute is needed in 
the database; which business functions, applications, forms, and reports use the attribute; and 
how often the attribute should be updated. 
ER modeling is valuable because it allows database designers to communicate with users 
throughout the organization to ensure that all entities and the relationships among the entities 
are represented. This process underscores the importance of taking all users into account when 
designing organizational databases. Notice that all entities and relationships in our example 
are labeled in terms that users can understand. 
Relationships illustrate an association between entities. The degree of a relationship 
indicates the number of entities associated with a relationship. A unary relationship exists 
when an association is maintained within a single entity. A binary relationship exists when 
two entities are associated. A ternary relationship exists when three entities are associated. 
In this Plug IT In, we discuss only binary relationships because they are the most common. 
Entity relationships may be classified as one-to-one, one-to-many, or many-to-many. The term, 
connectivity, describes the relationship classification. 
Connectivity and cardinality are established by the business rules of a relationship. Car­
dinality refers to the maximum number of times an instance of one entity can be associated 
with an instance in the related entity. Cardinality can be mandatory single, optional single, 
mandatory many, or optional many. Figure PI3.1 displays the cardinality symbols. Note that 
we have four possible cardinality symbols: mandatory single, optional single, mandatory 
many, and optional many. 
Let’s look at an example from a university. An entity is a person, place, or thing that can 
be identified in the users’ work environment. For example, consider student registration at 
a university. Students register for courses, and they also register their cars for parking per­
mits. In this example, STUDENT, PARKING PERMIT, CLASS, and PROFESSOR are entities. Recall 
that an instance of an entity represents a particular student, parking permit, 
class, or professor. Therefore, a particular STUDENT (James Smythe, 8023445) 
is an instance of the STUDENT entity; a particular parking permit (91778) is an 
instance of the PARKING PERMIT entity; a particular class (76890) is an instance 
of the CLASS entity; and a particular professor (Margaret Wilson, 390567) is an 
instance of the PROFESSOR entity. 
Entity instances have identifiers, or primary keys, which are attributes (attrib­
utes and identifiers are synonymous) that are unique to that entity instance. For 
example, STUDENT instances can be identified with Student Identification Num­
ber; PARKING PERMIT instances can be identified with Permit Number; CLASS 
instances can be identified with Class Number; and PROFESSOR instances can be 
identified with Professor Identification Number. 
Entities have attributes, or properties, that describe the entity’s character­
istics. In our example, examples of attributes for STUDENT are Student Name 
and Student Address. Examples of attributes for PARKING PERMIT are Student 
Identification Number and Car Type. Examples of attributes for CLASS are Class 
Name, Class Time, and Class Place. Examples of attributes for PROFESSOR are 
Professor Name and Professor Department. (Note that each course at this uni­
versity has one professor—no team teaching.) 
Why is Student Identification Number an attribute of both the STUDENT and 
PARKING PERMIT entity classes? That is, why do we need the PARKING PERMIT Figure depicting four possible cardinality symbols: mandatory single, optional single, mandatory many, and optional many.
FIGURE PI3.1  Cardinality symbols. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
434 
PI3 Fundamentals of Relational Database Operations 
entity class? If you consider all of the interlinked university systems, the PARKING PERMIT entity 
class is needed for other applications, such as fee payments, parking tickets, and external links 
to the state Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Let’s consider the three types of binary relationships in our example. 
In a one-to-one (1:1) relationship, a single-entity instance of one type is related to a sin­
gle-entity instance of another type. In our university example, STUDENT–PARKING PERMIT 
is a 1:1 relationship. The business rule at this university represented by this relationship is: 
Students may register only one car at this university. Of course, students do not have to reg­
ister a car at all. That is, a student can have only one parking permit but does not need to 
have one. 
Note that the relationship line on the PARKING PERMIT side shows a cardinality of optional 
single. A student can have, but does not have to have, a parking permit. On the STUDENT side 
of the relationship, only one parking permit can be assigned to one student, resulting in a car­
dinality of mandatory single. See Figure PI3.2. 
The second type of relationship, one-to-many (1:M), is represented by the CLASS–PRO­
FESSOR relationship in Figure PI3.3. The business rule at this university represented by this 
relationship is: At this university, there is no team teaching. Therefore, each class must have 
only one professor. On the other hand, professors may teach more than one class. Note that 
the relationship line on the PROFESSOR side shows a cardinality of mandatory single. In con­
trast, the relationship line on the CLASS side shows a cardinality 
of optional many. 
The third type of relationship, many-to-many (M:M), is rep­
resented by the STUDENT–CLASS relationship. Most database 
management systems do not support many-to-many relation­
ships. Therefore, we use junction (or bridge) tables, so that we 
have two one-to-many relationships. The business rule at this 
university represented by this relationship is: Students can 
register for one or more classes, and each class can have one 
or more students (see Figure PI3.4). In this example, we cre­
ate the REGISTRATION table as our junction table. Note that 
Student ID and Class ID are foreign keys in the REGISTRATION 
table. 
FIGURE PI3.2
Let’s examine the following relationships: 
• The relationship line on the STUDENT side of the STUDENT– 
REGISTRATION relationship shows a cardinality of optional 
single. 
• The relationship line on the REGISTRATION side of the STU­
DENT–REGISTRATION relationship shows a cardinality of 
optional many. 
• The relationship line on the CLASS side of the CLASS– 
REGISTRATION relationship shows a cardinality of optional 
FIGURE PI3.3
FIGURE PI3.4
 One-to-many relationship. 
single. 
 Many-to­
many relationship. Figure depicting one-to-one relationship between student and parking permit.
 One-to-one relationship. Figure depicting one-to-one relationship between professor and class.
Figure depicting many-to-many relationship between student and class.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Normalization and Joins 435 
• The relationship line on the REGISTRATION side of the CLASS–REGISTRATION relationship 
shows a cardinality of optional many. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What is an entity? An attribute? A relationship?
 2. Describe one-to-one, one-to-many, and many-to-many relationships. 
Apply the Concept PI3.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI3.2 Understand the  
understand the rules that govern how processes work and (2) be 
process of entity–relationship modeling.  
able to define and describe these rules in a picture. This section 
has provided you with the necessary tools to draw a basic ER 
model.
STEP 1: Background 
Imagine the following scenario. You are designing a database for 
It is very important that you understand the connections among 
your local police department to keep track of traff ic violations. 
entities, attributes, and relationships. This section has defined 
The department has provided you with the following rules: 
each of these terms for you. Typically, entities are described 
by their attributes, and they are related to other entities. For 
• Each office can write multiple tickets. 
example, if “student name” is the entity, then age, gender, 
• Each ticket will list only one off ice. 
country of origin, marital status, and other demographic data  
are the attributes (characteristics) of that particular student. 
• Each ticket will list only one driver.  
That student is also related to other entities such as financial 
• Drivers can receive multiple tickets.  
information, major, and course information.  
STEP 3: Deliverable 
STEP 2: Activity 
Using the tools described in this section, demonstrate that 
An entity–relationship model is one of the most challenging 
you understand the process of ER modeling by drawing and 
aspects of designing a database because you have to (1) 
submitting an ER model for the scenario provided in Step 2. 
PI3.3 Normalization and Joins 
To use a relational database management system efficiently and effectively, the data must be 
analyzed to eliminate redundant data elements. Normalization is a method for analyzing and 
reducing a relational database to its most streamlined form to ensure minimum redundancy, 
maximum data integrity, and optimal processing performance. Data normalization is a meth­
odology for organizing attributes into tables so that redundancy among the non-key attributes 
is eliminated. The result of the data normalization process is a properly structured relational 
database. 
Data normalization requires a list of all the attributes that must be incorporated into the 
database and a list of all of the defining associations, or functional dependencies, among the 
attributes. Functional dependencies are a means of expressing that the value of one particu­
lar attribute is associated with a specific single value of another attribute. For example, for 
a Student Number 05345 at a university, there is exactly one Student Name, John C. Jones, 
associated with it. That is, Student Number is referred to as the determinant because its value 
determines the value of the other attribute. We can also say that Student Name is functionally 
dependent on Student Number. 
As an example of normalization, consider a pizza shop. This shop takes orders from cus­
tomers on a form. Figure PI3.5 shows a table of nonnormalized data gathered by the pizza 
shop. This table has two records, one for each order being placed. Because there are several 

 
 
 
 
436 
PI3 Fundamentals of Relational Database Operations A tabular representation for raw data gathered from orders at the pizza shop, where order number, order date, customer ID, customer first name, customer last name, customer address, zip code, pizza code, pizza name, quantity, price, and total price are listed in the column heads.
Raw data gathered from orders at the pizza shop. 
FIGURE PI3.5 Figure depicting the example of functional dependencies in pizza shop.
FIGURE PI3.6 Functional dependencies in pizza 
shop example. 
pizzas on each order, the order number and customer information appear in 
multiple rows. Several attributes of each record have null values. A null value is 
an attribute with no data in it. For example, Order Number has four null values. 
Therefore, this table is not in first normal form. The data drawn from that form 
is shown in Figure PI3.5. 
In our example, ORDER, CUSTOMER, and PIZZA are entities. The first step 
in normalization is to determine the functional dependencies among the attrib­
utes. The functional dependencies in our example are shown in Figure PI3.6. 
In the normalization process, we will proceed from nonnormalized data, to 
first normal form, to second normal form, and then to third normal form. (There 
are additional normal forms, but they are beyond the scope of this book.) 
Figure PI3.7 demonstrates the data in first normal form. The attributes 
under consideration are listed in one table and primary keys have been estab­
lished. Our primary keys are Order Number, Customer ID, and Pizza Code. In 
first normal form, each ORDER has to repeat the order number, order date, customer first 
name, customer last name, customer address, and customer zip code. This data file contains 
repeating groups and describes multiple entities. That is, this relation has data redundancy, a 
lack of data integrity, and the flat file would be difficult to use in various applications that the 
pizza shop might need. 
Consider the table in Figure PI3.7, and notice the very first column (labeled Order Num­
ber). This column contains multiple entries for each order—three rows for Order Number 1116 
First normal form for data from pizza shop. 
FIGURE PI3.7 

 
 
 
Normalization and Joins 437 Figure depicting the data from the pizza shop in second normal form.
Second normal form for data from pizza shop. 
FIGURE PI3.8 
and three rows for Order Number 1117. These multiple rows for an order are called repeating 
groups. The table in Figure PI3.6 also contains multiple entities: ORDER, CUSTOMER, and PIZZA. 
Therefore, we move on to second normal form. 
To produce second normal form, we break the table in Figure PI3.6 into smaller tables to 
eliminate some of its data redundancy. Second normal form does not allow partial functional 
dependencies. That is, in a table in second normal form, every non-key attribute must be func­
tionally dependent on the entire primary key of that table. Figure PI3.8 shows the data from 
the pizza shop in second normal form. 
If you examine Figure PI3.8, you will see that second normal form has not eliminated all 
the data redundancy. For example, each Order Number is duplicated three times, as are all 
customer data. In third normal form, non-key attributes are not allowed to define other non-
key attributes. That is, third normal form does not allow transitive dependencies in which one 
non-key attribute is functionally dependent on another. In our example, customer information 
depends both on Customer ID and Order Number. Figure PI3.9 shows the data from the pizza 
shop in third normal form. Third normal form structure has these important points: 
• It is completely free of data redundancy. 
• All foreign keys appear where needed to link related tables. 
Let’s look at the primary and foreign keys for the tables in third normal form: 
• The ORDER relation: The primary key is Order Number and the foreign key is Customer ID. 
• The CUSTOMER relation: The primary key is Customer ID. 
• The PIZZA relation: The primary key is Pizza Code. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
438 
PI3 Fundamentals of Relational Database Operations 
Third normal form for data from pizza shop. 
FIGURE PI3.9 
•  The ORDER–PIZZA relation: The primary key is a composite key, consisting of two foreign 
keys, Order Number and Pizza Code. 
Now consider an order at the pizza shop. The tables in third normal form can produce the 
order in the following manner by using the join operation (see Figure PI3.10). The join oper­
ation combines records from two or more tables in a database 
to obtain information that is located in different tables. In our 
example, the join operation combines records from the four nor­
malized tables to produce an ORDER. Here is how the join oper­
ation works: 
• The ORDER relation provides the Order Number (the primary 
key), Order Date, and Total Price. 
• The primary key of the ORDER relation (Order Number) pro­
vides a link to the ORDER–PIZZA relation (the link numbered 1 
in Figure PI3.10). 
• The ORDER–PIZZA relation supplies the Quantity to ORDER. 
• The primary key of the ORDER–PIZZA relation is a composite 
key that consists of Order Number and Pizza Code. There­
fore, the Pizza Code component of the primary key provides 
a link to the PIZZA relation (the link numbered 2 in Figure 
PI3.10). 
• The PIZZA relation supplies the Pizza Name and Price to 
ORDER. 
• The Customer ID in ORDER (a foreign key) provides a link 
to the CUSTOMER relation (the link numbered 3 in Figure 
form to produce an order. 
FIGURE PI3.10 
PI3.10). Figure depicting the join process with the tables of third normal form to produce an order.
The join process with the tables of third normal 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Normalization and Joins 439 
• The CUSTOMER relation supplies the Customer FName, Customer LName, Customer 
Address, and Zip Code to ORDER. 
At the end of this join process, we have a complete ORDER. Normalization is beneficial 
when maintaining databases over a period of time. One example is the likelihood of having 
to change the price of each pizza. If the pizza shop increases the price of the Meat Feast from 
$12.00 to $12.50, this process is one easy step in Figure PI3.10. The price field is changed to 
$12.50 and the ORDER is automatically updated with the current value of the price. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What is the purpose of normalization?
 2. Why do we need the join operation? 
Apply the Concept PI3.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI3.3 Understand the 
Student Table (Raw Data) 
process of normalization and the process of joins. 
Juan 
11011 
19 
English (13579) 
History (14876) 
College Algebra (95827) 
Intro to Business (87650) 
Anita 
12015 
18 
English (13579) 
Public Speaking (13121) 
French (97869) 
Biology (75675) 
Jason 
53879 
19 
History (14876) 
Intro to MIS (24680) 
Intro to Business (87650) 
Communications (12670) 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Demonstrate that you understand the normalization process 
by producing the table provided in Step 2 in first normal form, 
second normal form, and third normal form. 
Student 
Student ID 
Age 
Courses 
STEP 1: Background 
Normalization, as described in this section, breaks a flat data 
file into multiple tables to eliminate redundancy by creating 
redundancy in the form of keys that link the tables together. 
In the example provided in the text, the normalized database 
allows for a pizza order to contain multiple pizzas without 
having to repeat the order number and leave blank (null) 
values. 
Joins are very important because they take the data from 
multiple locations and link them together with relationships. 
Repeating and relating the order number on the pizza table as a 
primary key in the order table enables you to maintain a cleaner 
set of data without null values. 
STEP 2: Activity 
Normalize the following student table into first, second, and third 
normal forms. 
What’s in IT for me? 
For all Business Majors 
All business majors will have to manage data in their professional 
work. One way to manage data is through the use of databases and 
database management systems. First, it is likely that you will need 
to obtain information from your organization’s databases. You will 
probably use structured query language to obtain this information. 
Second, as your organization plans and designs its databases, it will 
most likely use entity–relationship diagrams. You will provide much 
of the input to these ER diagrams. For example, you will describe 
the entities that you use in your work, the attributes of those enti­
ties, and the relationships among them. You will also help database 
designers as they normalize database tables, by describing how the 
normalized tables relate to each other (e.g., through the use of pri­
mary and foreign keys). Finally, you will help database designers as 
they plan their join operations to give you the information that you 
need when that information is stored in multiple tables. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
440 
PI3 Fundamentals of Relational Database Operations 
Summary  
1.  Understand the process of querying a relational database. 
The most commonly performed database operation is requesting informa­
tion. Structured query language is the most popular query language used 
for this operation. SQL allows people to perform complicated searches 
by using relatively simple statements or key words. Typical key words are 
SELECT (to specify a desired attribute), FROM (to specify the table to be 
used), and WHERE (to specify conditions to apply in the query). 
Another way to find information in a database is to use query by example. 
In QBE, the user fills out a grid or template—also known as a form—to con­
struct a sample or a description of the data desired. Users can construct a 
query quickly and easily by using drag-and-drop features in a DBMS such as 
Microsoft Access. Conducting queries in this manner is simpler than keying 
in SQL commands. 
2.  Understand the process of entity–relationship modeling. 
Designers plan and create databases through the process of entity– 
relationship modeling, using an entity–relationship diagram. ER 
diagrams consist of entities, attributes, and relationships. Entities are pic­
tured in boxes, and relationships are represented as diamonds. The attrib­
utes for each entity are listed, and the primary key is underlined. 
ER modeling is valuable because it allows database designers to communi­
cate with users throughout the organization to ensure that all entities and 
the relationships among the entities are represented. This process under­
scores the importance of taking all users into account when designing 
organizational databases. Notice that all entities and relationships in our 
example are labeled in terms that users can understand. 
3.  Understand the process of normalization and the process of joins. 
Normalization is a method for analyzing and reducing a relational database 
to its most streamlined form to ensure minimum redundancy, maximum 
data integrity, and optimal processing performance. When data are nor­
malized, attributes in each table depend only on the primary key. 
The join operation combines records from two or more tables in a database 
to produce information that is located in diff erent tables. 
Glossary 
attribute Each characteristic or quality describing a particular entity. 
binary relationship A relationship that exists when two entities are 
associated. 
business rules Precise descriptions of policies, procedures, or principles 
in any organization that stores and uses data to generate information. 
connectivity Describes the classification of a relationship: one-to-one, 
one-to-many, or many-to-many. 
data dictionary A collection of definitions of data elements; data 
characteristics that use the data elements; and the individuals, business 
functions, applications, and reports that use these data elements. 
entity–relationship (ER) diagram Document that shows data entities 
and attributes and relationships among them. 
entity–relationship (ER) modeling The process of designing a 
database by organizing data entities to be used and identifying the 
relationships among them. 
functional dependency A means of expressing that the value of one 
particular attribute is associated with, or determines, a specific 
single value of another attribute. 
join operation A database operation that combines records from two 
or more tables in a database. 
normalization A method for analyzing and reducing a relational 
database to its most streamlined form to ensure minimum 
redundancy, maximum data integrity, and optimal processing 
performance. 
query by example To obtain information from a relational database, a 
user fills out a grid or template—also known as a form—to construct 
a sample or a description of the data desired. 
relationships Operators that illustrate an association between two 
entities. 
structured query language The most popular query language for 
requesting information from a relational database. 
ternary relationship A relationship that exists when three entities are 
associated. 
unary relationship A relationship that exists when an association is 
maintained within a single entity. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  Draw the entity–relationship diagram for a company that has depart-
3. You are working at a doctor’s office. You gather data on the following 
ments and employees. In this company, a department must have at 
entities: PATIENT, PHYSICIAN, PATIENT DIAGNOSIS, and TREATMENT. 
least one employee, and company employees may work in only one 
Develop a table for the entity, PATIENT VISIT. Decide on the primary 
department. 
keys and/or foreign keys that you want to use for each entity. 
2.  Draw the entity–relationship diagram for library patrons and the pro­
cess of checking out books. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PLUG IT IN 4  
Cloud Computing  
PLUG IT IN OUTLINE 
PI4.1 Introduction 
PI4.2 What Is Cloud Computing? 
PI4.3 Different Types of Clouds 
PI4.4 Cloud Computing Services 
PI4.5 The Benefits of Cloud Computing 
PI4.6 Concerns and Risks with Cloud 
Computing 
PI4.7 Web Services and Service-Oriented 
Architecture 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
PI4.1 Describe the problems that modern information technology departments face.  
PI4.2 Describe the key characteristics and advantages of cloud computing.  
PI4.3 Describe each of the four types of clouds.  
PI4.4 Explain the operational model of each of the three types of cloud services.  
PI4.5 Identify the key benefits of cloud computing.  
PI4.6 Discuss the concerns and risks associated with cloud computing.  
PI4.7 Explain the role of Web services in building a firm’s IT applications, providing  
examples. 
We devote this Plug IT In to a vital topic: cloud computing. A working knowledge of cloud computing 
will enhance your appreciation of what technology can and cannot do for a business. In addition, it 
will enable you to make an immediate contribution by analyzing how your organization manages 
its IT assets. Going further, you will be using these computing resources in your career, and you 
will have input into decisions about how your department and organization can best utilize them. 
Additionally, cloud computing can be extremely valuable if you decide to start your own business. 
This Plug IT In defines cloud computing as a type of computing that delivers convenient, 
on-demand, pay-as-you-go access for multiple customers to a shared pool of configurable comput­
ing resources (e.g., servers, networks, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly and 
easily accessed over the Internet. Cloud computing allows customers to acquire resources at any 
time and then delete them the instant they are no longer needed. We present many examples of 
how the cloud can be used for business purposes. In addition, the cloud provides you with personal 
applications. Therefore, this guide can help you plan for your own use of the cloud. For a more 
detailed discussion of how you can utilize the cloud, see the section titled IT’s Personal: “The Cloud.” 
PI4.1  Introduction 
You were introduced to the concept of IT infrastructure in Chapter 1. Recall that an organization’s 
IT infrastructure consists of IT components—hardware, software, networks, and databases—and 
IT services—developing information systems, managing security and risk, and managing data. (It 
is helpful to review Figure 1.3 of Chapter 1 here.) The organization’s IT infrastructure is the founda­
tion for all of the information systems that the organization uses. 
441 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
442 
PI4 Cloud Computing 
Modern IT infrastructure has evolved through several stages since the early 1950s, when 
firms first began to apply information technology to business applications. These stages are 
as follows: 
•  Stand-alone mainframes: Organizations initially used mainframe computers in their engi­
neering and accounting departments. The mainframe was typically housed in a secure 
area, and only MIS personnel had access to it. 
•  Mainframe and dumb terminals: Forcing users to go to wherever the mainframe was located 
was time consuming and inefficient. As a result, firms began placing so-called “dumb ter­
minals”—essentially electronic typewriters with limited processing power—in user depart­
ments. This arrangement enabled users to input computer programs into the mainframe 
from their departments, a process called remote job entry. 
•  Stand-alone personal computers: In the late 1970s, the first personal computers appeared. 
The IBM PC’s debut in 1981 legitimized the entire personal computer market. Users began 
bringing personal computers to the workplace to improve their productivity—for example, 
by using spreadsheet and word processing applications. These computers were not ini­
tially supported by the firm’s MIS department. However, as the number of personal com­
puters increased dramatically, organizations decided to support these devices, and they 
established policies as to which PCs and software they would support. 
•  Local area networks (client/server computing): When personal computers are networked, 
individual productivity increases. For this reason, organizations began to connect personal 
computers to local area networks (LANs) and then connected these LANs to the mainframe, 
a type of processing known as client/server computing. 
•  Enterprise computing: In the early 1990s, organizations began to use networking standards 
to integrate different kinds of networks throughout the firm, thereby creating enterprise 
computing. As the Internet became widespread after 1995, organizations began using the 
TCP/IP networking protocol to integrate different types of networks. All types of hardware 
were networked, including mainframes, personal computers, smartphones, printers, and 
many others. Software applications and data now flow seamlessly throughout the enter­
prise and between organizations. 
•  Cloud computing and mobile computing: Today, organizations and individuals can use the 
power of cloud computing. As you will see in this Plug IT In, cloud computing provides 
access to a shared pool of computing resources, including computers, storage, applica­
tions, and services, over a network, typically the Internet. 
Keep in mind that the computing resources in each stage can be cumulative. For instance, 
most large firms still use mainframe computers (in addition to all the other types of comput­
ing resources) as large servers to manage operations that involve millions of transactions 
per day. 
To appreciate the impacts of cloud computing, you first need to understand traditional IT 
departments in organizations and the challenges they face. Traditionally, organizations have 
utilized on-premise computing. That is, they own their IT infrastructure (their soft ware, hard­
ware, networks, and data management) and maintain it in their data centers. 
On-premise computing incurs expenses for IT infrastructure, the expert  staffs needed to 
build and maintain complex IT systems, physical facilities, software licenses, hardware, and 
staff training and salaries. Despite all of this spending, organizations, however, typically do 
not use their infrastructure to its full capacity. The majority of these expenses are typically 
applied to maintaining the existing IT infrastructure, with the remainder being allocated to 
developing new systems. As a result, on-premise computing can actually inhibit an organ­
ization’s ability to respond quickly and appropriately to today’s rapidly changing business 
environments. 
As you will see in the next section, cloud computing can help organizations manage the 
problems that traditional IT departments face with on-premise computing. The next section 
defines cloud computing and describes its essential characteristics. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What Is Cloud Computing? 443 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Describe the stages in the evolution of today’s IT infrastructure.
 2. Describe the challenges that traditional IT departments face. 
Apply the Concept PI4.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI4.1 Describe the problems 
local area network (LAN) in the client/server model of computing. 
that modern information technology departments face. 
Beginning with that stage, consider the problems that modern IT 
departments face as their systems evolve.  
STEP 1: Background (This is what you are learning.) 
Imagine that your boss has asked your advice on moving 
This section has discussed the evolution of computer 
from traditional LAN computing, in which each department 
infrastructure over time. Early computing models were called 
operates a separate network, toward enterprise or cloud 
“terminal to host”; today we have “cloud” or “distributed 
computing. What type of challenges could you help your boss 
computing” models available. A knowledge of how infrastructure 
anticipate? 
models have changed can help you understand the challenges 
confronting modern IT departments. 
STEP 3: Deliverable (This is what you turn in.) 
STEP 2: Activity (This is what you are doing.) 
Write a letter to your boss (your instructor) that describes the 
Review the evolution of IT infrastructure as presented in this 
problems that modern IT departments must address as they 
section. It is likely that all businesses today have some form of a 
evolve toward enterprise and cloud computing.  
PI4.2 What Is Cloud Computing? 
Information technology departments have always been tasked to deliver useful IT applications 
to business users. For a variety of reasons, today’s IT departments are facing increased chal­
lenges in delivering useful applications. As you study cloud computing, you will learn how it can 
help organizations manage the problems that occur in traditional IT departments. You will also 
discover why so many organizations are utilizing cloud computing. 
Cloud Computing Characteristics 
The cloud computing phenomenon has several important characteristics. We take a closer look 
at them in this section. 
Cloud Computing Provides On-Demand Self-Service. A customer can access needed 
computing resources automatically. This characteristic gives customers elasticity and flexibil­
ity. That is, customers can increase (scale up) or decrease (scale down) the amount of comput­
ing they need. 
Consider retailers. During the Christmas buying season, these firms need much more com­
putational capacity than at other times of the year. Therefore, if they used cloud computing, 
they would scale up during peak periods of business activity and scale down at other times. 
Cloud Computing Encompasses the Characteristics of Grid Computing. Grid 
computing pools various hardware and software components to create a single IT environ­
ment with shared resources. Grid computing shares the processing resources of many geo­
graphically dispersed computers across a network. 
• Grid computing enables organizations to utilize their computing resources more eff iciently. 
• Grid computing provides fault tolerance and redundancy, meaning that there is no single 
point of failure, so the failure of one computer will not stop an application from executing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
444 
PI4 Cloud Computing 
• Grid computing makes it easy to scale up—that is, to access increased computing resources 
(i.e., add more servers)—to meet the processing demands of complex applications. 
• Grid computing makes it easy to scale down (remove computers) if extensive processing is 
not needed. 
Consider Oxford University’s (the United Kingdom) Digital Mammogram National Database 
project. The project aims to improve breast cancer screening and reduce the rate of errone­
ous diagnoses. The users of the system are radiologists, doctors, and technicians who want 
to query, retrieve, process, and store patients’ breast images and diagnostic reports. These 
images tend to be large, requiring fast access, high quality, and rigid privacy. 
The system utilizes a large distributed database that runs on a grid computing system. The 
grid is formed in a collaborative way, by sharing resources (CPU cycles and data) among diff er­
ent organizations. The database contains digital mammographies with explanatory notes and 
comments about each image. Because medical and university sites have diff erent equipment, 
the images and reports are standardized before they are stored in the database. 
The system enables individual medical sites to store, process, and manage mammograms 
as digital images and to enable their use through data mining and sharing of these mammog­
raphy archives. Radiologists can collaborate on diagnoses without being in the same physical 
location. 
With this system in place, the institutions involved have improved their collaboration 
resulting in quicker and more accurate diagnoses. By pooling their resources, each institution 
gained access to a much larger and more sophisticated set of resources, without increasing 
their costs proportionately. 
Cloud Computing Encompasses the Characteristics of Utility Computing. In util­
ity computing, a service provider makes computing resources and infrastructure management 
available to a customer as needed. The provider then charges the customer for its specific us­
age rather than a flat rate. Utility computing enables companies to efficiently meet fluctuating 
demands for computing power by lowering the costs of owning the hardware infrastructure. Photograph depicting the view of a server farm with ventilation in the racks and ceiling.
Cloud Computing Utilizes Broad Network 
Access. The cloud provider’s computing resources 
are available over a network, accessed with a Web 
browser, and they are configured so that they can 
be used with any computing device. 
Cloud Computing Pools Computing Re­
sources. The provider’s computing resources are 
available to serve multiple customers. These re­
sources are dynamically assigned and reassigned 
according to customer demand. 
Cloud Computing Often Occurs on Virtual­
ized Servers. Cloud computing providers have 
placed hundreds or thousands of networked serv­
ers inside massive data centers called server farms 
(see Figure PI4.1). Recall that a server is a com­
puter that supports networks, thus enabling users 
to share files, software, and other network devices. 
Server farms require massive amounts of electrical 
power, air-conditioning, backup generators, and 
security. They also need to be located fairly closely 
to fiber-optic communications links (Figure PI4.2). 
Going further, Gartner estimates that typical 
utilization rates on servers are very low, generally 
FIGURE PI4.1 
from 5 to 10 percent. That is, most of the time, 
A server farm. Notice the ventilation in the racks and ceiling. 
organizations are utilizing only a small percentage 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What Is Cloud Computing? 445 Figure depicting cloud computing web, where one Google server farm, one Yahoo! Server farm, and one Amazon server farm are highlighted with dashed circles.
Organizational server farms in relation to the Internet. 
FIGURE PI4.2 
of their total computing capacity. Chief information officers (CIOs) tolerate this ineff iciency 
to make certain that they can supply sufficient computing resources to users in case demand 
should spike. To alleviate this problem, companies and cloud computing providers are turn­
ing to virtualization. 
Server virtualization uses software-based partitions to create multiple virtual servers— 
called virtual machines—on a single physical server. The major benefit of this system is that each 
server no longer has to be dedicated to a particular task. Instead, multiple applications can run 
on a single physical server, with each application running within its own soft ware environment. 
As a result, virtualization enables companies to increase server utilization. In addition, compa­
nies realize cost savings in two areas. First, they do not have to buy additional servers to meet 
peak demand. Second, they reduce their utility costs because they are using less energy. The 
following example illustrates the benefits of virtualization for the city of Yawata in Kyoto, Japan. 
The City of Yawata in Kyoto Prefecture, Japan (www.city.yawata.kyoto.jp) is very active in 
developing its networked city government. Deployed in 2002, the city’s information system was 
designed to support the daily operations of the city. Since that time, the system has functioned 
as an IT service for city employees and members of the public. 
Over a decade later, the city’s continuing efforts to develop a more advanced digital com­
munity had resulted in an increasing number of physical servers, with accompanying increases 
in power consumption. The rise in power utilization was a particular problem as the city has a 
strong commitment to eco-friendliness. 
POM 

 
 
 
 
446 
PI4 Cloud Computing 
MIS 
In order to reduce hardware expenses, the city had been running multiple applications on 
a single physical server, an approach that sometimes caused server availability issues. To make 
the system more secure and stable, the city wanted to have an individual dedicated server for 
each application. 
The city decided to implement a server virtualization solution and realized a number of 
benefits. First, the city reduced its number of physical servers from 12 to 4. This reduction led to 
decreases in power consumption, which has helped the city reduce its environmental impact. 
Second, each application now runs on a single virtual machine. This benefit means that server 
availability has increased markedly, each app runs more efficiently, and the entire system 
is more stable. Third, by virtualizing its data center, the city is able to address future server 
resource needs, without having to add additional physical servers. 
With cloud computing, setting up and maintaining an IT infrastructure need no longer be a 
challenge for an organization. Businesses do not have to scramble to meet the evolving needs 
of developing applications. In addition, cloud computing reduces upfront capital expenses and 
operational costs, and it enables businesses to better utilize their infrastructure and to share 
it from one project to the next. In general, cloud computing eases the difficult tasks of procur­
ing, configuring, and maintaining hardware and software environments. In addition, it allows 
enterprises to get their applications up and running faster, with easier manageability and less 
maintenance. It also enables IT to adjust IT resources (e.g., servers, storage, and networking) 
more rapidly to meet fluctuating and unpredictable business demand. 
Businesses are increasingly employing cloud computing for important and innovative 
work. Let’s take a look at Lionsgate’s (www.lionsgate.com) use of Amazon Web Services. 
Lionsgate is a global entertainment corporation that produces feature films and televi­
sion shows, which they distribute worldwide. Their products include the television show Mad 
Men and the movie Hunger Games. Their productions appear in theaters, on TV, and online. As 
a successful media and entertainment company, Lionsgate faced IT challenges that included 
need for additional IT infrastructure capacity, leading to increased costs; increasing enterprise 
application workloads; and faster time-to-market requirements. 
As a result, the company turned to Amazon Web Services (AWS; http://aws.amazon.com) 
for development and test workloads, production workloads for enterprise applications, and 
backup, archive, and disaster recovery strategies. Lionsgate’s objectives were to reduce costs, 
increase flexibility, and increase operational efficiency. Lionsgate decided to use Amazon Sim­
ple Storage Service and Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud. 
Lionsgate has experienced many benefits from using AWS. The firm has reduced the time 
required to deploy infrastructure from weeks to days or hours. Further, testing and develop­
ment for its SAP applications also requires less time. AWS has increased the speed of building 
servers, improved disaster recovery and systems backup, and increased systems availability. 
The company avoided acquiring additional data center space, saving an estimated $1 million 
over three years. Overall, Lionsgate believes that moving to AWS saved the company about 
50 percent compared to a traditional hosting facility. 
These benefits have helped Lionsgate become more agile and more responsive to rapidly 
changing conditions in the marketplace. AWS has also contributed to helping the company 
maintain its systems security. Lionsgate is able to use its existing hardware policies and proce­
dures for a secure, seamless, and scalable computing environment that requires few resources 
to manage. 
In the next section, you learn about the various ways in which customers (individuals and 
organizations) can implement cloud computing. Specifically, you will read about public clouds, 
private clouds, hybrid clouds, and vertical clouds. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Describe the characteristics of cloud computing.
 2. Define server virtualization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Different Types of Clouds 447 
Apply the Concept PI4.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI4.2 Describe the key 
This link will take you to a case study on an off shore drilling 
characteristics and advantages of cloud computing. 
company, Seadrill, that migrated from in-house data centers to a 
virtual private cloud data center.  
STEP 1: Background  
As you review the site, focus carefully on the advantages and 
concerns mentioned in the case study.  
One of the more popular virtual servers is a virtual Web server 
offered by Web hosting companies. Historically, someone would 
simply purchase and share space on a server that would host his 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
or her files. However, many people today need dedicated servers 
In a Word document, describe the key characteristics and 
that guarantee performance for their consumers. 
advantages of cloud computing for Seadrill. Submit your 
document to your instructor. 
STEP 2: Activity 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept 4.2 for PI4.2. 
PI4.3  Different Types of Clouds 
There are three major types of cloud computing that companies provide to customers or 
groups of customers: public clouds, private clouds, and hybrid clouds. A fourth type of cloud 
computing is called vertical clouds (Figure PI4.3). 
Public Cloud 
Public clouds are shared, easily accessible, multicustomer IT infrastructures that are available 
nonexclusively to any entity in the general public (individuals, groups, and/or organizations). 
Public cloud vendors provide applications, storage, and other computing resources as services 
over the Internet. These services may be free or offered on a pay-per-usage model. Samba Tech 
(www.sambatech.com) provides an example of a young company using the public cloud. 
Figure depic t ing three major
 types of cloud computing that companies provide to customers or groups of customers: public clouds, private clouds, and hybrid clouds.

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
448 
PI4 Cloud Computing 
MIS 
MIS 
International media companies such as Viacom (www.viacom.com), Bloomberg (www 
.bloomberg.com), and ESPN (www.espn.com) rely on Samba Tech to deliver video content to 
online viewers across Latin America. As a result of its rapid growth, Samba decided to utilize 
cloud computing. The firm’s chief technology officer noted that buying and managing complex 
IT (i.e., on-premise computing) was never part of the company’s strategy. 
Samba turned to Rackspace (www.rackspace.com), a public cloud provider, to help it with 
its huge IT capacity demands. In 2009, Samba needed Rackspace to host about 1 terabyte of 
data. In 2015, Rackspace hosts over 100 terabytes of Samba’s data. Further, when Samba needs 
additional processing power—to deliver videos for a new marketing campaign, or to coincide 
with a large sporting event—Rackspace provides that power quickly and aff ordably. 
Private Cloud 
Private clouds (also known as internal clouds or corporate clouds) are IT infrastructures that 
can be accessed only by a single entity or by an exclusive group of related entities that share 
the same purpose and requirements, such as all of the business units within a single organiza­
tion. Private clouds provide IT activities and applications as a service over an intranet within an 
enterprise. Enterprises adopt private clouds to ensure system and data security. For this rea­
son these systems are implemented behind the corporate firewall. As an example of a private 
cloud, let’s take a look at the National Security Agency (NSA; www.nsa.gov). 
The NSA was running out of storage space for hundreds of different databases that contain 
information needed to run the agency as well as to produce intelligence on foreign matters. As 
a result, NSA analysts had to access many different databases to do their jobs. Questions that 
spanned more than one database had to be manually integrated by the analyst. The agency 
had to consolidate its databases to make its analysts more efficient and eff ective. 
At first, the NSA decided to simply add more storage capacity. However, this approach 
actually added to the problem, so the agency decided to implement a private cloud. By putting 
all its different databases in one private cloud, analysts had to interface with only one system, 
making their jobs much easier. 
The private cloud contains data that the agency acquires and uses for its missions. The 
cloud has strict security protocols and strong encryption, and has a distributed architecture 
across multiple geographic areas. In addition, the cloud provides a way to track every instance 
of every individual accessing data as specific as a single word or name in a file. This tracking 
includes when the data arrived, who can access them, who did access them, who downloaded 
them, copied them, printed them, forwarded them, modified them, or deleted them. Further, if 
the data have legal requirements, such as they must be purged at the five-year point, a notice 
will automatically tell NSA staff that the data need to be purged. One agency staff member 
noted that if the NSA had had this ability at the time, it is unlikely that U.S. soldier Bradley Man­
ning would have succeeded in obtaining classified documents in 2010. 
After implementation of the private cloud, analysts can perform tasks in minutes that once 
took days, overall data management costs have decreased, and the security of the data has 
been greatly enhanced. 
Hybrid Cloud 
Hybrid clouds are composed of public and private clouds that remain unique entities, but 
are nevertheless tightly integrated. This arrangement offers users the benefits of multiple 
deployment models. Hybrid clouds deliver services based on security requirements, the mis­
sion-critical nature of the applications, and other company-established policies. For example, 
customers may need to maintain some of their data in a private cloud for security and privacy 
reasons while storing other, less-sensitive data in a public cloud because it is less expensive. 
Let’s examine an example of hybrid cloud computing in the city of Asheville, North Carolina. 
POM 
Operating a disaster recovery (DR) facility is expensive, complex, and time consuming 
because an organization has to set up and maintain an entire backup information technology 
infrastructure. The new chief information officer of the city of Asheville, North Carolina quickly 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cloud Computing Services 449 
noticed that Asheville had a DR facility, but it was located only two blocks from the city’s main 
data center. This situation meant that there was not enough geographic dispersal for eff ective 
recovery from a disaster. 
He turned to cloud computing to help Asheville obtain the necessary geographic dispersal 
for its DR efforts. He wanted to provide disaster recovery for the city’s on-premise applications 
in the public cloud. As a result, the city used CloudVelox (www.cloudvelox.com), a cloud vendor 
that offers automated cloud migration and disaster recovery software for deploying organi­
zations’ applications and services to the cloud. The city’s apps remain in storage in the cloud, 
ready to be activated if and when they are needed. As the city operates its apps on its private 
cloud in its main data center, the apps on the public cloud are automatically updated in real 
time. 
Operating the city’s DR efforts on the cloud reduced the overall DR cost. Further, the city’s 
financial results improved because the DR efforts are now an operating expenditure rather than 
a capital expenditure. 
Vertical Clouds 
It is now possible to build cloud infrastructure and applications for diff erent businesses—the 
construction, finance, or insurance businesses, for example—thus building vertical clouds (see 
www.verticalcloud.com). 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What is a public cloud?
 2. What is a private cloud?
 3. What is a hybrid cloud?
 4. What is a vertical cloud? 
Apply the Concept PI4.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI4.3 Identify a use case 
STEP 2: Activity 
scenario for each of the four types of clouds. 
Refer to the Boeing example presented in this section. Boeing 
employs a hybrid cloud. As you have seen, there are many 
possible strategies for utilizing the cloud. Imagine a use case 
scenario for Boeing for each type of cloud.  
STEP 1: Background 
This section describes four types of clouds: public, private, 
hybrid, and vertical. The common feature among all four types is 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
that resources are hosted remotely and made available to a wide 
range of devices over high-speed Internet connections. All four 
Build a table that identifies a use case scenario for each of the 
types display the basic features of the cloud that were presented 
four types of clouds for Boeing.  
in earlier sections. However, the applications of these features 
differ for each type.  
PI4.4 Cloud Computing Services 
Cloud computing services are based on three models: infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS), 
platform-as-a-service (PaaS), and software-as-a-service (SaaS). These models repre­
sent the three types of computing generally required by consumers: infrastructure to run 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
450 
PI4 Cloud Computing 
FIGURE PI4.4  Comparison of 
on-premise soft ware, infrastruc­
ture-as-a-service, platform-as­
a-service, and soft ware-as-a­
service. 
software and store data (IaaS), platforms to develop applications (PaaS), and software 
applications to process their data (SaaS). Figure PI4.4 illustrates the differences among the 
three models. 
As you examine the figure from left to right, note that the customer manages the service 
less and less, and the vendor manages it more and more. 
Although each model has its distinctive features, all three share certain characteristics. 
First, customers rent them instead of buying them. This arrangement shifts IT from a capital 
expense to an operating expense. Second, vendors are responsible for maintenance, admin­
istration, capacity planning, troubleshooting, and backups. Finally, obtaining additional com­
puting resources—that is, scale from the cloud— is usually fast and easy. Examples are more 
storage from an IaaS vendor, the ability to handle more PaaS projects, and more users of a SaaS 
application. 
Infrastructure as a Service 
With the infrastructure-as-a-service model, cloud computing providers offer remotely acces­
sible servers, networks, and storage capacity. They supply these resources on demand from 
their large resource pools, which are located in their data centers. 
IaaS customers are often technology companies with IT expertise. These companies want 
access to computing power, but they do not want to be responsible for installing or maintaining 
it. Companies use the infrastructure to run software or simply to store data. 
To deploy their applications, IaaS users install their operating system and their applica­
tion software on the cloud computing provider’s computers. They can deploy any soft ware on 
this infrastructure, including different operating systems, applications, and development plat­
forms. Each user is responsible for maintaining their operating system and application soft ­
ware. Cloud providers typically bill IaaS services on a utility computing basis—that is, the cost 
reflects the amount of resources the user consumes. In the following example, 3M uses the IaaS 
capabilities of Microsoft Azure to develop a new app. 
The 3M Company (www.3m.com) produces more than 55,000 products for industries, 
including healthcare, retail, consumer electronics, and construction, hires 88,000 employees, 
and have customers in more than 200 countries. 
In one of its business segments, 3M helps its customers optimize parking operations by 
automating fee collection and other processes. The company had recently purchased the 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cloud Computing Services 451 
MIS 
assets of parking, tolling, and automatic license plate reader businesses, and required better 
insight into those acquisitions. 
3M needed a tracking application that its sales staff could use to obtain real-time informa­
tion about the type and location of 3M products in parking lots and garages. In order that the 
solution could be used onsite with potential customers, the app would have to provide access 
to data anytime, anywhere, and from an array of mobile devices. 
Creating an app developed specifically to operate on mobile devices meant that salespeo­
ple would be able to work everywhere and at any time. Further, after gathering new informa­
tion, salespeople would be able to seamlessly synchronize it with existing data in the cloud 
environment. 
To meet these requirements, the 3M development team turned to the Microsoft Azure 
(http://azure.microsoft .com) infrastructure-as-a-service platform. Using the Azure IT infra­
structure, the team was able to develop the app in two days over one weekend. 
Salespeople are now using the asset-tracking app to display real-time information about 
3M installations. Whenever a salesperson enters new data, the information is immediately 
available to others through Notification Hubs, which is a “push notification” software tool in 
Azure. The app also uses the GPS and mapping technologies built into mobile devices to auto­
matically provide visual, location-specific information to the 3M sales force. 
Platform as-a-Service 
In the platform-as-a-service model, customers rent servers, operating systems, storage, a 
database, software development technologies such as Java and .NET, and network capacity 
over the Internet. The PaaS model allows the customer both to run existing applications and 
to develop and test new applications. PaaS offers customers several advantages, which include 
the following: 
• Application developers can develop and run their software solutions on a cloud platform 
without the cost and complexity of buying and managing the underlying hardware and 
soft ware layers. 
• Underlying computing and storage resources automatically scale to match application 
demand. 
• Operating system features can be upgraded frequently. 
• Geographically distributed development teams can work together on soft ware develop­
ment projects. 
• PaaS services can be provided by diverse sources located throughout the world. 
• Initial and ongoing costs can be reduced by the use of infrastructure services from a single 
vendor rather than maintaining multiple hardware facilities that often perform duplicate 
functions or suffer from incompatibility problems. 
As an example of an entity that employed PaaS to improve its performance, con­
sider Novartis International AG (www.novartis.com), a pharmaceutical company based 
in Basel, Switzerland. The company employs approximately 100,000 people in 140 coun­
tries and has core businesses in pharmaceuticals, vaccines and diagnostics, and con­
sumer health. 
Novartis needed an alternative to its systems development process. The process was 
inflexible, expensive, and delivered new functionality much too slowly. These problems meant 
that the company was limited in the number of new development projects it could undertake. 
Novartis needed to reduce systems development effort and cost, while delivering systems with 
required functionality more quickly. 
As a result, Novartis turned to Dell Boomi AtomSphere (www.boomi.com) for its plat-
form-as-a-service product. Using this PaaS product, Novartis was able to reduce development 
efforts, and deliver twice the amount of new functionality in one-sixth the time than was pos­
sible earlier. 
MIS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
452 
PI4 Cloud Computing 
Soft ware-as-a-Service 
With the soft ware-as-a-service delivery model, cloud computing vendors provide soft ware 
that is specific to their customers’ requirements. SaaS is the most widely utilized service model, 
and it provides a broad range of software applications. SaaS providers typically charge their 
customers a monthly or yearly subscription fee. 
SaaS applications reside in the cloud instead of on a user’s hard drive or in a data center. 
The host manages the software and the infrastructure that runs this software and stores the 
customer’s data. The customers do not control either the software, beyond the usual config­
uration settings, or the infrastructure, beyond changing the resources they use, such as the 
amount of disk space required for their data. This process eliminates the need to install and run 
the application on the user’s computers, thereby simplifying maintenance and support. 
What differentiates SaaS applications from other applications is their ability to scale. As a 
result, applications can run on as many servers as is necessary to meet changing demands. This 
process is transparent to the user. 
To reduce the risk of an infrastructure outage, SaaS providers regularly back up all of their 
customers’ data. Customers can also back up their data on their storage hardware. 
To understand how SaaS operates, consider Zenefits (www.zenefits.com). Most businesses 
with fewer than 1,000 employees arrange for various benefit packages (e.g., health insurance 
plans, 401(k) plans, and many others) not through the companies themselves, but through bro­
kers who collect fees for managing these plans. SMBs (small-to-medium size businesses) save 
time and money by having brokers negotiate deals with benefits providers. 
San Francisco startup Zenefits offers SMBs a software-as-a-service product that simplifies 
the process of completing forms, collects all the necessary HR data in one interface, and off ers 
preset rates for its lists of available insurers. Further, Zenefits does not charge for its soft ware. 
The company makes money through fees that benefits providers pay for people signing up for 
their plans. Since the company’s founding in 2013, more than 2,000 SMBs have signed up for its 
SasS HR soft ware. 
For example, on a new worker’s first day, she can log in to the Zenefits Web site to register 
for health plans, 401(k) plans, stock options, flexible spending accounts, and other benefits. 
She enters her personal information, selects from lists of health and financial plans, and signs 
documents with a finger on any monitor that acts as a touchscreen. The Zenefits system can 
also be used to keep track of her vacation days and time sheets. The system can also manage 
terminations. 
HRM 
IT’s Personal: “The Cloud” 
This Plug IT In defines the cloud as distributed computing services, 
and it presents many examples of how the cloud can be used for 
both personal and business purposes. This IT’s Personal is intended 
to help you differentiate between the business and personal appli­
cations of the cloud and to help you plan for your own use of the 
cloud. 
First, you need to understand that there is no single “cloud.” 
Rather, almost all businesses refer to their Internet-based services 
as “cloud services.” Basically, anything you do over the Internet 
that you used to do on a local computer is a form of cloud com­
puting. When you store files on Dropbox, create a document using 
Google Docs, use iCloud to store purchases or sync documents, or 
use OnLive on your iPad, you are using cloud-based services that 
are intended for personal use. 
Infrastructure-as-a-service is an important application of the 
cloud for personal purposes. Dropbox is one of the most prominent 
companies in this area. In the past, users had to carry around a USB 
drive, a CD, an external hard drive, or (way back in the day) floppy 
disks to store their personal information. Today, users can employ 
Dropbox for this purpose. At the time of this writing, a free Dropbox 
account offered 2 GB of online storage. Not only does Dropbox off er 
you a place to store your files (eliminating the need for a personal 
infrastructure of removable storage), but it also provides synchro­
nization across computers and access from mobile devices! 
Virtualization is gaining ground. If you have an iPad, you 
should look up the app called “OnLive” and give it a test run. On-
Live allows you to log into a virtual computer that is running Win­
dows 7 or Windows 8. Here, your iPad is simply providing the input/ 
output, and the server is “serving up” a virtual operating system. 
It is very likely that one day your home computer will be virtual as 
well. 
Software-as-a-service has been a popular option for quite 
some time. For example, Google Docs offers Internet-based word 
processing, spreadsheet, presentation, forms, and drawing tools. 
Recently, Microsoft has moved into the game with their Microsoft 
Office 365 product. Basically, each of these services allows you to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Benefits of Cloud Computing 453 
use a computer program without having to install it on your com­
puter or mobile device. You simply access the entire program (and 
your saved files) over the Internet. 
Google has combined a couple of these cloud services with 
Google Drive, a service that offers the same services as Dropbox in 
addition to Google Docs’ online editing and file-sharing capabili­
ties. This also crosses over with SaaS because of the added benefit 
of Google Docs. It is very likely that one day Google will merge vir­
tualization, infrastructure, and software into a single cloud-based 
service. If this technology becomes available, then all you will need 
as a consumer is an Internet-connected device, and you will be able 
to store, access, edit, and share your files from the cloud. You will 
also be able to choose apps to run on your “virtual machine” much 
the way you currently purchase applications for your mobile de­
vices from a vendor-approved store. 
So, what is the point? Simply, cloud-based services are here to 
stay. The rise of ubiquitous Internet access has engendered a new 
world of possibilities. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Describe infrastructure-as-a-service.
 2. Describe platform-as-a-service.
 3. Describe soft ware-as-a-service. 
A word of caution, however. Along with its seemingly endless 
possibilities, cloud computing raises many critical security and 
privacy issues. Because your files, apps, and editing capability 
will no longer be stored on a local machine, they are only as safe 
as the company to which you have entrusted them makes them. 
So, when you select a cloud provider, make sure you choose 
wisely! 
A subset of SaaS is the desktop-as-a-service (DaaS) model, also 
known as a cloud desktop or desktop in the cloud. In this model, a 
SaaS provider hosts a software environment for a desktop personal 
computer, including productivity and collaboration soft ware— 
spreadsheets, word processing programs, and so on—such as 
Google Apps, Microsoft 365, and other products. The DaaS model 
can be financially advantageous for consumers because they do 
need to purchase a fully configured personal computer, or fat cli­
ent. In addition, this model makes the PC environment simpler to 
deploy and administer. 
Apply the Concept PI4.4 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI4.4 Explain the 
STEP 2: Activity 
operational model of each of the three types of cloud services. 
Review the material in this section. For each operational model, 
consider who owns the infrastructure, the operating systems, and 
the applications.  
STEP 1: Background 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Infrastructure-as-a-service, platform-as-a-service, and soft ware­
as-a-service are relatively new processing models made available 
In a Word document, explain the operational model for each of 
by the rise in dependable, high-speed Internet access and 
the three types of cloud services by highlighting the diff erences in 
powerful “host-computer” processing capabilities. The three 
who is responsible for the infrastructure, the operating systems, 
cloud models are differentiated by how users employ them and 
and the applications for each model. Submit your document to 
which services providers offer with each one.  
your instructor. 
PI4.5 The Benefits of Cloud Computing 
Cloud computing offers benefits for both individuals and organizations. It allows companies 
to increase the scale and power of their IT and the speed at which it can be deployed and 
accessed. It eliminates administrative problems and it operates across locations, devices, and 
organizational boundaries. 
Nearly half of the respondents in a recent CIO Economic Impact survey indicated that they 
evaluate cloud computing options first—before traditional IT approaches—before making any 
new IT investments. IBM predicts that the global cloud computing market will grow 22 percent 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
454 
PI4 Cloud Computing 
annually to $241 billion by 2020. Next we examine three major benefits that cloud computing 
provides to individuals and organizations. 
Benefit 1: Cloud Computing Has a Positive Impact on 
Employees 
Cloud computing enables companies to provide their employees with access to all the infor­
mation they need no matter where they are, what device they are using, or with whom they are 
working. Consider this example. 
The attorneys of one multistate law firm needed to access documents and data on a con­
stant basis. Since 2000, the firm’s data volume had expanded from 30 gigabytes to more than 
40 terabytes. Moreover, all of these data have to be stored and accessed securely. In the past, 
attorneys oft en had to manually copy case-relevant data onto external hard drives and USB 
devices, and then ship these devices back and forth among themselves and the firm’s head­
quarters. These processes were nonsecure, time-consuming, and expensive. 
To address these needs, the law firm turned to cloud computing for data storage, off site 
disaster recovery, and multisite access within a highly secure public cloud. Rather than main­
taining a massive inventory of extra storage as required by its old IT infrastructure, the firm can 
now increase storage capacity on demand. The cloud provides attorneys with constant access 
via encrypted communication channels. Furthermore, the cloud facilitates collaboration 
among distributed teams of attorneys, thereby increasing their overall productivity. The cloud 
environment has made the firm’s attorneys much more efficient and the firm’s IT expenses 
have declined by 60 percent. 
Benefit 2: Cloud Computing Can Save Money 
Over time, the cost of building and operating an on-premise IT infrastructure will typically be 
more expensive than implementing the cloud computing. Cloud providers purchase massive 
amounts of IT infrastructure (e.g., hardware and bandwidth) and gain cost savings by buying in 
large quantity. As a result, these providers continually take advantage of Moore’s law (discussed 
in Plug IT In 2). For example, the Amazon cloud, known as Amazon Web Services, reduced its 
prices many times over the last 10 years. 
As a result, cloud computing can reduce or eliminate the need to purchase hardware, 
build and install software, and pay software licensing fees. The organization pays only for 
the computing resources it needs, and then only when it needs them. This pay-for-use 
model provides greater flexibility and it eliminates or reduces the need for significant capital 
expenditures. 
Let’s consider the United States General Services Administration (GSA; www.gsa.gov). 
In 2010, the agency began a multiyear strategy to migrate core agency information systems 
to the cloud. In the first phase of the strategy, the GSA migrated 17,000 employees to Google 
Apps, making it the first federal agency to move basic e-mail and collaboration services entirely 
into a cloud environment. The GSA notes that the migration saves the agency approximately 
$3 million per year. 
In the second phase of the strategy, the GSA worked with Salesforce.com (www.salesforce 
.com) to implement cloud-based software that made it easier for GSA employees to collaborate 
on projects, share and manage case files, find internal subject-matter experts, and capture new 
ideas. In one instance, employees used the software to generate 640 ideas in 30 days to stream­
line GSA business processes, an initiative that eventually saved the agency $5 million per year. 
The GSA also established a rapid application development platform (discussed in Chapter 
14) in the cloud. Within six months, GSA’s IT department developed and delivered more than 
100 enterprise applications that replaced more than 1700 legacy applications. The new appli­
cations lowered the total cost of ownership by 92 percent. 
And the bottom line? The GSA spent $593 million on IT in fiscal year 2014, nearly $100 mil­
lion less than the previous year. 
MIS 
MIS 
HRM 

 
 
 
 
 
Concerns and Risks with Cloud Computing 455 
Benefit 3: Cloud Computing Can Improve Organizational 
Flexibility and Competitiveness 
Cloud computing allows organizations to use only the amount of computing resources they 
need at a given time. Therefore, companies can efficiently scale their operations up or down as 
needed to meet rapidly changing business conditions. Cloud computing is also able to deliver 
computing services faster than the on-premise computing. 
Consider PAC2000A (http://www.pac2000a.it/), a large Italian retailer. The company had 
been using a custom-developed, in-house application to manage shelf prices across more than 
1,000 outlets. The pricing application was not able to incorporate consumer demand into its 
algorithms, whether on a national or a local scale. When the retailer implemented a SaaS-based 
POM 
price optimization system, it gained sophisticated analytical capabilities on very detailed cost 
and competitors’ data. This process led to more precise localized pricing decisions, more accu­
rate forecasts, and a 2.4 percent increase in comparable store sales. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Describe how cloud computing can help organizations expand the scope of their business operations.
 2. Describe how cloud computing can help organizations respond quickly to market changes. 
Apply the Concept PI4.5 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI4.5 Identify the key  
link will take you to the amazon.com site that describes Amazon’s 
benefits of cloud computing.  
business cloud services.  This site contains several customer 
testimonials. As you watch them, look for common benefits the 
various customers receive from cloud computing.  
STEP 1: Background 
This section has outlined the benefits that are driving many 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
organizations to transition to cloud computing. Productivity, cost 
Based on the video and the material in this section, identify 
reductions, collaboration, more robust data mining, flexibility, 
the key benefits of cloud computing that amazon.com off ers its 
and scope expansion are just the beginning. Cloud  computing is a 
business customers. 
powerful tool that is changing the ways we do business. 
STEP 2: Activity 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept PI4.5.  This 
PI4.6 Concerns and Risks with Cloud 
Computing 
Gartner predicts that cloud computing will grow at an annual rate of 19 percent through the 
year 2015. Even if this prediction is accurate, however, cloud computing will still account for 
less than 5 percent of total worldwide IT spending that year. Why is this percentage so low? The 
reason is that there are serious concerns with cloud computing. These concerns fall into six cat­
egories: legacy IT systems, reliability, privacy, security, the legal and regulatory environment, 
and criminal use of cloud computing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
456 
PI4 Cloud Computing 
Concern 1: Legacy IT Systems 
Historically, organizational IT systems have accumulated a diversity of hardware, operat­
ing systems, and applications. When bundled together, these systems are called “legacy 
spaghetti.” These systems cannot easily be transferred to the cloud because they must 
first be untangled and simplified. Furthermore, many IT professionals have vested inter­
ests in various legacy systems, and they resist efforts to exchange these systems for cloud 
computing. 
Concern 2: Reliability 
Many skeptics contend that cloud computing is not as reliable as a well-managed, on-prem­
ise IT infrastructure. Although cloud providers are improving the redundancy and reliability of 
their offerings, outages still occur. Consider the examples of Dropbox and Google. 
On January 10, 2014, file-sharing service Dropbox (www.dropbox.com) went off line for 
about two days. Although hackers tried to claim credit for the crash, Dropbox said that the 
outage was its own fault. According to the company, a programming error caused upgrades 
its operating system to be applied on actively running machines during routine maintenance. 
Engineers attempted to restore the systems from backups, but thanks to the sheer size of Drop­
box’s databases, it took two days to get back to normal. The company maintained that no user 
data were damaged or compromised. 
Then, on March 14, 2014, Dropbox service stopped working for about one hour. Users 
received errors when attempting to access the Dropbox Web site or mobile apps. The company 
acknowledged the outage on Twitter, describing it only as a “service issue.” Forty minutes aft er 
that first tweet, Dropbox said that the issue had been resolved. The company never went into 
detail about what exactly happened with this outage. 
When Gmail, Google Calendar, Google Docs, and Google+ go off line, people  notice. 
On January 24, 2014, these Google services went down for some 25 minutes. Google says a 
software bug on its end caused the glitch. According to engineers, a system that controls the 
services sent faulty configurations to a variety of servers, which resulted in widespread errors. 
Google had everything back up and running for most folks in about 25 minutes, but for some 
users, it took 30 minutes to an hour for services to get back online. 
Then, on March 17, 2014, several Google services went down for about three and one-half 
hours, including Google Hangouts, Google Voice, and parts of Google Drive. Once again, Google 
blamed maintenance problems. The company said that routine procedures redirected traf­
fic to the wrong set of servers, causing a cycle of overloaded machines trying to handle more 
requests than they could manage. 
Concern 3: Privacy 
Privacy advocates have criticized cloud computing for posing a major threat to privacy because 
the providers control, and thus lawfully or unlawfully monitor, the data and communication 
stored between the user and the host company. For example, AT&T and Verizon collaborated 
with NSA to use cloud computing to record more than 10 million phone calls between Ameri­
can citizens. In addition, providers could accidentally or deliberately alter or even delete some 
information. 
Using a cloud computing, provider also complicates data privacy because of the extent to 
which cloud processing and cloud storage are used to implement cloud services. The point is 
that customer data may not remain on the same system or in the same data center. This situa­
tion can lead to legal concerns over jurisdiction. 
There have been efforts to address this problem by integrating the legal environment. One 
example is the US-EU Safe Harbor, a streamlined process for U.S. companies to comply with the 
European Union directive on the protection of personal data. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concerns and Risks with Cloud Computing 457 
MIS 
Concern 4: Security 
Critics also question how secure cloud computing really is. Because the characteristics of 
cloud computing can differ widely from those of traditional IT architectures, providers need to 
reconsider the effectiveness and efficiency of traditional security mechanisms. Security issues 
include access to sensitive data, data segregation (among customers), privacy, error exploita­
tion, recovery, accountability, malicious insiders, and account control. 
The security of cloud computing services is a contentious issue that may be delaying the 
adoption of this technology. Security issues arise primarily from the unease of both the pri­
vate and public sectors with the external management of security-based services. The fact that 
providers manage these services provides great incentive for them to prioritize building and 
maintaining strong security services. 
Another security issue involves the control over who is able to access and utilize the infor­
mation stored in the cloud. (Recall our discussion of least privilege in Chapter 7.) Many organiza­
tions exercise least-privilege controls effectively with their on-premise IT infrastructures. Some 
cloud computing environments, in contrast, cannot exercise least-privilege controls eff ectively. 
This problem occurs because cloud computing environments were originally designed for indi­
viduals or groups, not for hierarchical organizations in which some people have both the right 
and the responsibility to exercise control over other people’s private information. To address 
this problem, cloud computing vendors are working to incorporate administrative, least-privi­
lege functionality into their products. In fact, many have already done so. 
Consider Panama City, Florida as an example. Panama City was one of the first cities in the 
United States to adopt Google Apps for Government. The city was searching for a way to gain vis­
ibility into who was using Google Apps and how users were collaborating both inside and outside 
the city’s IT domain. Further, the city had to have the ability to control and enforce data-sharing 
policies where necessary. The city decided to adopt CloudLock (www.cloudlock.com). 
CloudLock provides a security system to protect its clients’ information assets located 
in public cloud applications such as Google Apps. CloudLock provides key data management 
issues such as the following: 
• Data inventory: How many information assets exist and what are their types? 
• Which information assets are shared with the public or over the Internet? 
• Who has access to what information asset and what information asset is accessible to  
whom?  
Using CloudLock, Panama City was able to notify data owners of policy violations or 
exposed documents containing potentially sensitive information; change or revoke excessive 
privilege; and audit permissions changes. Further, the city’s IT manager was able to designate 
department leaders to manage their respective organizational unit’s data policies and usage by 
giving them access to the CloudLock application. 
Concern 5: The Regulatory and Legal Environment 
There are numerous legal and regulatory barriers to cloud computing, many of which involve 
data access and transport. For example, the European Union prohibits consumer data from 
being transferred to nonmember countries without the consumers’ prior consent and approval. 
Companies located outside the European Union can overcome this restriction by demonstrat­
ing that they provide a “safe harbor” for the data. Some countries, such as Germany, have 
enacted even more restrictive data export laws. Cloud computing vendors are aware of these 
regulations and laws, and they are working to modify their off erings so that they can assure 
customers and regulators that data entrusted to them are secure enough to meet all of these 
requirements. 
To obtain compliance with regulations such as the Federal Information Security Manage­
ment Act (FISMA), the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), and the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act in the United States, the Data Protection Directive in the European Union, 
ACCT 
FIN 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
458 
PI4 Cloud Computing 
and the credit card industry’s Payment Card Industry’s Data Security Standard (PCI DSS), cloud 
computing customers may have to adopt hybrid deployment modes that are typically more 
expensive and may offer restricted benefits. This process is how, for example, Google is able to 
“manage and meet additional government policy requirements beyond FISMA,” and Rackspace 
(www.rackspace.com) is able to claim PCI compliance. FISMA requires each federal agency to 
develop, document, and implement a program to provide information security for the infor­
mation and information systems that support the operations of the agency, including those 
provided by contractors. PCI DSS is a set of requirements designed to ensure that all companies 
that process, store, or transmit credit card information maintain a secure environment. 
Concern 6: Criminal Use of Cloud Computing 
Cloud computing makes available a well-managed, generally reliable, scalable global infra­
structure that is, unfortunately, as well suited to illegal computing activities as it is to legitimate 
business activities. We look at a number of possible illegal activities here. 
The huge amount of information stored in the cloud makes it an attractive target for data 
thieves. 
Cloud computing makes immense processing power available to anyone. Criminals using 
cloud computing have access to encryption technology and anonymous communication chan­
nels that make it difficult for authorities to detect their activities. When law enforcement pur­
sues criminals, the wrongdoers can rapidly shut down computing resources in the cloud, thus 
greatly decreasing the chances that there will be any clues left for forensic analysis. When crim­
inals no longer need a machine and shut it down, other clients of cloud vendors immediately 
reuse the storage and computational capacity allocated to that machine. Therefore, the crim­
inal information is overwritten by data from legitimate customers. It is nearly impossible to 
recover any data after the machine has been “de-provisioned.” 
Criminals are registering for an account (with assumed names and stolen credit cards, of 
course) with a cloud vendor and “legitimately” using services for illegal purposes. For example, 
criminals are using Gmail or the text-sharing Web site Pastebin (www.pastebin.com) to plan 
crimes and share stolen information. Another example is that criminals use cloud computing 
in brute-force password cracking (see Chapter 7). Although such uses are prohibited by most 
company’s terms-of-service agreements, policing the cloud is expensive and not very reward­
ing for cloud providers. 
Many cloud vendors offer geographical diversity—that is, virtual machines that are located 
in different physical locations around the world. Criminals can use this feature in transnational 
attacks. Such attacks place political and technical obstacles in the way of authorities seeking 
to trace a cyberattack back to its source. 
Another weakness exploited by criminals arises from the Web-based applications, or SaaS 
offerings, provided by cloud vendors. With millions of users commingling on tens of thousands 
of servers, a criminal can easily mix in among legitimate users. 
Even more complicated for authorities and victims, cyberattacks can originate within 
cloud programs that we use and trust. For instance, researchers at the security firm F-Secure 
reported that they had detected several phishing sites hosted within Google Docs. What made 
the attacks possible is a feature within Google’s spreadsheet system that lets users create Web-
based forms, with titles such as “Webmail Account Upgrade” and “Report a Bug.” These forms, 
located on a Google server, were authenticated with Google’s encryption certificate. Signifi­
cantly, they requested sensitive information such as the user’s full name, username, Google 
password, and so on, according to the F-Secure researchers. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Discuss the various risks of cloud computing.
 2. In your opinion, which risk is the greatest? Support your answer. 

 
 
 
 
 
Web Services and Service-Oriented Architecture 459 
Apply the Concept PI4.6 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI4.6 Discuss the concerns  
computing that senior managers need to consider. As you read 
and risks associated with cloud computing.  
the article, try to organize the managers’ thoughts according 
to the concerns presented in this section: legacy systems, 
costs, reliability, security, privacy, and regulatory and legal 
STEP 1: Background 
environment. 
This section has discussed why the risks associated with cloud 
Imagine you have just overheard a conversation about how 
computing outweigh the benefits for some organizations. The 
wonderful cloud computing is that mentioned all of the positives 
statistics provided early on that cloud computing will remain 
and none of the negatives.  How would you respond? 
a small portion of IT spending reflect concerns regarding these 
risks. 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
STEP 2: Activity  
Based on the material contained in this section and the 
information conveyed in the article, write a response to the above 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
scenario that discusses the concerns and risks associated with 
and click on the link provided for Plug IT In 4.6. This link will 
cloud computing. 
take you to an article that addresses some of the risks of cloud 
PI4.7 Web Services and Service-Oriented 
Architecture 
Thus far we have explained how cloud computing can deliver a variety of functionality to users 
in the form of services (think IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS). We conclude by examining Web services 
and service-oriented architecture. 
Web services are applications delivered over the Internet (the cloud) that MIS profession­
als can select and combine through almost any device, from personal computers to mobile 
phones. By using a set of shared standards, or protocols, these applications permit diff erent 
systems to “talk” with one another—that is, to share data and services—without requiring 
human beings to translate the conversations. Web services have enormous potential because 
they can be employed in a variety of environments: over the Internet, on an intranet inside a 
corporate firewall, on an extranet set up by business partners. In addition, they perform a wide 
variety of tasks, from automating business processes to integrating components of an enter­
prisewide system to streamlining online buying and selling. 
Web services provide numerous benefits for organizations: 
• The organization can utilize the existing Internet infrastructure without having to imple­
ment any new technologies. 
• Organizational personnel can access remote or local data without having to understand 
the complexities of this process. 
• The organization can create new applications quickly and easily. 
The collection of Web services that are used to build a firm’s IT applications constitutes a 
service-oriented architecture. Businesses accomplish their processes by executing a series 
of these services. One of the major benefits of Web services is that they can be reused across an 
organization in other applications. For example, a Web service that checks a consumer’s credit 
could be used with a service that processes a mortgage application or a credit card application. 
Web services are based on four key protocols: XML, SOAP, WSDL, and UDDI. Extensible 
markup language (XML) is a computer language that makes it easier to exchange data among 
a variety of applications and to validate and interpret these data. XML is a more powerful and 
flexible markup language than hypertext markup language (HTML). HTML is a page-descrip­
tion language for specifying how text, graphics, video, and sound are placed on a Web page doc­
ument. HTML was originally designed to create and link static documents composed primarily 

 
 
 
460 
PI4 Cloud Computing 
FIGURE PI4.5 (a) Screenshot of an HTML wrapper. This wrapper gives instructions on how to open a video associated with this book. 
(b) Example of XML tagging done in Chapter 8 of this book. 
of text (Figure PI4.5). Today, however, the Web is much more social and interactive, and many 
Web pages have multimedia elements, such as images, audio, and video. To integrate these 
rich media into Web pages, users had to rely on third-party plug-in applications such as Flash, 
Silverlight, and Java. Unfortunately for users, these add-ons require both additional program­
ming and extensive computer processing. 
The next evolution of HTML, called HTML5, solves this problem by enabling users to embed 
images, audio, and video directly into a document without the add-ons. HTML5 also makes it 
easier for Web pages to function across different display devices, including mobile devices and 
desktops. HTML5 also supports offline data storage for apps that run over the Web. Web pages 
will execute more quickly, and they will resemble smartphone apps. HTML5 is used in a number 
of Internet platforms, including Apple’s Safari browsers, Google Chrome, and Firefox browsers. 
Google’s Gmail and Google Reader also use HTML5. Web sites listed as “iPad ready” are using 
HTML5 extensively. Examples of such sites are CNN, The New York Times, and CBS. 
Whereas HTML is limited to describing how data should be presented in the form of Web 
pages, XML can present, communicate, and store data. For example, in XML a number is not sim­
ply a number. The XML tag also specifies whether the number represents a price, a date, or a ZIP 
code. Consider this example of XML, which identifies the contact information for Jane Smith. 
<contact-info>  
<name>Jane Smith</name>  
<company>AT&T</company>  
<phone>(212) 555-4567</phone>  
</contact-info>  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Web Services and Service-Oriented Architecture 461 
Simple object access protocol (SOAP) is a set of rules that define how messages can be 
exchanged among different network systems and applications through the use of XML. These 
rules essentially establish a common protocol that allows different Web services to interoper­
ate. For example, Visual Basic clients can use SOAP to access a Java server. SOAP runs on all 
hardware and soft ware systems. 
The Web services description language (WSDL) is used to create the XML document that 
describes the tasks performed by the various Web services. Tools such as VisualStudio.Net 
automate the process of accessing the WSDL, reading it, and coding the application to refer­
ence the specific Web service. 
Universal description, discovery, and integration (UDDI) allows MIS professionals to search 
for needed Web services by creating public or private searchable directories of these services. 
In other words, UDDI is the registry of descriptions of Web services. 
Examples of Web services abound. As one example, the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) 
within the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) uses Amazon Web Services successfully. The 
FNS administers the department’s nutrition assistance programs. Its mission is to provide chil­
dren and needy families with improved access to food and a healthier diet through its food 
assistance programs and comprehensive nutrition education eff orts. 
The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP, is the cornerstone of the USDA’s 
nutrition assistance mission. More than 47 million people—most of them children—receive 
SNAP benefits each month. To help recipients, in 2010 the FNS created a Web application called 
the SNAP Retail Locator. Faced with limited budget and time to implement the solution, the 
FNS selected Amazon Web Services to host the application. As its name suggests, the SNAP 
Retail Locator, which receives 30,000 visitors per month, helps SNAP recipients find the closest 
SNAP-authorized store and also provides driving directions to the store. The application has 
been available 100 percent of the time since it was launched. In addition, by employing Ama­
zon, the FNS saved 90 percent of the cost it would have incurred had it hosted the application 
on-premises. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What are Web services?
 2. What is a service-oriented architecture? 
Apply the Concept PI4.7 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI4.7 Explain the role of Web 
then keep everything current.  This probably sounds like a lot 
services in building a firm’s IT applications, providing examples. 
of work. But, suppose someone else had done all of the work 
for you? 
STEP 1: Background  
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the link provided for Apply the Concept PI4.7.  This
Web services allow companies to increase functionality with 
link will take you to a Web site that discusses the available 
minimal effort by using standard protocols to access and share 
“widgets” (another name for an embeddable Web service) 
data.  The advantage of using Web services is that it standardizes 
that businesses can select to display on their sites.  Review the 
the Web platform.  Using the same Web protocols that allow you 
available information, and consider how it would help you add 
to access any Web site makes sharing data much easier. 
content to your bank’s intranet with minimal eff ort. 
STEP 2: Activity 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
Imagine you work for a bank and you want to display some 
Write a summary that explains the role of Web services in building 
financial data on your intranet to keep your employees up-to­
a firm’s IT applications. Include a few examples based on the 
date on major market trends.  One option is to gather data, 
options you viewed in Step 2.  
perform an analysis, build and share charts and graphs, and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
462 
PI4 Cloud Computing 
What’s in IT for me? 
For all Business Majors 
As with hardware (see Plug IT In 2), the design of enterprise IT ar­
chitectures has profound impacts for businesspeople. Personal and 
organizational success can depend on an understanding of cloud 
computing and a commitment to knowing the opportunities and 
challenges they will bring. 
At the organizational level, cloud computing has the potential 
to make the organization function more efficiently and eff ectively, 
while saving the organization money. Web services and SOA make 
the organization more flexible when deploying new IT applications. 
At the individual level, you might utilize cloud computing your­
self if you start your own business. Remember that cloud computing 
provides startup companies with world-class IT capabilities at a very 
low cost. 
Summary 
1.  Describe the problems that modern information technology 
departments face. 
Traditional IT departments (on-premise computing) face many problems: 
•  They spend huge amounts on IT infrastructure and expert staffs to build 
and maintain complex IT systems. These expenses include soft ware 
licenses, hardware, and staff training and salaries. 
•  They must manage an infrastructure that often is not used to its full 
capacity. 
•  They spend the majority of their budgets on maintaining existing IT infra­
structure, with the remainder being spent on developing new systems. 
•  They have difficulty capturing, storing, managing, and analyzing all 
these data. 
•  They can actually inhibit an organization’s ability to respond quickly and 
appropriately to rapidly changing dynamic environments. 
•  They are expensive. 
2.  Describe the key characteristics and advantages of cloud computing. 
Cloud computing is a type of computing that delivers convenient, on-de­
mand, pay-as-you-go access for multiple customers to a shared pool of 
configurable computing resources (e.g., servers, networks, storage, appli­
cations, and services) that can be rapidly and easily accessed over the Inter­
net. The essential characteristics of cloud computing include the following: 
•  Cloud computing provides on-demand self-service. 
•  Cloud computing includes the characteristics of grid computing. 
•  Cloud computing includes the characteristics of utility computing. 
•  Cloud computing utilizes broad network access. 
•  Cloud computing pools computing resources. 
•  Cloud computing typically occurs on virtualized servers. 
3.  Describe each of the four types of clouds. 
Public clouds are shared, easily accessible, multicustomer IT infrastructures 
that are available nonexclusively to any entity in the public (individuals, 
groups, and/or organizations). Private clouds (also known as internal clouds 
or corporate clouds) are IT infrastructures that are accessible only by a sin­
gle entity, or by an exclusive group of related entities that share the same 
purpose and requirements, such as all the business units within a single 
organization. Hybrid clouds are composed of public and private clouds that 
remain unique entities but are bound together, offering the benefits of mul­
tiple deployment models. Vertical clouds serve specific industries. 
4.  Explain the operational model of each of the three types of cloud 
services. 
With the infrastructure-as-a-service model, cloud computing providers 
offer remotely accessible servers, networks, and storage capacity. In the 
platform-as-a-service model, customers rent servers, operating systems, 
storage, a database, software development technologies such as Java and. 
NET, and network capacity over the Internet. With the soft ware-as-a-service 
delivery model, cloud computing vendors provide software that is specific 
to their customers’ requirements. 
5.  Identify the key benefits of cloud computing. 
The benefits of cloud computing include making individuals more pro­
ductive; facilitating collaboration; mining insights from data; developing 
and hosting applications; cost flexibility; business scalability; improved 
utilization of hardware; market adaptability; and product and service 
customization. 
6.  Discuss the concerns and risks associated with cloud computing. 
Cloud computing does raise concerns and have risks, which include legacy 
spaghetti, cost, reliability, privacy, security, and the regulatory and legal 
environment. 
7.  Explain the role of Web services in building a firm’s IT applications, 
providing examples. 
Web services are applications delivered over the Internet that MIS profes­
sionals can select and combine through almost any device, from personal 
computers to mobile phones. A service-oriented architecture makes it pos­
sible for MIS professionals to construct business applications using Web 
services. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Problem-Solving Activities 463 
Glossary  
cloud computing A technology in which tasks are performed by 
computers physically removed from the user and accessed over a 
network, in particular the Internet. 
extensible markup language (XML) A computer language that 
makes it easier to exchange data among a variety of applications and 
to validate and interpret these data. 
grid computing A technology that applies the unused processing 
resources of many geographically dispersed computers in a network 
to form a virtual supercomputer. 
HTML5 A page-description language that makes it possible to embed 
images, audio, and video directly into a document without add­
ons. Also makes it easier for Web pages to function across diff erent 
display devices, including mobile devices as well as desktops. 
Supports the storage of data off line. 
hybrid clouds Clouds composed of public and private clouds that 
remain unique entities but are bound together, offering the benefits 
of multiple deployment models. 
hypertext markup language (HTML) A page-description language 
for specifying how text, graphics, video, and sound are placed on a 
Web page document. 
infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS) A model with which cloud 
computing providers offer remotely accessible servers, networks, 
and storage capacity. 
on-premise computing A model of IT management where companies 
own their IT infrastructure (their software, hardware, networks, and 
data management) and maintain it in their data centers. 
platform-as-a-service (PaaS) A model with which customers 
rent servers, operating systems, storage, a database, soft ware 
development technologies such as Java and .NET, and network 
capacity over the Internet. 
private clouds (also known as internal clouds or corporate clouds) 
IT infrastructures that are accessible only by a single entity or by 
an exclusive group of related entities that share the same purpose 
and requirements, such as all the business units within a single 
organization. 
public clouds Shared, easily accessible, multicustomer IT 
infrastructures that are available nonexclusively to any entity in the 
general public (individuals, groups, and/or organizations). 
server farms Massive data centers, which may contain hundreds of 
thousands of networked computer servers. 
server virtualization A technology that uses soft ware-based 
partitions to create multiple virtual servers (called virtual machines) 
on a single physical server. 
service-oriented architecture An IT architecture that makes it 
possible to construct business applications using Web services. 
software-as-a-service (SaaS) A delivery model with which cloud 
computing vendors provide software that is specific to their 
customers’ requirements. 
utility computing A technology whereby a service provider makes 
computing resources and infrastructure management available to a 
customer as needed. 
Web services Applications delivered over the Internet that IT 
developers can select and combine through almost any device, from 
personal computers to mobile phones. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  What is the value of server farms and virtualization to any large organi-
3. What is the value of cloud computing to a small organization? 
zation? 
4.  What is the value of cloud computing to an entrepreneur who is starting 
2.  If you were the chief information off icer of a firm, how would you ex-
a business? 
plain the workings, benefits, and limitations of cloud computing? 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  Investigate the status of cloud computing by researching the off er-
 Microsoft (www.microsoft.com), and Google (www.google.com). Note 
ings of the following leading vendors: Dell (www.dell.com), Oracle 
any inhibitors to cloud computing. 
(www.oracle.com), IBM (www.ibm.com), Amazon (www.amazon.com), 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PLUG IT IN 5  
Artificial Intelligence  
PLUG IT IN OUTLINE 
PI5.1 Introduction to Artificial 
Intelligence 
PI5.2 Artificial Intelligence Technologies 
PI5.3 Artificial Intelligence Applications 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
PI5.1  Explain the potential value and the potential limitations of artificial intelligence. 
PI5.2  Provide use case examples of expert systems, machine learning systems, deep 
learning systems, and neural networks. 
PI5.3  Provide use case examples of computer vision, natural language processing, 
robotics, image recognition, and intelligent agents. 
PI5.1 Introduction to Artificial Intelligence 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a subfield of computer science that studies the thought processes 
of humans and re-creates the effects of those processes via information systems. We define 
artificial intelligence as the theory and development of information systems able to perform 
tasks that normally require human intelligence. That is, we define AI in terms of the tasks that 
humans perform, rather than how humans think. 
This definition raises the question, “What is intelligent behavior?” The following capabili­
ties are considered to be signs of intelligence: learning or understanding from experience, mak­
ing sense of ambiguous or contradictory messages, and responding quickly and successfully to 
new situations. 
The ultimate goal of AI is to build machines that mimic human intelligence. A widely used 
test to determine whether a computer exhibits intelligent behavior was designed by Alan 
Turing, a British AI pioneer. The Turing test proposes a scenario in which a man and a computer 
both pretend to be women or men, and a human interviewer has to identify which is the real 
human. Based on this standard, the intelligent systems exemplified in commercial AI products 
are far from exhibiting any significant intelligence. 
We can better understand the potential value of AI by contrasting it with natural (human) 
intelligence. AI has several important commercial advantages over natural intelligence, but it 
also displays some limitations, as outlined in Table PI5.1. 
It is important to distinguish between strong artificial intelligence and weak artificial intel­
ligence. Strong AI is hypothetical artificial intelligence that matches or exceeds human intel­
ligence—the intelligence of a machine that could successfully perform any intellectual task 
that a human being can. Strong AI, therefore, could be considered to have consciousness or 
sentience. Weak AI (also called narrow AI) performs a useful and specific function that once 
required human intelligence to perform, and does so at human levels or better (for example, 
character recognition, speech recognition, machine vision, robotics, data mining, medical 
informatics, automated investing, and many other functions). 
464 

 
 
 
 
 
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence 465 
TABLE PI5.1 Comparison of the Capabilities of Natural Versus Artificial Intelligence 
Capabilities 
Natural Intelligence 
Artificial Intelligence 
Preservation of knowledge 
Perishable from an organiza­
tional point of view 
Permanent 
Duplication and dissemination  
Difficult, expensive, takes 
Easy, fast, and inexpensive 
of knowledge in a computer 
time 
Total cost of knowledge 
Can be erratic and inconsis-
Consistent and thorough 
tent, incomplete at times 
Documentability of process and 
Difficult, expensive 
Fairly easy, inexpensive 
knowledge 
Creativity 
Can be very high 
Low, uninspired 
Use of sensory experiences 
Direct and rich in possibilities 
Must be interpreted first; limited 
Recognizing patterns and rela-
Fast, easy to explain 
Machine learning still not as good 
tionships 
as people in most cases, but in 
some cases better than people 
Reasoning 
Making use of wide context of 
Good only in narrow, focused, and 
experiences 
stable domains 
Today, systems that are labeled “artificial intelligence” are weak AI. Weak AI is already 
powerful enough to make a dramatic difference in human life. Weak AI applications enhance 
human endeavors by complementing what people can do. For example, when you call your 
bank and talk to an automated voice, you are probably talking to a weak AI program. Research­
ers at universities and companies around the world are building weak AI applications that are 
rapidly becoming more capable. 
Consider chess, which weak AI systems now play better than any human. In 1997, IBM’s 
Deep Blue system beat the world chess champion (Gary Kasparov) for the first time. Since that 
time, chess playing systems have become significantly more powerful. However, the way these 
systems play chess has not changed. They search through all possible future moves to find the 
best move to make next. 
Today however, the best players in the world are not machines, but what Garry Kasparov, 
a grandmaster, calls “centaurs.” Centaurs are teams of humans and chess playing programs. 
In freestyle chess matches, competitors can play unassisted as humans, unassisted as chess 
playing programs, or as centaurs. In the Freestyle Battle of 2014, pure chess playing AI soft ware 
won 42 games, while centaurs won 53 games. 
Interestingly, the advent of AI did not diminish the performance of purely human chess 
players. Quite the opposite. Cheap, highly functional chess programs have inspired more peo­
ple than ever to play chess and the players have become better than ever. In fact, today there 
are more than twice as many grandmasters as there were when Deep Blue beat Kasparov. 
Similar to centaurs, physicians who are supported by AI will have an enhanced ability to 
spot cancer in medical images; speech recognition algorithms running on smartphones will 
bring the Internet to many millions of illiterate people in developing countries; digital assis­
tants will suggest promising hypotheses for academic research; and image classification algo­
rithms will allow wearable computers to layer useful digital information onto people’s views of 
the real, physical world. 
Weak AI does present challenges. For example, consider the power that AI brings to national 
security agencies, in both autocracies and democracies. The capacity to monitor billions of 
conversations and to pick out every citizen from the crowd by his or her voice or face poses seri­
ous threats to liberty. Also, many individuals could lose their jobs as a result of advances in AI. 
Several technological advancements have led to advancements in artificial intelligence. 
We take a brief look at each of them here. 
•  Advancements in chip technology: AI systems employ graphics processing units (called GPU 
chips). These chips were developed to meet the visual and parallel processing demands of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
466 
PI5 Artificial Intelligence 
video games. In fact, GPU chips facilitate parallel processing in neural networks, which are 
the primary information architecture of AI software. (We discuss neural networks later in 
this Plug IT In.) 
•  Big Data: As we discussed in Chapter 3, Big Data consists of diverse, high-volume, high-ve­
locity information assets that require new types of processing to enable enhance decision 
making, insight discovery, and process optimization. Big Data is now being used to train 
deep learning software. (We discuss deep learning later in this Plug IT In.) 
•  The Internet and cloud computing: The Internet (discussed in Chapter 4) and cloud com­
puting (discussed in Plug IT In 4) make Big Data available to AI systems, specifically neural 
networks, and provide the computational capacity needed for AI systems. 
•  Improved algorithms: An algorithm is a problem-solving method expressed as a finite 
sequence of steps. Researchers are rapidly improving the capabilities of AI algorithms. In 
addition, AI algorithms run much faster on GPU chips. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What is artificial intelligence?
 2. Differentiate between artificial and human intelligence.
 3. Differentiate between strong AI and weak AI. 
Apply the Concept PI5.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI5.1 Explain the potential 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.) 
value and the potential limitations of artificial intelligence. 
Build a table that displays both the potential value (advantages) 
and the potential limitations (disadvantages) of artificial 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
intelligence for different scenarios illustrated in the example 
This section introduced you to several applications of artificial 
below. 
intelligence. One of these applications was the Google self-driving 
car. This innovation presents a scenario where technology could 
potentially greatly enhance the safety of motorists, pedestrians, 
and passengers. However, there are also significant risks posed by 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Tired driver 
Distracted driver 
turning over the keys to the computer. 
(texting) 
Sick/stressed driver 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you do.) 
Ambulance driver 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the link provided for Plug IT In 5.1. This link will take 
School bus driver 
you to a YouTube video that introduces the Google self-driving 
Soccer mom, mini van 
car. Although this innovation is very exciting, it can also be very 
driver 
scary! While you are watching the video, imagine the advantages 
and disadvantages of this type of intelligent system. Would it 
function best as a “pilot” or a very helpful “copilot”? 
PI5.2 Artificial Intelligence Technologies  
A variety of technologies have been developed in the field of artificial intelligence. In this sec­
tion we begin our discussion with expert systems, one of the earliest AI technologies. We con­
tinue with two technologies that have relatively recently revolutionized the field of artificial 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence Technologies 467 
intelligence: machine learning and deep learning. We then discuss neural networks that are 
essential to machine learning and deep learning. 
Expert Systems 
Expert systems (ESs) are computer systems that attempt to mimic human experts by apply­
ing expertise in a specific domain. Expert systems can either support decision makers or com­
pletely replace them. 
Essentially, an  ES transfers expertise from a domain expert (or other source) to the sys­
tem. This knowledge is then stored in the system, which users can call on for specific advice as 
needed. The system can make inferences and arrive at conclusions. Then, like a human expert, 
it offers advice or recommendations. In addition, it can explain the logic behind the advice. 
Because ESs can integrate and manipulate enormous amounts of data, they sometimes per­
form better than any single human expert can. On the other hand, expert systems do present 
problems, which include the following: 
• Transferring domain expertise from human experts to the expert system can be diff icult 
because humans cannot always explain how they know and what they know. Oft en they 
are not aware of their complete reasoning process. 
• Even if the domain experts can explain their entire reasoning process, automating that 
process may not be possible. The process might be either too complex or too vague, or 
it might require too many rules. Essentially, it is very difficult to program all the possible 
decision paths in an expert system. 
• In some contexts, there is a potential liability from the use of expert systems. Humans 
make errors occasionally, but they are generally “let off the hook” if they took reasonable 
care and applied generally accepted methods. An organization that uses an expert system, 
however, may lack this legal protection if problems arise later. The usual example of this 
issue is medical treatment, but it can also arise if a business decision driven by an expert 
system harms someone financially. 
For example, in the case of medical treatment, consider a physician who consults with a 
medical expert system when treating a patient. If the patient’s care goes poorly, then the ques­
tion arises, who is liable? The physician? The expert system? The vendor of the expert system? 
A large number of expert systems have been developed, such as MYCIN and PROSPECTOR. 
MYCIN was designed to identify bacteria causing infections and suggest appropriate antibiot­
ics. PROSPECTOR was designed to help geologists in mineral exploration. 
New developments in the field of artificial intelligence now largely take place in the areas 
of machine learning and deep learning. We turn our attention to these two technologies and 
then discuss how neural networks enable each technology. 
Machine Learning 
Machine learning develops algorithms that can learn from and make predictions about 
data. These algorithms operate by building a model from example inputs in order to make 
data-driven predictions or decisions, rather than following explicit instructions in computer 
program. Therefore, we can say that machine learning is the ability to accurately perform 
new, unseen tasks, built on known properties learned from training or historic data that are 
labeled. 
Machine learning systems have the ability to improve their performance by exposure 
to data without the need to follow explicitly programmed instructions. Essentially, machine 
learning automatically discovers patterns in data. Once discovered, the pattern can be used 
to make predictions. For instance, presented with data about credit card transactions, includ­
ing date, time, merchant, merchant location, price, and whether the transaction was legiti­
mate or fraudulent, a machine learning system learns patterns that are predictive of fraud. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
468 
PI5 Artificial Intelligence 
The more the transaction data the system processes, the better the predictions expected 
from them. 
For example, a machine learning system can be trained on e-mail messages to learn to 
distinguish between spam and nonspam messages. After learning, the system can then be used 
to classify new e-mail messages into spam and nonspam folders. The following are other exam­
ples of machine learning: 
• In banking, automated fraud detection systems use machine learning to identify behavior 
patterns that could indicate fraudulent payment activity. 
• In the life sciences, machine learning systems are used to predict cause-and-eff ect rela­
tionships from biological data and the activities of compounds, helping pharmaceutical 
companies identify promising drugs. 
POM 
MKT 
• In the oil and gas industry, producers use machine learning in many applications, from 
locating mineral deposits to diagnosing mechanical problems with drilling equipment. 
• Retailers use machine learning to discover attractive cross-sell offers and eff ective 
promotions. 
• In 2014, Google announced that it had just completed mapping the exact location of every 
business, every household, and every street number in all of France. The process took 
Google one hour. How? The company used its street-view database containing hundreds of 
millions of images. Humans manually examined a few hundred of the images and circled 
the street numbers in them. Then Google fed those labeled images into a machine-learn­
ing algorithm that figured out what was unique about the circled objects. The soft ware 
then looked for that type of object in the remainder of the images and read the numbers 
that it found. 
Deep Learning 
Deep learning is a subset of machine learning where the system discovers new patterns with­
out being exposed to labeled historical or training data. Example applications of deep learning 
include speech recognition, image recognition, natural language processing, drug discovery 
and toxicology, and customer relationship management. Let’s look at specific examples of 
deep learning. 
• In June 2012, a Google deep learning system that had been shown 10 million images from 
YouTube videos correctly identified cats, human faces, yellow flowers, and other objects 
16 percent of the time. The system identified these discrete objects even though no humans 
had ever defined or labeled them. The accuracy of the neural network was 70 percent better 
than any previous method.  
• eBay is using deep learning to categorize products in images posted by sellers. By studying 
images that have already been tagged, the system can tell the difference, for example, 
between a pair of flip-flops and a pair of flats. This process is helping eBay’s search engine, 
particularly for products that have not been tagged very accurately. 
• Facebook plans to use deep learning to help filter the posts and ads that its users see. 
Specifically, Facebook will apply deep learning to improve its users’ news feeds, the per­
sonalized list of recent updates that Facebook calls its “killer app.” The company already 
uses conventional machine learning techniques to manage the 1500 updates that average 
Facebook users could potentially see down to 30–60 that are judged to be the most likely 
to be important to them. Facebook needs to become more effective at picking the best 
updates due to the growing volume of data that its users generate. 
• Deep learning has improved voice search on smartphones. Because the multiple layers of 
neurons in a neural network (discussed next) allow for more precise training on the many 
variants of a sound, the system can recognize sounds more reliably, especially in noisy 
environments, such as offices with high levels of background conversations, or subway 
MIS 
FIN 
MKT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence Technologies 469 
platforms. Because the system is more likely to understand what the user actually said, it 
is more likely to return more accurate results.  
• At CERN, the world’s largest particle physics laboratory, deep learning algorithms are more 
accurate at identifying subatomic particles than the software written by physicists. 
• A team of researchers won a contest sponsored by Merck to identify molecules that could 
lead to new drugs. The group used deep learning to find molecules that would most likely 
bind to their targets. 
• A major U.S. insurance company is using deep learning to identify fraudulent claims. 
Neural Networks 
A neural network is a set of virtual neurons or central processing units (CPUs), which work in 
parallel in an attempt to simulate the way the human brain works, although in a greatly sim­
plified form. The neural network assigns numerical values, or weights, to connections between 
the neurons. 
Due to improvements in algorithms and increasingly powerful computer chips and stor­
age, deep learning researchers are able to model many more layers of virtual neurons in neural 
networks than previously. Current neural networks are able to simulate billions of neurons. 
Let’s look at how neural networks process an image and a sound. 
Each layer of the neural network manages a different level of abstraction. To process an 
image, for example, the first layer is fed with raw images. That layer notes aspects of the images 
such as the brightness and colors of individual pixels, and how those properties are distributed 
across the image. The next layer analyzes the first layer’s observations into more abstract cate­
gories, such as identifying edges, shadows, and so on. The next layer analyzes those edges and 
shadows, looking for combinations that signify features such as eyes, lips, and ears. The final 
layer combines these observations into a representation of a face. 
To process a sound, the first layer of processors learns the smallest unit of speech sound, 
called a phoneme. The next layer finds combinations of sound waves that occur more oft en 
than they would by chance alone. The next layer looks for combinations of speech sounds such 
as words, and the final layer can recognize complete segments of speech. 
Programmers train neural networks to detect an object or a sound by feeding the network 
with digitized images containing those objects or sounds containing those phonemes. If the 
neural network does not accurately recognize a particular object or sound, then an algorithm 
adjusts the weights or the strength of the connection between processors. The goal of the train­
ing is to teach the network to consistently recognize the patterns in sets of images or patterns in 
speech that humans know as, for instance, image of a dog or the phoneme “d.” 
For a neural network to learn facial recognition, it will be presented with a “training set” 
of millions of images. Some will contain faces and some will not. Each image will be labeled 
by a human, for example, through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. The images act as inputs to the 
neural network and the labels (“face” or “not face”) are the outputs. The network’s task is to 
develop a statistical rule (operationalized through the weights between processors) that corre­
lates inputs with correct outputs. 
To accomplish this task, the network will search for those features that are common to the 
images showing faces. Once these correlations are strong enough (i.e., the weights, or strength 
of the connections between processors, are high enough) the network will be able to reliably 
differentiate faces from not-faces in its training set. The next step is to feed the neural network 
with a fresh set of unlabeled images to see if the facial recognition algorithms that the network 
has developed actually work with the new data. 
Consider this example. In 2015, Matthew Lai created an artificial intelligence system called 
Giraffe that has taught itself to play chess by evaluating positions much more like humans and 
in an entirely different way than conventional chess playing programs. Giraffe’s level of play is 
in the top 2 percent of all tournament chess players. 
Lai’s system uses a neural network that examines each position on the chessboard via 
three different analyses. The first analysis examines the global state of the game, such as the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
470 
PI5 Artificial Intelligence 
number and type of pieces on each side, which side is to move next, and other rules of the 
game. The second analysis examines piece-centric features such as the location of each piece 
on each side. The third analysis assesses the potential squares that each piece can attack and 
defend. That is, Giraffe derives its strength not from being able to see far ahead, but from being 
able to accurately evaluate tricky positions, and understanding complicated positional con­
cepts that are intuitive to humans. 
To train his system, Lai randomly chose 5 million positions from a database of computer 
chess games. He then created greater variety by adding a random legal move to each position 
before using it to train his neural network. In total, he generated 175 million positions in this 
manner. 
He then had Giraffe play against itself with the goal of improving its prediction of its own 
future position. In this way, Giraffe learned which positions were strong and which were weak. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Define expert systems and describe some problems that expert systems have.
 2. Differentiate between machine learning and deep learning.
 3. Describe how neural networks function. 
Apply the Concept PI5.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI5.2 Provide use case 
sounds great, there are many challenges to developing this type  
examples of expert systems, machine learning systems, deep 
of system.  
learning systems, and neural networks.  
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you do.) 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and watch the YouTube video linked for Apply the Concept PI5.2. 
Throughout much of human history, expertise was transferred 
This video will show you a short demonstration of an expert 
from a master to an apprentice through years of training. Only 
cooking system. The video mentions that you are responsible for 
after the apprentice had mastered all of the “tricks of the trade” 
building and testing an expert system, but that is not part of this 
was he or she considered ready to perform on his or her own. We 
activity. As you watch the video, pay particular attention to the 
still employ a similar system for doctors, who must participate 
miscommunication between the cook and the computer. You will 
in a residency program under the guidance of the resident 
find this interaction to be quite comical. 
doctor before they can begin their own practice. This approach 
is not appropriate, however, for many non-life-threatening 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.) 
situations. In some cases, being able to make an expert decision 
is simply a matter of having access to the experts’ knowledge 
Based on the video and material in this section, provide examples 
and experiences. If this knowledge can be captured in a 
of the benefits, applications, and limitations of using artificial 
computer-based information system, then it can be distributed 
intelligence in the world of cooking. Create a Word document to 
for other people to use in similar scenarios. Although this 
submit to your instructor. 
PI5.3 Artificial Intelligence Applications 
The field of artificial intelligence has many applications. Note that these applications use 
machine learning, deep learning, and neural networks. In this section, we discuss computer 
vision, natural language processing, robotics, speech recognition, and intelligent agents. 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
Artificial Intelligence Applications 471 
Computer Vision 
Computer vision refers to the ability of information systems to identify objects, scenes, and 
activities in images. Computer vision applications are designed to operate in unconstrained 
environments. Computer vision has diverse applications: 
• Medical imaging to improve prediction, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases: 
To the human eye, an X-ray is an unclear puzzle. But to an AI system, an X-ray—or a CT 
scan or MRI scan—is a data field that can be assessed down to the pixel level. Images are 
estimated to make up as much as 90 percent of all medical data today. Image recognition 
software gathers high-resolution image data from multiple sources—X-rays, MRI scans, 
ultrasounds, CT scans—and then groups together biological structures that share hard­
to-detect similarities. For instance, the software can examine several images of the same 
breast to measure tissue density. The software then color-codes tissues of similar densities 
so that humans can observe the pattern as well. The software finds and indexes pixels that 
share certain properties, even pixels that are far apart in one image or in a diff erent image 
altogether. This process enables medical personnel to identify hidden features of diff use 
structures. 
In 2015, IBM purchased Merge Healthcare (www.merge.com) for $1 billion. Merge 
specializes in handling all kinds of medical images, and its service is used by more than 
7500 hospitals and clinics in the United States, as well as clinical research organizations 
and pharmaceutical companies. The acquisition is part of an effort to draw on many data 
sources, including anonymized, text-based medical records, to help physicians make 
treatment decisions. Merge’s data set contains some 30 billion images, which will be used 
to train the deep learning aspects of IBM Watson. 
IBM Watson is also being used to detect melanoma, a type of skin cancer. Detecting 
melanoma is difficult due to the variation in the way that it appears in individual patients. 
By feeding a deep learning system with many images of melanoma, it is possible to teach 
the system to recognize very subtle but important features associated with the disease.  
Enlitic (www.enlitic.com) is a startup that uses deep learning and image analysis to 
help physicians make diagnoses and spot abnormalities in medical images. For example, 
Enlitic software could analyze medical images such as X-rays, MRIs, and CT scans for trends 
in the data or anomalies in individual images. 
• Facial recognition used by Facebook to automatically identify people in photographs and 
in security and surveillance to spot and identify suspects: 
Specifically, Facebook’s Moments app uses facial recognition technology to group the 
photos on your phone, based on when they were taken and to identify which friends are in 
the photos. 
In 2014, Facebook unveiled an algorithm called DeepFace that can recognize specific 
human faces in images about 97 percent of the time, even when those faces are poorly lit 
or partially hidden. This performance is on par for what humans are able to do. 
• Shopping: Consumers now use smartphones to photograph products and be presented 
with purchase options. 
• Self-driving cars: Computer vision systems can now help drive a car down a street and not 
hit anything or hurt anyone—that is, a high-stake exercise in computer vision that involves 
many different kinds of data in a constantly changing environment. 
• Pinterest is using a computer vision system combined with deep learning to enhance prod­
uct recommendations by automatically recognizing specific objects contained within the 
image of a pin. 
• Google Photos app uses computer vision combined with deep learning to automatically 
recognize, classify, and organize a user’s photos. 
• Google and Microsoft Research are using computer vision combined with deep learning to 
improve object detection, classification, and labeling. For instance, one computer vision 

 
 
 
 
 
  
472 
PI5 Artificial Intelligence 
system automatically summarizes a complex scene in a photo and generate captions that 
accurately describe the scene. 
• Microsoft ’s Traffic Prediction Project uses Bing traffic maps, road cameras, sensors, and 
other data sources to predict traff ic jams. 
Natural Language Processing 
Natural language processing refers to the ability of information systems to work with text the 
way that humans do. For instance, these systems can extract the meaning from text and can 
generate text that is readable, stylistically natural, and grammatically correct. 
Because context is critically important, the practical applications of natural language pro­
cessing typically address relatively narrow areas such as analyzing customer feedback about 
a particular product or service, automating discovery in civil litigation or government investi­
gations (e-discovery), and automating writing of formulaic stories on topics such as corporate 
earnings or sports. Two other examples are as follows: 
• IBM’s Watson uses natural language processing to read and understand the vast amount of 
medical literature, hypothesis generation techniques to automate diagnosis, and machine 
learning to improve its accuracy. 
• Built into Google’s translation app, deep learning technology has the ability to translate 
printed text such as menus in a live view through your phone’s camera. The app can trans­
late among 27 different languages without needing an Internet connection. 
Robotics 
Integrating computer vision with tiny, high-performance sensors and actuators, a new gener­
ation of robots can work alongside people and flexibly perform many different tasks in unpre­
dictable environments. Examples include unmanned aerial vehicles, cobots (cooperative 
robots) that share jobs with humans on the factory floor, robotic vacuum cleaners, and so on. 
Specifically, recall our discussion of Baxter in Chapter 1. 
Speech recognition 
Speech recognition focuses on automatically and accurately transcribing human speech. This 
technology must manage diverse accents, dialects, and background noise. Further, it must dis­
tinguish between homophones and work at the speed of natural speech. Applications include 
medical dictation, hands-free writing, voice control of information systems, and telephone cus­
tomer service applications. 
Duncan Regional Hospital in Oklahoma wanted to improve eff iciency in its patient care. 
Approximately 15 physicians at the hospital are improving their clinical documentation on lap-
tops with Dragon speech recognition software from Nuance Communications. 
The hospital also uses a secure, HIPAA-compliant messaging platform from Imprivata 
(www.imprivata.com). Instead of sending a text message, physicians speak their message 
rather than having to stop interacting with a patient. Also, nurses use speech recognition soft ­
ware to enter clinical documentation, a critical need as the healthcare industry requires an 
increasing amount of documentation to meet HIPAA requirements as well as mandates for 
meaningful use of electronic health records. 
Intelligent Agents 
According to Gartner, by the end of 2016, two-thirds of consumers in the developed world will 
regularly use virtual personal assistants in their daily lives. Virtual assistants are the most basic 
form of AI—the ability of a system to mimic human intelligence through experience and learn­
ing. For example, popular voice-based digital assistants, such as Apple Siri, Microsoft Cortana, 
POM 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence Applications 473 
Google Now, Amazon Echo, and Facebook M, can understand our words, analyze our questions, 
and point us in the general direction of the right answer. 
An intelligent agent is a software program that assists you, or acts on your behalf, in per­
forming repetitive computer-related tasks. You may be familiar with an early type of intelligent 
agent—the paper clip (Clippy) that popped up in early versions of Microsoft Word. For example, 
if your document appeared as though it was going to be a business letter—that is, if you typed 
in a date, name, and address—the animated paper clip would offer helpful suggestions on how 
to proceed. Users objected so strenuously to this primitive intelligent agent that Microsoft elim­
inated it from subsequent versions. 
Today, there are many intelligent agents (also called bots) used for a wide variety of tasks. 
The following sections examine three types of agents: information agents, monitoring and sur­
veillance agents, and user or personal agents. 
Information Agents. Information agents search for information and display it to users. 
The best-known information agents are buyer agents. A buyer agent, also called a shopping 
bot, helps customers find the products and services they need on a Web site. There are many 
examples of information agents. We present here a few illustrative cases. 
• Companies in the insurance and financial services sector are using IBM Watson that func­
tions as a customer-facing intelligent advisor. For example, insurance company USAA (www.  
usaa.com) uses Watson in an application that lets USAA customers who are leaving mili­
tary service ask question about, for example, college tuition reimbursement or changes to  
their health benefits. USAA chose the topic of military separation because approximately  
150,000 people separate from military service each year. USAA executives say that the goal  
of the system is to augment employees’ expertise, not to replace them. The system off ers  
better insight and information than the original USAA digital portal offered. Watson helps  
shorten service calls, offers more context to incoming calls, and reduces the amount of  
paperwork around customer interactions.  
• Australian bank ANZ deployed IBM’s Watson Engagement Advisor. When a customer asks  
a financial planner about a company or an investment, the planner can relay questions  
to Watson using natural language, by either speaking or typing. The system then analyzes  
vast amounts of information—such as annual reports, SEC filings, relevant news stories,  
and other analysts’ views—and produces its own insight on the potential investment.  
• The information agents for Amazon.com display lists of books and other products that  
customers might like, based on past purchases.  
• The Federal Electronic Research and Review Extraction Tool (FERRET) was developed  
jointly by the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. You can use FERRET to find  
information on employment, healthcare, education, race and ethnicity, health insurance,  
housing, income and poverty, aging, and marriage and the family.  
Monitoring and Surveillance Agents. Monitoring and surveillance agents, also called 
predictive agents, constantly observe and report on some item of interest. There are many 
examples of predictive agents. Consider the following: 
• Allstate uses monitoring and surveillance agents to manage its large computer networks  
24/7/365. Every five seconds, the agent measures 1,200 data points. It can predict a system  
crash 45 minutes before it happens. The agent also watches to detect electronic attacks  
early so that they can be prevented.  
• Monitoring and surveillance agents can watch your competitors and notify you of price  
changes and special off ers.  
• Predictive agents can monitor Internet sites, discussion groups, and mailing lists for stock  
manipulations, insider trading, and rumors that might affect stock prices.  
• These agents can search Web sites for updated information on topics of your choice, such  
as price changes on desired products (e.g., airline tickets).  
MKT 
FIN 
MKT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
474 
PI5 Artificial Intelligence 
User Agents. User agents, also called personal agents, take action on your behalf. Let’s 
look at what these agents can do (or will be able to do shortly). 
• Check your e-mail, sort it according to your priority rules, and alert you when high-value 
e-mails appear in your in-box. 
• Automatically fill out forms on the Web for you. They will also store your information for 
future use. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Describe the advantages of computer vision, natural language processing, and speech recognition. 
2. What are cobots?  
3. Describe how you might use intelligent agents, information agents, monitoring and surveillance 
agents, and user agents. 
Apply the Concept PI5.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI5.3 Provide use case 
click on the link provided for Apply the Concept PI5.3.  This will 
examples of computer vision, natural language processing, 
take you to a Web site with information about Google’s Self-
robotics, image recognition, and intelligent agents. 
Driving Car project.  There are so many ramifications of using this 
technology, both good and bad.  But for this activity, we want you 
to focus on what is possible. 
STEP 1: Background (Here is what you are learning.) 
After researching the Google Self-Driving Car (and perhaps 
This section has discussed several applications of technology 
watching some of the videos on their site), how many of the 
that apply artificial intelligence to several activities that we 
artificial intelligence tools discussed in this text do you think 
take on every day. The applications of artificial intelligence are 
would be utilized in a single car ride.  
everywhere. From residential thermostats that automatically  
adjust temperatures when no one is home to cars that can drive  
without a human driver, this technology will forever change the 
STEP 3: Deliverable (Here is what you turn in.)  
world we live in.  
Create an outline of a single trip.  In this outline, provide 
examples of how the tools in this section (computer vision, 
STEP 2: Activity (Here is what you do.) 
natural language processing, robotics, image recognition, and 
intelligent agents) would all work together to safely take you to 
Google is one of the leading developers of a driverless car.  Visit 
your destination.
http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, and 
What’s in IT for me? 
ACCT For the Accounting Major 
AI systems are used extensively in auditing to uncover irregularities. 
They are also used to uncover and prevent fraud. Today’s CPAs use 
AI systems for many of their duties, ranging from risk analysis to cost 
control. Accounting personnel also use intelligent agents for mun­
dane tasks such as managing accounts and monitoring employees’ 
Internet use. 
FIN 
For the Finance Major 
People have been using computers for decades to solve financial 
problems. Innovative AI systems have been developed for activities 
such as making stock market decisions, refinancing bonds, assessing 
debt risks, analyzing financial conditions, predicting business fail­
ures, forecasting financial trends, and investing in global markets. 
Often, AI systems can facilitate the use of spreadsheets and other 
computerized systems used in finance. Finally, AI systems can help 
reduce fraud in credit cards, stocks, and other financial services. 
MKT 
For the Marketing Major 
Marketing personnel use AI systems in many applications, from al­
locating advertising budgets to evaluating alternative routings of 
salespeople. New marketing approaches such as targeted marketing 
and marketing transaction databases are heavily dependent on IT 
in general and on AI systems in particular. AI systems are especially 

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
useful for mining customer databases and predicting customer be­
havior. Successful AI applications appear in almost every area of 
marketing and sales, from analyzing the success of one-to-one ad­
vertising to supporting customer help desks. With customer service 
becoming increasingly important, the use of intelligent agents is 
critical for providing fast response. 
POM For the Production/Operations 
Management Major 
AI systems support complex operations and production decisions, 
from inventory to production planning. AI systems in the production/ 
operations management field manage tasks ranging from diagnos­
ing machine failures and prescribing repairs to complex production 
scheduling and inventory control. Some companies, such as DuPont 
and Kodak, have deployed hundreds of AI systems in the planning, 
organizing, and control of their operational systems. 
Summary 475 
HRM For the Human Resources Management 
Major 
Human resources personnel employ AI systems for many applica­
tions. For example, recruiters use these systems to find applicants’ 
resumes on the Web and sort them to match needed skills. HR man­
agers also use AI systems to evaluate candidates (tests, interviews). 
HR personnel use AI systems to train and support employees in man­
aging their fringe benefits and to predict employee job performance 
and future labor needs. 
MIS 
For the MIS Major 
The MIS function develops (or acquires) and maintains the organiza­
tion’s various AI systems, as well as the data and models that these 
systems use. In addition, MIS staff ers often interact with subject area 
experts to capture the expertise used in AI systems. 
Summary 
1.  Explain the potential value and the potential limitations of artificial 
intelligence. 
Table PI5.1 differentiates between artificial and human intelligence on a 
number of characteristics. 
2. Provide use case examples of expert systems, machine learning 
systems, deep learning systems, and neural networks. 
Expert systems are computer systems that attempt to mimic human experts 
by applying expertise in a specific domain. 
Machine learning is the ability to accurately perform new, unseen tasks, 
built on known properties learned from training or historic data that are 
labeled. Machine learning systems can distinguish between spam and 
nonspam messages; identify fraudulent banking transactions; help phar­
maceutical companies identify promising drugs; and diagnose mechanical 
problems with drilling equipment. 
Deep learning is a subset of machine learning where the system discovers 
new patterns without being exposed to labeled historical or training data. 
Example applications of deep learning include speech recognition, image 
recognition, and natural language processing. 
A neural network is a system of programs and data structures that simulate 
the underlying concepts of the human brain. Neural networks are used to 
detect weapons concealed in personal belongings, in research on various 
diseases, for financial forecasting, to detect fraud in credit card transac­
tions, to fight crime, and many other applications. 
3. Provide use case examples of computer vision, natural language 
processing, robotics, and intelligent agents. 
Computer vision refers to the ability of computers to identify objects, 
scenes, and activities in images. Computer vision has diverse 
applications, examples of which include medical imaging, facial recog­
nition, and self-driving cars. 
Natural language processing refers to the ability of information systems to 
work with text the way that humans do. Applications of natural language 
processing include analyzing customer feedback about a particular prod­
uct or service, automating discovery in civil litigation or government inves­
tigations (e-discovery), and automating writing of formulaic stories on 
topics such as corporate earnings or sports. 
Robots integrate computer vision with sensors and actuators. Cooperative 
robots (called cobots) can work alongside people and flexibly perform 
many different tasks in unpredictable environments. Examples include 
unmanned aerial vehicles, “cobots” (cooperative robots) that share jobs 
with humans on the factory floor, robotic vacuum cleaners, and so on. Spe­
cifically, recall our discussion of Baxter in Chapter 1. 
Speech recognition focuses on automatically and accurately transcribing 
human speech. Applications include medical dictation, hands-free writ­
ing, voice control of information systems, and telephone customer service 
applications. 
Intelligent agents are software programs that assist you, or act on your 
behalf, in performing repetitive, computer-related tasks. Intelligent agents 
are used to display lists of books or other products that customers might 
like, based on past purchases; to find information; to manage and moni­
tor large computer networks 24/7/365; to detect electronic attacks early so 
that they can be stopped; to watch competitors and send notices of price 
changes and special offers; to monitor Internet sites, discussion groups, 
and mailing lists for stock manipulations, insider trading, and rumors that 
might impact stock prices; to check e-mail, sort it according to established 
priority rules, and alert recipients when high-value e-mails appear in their 
inbox; and to automatically fill out forms on the Web. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
476 
PI5 Artificial Intelligence 
Chapter Glossary  
algorithm A problem-solving method expressed as a finite sequence 
of steps. 
artificial intelligence (AI) A subfield of computer science that is 
concerned with studying the thought processes of humans and 
recreating the effects of those processes via machines, such as 
computers. 
buyer agent (or shopping bot) An intelligent agent on a Web site that 
helps customers find products and services that they need. 
computer vision The ability of information systems to identify 
objects, scenes, and activities in images. 
deep learning The ability of information systems to discover new 
patterns without being exposed to labeled historical or training 
data. 
expert systems (ESs) Information systems that attempt to mimic 
human experts by applying expertise in a specific domain. 
information agent A type of intelligent agent that searches for 
information and displays it to users. 
intelligent agent A software program that assists you, or acts on your 
behalf, in performing repetitive, computer-related tasks. 
machine learning systems The ability of information systems to 
accurately perform new, unseen tasks, built on known properties 
learned from training or historic data that are labeled. 
monitoring and surveillance agents (or predictive agents) 
Intelligent agents that constantly observe and report on some item 
of interest. 
narrow AI See weak AI. 
natural language processing The ability of information systems to 
work with text the way that humans do. 
neural network A set of virtual neurons, placed in layers, which work 
in parallel in an attempt to simulate the way the human brain works, 
although in a greatly simplified form. 
personal agents See user agents.  
predictive agents See monitoring and surveillance agents.  
shopping bot See buyer agent.  
speech recognition The ability of information systems to  
automatically and accurately transcribe human speech. 
strong AI Hypothetical artificial intelligence that matches or exceeds 
human intelligence and could perform any intellectual task that 
humans can. 
user agents (or personal agents) Intelligent agents that take action 
on your behalf. 
weak AI (also called narrow AI) Performs a useful and specific function 
that once required human intelligence to perform, and does so at 
human levels or better. 
Discussion Questions 
1. Explain how your university could employ an expert system in its ad- 
2. One difference between a conventional business intelligence system 
mission process. Could it use a neural network?  
and an expert system is that the former can explain how questions, 
whereas the latter can explain both how and why questions. Discuss
What might happen if a student were denied admission to the universi­
the implications of this statement. 
ty and his parents discovered that an expert system was involved in the  
admissions process?  
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  You have decided to purchase a new “smart” television. To purchase it 
as inexpensively as possible and still get the features you want, you use 
a shopping bot. Visit several of the shopping bot Web sites that perform 
price comparisons for you. Begin with MySimon (www.mysimon.com), 
BizRate.com (www.bizrate.com), and Google Product Search. 
Compare these shopping bots in terms of ease of use, number of prod­
uct offerings, speed in obtaining information, thoroughness of informa­
tion offered about products and sellers, and price selection. Which site 
or sites would you use, and why? Which television would you select and 
buy? How helpful were these sites in making your decision? 
2.  Access the MyMajors Web site (www.mymajors.com). This site contains 
a rule-based expert system to help students find majors. The expert 
system has more than 300 rules and 15,000 possible conclusions. The 
site ranks majors according to the likelihood that a student will succeed 
in them, and it provides 6 possible majors from among 60 alternative 
majors that a student might consider. 
Take the quiz, and see if you are in the “right major” as defined by the 
expert system. You must register to take the quiz. 
3.  Access Exsys (www.exsys.com), and click on the Corvid Expert System 
demos (www.exsys.com/demomain.html). Provide your e-mail ad­
dress, and click on the link for “Student—Needed for Class.” Try the 
various demos, and report your results to the class. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PLUG IT IN 6  
Project Management  
PLUG IT IN OUTLINE 
PI6.1 Project Management for Informa­
tion Systems Projects 
PI6.2 The Project Management Process 
PI6.3  The Project Management Body of 
Knowledge 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
PI6.1 Explain the relationship between the triple constraints on projects.  
PI6.2 Describe the five phases of the project management process.  
PI6.3 Review how each of the nine processes of the Project Management Body of Knowl­
edge is necessary in order to ensure smooth project deployment. 
PI6.1 Project Management for Information 
Systems Projects 
Projects are short-term efforts to create a specific business-related outcome. These outcomes 
may take the form of products or services. In the context of information systems (IS), many of the 
resource investments made by organizations are in the form of projects. For example, Home Depot 
(www.homedepot.com) recently engaged in an IS project to develop an inventory management 
system. The objectives of the project were to improve inventory turnover, reduce product stock-
outs, and integrate more tightly with supply chain partners. The outcome was to lower company-
wide costs by carrying less physical inventory. 
Almost every organization that utilizes information technology to support business pro­
cesses engages in some form of IS project management. IS project management is a directed 
effort to plan, organize, and manage resources to bring about the successful achievement of 
specific IS goals. All projects, whether they are IS projects or not, are constrained by the same 
three factors, known as the triple constraints of project management: time, cost, and scope. 
Time refers to the window of opportunity in which a project must be completed to provide a ben­
efit to the organization. Cost is the actual amount of resources, including cash and labor, that 
an organization can commit to completing a project. Scope refers to the processes that ensure 
that the project includes all the work required—and only the work required—to complete the pro­
ject successfully. For an IS project to be successful, the organization must allow an adequate 
amount of time, provide an appropriate amount of resources, and carefully define what is and is 
not included in the project. 
The triple constraints are related and involve trade-offs. For example, scope can oft en be 
increased by using additional time and incurring increased costs. Cost and/or time can oft en 
be saved by reducing scope. For a given scope, time can sometimes be saved by increasing cost. 
The following example illustrates just how complex projects can be. 
477 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
478 
PI6 Project Management 
Example 
Building a Natural Gas Pipeline to Hong Kong 
As one of the world’s most populous cities, Hong Kong needs energy to supply its 7.1 million residents 
with electricity. The city relies on a mix of fuels, chosen for reliability, sustainability, and eff iciency. 
One of these energy sources is natural gas. Since 1996, Hong Kong’s Black Point Power Station 
has drawn natural gas from the reserves of a gas field in Hainan, a nearby Chinese province. However, 
these reserves had begun to deplete, and it was clear that Hong Kong needed a new plan to maintain 
a consistent supply of natural gas and to comply with tightened emission caps that will be required by 
the government of Hong Kong in 2015. 
In 2008, the governments of Hong Kong and the People’s Republic of China signed a memoran­
dum of understanding on energy cooperation, which identified three new gas sources from which 
mainland China could supply gas to Hong Kong. 
One of the sources was the second West–East Gas Pipeline (WEPII), which is the world’s longest 
natural gas pipeline. Building a natural gas pipeline from the existing WEPII network to Hong Kong is an 
incredibly complex project, presenting numerous challenges:
 
Regulations: Because it crossed the border between mainland China and Hong Kong, the project 
team had to acquire permits from both jurisdictions. The project also had to obtain diff erent stat­
utory approval processes between the jurisdictions.
 
Communications: The various project team members spoke different languages, and the parties 
involved had different requirements for documentation and reporting. The teams predominantly 
used English, Putonghua, and Cantonese. However, they used English and Cantonese for docu­
ments and PowerPoint presentations. The project team also had to manage a multitude of stake­
holders, including over 30 government departments in both jurisdictions.
 
Environmental requirements: The project had to fulfill stringent environmental requirements for 
the two jurisdictions. Project managers instituted a robust monitoring and audit program during 
the project’s execution phase, with intensive water quality monitoring, marine mammal monitor­
ing, and site inspections. Mitigation measures also included the deployment of silt curtains and 
limitations of working speed during marine dredging operations.
 
Physical restraints: The actual laying of the pipeline was subject to many physical constraints. 
The project required a 12-mile undersea pipeline through three shipping channels. There were 
also challenges involving shallow water with a dredged marine channel, anchorage areas, and an 
existing subsea pipelines and cables. 
Before laying the pipeline, the project team conducted an extensive marine traffic impact assess­
ment. They also coordinated closely with local marine and port control authorities to successfully work 
around channel traffic, laying the entire 12-mile undersea pipeline in only six to seven months. 
To handle a complex project of this magnitude and to finish on time and on budget, the project 
team needed careful planning. Before project initiation, the team thoroughly planned, scheduled, and 
engineered the project to ensure that the pipeline would function properly and, more importantly, that 
it would be safe. 
The project had a tight schedule. To meet the deadlines, project managers implemented elements 
of the waterfall approach, where certain milestones had to be completed before the next tasks could 
begin. For example, the channel dredging had to be finished before the pipeline could be laid. Proper 
planning, critical path monitoring, and close coordination between Hong Kong and China helped en­
sure that the project finished on time. 
The project team tightly controlled the scope of the project. Any changes had to go through a 
rigorous change management process, which kept the project on track. 
The team also realized that communication was a key component to successfully completing the 
pipeline. Project managers made special efforts to build effective teams. They established processes to 
always engage the right person for the right task and to encourage teamwork. For instance, given the 
different nationalities involved, all materials and discussions were in multiple languages. 
Project managers focused on quality and safety. They performed daily site visits, as well as sched­
uled and nonscheduled management walkthroughs. There were also third-party inspections done on 
critical tasks, such as the pipe welding. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Project Management Process 479 
As a result of excellent project management, the pipeline was finished on time, and it began sup­
plying Hong Kong with natural gas in 2013. The project also had a minimal impact of heavy marine 
traffic in the area, especially on the container ships that are vital to that area’s economy. 
Sources: Compiled from “Hong Kong Natural Gas Pipeline,” Project Management Institute Case Study, 2014; 
“Hong Kong Branch of Second West–East Gas Pipeline Completed and Operational,” Penn Energy, October 
21, 2103; J. Cullen, “Second West–East Gas Pipeline Set to Start Hong Kong Supplies This Summer,” South 
China Morning Post, June 16, 2013. 
Questions 
1. What were the drivers of the new natural gas pipeline to Hong Kong? 
2. Describe the key factors contributing to the success of the pipeline project. 
3. Describe the triple constraints of Hong Kong’s pipeline project. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What is a project?
 2. What is the triple constraint of any project? 
Apply the Concept PI6.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI6.1 Explain the  
take you to a Web site that sells project management soft ware. 
relationship between the triple constraints on projects.  
At this site you can click on links that will show you tours, 
customer success stores, pictures, and demos of the soft ware. 
As you explore the site, look for the ways different products are 
STEP 1: Background (This is what you are learning.) 
marketed to help companies deal with the triple constraints.   
This section describes how companies employ soft ware to 
support project management. Project management soft ware 
STEP 3: Deliverable (This is what you turn in.) 
offers tools such as planning, communication, coordination, 
From the site you looked at in Step 2, choose one soft ware 
measurement, and data collection to help companies navigate 
package, and explain how it helps companies deal with the 
the triple constraints on projects: time, cost, and scope. 
relationships among time, cost, and scope of projects.  Submit 
your explanation to your instructor. 
STEP 2: Activity (This is what you are doing.) 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the link provided for Plug IT In 6.1. This link will 
PI6.2 The Project Management Process  
The traditional approach to project management divides every project into five distinct phases: 
initiation, planning, execution, monitoring and control, and completion (see Figure PI6.1). 
These phases are sequential, and we discuss them in order. 
Project Initiation 
The first phase in the management of a process is to clearly define the problem that the pro­
ject is intended to solve and the goals that it is to achieve. In this phase, it is also necessary to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
480 
PI6 Project Management Figure depicting the project management process, where initiation, planning, execution, monitoring and control, and completion are denoted in a circular manner.
The project management process. 
FIGURE PI6.1 
identify and secure the resources necessary for the project, analyze the 
costs and benefits of the project, and identify potential risks. 
In an IS project, a user’s business problem or need typically initiates 
a project that can solve the problem and meet the need. The user must 
clearly define the problem so that the IS team can understand it. The user 
must also define the benefits he or she expects to gain from successful 
completion of the IS project. 
Project Planning As the term planning suggests, in this phase, every 
project objective and every activity associated with that objective must be 
identified and sequenced. This phase is critically important to avoid scope 
creep once the project gets underway. Scope creep refers to uncontrolled 
changes in a project’s scope. This phenomenon can occur when the scope 
of a project is not properly defined, documented, or controlled. It is gener­
ally considered a negative occurrence that is to be avoided. 
In an IS project, users often contribute to scope creep when they ask 
for additional features or functionality after the project is underway. This 
situation often leads to the project being overtime and over budget. 
Many tools assist developers in sequencing these activities, including dependence dia­
grams, such as the program evaluation and review technique (PERT), the critical path method 
(CPM), and a timeline diagram called the Gantt chart. Project managers use these tools to 
ensure that activities are performed in a logical sequence. As the project progresses, project 
managers also employ these tools to evaluate whether the project is on schedule and, if not, 
where the delays are occurring and what the managers must do to correct them. 
Project Execution 
In this phase, the work defined in the project management plan is performed to accomplish 
the project’s requirements. Execution coordinates people and resources, and it integrates and 
performs project activities in accordance with the plan. 
Users may be involved in project execution. For example, in an IS project, users oft en eval­
uate prototypes so that they can provide meaningful feedback to the IS team. 
Project Monitoring and Control 
The purpose of monitoring and control is to determine whether the project is progressing as 
planned. This phase consists of three steps: (1) monitoring ongoing project activities (where 
we are); (2) comparing project variables (cost, effort, time, resources, etc.) with the actual plan 
(where we should be); and (3) identifying corrective actions (how do we get on track again). 
Project Completion 
The project is completed when it is formally accepted by the organization. All activities are 
finalized and all contracts are fulfilled and settled. In addition, all files are archived and all les­
sons learned are documented. 
Project Management Failure 
As IT systems have become an important competitive necessity in modern organizations, IT 
projects are getting larger, involve more parts of the organization, and pose a risk to the com­
pany if something goes wrong. Research by McKinsey and the University of Oxford suggest that 
half of all large IT projects—defined as those with initial price tags exceeding $15 million—go far 
over their budgets. Their research also shows that, on average, large IT projects run 45 percent 
over budget and 7 percent over time, while delivering 56 percent less value than predicted. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Project Management Process 481 
Such projects are called runaway projects, meaning they are so far over budget and past dead­
line that they must be abandoned, typically with large monetary loss. Even worse, the research­
ers found that 17 percent of large IT projects are so bad that they threaten the very existence 
of a company. 
The researchers found that four groups of issues caused most IT project failures: 
• A lack of focus, including unclear objectives and lack of business focus 
• Content issues, such as shifting requirements (e.g., scope creep) and technical complexity 
• Skill issues, such as a team not aligned with business objectives and a general lack of skills 
• Execution issues, such as an unrealistic schedule and reactive planning (on the fly, as 
opposed to sufficient planning at the start of a project) 
Enabling Project Management Success 
The research findings bring up the crucial question: How do companies maximize the chance 
that their IT projects deliver the expected value on time and within budget? The findings indi­
cated that the key to project management success is in mastering four broad dimensions of 
project management: 
• Focusing on managing strategy and stakeholders instead of exclusively concentrating on 
budgeting and scheduling 
• Mastering technology and project content by securing critical internal and external talent 
• Building effective teams by aligning their incentives with the overall goals of projects 
• Excelling at core project-management practices, such as short delivery cycles and rigorous 
quality checks 
Let’s discuss each of these in turn. 
Manage Strategy and Stakeholders. IT projects often pay little attention to strate­
gy and stakeholders and manage projects only according to budget and schedule targets. 
These problems are illustrated by one bank’s IT transformation effort, in which its finance 
department became involved only a few months before the system was due to become op­
erational. This problem led to several complex changes in the accounting soft ware modules 
as a result of a recently introduced performance management system. Occurring so late in 
the project, the changes delayed the launch by more than three months, at a cost of more 
than $8 million. 
Top-performing projects, on the other hand, establish a clear view of the project’s stra­
tegic value—one that goes beyond technical content. By building a robust, well-understood 
business case and maintaining focus on business objectives along the entire project timeline, 
success teams can avoid cost and time overruns. 
These teams ensure that the project aligns with the company’s business strategy and 
undertake detailed analyses of stakeholder positions. Team leaders continually engage with all 
business unit and functional area heads to ensure consistent alignment. 
Secure Critical Talent. Drawing on expert help as needed, high-performance teams inte­
grate all technical aspects of the project, including IT architecture and infrastructure, function­
ality trade-offs, quality assurance, migration and rollout plans, and project scope. The excellent 
team will understand both business and technical concerns, which is why companies must as­
sign a few high-performing and experienced experts for the length of the project. 
One common problem occurs when teams focus too much on technology issues and 
targets. For instance, a large retailer wanted to create a central data warehouse to overcome 
inconsistencies that occurred among its business unit financial data, centralized financial data, 
and risk data. However, the project team focused purely on developing the IT architecture solu­
tion for the data warehouse instead of addressing the end goal, which was to manage data 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
482 
PI6 Project Management 
inconsistencies. As a result, the project budget increased as the team pursued architectural 
“perfection,” which involved the inclusion of unnecessary data from other systems. The bank 
finally had to halt the project after 18 months and several million dollars. 
Build Effective Teams. Large projects can take a life of their own in an organization. Project 
teams need a common vision, shared team processes, and a high-performance culture. Mem­
bers must have a common incentive structure that is aligned with the overall project goal, in 
contrast with individual goals. 
For example, to ensure the smooth start-up of new front-end and core systems that more 
than 8,000 people would use, one company project team launched a massive, and successful, 
change management program. This program included a regular newsletter, desktop calendars 
that highlighted key changes and milestones, and quarterly town hall meetings with the CEO. 
The team made sure that all business unit leaders were involved during the user acceptance 
phase of the project. 
Excel at Project-Management Practices. To achieve excellent project management, 
there is no substitute for tested practices. These practices include having a strategic and dis­
ciplined project management office and establishing rigorous processes for managing project 
requirements and change requests. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What are the five phases of the project management process?
 2. What are the major causes of project failure?
 3. Describe how to best ensure the success of projects. 
Apply the Concept PI6.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI6.2 Describe the five  
you to an article that discusses the difficulties that Hershey’s 
phases of the project management process.  
experienced when it implemented a new IT system. In fact, this 
project cost the company more than $100 million in sales because 
the ordering system did not function properly. 
STEP 1: Background 
After reading the article, search the Web for additional 
As you have seen in this section, project management is a 
information on this story. 
complicated task. Multiple people, multiple activities, and 
multiple opinions about the “right” way to handle the project 
always make it difficult for the individuals who are actually 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
managing the operation. 
Based on what you read in Step 2, describe the five phases of the 
project management process at Hershey’s.  Try to determine in 
STEP 2: Activity 
which step (or steps) Hershey’s made its mistakes. Submit your 
description to your instructor. 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
and click on the link provided for Plug IT In 6.2. The link will take 
PI6.3 The Project Management Body 
of Knowledge 
The Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) is a collection of processes and 
knowledge areas generally accepted as best practice within the project management dis­
cipline. As an internationally recognized standard, it provides the fundamentals of project 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Project Management Body of Knowledge 483 
management, regardless of the type of project (e.g., construction, software, engineering, and 
automotive). The purpose of the PMBOK is to provide and promote a common vocabulary 
within the project management profession for discussing, writing, and applying project man­
agement concepts. 
The PMBOK recognizes five basic process groups and nine knowledge areas typical of 
almost all projects. You learned about the five basic process groups in the previous section: 
• Initiation 
• Planning 
• Execution 
• Monitoring and control 
• Completion 
Processes overlap and interact throughout a project. Processes are described in terms of 
inputs (documents, plans, designs), tools and techniques, and outputs (documents, products). 
The following are the nine knowledge areas of the PMBOK: 
•  Project integration management: Project integration management includes those pro­
cesses required to ensure that all the project’s components are properly coordinated. The 
project plan development processes, project plan execution processes, and integrated 
change control processes are all included in this area of knowledge. Each process has 
expected inputs and outputs and plus the appropriate tools and techniques to support 
the change of inputs to outputs. 
•  Project scope management: Project scope management defines the processes that limit 
and control the work included in a project. Scope creep is a serious problem that oft en 
causes projects to go over time and over budget. These processes ensure that all the work 
of the project is included and properly accounted for. 
•  Project time management: Proper sequencing is vital to timely project completion. When 
the amount of time needed is established, it takes excellent scheduling skills and tools 
to manage the activities to complete project milestones and the project itself within the 
allotted time. Different tools are available to assist with this process, such as Gantt charts, 
milestone charts, and network charts. Each tool helps managers see the big picture and 
stay in control of the project’s progression. 
•  Project cost management: Resource planning and cost estimation are equally vital to time 
management. These two processes cannot exist independently of each other. Resource 
cost management is difficult to estimate and even more difficult to manage when unfore­
seen events take place. Early in a project, managers may project a budget range and then 
fine-tune it as the project progresses. 
•  Project quality management: Every project needs a set of processes ensuring that project 
outcomes meet the needs for which the project was executed. Quality planning, assur­
ance, and control are included in this area. There are many quality management models 
to consider, such as the Deming Prize, TQM, and Six Sigma. All of these aim to help organ­
izations produce quality products the first time they try. There are also many paradigms 
applicable to this area of knowledge, such as “Zero Defects” and “DTRTRTFT” (Do the right 
thing right the first time). These paradigms are meant to inspire organizations to operate 
at higher quality levels. 
•  Project human resource management: People can be the major headache or the major 
asset of any project. People with diff ering skill sets are required at various times during 
a project and their individual skills have to be used effectively for the project to succeed. 
This area of knowledge includes concepts such as staffing decisions; team management; 
and organizational culture, style, and structure. 
•  Project communications management: A vast amount of communication is necessary in 
successful projects. Information must be collected, disseminated, stored, and destroyed 
at the appropriate time. This area of knowledge contains the processes to perform these 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
484 
PI6 Project Management 
functions. Often, organizations investigate personality styles to determine their most 
effective communicators. Choosing the right person to be a leader can make all the diff er­
ence in the success of a project. 
•  Project risk management: All projects face risk. With organizational success, jobs, careers, 
and livelihoods on the line, it is a good idea to minimize the risk of projects as much as fea­
sible. Therefore, risk management must be an integral part of any project because things 
do not always happen as planned. The risk management process includes identification of 
risks, quantitative and qualitative analyses, risk response planning, and risk monitoring. 
•  Project procurement management: No matter how good the idea behind a project, without 
funding it will never be more than a good idea. The accumulated knowledge related to 
project procurement management encompasses processes of solicitation, selection, con­
tractual agreements, and closeout processes. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. What is the Project Management Body of Knowledge and why is it important to organizations?
 2. What part of the PMBOK do you think is most important? Can a project succeed without all the parts? 
Apply the Concept PI6.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI6.3 Review how each 
STEP 2: Activity 
of the nine processes of the Project Management Body of 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
Knowledge is necessary in order to ensure smooth project 
and click on the link provided for Plug IT In 6.3.  This link will take 
deployment. 
you to an article about a failure of the Denver Airport Baggage 
System.  As you review this story, consider the nine processes 
of the Project Management Body of Knowledge, and try to 
determine which ones could have helped the project succeed.  
STEP 1: Background 
Project management is critical to the successful implementation 
of any new system. As you saw from the Hershey’s case in Apply 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
the Concept PI6.2, projects can get out of hand very quickly. (If 
you did not complete this activity, visit http://www.wiley.com/go/ 
Within the context of the Denver Airport Baggage story you read 
rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, and click on the link for Plug IT In 
in Step 2, review how each of the nine processes of the Project 
6.2 to read the article). There are many stories you could read that 
Management Body of Knowledge is necessary to ensure smooth 
would demonstrate just how quickly projects go awry. 
project deployment. 
What’s in IT for me? 
For all Business Majors 
Regardless of the functional area in organizations, each of you will 
it is critical that all majors understand the project management 
be on project teams beginning very early in your careers. These 
process so that you can make immediate contributions to your 
projects will be critical to your organization’s success. Therefore, 
project teams. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discussion Questions 485 
Summary  
1.  Explain the relationship between the triple constraints on projects. 
Projects are short-term efforts to create a specific business-related outcome. 
IS project management is a directed effort to plan, organize, and manage 
resources to bring about the successful achievement of specific IS goals. All 
projects, whether they are IS projects or not, are constrained by the same 
three factors, known as the triple constraints of project management: time, 
cost, and scope. Time refers to the window of opportunity in which a project 
must be completed to provide a benefit to the organization. Cost is the actual 
amount of resources, including cash and labor, that an organization can com­
mit to completing a project. Scope refers to the processes that ensure that the 
project includes all the work required—and only the work required—to com­
plete the project successfully. 
2.  Describe the five phases of the project management process. 
Project initiation clearly defines the problem that the project is intended to 
solve and the goals that it is to achieve. In project planning, every project 
objective and every activity associated with that objective must be iden­
tified and sequenced. In the project execution phase, the work defined in 
the project management plan is performed to accomplish the project’s 
requirements. The purpose of the monitoring and control phase is to deter­
mine whether the progress is progressing as planned. The project comple­
tion phase is when the project is formally accepted by the organization. 
3.  Review how each of the nine processes of the Project Management 
Body of Knowledge is necessary in order to ensure smooth project 
deployment. 
IS projects do not deliver their potential value for a number of reasons, 
including lack of sufficient planning at the start of a project; diff iculties 
with technology compatibility (i.e., new technology may not work with 
existing technology); lack of commitment by management in providing the 
necessary resources; poorly defined project scope; and lack of suff icient 
time to complete the project. 
Glossary 
IS project management A directed effort to plan, organize, and 
Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK)  A collection 
manage resources to bring about the successful achievement of 
of processes and knowledge areas generally accepted as best 
specific IS goals. 
practice within the project management discipline. 
project Short-term effort to create a specific business-related 
scope creep Uncontrolled changes in a project’s scope. 
outcome. 
triple constraints of project management Time, cost, and scope. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  You manage the department that will use a system being developed 
on a large project. After carefully reviewing the requirements definition 
document, you are positive that there are missing, ambiguous, inaccu­
rate, and unclear requirements. The project manager is pressuring you 
for your sign-off  because he has already received sign-off s from all of 
your coworkers. If you fail to sign off on the requirements, you are going 
to put the entire project at risk because the time frame is not negotia­
ble. What should you do? Why? Support your answer. 
2.  You have been hired as a consultant to build an employee payroll sys­
tem for a startup restaurant. Before you even have a chance to inter­
view them, the two owners decided to independently come up with a 
list of their business requirements. When you combine their two lists, 
you have the following list: 
•  All employees must have a unique employee ID. 
•  The system must track employee hours worked based on employ­
ees’ last names. 
•  Employees must be scheduled to work a minimum of 8 hours 
per day. 
•  Employee payroll is calculated by multiplying the employees’ hours 
worked by $7.25. 
•  Managers must be scheduled to work morning shift s. 
•  Employees cannot be scheduled to work more than 8 hours per day. 
•  Servers cannot be scheduled to work morning, aft ernoon, or 
evening shift s. 
•  The system must allow managers to change and delete employees 
from the system. 
a.  Highlight potential issues with the list. 
b.  Add requirements that you think should be there but are not. 
c.  What do you tell the owners when you derive your new list? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
486 
PI6 Project Management 
Collaboration Exercise PI6.1  
Step 1: Background 
One key element of Project Management is dealing with people.  In fact, 
effective interaction skills are listed as one of the nine knowledge areas 
of the Project Management Body of Knowledge.  To help their employees 
develop these skills, many companies use personality profiles to develop 
teams that have the best chance of success.  
Step 2: Activity 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, and click 
on the link provided for the Collaboration Exercise for this Plug IT In.  This 
link will take you to a Web site where you can complete a free personality 
profile.  This profile, known as the Jung Typology Test, is based on the Mey­
ers-Briggs personality test that is widely used by HR departments.  
Complete this activity as an individual, and print a copy of your results. 
Then, build a Google Document with your team that includes every­
one’s results.  Determine whether you have a good balance on all four 
criteria. 
Step 3: Deliverable 
As a team, determine whether you have a good mix of personalities that 
would work well together. If there is an area where you do not have good 
balance, it can pose a problem.  Submit your team document that includes 
both your individual responses and your team’s thoughts. 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  Apply each of the five project management processes of the PMBOK to 
the following massive project. Then, discuss each process with regard 
to that project. Finally, use a search engine to find out where the project 
stands now. Would this be considered a runaway project? Why or why 
not? 
Established in 1948, the National Health Service (NHS) in the United 
Kingdom is the largest healthcare organization in Europe. Controlled 
by the British government, it is also a vast bureaucracy, employing 
more than 1 million workers and providing a full range of healthcare 
services to the country’s 60 million citizens. 
The inspiration to digitize this huge bureaucracy first surfaced in 
2001. At that time, much of the NHS was paper based and severely lagging 
in its use of technology, largely because of years of underinvestment. Hos­
pitals throughout the United Kingdom were dealing with multiple ven­
dors, many of them small to midsize UK software companies. Predictably, 
the NHS had become a hodgepodge of incompatible systems from diff er­
ent suppliers, with differing levels of functionality. The NHS had created 
silos of information that were not shared, or even sharable. 
In an attempt to resolve these problems, in 2002 the British govern­
ment initiated the National Program for Information Technology (NPIT), 
which includes England, Northern Ireland, and Wales (but not Scotland). 
The overall objective of the NPIT was to build a single, electronic health-
care record for every individual. In effect, this record would be a compre­
hensive, lifelong history of a patient’s healthcare information, regardless 
of where, when, and by whom he or she was treated. In addition, the NPIT 
would provide healthcare professionals with access to a national data 
repository. Finally, it would support the NHS in collecting and analyzing 
information and monitoring health trends to make the best use of clinical 
and other resources. 
A major obstacle for the NPIT was the sheer size of England’s 
healthcare system. For example, in one year, the system served some 
52 million people; it dealt with 325 million consultations in primary 
care, 13 million outpatient consultations, and 4 million emergency 
admissions; and it issued 617 million prescriptions. 
The NPIT is a 10-year project designed to build new information 
systems to (1) connect more than 100,000 doctors, 380,000 nurses, and 
50,000 other healthcare professionals; (2) allow for the electronic stor­
age and retrieval of patient medical records; (3) permit patients to set 
up appointments via their computers; and (4) let doctors electronically 
transmit prescriptions to local pharmacies. 
Specifically, the information systems that the NHS is attempting 
to deliver include the following: 
•  The National Spine: The National Spine is a database at the heart of the 
NPIT. The Spine encompasses individual electronic NHS lifelong care 
records for every patient in England, securely accessible by the patients 
and their health providers. The Spine will enable patients and providers 
to securely access integrated patient data, prescription ordering, proac­
tive decision support, and best-practice reference data. 
•  Choose and Book: Choose and Book provides convenience for patients in 
electronically selecting the date, place, and time of their appointments. 
•  N3: The N3 national network is a massive, secure, broadband, virtual pri­
vate network that provides the IT infrastructure and broadband connec­
tivity for the NHS so that it can share patient information with various 
organizations. The N3 supports Choose and Book, electronic prescrip­
tions, and electronic transfer of patient information. 
The NHS first had McKinsey & Company conduct a study of the UK 
healthcare system. McKinsey concluded that the project was too 
large for any one vendor to act as prime contractor for all of it. Conse­
quently, the NHS divided England into five regions—London, Eastern, 
Northeast, Northwest, and Southern—each with about 12 million peo­
ple. Each of the five regions would be serviced by a prime IT vendor, 
known as a Local Service Provider (LSP). 
The vendor selection process was conducted with great secrecy. 
Unfortunately, the secrecy led to most frontline healthcare providers 
being excluded from the vendor selection process. The NHS off ered 
10-year service contracts to the LSPs for the five regions, each worth 
about $2 billion. 
The LSPs are responsible for developing and integrating informa­
tion systems at a local level. The LSPs are also responsible for imple­
menting clinical and administrative applications, which support the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Problem-Solving Activities 487 
delivery of patient care and enable trusts to exchange data with the 
National Spine. (A trust is a regional healthcare agency that admin­
isters England’s national healthcare programs). In addition, the LSPs 
provide the data centers to run all the applications. 
Significantly, all of the NHS’s contracts with the LSPs stipulated 
that vendors would not be paid until they delivered working systems. 
Because the vendors were the prime contractors, this stipulation also 
meant that the subcontractors would not be paid until they delivered 
working systems. 
Accenture was named LSP for two regions. Computer Sciences 
Corporation (CSC), British Telecom (BT), and a Fujitsu-led alliance were 
named LSPs for the other three regions. BT was also given the contract 
to build both the N3 network and the National Spine. Atos Origin was 
chosen to provide Choose and Book. 
As previously explained, the LSPs were to act as prime contrac­
tors for their respective regions, and they were able to choose their 
own software vendors and subcontractors. BT and the Fujitsu group 
selected IDX (now part of GE Healthcare), an established healthcare 
services and software provider, to develop health records soft ware. 
Accenture and CSC chose iSoft, a UK-based supplier of healthcare soft ­
ware, for that function. 
Developing this software presented many challenges. Both iSoft 
and IDX had to write some of the software from scratch. The diff iculty 
was that the programmers and systems developers did not compre­
hend some of the terminology used by the British health system and, 
more important, how the British health system actually operated. 
Compounding these problems was the decision by Accenture and 
CSC to select iSoft as its clinical and administrative soft ware vendor. 
These companies were depending on iSoft’s Lorenzo application suite, 
which at that time was still in development. However, iSoft seriously 
underestimated the time and effort necessary to develop the Lorenzo 
suite. As a result, under the collect-on-implementation contract that 
the LSPs had signed with the NHS, neither Accenture nor iSoft  could 
generate revenue. In a catch-22 situation, this lack of revenue left iSoft 
short of the cash it needed to finish developmental work on Lorenzo. 
The ongoing delay of Lorenzo left Accenture and CSC in a quan­
dary. Should they continue to wait for Lorenzo, or should they lock into 
older, existing applications? Accenture opted to wait and use Lorenzo. 
In contrast, CSC chose to implement iSoft’s existing line of products. 
While waiting for Lorenzo, Accenture worked with general practi­
tioners, as opposed to CSC, which focused almost entirely on hospitals. 
Accenture’s problem was that the general practitioner implementa­
tion was extremely difficult because there are so many of them and 
the NHS had given them an option called GP Systems of Choice. This 
option stipulated that the doctors did not have to follow Accenture’s 
lead in selecting a system but could, instead, choose on their own. This 
choice, in turn, further complicated the transfer of more than 10 years 
of data from old systems to the Spine-compliant systems being pro­
vided by Accenture. Typically, it cost about $9,000 and took six months 
to transfer the data of each practitioner. 
Meanwhile, there were concerns with GE Healthcare’s IDX as well. 
Fujitsu and BT had agreed to develop a Common Solution Program, 
meaning that the two LSPs would develop common applications for 
two of England’s regions. Because of time delays at IDX, Fujitsu and 
BT replaced the firm with Cerner, a U.S. healthcare IT company. This 
replacement caused additional time delays for the project. 
The NPIT was originally budgeted at $12 billion, but that figure 
has risen to $24 billion as a result of the many problems encountered 
in developing the NPIT. By mid-2007, the NHS had delivered some of 
the program’s key elements. For example, 1 million patient referrals to 
specialist care were made through Choose and Book and 97 percent of 
doctors’ offices were connected to the N3 network. 
However, many deliverables of the project have been delayed. In 
addition, the N3 network experienced more than a hundred failures 
in 2006. One network outage disrupted mission-critical computer ser­
vices such as patient administration systems for three days. 
Another problem was that the project has little support among 
healthcare workers. This problem stemmed from excluding frontline 
healthcare professionals in the early phases of the project. There­
fore, it fell largely to the vendors and the bureaucrats to create the 
system. Physicians complained that the system focused too much on 
administrative needs and not enough on clinicians’ concerns. A sur­
vey conducted in 2006 showed that only 38 percent of British general 
practitioners and nurses believed that the project was an important 
priority for the NHS, and only 13 percent believed that the project rep­
resented a good use of NHS resources. 
The NHS policy to pay vendors only on delivery of working sys­
tems was shortsighted because the policy provided no flexibility to 
deal with vendors that encountered unexpected problems. In late 
2006, Accenture announced that it was walking away from its contract 
with the NHS. Accenture did not say why it was exiting the project, but 
the company had set aside some $500 million to cover losses from its 
work in England. 
As of mid-2007, the NHS itself had run short of funding, resulting 
in huge layoffs, possible closings of hospitals, and reductions in ser­
vices. These problems were so serious that they prompted the British 
government to initiate an effort to bring costs under control. Some 
experts estimate that it will take another $15 billion (over the $24 bil­
lion already spent) to get the NPIT initiative fully functional. 
The NHS is an incredibly political system. On the one hand, in 
mid-2014, the NHS continues to operate chronically short of funds. 
British analysts predict that by 2020, the largest healthcare system in 
the world will be operating a deficit six times larger than its annual 
operating budget, forcing the closure of up to 20 percent of Britain’s 
hospitals, which are already inundated with patients. 
On the other hand, proponents of the NHS say that it operates 
efficiently, delivering better health outcomes than the United States 
at half the cost. In fact, proponents state that NHS physicians, and 
patients, are more humble about their expectations of what their 
healthcare system should provide than physicians and patients in the 
United States. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PLUG IT IN 7  
Protecting Your Information  
Assets 
PLUG IT IN OUTLINE 
PI7.1  How to Protect Your Assets: The 
Basics 
PI7.2  Behavioral Actions to Protect Your 
Information Assets 
PI7.3  Computer-Based Actions to 
Protect Your Information Assets 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
PI7.1  Explain why it is critical that you protect your information assets. 
PI7.2  Identify the various behavioral actions you can take to protect your information 
assets. 
PI7.3  Identify the various computer-based actions you can take to protect your 
 information assets. 
PI7.1 How to Protect Your Assets: The Basics 
We travel on our jobs, we work from home, and we access the Internet from home and from 
our favorite hot spots for any number of reasons— shopping, ordering products, planning trips, 
gathering information, and staying in touch with friends and family via e-mail. Unfortunately, 
every time we use our computers or access the Internet, we risk exposing both professional and 
personal information to people intent on stealing or exploiting that information. Therefore, we 
have prepared this Plug IT In to explain how you can protect your information assets when you 
are computing at home or while you are traveling. 
Hopefully, when you are at work or when you access your university’s network from home 
or on the road, you have the advantage of “industrial-strength” information security that your 
company or university’s IS department has implemented. In all other cases, however, you 
are on your own, so it is your responsibility to protect yourself. Maintaining proper security 
is becoming even more critical because organized crime is increasingly turning its attention 
to home users. As businesses improve their information security, consumers become the next 
logical target. According to Symantec (www.symantec.com), which manufactures the Norton 
Internet security products, if you connected an unprotected personal computer to the Internet 
in 2003, it would have been attacked within 15 minutes. Today, that same computer will be 
attacked within seconds. 
You can take two types of actions to protect your information assets: behavioral actions 
and computer-based actions (see Figure PI7.1). Behavioral actions are those actions that do 
not specifically involve a computer. Computer-based actions relate to safe computing. If you 
take both types of actions, you will protect your information and greatly reduce your exposure 
to fraud and identity theft . 
488 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Behavioral Actions to Protect Your Information Assets  489 Figure depicting behavioral and computer-based actions that protect information assets.
FIGURE PI7.1 Two types of actions can protect your information assets. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Why is it so important that you take the responsibility for the security of your information assets?
 2. Differentiate between behavioral and computer-based actions taken to protect your information assets. 
Apply the Concept PI7.1 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI7.1 Explain why it is  
complete, Web sites to which you submit your e-mail address, 
critical that you protect your information assets.  
and so on. If you visit a site that can identify you, make note of 
that. Visit your junk mail at the end of the hour, and see how 
many messages have been sent to that folder since you began the 
STEP 1: Background (This is what you are learning.) 
activity. 
If you knew all the tricks the thieves would use at a department 
store, you would know how to fend them off. The same is true 
STEP 3: Deliverable (This is what you turn in.) 
online, although it is often much more difficult to know when 
Review your diary of events, and write a summary to your 
you have left yourself vulnerable. Sometimes the best strategy to 
professor that explains why it is critical that you protect your 
assess your security is a simple tracking activity. 
information assets. Make certain to include specific references to 
your online activities.
STEP 2: Activity (This is what you are doing.) 
Spend one hour online. Keep track of every bit of information you 
put on the computer: user names, passwords, preferences you 
PI7.2 Behavioral Actions to Protect Your 
Information Assets 
You should take certain behavioral actions to protect your information assets. We discuss these 
actions in this section. 
General Behavioral Actions 
You should never provide personal information to anyone in any format—physical, verbal, or 
electronic. As discussed in Chapter 7, you are vulnerable to social engineering attacks at home 
as well as at work. Therefore, it is critical to be on your guard at all times. For example, always 
verify that you are talking to authorized personnel before you provide personal information 
over the telephone. To accomplish this, you should hang up and call back the person or com­
pany, at a number that you obtain independent of the phone call. If the call is fraudulent, then 
the number the caller gives you will also be fraudulent. Credit card companies usually print 
their numbers on the back of their cards and/or on every statement. Further, you can find tele­
phone numbers on your credit card company’s Web site. Similarly, you should never click on a 
link received in an e-mail. If your bank e-mails you for an account update, then open your Web 
browser and go directly to the bank’s Web site to complete this activity. If you click through the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
490 
PI7 Protecting Your Information Assets 
e-mail, you could fall victim to identity theft by giving your information to someone using a fake 
Web site. 
One critical behavioral action you should take is to protect your Social Security number. 
Unfortunately, far too many organizations use this number to uniquely identify you. When you 
are requested to provide this number, ask why you cannot substitute some other combination 
of nine numbers and letters. If the person asking for your Social Security number—for exam­
ple, someone at your physician’s office—is not responsive, then ask to speak with a supervisor. 
Remember: You have to take the initiative here. 
The good news is that the use of Social Security numbers for identification has rapidly 
decreased. For example, the federal Social Security Number Protection Act of 2007 places 
restrictions on the use of Social Security numbers for identification purposes. The bad news 
is that you might have to remember many more identifiers. However, your information will 
become more secure. 
Another critical consideration involves your use of credit cards. Securing your credit 
cards is important because fraudulent credit card use is so widespread. One security 
measure you can take is to use credit cards with your picture on them. Although cashiers 
probably cannot read your signature on the back of your card, they can certainly com­
pare your picture to your face. For example, Bank of America will place your picture on 
several of its credit cards for free. To access this service, visit www.bankofamerica.com/ 
creditcards, click on “Manage Your Account” on the top menu, and then click on “Protect 
Your Account.” Also, do not sign the back of your credit cards. Instead, write “Photo ID 
Required” on the back. 
You may also want to use virtual credit cards, which offer you the option of shop­
ping online with a disposable credit card number. For no extra charge, you sign up at your 
credit card provider’s Web site and typically download software onto your computer. When 
you are ready to shop, you receive a randomly generated substitute 16-digit number that 
you can use at the online store. The number can be used only once or, in some cases, 
repeatedly, but only at the same store. It can also be used to purchase goods and services 
over the phone and through the mail, although it cannot be used for in-store purchases 
that require a traditional plastic card. Several companies offer virtual credit cards, but 
the major ones are Citibank and Discover. (Recall our discussion of virtual credit cards in 
Chapter 9.) 
Also, pay very close attention to your credit card billing cycles. You should know, to within a 
day or two, when your credit card bills are due. If a bill does not arrive when expected, call your 
credit card company immediately. If your credit card is stolen and is being used fraudulently, 
the first thing the thief does is change the address on the account so that you do not receive the 
bill. Fortunately, you can view your credit card bills online and on most mobile devices. Further, 
most credit card issuers offer the option to receive your credit card bills via e-mail. This process 
eliminates postal mail theft as a problem. In addition, when you write checks to pay any of your 
accounts, particularly your credit card accounts, do not write your complete card number on 
the “For” line of your check. Instead, write only the last four digits. 
Another important action is to limit your use of debit cards. Debit cards are linked to 
your bank account, meaning that a person who steals your debit card and personal iden­
tification number (PIN) can clean out your bank account. In contrast, your liability with 
credit cards is usually zero (or a small amount). Instead, your credit card company bears 
the liability for fraudulent charges, provided that you notify the company within 60 days 
of the theft. 
Do not use a personal mailbox at your home or apartment for anything other than catalogs 
and magazines. Use a private mailbox or a P.O. (Post Office) box. It is far too easy for thieves to 
steal mail from home mailboxes when no one is at home for much of the day. Think about the 
wealth of information that could be stolen from your mailbox: credit card statements, bank 
statements, investment statements, and so on. 
When you discard mail or old records, use a cross-cut, or confetti, shredder to cut them 
up. Recall our discussion of dumpster diving in Chapter 7. A single-cut shredder is not suff icient 
because, with enough time, a thief can reassemble the strips. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Behavioral Actions to Protect Your Information Assets  491 
Another security option is to sign up with a company that 
provides proactive protection of your personal information. 
Examples of such companies are LifeLock (www.lifelock.com) 
and TrustedID (www.trustedid.com). 
LifeLock and TrustedID allow customers to lock their credit 
files so that new lines of credit cannot be opened unless custom­
ers first unlock their existing files. When credit files are locked, 
merchants and banks must have verbal or written permission 
from the customer before opening new credit in the customer’s 
name. Ordinarily, the locking process involves sending regis­
tered mail every 90 days to each of the three major credit agen­
cies: Equifax (www.equifax.com), Experian (www.experian.com), 
and TransUnion (www.transunion.com). LifeLock and TrustedID 
perform this service for you and thus proactively monitor your 
various credit files. 
CardCops provides an early warning service that notifies its 
customers that the company has found their personal informa­
tion circulating on the Internet. It also collects  compromised data on the Internet and makes 
them available to its customers and to merchants. 
What to Do in the Event of Identity Theft 
Identity theft is on the rise, with more than 12.5 million victims reported in the United 
States in 2012. If you follow the behavioral and computer-based actions recommended in 
this Plug IT In, you will greatly reduce, but not eliminate, the chances that your identity will 
be stolen. 
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) provides the following instructions of what to do 
if your identity is stolen. You can review these instructions at https://www.consumer.ft c.gov 
/articles/pdf-0009-taking-charge.pdf. The recommended immediate steps are as follows: 
1.  Place an Initial Fraud Alert by contacting one of the three nationwide credit reporting com­
panies: Equifax, Experian, or TransUnion. Report that you are a victim of identity theft , and 
request that the company put a fraud alert on your file. Also, make certain the company 
will contact the other two credit companies. Finally, keep a record of every phone call, 
letter, e-mail, or other forms of communication for your files. 
2.  Order your credit reports from each of the three credit reporting companies listed above. 
Inform them that you have placed an initial fraud alert, and request a free copy of your 
credit that lists only the last four digits of your Social Security number. Again, keep de­
tailed records of everything you requested and received. 
3.  Create an Identity Theft Report that includes an Identity Theft Affidavit (you can find exam­
ples of this online) and a Police Report. 
4.  Finally, get in the habit of regularly reviewing your credit report. Pay particular attention 
to medical benefit explanations from your insurance company, and respond quickly to no­
tices from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). It is not necessary to obtain legal counsel to 
report identity theft, but it is a good idea. A lawyer who is experienced in this type of crime 
will be able to help you get back on your feet more quickly. Photograph depicting a paper shredder.
A paper shredder is a simple, but effective tool to use to protect 
your identity. 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Describe three behavioral actions you can take to thwart social engineering attacks.
 2. Describe the steps you should take if you think your identity is stolen. 

 
 
 
 
492 
PI7 Protecting Your Information Assets 
Apply the Concept PI7.2 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI7.2 Identify the various 
STEP 2: Activity 
behavioral actions you can take to protect your information 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, and 
assets. 
click on the link provided for PI7.2. This link will take you to a page 
on the Chase Web site that provides examples of false e-mails. 
Read over these e-mails, and develop five clues that suggest these 
messages may be fraudulent. Also, prepare a statement of best 
STEP 1: Background 
Education is extremely important in being able to determine 
practices to pursue when you receive phishing e-mails. 
whether something on the Web is legitimate. This section teaches 
you how to respond if your identity has been stolen. One way this 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
could happen is via phishing, the process whereby a thief sends 
an e-mail that looks legitimate and requests your user name and 
Based on what you learned by reading this section and reviewing 
login information so that he or she can update it. Once you send 
the Chase Web site in Step 2, identify the various behavioral 
that information, your account—and possibly your identity—is no 
actions you can take to protect your information assets. 
longer secure. (Recall our discussion of phishing in Chapter 7.) 
PI7.3 Computer-Based Actions to Protect 
Your Information Assets 
You can take many computer-based actions to increase the security of your information. We 
first discuss how to determine where persons who use your computer have visited on the Inter­
net. Next, we briefly explain how to access social networking sites safely. We then consider 
how to determine if your computer is infected with malicious software (malware) and what 
actions you can take to prevent such infections. Next, we discuss how to protect your portable 
devices—for example, laptops and flash drives—and the information they contain. We follow 
with discussions of other valuable computer-based actions, how to protect your privacy when 
using the Internet and e-mail, how to recover from a disaster, and how to protect yourself when 
you are computing wirelessly. 
Determining Where People Have Visited on the Internet 
Using Your Computer 
At home, you may have a single computer or several computers connected to a network. 
Although you may practice “safe computing,” other people who use your computer might not. 
For example, you might have roommates who use your computer. Their friends could be using 
your computer as well. You cannot be certain that these individuals take the same safety pre­
cautions that you do. You can, however, identify the Internet sites that anyone who uses your 
computer has visited. To accomplish this task, check the browser history. It is important to 
note that all modern browsers have a “private browsing” mode in which the viewing history 
is not recorded. If someone uses private browsing on your computer, then you will not be able 
to check that person’s browser history. The better practice is to keep your computer password 
protected so that users must enter the correct password to use it. Also, allow only people 
you trust to access your computer. If you are paying for the Internet connection, then you are 
responsible for the actions taken on your computer. 
The Dangers of Social Networking Sites 
You should never post personal information about yourself or your family in chat rooms or 
on social networking sites. In fact, you should access these Web sites and review any entries 
that you have made. Although you may never be able to recover all of your entries because 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer-Based Actions to Protect Your Information Assets 493 
someone could have saved copies of pictures you posted or 
took screen shots of your posts, you can take positive steps to 
remove them from the main host. The reason for these precau­
tions is that potential employers are now searching these Web 
sites for information about you. Well-known social networking 
sites include MySpace, Friendster, Xanga, YouTube, Facebook, 
and Flickr. Additionally, several people have been robbed when 
they posted pictures on social networks that let criminals know 
they were not home. 
The good news is that social networking Web sites have 
added features to give us more control over our information. 
The bad news is that the privacy settings are not always easy to 
find and use. Your first decision is whether to make your profile 
publicly available or to keep it more private. More than one-third 
of adult users allow everyone to see their profiles. In contrast, 
some two-thirds restrict access in some way. 
On Facebook the default is a private profile, where users 
decide what information to make publicly available. To make 
privacy adjustments on Facebook, follow these steps: 
• Click on “Settings.” 
• Click on “Privacy Settings.” 
• Work with the options you find there. 
If you want to keep a low profile on Facebook, it is a good idea to look at the “Applications” 
section in Privacy Settings. You may have shielded parts of your profile from public access, but 
that does not mean that you have done the same for Facebook applications that have access 
to much of the same data by default. For a full explanation of Facebook’s privacy settings, see 
www.facebook.com/privacy/explanation.php. 
On LinkedIn, most people want their profiles to be public, and that is the default. The infor­
mation that LinkedIn users share tends to be professional credentials, not details of their social 
lives, so there is less need for privacy. If you want additional privacy on LinkedIn, follow these 
steps: 
• Click on “Account & Settings” from your home page. 
• Scroll down to adjust your privacy settings. 
One company, Reputation Defender (www.reputationdefender.com), will search out all 
information about you on the Internet and present it to you in the form of a report. Then, at 
your command, it will “destroy all inaccurate, inappropriate, hurtful, and slanderous informa­
tion about you.” 
Determining If Your Computer Is Infected 
There are several signs to look for if you think your computer system is infected with malicious 
software or malware (discussed in Chapter 7), including the following: 
• Your computer shuts down unexpectedly by itself. 
• Your computer does not start normally. 
• Your computer exhibits erratic behavior, displaying some or all of these characteristics: 
– Your system unexpectedly runs out of memory on your computer’s hard drive. 
– Your system continually runs out of main memory (RAM). 
– Programs take longer to load than normal. 
– Programs act erratically. 
– Your monitor displays strange graphics or messages. Figure depicting a human figure in red placed at the center and connected to various blue colored human figures with red lines.
Social Media operates on openness, but safety is in maintaining 
some privacy. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
494 
PI7 Protecting Your Information Assets 
– Your system displays an unusually high number of error messages. 
– Your e-mail program sends messages to all the contacts in your address book without 
your knowledge or permission. 
If you note any or all of these signs, then your computer might be infected with malware. 
You can then take the computer-based actions discussed later in this chapter to rid your com­
puter of this soft ware. However, taking the actions discussed in the next section will reduce 
your chances of being infected in the first place. 
Computer Actions to Prevent Malware Infections 
Many of the actions we discuss in this section are common sense, but surprisingly large num­
bers of people do not pay attention to them. Taking these steps will help you prevent a malware 
infection of your computer system. We begin by considering actions that you must never take 
with your computer. 
Never open unrequested attachments to e-mail files, even if they are from people you 
know and trust. Their computers may have been compromised without their knowledge, in 
which case the e-mail could be a phishing attack. Never open attachments or Web links in 
e-mails from people you do not know. These attachments can infect your system with a worm 
or virus. Similarly, these Web links can be a phishing attack that can infect your system with a 
Trojan horse, turning your computer into a zombie or bot (short for robot). As we saw in Chap­
ter 7, when this occurs your computer is no longer under your control. 
Never accept files transferred to you during Internet chat or instant messaging sessions. 
These files are usually not from people you know, and they can infect your system. 
Never download any files or software over the Internet from Web sites that you do not 
know. Never download files or software that you have not requested. 
Test Your System. It is a good idea to test your system. Several Web sites provide free secu­
rity tests. These tests send different types of messages to your computer to evaluate how well 
your system is protected from a variety of attacks. Free testing Web sites include Shields Up! 
(www.grc.com), Symantec Security Check (http://security.norton.com), and McAfee My Securi­
tyStatus (search “McAfee My SecurityStatus” on the Web). 
Microsoft provides a valuable scanning tool called the Microsoft Baseline Analyzer. This 
tool scans Windows-based computers for common security problems and generates individual 
security reports for each computer that it scans. The Baseline Analyzer can be downloaded for 
free. You can also run free malware scans on your computer. Several companies, including the 
following, will scan your computer to identify viruses, worms, and other malware, and off er 
suggestions about how to clean up your system if it is infected: 
• Trend Micro (search the Web for “Trend Micro HouseCall”) 
• Panda Soft ware (http://www.pandasecurity.com/usa) 
Install a Security Suite on Your Computer. Security suites are software packages that 
contain a variety of security products, such as anti-malware software, spam protection, e-mail 
fraud protection, spyware detection, intrusion detection, and monitoring soft ware. These 
suites provide a great deal of functionality in one package. There is a question of whether the 
individual functions in a security suite can match the combined functions of a group of indi­
vidual products. Therefore, we discuss individual products in the next sections. 
Well-known security suites include the following, but there are many others: 
• ZoneAlarm Security Suite (www.zonealarm.com) 
• McAfee Internet Security Suite (www.mcafee.com) 
• Norton Internet Security (www.symantec.com) 
• PC-cillin Internet Security (www.trendmicro.com) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer-Based Actions to Protect Your Information Assets 495 
Install an Anti-Malware Product on Your Computer. You should install an anti-mal­
ware product on your computer and use it, ideally at least once per week. Remember that every 
time you scan your computer for malware with your anti-malware product, you must update 
your malware definitions before you scan. Typically, anti-malware product vendors automati­
cally update your malware definitions over the Web. 
There are free anti-malware products and commercial anti-malware products. In gen­
eral, the free products are adequate, but the commercial products offer more functionality. An 
excellent resource that offers a great deal of information on free anti-malware products, as well 
as many other security products, is www.thefreecountry.com. Go to Security > Free Antivirus 
Software to access their list of anti-malware products. 
Well-known commercial anti-malware products include the following, but there are many 
others: 
• Norton Anti-malware (www.symantec.com) 
• PC-cillin (www.trendmicro.com) 
• VirusScan (www.mcafee.com) 
Install a Firewall on Your Computer. A personal firewall is software installed on your 
home computer that controls communications to and from your computer by permitting or de­
nying communications based on your security settings. A personal firewall usually will protect 
only the computer on which the software is installed. Nevertheless, firewalls perform essential 
functions. 
Essentially, firewalls should make your computer invisible. This means that your firewall 
should not respond to Internet requests to ports (i.e., communications links to your computer) 
that are not used for common Internet use. In effect, your computer operates in stealth mode 
on the Internet. 
Firewalls also should alert you to suspicious behavior. They should tell you when a pro­
gram or connection is attempting to do something you have not instructed it to do, such as 
download software or run a program such as ActiveX. ActiveX (by Microsoft), which can exe­
cute programs downloaded from Internet Explorer, can be exploited by attackers trying to 
compromise your computer. It can be managed on all Windows computers. Search the Web 
to find instructions on managing ActiveX on your particular operating system and Internet 
browser. 
Firewalls should block outbound connections that you do not initiate. Your firewall should 
not let your computer access the Internet on its own. If your computer tries to access the Inter­
net by itself, this is a sure sign that it is infected with malware. 
As with anti-malware programs, firewall products can be either free or commercially pro­
duced. Again, the free products are adequate, but the commercial products offer more func­
tionality. For a list of free firewall software, search “about.com free firewalls.” 
Many companies off er commercial firewall soft ware. These are some of the best-known 
commercial firewall products: 
• ZoneAlarm Security Suite (www.zonealarm.com) 
• Norton Internet Security (www.symantec.com) 
• PC-cillin Internet Security (www.trendmicro.com) 
• McAfee Internet Security (www.mcafee.com) 
• F-Secure Internet Security (www.f-secure.com) 
• Panda Platinum Internet Security (www.pandasecurity.com) 
It is a good idea to test your firewall. However, it is best to use only those test Web sites 
that are run by actual firewall or security software companies. A good firewall test site is the 
McAfee HackerWatch site at www.hackerwatch.org/probe. The HackerWatch site allows you 
to perform a basic probe test on your computer to determine whether your firewall is blocking 
ports that may be vulnerable. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
496 
PI7 Protecting Your Information Assets 
Install an Antispyware Product on Your Computer. As with anti-malware products 
and firewalls, free antispyware products are adequate, but commercial antispyware products 
offer greater functionality. Free antispyware products include the following: 
• Ad-Aware SE Personal (www.lavasoft .com) 
• Spybot Search&Destroy (www.safer-networking.org) 
Well-known commercial antispyware products include the following, but there are many 
others: 
• Spy Sweeper (www.webroot.com) 
• SpyCatcher (www.tenebril.com) 
In addition, several companies offer free spyware scans: 
• Spy Audit (www.webroot.com) 
• Zonelabs (www.zonealarm.com) 
• Norton (www.symantec.com) 
Install Monitoring Software on Your Computer. Monitoring soft ware logs keystrokes, 
e-mails, applications, windows, Web sites, Internet connections, passwords, chat conversa­
tions, Web cams, and even screenshots. Companies that offer monitoring software include the 
following: 
• SpyAgent (www.spytech-Web.com) 
• SpyBuddy (www.exploreanywhere.com) 
• WinSpy (www.win-spy.com) 
Install Content-Filtering Software on Your Computer. Content-filtering soft ware per­
forms many functions. It can block access to undesirable Web sites, and it can record and view 
all of the Web sites that you or other users have visited. It can also record both sides of chat 
conversations from AOL Instant Messenger (AIM and AIM Triton), Yahoo! Messenger, and MSN 
Messenger. 
Content-filtering software provides many filter categories, thus enabling you to selectively 
filter content. Companies that offer this software include the following: 
• Cybersitter (www.cybersitter.com) 
• NetNanny (www.netnanny.com) 
• CyberSpy (www.cyberspyware.com) 
Internet Explorer’s Content Advisor utility allows you to block access to Web sites that meet 
specified criteria and to set your own tolerance levels for various types of Internet content. To 
activate and configure Content Advisor, search the Web for instructions specific to your version 
of Windows and Internet Explorer. 
Install Antispam Software on Your Computer. Antispam software helps you to control 
spam. Well-known commercial antispam products include the following, but there are many 
others: 
• Cloudmark (www.cloudmark.com) 
• MailFrontier Desktop (www.sonicwall.com/) 
• SpamKiller (www.mcafee.com) 
• Norton Antispam (www.symantec.com) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer-Based Actions to Protect Your Information Assets 497 
• SpamGourmet (www.spamgourmet.com) 
• SpamAssassin (http://spamassassin.apache.org) 
You might also want to set up multiple free e-mail accounts, such as accounts on Hotmail 
and Gmail. Then, as you surf the Internet and are asked for your e-mail address, you can use 
one of these accounts rather than your home or business e-mail account. When your free e-mail 
accounts are full of spam, you can close them and open new accounts. 
Manage Patches.  Companies typically release software patches to repair security prob­
lems. You should download and install all patches immediately—for example, patches for 
Windows. If you do not, then your computer will be extremely vulnerable to attack. Both Micro-
soft and Apple provide automatic downloads for updates and patches. It is recommended that 
you configure your system to automatically download and install these updates so that your 
computer is not left vulnerable. 
Use a Browser Other Than Internet Explorer. You might consider using a browser oth­
er than Internet Explorer, such as Firefox (www.mozilla.org), Opera (www.opera.com), Safari 
from Apple (www.apple.com/safari/download), or Google Chrome (www.google.com/chrome). 
These browsers are not impregnable, but they are less prominent, and hackers, at least so far, 
have paid less attention to them. 
Use an Operating System Other Than Windows. The two main alternatives to Win­
dows 7 and Windows 8 are Apple’s Mac OS X and Linux. These two operating systems are not 
invulnerable, but they are both based on UNIX, which makes them inherently more secure 
than any version of Windows. (UNIX is an operating system developed by AT&T in the 1960s 
and 1970s that usually runs on servers rather than on desktops.) In addition, Linux and 
Mac OS X have smaller market shares than Windows and thus are less attractive targets for 
malware. 
Protecting Your Portable Devices and Information 
Theft or loss of laptops, notebook computers, tablets, thumb drives, and smartphones, as well 
as the data contained on these devices, is a significant problem. You can take many proactive 
steps to protect portable devices and their data, including preventing the theft, using two-fac­
tor authentication, and encrypting your data. You can also take reactive steps after a theft or 
loss has occurred. We consider all of these actions in this s ection. 
Before we discuss these steps, there are two commonsense precautions that many peo­
ple forget. First, keep your laptop in an inconspicuous container. Laptop cases with your 
company logo simply draw the attention of thieves. Second, do not leave your laptop unat­
tended in plain view—for example, in your car where it can be seen. Instead, lock it in the 
trunk. 
One strategy to prevent the theft of a portable device is to use alarms. Laptop security 
systems operate by detecting motion, analyzing the motion to determine whether a threat 
exists, and, if it does, implementing responses. These alarms are battery powered, they are 
independent of the computer operating system, and they operate whether the laptop is on 
or off. If a laptop armed with a security system is carried beyond a perimeter specified by 
the user, then the alarm assumes the laptop is being stolen. In these cases, it can prevent 
access to the operating system, secure passwords, and encryption keys, and it can sound 
an audible alarm. One laptop security system is Absolute Software’s LoJack for Laptops 
(www.absolute.com). 
Two-factor authentication (discussed in Chapter 7) requires two forms of identification to 
access your computing device. The first authentication factor uses a token or biometrics. The 
second factor is your personal password. A token generates a one-time password that you must 
enter within a specified time limit. This password typically consists of six digits, which appear 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
498 
PI7 Protecting Your Information Assets 
on the token’s LCD screen. Companies offering tokens for two-factor authentication include 
Authenex (www.authenex.com), Kensington (www.kensington.com), and SecuriKey (www 
.securikey.com). 
Fingerprints are the biometric used for two-factor authentication, by incorporating fin­
gerprint readers into the laptop itself. See IBM (www.ibm.com) and Microsoft (www.microsoft 
.com). You can also use fingerprint authentication on your thumb drive with the SanDisk Cruzer 
(www.sandisk.com), the Lexar JumpDrive TouchGuard (www.lexar.com), the Sony MicroVault 
(www.sony.net), and the Kanguru Bio Slider (www.kanguru.com). 
Data encryption provides additional protection by turning data into meaningless sym­
bols that can be deciphered only by an authorized person. You can encrypt some or all of 
the data on your computer by using built-in encryption, folder-based encryption, or full-disk 
encryption. If you are not certain how to encrypt files on your particular operating system, 
search the Web for instructions on how to complete this task. Alternatively, you can purchase 
a third-party product from firms such as Beachhead Solutions (www.beachheadsolutions 
.com) and Dell (www.dell.com), which provide applications that allow you to encrypt files and 
folders. 
Another step you can take to improve your security is to encrypt your entire hard drive, 
including your applications. See TrendMicro (www.trendmicro.com), the Kanguru Wizard 
(www.kanguru.com), and the PCKey (www.kensington.com). 
If your laptop is lost or stolen, then you can use laptop-tracing tools or device reset/ 
remote kill tools. For example, the XTool Computer Tracker (www.computersecurity.com), 
and PC PhoneHome (www.pcphonehome.com) provide transmitters that secretly send a 
signal to their respective company control centers via telephone or the Internet. This signal 
enables the company to track your computer’s location, with the help of the local authori­
ties, Internet service providers, and telephone companies. 
You can also use device reset/remote kill tools to automatically eliminate specified data 
on a lost or stolen laptop to prevent it from being compromised or misused. The solution works 
even when other security software or encryption methods fail. One company providing these 
solutions is Beachhead Solutions (www.beachheadsolutions.com). 
Other Actions That You Can Take on Your Computer 
Other actions you can perform on your computer to increase your protection include detecting 
worms and Trojan horses, turning off peer-to-peer file sharing, searching for new and unusual 
files, detecting spoofed (fake) Web sites, and adjusting the privacy settings on your computer. 
Oft en, Microsoft provides tips on how to handle problems on a Windows computer. Mac com­
puters have built-in software to protect, detect, and remove malware automatically. If you are 
interested in learning how these features work, look up XProtect, Gatekeeper, and Malware 
Removal Tool (MRT) for Mac. 
How to Detect a Worm. Worms are malicious programs that perform unwanted actions on 
your computer (see Chapter 7). They exhibit several characteristics you can watch for: 
• Your system exhibits unexplained hard disk activity. 
• Your system connects to the Internet by itself without any action on your part. 
• Your system seems to be short on available memory. 
• Your family, friends, or colleagues notify you that they have received an odd e-mail mes­
sage from you that they are certain you did not send. 
Ordinarily, your anti-malware software should detect and remove worms. However, if your 
Windows-based computer is currently infected with a worm, you may not be able to delete that 
file. In this case, you will have to reboot (start up) your system from a bootable disk and then 
delete the worm file from the Command Prompt. Then normally, when you reboot your system, 
the worm file should no longer be present. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer-Based Actions to Protect Your Information Assets 499 
How to Detect a Trojan Horse. Trojan horses are ma­
licious programs disguised as, or embedded within, legiti­
mate software (see Chapter 7). On a Windows computer, you 
can determine if your computer is infected with a Trojan 
horse by using a DOS-based utility program called Netstat. 
The steps to use Netstat will vary depending on the version 
of Windows you are running. However, it is easy to find in­
structions online. 
How to Detect Fake Web Sites. A fake Web site is typically 
created to mimic a well-known, legitimate site with a slightly 
different or confusing URL. The attacker tries to trick people 
into going to the spoofed site and providing valuable informa­
tion by sending out e-mail messages and hoping that some us­
ers will not notice the incorrect URL. (We discussed this attack, 
known as phishing, in Chapter 7.) Products that help detect 
fake Web sites include the SpoofStick and McAfee’s SiteAdvi­
sor. These products are not definitive solutions, but they are 
helpful. 
The SpoofStick (www.spoofstick.com) helps users detect fake Web sites by  prominently 
displaying a new toolbar in your browser that indicates which site you are actually surfing. 
For example, if you go to Amazon’s Web site, the SpoofStick toolbar says, “You’re on ama­
zon.com.” However, if you go to a fake Web site that pretends to be Amazon, the SpoofStick 
toolbar displays the actual IP address of the Web site you are surfing; for example, “You’re on 
137.65.23.117.” 
Similarly, during a secure communications session with Internet Explorer, you can move 
your mouse over the padlock to verify that (1) the padlock is genuine and not a fraudulent 
graphic and (2) the site uses a transport layer security (TLS) certificate (discussed in  Chapter 7) 
that contains the correct information about the company to which you are connected. 
McAfee’s SiteAdvisor (www.siteadvisor.com) sticks a green, yellow, or red safety logo next to 
search results on Google, Yahoo!, and MSN. It also puts a color-coded button in the Internet 
Explorer toolbar. Mousing over the button displays details as to why the Web site is good or bad. 
SiteAdvisor also scores Web sites based on the excessive use of pop-up  advertisements, how 
much spam the Web site will generate if you reveal your e-mail address, and whether the site 
spreads spyware and adware. 
Protecting Your Privacy 
In today’s hostile Internet environment, you must use strong passwords (discussed in 
Chapter 7) and adjust the privacy settings on your computer. You may also wish to protect 
your privacy by surfing the Web and e-mailing anonymously. In this section, we discuss these 
actions. 
Use Strong Passwords. You can use the Secure Password Generator at PCTools to create 
strong passwords. The Generator lets you select the number and type of characters in your 
password. 
Remembering multiple passwords is difficult. You can use free software such as Password 
Safe or Roboform (www.roboform.com) to help you remember your passwords and maintain 
them securely. 
How to Adjust Your Privacy Settings on Your Computer. Both Windows and Mac al­
low you to set personal privacy settings on your computer. Because this process is diff erent for 
each operating system and space is limited, it is recommended that you visit their respective 
Web sites for specifics. We do, however, want to make a note about cookies. Photograph depicting a statue of Trojan horse.
The Trojan horse virus is named for the Trojan Horse offered to Troy 
by Greece during the Trojan War. It was part of a plan to destroy 
the city. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
500 
PI7 Protecting Your Information Assets 
Note: A first-party cookie either originates on, or is sent to, the Web site you are currently view­
ing. These cookies are commonly used to store information, such as your preferences when 
visiting that site. In contrast, a third-party cookie either originates on, or is sent to, a diff erent 
Web site from the one you are currently viewing. Third-party Web sites usually provide some 
content on the Web site you are viewing. For example, many sites rely on advertising from third-
party Web sites, which frequently use cookies. A common use for third-party cookies is to track 
your browsing history for advertising or other marketing purposes. 
How to Surf the Web Anonymously. Many users worry that knowledge of their IP ad­
dresses is enough for outsiders to connect their online activities to their “real-world” identities. 
Depending on his or her technical, physical, and legal access, a determined party (such as a 
government prosecutor) may be able to do so, especially if he or she is assisted by the records 
of the ISP that has assigned the Internet Protocol (IP) address. To protect their privacy against 
this type of activity, many people surf the Web and e-mail anonymously. 
Surfing the Web anonymously means that you do not make your IP address or any other 
personally identifiable information available to the Web sites that you are visiting. There are 
two ways to surf the Web anonymously: You can use an anonymizer Web site as a proxy server, 
or you can use an anonymizer as a permanent proxy server in your Web browser. 
A proxy server is a computer to which you connect, which in turn connects to the Web site 
you wish to visit. You remain anonymous because only the information on the proxy server is 
visible to outsiders. 
Keep in mind that although anonymous surfing is more secure than regular surfing, it is 
also typically slower. Anonymizers include Anonymize (www.anonymize.net), Anonymizer 
(www.anonymizer.com), Ultimate Privacy (www.ultimate-anonymity.com), and GhostSurf 
Platinum. These sites allow you to surf the Web anonymously because the anonymizer acts as 
a permanent proxy server on your computer. 
How to E-Mail Anonymously. The reasons for anonymous e-mail are the same as those 
for surfing the Web anonymously. Basically, you want to protect your privacy. When you e-mail 
anonymously, your e-mail messages cannot be tracked back to you personally, to your loca­
tion, or to your computer. Essentially, your e-mail messages are sent through another server 
belonging to a company—known as a re-mailer—that provides anonymous e-mail services. The 
recipient of your e-mail sees only the re-mailer’s header on your message. In addition, the re-
mailer encrypts your messages so that if they are intercepted, they cannot be read. One pos­
sible drawback to utilizing a re-mailer is that your intended recipients might not open your 
e-mail because they will not know it is from you. 
Leading commercial re-mailers include CryptoHeaven (www.cryptoheaven.com), Ultimate 
Privacy (www.ultimate-anonymity.com), and Hushmail (www.hushmail.com). The commercial 
version of Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) is available at www.symantec.com. 
In addition, several free products for anonymous e-mailing and encryption are widely 
available. For example, the free, open-source version of Pretty Good Privacy, called Open PGP, 
is available at www.pgpi.org. For a list of these free products and a review of each one, visit 
http://netsecurity.about.com/. The Outlook e-mail client that comes with Microsoft Off ice also 
allows you to encrypt outgoing e-mail messages. This product is based on public key tech­
nology (discussed in Chapter 7), so you must download and purchase a digital certificate. The 
first time you send an encrypted message, Microsoft takes you through the steps necessary 
to obtain your certificate. Thawte (www.thawte.com) is a company that offers a free personal 
digital e-mail certificate. 
It is a good idea to periodically check the trusted certificate authorities that are configured 
in your browser and verify that those companies can be trusted. Again, this process will vary 
depending on the browser you use. Most browsers make these settings easy to review, so you 
should be able to find instructions through a simple Web search. 
Erasing Your Google Search History. If you have signed up for Google’s Personal­
ized Search, then you can follow these steps to erase your search history. First you sign in 
to your Google account at www.google.com/psearch. You can examine the Search History 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer-Based Actions to Protect Your Information Assets 501 
page and choose days on the calendar to see every search you have made since you created 
your Google account. Click on the Remove Items button. Remember, however, that even aft er 
you remove items from your computer, logs and backups will still exist on Google’s serv­
ers. To prevent Google from collecting this information in the future, select items such as 
“Web,” “Images,” and “News” about which you do not want data collected, and then press 
the “Pause” button. 
Preparing for Personal Disasters 
Disasters are not limited to businesses. You can experience disasters at home, such as fires and 
floods. Therefore, you should take certain steps to protect your information assets, whether 
they are stored on your computer (digital form) or in another form (hard copy). First and fore­
most, you should have a safety deposit box at your bank for your important papers. You should 
also have a fireproof safe at home where you can store other important papers. You should 
make a regular backup of your key files and keep these backups in the safe as well. You might 
also want to encrypt your backup files if they contain sensitive information. 
Both Windows and Mac have fairly easy processes for restoring backup files. Mac comput­
ers use a built-in program called Time Machine; in Windows this program is named System 
Restore. It is important to have a backup of your files in the event that you need to restore them. 
Several third-party companies offer external backup drives that include their own backup 
and restore systems. Before you purchase one, make certain it is compatible with the operating 
system you are using. 
In recent years, the cloud (see Plug IT In 4) has also become a viable backup alternative. 
You do not necessarily need to back up your entire computer; rather, you might want to save 
only your important documents. Dropbox.com, Box.com, Google Drive, Apple’s iCloud, Micro-
soft SkyDrive, and many other companies offer substantial cloud storage space where you can 
back up photos, videos, and other important files. 
Wireless Security 
Many home users have implemented a wireless local area network (LAN). The security consid­
erations for wireless networks are greater than those for wired networks. The reason for this is 
simple. If you are wirelessly computing and communicating, then you are broadcasting, and 
therefore, by definition, you are nonsecure. The most common reason for intruders to connect 
to a nonsecure wireless network is to gain access to the Internet. Intruders might also connect 
in order to use your network as a base for spamming or for other unethical or illegal activities. 
Finally, they may do so to gain access to your sensitive personal information. 
Unfortunately, recent studies have indicated that three-fourths of all home wireless users 
have not activated any security features to protect their information. Unless you take the steps 
we discuss here, your information assets are extremely vulnerable. 
Hide Your Service Set Identifier (SSID). Your wireless router, which connects your home 
network with your ISP, comes with a default SSID that is the same for thousands or millions of 
routers made by the manufacturer. Therefore, an attacker can search for wireless networks by 
looking for a relatively small number of default SSIDs. For this reason, you should (1) change 
your default SSID to a unique SSID and (2) configure your wireless home network to stop broad­
casting the SSID. A step-by-step guide to perform these security measures is available online: 
Simply search “about.com change default SSID.” 
Use Encryption. To avoid broadcasting in the clear, you must use encryption with your 
wireless home network. Wireless equivalent protocol (WEP) is an old protocol that is now very 
easy to crack and therefore should not be used. Instead, you should use Wi-Fi Protected Access 
(WPA2), which is the second generation of WPA. WPA2 is much stronger than WEP and will pro­
tect your encryption against attackers. (Note: Your wireless router must support WPA2. Other­
wise, use WPA rather than WEP.) In addition, you should use a strong passphrase of at least 20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
502 
PI7 Protecting Your Information Assets 
random characters on your router. (Chapter 7 provides specific instructions for creating strong 
passphrases.) 
Filter Out Media Access Control (MAC) Addresses. Every piece of networking hard­
ware has a unique identification number called a media access control (MAC) address that 
looks like this: 00-00-00-00-00-00. (This MAC address is only an example.) You should compile 
the MAC address of all computers on your home wireless network. Then, instruct your router 
to connect only with those computers, and deny access to all other computers that attempt to 
connect with your network. 
Limit Internet Protocol (IP) Addresses. You should instruct your router to allow only a 
certain number of IP addresses to connect to your network. Ideally, the number of IP addresses 
will be the same as the number of computers on your network. 
Sniff Out Intruders. A variety of wireless intrusion detection systems will monitor your wire­
less network for intruders, alert you when intruders are on your network, display their IP ad­
dresses and their activity, and even inform them that you know that they are there.  Commercial 
products include the IBM Internet Security Systems (www.ibm.com) wireless scanner and 
AirSnare which is a free wireless intrusion detection system. 
Using a Public Hotspot. When you travel, keep in mind that most public wireless providers 
and hotspots employ no security measures at all. As a result, everything you send and receive is 
in the clear and is not encrypted. Many intruders go to public hotspots specifically to listen in 
on the wireless computing and communications taking place there. If you must compute wire­
lessly at a public hotspot, you should take several precautions before you connect. 
• Use virtual private networking (VPN) technology to connect to your organization’s network 
(discussed in Chapter 7). 
• Use Remote Desktop to connect to a computer that is running at your home. 
• Configure the Windows firewall to be “on with no exceptions.” 
• Only use Web sites that use secure sockets layer (SSL) for any financial or personal 
transactions. 
Test Your Wireless Network. After you have finished all of the necessary steps to protect 
your wireless home network, it is a good idea to test the network for vulnerabilities. A free Wi-Fi 
vulnerability scanner has been created by eEye and is available for download (just search “eEye 
download” for the link). This tool scans your vicinity looking for wireless devices to test. When 
you run it, it generates a detailed report that outlines all of the security problems it finds. 
Wireless Security Software. For extra security, you can purchase wireless security pro­
grams. Trend Micro (www.trendmicro.com) has added Wi-Fi Intrusion Detection to PC-cillin, 
which also includes a personal firewall, antivirus software, and antispyware soft ware. The 
 software warns you when an unknown user tries to access your wireless network. Zonelabs 
(www.zonealarm.com) has a product called ZoneAlarm Wireless Security that automatically 
detects wireless networks and helps secure them. 
McAfee (www.mcafee.com) provides a free scan to check the security of the wireless net­
work connection that you are using. The scan works only with Internet Explorer. Go to www 
.mcafee.com, click the section for home users, and look under Free Services for McAfee Wi-Fi 
scan. 
Mobile Security 
In recent years, technology has created a highly mobile computing market that previously 
was almost unimaginable. Several basic features of modern information technologies made 
these innovations possible. First, computer processors have become physically smaller and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer-Based Actions to Protect Your Information Assets 503 
computationally more powerful, thus enabling small devices to operate at amazing speeds. 
Second, computer memory has become physically smaller while dramatically expanding its 
capacity. Consequently, small computers can now store and manipulate massive amounts of 
data. Third, the rise in high-speed Internet access over multiple channels (cellular and Wi-Fi) 
allows for near ubiquitous connectivity and distributed processing (cloud computing). Finally, 
input methodologies have migrated to touch screens. As a result, smaller and lighter devices 
now have larger useful screens. Together, these factors have created the rapidly expanding 
mobile smartphone/tablet market. Today, that market is dominated by two operating systems: 
Apple’s iOS and Google’s Android. 
As with all new technologies, issues have arisen concerning how people utilize and secure 
(or don’t secure) their mobile devices. Below we discuss some general principles that apply to 
securing all mobile devices. 
Mobile Best Practices. There are a few habits you should develop no matter what mobile 
device you are using. First, always use a strong password. Your e-mail, contacts, photos, billing 
information, and other personal data are stored on your mobile device, and a strong password 
can help protect your information. A strong password is one that is longer and more diff icult 
to crack than the simple four-digit password that some devices allow. Your settings will allow 
you to create a password that is much more difficult to figure out. Avoid using common words, 
names (including your name!), birthdays, and other information that is easy to guess. 
In addition, you should keep an encrypted backup all of the information on your device. 
Most of us use our devices to store pictures, music, videos, contacts, files, e-mails, text mes­
sages, calendars, and account information. With so much personal information, it is impera­
tive that you regularly back it up. Fortunately, you have quite a few choices here. If you have 
an Apple iOS device, your backup will either remain on your personal computer or in iCloud 
(Apple’s proprietary cloud product). Both methods are acceptable, and users have diff erent 
reasons for choosing one over the other. The local backup keeps a complete copy of your data 
on your computer, which it can restore to your device. The iCloud backup maintains informa­
tion about settings and apps, but this information has to be re-downloaded from the app store. 
In contrast to iOS, Android devices do not offer a built-in backup system. However, there 
are several apps on the market that perform this task for you. Various apps will back up your 
photos, text messages, settings, and other key data. MyBackup Pro (www.rerware.com/ 
Android-Backup/) will keep a complete backup of everything. 
Also, make use of the auto-lock feature on your device. We all lay down our devices 
momentarily, and sometimes they are still on and unlocked. Therefore, you want your device 
to lock itself as quickly as possible so that an unauthorized user cannot gain access to your 
information. 
Currently, mobile devices allow only one user account. Therefore, a device should be used 
only by the individual whose account is on the device. Perhaps one day you will be able to 
create multiple user accounts on mobile devices. Until then, do not share or loan any personal 
device that contains your personal information. If you have an unused device that you loan, 
make certain to restore it to factory settings so that none of your personal information is still on 
the device when the borrower uses it. 
Today, most smartphones have a global positioning system (GPS) chip to receive location 
signals from the GPS satellites. (Recall our discussion of GPS in Chapter 10.) This information 
was originally intended exclusively for navigation purposes. Today, however, many apps use 
your position to offer location-based advertising, tags within social apps, and other commer­
cial purposes. To prevent every app you download from sharing your location, access your pri­
vacy settings, and select the apps you want to share this information with. 
As with your computers, you should keep your operating systems updated. All smart-
phones have a feature to autodownload and install recent apps and security features. Although 
you may want to wait a day or two to see if there are problems with the latest update, in general 
you want to update your mobile device as soon as possible. Many updates offer critical patches 
to vulnerabilities of the operating systems that hackers could exploit. 
Be careful with the apps you download. Both Apple and Google offer virtual stores for you 
to find and purchase apps, but the clearing procedure is not the same with each system. Apple 

 
 
504 
PI7 Protecting Your Information Assets 
reviews and clears each app before allowing it to be posted on its store. In contrast, Google’s 
Android system allows users to download apps from any Web site and install them. To be safe, 
follow these tips: 
• Download only from a reputable app store such as Google Play or Amazon Appstore where 
you can read user reviews. Typically, if people have experienced problems with a particular 
app, it will be obvious in the ratings. 
• Do not download apps that do not have ratings! 
• Download only official apps. Unfortunately, it is fairly easy to create a fraudulent app that 
appears to be from a legitimate company. In addition to using a reputable store and read­
ing reviews, try to determine who developed and owns the app before you download it. 
• Use an antivirus program such as Lookout Mobile Security (www.lookout.com), Symantec 
(www.symantec.com/mobility), or AVG (www.avg.com/us-en/for-mobile). 
Before you go on . . .
 1. Describe two actions you should take to prevent malware infections.
 2. Describe two actions you should take to protect the information on your mobile devices.
 3. Describe two actions that you can take to protect your privacy.
 4. Describe two mobile best practices for information security. 
Apply the Concept PI7.3 
LEARNING OBJECTIVE PI7.3  
It Works” link at the top of the page. You will see that this simple 
tool makes it easy for you to be more aware of the security level 
of the sites you are visiting. 
STEP 1: Background 
Download and install this tool, and browse the Web for 30 
Computer-based actions are vital to computer security. 
minutes or so. Visit the sites you routinely go to, and write down 
Significantly, all of these actions begin with the decision to 
the security rating McAfee gives each one. Does this activity make 
protect your information assets. A vast array of tools is available 
you want to change any of your browsing behaviors? 
to help you protect your information. Try to become familiar with 
these tools, many of which are presented in this chapter. 
STEP 3: Deliverable 
STEP 2: Activity  
Considering what you learned in Step 2, identify at least five 
computer-based actions you can take to protect your information 
Visit http://www.wiley.com/go/rainer/MIS4e/applytheconcept, 
assets. Submit those actions to your instructor in a Word 
and click on the link provided for PI7.3. This link will take you to a 
document. 
McAfee product Web site called “Site Advisor.” Look for the “How 
Summary 
1. Explain why it is critical that you protect your information assets. 
We live in a digital world. Unfortunately, every time we use our comput­
ers or access the Internet, we risk exposing both professional and personal 
information to people looking to steal or exploit that information. It is your 
responsibility to protect yourself in our hostile digital environment. Pro­
tecting yourself is becoming even more critical because organized crime 
is increasingly turning its attention to home users. As businesses improve 
their information security, consumers become the next logical target. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary 505 
2.  Identify the various behavioral actions you can take to protect your 
information assets. 
•  Do not provide personal information to strangers in any format (physi­
cal, verbal, or electronic). 
•  Protect your Social Security number. 
•  Use credit cards with your picture on them. 
•  Do not sign the back of your credit cards. Instead, write “Photo ID 
Required.” 
•  Pay very close attention to your credit card billing cycles. 
•  Limit your use of debit cards. 
•  Do not use a personal mailbox at your home for anything other than cat­
alogs and magazines. 
•  Use a cross-cut, or confetti, shredder. 
•  Sign up with a company that provides proactive protection of your per­
sonal information. 
3.  Identify the various computer-based actions you can take to protect 
your information assets. 
•  Identify the Internet sites that anyone who used your computer visited. 
•  Never post personal information about yourself or your family in chat 
rooms or on social networking sites. Use the privacy features provided 
by social networking sites to limit public access to your profile. 
•  Never open unrequested attachments to e-mail files, even from people 
you know and trust. 
•  Never open attachments or Web links in e-mails from people you do not 
know. 
•  Never accept files transferred to you during Internet chat or instant mes­
saging sessions. 
•  Never download any files or software over the Internet from Web sites 
that you do not know. 
•  Never download files or software that you have not requested. 
•  Test your system. 
•  Run free malware scans on your computer. 
•  Install an anti-malware product on your computer, and use it (ideally at 
least once per week). 
•  Install a firewall on your computer. 
•  Install an antispyware product on your computer. 
•  Install monitoring software on your computer. 
•  Install content-filtering software on your computer. 
•  Install antispam software on your computer. 
•  Install proactive intrusion detection and prevention software on your 
computer. 
•  Manage patches. 
•  Use a browser other than Internet Explorer. 
•  Use a laptop security system. 
•  Use two-factor authentication. 
•  Use encryption. 
•  Use laptop-tracing tools or device reset/remote kill tools. 
•  Look for new and unusual files. 
•  Detect fake Web sites. 
•  Use strong passwords. 
•  Surf the Web anonymously. 
•  E-mail anonymously. 
•  Adjust the privacy settings on your computer. 
•  Erase your Google search history. 
•  Personal disaster preparation: back up, back up, back up! 
•  Wireless security 
–  Hide your service set identifier (SSID). 
–  Use encryption. 
–  Filter out media access control (MAC) addresses. 
–  Limit IP addresses. 
–  Sniff out intruders. 
–  Change the default administrator password on your wireless router to 
something not easily guessed. 
–  Use VPN technology to connect to your organization’s network. 
–  Use Remote Desktop to connect to a computer that is running at your 
home. 
–  Configure Windows firewall to be “on with no exceptions.” 
–  Visit only those Web sites that use SSL for any financial or personal 
transactions. 
–  Use wireless security programs. 
•  Mobile security 
–  Use a strong password. 
–  Keep an encrypted backup. 
–  Use your device’s auto-lock feature. 
–  Do not share your device. 
–  Be careful with whom you share your location. 
–  Keep your operating system updated. 
–  Use caution with the apps you download. 
Discussion Questions 
1.  Why is it so important for you to protect your information assets? Can 
2. Discuss the differences between behavioral actions that you should 
you assume that your organization’s MIS department will do it for you? 
take and  computer-based actions that you should take. 

 
 
 
 
506 
PI7 Protecting Your Information Assets 
Problem-Solving Activities 
1.  Using one product suggested in this Plug IT In or a product you find, do 
2. Follow the steps in this Plug IT In to see if you have a Trojan horse on 
the following: 
your computer. 
•  Test or scan your computer for malware. 
•  
Test your firewall. 
•  Scan your computer for spyware. 

 
Index  
A
AAFES, 139 
Accenture, 380, 487 
access controls, 193 
accessibility issues, 160 
accessing information, 295 
accountability, 158 
accounting and finance information systems, 
310–311 
accuracy issues, 160 
Acxiom, 164 
Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA), 103 
adware, 187 
affinity portal, 109 
agile development, 388 
agriculture industry, 19 
Airbnb, 221 
alien soft ware, 187 
alignment, business-information technology, 
49, 50 
Amazon, 225 
Amazon.com, 248 
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud, 446 
Amazon Web Services, 446 
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), 164 
American Express’s ExpressPay, 292 
Android Pay, 292 
anti-malware software, 498 
anti-malware systems, 196 
antivirus, 196 
Apple iPad tablet, 413 
Apple Pay, 253, 292 
Apple Watch, 292 
application (or app), 12 
application acquisition 
application acquisition and, 376–377 
application service providers and, 378 
custom development and, 380–381 
lease and, 377–378 
open-source software, 379–380 
outsourcing, 380 
soft ware-as-a-service (SaaS), 378 
application portfolio, 372, 374 
application program, 12 
application service providers, 378 
arithmetic logic unit (ALU), 417 
artificial intelligence (AI), 464–466 
advancements in chip technology, 465 
applications, 470–474 
big data, 466 
hypothetical, 464 
improved algorithms, 466 
internet and cloud computing, 466 
technologies, 466–470 
deep learning, 468–469 
expert systems (ESs), 467 
machine learning, 467–468 
neural networks, 469–470 
vs. natural intelligence, 465 
asymmetric encryption, 197 
asynchronous collaboration, 113 
AT&T, 92, 105, 253, 288, 289, 290, 456, 497 
attribute, 64 
attributes, 433 
auction, 250 
auditing around computer, 200, 311 
auditors, 200 
audits, 200 
augmented reality, 413 
authentication, 193 
mechanism, 193 
authorization, 193 
automobile industry, 19 
automobile insurance companies, 167 
automobile manufacturers, 35 
B
bandwidth, 8, 94, 95, 98, 106, 285, 286, 288, 
291, 454 
Bank of America, 490 
bank statements, 490 
banners, 258 
Barnes & Noble, 286 
batch processing, 309 
baxter, 24 
Baymax, 34 
Beachhead Solutions, 498 
behavioral actions, 488 
behavioral feasibility, 385 
Best Buy, 260 
big data, 66 
characteristics, 68 
defining, 67–68 
issues with, 68–69 
managing, 69 
usages, 70–74 
Binary form, 418 
biometrics, 193, 194 
Bit, 418 
Bitcoin, 253 
Bla Bla Car, 223 
blacklisting, 197 
Blippy, 226 
blogosphere, 214 
blogs, 60, 167, 213, 230 
Bloomberg terminal, 148 
Bluetooth, 252, 284 
Blu-ray disk, 421 
book industry, 18 
breakeven analysis, 375 
brick-and-mortar organizations, 248 
British Petroleum, 226 
broadband, 91, 95, 111, 112, 126, 275, 287, 289, 
361 
broadcast media, 98 
broadcast transmission, 281 
browser, 252 
browser history, 492 
bullwhip effect, 359 
business analytics (BA), 128, 133 
process, 134 
scope of, 135 
business case approach, 375 
business continuity plan, 199 
business–customer relationship, 335 
business environment, 35 
business intelligence (BI), 129 
systems, 15 
business-IT alignment, 49 
business managers, objectives, 49 
business models, 222 
business pressures, 36 
organizational responses to, 40–43 
business processes, 41, 398–404 
cross-functional processes, 399–401 
ERP support, 322–326 
e-ticket, 400, 401 
examples of, 399 
fulfillment process, 400 
fundamental elements, 398 
improvement, 404–407 
information systems, 401–404 
capturing/storing process data, 403 
executing, the process, 402–403 
monitoring process performance, 403–404 
procurement process, 400 
business process improvement (BPI), 405 
business process management (BPM), 404–407, 
406 
process modeling, 407 
business process reengineering (BPR), 404–407, 
405 
business rules, 433 
business-to-business (B2B) electronic com­
merce, 103 
buy-side marketplaces, 261 
electronic exchanges, 262 
sell-side marketplaces, 261 
business-to-consumer (B2C) electronic com­
merce, 14, 254, 255 
Business-to-employee (B2E) electronic, 247, 
248, 249 
buyer agent, 473 
Buzzillions, 225 
Byte, 418 
C
cable media, 98 
cable modems, 98 
Cache memory, 419 
call center, 339 
campaign management, 340–341 
CAPTCHA, 187 
carbon management, 38 
CardCops, 490, 491 
Cardinality, 433 
symbols, 433 
cellular technology, 288 
cellular telephones (cell phones), 288. see also 
smartphones 
central processing units (CPUs), 34, 469 
CERN, 469 
certificate authority, 197 
channel conflict, 258 
chief executive officer (CEO), 5, 166 
chief financial officer (CFO), 5 
chief information officers (CIOs), 5, 166, 423, 
445 
ChoicePoint, 164 
CIO Economic Impact survey, 453 
clearinghouse, 252 
clicks-and-mortar organizations, 248 

508 
INDEX 
clickstream data, 60 
client/server computing, 101 
cloud computing, 442 
benefits of, 453–455 
money saving, 454 
organizational flexibility and competitive­
ness, 455 
positive impact on employees, 454  
characteristics, 443–446  
characteristics of grid computing, 443  
concerns and risks, 455–458  
criminal use of, 458 
legacy IT systems, 456 
privacy, 456 
regulatory and legal environment, 
457–458  
reliability, 456  
security, 457  
defines, 441 
different types of, 447  
hybrid cloud, 448–449  
private cloud, 448  
public cloud, 447–448  
vertical clouds, 449  
legacy spaghetti, 456  
often occurs on virtualized servers, 444  
on-demand self-service, 443  
overview of, 441–443  
pools computing resources, 444  
utilize broad network access, 444  
cloud computing services, 449–453 
infrastructure-as-a-service, 450 
infrastructure-as-a-service model, 
450–451  
on-premise soft ware, 450  
platform-as-a-service, 450  
platform-as-a-service model, 451  
software-as-a-service, 452  
CloudVelox, 449 
coaxial cable, 99 
Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA), 288 
cold site, 199 
collaboration, 113 
collaborative consumption, 221, 222 
market, 222 
commercial (public) portal, 109 
common good approach, 157 
communicating devices, 275 
communications channel, 98 
communications controls, 196 
Compact disk read-only memory (CD-ROM) 
storage devices, 421 
competitive advantage, 34, 48, 49 
competitive forces model and, 44–47 
strategies for, 48–49 
value chain model and, 47–48 
competitive forces model (Porter) 
customer bargaining power and, 45 
existing firm rivalry and, 46 
new competitors and, 45 
substitute products or services threat and, 
supplier bargaining power and, 45 
competitive intelligence, 183 
competitive strategy, 44 
computer actions, to prevent malware 
 infections, 494  
install a firewall on your computer, 495  
install an antispyware product on your  
 computer, 496 
install antispam software on your computer, 
496, 497 
install a security suite on your computer, 494 
install content-filtering software on your 
computer, 496 
install monitoring software on your comput­
er, 496 
manage patches, 497 
test your system, 494 
use a browser other than internet explorer, 
497 
use an operating system other than win­
dows, 497 
computer-aided software engineering (CASE), 
390 
computer-assisted design (CAD), 13 
computer-assisted manufacturing (CAM), 13 
computer-based actions, 488 
computer-based decision support, 131 
computer-based information system (CBIS), 
3, 9, 10, 12–17. see also information 
systems (IS) 
computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM), 
312–313 
computerized decision analysis 
computer support for structured decisions 
and, 132  
decision matrix and, 132  
nature of decisions and, 132  
problem structure and, 131–132  
computer networks, 93. see also virtual private 
networks (VPNs) 
computers, 275 
computer system, infected with, 493 
configurators, 340 
connectivity, 433 
contact management system, 340 
continuous application development, 380 
control and auditing, 311 
auditing, 311  
budgetary control, 311  
financial ratio analysis, 311  
controls, 191 
conversational marketing, 225, 230 
cookies, 187 
copyrigh, 266 
core business, 44 
core developers, 424 
corporate portal, 109 
cost leadership strategy, 48 
cost reduction, 405 
country-code top-level domains (ccTLD), 105 
Craigslist, 221, 228 
credit cards, 490 
billing cycles, 490  
bills online, 490  
statements, 490  
credit files, 491 
critical behavioral action, 490 
CRM strategy vs.CRM systems, 334 
cross-departmental process, 322 
order fulfillment, 322, 323  
procurement, 322, 323  
production, 322, 324  
cross-functional business processes, 399 
crowdsourcing, 115 
CubeSat, 280 
customer churn, 178, 334 
customer-facing CRM applications, 338–341 
customer interaction centers (CIC), 338 
customer intimacy, 164, 334 
customer orientation strategy, 49 
customer relationship management (CRM), 
232, 326, 333–337, 335, 378  
high-end, 335  
low-end, 335  
other types, 343–345  
mobile, 344  
on-demand, 343  
open-source, 344  
real-time CRM, 345  
social CRM, 344  
customer satisfaction, 404 
customer service and support, 338–339 
customer-touching CRM applications, 341–342 
customer touch points, 335, 336 
actual physical interactions, 335  
communications via smartphones, 335  
direct mailings, 335  
e-mail, 335  
telephone contact, 335  
web sites, 335  
cyberbanking, 256 
cybercrime, 179 
cybermalls, 256 
cybersquatting, 265 
cyberterrorism, 178, 188 
cyberwarfare, 178, 188 
Cycle/fulfillment time reduction, 405 
D
dashboards, 146 
capabilities of, 147 
sample performance, 147 
data aggregators, 164 
database, 10. see also database management 
system (DBMS)  
approach, 62, 63  
database design, 59  
data hierarchy, 63  
database management system (DBMS), 64 
data consolidation, 337 
data dictionary, 433 
data encryption, 498 
data exhaust, 221 
data file, 62 
data governance, 61 
data hierarchy, 63, 64 
data integration, 79 
data items, 9 
data management 
data governance and, 61 
data marts, 75 
data mining, 138 
data model, 64 
data reduction, 141 
data storage, 79–80 
data transfer, 169 
data visualization, 146 
data warehouses, 75 
benefits and limitations of, 81  
characteristics of, 75–76  
data integration and, 79  
data quality and, 80  
data storage and, 79–80  
governance and, 80  
metadata and, 80  
source systems and, 76–79  
users and, 80–81  
debit card, 252 
46 

 
 
debugging, 386 
decision, 130 
decisional roles, 130 
decision making, 130, 131 
decision support framework, 132 
decision support systems (DSSs), 139 
defense-in-depth, 191 
define, measure, analyze, improve, and control 
(DMAIC), 405 
deliberate threats, 183 
deliverable, 360, 364, 385 
Dell Boomi AtomSphere, 451 
Dell Computer, 232 
demand forecast, 359 
demilitarized zone (DMZ), 196 
departmental information system, 12 
desktop computers, 116 
differentiation strategy, 49 
digital certificate, 198 
digital dashboards, 16 
digital divide, 38 
digital dossier, 163 
digital manufacturing, 313 
digital video disk (DVD), 421 
digital wallets, 252 
direct conversion, 386 
disaster recovery (DR) facility, 448 
disintermediation, 256 
Disney animation, 33 
distance learning, 117 
distribution portals, 364 
Domain Names, 265 
domain name system (DNS), 105 
drones, 25 
DSL modems, 98 
dumb cards, 193 
Dumb terminals, 442 
dumpster diving, 184 
E
eBay, 468 
e-collaboration, 113 
economic feasibility, 384 
economic model, 223 
EDEN system, 299 
education, 20 
e-government, 249 
e-learning, 117, 118 
electromagnetic waves, 275 
electronic banking, 256 
electronic business (e-business), 43, 248 
degree of digitization, 248 
ethical and legal issues, 264 
electronic cards, 251 
electronic chat rooms, 111 
electronic checks (e-checks), 251 
electronic clearinghouses, 251 
electronic commerce (EC or e-commerce), 14, 
43, 245, 248. see also business-to-busi­
ness (B2B) electronic commerce; 
business-to-consumer (B2C) electronic 
commerce 
applications, 246 
benefits, 253 
business models, 250 
companies utilize the Internet to, 246 
impact of, 246 
legal and ethical issues specific to, 
264–265 
limitations, 253 
mechanisms, 249–251 
types, 248–249 
electronic credit cards, 251 
working, 252 
electronic CRM (e-CRM) applications, 341–342 
customized products and services, 341 
e-mail and automated response, 341 
frequently asked questions (FAQs), 341 
loyalty programs, 342 
personalized web pages, 341 
rewards programs, 342 
search and comparison capabilities, 341 
technical and other information and 
 services, 341 
electronic malls, 251, 256 
electronic marketplace (e-marketplace), 251 
electronic payment mechanisms, 251 
electronic retailing (e-tailing), 255 
electronic shopping cart, 256 
electronic storefronts, 251, 255 
electronic surveillance, 164–166 
e-mails, 166, 489 
server, 424 
e-mall, 256 
employee monitoring systems, 199 
empowered customers, 233 
EMV cards, 292 
EMV-compatible, 292 
encryption, 197 
end-user development, 384, 389 
Enlitic, 471 
enterprise application integration (EAI) system, 
322 
enterprise computing, 442 
enterprise networks, 96 
enterprise resource planning (ERP), 307, 312, 
316–322 
benefits and limitation, 318–320 
decision support, 318 
organizational flexibility and agility, 318 
quality and efficiency, 318 
ERP II systems, 317–318, 318 
implementation, 320–322  
on-premise, 320–321  
software-as-a-service, 321–322  
integrated processes, 325 
enterprise social networks, 218 
entity–relationship (ER) diagram, 432 
entity–relationship modeling, 432–435 
entry barrier, 45 
Epinions, 225 
Equifax, 491 
ergonomic products protect computer 
users, 22 
ERP modules, 319 
espionage, 183 
e-tailing, 258 
ethernet, 100 
ethical frameworks, 157 
steps, 157–158 
ethical issues, 157 
framework for, 162 
and informatiom technology, 40 
ethics, 157 
in corporate environment, 157 
and information technology, 160 
e-ticket, 400 
Etsy, 228 
European Community Commission (ECC) 
guidelines, 169 
Index 509
European Directive on Data Protection, 169 
European Union (EU), 169 
Evolution-Data Optimized (EV-DO) 
 technology, 288 
Exabyte, 419 
Excel, 137–138 
executive dashboards, 16 
Experian, 491 
expert ratings and reviews, 225 
expert systems (ES), 16 
explicit knowledge, 82 
exposure, 178 
extensible markup language (XML), 459 
extract, transform, and load (ETL), 134 
extranet, 103 
F
Facebook, 165, 221, 468 
for market research, 231 
Facebook’s Moments app, 471 
facilities design and management, 38 
fairness approach, 157 
fake web sites, detection, 499 
fashion industry, 20 
Fast Identity Online (FIDO) Alliance, 194 
fat client, 413 
feasibility study, 384 
Federal Information Security Management Act 
(FISMA), 457 
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 169, 491 
Fair Information Practices Standard, 169 
FedEx, 248, 299 
fiber-optic cable, 99 
fiber-optic cable service, 105 
fifth generation (5G) cellular networks, 289 
file-sharing service Dropbox, 456 
financial planning and budgeting 
budgeting, 310 
financial and economic forecasting, 310 
financial services, 294 
financial services industry, 19 
financial transactions management, 
310–311 
expense management automation, 311 
global stock exchanges, 310 
multiple currencies management, 310 
virtual close, 311 
fingerprints, 194, 498 
firewall, 196, 196 
firm’s transaction processing systems, 307 
first generation (1G) cellular networks, 288 
fixed disk drives, 420, 421 
flash memory devices, 421 
Flipsy, 228 
FLOOW2, 223 
folksonomies, 212 
footprint satellite, 280 
foreign key, 431 
foreign languages, Internet and, 108 
forward auctions, 250 
Fotolia, 228 
fourth generation (4G) cellular 
networks, 289 
fraud, on internet, 265 
fulfillment process 
departments and documents flow, 324 
functional area information systems 
(FAIS), 12, 309, 315 
supported activities, 314 
functional exchanges, 262 

 
510 
INDEX 
G
GaMmD, 195 
Gartner, 407 
G2C electronic commerce, 249 
general behavioral actions, 489 
General Services Administration (GSA), 454 
generic supply chain, 355 
generic top-level domains (gTLD), 106 
geocoding, 149 
geographic information system (GIS), 149 
GEO satellites, 281 
limitation of, 281 
geostationary-earth-orbit satellites 
orbit, 281 
geotagging, 212 
Gigabyte (GB), 419 
Gilt Groupe, 227 
global competition, 36 
globalization, 35 
global positioning system (GPS), 281 
commercial use, 282 
sensors, 164 
global scale, 35 
Globalstar, 281 
Global System for Mobile Communications 
(GSM), 288 
GLONASS, global positioning system, 282 
Gmail, 456 
goal-seeking analysis, 139, 140 
Google, 165, 167, 256. see also YouTube 
Google+, 456 
Google Apps, 457 
Google Calendar, 456 
Google Docs, 456 
Google Fiber, 104 
Google Maps, 212 
Google Photos app, 471 
Google Translate, 108 
Google Wallet, 253, 292 
GPS satellites, 504 
GPS system, 288 
Graphical user interface (GUI), 425 
group shopping, 226 
H
hard drives, 421 
hardware, 10 
advances, in microprocessor 
design, 418 
central processing unit, 417 
working process, 417–418 
computer hierarchy, 412–414 
computer memory, 418–421 
input and output technologies, 
414–417 
overview of, 411–421 
strategic issues, 412 
health and safety, information technology 
and, 21 
healthcare, improvements in, 25 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA), 39, 457 
hidden backlog, 385 
horizontal exchanges, 262 
hot site, 199 
hotspot, 285 
HTML5, 460 
human data-entry devices, 413 
human errors, 180 
human mistakes, 180 
human resource information system (HRIS), 12, 
13, 313–315 
human resources development, 313 
human resources planning and manage­
ment, 313–314 
recruitment, 313 
human resource management, 235 
employee development, 235, 236 
finding a job, 235, 236, 237 
onboarding, 235 
recruiting, 235 
human resources planning and management 
benefits administration, 314 
employee relationship management (ERM), 
314 
payroll and employees’ records, 313 
hypercompetitive marketplace, 333 
hypertext, 106 
hypertext markup language (HTML), 459 
hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP), 100 
hypothetical artificial intelligence, 464 
I
iBeacons, 293 
IBM’s Deep Blue system, 465 
IBM Watson, 471 
IdeaStorm, 230 
identity theft, 184, 491 
Identity Theft Affidavit, 491 
inbound teleservice, 339 
indirect materials, 262 
individual social responsibility, 38 
industrywide portals, 109 
information agents, 473 
informational roles, 130 
information extortion, 183 
information overload, 37 
information privacy, 160, 163 
information security, 178 
information sharing, supply chains and, 360 
information silos, 316 
information system (IS), 2, 9, 307, 401 
auditing, 199–200 
information technology (IT), 2, 3 
affects our quality of life, 24 
applications, planning for, 372–375 
applications, strategies for acquiring, 
374–381 
career opportunities and, 4–6 
changes the manager’s job, 20 
changing role of the information systems 
department, 7 
components, 10 
impacts employees at work, 21 
impacts entire industries, 17–20 
improvements in healthcare, 25 
information resources management and, 6–8 
infrastructure, 12 
jobs, 5 
major capabilities, 12 
platform, 11–12 
quality-of-life implications and, 24 
reduces the number of middle managers, 20 
services, 12 
support, supply chain management, 361 
electronic data interchange (EDI) 
and, 361 
extranets and, 361–363 
portals and exchanges and, 364 
informed user, 4 
infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS), 449, 450 
model, 450 
innovation strategy, 49 
input devices, 414–416 
instance, 64 
instant connectivity, 291 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE), 285 
integrated CASE (ICASE) tools, 390 
intellectual assets, 82 
intellectual capital, 82 
intellectual property, compromises to, 
184–185 
intelligence phase, 131 
intelligent agent, 473 
intelligent behavior, 464 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 491 
international and U.S. environmental 
laws, 38 
Internationalized country code top-level 
domains (IDN ccTLD), 106 
Internet, 93, 102, 103, 165. see also Web 2.0 
accessing, 103–106 
future of, 106 
internet connection methods, 104 
Internet2, 106 
Internet access, 284 
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA), 
105 
Internet backbone, 103 
Internet Bulletin Boards, 167 
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names 
(ICANN), 105 
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and 
Numbers (ICANN), 265 
Internet of Things (IoT), 275, 296, 297 
internet-only banks, 256 
Internet over Satellite (IoS), 283 
Internet Protocol (IP) address, 105 
internet relay chat (IRC), 111 
internet transactions, 256 
interorganizational information system (IOS), 
14, 357 
interorganizational processes 
ERP with customer relationship 
management (CRM), 325–326 
ERP with supply chain management (SCM), 
325–326 
interpersonal roles, 130 
intrabusiness applications, 294–295 
inventory management, 312 
inventory replenishment for, Walmart’s stores, 
360 
investment management, 311 
investment statements, 490 
iPads, 275 
iPhone, 292, 295 
IPv4, 105 
IPv6, 105 
IS operational plan, 373 
IS project management, 477 
IT managers, objectives, 49 
IT steering committee, 373 
IT strategic plan, 373 
iTunes, 225 
J
JetBlue, 232 
joint application design (JAD), 383, 387 
Jump drive, 421 

 
 
 
Index 511
just-in-time (JIT) inventory system, 359 
JustPark, 223 
K
Kaboodle, 227 
Kanguru Wizard, 498 
keyloggers, 187 
kilobyte (KB), 419 
knowledge, 10, 82 
knowledge management (KM), 82 
knowledge management systems (KMSs), 64, 
82–83 
cycle, 84 
knowledge workers, 15 
L
labor-intensive industries, 36 
Lai’s system, 469 
laptop, 116 
laptop computers, 413 
laptop-tracing tools, 498 
learning objective, 17 
least privilege, 196 
Leftover Swap, 222 
legacy spaghetti, 456 
legal profession, 20 
LEO constellations, 281 
LexisNexis, 164 
liability, 158 
LifeLock, 490, 491 
lifetime value, 334 
LinkedIn, 221 
for market research, 232 
LivingSocial, 227 
local area networks (LANs), 95, 96, 442 
location-based commerce (or L-commerce), 
293 
long-term evolution (LTE), 289 
low-earth-orbit satellites, 281 
lower CASE tools, 390 
loyalty programs, 45 
luxury brands, 227 
M
machine-to-machine (M2M) communication, 
296 
magnetic disks, 420 
mailbox, 490 
mainframe computers, 412–413 
mainframe terminals, 442 
mall organizer, 256 
malls, 255 
malware, 185, 492 
management, 129 
cockpit room, 147, 148, 149 
manufacturing resource planning (MRP II), 312 
market capitalization, 334 
marketing, 229, 340 
bundling, 340 
cross-selling, 340 
efforts, 334 
industry, 19 
information system, 311 
purchasing profile, 340 
upselling, 340 
market pressures, 35 
market research, 230 
using Facebook for, 231 
using social networks, 231 
Marriott blocking Wi-Fi access, 156 
mashup, 218 
mass customization, 42 
massive open online courses (MOOCs), 118 
MasterCard, 256 
MasterCard’s Contactless, 292 
master data, 61 
management, 61 
material requirements planning (MRP), 312 
McAfee, 498 
McAfee’s SiteAdvisor, 499 
McAfee VirusScan, 196 
3M Company, 450 
medium-earth-orbit satellites, 281 
megabyte (MB), 419 
memory capacity, 418 
memory cards. see flash memory devices 
memory stick, 421 
Merchant Customer Exchange, 253 
metadata, 80 
metasearch engines, 108 
methods,systems development, 387 
agile development, 388 
end-user development, 389 
joint application design (JAD), 387 
rapid application development (RAD), 387, 
388 
metropolitan area networks (MANs), 95 
microblogging, 214 
microcomputers, 413 
micropayments, 252 
microprocessor, 417 
Microsoft Azure, 451 
Microsoft Shopping, 256 
Microsoft’s Tellme, 427 
microwave transmission systems, 279 
MiFi, 287 
minimum viable product (MVP) development, 
388 
mobile advertising, 293 
mobile commerce (m-commerce), 249, 275, 291 
applications, 292 
development, 291 
mobile computing, 275, 291, 442 
mobile operating system (iOS), 289 
mobile portal, 295 
mobile security, 503 
mobile best practices, 503, 504 
mobile wallets, 292 
mobility, 291 
models, 139 
Moore’s law, 416, 418 
motion picture industry, 19 
multichanneling, 259, 260 
multidimensional analysis, 138 
multidimensional data, 76 
multifactor authentication, 194 
multimedia technology, 416 
multinational corporations, 35 
music industry, 18 
N
nanosatellites, 280 
national defense, 19 
National Security Agency, 448 
natural intelligence, 464 
near field communication (NFC), 252, 285 
Net. see Internet 
net present value (NPV), 375 
network, 11 
protocols, 99 
network processing 
client/server computing, 101 
peer-to-peer processing, 101–102 
newsgroups, 167 
nonvolatile data, 76 
normalization, 435–439 
data normalization, 435 
first normal form, 436 
functional dependencies, 435, 436 
join operation, 438 
ORDER–PIZZA relation, 438 
raw data, 436 
second normal form, 437 
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), 
36 
Notebook computers. see Laptop computers 
O
Obama, Barack, 144 
object-oriented development, 384, 390–391 
office automation systems (OASs), 15 
onboarding, 235 
one laptop per child (OLPC) project, 39 
online advertising, 257 
methods, 257, 258 
online analytical processing (OLAP), 134, 138 
online job market, 257 
online securities trading, 257 
online service industries, 256 
travel services and, 257 
online transaction processing (OLTP), 309 
on-premise computing, 442 
on-premise ERP implementation 
best-of-breed approach, 320 
custom approach, 320 
vanilla approach, 320 
on-premise software, 450 
operating system (OS), 424 
operational CRM and analytical CRM 
relationship between, 342 
operational CRM systems, 338–342 
front-office business processes, role in, 338 
operational effectiveness strategy, 49 
optical storage devices, 420 
opt-in model, 168 
opt-out model, 168 
organizational employees, support for, 15 
organizational performance, 36 
organizational responses, pressures and 
customer focus and, 41 
e-business and, 43 
e-commerce and, 43 
make-to-order and, 42 
mass customization and, 42 
strategic systems and, 40 
organizational server farms, 445 
organizational social responsibility, 38 
organizational strategic plan, 372 
organizations efficiency and effectiveness, 398 
outbound telesales, 339 
output devices, 416 
P
PAC2000A, 455 
package, 426 
packet switching, 100, 101 
parallel conversion, 386 
passphrase, 195 
passwords, 193 
PayPal, 253 

512 
INDEX 
Pay-per-usage model, 447 
pay rates, 222 
PC PhoneHome, 498 
peer-to-peer processing, 101–102 
people, 11 
with disabilities, information technology 
and, 21 
visited on internet, using computer, 
determining, 492 
PepsiCo, 232 
permission marketing, 258 
personal application software, 426 
personal area networks (PANs), 95 
personal disasters, preparing for, 501 
personal identification number (PIN), 490 
personal information, 490 
in databases, 166 
Petabyte, 419 
phased conversion, 386 
phishing, 193 
phone call, 489 
phone’s Touch ID sensor, 292 
photography Industry, 19 
Photo ID, 490 
photo-sharing Web sites, 164 
photo tagging, 165 
physical controls, 192 
pilot conversion, 386 
piracy, 185 
plain old telephone service (POTS), 111 
Planet Labs, 280 
planning production and operations, 312 
platform-as-a-service (PaaS), 449 
platform-as-a-service model, 451 
platform for privacy preferences (P3P), 168 
Polycom, 116 
pop-under ad, 258 
pop-up ad, 258 
portable devices and information, protecting, 
497–498 
portals, 109 
powerful customers, 37 
predictive analytics, 144 
prescriptive analytics, 146 
primary activities, 47 
privacy, 160, 163 
codes, 168 
international aspects of, 169–170 
policies, 168 
guidelines, 169 
privacy protection, 499–501 
e-mail anonymously, 500–501 
erasing google search history, 501 
settings on computer, 499–500 
strong passwords, 499 
surf the web anonymously, 500 
private browsing, 492 
private mailbox, 490 
private sector, 3 
privilege, 195 
proactive protection, 490 
problem structure, computerized decision 
analysis and, 131 
procedures, 11 
procurement portals, 364 
procurement process 
departments and documents 
flow, 323 
production/operations management 
information system, 312 
production/operations management (POM), 
309 
production process 
departments and documents flow, 325 
productivity, 130 
product knowledge system, 340 
product lifecycle, 313 
product lifecycle management (PLM), 
312, 313 
profiling, 163 
programmers, 382, 422 
project management, 479 
failure, 480–481 
triple constraints of, 477 
project management body of knowledge 
(PMBOK), 482–484 
basic process groups, 483 
knowledge areas, 483–484 
project management success, 481 
build effective teams, 482 
excel at project-management practices, 482 
manage strategy and stakeholders, 481 
secure critical talent, 481–482 
projects, 477 
completion, 480 
execution, 480 
initiation, 479–480 
monitoring and control, 480 
propagation delay, 281 
property issues, 160 
prototyping, 383, 389–390 
public exchanges, 262 
public-key encryption, 197 
working, 197 
public sector, 3 
pull model, 358 
purchasing cards, 252 
push model, 358 
push notification software tool, 451 
Q
quick response (QR) codes, 297 
R
radio-frequency identification (RFID) technol­
ogy, 297 
radio-frequency (RF) jamming, 284 
radio transmission, 283 
random access memory, 419 
rapid application development (RAD), 384, 
387, 388 
ratings, 225 
read-only memory, 420 
really simple syndication (RSS), 213 
recruitment, 115, 235 
industry, 19 
referral malls, 256 
registers, 419 
regular ID cards, 193 
regulations, government, 39 
relational database model, 64 
relationships, 433 
binary, 433 
many-to-many (M:M), 434 
one-to-many (1:M), 434 
one-to-one (1:1), 434 
second type, 434 
ternary, 433 
unary, 433 
remote job entry, 442 
reports, 315–316 
ad hoc (on-demand) reports, 315 
comparative reports, 315 
drill-down reports, 315 
exception reports, 315 
key indicator reports, 315 
monthly sales report, 315 
routine reports, 315 
request for quotation (RFQ), 251 
responsibility, 38, 158 
retailers, 231 
return on investment (ROI), 375 
reverse auctions, 251 
rights approach, 157 
risk, 190 
acceptance, 191 
analysis, 190 
limitation, 191 
management, 190 
mitigation, 191 
transference, 191 
robot revolution, 24–25 
routers, 96 
S
sabotage/vandalism, 183 
salesforce automation (SFA), 340 
sales forecasting system, 340 
Samba Tech, 447 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 457 
Sarbanes–Oxley Act 
in 2002, 158 
satellite footprints, 280 
satellite radio, 283 
satellite transmission systems, 279 
SCADA systems, 187–188 
scitable, 115 
scope creep, 385 
scripts, 179 
scrum approach, 388 
search engine, 108 
second generation (2G) cellular networks, 288 
secure socket layer, 198 
security, 178. see also privacy protection 
systems using physical devices, 194 
threats, 180 
self-driving cars, 471 
semistructured decisions, 132 
Send Mail Transport Protocol (SMTP), 424 
sensitivity analysis, 140 
server farm, 444 
server virtualization, 445 
service level agreements (SLAs), 321 
service-oriented architecture, 459 
shadow IT, 389 
shopping bot, 473 
shopping clubs, 227 
shopping communities, 227 
ShopSocially, 226 
short message service (SMS), 291 
short-range wireless networks, 284 
Bluetooth, 284 
near-field communications, 285 
ultra-wideband, 285 
shoulder surfing, 182 
showrooming, 260 
signature recognition, 193 
simple object access protocol (SOAP), 461 
Sirius Satellite Radio, 283 
Six Sigma, 405 

 
 
 
 
 
Skillshare, 222 
Skybox satellites, 281 
small-to-medium enterprises (SMEs), 251 
smart cards, 252, 252 
Smart Home, 298 
smart ID cards, 193 
smartphones, 116, 252, 275, 288, 289 
cameras, 164 
social advertising, 229 
innovative methods, 229 
social apps, 229 
social capital, 215 
social commerce, 212, 219 
benefits and risks of, 220–221 
social computing, 211, 229 
in business, 232, 235 
social engineering, 182 
social graph, 215 
social intelligence, 231 
social interface, 425 
social marketplaces, 228 
social media, 493 
social networks, 164, 215, 231. see also Blogs; 
Tweet; specific entries, e.g., Facebook 
sites, 167 
dangers of, 492–493 
Web sites, 215 
categories of, 217 
Social Security, 222, 490 
numbers, 164 
Social Security Number Protection Act of 2007, 
490 
social shopping, 225 
societal/political/legal pressures, 38 
soft card, 292 
software, 10, 33 
application, 425–427 
defects, 423 
industry, 18 
licensing, 423 
open-source, 423–424 
open systems, 423 
overview of, 421–427 
systems software, 424–425 
software-as-a-service (SaaS), 378, 449, 452 
software attacks, 185 
types of, 185 
Software Engineering Institute (SEI), 423 
solid-state drives (SSDs), 420 
Sony, 178, 198 
source-data automation devices, 413 
spamming, 258 
spamware, 187 
spear phishing attack, 193 
SpectorSoft, 199 
speech-recognition, 472 
soft ware, 426 
sponsored reviews, 225 
Sprint, 290 
spyware, 187 
stand-alone mainframes, 442 
stand-alone personal computers, 442 
Starbucks, 286 
stealing mail, 184 
stealing personal information in computer 
databases, 184 
storage, primary, 419, 420 
storage, secondary, 420 
stored-value money cards, 252 
strategic information systems (SISs), 44 
Streetbank, 223 
strong passwords, 194 
structured data in relational databases, 134 
structured decisions, 132 
structured query language (SQL), 431 
Supercomputers, 412 
Super Wi-Fi, 288 
supply chain, 14 
computer-based information systems and, 
12–17 
supply chain management (SCM), 103, 326, 
353, 356 
components of, 356 
information technology support 
for, 361 
push model vs the pull model, 358 
supply chains 
flows in, 355 
inventory velocity, 354 
organizations, 354 
problems with, 358–359 
processes, 354 
solutions and, 359–360 
structure and components of, 
354–355 
tiers of suppliers and, 355 
visibility, 357 
support activities, 47 
surfing, 106 
surveillance agents, 473 
Swipely, 226 
synchronous collaboration, 113 
systems development life cycle (SDLC), 381 
advantages and disadvantages of, 383–384 
implementation and, 386 
operation and maintenance and, 386 
programmers, 382 
programming and testing, 385–386 
systems analysts, 382 
systems design, 385 
systems stakeholders, 383 
systems investigation, 384–385 
systems stakeholders, 382 
systems within organizations, 307 
T
tablet computers (tablets), 116, 289, 413 
tacit knowledge, 82, 84 
tag, 212 
tailgating, 182 
taxes and other fees, 266 
technical feasibility, 384 
technical specialists, 382 
technological innovation, and obsolescence, 37 
technology pressures, 37 
telecommunications satellites, basic types of, 
280 
telecommuting, 112 
teleconferencing, 116 
telemetry applications, 295 
terrorist attacks, protection against, 40 
Teusner Wines, 232 
theft of equipment or information, 
183–184 
thin clients, 101, 413 
third generation (3G) cellular networks, 288 
threat, 178 
thumb drive, 421 
T-Mobile, 288, 290 
tokens, 193 
Index 513
tools, system development, 389 
component-based development, 390 
integrated computer-assisted software 
engineering, 383, 390 
object-oriented development, 384, 390–391 
prototyping, 389–390 
top-level domain (TLD), 105 
tracking cookies, 187 
TradeCard, 256 
trade-offs, 477 
Tradesy, 222 
transaction processing system (TPS), 13, 308 
data management, 308 
real time data collection, 308 
translator, 361 
transmission control protocol/internet protocol 
(TCP/IP), 100 
layers, for reference model, 100 
transport layer security (TLS), 198 
certificate, 499 
TransUnion, 491 
trespass, 183 
TripAdvisor, 221 
Trojan horse, 499 
TrustCloud, 221 
TrustedID, 490, 491 
trusted network, 178 
tunneling, 198 
tweet, 214 
TweetStats, 232 
twisted-pair wire, 98 
Twitter, 221 
for market research, 231 
U
ultra-wideband, 285 
unethical, 158 
unified communications (UC), 111 
uniform resource locator (URL), 106 
unintentional threats, 180 
to information systems, 180 
unique uniform resource locator (URL), 255 
universal description, discovery, and 
integration (UDDI), 461 
Universal Product Code (UPC), 297 
unshielded twisted-pair wire (UTP), 96 
unstructured data, 65, 69 
untrusted network, 178 
updating, 386 
upper CASE tools, 390 
UPS, 248 
URL filtering, 166 
utilitarian approach, 157 
utility computing, 444 
V
value-added services, 256 
value-added tax (VAT), 266 
value chain model (Porter) 
definition of, 47 
primary activities and, 47 
support activities and, 47 
value system, 48 
vendor-managed inventory (VMI), 360 
VeriSign, 198 
Verizon, 290 
version control, 113 
version management, 113 
vertical exchanges, 262 
vertical integration, 359 

514 
INDEX 
Viacom, 448 
videoconference, 116 
videogame industry, 18 
video-game motion sensors, 164 
video industry, 18 
viral marketing, 229, 258 
virtual collaboration, 113 
virtual group, 113 
virtual group (team), 113 
virtual (or pure-play) organizations, 248 
virtual private networks (VPNs), 103, 
198, 321 
virtual universities, 119 
Visa’s PayWave, 292 
voice communication, 111 
voice portal, 295 
voice recognition, 193 
vulnerability, 178 
W
Walmart Online, 248 
Wearable computers, 413 
Web 2.0, 212 
web-based call centers, 110–111 
Web browsers, 106 
webcrawlers, 108 
Web-enabled technologies, 407 
weblog, 213 
Websense, 199 
Web service-oriented architecture, 459–461 
Web services, 459–461 
Web services description language 
(WSDL), 461 
Web sites, 106, 144 
what–if analysis, 140 
whitelisting, 197 
wide area networks (WANs), 95, 96, 103 
wide-area wireless networks, 288 
cellular radio, 288 
Wi-Fi, 285 
Wi-Fi Direct, 287 
wiki, 214 
WiMAX, 289 
wireless, 144, 275 
wireless broadband, 289 
wireless computer networks, 284 
standards for, 285–286 
wireless fidelity, 285 
wireless local area networks (WLANs), 285 
wireless media, 98 
advantages and disadvantages of, 279 
wireless security, 283–284, 501 
filter out media access control (MAC) 
addresses, 502 
limit internet protocol (IP) addresses, 502 
service set identifier (SSID), hiding, 501, 502 
sniff out intruders, 502 
software, 502, 503 
test your wireless network, 502 
use encryption, 502 
using a public hotspot, 502 
wireless sensors, 296 
wireless technologies, 179, 275, 276 
wireless devices, 276–278 
wireless transmission media, 279–282 
wireline communications channels, 98 
advantages and disadvantages, 98 
wireline media, 98 
workflow, 113 
workforce, changing nature of, 36 
workgroup, 113 
World Trade Organization, 36 
World Wide Web (WWW), 106 
worms, 498 
X
XLTE (advanced LTE), 289 
XM Satellite Radio, 283 
XTool Computer Tracker, 498 
Y
Yerdle, 222 
YouTube, 67, 68, 115, 133, 218, 468 
Z
Zettabyte, 419 
Zipcar, 221, 222 

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley's ebook EULA.

