Kenneth A. Merchant & Wim A. Van der Stede
Performance Measurement, Evaluation and Incentives
MANAGEMENT
Fourth Edition
CONTROL SYSTEMS

MANAGEMENT  
CONTROL SYSTEMS

At Pearson, we have a simple mission: to help people
make more of their lives through learning.
We combine innovative learning technology with trusted
content and educational expertise to provide engaging
and eﬀective learning experiences that serve people
wherever and whenever they are learning.
From classroom to boardroom, our curriculum materials, digital
learning tools and testing programmes help to educate millions
of people worldwide – more than any other private enterprise.
Every day our work helps learning ﬂourish, and
wherever learning ﬂourishes, so do people.
To learn more, please visit us at www.pearson.com/uk

Kenneth A. Merchant
University of Southern California
Wim A. Van der Stede
London School of Economics
Performance Measurement, Evaluation, and Incentives
MANAGEMENT  
CONTROL SYSTEMS
Fourth edition
Harlow, England • London • New York • Boston • San Francisco • Toronto • Sydney • Dubai • Singapore • Hong Kong 
Tokyo • Seoul • Taipei • New Delhi • Cape Town • Sao Paulo • Mexico City • Madrid • Amsterdam • Munich • Paris • Milan

PEARSON EDUCATION LIMITED
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow CM20 2JE
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (0)1279 623623
Web: www.pearson.com/uk
First published 2003 (print)
Second edition published 2007 (print)
Third edition published 2012 (print and electronic)
Fourth edition published 2017 (print and electronic)
© Pearson Education Limited 2003, 2007 (print)
© Pearson Education Limited 2012, 2017 (print and electronic)
The rights of Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede to be identified as authors of this work have been 
asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
The print publication is protected by copyright. Prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, 
distribution or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, recording or otherwise, permission 
should be obtained from the publisher or, where applicable, a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom 
should be obtained from the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Barnard’s Inn, 86 Fetter Lane, London EC4A 1EN.
The ePublication is protected by copyright and must not be copied, reproduced, transferred, distributed, leased, 
licensed or publicly performed or used in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the publishers, as 
allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was purchased, or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright 
law. Any unauthorised distribution or use of this text may be a direct infringement of the authors’ and the publisher’s 
rights and those responsible may be liable in law accordingly.
Pearson Education is not responsible for the content of third-party internet sites.
ISBN:	 978-1-292-11055-4 (print)
	
978-1-292-11058-5 (PDF)
	
978-1-292-18187-5 (ePub) 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for the print edition is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Merchant, Kenneth A., author. | Van der Stede, Wim A., author.
Title: Management control systems: performance measurement, evaluation and incentives / Kenneth A. Merchant,  
  University of Southern California, Wim A. Van der Stede, London School of Economics.
Description: Fourth Edition. | New York: Pearson, [2017] | Revised edition of the authors’ Management control  
  systems, 2012.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016053625| ISBN 9781292110554 (print) | ISBN 9781292110585 (pdf) |  
  ISBN 9781292181875 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Industrial management. | Cost control. | Managerial accounting. | Performance—Measurement. |  
  Industrial management—Case studies. | Cost control—Case studies. | Managerial accounting—Case studies.
Classification: LCC HD31 .M3972 2017 | DDC 658—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016053625
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
21  20  19  18  17
Print edition typeset in 9/12, Charter ITC Std Regular by iEnergizer Aptara® Ltd.
Printed by Ashford Colour Press Ltd, Gosport
NOTE THAT ANY PAGE CROSS REFERENCES REFER TO THE PRINT EDITION

To our families
Gail, Abbidee, Madelyn (KM)
Ashley, Emma, Erin (WVDS)

This page intentionally left blank

vii
 BRIEF CONTENTS 
 Preface 
 xiii 
 Acknowledgements 
 xvi 
 SECTION I 
The Control Function of Management 
 
  1  Management and Control 
 3 
 SECTION II 
Management Control Alternatives 
and Their Eff ects 
 
 2  Results Controls 
 33 
 3  Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls  
 86 
 4  Control System Tightness 
 128 
 5  Control System Costs 
 173 
 6  Designing and Evaluating Management 
Control Systems 
 221 
 SECTION III
 Financial Results Control Systems 
 
 7  Financial Responsibility Centers 
 261 
 8  Planning and Budgeting 
 297 
 9  Incentive Systems 
 353 
 SECTION IV 
Performance Measurement Issues 
and Their Eff ects 
 
 10  Financial Performance Measures and 
Their Eff ects 
 397 
 11  Remedies to the Myopia Problem 
 448 
 12  Using Financial Results Controls in 
the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors 
 517 
 SECTION V 
Corporate Governance, Important 
Control-Related Roles, and Ethics 
 
 13  Corporate Governance and Boards 
of Directors 
 573 
 14  Controllers and Auditors 
 629 
 15  Management Control-Related 
Ethical Issues 
 677 
 SECTION VI 
Management Control When 
Financial Results Are Not the Primary 
Consideration 
 
 16  Management Control in Not-for-profi t 
Organizations 
 721 
 Index 
 761 

This page intentionally left blank

ix
 CONTENTS 
 Preface 
 xiii 
 Acknowledgements 
 xvi 
 SECTION I
 The Control Function of Management 
 
 1  Management and Control 
 3 
 Management and control 
 8 
 Causes of management control problems 
 12 
 Characteristics of good management control 
 15 
 Control problem avoidance 
 15 
 Control alternatives 
 19 
 Outline of this text 
 19 
 Notes 
 20 
 Leo’s Four-Plex Theater  
 22 
 Wong’s Pharmacy  
 23 
 Private Fitness, Inc.  
 23 
 Atlanta Home Loan 
 25 
 SECTION II 
Management Control Alternatives 
and their Eff ects 
 
 2  Results Controls 
 33 
 Prevalence of results controls 
 34 
 Results controls and the control problems 
 37 
 Elements of results controls 
 38 
 Conditions determining the eff ectiveness 
of results controls 
 42 
 Conclusion 
 46 
 Notes 
 46 
 Offi  ce Solutions, Inc. 
 48 
 Puente Hills Toyota 
 58 
 Kooistra Autogroep 
 71 
 Houston Fearless 76, Inc.  
 78 
 3  Action, Personnel, and Cultural 
Controls 
 86 
 Action controls 
 86 
 Action controls and the control problems 
 91 
 Prevention vs. Detection 
 92 
 Conditions determining 
the eff ectiveness of action 
controls 
 93 
 Personnel controls 
 95 
 Cultural controls 
 97 
 Personnel/cultural controls and 
the control problems 
 101 
 Eff ectiveness of personnel/cultural 
controls 
 101 
 Conclusion 
 103 
 Notes 
 103 
 Witsky and Associates, Inc. 
 105 
 The Platinum Pointe Land Deal 
 106 
 EyeOn Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 
 114 
 Axeon N.V. 
 121 
 4  Control System Tightness 
 128 
 Tight results control 
 128 
 Tight action controls 
 131 
 Tight personnel/cultural controls 
 137 
 Conclusion 
 139 
 Notes 
 140 
 Controls at the Bellagio 
Casino Resort 
 142 
 PCL: A Breakdown in the Enforcement 
of Management Control 
 168 
 5  Control System Costs 
 173 
 Direct costs 
 173 
 Indirect costs 
 174 
 Adaptation costs 
 182 
 Conclusion 
 186 
 Notes 
 187 
 Philip Anderson 
 189 
 Sunshine Fashion: Fraud, Theft, 
and Misbehavior among 
Employees 
 190 
 Better Beauty, Inc. 
 194 
 Fit Food, Inc. 
 206 
 Atlantis Chemical Industries 
 212 

x
Contents
6  Designing and Evaluating  
Management Control Systems
221
What is desired and what is likely
221
Choice of controls
222
Choice of control tightness
229
Adapting to change
230
Keeping a behavioral focus
231
Maintaining good control
231
Notes
232
Diagnostic Products Corporation
233
Game Shop, Inc.
242
Family Care Specialists Medical  
Group, Inc.
252
SECTION III 
Financial Results Control Systems
7  Financial Responsibility Centers
261
Advantages of financial results  
control systems
261
Types of financial responsibility  
centers
262
Choice of financial responsibility centers
267
The transfer pricing problem
269
Conclusion
274
Notes
275
Kranworth Chair Corporation
275
Zumwald AG
283
Global Investors, Inc.
285
8  Planning and Budgeting
297
Purposes of planning and budgeting
297
Planning cycles
299
Target setting
301
Planning and budgeting practices,  
and criticisms
310
Conclusion
312
Notes
313
Royal Wessanen NV
315
The Stimson Company
323
Multiple Versions of the Plan
332
Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation
333
VisuSon, Inc.: Business Stress Testing
342
9  Incentive Systems
353
Purposes of incentives
355
Monetary incentives
357
Incentive system design
364
Criteria for evaluating incentive systems
365
Group rewards
370
Conclusion
370
Notes
371
Harwood Medical Instruments PLC
374
Superconductor Technologies, Inc.
375
Raven Capital, LLC
384
SECTION IV 
Performance Measurement  
Issues and Their Effects
10  Financial Performance Measures  
and Their Effects
397
Value creation
398
Market measures of performance
399
Accounting measures of performance
401
Investment and operating myopia
404
Return-on-investment measures  
of performance
406
Residual income measures as a possible  
solution to the ROI measurement  
problems
411
Conclusion
413
Notes
414
Behavioral Implications of Airline Depreciation 
Accounting Policy Choices
415
Las Ferreterías de México, S.A. de C.V.
417
Industrial Electronics, Inc.
421
Haengbok Bancorp
422
Corbridge Industries, Inc.
424
King Engineering Group, Inc.
433
Berkshire Industries PLC
442
11  Remedies to the Myopia  
Problem
448
Pressures to act myopically
448
Reduce pressures for short-term profit
450
Control investments with preaction reviews
451
Extend the measurement horizon  
(use long-term incentives)
453
Measure changes in value directly
455
Improve the accounting measures
455
Measure a set of value drivers
456
Conclusion
460

xi
Contents
Notes
461
Catalytic Solutions, Inc.
462
Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH
470
Johansen’s: The New Scorecard  
System
478
Mainfreight
488
Statoil
501
12  Using Financial Results  
Controls in the Presence  
of Uncontrollable Factors
517
The controllability principle
519
Types of uncontrollable factors
520
Controlling for the distorting effects  
of uncontrollables
522
Other uncontrollable factor issues
529
Conclusion
529
Notes
530
Olympic Car Wash
531
Beifang Chuang Ye Vehicle Group
532
Hoffman Discount Drugs, Inc.
534
Howard Building Corporation, Inc.
541
Bank of the Desert (A)
554
Bank of the Desert (B)
556
Fine Harvest Restaurant Group (A)
561
Fine Harvest Restaurant Group (B)
565
SECTION V 
Corporate Governance,  
Important Control-Related  
Roles, and Ethics
13  Corporate Governance  
and Boards of Directors
573
Laws and regulations
574
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act
575
Boards of directors
580
Audit committees
583
Compensation committees
585
Conclusion
586
Notes
586
Arrow Motorcar Corporation
588
Golden Parachutes?
594
Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc.
598
Entropic Communications, Inc.
610
Bio/Precise Medical Devices, Inc.
625
14  Controllers and Auditors
629
Controllers
629
Auditors
633
Conclusion
639
Notes
640
Don Russell: Experiences of a Controller/CFO
641
Desktop Solutions, Inc. (A): Audit  
of the St. Louis Branch
648
Desktop Solutions, Inc. (B): Audit  
of Operations Group Systems
657
Andrew G. Scavell, Chief Risk Officer
660
15  Management Control-Related  
Ethical Issues
677
Good ethical analyses and  
their importance
678
Why do people behave unethically?
682
Some common management  
control-related ethical issues
684
Spreading good ethics within  
an organization
689
Conclusion
691
Notes
692
Two Budget Targets
694
Conservative Accounting in the General  
Products Division
694
Education Food Services at Central  
Maine State University
695
The “Sales Acceleration Program”
697
The Expiring Software License
698
Wired, PLC
699
Mean Screens USA, Inc.
700
Lernout & Hauspie Speech Products
701
Ethics@Cisco
708
SECTION VI 
Management Control When Financial 
Results Are Not the Primary 
Consideration
16  Management Control in  
Not-for-profit Organizations
721
Corporations, B corporations, and  
not-for-profits
722
Key differences between for-profit  
and not-for-profit organizations
723

xii
Contents
Goal ambiguity and conflict
724
Difficulty in measuring and  
rewarding performance
725
Accounting differences
727
External scrutiny
728
Employee characteristics
731
Conclusion
731
Notes
733
SCI Ontario: Achieving, Measuring, and 
Communicating Strategic Success
735
University of Southern California:  
Responsibility Center Management System
746
Index
761

xiii
 PREFACE 
 This text provides materials for a comprehensive course 
on management control systems (MCSs). MCSs are 
defi ned broadly to include everything managers do to 
help ensure that their organization’s strategies and 
plans are carried out or, if conditions warrant, are mod-
ifi ed. Thus, the text could also be used in any course 
that focuses on topics related to the back end of the 
management process, such as strategy implementation 
or execution. 
 Because management control is a core function of 
management, all students interested in business or 
management can benefit from this text. However, 
courses based on the materials presented here should 
be particularly useful for those who are, or aspire to be, 
managers, management consultants, fi nancial special-
ists (e.g. controllers, budget analysts, auditors), or 
human resource specialists (e.g. personnel directors, 
compensation consultants). 
 This edition includes 70 cases for classroom use. 
Case studies that stimulate learning through the analy-
sis of complex situations such as those often faced in 
the “real world” are generally recognized to be perhaps 
the best pedagogical conduit for teaching a MCSs 
course. Because MCSs, the contexts in which they oper-
ate, and the outcomes they produce, are complex and 
multidimensional, simple problems and exercises can-
not capture the essence of the issues managers face in 
designing and using MCSs. Students must develop the 
thinking processes that will guide them successfully 
through decision tasks with multiple embedded issues, 
incomplete information, and large amounts of rela-
tively unstructured information. They must learn to 
develop problem-fi nding skills as well as critical think-
ing and problem-solving skills, and they must learn 
how to articulate and defend their ideas. Case analyses, 
discussions, and presentations provide an effective 
method for simulating these tasks in a classroom. 
 Although the text was designed primarily for use 
with graduate students and practicing professionals, it 
can be, and has been, used successfully with under-
graduate students who have had a prior management 
accounting course. All that should be recognized when 
using this material with pre-work experience students 
is that some of the cases might be too challenging. That 
said, there are several suitable candidates to select 
from among the set of cases at the end of each chapter 
to tailor to various audiences and/or to achieve various 
course objectives (see also below). 
 This text is diff erent from other MCS texts in a num-
ber of important ways. First, the basic organizing 
framework is different. The first major module dis-
cusses management controls based on the object of 
control: results, actions, or personnel/culture. The 
object-of-control framework has considerable advan-
tages over other possible organizing frameworks. It has 
clean, clearly distinguishable categories. It is also rela-
tively all-inclusive in the sense that the reader can 
relate many management controls and other control 
classifi cations and theories (for example, proactive vs. 
reactive controls, prevention vs. detection controls, 
and agency theory concepts such as adverse selection 
and monitoring vs. incentives) to it. It is also intuitive; 
that is, students can easily see that managers must 
make choices from among these categories of manage-
ment control. Thus, using the object-of-control focus, 
the text is structured around a framework that 
describes the core management control problems that 
need to be addressed, the MCSs that can be used to 
address those problems, and the outcomes that can be 
produced, both positive (intended) and negative (unin-
tended). 
 Second, the treatment of management control is 
broad. Like all MCS textbooks, this text focuses inten-
sively on the use and eff ects of fi nancial performance 
measures and associated  results controls , which are in 
common use at managerial levels in many organizations. 
However, it also provides a broader treatment of manage-
ment controls (organized around the object-of-control 
framework) to put the fi nancial results controls in proper 
perspective. For example, the text describes many situa-
tions where fi nancial results controls are not eff ective 
and discusses the alternatives that managers can use in 
those situations (such as nonfi nancial performance indi-
cators or greater reliance on stronger cultures). 

xiv
Preface
Third, the text provides considerable discussion on 
the causes and remedies of the most common and seri-
ous management control-related problems, including 
the implications of issues of uncontrollability on man-
ager’s behaviors; the tendency of managers to adopt a 
short-term horizon in their decision-making; and man-
agers’ and employees’ propensities to engage in distor-
tive “gameplaying” evidencing misalignment with 
organizational objectives.
Fourth, the text provides a whole chapter of ethics 
coverage. There are many management control-related 
ethical issues, and both erstwhile and recent scandals 
across industries, including the automobile and bank-
ing sectors, but also the public and not-for-profit sec-
tors, clearly suggest the need to develop managers’ and 
prospective managers’ ethical reasoning skills more 
fully. Related to this is coverage of corporate govern-
ance, to which we also devote a chapter.
Fifth, the important concepts, theories, and issues 
are not discussed just in abstract terms. They are illus-
trated with a large number of real-world examples, far 
more than typically included in any other MCS text-
book. The examples make the textual discussion more 
concrete and bring the subject to life.
Finally, the mix of cases provided here is different 
from those included in other MCS textbooks in four 
important ways:
● Nearly all of the cases are real (that is, they describe 
the facts of an actual situation) although some of them 
are disguised (that is, they do not use the company’s 
real name and/or use scaled figures/data to avoid iden-
tification or to protect data confidentiality). The rela-
tively small number of cases that do not describe the 
(disguised) facts of an actual situation are “vignettes” 
that are, even so, almost always based on an observed 
situation but do not describe all of it. Instead, they 
focus on a particular (narrower) issue. Reality (and 
lack of disguise where possible) enhance student inter-
est and learning about, for example, types of indus-
tries, companies, and organizational roles.
● Most of the cases (except the vignettes) include rich 
descriptions of the context within which the MCSs 
are operating. The descriptions give students oppor-
tunities to try to identify and address management 
control problems and issues within the multidimen-
sional situations within which practicing managers 
cope with them.
● Most of the cases are of relatively recent vintage, 
and the set of cases has been chosen to ensure 
coverage of the latest MCS topics and issues, such as 
related to stress testing of budgets; mitigating man-
agement myopia; balancing sustainable value crea-
tion; motivating ethical behaviors; and using the 
EVATM or Balanced Scorecard measurement systems 
or alternative budgeting approaches, just to name a 
few.
● The cases are descriptive of the operations and 
issues faced by companies located in many different 
countries and regions around the world, including 
Asia, Europe, Latin America, Oceania, as well as 
North America.
The cases permit the exploration of the manage-
ment control issues in a broad range of settings. 
Included are cases on both large and small firms, man-
ufacturing and service firms, domestic-focused and 
multinational firms, and for-profit and not-for-profit 
organizations. The cases present issues faced by per-
sonnel in both line and staff roles at corporate, divi-
sional, and functional levels of the organization, as 
well as by members of boards of directors. Instructors 
can use this set of cases to teach a management control 
course that is broad in scope or one that is more nar-
rowly focused (for example, MCSs in service organiza-
tions by focusing on the cases from the retail, financial, 
healthcare, education and other service sectors).
The cases provide considerable scheduling flexibility. 
Most of the cases cut across multiple topic areas because 
MCSs are inherently multidimensional. For example, 
the classroom focus for the Statoil case in Chapter 11 
might be on performance measurement, as Statoil uses 
a key-performance-indicator (KPI) structure that is 
“balanced scorecard”-like. Or it could be on Statoil’s 
planning and budgeting system, which separates the 
functions of target setting, forecasting and resource 
allocation using the principles of “Beyond Budgeting.” 
To illustrate the latter further or in more depth, Statoil 
could be followed (or preceded) by the Mainfreight 
case, which offers ample opportunity for students to dis-
cuss and critically challenge the idea of beyond budget-
ing. In that context, both cases could be taught related 
to the subject matter in Chapter 8 on planning and budg-
eting instead of with Chapter 11. Yet, there are still suf-
ficient cases listed with Chapter 11 to focus on remedies 
to the myopia problem, such as the new Johansen’s case 
that describes a retail company that has adopted a bal-
anced scorecard-based performance evaluation system. 
Students also have to consider the industry characteris-
tics, the organization structure, the characteristics of 

xv
Preface
the people in key positions, and the company’s history 
(e.g. a recent merger), so instructors can choose to use 
the Statoil case, say, when they wish to focus on the 
effects of one or more of these factors on the design of 
MCSs. As a consequence, the ordering of the cases is not 
intended to be rigid. Many alternatives are possible. A 
case overview sheet in the accompanying Instructors 
Manual to this text provides a matrix that helps instruc-
tors disentangle the various relevant topics for which 
each case could be fruitfully used.
In this fourth edition, we made various updates, 
most obviously in those areas where the world has been 
moving fast during the past few years, particularly 
since the 2008–2009 financial crisis and subsequent 
economic recession. This includes changes in incentive 
systems (Chapter 9), corporate governance 
(Chapter 13), and also ethics-related concerns 
(Chapter 15). Throughout the text, we incorporated 
recent research findings and updated the survey statis-
tics and examples provided. We also added some new, 
exciting cases. Twenty-one of the 70 cases included in 
this edition are new, and an additional 12 were revised 
or brought up to date. Some of the new cases cover rela-
tively recent and/or perennially pivotal topics, such as 
“mobile monitoring” of employees (Witsky and Associ-
ates, Inc.); planning and budgeting flexibility 
(Wessanen N.V.); alternatives to traditional budgeting 
(Mainfreight); project management (The Stimson 
Company); comprehensive multi-criteria performance 
evaluations (Johansen’s); “hands-on” relative perfor-
mance evaluations using real-world data (Fine Harvest 
Restaurant Group); as well as crucial ethical considera-
tions (Ethics@Cisco). Others were intended to address 
the topics in new and different settings, such as King 
Engineering Group (an ESOP, or “employee stock own-
ership plan,” company), or in relevant control-related 
roles, such as corporate risk officers (Andrew G. Scav-
ell, CRO).
In developing the materials for this fourth edition, 
we have benefited from the insightful comments, help-
ful suggestions, and cases of many people. Ken owes 
special thanks to the two professors who served as his 
mentors at the Harvard Business School: William 
Bruns and Richard Vancil. Ken also appreciates the 
valuable research assistance from Michelle Spaulding. 
And Wim is especially grateful to Olivia Hanyue Luo 
for her capable research assistance. At Pearson Educa-
tion, we are indebted to Commissioning Editors Caitlin 
Lisle and Rebecca Pedley for their support of this revi-
sion project from start to finish. Finally, Abhishek 
Agarwal of Aptara and Matthew Van Atta made very 
detailed and helpful suggestions in copyediting the 
manuscript.
We thank the Asia Case Research Center at the Uni-
versity of Hong Kong for granting permission to use two 
of their Poon Kam Kai Series cases (PCL and Sunshine 
Fashion). We appreciate Darden Business Publishing’s 
help with their permission for use of the Johansen’s case, 
and we also thank Winnie O’Grady for letting us use the 
Mainfreight case. Finally, we thank our co-authors on 
several cases included in this text, the names of whom 
are listed with the cases.
In closing, we wish to acknowledge that there is cer-
tainly no one best way to convey the rich subjects related 
to MCSs. We have presented one useful framework in 
the best way we know how, but we welcome comments 
about the content or organization of the text, or regard-
ing any errors or omissions. Please direct them to us.
Kenneth A. Merchant
Deloitte & Touche LLP Chair of Accountancy
Leventhal School of Accounting
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0441
U.S.A.
Phone: (213) 821-5920
Fax: (213) 747-2815
E-mail: kmerchant@marshall.usc.edu
Wim A. Van der Stede
CIMA Professor of Accounting and Financial 
Management
London School of Economics
Department of Accounting
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
U.K.
Phone: (020) 7955-6695
Fax: (020) 7955-7420
E-mail: w.van-der-stede@lse.ac.uk

xvi
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to the following for permission to repro-
duce copyright material:
Figures
Figures 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 14.1, and 14.2: from 
Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases, 
Prentice Hall (Merchant, K. A. 1998), pp. 308, 309, 
388, 390, 391, 640, and 642, respectively; MER-
CHANT, KENNETH A., MODERN MANAGEMENT 
CONTROL SYSTEMS: TEXT & CASES, 1st Ed., © 1998. 
Reprinted and electronically reproduced by permission 
of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY.
Tables
Tables 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 4.1, 5.1, 6.1, 7.1, 7.2, 9.1, 10.1, 10.2, 
10.3, 10.4, and 10.5: from Modern Management Control 
Systems: Text and Cases, Prentice Hall (Merchant, K. A. 
1998), pp. 30, 31, 130, 166, 224, 253, 303, 306, 427, 
545, 546, 547, p. 547, and 548, respectively; MER-
CHANT, KENNETH A., MODERN MANAGEMENT 
CONTROL SYSTEMS: TEXT & CASES, 1st Ed., © 1998. 
Reprinted and electronically reproduced by permission 
of Pearson Education, Inc., New York, NY. 
Text
Extracts on pages 4 and 6: from ‘Bankers Not Only 
Ones Pushing Ethical Boundaries’, The Financial Times 
(September 25, 2015), © The Financial Times Limited, 
All Rights Reserved. Extracts on pages 5 and 6: from 
‘Atlanta’s Schools – the Reckoning’, The Economist 
(April 6, 2013), online at www.economist.com. Extract 
on page 5: from ‘Accounting Scandal Set to Shake Up 
Toshiba’, The Financial Times (July 16, 2015), © The 
Financial Times Limited, All Rights Reserved. Extract 
on page 6: from ‘Scathing Report Says Toshiba CEOs 
Had Role in Accounting Scandal‘, The Financial Times 
(July 20, 2015), © The Financial Times Limited, All 
Rights Reserved. Extract on page 6: from ‘Deutsche 
Bank in $6bn “Fat Finger” Slip-Up’, The Financial Times 
(October 19, 2015), © The Financial Times Limited, 
All Rights Reserved. Extract on page 7: from ‘Two 
Accused of INS Shredding Spree’, The Los Angeles 
Times (January 31, 2003), p. B5 (Morin, M.). Extract 
on page 16 from ‘German Regulator Warns Deutsche 
Bank on Commodity Trading’, The Financial Times 
(June 19, 2014), © The Financial Times Limited, All 
Rights Reserved. Extract on page 17: from ‘Rio Tinto 
Shifts to Driverless Trucks in Australia’, The Financial 
Times (October 19, 2015), © The Financial Times Lim-
ited, All Rights Reserved. Extract on page 87: from 
‘Manage Like a Spymaster’, The Economist (August 29, 
2015), online at econ.st/1U8j8KK, The Economist by 
ECONOMIST NEWSPAPER LTD.; reproduced with per-
mission of ECONOMIST NEWSPAPER LTD. in the for-
mat Educational/Instructional Program via Copyright 
Clearance Center. Extract on page 88: from Association 
of Certifi ed Fraud Examiners, 2014, online at www.
acfe.com. Extract on page 91: from ‘Digital Taylorism’, 
The Economist (September 12, 2015), The Economist by 
ECONOMIST NEWSPAPER LTD.; reproduced with per-
mission of ECONOMIST NEWSPAPER LTD. in the for-
mat Educational/Instructional Program via Copyright 
Clearance Center. Extract on page 100: from ‘Method 
in the Madness of the Alibaba Cult’, The Financial Times 
(September 7, 2014). Extract on page 131: from ‘Tesco 
Monitors Employees with Motorola Armbands’, 
Business Week (February 13, 2013), online at www.
bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2013-02-13/tesco-moni-
tors-employees-with-motorola-arm-bands. Extract on 
page 132: from Report to the Nations on Occupational 
Fraud and Abuse 2014 Global Fraud Study, Association 
of Certifi ed Fraud Examiners, 2014, online at www.
acfe.com/rttn/docs/2014-report-to-nations.pdf. 
Extract on page 135: from ‘Struggling with Employee 
Complacency? Kill Your Stupid Rules’, Forbes (October 
30, 2013) with the permission of Lisa Bodell, CEO 
futurethink, author of Why Simple Wins. Case Study on 
page 183: This case was prepared by Grace Loo (Lao) 
under the supervision of Professor Neale O’Connor, 
Copyright © by The Asia Case Research Centre, The 
University of Hong Kong. Extract on page 188: from 
‘CFO Insights: Can Internal Audit Be a Command 
Center for Risk?’ Deloitte (2014), online at deloi.
tt/1OidCMB. Extract on page 189: from ‘Banks Increase 

xvii
Acknowledgements
and Even Worse for Banks’, The Financial Times (Janu-
ary 25, 2016), online at on.ft.com/1FmAXiS, © The 
Financial Times Limited, All Rights Reserved. Extracts 
on page 439 and 497: from ‘Top Managers’ Pay Reveals 
Weak Link to Value’, The Financial Times (December 
28, 2014), online at on.ft.com/1FmAXiS. Extract on 
page 487: from ‘The Accounting Wizardry behind 
Banks’ Strong Earnings’, Bloomberg (January 14, 2014), 
online at bloom.bg/1mc0IcA. Extract on page 488: 
from ‘Unicorns Beware: Markets Get It Wrong on Tech 
Valuations’, The Financial Times (November 13, 2015), 
online at on.ft.com/1FmAXiS, © The Financial Times 
Limited, All Rights Reserved. Extract on page 489: 
from ‘China Seeks End to Gold Medal Fixation’, The 
Financial Times (January 27, 2015), online at on.ft.
com/1FmAXiS, © The Financial Times Limited, All 
Rights Reserved. Extract on page 489: from ‘HSBC Suf-
fers 20% Fall in Profits’, The Financial Times (May 7, 
2014), online at on.ft.com/1FmAXiS, © The Financial 
Times Limited, All Rights Reserved. Extracts on page 
491 and 712: from ‘Christine Lagarde Calls for Shake-
up of Bankers’ Pay’, The Financial Times (May 6, 2015), 
online at on.ft.com/1FmAXiS, © The Financial Times 
Limited, All Rights Reserved. Extract on page 491: 
from ‘Fidelity Challenges Companies on Long-term 
Incentives’, The Financial Times (September 22, 2013), 
online on.ft.com/1FmAXiS, © The Financial Times 
Limited, All Rights Reserved. Case Study on page 516: 
Copyright 2016 by the University of Virginia Darden 
School Foundation, Charlottesville, VA; All Rights 
Reserved. Case Study on page 526: Copyright © Win-
nie O’Grady; All Rights Reserved. Extract on page 669: 
from ‘New Code of Conduct for Internal Auditors’, The 
Financial Times (September 9, 2012), online at on.ft.
com/1FmAXiS, © The Financial Times Limited, All 
Rights Reserved. Extract on page 712: from ‘A Bigger 
Stick’, The Economist (June 13, 2015), online at econ.
st/1MsDNRB, The Economist by ECONOMIST NEWS-
PAPER LTD., reproduced with permission of ECONO-
MIST NEWSPAPER LTD. in the format Educational/
Instructional Program via Copyright Clearance Center. 
Extract on page 722: from ‘Credit Suisse Spooked by 
What Lurks Within’, The Financial Times (March 25, 
2016), online at on.ft.com/1FmAXiS, © The Financial 
Times Limited, All Rights Reserved. Extract on page 
738: adapted from ‘Tech Firm’s Korean Growth Raises 
Eyebrows’, The Wall Street Journal (August 8, 2000), p. 
C1 (Maremont, M., Eisinger, J. and Song, M.), reprinted 
with permission of The Wall Street Journal, Copyright 
© 2000 Dow Jones & Company, Inc., All Rights 
Efforts to Stay on Right Side of Law’, The Financial 
Times (September 28, 2014), online at on.ft.com/ 
1FmAXiS. Extract on page 194: from ‘Tesco’s Account-
ing Problems Not So Funny’, The Economist (October 27, 
2014), The Economist by ECONOMIST NEWSPAPER 
LTD., reproduced with permission of ECONOMIST 
NEWSPAPER LTD. in the format Educational/Instruc-
tional Program via Copyright Clearance Center. Extract 
on page 200: from ‘Insiders and Outsiders’, The Econo-
mist (November 18, 2010), pp. 7–9, The Economist by 
ECONOMIST NEWSPAPER LTD., reproduced with per-
mission of ECONOMIST NEWSPAPER LTD. in the for-
mat Educational/Instructional Program via Copyright 
Clearance Center. Case Study on page 205: prepared by 
Grace Loo under the supervision of Professor Neale 
O’Connor, Copyright © by The Asia Case Research 
Centre, The University of Hong Kong. Extract on page 
238: from ‘How Corporate Culture Affects the Bottom 
Line’, Duke’s Fuqua School of Business News Release 
(November 12, 2015), online at www.fuqua.duke.edu/
news_events/news-releases/corporate-culture; and 
Corporate Culture: Evidence from the Field, online at 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=2805602. Extract on page 238: from ‘VW Needs 
More Therapy to Change Its Flawed Mindset’, The 
Financial Times (December 14, 2015), online  
at on.ft.com/1FmAXiS, © The Financial Times Lim-
ited, All Rights Reserved. Extract on page 240: from 
‘Will the Affordable Care Act Affect Doctors? Yes’, The 
Heritage Foundation (June 26, 2013), online at www.
heritage.org (Moffit, R. E., PhD). Extract on page 326: 
from ‘The Quantified Serf’, The Economist (March 7, 
2015), The Economist by ECONOMIST NEWSPAPER 
LTD., reproduced with permission of ECONOMIST 
NEWSPAPER LTD. in the format Educational/Instruc-
tional Program via Copyright Clearance Center. Extract 
on page 340: from ‘Integrated Performance Manage-
ment: Plan. Budget. Forecast’, Deloitte (2014), online at 
www.planbudgetforecast.com. Extract on page 392: 
from ‘Executives Ask: How and Why Should Firms and 
Their Employees Set Goals’, Academy of Management 
Executive, 18, no. 4 (November 2004), pp. 122–3 (Kerr, 
S. 2004). Extract on page 406: from ‘Bonuses and the 
Illusion of Banking Performance’, The Financial Times 
(November 25, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1FmAXiS, 
© The Financial Times Limited, All Rights Reserved. 
Extract on page 408: from ‘Small Chinese Cities Steer 
Away from GDP as Measure of Success’, The Financial 
Times (August 13, 2014), online at on.ft.com/1FmAXiS. 
Extract on page 408: from ‘Bonuses Are Bad for Bankers 

xviii
Acknowledgements
Reserved Worldwide, License numbers 4032150712139 
and 4032150524598. Extract on page 755: from ‘Sus-
tainability Matters, but What Does It Mean for Your 
Company?’ NACD Directorship (July 30, 2015), online at 
w w w. n a c d o n l i n e . o r g / M a g a z i n e /A r t i c l e .
cfm?ItemNumber=17504. Extract on page 760: from 
‘Debate Heightens over Measuring Health Care Quality’, 
The Wall Street Journal (January 30, 2015), online at on.
wsj.com/1EvciGo, reprinted with permission of The Wall 
Street Journal, Copyright © 2015 Dow Jones & Com-
pany, Inc., All Rights Reserved Worldwide, License num-
bers 4032140775190 and 4032140995347. Case Study on 
page 769: from Bendle, N., copyright 2014, Richard Ivey 
School of Business Foundation; Ivey Publishing, Ivey 
Business School, Western University, London, Ontario, 
Canada, N6G 0N1, cases@ivey.ca, www.iveycases.com; 
one-time permission to reproduce granted by Richard 
Ivey School of Business Foundation on January 11, 2017.

1
 SECTION I 
 The Control Function 
of Management 

This page intentionally left blank

 CHAPTER 1 
 Management and Control 
        Management control is a critical function in organizations. Management control failures can 
lead to large fi nancial losses, reputation damage, and possibly even organizational failure. To 
illustrate this, let us start with some examples in the fi nancial services sector that, since the 
fi nancial crisis have been beset by a raft of control failures related to rusty information sys-
tems; 1 misconduct related to misselling fi nancial services such as pay-protection insurance 
stemming from aggressive sales-based tactics; 2 allegations that fi nancial services companies 
helped their clients evade taxes;  3   manipulation of interest rates, such as the venerable LIBOR 
(the benchmark inter-bank rate that is used to calculate interest rates on major fi nancial trans-
actions throughout the world);  4 faults in internal controls surrounding the reporting of com-
modity prices by banks’ trading desks; more isolated but crippling unauthorized “rogue 
trades”; 5 and anti-money-laundering violations, 6 just to name the most striking ones. 
 To provide some more detail about one particular case to demonstrate its relevance to man-
agement control systems (MCSs) and the signifi cant risks when they fail, the Financial Services 
Authority (FSA) fined UBS, a Swiss-based global bank, £29.7 million (discounted from 
£42.4 million for early settlement) for systems and controls failings that allowed an employee 
(Kweku Adoboli) to cause substantial losses totaling US$2.3 billion as a result of unauthorized 
trading. In particular, UBS’ failings included the following: 7 
 ●  The computerized system operated by UBS to assist in risk management was not eff ective in 
controlling the risk of unauthorized trading. 
 ●   The trade capture and processing system had significant deficiencies, which Adoboli 
exploited in order to conceal his unauthorized trading. The system allowed trades to be 
booked to an internal counterparty without suffi  cient details, there were no eff ective meth-
ods in place to detect trades at material off -market prices, and there was a lack of integration 
between systems. 
 ●  There was an understanding amongst personnel supporting the trading desk that the opera-
tions division’s main role was that of facilitation. They focused mainly on effi  ciency as 
opposed to risk control, and they did not adequately challenge the front offi  ce. 
 ●   There was inadequate front offi  ce supervision. The supervision arrangements were poorly 
executed and ineff ective.  
 ●  The trading desk breached the risk limits set for their desk without being disciplined for 
doing so. These limits represented a key control and defi ned the maximum level of risk that 
the desk could enter into at a given time. This created a situation in which risk taking was not 
actively discouraged or penalized by those with supervisory responsibility. 

4
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
● Failing to investigate the underlying reasons for the substantial increase in profitability of 
the desk despite the fact that this could not be explained by reference to the end-of-day risk 
positions.
● Profit and loss suspensions to the value of $1.6 billion were requested by Adoboli, and these 
were accepted without challenge or escalation. The combined factors of unexplained profit-
ability and loss suspensions should have indicated the need for greater scrutiny.
The FSA report concluded that these failings were particularly serious because:8
● Market confidence was put at risk, given the sudden announcement to the market and size of 
the losses announced. Negative announcements, such as this, put at risk the confidence 
which investors have in financial markets.
● The systems and controls failings revealed serious weaknesses in the firm’s procedures, 
management systems and internal controls.
● The failings enabled Adoboli to commit financial crime.
Global regulators have similarly exposed flaws in banks’ internal control systems that 
allowed traders to manipulate interest rates, such as LIBOR, around the world.9 To add, Stuart 
Gulliver, the chief executive of HSBC, the largest financial institution in Europe, admitted that 
“our anti-money-laundering controls should have been stronger and more effective, and we 
failed to spot and deal with unacceptable behavior.”10
The press headlines to which these examples are selectively referenced speak for themselves. 
Of course, not all banks have been entangled in each and every issue. However, that the list of 
those being caught in these nets has been so long, sparing few, is surprising for organizations 
whose reputations are among their most valuable assets. Failures of this type and magnitude 
also damage the integrity of the wider market and financial system on a global scale. But these 
failures have also been costly money-wise, where the wave of fines and lawsuits that has swept 
through the financial sector since the financial crisis has cost big banks a whopping $260 bil-
lion, according to research from Morgan Stanley. The report also suggests that “actions taken 
by banks to prevent future litigation issues include everything from changing remuneration 
[compensation] policies [which we discuss under the rubric of results controls in Chapter 2 and 
incentive systems in Chapter 9] to a greater focus on ‘non-financial metrics’ [Chapter 11], adding 
compliance staff [Chapters 3 and 14], to elevating chief risk officers to boards [Chapter 13] and 
using ‘robo-surveillance’ in trading rooms [a form of action controls which we discuss in Chap-
ter 3]” (brackets added).11 Clearly, the issues illustrated here touch on, and cut across, many of 
the issues we discuss in this text.
To add, though, here is a quote from a Financial Times columnist that builds nicely on the 
above but extends it to other sectors:
It turns out that bankers may not be alone. The traders who rigged Libor and foreign 
exchange rates cheated clients out of money. Volkswagen, we now know, deliberately 
polluted our air. The carmaker had a choice: install additional emissions cleaning equip-
ment; admit that its diesel cars were not very fuel efficient; or spew out illegal amounts of 
nitrogen oxide. It chose the last of these options, and covered it up by designing soft-
ware to deceive the US regulators. […] This round-the-world tour of fraud also takes in 
Toshiba. The nuclear-to-semiconductor conglomerate was hit by a record fine from 
Japan’s stock exchange and ordered to improve its governance and internal controls, in 
the wake of a $2bn accounting scandal. […] Not even the tech industry has proved 
immune. European researchers revealed this week that Google has been charging adver-
tisers for having their ads seen on YouTube, even when fraud-detection systems discover 
that the ‘viewer’ is a robot. That practice is clearly not in the same league as rate-rigging, 

Management and Control
5
years of accounting fraud or emission test deceit. But the disclosure reinforces a grow-
ing sense that companies around the world are pushing ethical boundaries [which we 
discuss in Chapter 15].12
Another article commented that the issues at VW were predictable because of VW’s lax board-
room controls (which we discuss in Chapter 13) and its peculiar corporate culture (Chapter 3): 
“The scandal clearly also has to do with structural issues at VW … There have been warnings 
about VW’s corporate governance for years, but they didn’t take it to heart and now you see the 
result,” says Alexander Juschus, director at IVOX, the German proxy adviser.13
Effective cultures, structures, and controls are quintessential as the above examples suggest, 
but not only in the for-profit sector, as the next example illustrates (we discuss non-profit organ-
izations in Chapter 16). Consider the case of an award-winning teacher who at the time headed 
Atlanta’s public schools, and who had been praised by the American Association of School 
Administrators for the significant gains in student achievement she had overseen, where Atlan-
ta’s schoolchildren made sizable gains on the standardized tests used to determine yearly pro-
gress. At one school, for instance, the share of 13-year-olds who passed the test’s maths section 
rose from 24% to 86%, and the share of those who “exceeded expectations” rose from 1% to 
46% – both in a single year. However,
[…] the state of Georgia alleges that those remarkable leaps rested on neither pedagogy 
nor determined study, but something far more invidious: cheating. A report by a special 
investigative team […] found widespread evidence of cheating […]. Sometimes teachers 
gave pupils the correct answers. Sometimes they erased pupils’ answers after the test and 
filled in the correct ones themselves. The investigative team ferreted out cheating by ana-
lyzing erasure marks on test sheets. They flagged classrooms with an average number of 
wrong-to-right erasures more than three standard deviations above the state average. The 
chance of that occurring randomly is one in 370. More than half of Atlanta’s elementary and 
middle schools had such classrooms, and many had erasures more than 20 to 50 standard 
deviations above the norm. Of the 178 teachers accused of having taken part in the cheat-
ing, 82 confessed. [The head], said the report, either knew or should have known what was 
going on. […] Prosecutors did not charge [the head] with taking part in the cheating, but 
with putting “unreasonable pressure” on principals and teachers to do well, and for creat-
ing “an environment where achieving the desired end result was more important than the 
students’ education.”14
This is an example of results controls (Chapter 2) and, clearly, not only the functional but also the 
behavioral displacements that they can create (Chapters 5 and 11), in part due to target pressure 
(Chapter 8), but also employees’ and organizations’ moral failures (Chapters 3 and 15).
Excessive target pressure was also identified as a culprit in the accounting scandal at Toshiba 
that was mentioned in passing earlier:
In April 2015, an improper accounting scandal came to light that inflated profits by well 
over $1bn at Toshiba, the Japanese industrial conglomerate, which makes laptops, mem-
ory chips and nuclear reactors. A panel of external lawyers and accountants that was 
appointed to investigate was said to have uncovered emails showing that Hisao Tanaka, 
chief executive, and Norio Sasaki, former chief executive and then vice-chairman, 
“instructed employees to delay the booking of costs to make the financial figures look bet-
ter” […] and that “the problems were worsened by reporting procedures for projects that 
were time-consuming and old-fashioned. Some of the paperwork was being done by junior 
employees in their first few years at the company.” Experts further commented that “the 
accounting issues at Toshiba also exposed concerns around Japanese corporate govern-
ance practices [which we discuss in Chapter 13], including the weak role of external 

6
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
directors and the extensive power that many former chief executives continue to exer-
cise.”15 The scathing panel report also detailed what it said “were ‘institutional’ accounting 
malpractices [Chapter 5] and a corporate culture [Chapter 3] in which employees were 
afraid to speak out against bosses’ push for increasingly unachievable profits [Chapter 8]. 
[…] Pressures to meet aggressive, short-term profit targets [Chapter 11] – known as ‘the 
challenge’ – existed from the presidency of Atsutoshi Nishida, who headed the company 
from 2005 to 2009 and remained an adviser. Those pressures escalated as the company’s 
earnings deteriorated in the wake of the global financial crisis and […] the Fukushima 
nuclear accident. The panel declared that Mr. Tanaka and Mr. Sasaki were aware that prof-
its were being inflated and did not take any action to end the improper accounting. In some 
instances, the report added, top executives pressured employees to achieve their targets 
with suggestions that the company may withdraw from underperforming businesses if they 
were not met. But the panel found no evidence any of the three current and former chief 
executives had given specific instructions to division chiefs to inflate profit figures.”16 They 
described a corporate culture – one of exerting pressure on employees to meet aggres-
sive, short-term profit targets spanning three generations of chief executives – in which 
employees were afraid to speak out against bosses when they pushed for unrealistic earn-
ings targets.17
The consequences of failures of organizational control (which we define more precisely in 
the later sections of this chapter) can reach far and wide beyond the organizations in which 
they take place. As mentioned above, the banking failures have undermined the integrity of the 
wider market and financial system on a global scale. But there are other major impacts:
Shareholders and customers are obvious victims of the current flood of bad news. They 
are seeing their investments shrink, having their cars recalled and paying too much for 
goods and services. But there is another set of losers: the employees and shareholders of 
the companies that try to play fair. Back in the early 2000s, a company called WorldCom 
upended the telecommunications industry by repeatedly posting profit margins that its 
rivals simply could not match. Five big groups, including AT&T, responded by slashing 
about 5 per cent of their combined workforces – more than 20,000 jobs. In 2002, WorldCom 
was exposed as the US’s largest accounting fraud and its chief executive sentenced to jail. 
However, the employees who were laid off at rival companies did not get their jobs back.18
And in the case of Atlanta’s schools:
[…] the scandal’s real casualties are Atlanta’s schoolchildren. Schools that cheated their 
way to false improvements lost federal funds which could have been used to make actual 
improvements. Because of their apparently high test scores, struggling pupils were denied 
the help they needed and deserved. A generation of Atlanta’s students have, in fact, been 
left behind.19
We discuss these impacts in the light of organizations’ corporate social responsibility and their 
concerns about sustainability and the wider stakeholder communities in Chapter 16.
Not all control failures are as consequential, or of similar magnitude, as the examples listed 
above; yet they can, and do, inflict costs and/or embarrassment. For example,
[…] this happened when Deutsche Bank paid $6 billion to a hedge fund client by mistake in 
a ‘fat finger’ trade, where a junior member of the bank’s forex sales team, while his boss 
was on holiday, processed a gross value instead of a net value, meaning that the trade had 
‘too many zeroes’. Whereas the bank recovered the money from the U.S. hedge fund the 
next day, the incident was “an embarrassing blow to the bank” and it also “raised fresh 
questions about Deutsche’s operational controls and risk management.” The $6bn error 

Management and Control
7
also raised questions about why it was not spotted under the bank’s ‘four eyes principle’ 
[an action control discussed in Chapter 3], requiring every trade to be reviewed by another 
person before being processed.20
Other examples of this type also occur in the public sector and do not always involve money 
being inadvertently wired. This happened at the Bank of England (BoE), where its head of press 
mistakenly sent an email to the media revealing that officials were quietly researching the 
impact of Britain’s exit from the European Union, a major blunder given the secrecy of this 
study. What had caused this mistake? The “auto-complete” tool in BoE’s internal email service. 
The BoE confirmed that following this incident, it had switched off auto-complete from its email 
system – that is, staff now have to write the full name of the recipient of their email messages 
rather than being automatically proposed through the Outlook auto-complete functionality – 
“to preserve the security of its data.”21
Employees do not always have to steal or engage in fraudulent activities to cause harm. 
Sometimes it suffices to just “fall asleep.” This happened when a bank teller was making a pay-
ment of €64.20, but as he fell asleep, he left his finger on the number 2 key, accidentally putting 
through a payment of €22,222,222.22. The payment almost went through when the supervisor 
who was supposed to be looking out for such mistakes allegedly failed to notice and approved 
the transaction. The mistake was spotted only by another colleague who managed to correct it 
before it was too late.22 As we will see, this is an example of a rather simple internal control 
procedure. We discuss internal controls as one type of what we call action controls in Chapter 3, 
and we discuss how tightly they should be applied in Chapter 4. The example further illustrates 
that not every control problem involves fraud, yet adequate control systems must also be able to 
prevent mistakes. Furthermore, when there are irregularities or control breaches, money or 
incentives like bonuses are not always the motive for the wrongdoing. For example,
[…] two clerical workers at the Laguna Niguel, California-based service center of the U.S. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) were accused of destroying thousands of 
immigration documents, including visa applications, passports, and other papers. Accord-
ing to the probe, the clerks started shredding unprocessed paperwork after an inventory 
revealed a processing backlog of about 90,000 documents. A month later, the backlog was 
reported to be zero. The shredding allegedly went on for about another month to keep the 
backlog at zero, until INS officials discovered the shredding spree during an evening 
shift.23
Although it is not entirely clear what the clerks’ motives were, there were no bonuses 
involved here, and maybe they were concerned about keeping their job and/or also not doing 
their job well or being lazy and cutting corners. Nonetheless, their actions were completely 
inappropriate, and thus proper control systems are needed to mitigate such undesirable 
behaviors.
However, more controls should not always be equated with better controls. When copious 
MCSs are stifling, they can exacerbate rather than mitigate control problems. We discuss this 
further in Chapters 4 and 5, where we consider not only direct, explicit, more easily quantifia-
ble, out-of-pocket costs, but also various types of indirect, implicit costs of tightening the con-
trols. For example, when financial irregularities were discovered at Eurostat, the European 
Commission’s statistical service, it was not immediately clear whether these had occurred for 
the personal enrichment of those involved; instead, some argued that the “secret accounts” may 
at least initially have been set up to give Eurostat a way to pay for research quickly without 
going through the Commission’s cumbersome procedures. Ironically, then, while the Commis-
sion had elaborate procedures to prevent financial fraud, these procedures may not only have 
proved insufficient (because they clearly could be circumvented), they may actually have made 

8
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
the problem worse. Because tortuous form-filling was required to request funds, requesters had 
to jump through a number of bureaucratic hoops to get anything approved, and funds delivery 
was notoriously slow, commission officials and staff may have taken to cutting corners and find-
ing “creative” ways to expedite the process. Of course, these “work-arounds” should be a red 
flag for possible exploitation and potential improprieties, too.24
By this point, it should be no surprise that we are claiming, but also that it is widely accepted, 
that good MCSs are important. Comparing the books and articles written on management con-
trol is difficult, however, because much of the MCS language is imprecise. The term “control” as 
it applies to a management function does not have a universally accepted definition. An old, nar-
row view of a MCS is that of a simple cybernetic or regulating system involving a single feedback 
loop analogous to a thermostat that measures the temperature, compares the measurement with 
the desired standard, and, if necessary, takes a corrective action (turn on, or off, a furnace or air 
conditioner). In a MCS feedback loop, managers measure performance, compare that measure-
ment with a pre-set performance standard, and, if necessary, take corrective actions.25
In this text, however, we take a broader view. Many management controls in common use, 
such as direct supervision, employee selection and retention, and codes of conduct, do not 
focus on measured performance. They focus instead on encouraging, enabling, or sometimes 
forcing employees to act in the organization’s best interest. This is consistent with the observa-
tion that all the above examples have one key question in common: how can organizations of 
all types ensure that their employees up and down the hierarchy carry out their jobs and 
responsibilities properly? Moreover, some management controls are proactive rather than 
reactive. Proactive means that the controls are designed to prevent problems before the organi-
zation suffers any adverse effects on performance. Examples of proactive controls include 
planning processes, required expenditure approvals, segregation of duties, and restricted 
access. Management control, then, includes all the devices or systems that managers use to 
ensure the behaviors and decisions of their employees are consistent with the organization’s 
objectives and strategies. The systems themselves are commonly referred to as management 
control systems (MCSs).
Designed properly, MCSs influence employees’ behaviors in desirable ways and, conse-
quently, increase the probability that the organization will achieve its goals. Thus, the primary 
function of management control is to influence behaviors in desirable ways. The benefit of man-
agement control is the increased probability that the organization’s objectives will be achieved.
Management and control
Management control is the back end of the management process. This can be seen from the 
various ways in which the broad topic of management is disaggregated.
Management
The literature includes many definitions of management. All relate to the processes of organiz-
ing resources and directing activities for the purpose of achieving organizational objectives. 
Inevitably, those who study and teach management have broken the broad subject into smaller, 
more discernable elements. Table 1.1 shows the most prominent classification schemes. The 
first column identifies the primary management functions of the value chain: product or service 
development, operations (manufacturing products or performing/delivering services), market-
ing/sales (finding buyers and making sure the products and services fulfill customer needs), 
and finance (raising money). Virtually every management school offers courses focused on only 
one, or only part of one, of these primary management functions.

Management and control
9
The second column of Table 1.1 identifies the major types of resources with which managers 
must work: people, money, machines, and information. Management schools also offer courses 
organized using this classification. These courses are often called human resource manage-
ment, accounting and finance, production and operations management, and information sys-
tems, respectively. These are sometimes also referred to as the support management functions.26
The term management control appears in the third column of Table 1.1, which separates the man-
agement functions along a process involving objective setting, strategy formulation, and manage-
ment control. Control, then, is the back end of the management process. The way we use the term 
management control in this text has the same meaning as the terms execution and strategy imple-
mentation. In most organizations, focusing on improving MCSs will provide higher payoffs than 
will focusing on improving strategy. A Fortune study showed that 7 out of 10 CEOs who fail do so not 
because of bad strategy, but because of bad execution.27 The above examples reinforce this, too.
Many management courses, including business policy, strategic management, and manage-
ment control systems, focus on elements of the management process. To focus on the control 
function of management, we must distinguish it from objective setting and strategy formulation.
Objective setting
Knowledge of objectives is a prerequisite for the design of any MCS and, indeed, for any pur-
poseful activities. Objectives do not have to be quantified and do not have to be financial, 
although that is how they are commonly thought of in for-profit organizations. A not-for-
profit organization’s primary objective might be to provide shelter for homeless people, for 
example; but even in these organizations, there have been calls to express the achievement 
of these objectives in financial or quasi-financial terms, such as social return on invest-
ment.28 However, many for-profit organizations also have nonfinancial objectives, such as 
related to sustainability or personnel development and well-being (see Chapter 16). In any 
organization, however, employees must have a basic understanding of what the organiza-
tion is trying to accomplish. Otherwise, no one could claim that any of the employees’ actions 
are purposive, and no one could ever support a claim that the organization was successful.
In most organizations, the objectives are known. That is not to say that all employees always 
agree unanimously as to how to balance their organizations’ responsibilities to all of their 
stakeholders, including owners (equity holders), debtholders, employees, suppliers, customers, 
and the society at large. They rarely do.29 That said, organizations develop explicit or implicit 
compromise mechanisms to resolve conflicts among stakeholders and reach some level of 
agreement about the objectives they will pursue. As Jason Luckhurst, managing director of 
Practicus, a UK-based project-management recruitment firm, argues:
[To achieve organizational success], it takes a clear vision around which the entire busi-
ness [can] be designed, [and I] think it is something you should be able to communicate 
Table 1.1  Different ways of categorizing the broad area of management
Functions
Resources
Processes
Product (or service) development
People
Objective setting
Operations
Money
Strategy formulation
Marketing/sales
Machines
Management control
Finance
Information
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 3.

10
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
simply to everyone, whether a client or [an employee]. Having a simple and easily under-
stood statement of intent is vital for setting clear objectives and targets.30
Strategy formulation
Having set the firm’s strategic intentions or objectives, strategies then define how organizations 
should use their resources to meet these objectives. A well-conceived strategy guides employees 
in successfully pursuing their organization’s objectives; it conveys to employees what they are 
supposed to be doing. Or, as Mr. Luckhurst at Practicus states:
All the planning in areas as diverse as marketing, branding, financing and training, is 
designed around [our] objective – as are [our] incentive [systems]. We have a detailed road 
map, but it starts with a simple vision that everyone can understand and buy into. Every-
thing else we do comes on the back of those goals. In effect, we can reverse-engineer the 
business to those objectives.31
Many organizations develop formal strategies through systematic, often elaborate, planning 
processes (which we discuss further in Chapter 8). Put differently, they have what can be called 
an intended strategy. However, strategies can sometimes be left largely unspecified. As such, 
some organizations do not have formal, written strategies; instead they try to respond to oppor-
tunities that present themselves. Major elements of these organizations’ strategies emerge from 
a series of interactions between management, employees, and the environment; from decisions 
made spontaneously; and from local experimentation designed to learn what works well. None-
theless, if some decision-making consistency exists, a strategy can be said to have been formed, 
regardless of whether managers planned or even intended that particular consistency. In that 
sense, strategic visions sometimes come about through dynamic organizational processes 
rather than through formalized strategic planning.32
Not even the most elaborate strategic visions and statements are complete to the point where 
they detail every desired action and contemplate every possible contingency. However, for pur-
poses of designing MCSs, it is useful to have strategies that are as specific and detailed as pos-
sible, if those strategies can be kept current. The formal strategic statements make it easier for 
management both to identify the feasible management control alternatives and to implement 
them effectively. The management controls can be targeted to the organization’s critical success 
factors, such as developing new products, keeping costs down, or growing market share, rather 
than aiming more generally at improving profitability in otherwise largely unspecified ways.
Formal strategic statements are not a sufficient condition for success, however. As Adrian 
Grace, managing director of Bank of Scotland – Corporate, states:
I have seen businesses with 400-page documents outlining their strategy and it’s clear 
they should have spent less time outlining the vision and more time thinking about how 
they will deliver on it. You can have the best vision in the world but if you can’t put it into 
effect, you are wasting your time.33
It is on the execution side of the management process that MCSs play a critical role. Jason 
Luckhurst explained:
The difference between merely having a strategic vision and achieving strategic success is 
having a detailed understanding of what that vision means for every level of the business – 
how much funding you need, the branding and marketing strategy, which channels you will 
develop, how many people you need in which areas and when and what the organizational 
structure will be. It is also important to revisit the vision often and be aware of how close 
you are to achieving it at any given stage. This helps everyone in the company to stay 
focused.34

Management and control
11
Management control
Management control focuses on execution, and it involves addressing the general question: Are 
our employees likely to behave appropriately? This question can be decomposed into several 
parts:
● First, do our employees understand what we expect of them?
● Second, will they work consistently hard and try to do what is expected of them – that is, will 
they pursue the organization’s objectives in line with the strategy?
● Third, are they capable of doing a good job?
Finally, if the answer to any of these questions is negative, what can be done to solve the man-
agement control problems? All organizations who must rely on their employees to accomplish 
organizational objectives must deal with these basic management control issues. Addressing 
management control issues, therefore, involves reflecting on how to influence, direct, or align 
employees’ behaviors toward the achievement of organizational objectives consistent with the 
espoused strategy.
From a management control perspective, strategies should be viewed as useful but not 
absolutely necessary to the proper design of MCSs. When strategies are formulated more 
clearly, more control alternatives become feasible, and it becomes easier to implement each 
form of management control effectively. Managers can, however, design and operate some 
types of MCSs without having a clear strategy in mind. As Adrian Grace, managing director 
of Bank of Scotland – Corporate, proffers: “If you don’t have [a strategy] but you know how to 
deliver, you might still make it. Success in business is 25% strategy but 75% execution.”35 
Or, the other way around, to devise a strategy and write it down is one thing; it is another 
thing entirely to make the plan work in practice. That said, there is some evidence that 
organizations with formal systems for managing the execution of strategy outperform those 
that do not.36
Behavioral emphasis
Management control involves managers taking steps to help ensure that the employees do what 
is best for the organization. This is an important purpose because it is people in the organiza-
tion who make things happen. Management controls are necessary to guard against the possi-
bilities that people will do something the organization does not want them to do, or fail to do 
something they should do. For example, aiming to achieve greater cost control is open to ques-
tion without reference to people because costs do not control themselves; people control them. 
As many examples throughout the text will illustrate, employees can work against or around 
systems, thereby leaving many objectives unmet or producing unintended consequences.
This behavioral orientation has long been recognized by practitioners. For example, Roman 
Stanek, chief executive of GoodData in San Francisco, a business analytics company, acknowl-
edged that:
Having a vision and having confidence doesn’t mean anything unless you’re able to com-
municate it to your team […]. The ability to communicate well didn’t come easily for me. I 
always assumed that everybody would see things the same way I see them, and now I 
understand it takes a lot of time to get people aligned.37
If all employees could always be relied on to do what is best for the organization, there would be 
no need for a MCS. But employees are sometimes unable or unwilling to act in the organization’s 
best interest, so managers must take steps to guard against the occurrence of undesirable 
behaviors and encourage desirable behaviors.

12
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
Causes of management control problems
Given the behavioral focus of controls, the next logical question to ask is: What is it about the 
employees on whom the organization must rely that creates the need to implement MCSs? The 
causes of the needs for control can be classified into three main categories: lack of direction, 
motivational problems, and personal limitations.
Lack of direction
Some employees perform inadequately simply because they do not know what the organiza-
tion wants from them. When this lack of direction occurs, the likelihood of the desired behav-
iors occurring will be haphazard or random. Thus, one function of management control 
involves informing employees as to how they can direct their contributions to the fulfillment 
of organizational objectives. Indeed, this is also the key point that came through in the quote 
from Stanek above.
Lack of direction is not a trivial issue in many organizations, although it is often taken for 
granted (as the quote from Stanek also suggests). For example, survey evidence collected by 
KPMG, a big-four professional services company providing audit, tax, and advisory services, 
from approximately 4,000 US employees spanning all levels of job responsibility across a wide 
range of industries and organizational sizes revealed that 55% of the sample respondents had a 
lack of understanding of the standards that apply to their jobs.38 Moreover, a study of 414 
World-at-Work members in mostly managerial positions at large North-American companies 
suggested that 81% of the respondents believe that senior managers in their organizations 
understand the value drivers of their business strategy; 46% say that middle management 
understands these drivers; but just 13% believe non-management employees understand them. 
This indicates that organizational goals are not cascading down to all levels in the organization. 
And while 79% of the respondents in this study believed that their employees’ goals are aligned 
with organizational goals, 44% also stated that employees set goals based on their own views 
rather than direction from leadership.39
Another survey from KPMG asked what factors might cause managers and employees to 
engage in misconduct, which, as we will see across several chapters in this text, is an impor-
tant management control problem. The answer, in fifth place and mentioned by 59% of the 
respondents, was “a lack of understanding of the standards that apply to their jobs.”40 Another 
survey of 5,000 respondents, including “techies” (e.g. software developers or engineers), indi-
cated that only 28% of the techies said they understood their companies’ vision compared with 
(also only) 43% of non-techies.41 And, in a university one of the authors of this text is familiar 
with, a staff survey revealed that only half of the employees responded affirmatively to the 
question whether “they had a clear understanding of the purpose and objectives of [the univer-
sity],” whereas (also only) 68% said this to be the case for the objectives of their department.42 
All told, then, it should not be taken for granted that employees have a clear understanding of 
direction. To the contrary, the survey evidence suggests that a lack of direction may be quite a 
common occurrence.
Motivational problems
Even if employees understand what is expected of them, some do not perform as the organi­
zation expects because of motivational problems. Motivational problems are common 
because individual and organizational objectives do not naturally coincide – individuals are 
self-interested.

Causes of management control problems
13
Employees sometimes act in their own personal interest at the expense of their organiza-
tion’s interest. Frederick Taylor, one of the major figures in the scientific management movement 
that took place in the early twentieth century, wrote: “Hardly a competent worker can be found 
who does not devote a considerable amount of time to studying just how slowly he can work and 
still convince his employer that he is going at a good pace.”43 Such effort aversion and other self-
interested behaviors are still a problem today. Gary Gill, the author of KPMG’s Fraud Barometer 
for Australia, believes that broad economic conditions have a significant effect on fraud levels: 
“It goes up following a boom period. People want to maintain their standard of living, even if it 
means criminal activity.”44 Another survey suggests that fraud is on the increase in the United 
Kingdom’s public sector as austerity programs imply personnel reductions and fewer resources 
being spent on internal controls, according to a report from PwC, a big-four competitor of 
KPMG.45
Overall, survey evidence suggests that wasting, mismanaging, and misappropriating organi-
zational resources, among other types of employee misconduct, are prevalent in most organiza-
tions.46 Even ostensibly inconsequential forms of wasting time on the job can have high costs. 
Surfing the Internet while on the job, for example, has been estimated to have cost US employ-
ers in the billions of dollars per year.47 All told, survey participants in the most recent report by 
the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners estimated that the typical organization loses 5% 
of its annual revenue to fraud. Applied to the estimated 2014 Gross World Product, this figure 
translates to a potential global fraud loss of more than $3.7 trillion.48 Staggering as these statis-
tics may be, they suggest that it should not be taken for granted that employees will always reli-
ably act with the best interest of their organizations in mind. Because of this, the costs to 
organizations are nontrivial, to say the least.
Indeed, the most serious forms of employees’ misdirected behaviors, such as fraud, can have 
severe impacts, including deteriorated employee morale, impaired business relations, lost rev-
enues from damaged reputations, investments in improving control procedures, legal fees and 
settlements of litigation, fines and penalties to regulatory agencies, and losses from plummet-
ing stock prices. Many of the examples that we included at the start of this chapter illustrate 
this,49 and various fraud or integrity surveys, some of which have been conducted over many 
years by major organizations, reinforce this with statistics.50
These huge fraud costs can be traced back to human weaknesses but also, and importantly, 
as we will see later in this text, to the lack of effective MCSs. Anecdotal assertions abound. For 
example, one manager claimed, rather brashly, that “every single person in your [business] is 
trying to steal from you.”51 Another manager’s estimate, while more measured, still suggests 
that:
Between 10 and 20% of a company’s employees will steal anything that isn’t nailed down. 
Another 20% will never steal; they would say it is morally wrong. The vast majority of peo-
ple are situationally honest; they won’t steal if there are proper controls.52
Regardless of these opinions, one might argue that “stealing” is a rather literal, peculiar, and 
perhaps too extreme or negative type of behavior to illustrate self-interest. Taking “stealing” 
less literally, many other forms of misaligned behaviors occur when employees, for example, 
manipulate their performance reports, either by falsifying the data or by taking decisions that 
artificially boost performance, with the intention of earning higher, but undeserved, incentive 
pay (see also Chapter 15). The most common cause of this is reported to be pressure to do 
“whatever it takes” to meet business targets.53 This goes to the heart of results controls (which 
we discuss in Chapter 2) and related performance targets (Chapter 8) and incentives (Chapter 9). 
Well-designed MCSs are needed to protect organizations against these behaviors.
However, in addition to focusing on how MCSs can be used to prevent or mitigate these 
negative or dysfunctional behaviors, this text’s emphasis is also, even primarily, on how MCSs 

14
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
can be employed to motivate positive or productive behaviors; that is, how they encourage 
employees to work consistently hard to accomplish organizational objectives. As we will dis-
cuss further below, whenever feasible, motivation should be the primary focus of effective 
MCSs, most commonly brought about through results controls (Chapter 2) while also providing 
any necessary behavioral constraints and/or mitigating any behavioral displacements through 
a well-designed combination or “configuration” of action and personnel/cultural controls 
(Chapter 3).54
Personal limitations
The final behavioral problem that MCSs must address occurs when employees who know 
what is expected of them, and may be highly motivated to perform well, are simply unable to 
perform well because of any number of other limitations. Some of these limitations are per-
son-specific. They may be caused by a lack of aptitude, training, experience, stamina, or 
knowledge for the tasks at hand. An example is the too-common situation where employees 
are promoted above their level of competence; that is, when employees are “over their 
heads.” Sometimes jobs are just not designed properly, causing even the most physically fit 
and apt employees to become tired or stressed, leading to on-the-job accidents and decision 
errors.
Regarding lack of training, for example, Illinois-based Ace Hardware was forced to restate 
its earnings for four fiscal years because of a $152 million accounting error made by a poorly 
trained employee, who incorrectly entered accounts in ledgers in the Finance department at 
the company’s headquarters. Ace CEO Ray Griffith stated: “We are embarrassed by it. We did 
not provide the training, oversight or checks and balances to help that person do (the) job.”55 
Errors such as these are not uncommon. For example, when Bank of America, a global US-
based bank, disclosed that it had made a significant error in the way it calculates a crucial 
measure of its financial health, which led the bank to report that it had $4 billion more capital 
than it actually had, the error raised serious questions about the “quality of its accounting 
employees.”56 Similarly, at Tesco, the largest UK supermarket chain, when it announced to 
have overstated its expected profits by £250 million, one commentator observed that “even if 
there was no fraudulent intent and the problems stem from a misunderstanding of the rules 
[…], the apparent scale of the error suggests that, at the very least, Tesco’s internal controls 
need a thorough overhaul.”57
Moreover, research in psychology and behavioral economics suggests that all individuals, 
even intelligent, well-trained, and experienced ones, face limitations in their abilities to per-
ceive new problems, to remember important facts, and to process information properly (or 
rationally). In looking at the future, it has been shown, for example, that people tend to overes-
timate the likelihood of common events and events that have occurred relatively recently (both 
of which are easier to remember) as compared with relatively rare events and those that have 
not occurred recently. Such biases may, for example, affect employees’ propensities to assess 
risks by biasing their estimates of either the likelihood or impact, or both, of certain risk events. 
Sometimes training can be used to reduce the severity of these limitations. Nonetheless, these 
limitations are a problem because they reduce the probability that employees will make 
the correct decisions or that they will correctly assess the problems about which decisions 
should be made.58
These three management control problems – lack of direction, motivational problems, and 
personal limitations – can obviously occur simultaneously and in any combination. However, 
all that is required to call for the necessity of effective MCSs is that at least one of these prob-
lems occurs, which will almost inevitably be the case in complex organizations as the above 
arguments and examples have suggested.

Control problem avoidance
15
Characteristics of good management control
To have a high probability of success, organizations must therefore maintain good management 
control. Good control means that management can be reasonably confident that no major 
unpleasant surprises will occur. The label out of control is used to describe a situation where 
there is a high probability of poor performance, either overall or in a specific performance area, 
despite having a sound strategy in place.
However, even good management control still allows for some probability of failure because 
perfect control does not exist except perhaps in very unusual circumstances. Perfect control 
would require complete assurance that all control systems are foolproof and all individuals on 
whom the organization must rely always act in the best way possible. Perfect control is obvi-
ously not a realistic expectation because it is virtually impossible to install MCSs so well 
designed that they guarantee good behaviors. Furthermore, because MCSs are costly, it is 
rarely, if ever, cost effective to try and implement enough controls even to approach the ideal-
ized perfect control.
The cost of not having a perfect control system can be called a control loss. It is the difference 
between the performance that is theoretically possible given the strategy selected and the per-
formance that can be reasonably expected with the MCSs in place. More or better MCSs should 
be implemented only if the benefits by which they would reduce the control loss exceed the 
costs. Except in cases where the consequences of failure are incalculable, optimal control can be 
said to have been achieved if the control losses are expected to be smaller than the cost of imple-
menting more controls. Because of control costs, perfect control is rarely the optimal outcome 
(or even conceivable). The benchmark, therefore, is adequate control rather than perfect con-
trol, except again in cases where failure is not an option and where control must be uncompro-
misingly focused on avoiding failure at any cost (such as in nuclear plants).
Assessing whether good control has been achieved must be future-oriented and objectives-
driven. It must be future-oriented because the goal is to have no unpleasant surprises in the 
future; the past is not relevant except as a guide to the future, such as in terms of experiences or 
lessons learned from control failures. It must be objectives-driven because the objectives repre-
sent what the organization seeks to attain. Nonetheless, assessing whether good control has 
been achieved is difficult and subjective. It is difficult because the adequacy of management 
control must be measured against a future that is inevitably difficult to predict, as are predic-
tions of possible unintended consequences of the controls. Good control also is not established 
over an activity or entity with multiple objectives unless performance on all significant dimen-
sions has been considered. As difficult as this assessment of management control is, however, it 
should be done because organizational success depends on good MCSs.
As the examples at the beginning of this chapter illustrate, organizations that fail to imple-
ment adequate MCSs can suffer loss or impairment of assets, deficient revenues, excessive costs, 
inaccurate records, or reports that can lead to poor decisions, legal sanctions, or business dis-
ruptions. At the extreme, organizations that do not control performance on one or more critical 
dimensions can fail.
Control problem avoidance
Implementing some combination of the behavior-influencing devices commonly known as 
MCSs is not always the best way to achieve good control; sometimes the problems can be 
avoided. Avoidance means eliminating the possibility that the control problems will occur. 

16
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
Organizations can never avoid all their control problems, but they can often avoid some of them 
by limiting exposure to certain types of problems and problem sources, or by reducing the max-
imum potential loss if the problems occur. Four prominent avoidance strategies are activity 
elimination, automation, centralization, and risk sharing.
Activity elimination
Managers can sometimes avoid the control problems associated with a particular entity or 
activity by turning over the potential risks, and the associated profits, to a third party through 
such mechanisms as subcontracting, licensing agreements, or divestment. This form of avoid-
ance is called activity elimination.
Managers who are not able to control certain activities, perhaps because they do not have the 
required resources, because they do not have a good understanding of the required processes, 
or because they face legal or structural limitations, are those most likely to eliminate activities. 
Here is an example:
When the German financial regulator ordered Deutsche Bank “to do more to ensure that 
commodity prices cannot be manipulated by its traders,” the bank responded that it “has 
since shut trading desks dedicated to energy, agriculture, dry bulk and freight and base 
metals. Other commodity businesses have been transferred to Deutsche’s non-core bank 
where they will be wound down or sold, while some parts remain active,” adding that “we 
significantly scaled back our commodities business and exited entirely non-precious met-
als trading. As we have previously said, we continue to cooperate with authorities in their 
industrywide review of certain benchmarks and are investing to further improve our control 
environment.”59
When managers do not wish to avoid completely an area that they cannot control well, they are 
wise at least to limit their investments, and hence (some of) their risks, in that area. An example is 
cloud computing, which means that companies obtain computing resources (processing, storage, 
messaging, databases, and so on) from outside, and pay only for what they use, rather than 
develop their own computing infrastructure and run their own systems. With the increase in 
demand for servers to store and process data, many companies would need to multiply their 
server capacity manyfold, for which they sometimes have neither the money nor the skills, nor the 
interest, because doing so falls outside of most companies’ core competencies. By using cloud 
computing services, firms can leave all that to be managed by those who have the competencies 
and, hence, can provide essential control over the process. Whereas this does not eliminate all 
risks, it partially avoids some control problems related to data management and all that it entails.
Indeed, many companies have been expanding their use of cloud services, with growing 
numbers running systems such as email services, human resources, and administrative pro-
cesses via the cloud, as well as data storage and backup. James Petter, UK managing director of 
EMC, the data storage and software group, said: “Organizations move to the cloud for a number 
of reasons, but they most often relate to agility, control and efficiency” (italics added). “More 
than just hosting services, the cloud is ensuring availability and performance, protecting data 
and helping businesses with change management by deploying functions and lessening disrup-
tion,” Joe King, senior vice-president at JDA, the supply chain software group, added.60
The economics-based literature that focuses on whether specific activities (transactions) can 
be controlled more effectively through markets (external) or through organizational hierarchies 
(internal) is known as transaction cost economics. A detailed examination of the theories and 
evidence in this field of study is outside the scope of this text.61 We just note that the cost/benefit 
tradeoffs of dealing with management control issues internally do not always favor arms-length, 
market-based transactions or inter-organizational arrangements, and thus a careful balance has 

Control problem avoidance
17
to be struck.62 Referring back to the cloud services, for example, one issue that sometimes holds 
companies back is a concern about security. As such, organizations will always have to rely on 
MCSs internally, which have been found to be effective in a broad range of settings. The preva-
lence of large diversified organizations has depended to a large extent on good MCSs.
Automation
Automation is a second avoidance possibility. Managers can sometimes use computers, robots, 
expert systems, and other means of automation to reduce their organization’s exposure to some 
control problems. These automated devices can be set to behave as required, and when they are 
operating properly, they perform more consistently than do humans. Computers eliminate the 
human problems of inaccuracy, inconsistency, and lack of motivation. Once programmed, com-
puters are consistent in their treatments of transactions, and they never have dishonest or dis-
loyal motivations. Here is a representative quote from the mining industry:
Rio Tinto has rolled out fully automated driverless truck fleets at two of its iron ore mines in 
the Pilbara in Western Australia. […] “Our autonomous fleet outperforms the named fleet by 
an average of 12 per cent, primarily by eliminating required breaks, absenteeism and shift 
changes,” said Andrew Harding, Rio’s iron ore chief executive. “Innovation and technology 
is critical in our efforts to improve safety.” […] The world’s biggest miners are turning to 
technology to cut costs. […] This follows a similar trend across a wide range of industries, 
from car manufacturing to computing, whereby robots or artificial intelligence are increas-
ingly taking roles traditionally performed by humans. […] “Removing people from the mine 
environment is safer,” said Dr. Carla Boehl, a lecturer at Curtin University – “It has cost 
advantages too. It can be very costly for companies if employees are hurt onsite.” […] “We 
have also seen a 13 per cent reduction in load and haul costs due to the greater efficiency,” 
Mr. Harding said. Dr. Boehl said embracing technology could create more interesting jobs 
while making lower skilled positions obsolete. “You will tend to lose the boring, repetitive 
jobs performed in the 50 degrees centigrade heat in the Pilbara but you can also create new 
innovative roles in analyzing data and developing technology,” she said.63
As technology has advanced, organizations have substituted machines and expert systems for 
people who have been performing quite complex actions and making sophisticated judgments 
and decisions. In hospitals, for example, artificial intelligence systems are able to perform many 
of the tasks doctors and nurses used to perform. These systems monitor the patients’ conditions 
and trends and alert the medical staff of possible problems; they assist in making diagnoses; they 
order the needed drugs; and they check for potential drug interactions and allergic reactions. 
Computer-aided insertions of central venous catheters are more accurate and reduce complica-
tions (such as punctured arteries that can lead to infections).64 And so on. Importantly, these 
systems allow hospitals to avoid one of the behavioral problems – the personal limitations of the 
medical staff. In the vast majority of situations, these systems are more likely than are medical 
personnel to recall all the details of every condition, medication, and possible complications to 
initiate the proper response. Needle injection robots use tracking algorithms to keep the blood 
vessel aligned, and thus, are more accurate. Hence, these systems make it more likely that no 
major, unpleasant surprises will occur; in this case, avoidable medical errors and complications.
Similarly, many legal tasks, although sometimes quite complex, are variations on a theme, 
where the production of certain types of legal documents does not differ vastly from one 
instance to another. Legal firms are therefore increasingly using what is called document 
assembly software, allowing them to reduce the time needed to put together a certain type of 
legal document (such as a trademark registration or a real estate lease) to a fraction of the time 
it takes an employee to do the same and, possibly, more consistently and accurately with fewer 

18
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
errors. Moreover, automating these onerous processes reduces costs and allows lawyers to 
spend more time dealing with their clients.65
Another example is where banks (when they have not exited parts of the trading business as 
Deutsche Bank did in the example above) have sped up digital trading to settle trades via auto-
mated processes to minimize human intervention because traditional trading over the phone 
has come under intense regulatory scrutiny due to alleged manipulation of benchmarks such as 
currency fixes and interbank lending rates. Automation leads to a better client experience at 
lower cost with stronger control, thereby reshaping a once opaque but lucrative business to 
become less risky.66
In most managerial situations, however, automation can provide only a partial control solu-
tion at best. One limitation is feasibility. Humans have many talents – particularly those involv-
ing complex, intuitive judgments – that no machines or decision models have been able to 
duplicate. There are often also regulatory constraints, where the regulators may be understand-
ably wary of fully autonomous systems in some settings, such as in health care. In other set-
tings, such as automated trading in banks, they may welcome them. Regulators may find fully 
autonomous or “self-driving” cars not yet feasible, but they are likely to welcome semi-autono-
mous systems that help “take the human error out of driving”.67
A further limitation is cost. Automation often requires major investments that may be justifi-
able only if improvements in productivity, as well as in control, are forthcoming. Finally, auto-
mation may just replace some control problems with others, or introduce different control 
issues. The elimination of source documents can obscure the audit trail; the concentration of 
information in one location can increase security risks; and placing greater reliance on com-
puter programs can expose the company to the risks of programmer errors or fraud.
Centralization
Centralization of decision-making is a third avoidance possibility, which is a key element of 
almost all organizations’ MCSs. High degrees of centralization, where all the key decisions are 
made at top management levels, are common in small businesses, particularly when they are 
run by the founder or owner. High degrees of centralization also exist in some large businesses 
whose top managers sometimes have reputations for being “detail oriented” or “control freaks.” 
When that is the case, top management reserves the important, and sometimes the not-so-
important, decisions for themselves, and in so doing, they avoid having the lower-level employ-
ees make poor judgments.
Centralization inevitably exists to some extent in all organizations, as well as at all levels of 
management within organizations, as managers tend to reserve for themselves many of the 
most crucial decisions that fall within their authority. Common candidates for centralization 
are decisions regarding major acquisitions and divestments, major capital expenditures, nego-
tiation of pivotal sales contracts, organization changes, and hiring and firing of key personnel. 
However, in most organizations of even minimal size, it is not possible to centralize all critical 
decisions, and other control solutions are necessary. As we will see in Chapters 2 and 7, results 
controls play a critical role when decisions are decentralized. When decisions are decentral-
ized, results controls need to be in place to hold the managers who enjoy the decision authority 
accountable for the results of their decisions. Accountability for results is what makes delegated 
authority legitimate.
Risk sharing
A final, partial avoidance possibility is risk sharing. Sharing risks with outside entities can bound 
the losses that could be incurred by inappropriate employee behaviors. Risk sharing can involve 
buying insurance to protect against certain types of potentially large losses the organization 

Outline of this text
19
might not be able to afford. Many companies purchase fidelity bonds on employees in sensitive 
positions (such as bank tellers) to reduce the firm’s exposure. These insurance contracts pass at 
least a portion of the risk of large losses and errors to the insurance providers. Another way to 
share risks with an outside party is to enter into a joint venture agreement. This shares the risk 
with the joint venture partner.
These avoidance alternatives are often an effective partial solution to, or bounding of, many 
of the control problems managers face. It is rarely possible to avoid all risks because firms are 
rewarded for bearing risk, but most firms use some forms of elimination, automation, centrali-
zation, and risk sharing in order to limit their exposure to the management control problems.
Control alternatives
For the control problems that cannot be avoided, and those for which decisions have been made 
not to avoid, managers must implement one or more control mechanisms that are generally 
called management controls. The collection of control mechanisms that are used is generally 
referred to as a management control system (MCS).
MCSs vary considerably among organizations and among entities or decision areas of any 
single organization. That said, they commonly include a combination of action, results, and 
personnel/cultural controls, which we discuss in depth in the next two chapters. The MCSs of 
some organizations consist primarily of trying to hire people who can be relied upon to serve 
the organization well. Other organizations provide modest performance-based incentives, and 
still others offer incentives that are highly leveraged. Some organizations base incentives on the 
accomplishment of targets defined in terms of accounting numbers, others use nonfinancial 
measures of performance, and still others evaluate performance subjectively. Some organiza-
tions have elaborate sets of policies and procedures that they expect employees to follow, 
whereas others have no such procedures, or they allow the procedures that were once in place 
to get out of date. Some organizations make extensive use of a large professional internal audit 
staff, while others only ensure to be in minimal compliance with regulatory requirements in 
this regard. These are just examples. The distinctions that can be made among the MCSs in use 
are numerous.
Management control choices are not random, however. They are based on many factors. 
Some controls are not effective, or are not cost-effective, in certain situations. Some types of 
controls are better at addressing particular types of problems, and different organizations and 
different areas within each organization often face quite different mixes of control problems. 
Some types of controls have some undesirable side effects that can be particularly damaging in 
some settings. And some controls merely suit particular management styles better than others. 
A major purpose of this text is to describe the factors affecting management control choice deci-
sions and the effects on the employees and the organization when different choices are made.
Outline of this text
The text discusses MCSs from several different angles, each the focus of one major section. 
Section II distinguishes controls based on the object of control, which can focus on the results 
produced (results control), the actions taken (action control), or the types of people employed 
and their shared norms and values (personnel and cultural control). Chapters 2–6 in Section II 
discuss each of these forms of control, the outcomes they produce (which can be both positive 
and negative), and the factors that lead managers to choose one object of control over another.

20
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
Section III focuses on the major elements of financial results-control systems, an important 
type of results control in which results are defined in financial terms. This section includes dis-
cussions of financial responsibility structures (Chapter 7), planning and budgeting systems 
(Chapter 8), and incentive systems (Chapter 9).
Section IV discusses some major problems managers face when they use financial results-
control systems and, particularly, the performance measurements that drive them. These prob-
lems include the tendency of accounting measures to cause managers to be excessively 
short-term oriented (myopic), the tendency for return-on-investment measures of performance 
to cause poor investment and performance evaluation decisions, and the likelihood of negative 
behavioral reactions from managers who are held accountable for factors over which they have 
less than complete control. Throughout Chapters 10–12, we also discuss several approaches 
organizations can rely on to mitigate these problems.
Section V discusses some key organizational control roles, including those of controllers, 
auditors, and audit committees of the board of directors. It also discusses recent developments 
in corporate governance (Chapters 13 and 14) as well as common control-related ethical issues 
and how to analyze them (Chapter 15).
Given the focus on financial results controls in primarily Sections III and IV, in the final sec-
tion (Chapter 16), we come back to broaden this focus by discussing the pertinence of MCSs 
even when financial results are not the primary raison d’être of the organization, such as in non-
profit organizations, or where there are broader missions or concerns beyond the financial 
realm, such as regarding sustainability and corporate social responsibility.
Notes
	 1	 See, for example, and selectively only, “Royal Bank of 
Scotland Fined £56m for IT Meltdown,” Financial Times 
(November 20, 2014), online at on.ft.com/14PBtV9.
	 2	 See, for example, and selectively only, “Banks Braced for 
Additional £22bn in PPI Claim Payout,” Financial Times 
(April 4, 2016), online at on.ft.com/1VoDSwj.
	 3	 See, for example, and selectively only, “BNP Paribas Made 
Ethical and Legal Mistakes, Says Chairman,” Financial 
Times (February 15, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1ITIql4.
	 4	 Too many articles on the LIBOR scandal have appeared in 
the press to make a sensible selection. For a taste, and 
indicatively only, type “Libor Investigation” in the search 
box on next.ft.com.
	 5	 See, for example, and selectively only, “Hong Kong Mar-
ket Regulator Fines RBS for Trading Control Failure,” 
Bloomberg (April 22, 2014), online at bloom.bg/1VKR9l2; 
“London Whale Complains of Unfair Blame for $6.2bn 
JPMorgan Losses,” Financial Times (February 23, 2016), 
online at on.ft.com/1SR98Ek.
	 6	 See, for example, and selectively, “BNP Paribas Made Eth-
ical and Legal Mistakes, Says Chairman,” op. cit.; “HSBC 
Monitor Says Bank’s Compliance Progress Too Slow – 
Bank Needs to Do More to Fix Corporate Culture, Update 
Technology, Compliance Monitor Says,” The Wall Street 
Journal (April 1, 2015), online at on.wsj.com/1ajxzqz.
	 7	 “FSA Fines UBS £29.7 Million for Significant Failings in 
Not Preventing Large Scale Unauthorized Trading,” 
Financial Services Authority (November 26, 2012), online 
at www.fsa.gov.uk/library/communication/pr/2012/105.
shtml or at www.fsa.gov.uk.
	 8	 Ibid.
	 9	 “Libor Probe Said to Expose Collusion, Lack of Internal 
Controls,” Bloomberg (February 15, 2012), online at 
www.bloomberg.com.
	10	 “HSBC Reveals Problems with Internal Controls,” The 
New York Times (July 12, 2012), online at nyti.ms/NO7PkC.
	11	 “Bank Litigation Costs Hit $260bn – with $65bn More to 
Come,” Financial Times (August 23, 2015), online at on.
ft.com/1JHtT1P.
	12	 “Bankers Not Only Ones Pushing Ethical Boundaries,” 
Financial Times (September 25, 2015), online at on.ft.
com/1FmAXiS.
	13	 “Boardroom Politics at Heart of VW Scandal,” Financial 
Times (October 4, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1hiU1CQ.
	14	 “Atlanta’s Schools – the Reckoning,” The Economist (April 
6, 2013), online at www.economist.com.
	15	 “Accounting Scandal Set to Shake Up Toshiba,” Financial 
Times (July 16, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1fMNz7h.
	16	 “Scathing Report Says Toshiba CEOs Had Role in Account-
ing Scandal,” Financial Times (July 20, 2015), online at 
on.ft.com/1KgFnZB.
	17	 “Toshiba Chief Hisao Tanaka Resigns over $1.2bn Account-
ing Scandal,” Financial Times (July 21, 2015), online at on.
ft.com/1edzVbE.
	18	 “Bankers Not Only Ones Pushing Ethical Boundaries,” op. cit.
	19	 “Atlanta’s Schools – the Reckoning,” op. cit.
	20	 “Deutsche Bank in $6bn ‘Fat Finger’ Slip-Up,” Financial 
Times (October 19, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1QMFz2q.
	21	 “Bank of England Moves to Stamp Out ‘Fat Finger’ Errors,” 
Financial Times (June 14, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1JNEF5M.

21
Notes
	22	 “Bank Clerk Nods Off with Finger on Keyboard and Gives 
Away £189m,” Evening Standard (June 11, 2013), p. 3.
	23	 “Two Accused of INS Shredding Spree,” The Los Angeles 
Times (January 31, 2003), p. B5.
	24	 “The Road to Perdition: Are the EU’s Financial Controls so 
Exasperating that They Force Its Own Staff to Evade 
Them?,” The Economist (July 24, 2003), p. 39.
	25	 For an academic article on the various concepts of man-
agement control, see T. Malmi and D. A. Brown, “Manage-
ment Control Systems as a Package – Opportunities, 
Challenges and Research Directions,” Management 
Accounting Research, 19, no. 4 (December 2008), pp. 287–
300. For a lighter reading, see also “How Not to Lose Con-
trol,” Finance & Management, 242 (April 2016), pp. 14–15, 
online at www.icaew.com.
	26	 For a classic text, see, for example, M. E. Porter, Competi-
tive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Perfor-
mance (New York: The Free Press, 1985), Chapter 2.
	27	 “Why CEOs Fail,” Fortune (June 21, 1999), online at 
www.businessbuilders.bz/why-ceos-fail.pdf. See also 
“How to Execute a New Business Strategy Successfully,” 
Financial Post (August 8, 2013), online at natpo.st/21Klsrs.
	28	 M. Hall, Y. Millo, and E. Barman, “Who and What Really 
Counts? Stakeholder Prioritization and Accounting for 
Social Value,” Journal of Management Studies, 52, no. 7 
(November 2015), pp. 907–34.
	29	 See R. E. Freeman, Strategic Management: A Stakeholder 
Approach (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2010). See also “Shareholders vs. Stakeholders: A New 
Idolatry,” The Economist (April 24, 2010), online at econ.
st/KA1p7h; “Analyse This,” The Economist (April 2, 2016), 
online at econ.st/1V9hSFB.
	30	 “Keep Sight of Your Vision,” The Sunday Times (March 23, 
2008), online at www.business.timesonline.co.uk.
	31	 Ibid.
	32	 A seminal framework for “strategy analysis” is that by M. E. 
Porter, Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Indus-
tries and Competitors (New York: The Free Press, 1980). A 
seminal contributor to the “emergent strategy” view is H. 
Mintzberg, “Crafting Strategy,” Harvard Business Review, 
65, no. 4 (July–August 1987), pp. 66–75. For a recent edi-
tion of a textbook on strategic management, see R. M. Grant, 
Contemporary Strategy Analysis, 9th ed. (Chichester, UK: 
Wiley, 2016). For a recent empirical study on the “ongoing 
riddle” of formal and/or emergent planning practices, see 
R. B. Bouncken, V. Fredrich, and R. Pesch, “Configurational 
Answer to the Ongoing Riddle of Formal and/or Emergent 
Planning Practices,” Journal of Business Research, 69, no. 9 
(September 2016), pp. 3609–3615.
	33	 “Keep Sight of Your Vision,” op. cit.
	34	 Ibid.
	35	 Ibid.
	36	 R. S. Kaplan and D. P. Norton, Execution Premium (Bos-
ton, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2008); see also 
D. C. Hambrick and J. W. Frederickson, “Are You Sure You 
Have a Strategy?,” Academy of Management Executive, 15, 
no. 4 (November 2001), pp. 48–59.
	37	 “A Good Manager Must Be More Than a Messenger,” The 
New York Times (May 30, 2013), online at nyti.ms/12Skw5l.
	38	 KPMG 2005/2006 Integrity Survey (KPMG LLP, 2005).
	39	 World-at-Work, Sibson, and Synygy, The State of Perfor-
mance Management (Survey Report, August 2004); and J. 
Kochanski and A. Sorensen, “Managing Performance 
Management,” Workspan (September 2005), pp. 21–6.
	40	 KPMG 2013 Integrity Survey (KPMG LLP, 2013), p. 16, 
online at www.kpmg.com/CN/en/IssuesAndInsights/
ArticlesPublications/Documents/Integrity-Survey-
2013-O-201307.pdf.
	41	 “The Other Side of Paradise,” The Economist (January 16, 
2016), online at econ.st/1URPB3P.
	42	 A [university] staff survey (2016); source withheld for 
confidentiality reasons.
	43	 F. Taylor, The Principles of Scientific Management (New 
York: Harper, 1929).
	44	 “Employee Fraud Is a Growing Problem, Survey Shows,” 
The Australian (June 25, 2010), online at www.adelaide-
now.com.au.
	45	 “PWC Survey Shows Rise in Fraud by Public-Sector Staff,” 
The Independent (July 4, 2010), online at www.independ-
ent.co.uk.
	46	 KPMG 2013 Integrity Survey, op. cit.
	47	 “Are Employees Wasting Time Online?” PCWorld.com 
(August 2, 2001); see also “These Charts Show What We’re 
Not Doing because We’re Online All the Time,” Business 
Insider (October 21, 2013), online at read.bi/16qZVGz.
	48	 Association of Certified Fraud Examiners – 2016 Report to 
the Nations (ACFE, 2016), online at www.acfe.com/
rttn2016.aspx (hereafter ACFE 2016 Report).
	49	 See, for example, “Bank Litigation Costs Hit $260bn – 
with $65bn More to Come,” op. cit.
	50	 KPMG 2013 Integrity Survey, op. cit.; ACFE 2016 Report, 
op. cit.
	51	 “Thou Better Not Steal,” Forbes (November 7, 1994), p. 170.
	52	 “Crime Is Headed Up – and So Is Business,” Boston Globe 
(February 15, 1983), p. 47.
	53	 KPMG 2013 Integrity Survey, op. cit.
	54	 For a recent study of “configurations” of the various types 
of MCSs that organizations employ, see, for example, D. S. 
Bedford and T. Malmi, “Configurations of Control: An 
Exploratory Analysis,” Management Accounting Research, 
27, no. 2 (June 2015), pp. 2–26. For another recent study 
in a non-profit setting that pertinently illustrates the 
“inter-relatedness” of pay-for-performance, autonomy 
(related to incentives or results controls), and mission con-
gruence (related to personnel/cultural control), see M. A. 
Barrenechea-Méndez and A. Ben-Ner, “Mission Congru-
ence, Incentives and Autonomy: An Empirical Analysis of 
Child-Care Facilities in Minnesota, the U.S.,” Working 
Paper (2016), online at papers.sioe.org/paper/848.html.
	55	 “Poorly Trained Finance Worker Makes $152m Flub,” 
CFO.com (January 14, 2008), online at ww2.cfo.com.
	56	 “Bank of America Finds a Mistake: $4 Billion Less 
Capital,” The New York Times (January 14, 2008), online 
at nyti.ms/1mR3FLb.

22
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
  57  “Not So Funny: Booking Revenues, Like Comedy, Is All 
about Timing,”  The Economist (September 27, 2014), 
online at  econ.st/1qxwvPw . 
   58  For a fl avor of research in this area of behavioral econom-
ics, see, for example, R. Thaler,  Misbehaving: The Making 
of Behavioral Economics (London: Allen Lane, 2015). 
 59  “German Regulator Warns Deutsche Bank on Commodity 
Trading,”  Financial Times (June 19, 2014), online at 
 on.ft.com/T9Xacd . 
 60  “Companies Take to The Cloud for Flexible Solutions,” 
 Financial Times (January 28, 2014), online at  on.ft.
com/1evKHmS . 
 61  Oliver Williamson is generally recognized as the most 
prominent theoretical contributor in the area of transac-
tion cost economics, and went on to win the Nobel Prize in 
Economics for it in 2009. For a layman’s overview of some 
of the key ideas behind his seminal contributions, see 
“Reality Bites,”  The Economist (October 15, 2009), p. 92.  
 62  For a more detailed discussion and overview of the issues 
related to inter-organizational controls, see S. W. Ander-
son and H. C. Dekker, “The Role of Management Controls 
in Transforming Firm Boundaries and Sustaining Hybrid 
Organizational Forms,”  Foundations and Trends in 
Accounting , 8, no. 2 (November 2014), pp. 75–141. 
 63  “Rio Tinto Shifts to Driverless Trucks in Australia,”  Finan-
cial Times (October 19, 2015), online at  on.ft.com/ 
1W1IJGh . 
  64  See, for example, “Medical Robotics: To the Point,”  The 
Economist (April 11, 2015), online at  econ.st/1JpkkjU . 
 65  “Curbing Those Long, Lucrative Hours,”  The Economist 
(July 22, 2010), p. 66. 
   66   “Banks Speed Up Shift to Forex Automation,”  Financial 
Times (June 22, 2014), online at  on.ft.com/1lhky2N . 
 67  “Google’s Self-Driving Cars Get Boost from U.S. Agency,” 
 Bloomberg (May 30, 2013), online at  www.bloomberg.
com . 
 Leo’s Four-Plex Theater was a single-location, four-
screen theater located in a small town in west Texas. 
Leo Antonelli bought the theater a year ago and hired 
Bill Reilly, his nephew, to manage it. Leo was concerned, 
however, because the theater was not as profi table as he 
had thought it would be. He suspected the theater had 
some control problems and asked Park Cockerill, an 
accounting professor at a college in the adjacent town, 
to study the situation and provide suggestions. 
 Park found the following: 
 1.  Customers purchased their tickets at one of two 
ticket booths located at the front of the theater. The 
theater used general admission (not assigned) seat-
ing. The tickets were color coded to indicate which 
movie the customer wanted to see. The tickets were 
also dated and stamped “good on day of sale only.” 
The tickets at each price (adult, child, matinee, 
evening) were prenumbered serially, so that the 
number of tickets sold each day at each price for 
each movie could be determined by subtracting the 
number of the first ticket sold from the ending 
number. 
 2.  The amounts of cash collected were counted daily 
and compared with the total value of tickets sold. The 
cash counts revealed, almost invariably, less cash 
than the amounts that should have been collected. 
The discrepancies were usually small, less than $10 
per cashier. However, on one day two weeks before 
Park’s study, one cashier was short by almost $100.  
 3.  Just inside the theater’s front doors was a lobby with a 
refreshment stand. Park observed the refreshment 
stand’s operations for a while. He noted that most of the 
stand’s attendants were young, probably of high school 
or college age. They seemed to know many of the cus-
tomers, a majority of whom were of similar ages, which 
was not surprising given the theater’s small-town loca-
tion. But the familiarity concerned Park because he had 
also observed several occasions where the stand’s 
attendants either failed to collect cash from the custom-
ers or failed to ring up the sale on the cash register.  
 CASE STUDY 
 Leo’s Four-Plex Theater 

Private Fitness, Inc.
23
 4.  Customers entered the screening rooms by passing 
through a turnstile manned by an attendant who 
separated the ticket and placed part of it in a locked 
‘stub box.’ Test counts of customers entering and 
leaving the theater did not reconcile either with the 
number of ticket sales or the stub counts. 
 Park found evidence of two specifi c problems. First, 
he found a few tickets of the wrong color or with the 
wrong dates in the ticket stub boxes. And second, he 
found a sometimes signifi cant number of free theater 
passes with Bill Reilly’s signature on them. These 
problems did not account for all of the customer test 
count discrepancies, however. Park suspected that the 
ticket collectors might also be admitting friends who 
had not purchased tickets, although his observations 
provided no direct evidence of this.  
 When his study was complete, Park sat down and 
wondered whether he could give Leo suggestions that 
would address all the actual and potential problems, 
yet not be too costly. 
 This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Thomas Wong was the owner/manager of Wong’s Phar-
macy, a small, single-location drugstore. The store was 
founded by Thomas’s father, and it had operated in the 
same location for 30 years. All of the employees who 
worked in the store were family members. All were hard 
workers, and Thomas had the utmost trust in all of them. 
 Although the store thrived in its early years, perfor-
mance in the last few years had not been good. Sales 
and profi ts were declining, and the problem was get-
ting worse. The performance problems seemed to have 
begun approximately at the time when a large drug-
store chain opened a branch two blocks away. 
 This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 “I don’t know how much money I might have lost because 
of Kate. She is a long-time friend whom I thought I could 
trust, but I guess that trust was misplaced. Now I’ve got 
to decide whether or not to fi re her. And then I’ve got to 
fi gure out a way to make my business work eff ectively 
without my having to step in and do everything myself.” 
 Rosemary Worth was talking about the conse-
quences of a theft that had recently occurred at the 
 CASE STUDY 
 Wong’s Pharmacy 
 CASE STUDY 
 Private Fitness, Inc. 

24
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
business she owned, Private Fitness, Inc. Private Fitness 
was a small health club located in Rancho Palos Verdes, 
California, an upscale community located in the Los 
Angeles area. The club offered personal fitness training 
and fitness classes of various types, including aerobics, 
spinning, body sculpting, air boxing, kickboxing, hip 
hop, step and pump, dynamic stretch, Pilates, and yoga. 
Personal training clients paid $50 per hour for their 
instructor and use of the club during prime time. Dur-
ing slower times (between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.) the 
price was $35 per hour. The price per student for each 
hour-long fitness class was $12. Some quantity dis-
counts were offered to clients who prepaid. Unlike the 
large health clubs, Private Fitness did not offer member-
ships for open access to fitness equipment and classes.
Prior to starting Private Fitness, Rosemary had been 
working as an aerobics instructor and fitness model. 
She had won many local fitness competitions and was a 
former finalist in the Ms. Fitness USA competition. She 
wanted to go into business for herself to increase her 
standard of living by capitalizing on her reputation and 
knowledge in the growing fitness field and to have 
more time to spend with her two young children. Pri-
vate Fitness had been operating for six months.
To open the club, Rosemary had to use almost all of 
her personal savings, plus she had to take out a bank 
loan. The building Rosemary rented, located in a con-
venient strip mall with ample parking, had formerly 
been operated as a fresh food market. Rosemary spent 
about $150,000 to renovate the facility and to buy the 
necessary fitness equipment. The club was comprised 
of five areas: an exercise room, a room containing aero-
bic equipment (e.g. treadmills, stair climbers, station-
ary bicycles, cross-country ski machines), a room 
containing weight machines and free weights, men’s 
and ladies’ locker rooms, and an office.
Rosemary contracted with five instructors she knew 
to run the classes and training sessions. The instructors 
were all capable of running personal training sessions, 
but they each tended to specialize in teaching one or 
two types of fitness classes. Rosemary herself ran most 
of the spinning classes and some of the aerobics classes. 
The instructors were paid on commission. The commis-
sion, which ranged between 20% and 50% of revenue, 
varied depending on the instructor’s experience and on 
whether the instructor brought the particular client to 
Private Fitness.
As manager of the business, Rosemary hired Kate 
Hoffman, one of the instructors and a long-time friend. 
Kate’s primary tasks included marketing, facility 
upkeep, scheduling of appointments, and record keep-
ing. Kate was paid a salary plus a commission based on 
gross revenues. During normal business hours when 
Kate was teaching a class, one of the other instructors, 
or sometimes a part-time clerical employee, was asked 
to staff the front desk in return for an hourly wage. Pri-
vate Fitness was open from 5:30 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Mon-
day through Friday. It was also open from 6:00 a.m. to 
noon on Saturday and noon to 3:00 p.m. on Sunday.
Rosemary was still in the process of building the vol-
ume necessary to operate at a profit. Typically, one or 
two private fitness clients were in the facility during 
the prime early morning and early evening hours. A 
few clients came in at other times. Classes were sched-
uled throughout the times the club was open. Some of 
these classes were quite popular, but many of them had 
only one or two students, and some classes were can-
celled for lack of any clients. However, Kate’s market-
ing efforts were proving effective. The number of 
clients was growing, and Rosemary hoped that by the 
end of the year the business would be earning a profit.
As the quote cited above indicates, however, Rose-
mary gradually realized that Kate Hoffman was stealing 
from the club. On one occasion when Rosemary came to 
the club she noticed $60 in the cash drawer, but she 
noticed when she was leaving that the drawer contained 
only $20. She asked Kate about it, and Kate denied that 
there had been $60 in the drawer. Rosemary wondered 
if other cash amounts had disappeared before they had 
been deposited at the bank. While some clients paid by 
credit card or check, others, particularly those attend-
ing fitness classes, often paid cash.
Rosemary became very alarmed when, during a cas-
ual conversation with one of the other instructors, the 
instructor happened to mention to Rosemary some sur-
prising “good news.” The good news was that Kate had 
brought in a new private fitness client who was working 
out in the 1:00–2:00 p.m. time period on Monday, 
Wednesday, and Friday. Kate was doing the training 
herself. However, Rosemary checked the records and 
found no new revenues recorded because of this new 
client. She decided to come to the club during the 
period to see if this client was indeed working out. 
Since the client was there and no revenue entry had 
been made, she confronted Kate. After first explaining 
that she had not yet gotten around to making the book-
keeping entry, Kate finally admitted that this client had 
been writing her checks out to Kate directly, in 
exchange for a discount. Kate said that she was very 
sorry and that she would never be dishonest again.

Atlanta Home Loan
25
 Rosemary realized she had two major problems. 
First, she had to decide what to do with Kate. Kate 
was a valuable instructor and a longtime friend, but 
her honesty was now in question. Should she forgive 
Kate or fi re her? Second, Rosemary also realized that 
she had an operating problem. She did not want to 
step in and assume the managerial role herself 
because she had signifi cant family responsibilities to 
which she wanted to be able to continue to attend. 
But how could she ensure that her business received 
all the revenues to which it was entitled without 
being on site at all times herself? Should she leave 
Kate, who promised not to steal again, in the man-
ager position? Or should she hire one of the other 
instructors, or perhaps a non-instructor, to become 
the manager? And in either case, were there some 
procedures or controls that she could use to protect 
her business’s assets? 
 This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 In late 2002, Albert (Al) Fiorini was becoming more and 
more frustrated and depressed. In September 2002, he 
had taken a leave of absence to return to school to earn 
his MBA, and he had trusted some employees to run the 
mortgage lending business he had founded. Now it was 
clear to Al that those employees had schemed to wrest 
control of the business away from him. And amazingly, 
they seemed to have been successful. Al lamented, 
“They didn’t just steal some of my assets. They stole my 
whole business!” Being 2,500 miles away and busy with 
his studies, Al felt nearly powerless to stop them. He had 
spent many sleepless nights wondering what he could 
and should do to get his business back. He also thought 
about where he went wrong – what he should have done 
to prevent this problem from happening in the fi rst place. 
 The company 
 Atlanta Home Loan (hereafter AHL) was a mortgage 
lending and fi nancing company based in Atlanta, Geor-
gia. Al Fiorini founded the company in April 2002, with 
an initial investment of about $40,000. He started 
operating the company from his home. 
 Al had many years of experience in the mortgage 
banking industry. He had worked for several diff erent 
companies and had also served a year as president of 
the Orange County Chapter of the California Associa-
tion of Mortgage Brokers. Under his direction, AHL’s 
business grew rapidly in its fi rst quarter of operation. 
By the summer of 2002, the company consisted of four 
telemarketers and eight loan officers, all of whom 
worked from their homes. “Telecommuting” was con-
venient for the employees because Atlanta was a large 
city with heavy traffi  c. 
 Al established banking relationships that allowed 
AHL clients to borrow money at wholesale rates. The 
actual loan terms varied depending on the clients’ FICO 
scores. 1   In summer 2003, banks might off er an AHL cli-
ent with a very high FICO score (over 620) a rate of 
6.25–6.75% on a fi xed 30-year mortgage. This rate pro-
vided the bank with an operating margin of 1.5% to 
2.0%. AHL earned a fee of 1.50% of the loan amount 
for every loan funded. This provided AHL with an aver-
age revenue per loan of $3,200. 
 1   FICO® scores provide a numeric representation of an individual’s 
fi nancial responsibility, based on his or her credit history. FICO 
scores are based on a scale from 300 to 900. Most individuals actu-
ally have three FICO scores, one from each national credit bureau 
(Equifax, Experian, TransUnion). These three FICO scores are the 
measure that most lenders look at when evaluating credit or loan 
applications. FICO is an acronym for Fair Isaac Credit Organization, 
the developer of the credit-rating analytics. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Atlanta Home Loan 

26
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
AHL bought leads from list brokers for $0.20 per 
name. These lists provided information as to whether 
the individuals owned their homes; if so, when they 
bought their homes; and when, if ever, they had refi-
nanced their mortgages.
The telemarketers called people on the lead lists to 
assess their interest in refinancing. Al knew from 
industry experience that telemarketers should gener-
ate a minimum of one lead per hour. They were paid a 
combination of an hourly wage plus a performance 
bonus ($10.00) for each lead produced. Since most of 
them worked part-time, AHL’s telemarketers gener-
ated, on average, about four new leads per person per 
day.2 They gave the leads, the potential clients’ names, 
to Al Fiorini. Al distributed the names to AHL’s loan 
officers.3
The loan officers helped the prospective clients to fill 
out their loan applications and to assemble the needed 
backup documents, such as W-2s, pay stubs, and bank 
statements. After the clients’ information had been col-
lected, office support personnel, called “loan proces-
sors,” would order an appraisal and a credit report, 
open escrow, and independently verify the financial 
information. After all the information was collected 
and verified, the completed file would then be submit-
ted to the prospective lenders either electronically or in 
paper form.
AHL did not yet have electronic links to the proces-
sors’ files that would allow monitoring of the progress 
of the applications before they were submitted. Capa-
bilities for those links were being put into place. How-
ever, each application required a credit inquiry, so Al 
monitored the activities of his loan officers by tracking 
the number of credit inquiries each requested. This 
provided him with an early indication of how many 
applications were being submitted. The loan applica-
tion/lead ratios varied from 5% to 20% depending on 
the skill of the loan officer. Al also closely monitored 
these ratios and their trends.
In the mortgage lending industry, a 30% “fallout 
ratio” (the proportion of loans submitted to processing 
that were not funded) was typical. AHL’s fallout ratio 
was slightly less than 30%.
Once approved, the legal loan documents were pre-
pared. At that time, Al knew the revenue due to his 
company and the fees due to the loan officer involved. 
AHL paid the loan officers 40% of this total loan reve-
nue on loans that AHL originated, and 60% on loans 
they originated (by generating their own leads). At 
closing, AHL received its funds directly from the pro-
ceeds. A broker’s check would be overnight mailed to 
AHL’s office, or the money would be wired directly into 
AHL’s general account.
Back to school
For years Al had been thinking about earning an MBA 
degree. In June 2002, he was admitted to the executive 
MBA (EMBA) program at the University of Southern 
California in Los Angeles, and he decided to enroll. 
While in California, he planned to start another mort-
gage lending company.
Al had several options for AHL. He could find some-
one to run it; he could try to sell it; or he could shut it 
down. If he chose to shut it down, he would turn the 
unfunded applications over to a contract processing 
firm. The contract processing firm would be responsi-
ble for ordering credit reports and appraisals and for 
interfacing with the escrow companies and attorneys 
until the loans were funded. For its services, this firm 
would charge AHL $300–$400 per contract.
But Al decided that he did not want to close AHL. It 
was a profitable business with considerable growth 
potential. In September 2002 alone, AHL loan officers 
were preparing to submit 30–40 new applications to 
banks for funding, and the volume of business was con-
tinuing to grow. Al enlisted the services of a business 
broker who placed a value of $600,000 on the company. 
However, Al doubted that he had enough time to find a 
buyer before he left for California. He decided to find 
someone to operate the company in his absence.
A partner
Joe Anastasia4 was one of AHL’s loan officers. He had 
20 years’ experience in the mortgage lending business. 
Although Al had known him for only about two months, 
his initial judgments about Joe were quite favorable. 
Joe seemed to have excellent sales ability; he was peo-
ple-oriented; and he was knowledgeable about all areas 
of mortgage lending and financing. On his resume, he 
described himself as “dependable and honest.” Before 
joining AHL, Joe had worked for 10 years as vice presi-
dent of operations for a sizable financial corporation 
2	 AHL also developed leads from the Internet, as it operated the 
website www.lowerrate.com.
3	 In Georgia, unlike in some other states, loan officers are not licensed.

Atlanta Home Loan
27
and had previously operated his own mortgage service 
company for three years. Since Joe joined AHL, he had 
closed a higher loan volume than any of the other loan 
officers.
Impressed by Joe’s background and performance, Al 
decided to make Joe a deal to be his partner. In July 
2002, Al and Joe reached a verbal partnership agree-
ment. Joe would invest $8,400, which was used to rent 
an office and to purchase some office equipment, and 
Joe and Al would share AHL’s profits equally.
Curiously, however, on the day when the two part-
ners were to meet their new landlord, Joe did not show 
up for the meeting. Al could not find him for two days.5 
In the first 10 working days after becoming Al’s part-
ner, Joe showed up in the office only three times.
Al did not feel comfortable letting Joe continue to 
run the company. Two weeks after their partnership 
agreement had been struck, he made Joe a deal. In 
exchange for terminating their agreement, Al agreed to 
pay Joe 100% of the fees earned on loans that Joe 
closed. Al then brought in an acquaintance, one with 
banking experience, to run AHL in his absence, but this 
manager lasted only three days before quitting. Faced 
with limited options and desperate to find someone to 
run the company before he left for Los Angeles the next 
day, Al turned again to his first option – Joe. Joe apolo-
gized for his absences with the admittedly weak excuse 
that “he had been partying, but it wouldn’t happen 
again.” So Al and Joe reinstated the previous agree-
ment. When Al left for Los Angeles in August 2002, 
AHL had 90 loan applications in the pipeline, constitut-
ing nearly $300,000 in potential revenue.
Al started monitoring AHL from afar. He learned 
that in the following two weeks, Joe went to the office 
only four times. One day he took a large batch of loan 
files home and did not return to the office for three days.
A new partner and licensing 
agreement
In September 2002, Al made a final decision that he 
could not trust Joe. He turned to Wilbur Washington, 
to whom Al had been introduced by Joe several months 
earlier. Like Al and Joe, Wilbur had considerable expe-
rience in mortgage banking. Al judged quickly that 
Wilbur would be quite good at sales. He had the requi-
site knowledge, and “he was smooth.” On the basis of 
these quick judgments, on September 1, 2002, Al 
signed a written partnership and licensing agreement 
with Wilbur. This agreement stated that Al would offer 
Wilbur the use and privileges of AHL as an ongoing 
business until he returned, and Wilbur would provide 
AHL with his management services. AHL would make 
commission payments to Wilbur at 100% on all loans 
closed less a monthly licensing fee of $5,000 or 10% of 
all revenue, whichever was greater. Wilbur would also 
be responsible for interviewing and hiring all new loan 
officers, paying the expenses of running the office, and 
managing the entire staff.
Wilbur asked for authority to sign checks written 
against AHL’s main bank account, but Al refused. 
Instead, as a gesture of good faith, Al left with Letitia 
Johnson (the office manager) four signed, blank checks 
written against the main account. Al’s instructions to 
Letitia were that the checks were not to be used with-
out Al’s permission.
Letitia had been with Al since May 2002. She had 
effectively managed the telemarketers and had dem-
onstrated her loyalty to Al. In August 2002, because 
of slow funding loans, Al was unable to pay Letitia 
her full salary. He asked her whether she would like 
to find employment elsewhere or go through the 
hardship with AHL. Letitia responded that she would 
like to stay with AHL. Al promised to pay Letitia the 
deferred part of her salary as soon as some loans got 
funded, which they did in September. Al trusted 
Letitia.
Later that month, when Joe found out what was hap-
pening, he became quite upset. Not only was he no 
longer the managing partner of AHL, he thought Al 
owed him a lot of money. He wanted his $8,400 invest-
ment back. But Al refused to pay him until he returned 
all of AHL’s leads and loan files in his possession. Not 
only had his dereliction of duty caused AHL great harm, 
but none of Joe’s loans had closed since August, which 
Al found suspicious.6 In response, Joe filed a civil law-
suit demanding payment.7
4	 All names, with the exception of Al Fiorini’s, are disguised.
5	 Al found out later that Joe had a problem with alcoholism.
6	 Al later also found out that Joe had used a friend to close his loans, 
which violated legal regulations for the mortgage business. Another 
reason for Al’s suspicion was that one of AHL’s loan officers had orig-
inated a loan and asked Joe to bring it to the office, but Joe never 
brought it in.
7	 The court dismissed this lawsuit on December 5, 2002.

28
Chapter 1 • Management and Control
Monitoring from California
While he was no longer managing the day-to-day oper-
ations of the company, Al continued to monitor AHL’s 
operations closely. Daily, or as soon as the information 
was available, he tracked the employee head count, the 
number of leads produced, credit inquiries requested, 
loan applications funded, office expenses, and bank 
activity. Al was also on the phone three to four hours 
per day talking with employees and, particularly, loan 
officers. He thought that this would allow him to moni-
tor the employees’ emotional states, an important lead-
ing indicator of forthcoming company performance. Al 
also had all of AHL’s corporate mail forwarded to his 
California address. Al was particularly concerned 
about Wilbur keeping overhead expenses in line with 
production levels so that he would be able to pay the 
employees, to whom Al continued to feel a responsibil-
ity, as well as Al himself.
In late September, Wilbur hired a new loan proces-
sor. Al knew from experience that every loan officer 
believes that there is never enough processor time 
available to get “his” particular loan documents com-
pleted on a timely basis. But Al’s experience also told 
him that each processor should be able to fund 20 loans 
per month, so the company needed only one processor 
for every four loan officers. Al thought that Wilbur was 
now employing one, or maybe even two, too many pro-
cessors and/or salaried, overhead personnel. He sent 
Wilbur a note telling him that his processor-to-loan-
officer ratio was too high. But Wilbur reacted angrily. 
He told Al “not to tell him what to do,” that he was man-
aging the company in the best way he saw fit.
Subsequent events
At the time Wilbur took over the operation of AHL, four 
loans, which would generate total revenues of $11,700, 
were about to be funded. This amount was supposed to 
be wired into AHL’s main corporate checking account 
at Bank of America (BofA). When the loans funded, 
however, on October 1, 2002, without Al’s permission, 
Wilbur personally collected the four checks himself 
from the closing attorneys, pooled them together, and 
deposited them into BofA. After depositing the checks, 
Wilbur immediately wrote checks to himself and Leti-
tia for the entire amount of $11,700 using the four pre-
signed checks Al had left.8 However, since Wilbur 
wrote the checks against uncleared funds, the checks 
bounced.
Al had been monitoring the activity in the BofA 
account on the Internet from Los Angeles. He noticed 
that the four checks had been written without his 
knowledge and that they had all bounced. He immedi-
ately called Wilbur for an explanation. Wilbur told Al 
that he had withdrawn money from the account to pay 
the employees. Al did not believe this explanation, in 
part because the checks were made out to Wilbur and 
not run through the payroll account where payroll 
taxes would be withheld if the checks were meant for 
employees. On October 7, 2002, Al sent a fax and certi-
fied letter to Wilbur and Letitia and also spoke directly 
to them, ordering them not to write any more checks 
without his permission and to make sure that there 
were sufficient funds in the account to cover the checks 
they wrote. With the returned check charges, the main 
AHL account was already $1,533.09 overdrawn.
Al also called BofA to stop payments on the four 
checks and asked the bank to transfer the funds from 
the general checking account to a side payroll account 
to which Wilbur would not have access. However, 
Wilbur managed to release the stop payments on the 
checks. He transferred the money from the payroll 
account back into the general account and cashed the 
checks. Bank personnel apparently assumed that 
Wilbur had authority over the account since he had 
deposited the funds in the first place.
Angry and frustrated, Al decided that he could no 
longer trust Wilbur and could not do business with him. 
On October 9, 2002, Al asked a friend of his who used to 
be a sales manager in the mortgage company that Al 
had worked for previously to act as his agent. The friend 
was to go to AHL’s office and fire all the employees. 
Among other things, Al was particularly concerned that 
AHL had over 100 client files with sensitive personal 
information that might be misused. However, when Al’s 
agent went to the AHL premises to fire the employees, 
they all refused to go. Al called in the police to support 
the firing action, but when they arrived, Wilbur told the 
police that he was the owner, not Al. Not knowing who 
was telling the truth, the police just left.
On October 14, 2002, Al sent a letter to all 100+ 
AHL clients whose loans were in process that the com-
pany had to drop their applications. The key phrase in 
the letter was, “We are no longer going to be able to ser-
vice your application.”
8	 Al found out later that Wilbur and Letitia were actively dating.

Atlanta Home Loan
29
On October 15, Wilbur opened a new account at Citi-
zens Bank & Trust (CBT) in Atlanta, a bank where he 
did his personal business and where he knew the man-
ager personally. Wilbur wired the funds being held in 
AHL’s corporate name at the offices of the closing attor-
neys into this new bank account. He now had signing 
authority over the checks.
Al discovered the second bank account when a “Wel-
come” letter from CBT arrived to his California address. 
Al was outraged that personnel at CBT did not ask 
Wilbur for any corporate documents:
Wilbur showed no documentation whatsoever . . . You 
would expect highly regulated institutions like banks 
to provide better protection for the public, but . . .
Al immediately called bank personnel and informed 
the manager that Wilbur had opened a fraudulent 
account with CBT. But CBT refused to freeze the 
account or return the money. As a last resort, Al 
informed the Atlanta police and the FBI, thinking that 
they might be interested in this identity theft case. 
However, possibly due to the relatively small amount of 
money involved, neither the police nor the FBI gave the 
case any attention.
To make things worse, the day Wilbur opened the 
fraudulent bank account at CBT, he also filed two appli-
cations for warrants for Al’s arrest. Wilbur claimed that 
Al was the one who had taken the proceeds received 
from the closing attorneys out of the company’s 
accounts. Al had to return twice to Atlanta to defend 
himself. Both cases were dismissed, but Al incurred 
over $7,500 in legal fees and travel costs, and he wasted 
substantial time and energy dealing with these frivo-
lous lawsuits.
During all this time, the AHL personnel were main-
taining their daily routines. Wilbur renegotiated a lease 
with the landlord and established AHL as his own com-
pany. Al suspected that Wilbur had used all of his 
means of persuasion to mislead the employees in order 
to break their bonds with Al. Al received his $5,000 
licensing fee in September, but that was the last money 
he received. By December, Al realized that he had 
already lost at least $15,000 in licensing fees, and pos-
sibly more that might have been realized from the 
funding of the loans in the pipeline. Moreover, he had 
lost his company. Al said, sadly, “I have no idea how 
much revenue ended up being taken in my name.”
Sensing defeat, Al finally asked the Georgia Depart-
ment of Banking and Finance to withdraw AHL’s mort-
gage banking license. Not only had he lost his business 
and his income, he had also lost his credit rating since 
he had incurred bills that he was unable to pay. And in 
February 2003, Al was forced to sell his home.
In the summer of 2003, Al had still not decided what 
he should do. Should he fight to regain control over 
AHL? But what was left of it? Perhaps only about 
$25,000 worth of equipment. Or should he give up, let 
these crooks get away with it, and try to rebuild some-
where else?
Al also pondered how he had gotten into this mess. 
What might he have done to prevent this disaster from 
happening?
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede, and research assistant Clara (Xiaoling) Chen.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.

This page intentionally left blank

 
31
 SECTION II 
 Management Control Alternatives 
and Their Eﬀ ects 

This page intentionally left blank

 
33
 CHAPTER 2 
 Results Controls  
    If asked to think about powerful ways to infl uence behavior in organizations, most people 
would probably think fi rst about pay-for-performance, which is no doubt an eff ective motivator. 
For example, at Thor Industries, a large recreational vehicle manufacturer, CEO Wade Thomp-
son attributes much of the company’s success to its incentive compensation system. Among 
other things, the company shares 15% of each division’s pretax profi ts with the division manag-
ers, because, Mr. Thompson explained, “I want every one of our company heads to feel like it is 
their business, in their control. If they don’t perform, they don’t get paid very much. If they do, 
there is no cap to what they can make.”  1   Indeed, Vicky Wright, managing director at Hay Group, 
a compensation consultancy fi rm, argues: 
 [Many] companies on the Most Admired list [a list of companies produced annually by 
 Fortune ] have chief executives who understand what performance measurement is all 
about. It’s about learning how to motivate people – how to link those performance meas-
ures to rewards. 2 
 Pay-for-performance is a prominent example of a type of control that can be called  results 
control because it involves rewarding employees for generating good results. Identifying what 
are  good results, as we will see, is crucial. Indeed, following the fi nancial crisis through to today, 
pay-for-performance systems, especially in banks, have received a hard look, in part because, 
rather than producing “good” results, they have been bashed for having bred “bonus cultures” 
of  greed and  short-termism . Even the chief executives of such major banks as Barclays admitted 
that their bonus systems were overly “geared,” created temptations for employees to “cut cor-
ners,” and may have backfi red through “ethical lapses,” while the chief executive of Deutsche 
Bank touched on the basic underlying motivational eff ect of bonuses by contemplating that 
“[he] ha[d] no idea why [he] was off ered a contract with a bonus in it because [he couldn’t 
imagine he would] work any harder or any less hard in any year, in any day because someone is 
going to pay [him] more or less.” 3 
 Nonetheless, even in the aftermath of the fi nancial crisis, investors, regulators, and politi-
cians did not indiscriminately call to do away with pay-for-performance; rather, their calls for 
reform were typically directed at making compensation  more closely tied to  sound  performance, 
particularly long-term value creation.  4 
 Setting aside possible idiosyncrasies of the fi nancial sector, where one could argue that good 
employees work hard every day in other organizations without monster bonuses, results con-
trols of the pay-for-performance variety are widely used, even increasingly so in the non-profi t 
sector. For example, the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission in Australia argued 
that the fee-for-service system of healthcare rebates often fails to promote the most eff ective 

Chapter 2 • Results Controls
34
treatments because doctors get paid for each consultation or clinical activity regardless of 
whether the patient recovers well or not. In considering how to reform this system, the Commis-
sion recommended to link the pay of doctors and nurses to measures of how well they treat their 
patients or how quickly they are seen.5 Similar initiatives to create “accountable care organiza-
tions” by providing extra rewards for efficiency and quality performance have also been consid-
ered elsewhere, particularly in the United States.6 “The idea is to see whether shifting financial 
incentives for hospitals can make people healthier and save the U.S. money before Medicare’s 
hospital trust fund becomes depleted, which could happen by 2024.”7
Clearly, designers of results controls of the pay-for-performance variety have “good” results 
(e.g. long-term value creation) – even perhaps lofty results (e.g. making people healthier and 
saving a country’s healthcare system from ruin) – in mind when implementing them, brought 
about through the motivational, results-driven effects such systems purportedly can have. 
Anecdotal as well as research evidence, however, have repeatedly thrown the potency of these 
systems into sharp relief by suggesting that either they have weak or no effects or, where they 
do, they can produce the wrong results or have severe unintended consequences.
Even so, and despite, perhaps, a prevalent emphasis on pay-for-performance in many con-
texts, the rewards that can be linked to results go far beyond monetary compensation. Other 
rewards that can be usefully tied to measured performance include job security, promotions, 
autonomy, plum assignments, and recognition. (We discuss the vast array of rewards that can 
be given more fully in Chapter 9.)
Furthermore, results controls create meritocracies. In meritocracies, the rewards are given to the 
most talented and hardest-working employees, rather than to those with the longest tenure or the 
right social connections. At Koch Industries, a conglomerate, results controls are seen as the “secret 
sauce” with two main ingredients – meritocracy and operational efficiency. Charles Koch, its boss, 
is proud to proclaim that “workers can earn more than their bosses [and] high-school-educated 
farm boys from Kansas can rise faster than Ivy League MBAs” based on their performance.8
The combinations of rewards linked to results inform or remind employees as to what result 
areas are important and motivate them to produce the results the organization rewards. Results 
controls influence actions or decisions because they cause employees to be concerned about the 
consequences of their actions or decisions. The organization does not dictate to employees what 
actions or decisions they should take; instead, employees are empowered to take those actions or 
decisions they believe will best produce the desired results. Results controls also encourage 
employees to discover and develop their talents and to get placed into jobs in which they can 
perform well.
For all these reasons, well-designed results control systems can help produce the results 
desired. A review of studies on the use of incentives to motivate performance found an average 
gain in performance of about 22% stemming from the use of incentive programs.9 Like all other 
forms of controls, however, results controls do not operate in isolation10 and, equally, cannot be 
used in every situation. They are effective only where the desired results can be clearly defined 
and adequately measured by the organization, and where the measured results can be suffi-
ciently controlled by the employee.11 We discuss the conditions for the effective use of results 
controls in greater depth in this chapter.
Prevalence of results controls
Results controls are commonly used for controlling the behaviors of employees at many organi-
zational levels. They are a necessary element in the employee empowerment approach to man-
agement, which became a major management trend starting in the 1990s.12 Results controls 

Prevalence of results controls
35
are particularly dominant as a means of controlling the behaviors of professional employees; 
those with decision authority, like managers. Reengineering guru Michael Hammer even 
defines a professional as “someone who is responsible for achieving a result rather than [for] 
performing a task.”13
Results controls are consistent with, and even necessary for, the implementation of decen-
tralized forms of organization with largely autonomous entities or responsibility centers (which 
we discuss in more detail in Chapter 7). For example, business pioneer Alfred Sloan observed 
that he sought a way to exercise effective control over the whole corporation yet maintain a 
philosophy of decentralization.14 At General Motors (and numerous other companies that fol-
lowed), the results controls under Sloan’s leadership were built on a return-on-investment 
(ROI) performance measure (which we discuss in more detail in Chapter 10). By using this type 
of control system, corporate management could review and judge the effectiveness of the vari-
ous organizational entities while leaving the actual execution of operations to those responsible 
for the performance of the decentralized entities – the entity managers.
Many large corporations have gone through the process of instituting decentralized forms of 
organization with a concurrent increased emphasis on results control. For example, DuPont 
replaced a complex management hierarchy by splitting the company into 21 strategic business 
units (SBUs), each of which operates as a free-standing unit. The SBU managers were given 
greater responsibility and asked to be more entrepreneurial and more customer-focused. They 
were also asked to bear more risk, because a large portion of SBU managers’ compensation was 
based on SBU performance (sales and profitability). The managers noticed the change. One 
SBU manager said, “When I joined DuPont [21 years ago], if you kept your nose clean and 
worked hard, you could work as long as you wanted. [But today] job security depends on 
results.”15 The change was perceived as being successful: A Business Week article noted that, 
“The image of DuPont has morphed from giant sloth to gazelle.”16
In 2010, Sanofi-Aventis, a large pharmaceutical company, divided its vast resources into 
decentralized disease-based units, each with its own departments for research and develop-
ment, regulatory affairs, marketing, and sales – a plan designed to identify promising drugs 
more quickly and weed out failures before spending large amounts of money on unsuccessful 
drugs. One industry expert noted that “the [model of] fully independent units, operating under 
the parent company’s umbrella, [constitutes] a break from the traditional big pharma business 
model, and represents companies’ interest in duplicating the flexibility and cost-efficiencies of 
small biotech and biotech-like companies.”17 By establishing accountability for a fully inte-
grated entity’s results, where the entity manager closest to the business makes the tradeoffs and 
takes responsibility over the entity’s budget, the company aims to instill a “performance cul-
ture” that encourages both operating discipline (efficiency) and greater responsiveness to local 
business needs (flexibility).
In other words, decentralization attempts to replicate an “entrepreneurial model” within 
typically large corporations, where entity managers are given decision authority but then held 
responsible for the results that their decisions produce. Accountability for results was exactly 
the driving motive behind a recent reorganization into “reporting segments” at Air Products 
Chemicals Inc., a large industrial gases producer, which Seifi Ghasemi, Air Products’ chief exec-
utive, claimed would retain Air Products’ leadership position through “a decentralized, simpler, 
and more efficient structure which creates true profit and loss (P&L) accountability at many 
levels of the organization.”18
Similarly, when Nick Reilly became CEO in late 2009 of troubled Opel, the German car man-
ufacturer owned by General Motors, he announced that he wanted to encourage an entrepre-
neurial spirit at Opel by delegating most decisions to country heads and dismantling GM’s 
bureaucratic style of centralized management that fostered a “debilitating culture of passing 
the buck.” “It might seem obvious, but it isn’t the way GM was managed and there was definitely 

Chapter 2 • Results Controls
36
some confusion about who was accountable,” he said. “From the top line of revenue to the bot-
tom line of profit, this is now the responsibility of the managing directors of the major entities,” 
Reilly added.19
However, managers will act in an entrepreneurial manner necessary to thrive in competitive 
environments not only if they are subjected to the same market forces and pressures that drive 
independent entrepreneurs, but also if they are promised commensurate rewards for the risks 
they bear from doing so. As such, Richard Chandler, founder of Sunrise Medical, a medical 
products company, defended his company’s decentralized organization and lucrative incentives 
by stating that “people want to be rewarded based on their own efforts. [Without divisional 
accountability] you end up with a system like the U.S. Post Office. There’s no incentive [for 
workers to excel].”20
Results controls need not be limited to management levels only; they can also be driven 
down to lower levels in the organization, as many companies have done with good effects. Lin-
coln Electric, a worldwide leader in the production of welding products, serves as the poster 
child of companies that use results controls down to the lowest organizational level. Lincoln 
Electric provides wages based solely on piecework for most factory jobs and lucrative perfor-
mance-based bonuses that can more than double an employee’s pay.21 This incentive system 
has created such high productivity that some of the industry giants (General Electric, Westing-
house) found it difficult to compete in Lincoln Electric’s line of business (arc welding) and exited 
the market. A Business Week article observed that “in its reclusive, iconoclastic way, Lincoln 
Electric remains one of the best-managed companies in the United States and is probably as 
good as anything across the Pacific.”22 And even though Lincoln’s legendary Incentive Perfor-
mance System has essentially remained the same since it was installed in 1934, the company is 
still acclaimed for its systems and performance today, such as in the book The Modern Firm.23
Whereas decentralization is an effective way to empower employees in a results-control con-
text, there can, and even should, be limits to empowerment in certain circumstances. One prob-
lem is infighting, as exemplified at Sears, a struggling US retailer. Edward Lampert, the investor 
who had tried for eight years to turn around the company, “divided Sears into more than 30 
units, each with their own presidents, chief marketing officers, boards of directors and profit-
and-loss statements, which former executives say has caused infighting.”24
Other issues stem from loss of economies of scale or increased costs and inefficiencies, or 
even inconsistencies, and complexity. This is reflected in the situation that Alex Gorsky, a 
21-year Johnson & Johnson veteran who was named CEO in April 2012, inherited:
The J&J that Gorsky inherited was superficially easy to understand: 40% of sales came 
from drugs, another 40% from medical devices, and the rest from consumer products. Dig 
deeper and it was unimaginably complex: 275 operating companies, 450 distribution cent-
ers, more than 120 manufacturing sites, 500 outside manufacturers, and 60 enterprise 
resource-planning systems. It was more a flotilla of speedboats than a single ship. In the 
past, that famous decentralization inspired entrepreneurial thinking. Lately, it caused qual-
ity-control problems that bedeviled the company.25
Gorsky said: “We have to be more decisive and disciplined, and more efficient. Otherwise, it 
is too complex, and it costs too much.” Part of that was addressing decentralization: Gorsky 
introduced a program to centralize procurement, which would enhance J&J’s buying power. He 
also ordered up new quality and compliance controls to ensure consistent standards.26
Decentralization may also increase overlap, and curiously, it “may also create more oppor-
tunities for corruption by increasing the number of decision makers with the power to exploit 
the decision-making process for personal gain.”27 For example, when pursuing rapid growth 
in China, French hypermarket Carrefour faced systemic corruption among its management 
ranks at the local levels. Unlike the centralized approach to management that Wal-Mart 

Results controls and the control problems
37
employed in China, Carrefour empowered local managers to take charge of virtually all 
aspects of running their stores, including product pricing and promotions, supplier selection, 
and store design. Whereas this high degree of flexibility gave ample leeway for managers to 
expand fast in the early stages of building the chain, it also encouraged widespread bribe-
taking at the local level and, over time, led to higher operating costs and reputation risk than 
would a centralized system.28
But decentralization puts decision making closest to where the detailed knowledge and 
understanding of the business resides, allowing greater responsiveness. “A decentralized struc-
ture provides better information over time, which helps decision-making and accountability,” 
said Lambert of Sears,29 and echoed by Airbus chief Fabrice Bregier:
Now is the time to give a little bit more power to local teams in our countries, in our pro-
grams, in our plants [as] we need to take decisions faster. This is a weakness of Airbus. It 
takes much too long to make decisions, I want to speed it up and simplify it.30
The chief executive at China’s Huawei, Ren Zhengfei, put it as follows:
The future model is to give the biggest say to our local teams who are closest to our cus-
tomers and empower them so they have flexibility in interaction with customers. The head-
quarters or corporate functions will change into a more supporting and service function.31
And at Samsonite, the luggage maker, chief executive Tim Parker said:
I think we were trying to run a very centralized business in a marketplace where our con-
sumers differed enormously. We had to decentralize our decision-making. So we created 
an Asian business, a Europe business and an American business, and that allowed each 
management team to concentrate on local customers.32
The multitude of examples above also illustrate that firms can decentralize by geographical 
regions, business groups or segments, product lines, or a variety of other lines of delegation in 
their organization structure. One critical point, however, is that decentralization or “delegation 
of decision rights” to managers, and the design of incentive systems to motivate these managers 
to generate the desired results, are two critical organizational design choices in a results-con-
trol context; they are part of what organizational theorists call the organizational architecture. 
This literature maintains that organizational choices about decentralization and incentive sys-
tems should be made jointly, and that concentrating on one element to the exclusion of the other 
will lead to poorly designed organizations.33
Results controls and the control problems
Results controls provide several preventive-type benefits. Well-defined results inform employ-
ees as to what is expected of them and encourage them to do what they can to produce the 
desired results. In this way, the results controls alleviate a potential lack of direction. Results 
controls also can be particularly effective in addressing motivational problems. Even without 
direct supervision or interference from higher up, the results controls induce employees to 
behave so as to maximize their chances of producing the results the organization desires. This 
motivational effect arises particularly when incentives for producing the desired results also 
further the employees’ own personal rewards. Finally, results controls also can mitigate per-
sonal limitations. Because results controls typically promise rewards for good performers, they 
can help organizations to attract and retain employees who are confident about their abilities. 

Chapter 2 • Results Controls
38
Results controls also encourage employees to develop their talents to position themselves to 
earn the results-dependent rewards.34
The performance measures that are a part of the results controls also provide some non-
motivational, detection-type control benefits of a cybernetic (feedback) nature, as was men-
tioned in Chapter 1. The results measures help managers answer questions about how various 
strategies, organizational entities, and/or employees are performing. If performance fails to 
meet expectations, managers can consider changing the strategies, the processes, or the man-
agers.35 Investigating and intervening when performance deviates from expectations is the 
essence of a management-by-exception approach to management, which large organizations 
commonly use.
Elements of results controls
The implementation of results controls involves four steps: (1) defining the dimension(s) on 
which results are desired; (2) measuring performance in the chosen dimensions; (3) setting 
performance targets for employees to attain for each of the measures; and (4) providing rewards 
for target attainment to encourage the behaviors that will lead to the desired results. While 
these steps are easy to list, executing them effectively can be challenging.
Defining performance dimensions
Defining the right performance dimensions involves balancing an organizations’ responsi-
bilities to all of their stakeholders, including owners (equity holders), debtholders, employ-
ees, suppliers, customers, and the society at large. Should a firm’s sole aim be to maximize 
shareholder returns, or should it also, or even primarily, be customer- or employee-focused? 
Are these performance foci mutually exclusive, or are they rather mutually reinforcing?36 
Where do performance dimensions such as innovation and sustainability belong? And so on.
As challenging as defining the desired performance dimensions may be, it is equally critical 
to choose performance measures that are congruent or aligned with the chosen performance 
dimensions because the goals that are set and the measurements that are made will shape 
employees’ views of what is important. Phrased differently, what you measure is what you get. 
For example, firms may define one of their desired performance dimensions to be shareholder 
value creation, and yet measure performance in terms of accounting profits. This implies that 
employees are likely to try to improve the measured performance (in this example, accounting 
profits) regardless of whether or not it contributes to the desired performance (in this example, 
shareholder value). We discuss this problem, and the difficulties related to this particular exam-
ple, further in Chapters 5, 10, and 11.
Similarly, firms may aim to pursue innovation, yet they end up measuring patents filed. 
Anxious to promote innovation, many companies offer incentives to their employees to 
develop patentable ideas, and such incentives are likely to produce results in the form of an 
increase in the number of patents filed. But as Tony Chen, a patent attorney with Jones Day 
in Shanghai, notes, “patents are easy to file, but gems [can be] hard to find in a mountain 
of junk.”37
Citibank’s chief executive, Michael Corbat, slightly rephrased this adage by proclaiming 
that “you are what you measure.”38 He felt he needed to measure performance in five catego-
ries to try to alleviate the singular focus of managers on one measure, exactly because you get 
what your measure. His plan was welcomed by an analyst who commented that “the most 
important job of a CEO is to make sure that the right incentives are in place [because] 
improper measures lead to improper behavior.”39 We discuss the use of multiple measures of 

Elements of results controls
39
performance, such as by way of so-called scorecards, which Mr. Corbat advocated at Citibank, 
in Chapter 11.
The problem of misalignment has also been at the heart of some of the work by Jean Tirole, 
the 2014 Nobel Prize winner in economics. Tirole examines the undesirable consequences that 
performance-dependent incentives in the measured areas can have, either by skewing how 
employees approach their jobs, shifting effort away from less-easily measured (and hence unre-
warded) tasks such as long-term investments, employee development, and within-firm cooper-
ation; or by undermining work ethic by encouraging excessive risk-taking, inducing “managed” 
performance or producing “fudged” performance metrics.40 The first part of this problem – the 
skewing part – is known in the literature as the multitasking problem, and we discuss it in more 
detail in Chapter 5.
Even though Bloomberg concluded that “there’s a role for Tirole to advise on how to struc-
ture compensation without inciting the kind of disastrous risk-chasing that sparked the finan-
cial crisis,”41 this important congruence problem also surfaces in many other sectors, 
including the non-profit sector. For example, a study by the Home Office in the United King-
dom found that organized trafficking was a “thriving industry” that “makes a killing,” amass-
ing healthy profits with little risk of detection. The study suggested that one of the reasons for 
this was the ill-defined performance targets that the police had to meet. Solving high volumes 
of simple crimes such as petty thefts and home burglaries is easier and cheaper than the long-
drawn-out and expensive police work that is needed to crack down on trafficking rings. Even 
though the goal was to reduce crime, the result may have been that hardened criminals were 
let off.42
Hence, not only do firms need to decide what is desired, but they also must ensure that their 
measurements of the desired performance dimensions are aligned with what is desired. If they 
are not, the results controls are likely to encourage employees to produce undesired results. The 
results controls can then be said to have unintended consequences.
Measuring performance
As per the above, then, measurement is a critical element of a results-control system. The object 
of the measurement is typically the performance of an organizational entity or an employee 
during a specific time period. Many objective financial measures, such as net income, earnings 
per share, and return on assets, are in common use. So, too, are many objective nonfinancial 
measures, such as market share, customer satisfaction, and the timely accomplishment of cer-
tain tasks. Some other measurements involve subjective judgments involving assessments of 
qualities; for example, “being a team player” or “developing employees effectively.”
Performance measures typically vary across organizational levels. At higher organizational 
levels, most of the key results are defined in either stock market terms (such as share price) 
and/or financial or accounting terms (such as a return on equity). Lower-level managers, on 
the other hand, are typically evaluated in terms of operational measures that are more control-
lable at the local level. The key result areas for a manager in charge of a manufacturing site, for 
example, might be a combination of measures focused on production efficiency, inventory con-
trol, product quality, and delivery time. The variation in the use of financial and operational 
performance measures between higher- and lower-level management creates a hinge in the 
management hierarchy. That is, at some critical middle organizational level, often a profit 
center level (see Chapter 7), managers must translate financial goals into operational goals. 
These managers’ goals are defined primarily by financial measures, so their communications 
with their superiors are primarily in financial terms. But because their subordinates’ measures 
are primarily operational, their downward communications are primarily in operational 
terms.

Chapter 2 • Results Controls
40
If managers identify more than one result measure for a given employee, they must attach 
weightings to each measure so that the judgments about performance in each result area can be 
aggregated into an overall evaluation. The weightings can be additive. For example, 60% of the 
overall evaluation is based on return on assets and 40% is based on sales growth. The weight-
ings can also be multiplicative. For example, achievement of profit and revenue goals might be 
multiplied by a score assessed on the basis of environmental responsibility. If the environmen-
tal responsibility score is less than 70%, say, the multiplier is zero, yielding no bonus. Sometimes, 
organizations make the weightings of performance measures explicit to the employees, as in the 
example just presented. Often, however, the weightings are partially or totally implicit, such as 
when the performance evaluations are done subjectively. Leaving the weighting implicit blurs 
the communication to employees about what results are important. Employees are left to infer 
what results will most affect their overall evaluations. That said, evidence suggests that implicit 
weights can generate improvements in performance and, thus, can be effective as an alterna-
tive, or at least complement, to the explicit weighting of performance measures in incentive 
contracts.43
Setting performance targets
Performance targets are another important results-control element because they affect behav-
ior in two ways. First, they improve motivation by providing clear goals for employees to strive 
for. Most people prefer to be given a specific target to shoot for, rather than merely being given 
vague statements like “do your best” or “work at a reasonable pace.”44 Second, performance 
targets allow employees to assess their performance. People do not respond to feedback unless 
they are able to interpret it, and a key part of interpretation involves comparing actual perfor-
mance relative to target. The targets distinguish strong from poor performance. Failure to 
achieve the target signals a need for improvement. (We discuss performance targets and target 
setting processes in more detail in Chapter 8.)
The following example illustrates both points. Maria Giraldo, a nurse in the intensive care 
unit at Long Island Jewish Medical Center, used to be evaluated on such criteria as leadership, 
respectfulness, and how well she worked with others. A few years ago, her hospital imple-
mented a new computer-based performance system that broke down her job description into 
quantifiable goals, such as to keep infection rates for her unit low and patient satisfaction 
scores high, all relative to specific target levels. Ever since this new system was implemented, 
at review time, the discussion does not linger on about how Ms. Giraldo had performed. Either 
she hit the targets, or she did not. The clarity about measures and goals, and the reviews “by 
the numbers” that they allow, changed Ms. Giraldo’s views about success and what she needs 
to do to get ahead in her career – all for the better, she believed.45 (In Chapter 9, we discuss the 
drawbacks of relying exclusively on objective, formulaic performance evaluations in more 
detail.)
Providing rewards
Rewards or incentives are the final element of a results-control system. The rewards included in 
incentive contracts can come in the form of anything employees value, such as salary increases, 
bonuses, promotions,46 job security, job assignments, training opportunities, freedom, recogni-
tion, and power. Punishments are the opposite of rewards. They are things employees dislike, 
such as demotions, supervisor disapproval, failure to earn rewards that colleagues earn, or, at 
worst, dismissal.

Elements of results controls
41
Organizations can elicit motivational effects from linking the prospect of rewards (or 
punishment) to results that employees can influence. For example, organizations can use 
any of a number of extrinsic rewards. They can grant additional monetary rewards, such as 
in the form of cash or stock. They can use non-monetary rewards, such as by granting high-
performing employees public recognition and more decision authority. Alternatively, in 
entities where performance is mediocre or poor, they can threaten to reduce the decision 
authority and power that managers derive from managing their entities or decline to fund 
proposed projects.
Results measures can provide a positive motivational impact even if no rewards are explic-
itly linked to results measures. People often derive their own internally generated intrinsic 
rewards through a sense of accomplishment for achieving the desired results. For example, 
when William J. Bratton became the New York City police commissioner, he gave his police 
force one clear, simple goal: cut crime.47 (Previously the thinking had been that crime was due 
to societal factors beyond the department’s control, so the police were measured largely by how 
quickly they responded to emergency calls.) He also implemented a results-control system. He 
decentralized the department by giving the 76 precinct commanders the authority to make 
most of the key decisions in their police units, including the right to set personnel schedules, 
and he started collecting and reporting crime data daily. Even though Commissioner Bratton 
legally could not award good performers with pay raises or merit bonuses, the system was 
deemed effective. In the subsequent two years, major felonies in New York fell first by 12% and 
then a further 18%, respectively. This clearly could not have been attributable to pay-for-perfor-
mance in the strictest sense; it was instead due, at least in part, to providing officers with clear 
goals and empowering them to go about fighting crime. Seeing the results of their initiatives 
may have given police officers a sense of accomplishment and a greater intrinsic motivation to 
perform well.
The motivational strength of any of the extrinsic or intrinsic rewards can be understood in 
terms of several motivation theories that have been developed and studied for over 50 years, 
such as expectancy theory. Expectancy theory postulates that individuals’ motivational force, or 
effort, is a function of (1) their expectancies, or their belief that certain outcomes will result from 
their behavior (e.g. a bonus for increased effort); and (2) their valences, or the strength of their 
preference for those outcomes. The valence of a bonus, however, is not always restricted to its 
monetary value; it also may have valence in securing other valued items, such as status and 
prestige.48
Organizations should promise their employees the rewards that provide the most powerful 
motivational effects in the most cost-effective way possible. But the motivational effects of the 
various forms of reward can vary widely depending on an individual’s personal tastes and cir-
cumstances. Some people are greatly interested in immediate cash awards, whereas others are 
more interested in increasing their retirement benefits, increasing their autonomy, or improv-
ing their promotion prospects. Reward tastes also vary across countries for a number of rea-
sons, including differences in cultures and income tax laws.49 However, if organizations can 
tailor their reward packages to their employees’ individual preferences, they can provide mean-
ingful rewards in a cost-efficient manner. But tailoring rewards to individuals or small groups 
within a large organization is not easy to accomplish and is sometimes even seen as possibly, or 
even legally, inequitable. A tailored system will likely be complex and costly to administer. 
When poorly implemented, it can easily lead to employee perceptions of unfairness and poten-
tially have the opposite effects of those intended: demotivation and poor employee morale. We 
discuss the choice of different forms of incentives and incentive system design in more detail in 
Chapter 9.

Chapter 2 • Results Controls
42
Conditions determining the effectiveness of results controls
Although they are an important form of control in many organizations, results controls cannot 
always be used effectively. They work best only when all of the following conditions are present:
1.	 Organizations can determine what results are desired in the areas being controlled;
2.	 The employees whose behaviors are being controlled have significant influence on the 
results for which they are being held accountable; and,
3.	 Organizations can measure the results effectively.
Knowledge of desired results
For results controls to work, organizations must know what results are desired in the areas they 
wish to control, and they must communicate the desired results effectively to the employees 
working in those areas. Results desirability means that more of the quality represented by the 
results measure is preferred to less, everything else being equal.
As we alluded to earlier, even if one might agree that (one of) the primary objective(s) of for-
profit firms or corporates is to maximize shareholder value, this does not imply that the desired 
results, even if the overall objective is understood, will be unequivocally known or have unam-
biguous meaning at all intermediate and lower levels in the organization. The disaggregation of 
overall organizational objectives into specific expectations for all employees lower in the hier-
archy is often difficult. Different parts of the organization face different tradeoffs.
For example, purchasing managers create value by procuring good-quality, low-cost materi-
als on time. These three result areas (quality, cost, and schedule) can often be traded off against 
each other, and the overall organizational objective to maximize profit provides little guidance 
in making these tradeoffs. The importance of each of these results areas may vary over time and 
among parts of the organization depending on differing needs and strategies. For example, a 
company (or entity) short of cash may want to minimize the amount of inventory on hand, 
which may make scheduling the dominant consideration. A company (or entity) with a cost 
leadership strategy may want to emphasize the cost considerations. A company (or entity) pur-
suing a unique product quality image or differentiation strategy may emphasize meeting or 
exceeding the specifications of the materials being purchased. Thus, to ensure proper purchas-
ing manager behaviors, the importance orderings or weightings of these three results areas 
must be made clear and aligned with the strategy.
If the wrong results areas are chosen, or if the right areas are chosen but given the wrong 
weightings, the combination of results measures will not be congruent with the organization’s 
intended objectives. Using an incongruent set of results measures may then result in motivating 
employees to take the wrong actions. In the above setting, for example, ill-guided cost consid-
erations may damage the company’s pursued product-quality reputation.
Ability to influence desired results (controllability)
A second condition that is necessary for results controls to be effective is that the employees 
whose behaviors are being controlled must be able to affect the results in a material way in a 
given time period. This controllability principle is one of the central tenets of responsibility 
accounting (which we discuss in more detail in Chapters 7 and 12). Here are some representa-
tive expressions that have stood the test of time of this perennial principle:
It is almost a self-evident proposition that, in appraising the performance of divisional 
management, no account should be taken of matters outside the division’s control.50

Conditions determining the effectiveness of results controls
43
A manager is not normally held accountable for unfavorable outcomes or credited with 
favorable ones if they are clearly due to causes not under his control.51
The main rationale behind the controllability principle is that results measures are useful 
only to the extent that they provide information about the desirability of the actions or deci-
sions that were taken. If a results area is totally uncontrollable, the results measures reveal 
nothing about what actions or decisions were taken. Partial controllability makes it difficult to 
infer from the results measures whether or not good actions or decisions were taken.
In most organizational situations, of course, numerous uncontrollable or partially uncontrol-
lable factors inevitably affect the measures used to evaluate performance. These uncontrollable 
influences hinder efforts to use results measures for control purposes. As a consequence, it 
becomes difficult to determine whether the results achieved are due to the actions or decisions 
taken or, rather, to uncontrollable factors or noise. Good actions and decisions will not necessar-
ily produce good results. Bad actions or decisions may similarly be obscured.
In situations where many significant, uncontrollable influences affect the available results 
measures, results control is not effective. Managers cannot be relieved of their responsibility 
to respond to some uncontrollable factors or be exempted from dealing with reasonable or 
normal uncertainty in their environment; but if these factors, or the uncertainty, are difficult 
to separate from the results measures, results controls do not provide good information for 
either evaluating performance or motivating good behaviors. We discuss the methods that 
organizations use to cope with uncontrollable factors in results-control systems in more detail 
in Chapter 12.
Ability to measure controllable results effectively
Ability to measure the controllable results effectively is the final constraint limiting the feasi-
bility of results controls. Often the controllable results that the organization desires, and that 
the employees involved can affect, cannot be measured effectively. In virtually all situations, 
something can be measured; but often, however, the key results areas cannot be measured 
effectively.
The key criterion that should be used to judge the effectiveness of results measures is the 
ability to evoke the desired behaviors. If a measure evokes the right behaviors in a given situ-
ation – that is, if the measure can be said to be congruent with the desired results area – then 
it is a good control measure. If it does not, it is a bad one, even if the measure accurately 
reflects the quantity it purports to represent; that is, even if the measurement has little meas-
urement error.
To evoke the right behaviors, in addition to being congruent and controllable, results meas-
ures should be precise, objective, timely, and understandable. Even when a measure has all of the 
above qualities, it should also be cost efficient; that is, the costs of developing and using the 
measure should be considered.
Precision
Measurements inevitably contain error, some random, some systematic. Error makes the meas-
urement inaccurate. Measurement accuracy refers to the degree of closeness of measurements 
of a quantity to its actual (true) value. Precision is the degree to which repeated measurements 
under similar conditions show the same result; if they do, the measurements can be said to be 
reliable. Using a bull’s-eye analogy, accuracy describes the closeness of arrows (measurement) 
to the target (true value). When all arrows are grouped tightly together, the cluster of arrows 
(measurement) is considered precise since they all struck close to the same spot, even if not nec-
essarily near the bull’s-eye.

Chapter 2 • Results Controls
44
Reducing systematic error (or bias) improves accuracy but does not change precision. How-
ever, it is not possible to achieve accuracy in measurement without precision; that is, when the 
measures contain mostly random error or, thus, when they are unreliable. In other words, and 
in the bull’s-eye analogy, if the arrows are not grouped close to one another, they cannot all be 
close to the bull’s-eye. Therefore, lack of precision is an undesirable quality for a results meas-
ure to have. But even precise measures that are biased (i.e. that contain systematic error) may 
not be of great use for control purposes. If the degree of the systematic error is not known; then 
the measurement will be systematically biased by either showing greater or lesser values than 
the actual value (see the next section on objectivity).
It is obvious that some aspects of performance (such as social responsibility, leadership acu-
men, and personnel development) are difficult, or even impossible, to measure precisely, either 
because the measurements contain random error or are systematically biased (such as may be 
the case when subjective performance evaluations are used). Precision, therefore, is important 
because without it, the measure loses much of its information value. Imprecise measures 
increase the risk of misevaluating performance. Employees will react negatively to the inequi-
ties that inevitably arise when equally good performances are rated differently.
Objectivity
An objective measure here means that it is not influenced by personal feelings, mental states, 
emotions, tastes, or interpretations – hence, that it is unbiased. Measurement objectivity will be 
inevitably suspect where either the choice of measurement rules or the actual measuring is 
done by the persons whose performances are being evaluated. Low objectivity is likely, for 
example, where performance is self-reported or where evaluatees are allowed considerable dis-
cretion in the choice of measurement methods. Indeed, and referring to the earlier definition 
related to measurement precision, low objectivity is likely to introduce systematic error due to, 
for example, selectivity, leniency, or lack of self-criticalness. If that is the case, the measure-
ment may be precise, but it will not be accurate. Good measures for control purposes therefore 
should be both precise (reliable) and objective (unbiased).
There are two main ways to increase measurement objectivity. The first is to have the meas-
uring done by people independent of the processes that generate the results, such as by person-
nel in the controller’s department. The second is to have the measurements verified by 
independent parties, such as auditors.
Timeliness
Timeliness refers to the lag between the employee’s performance and the measurement of 
results (and the provision of rewards based on these results). Timeliness is an important meas-
urement quality for two reasons. The first is motivational. Employees need repeated perfor-
mance pressure to perform at their best. The pressure helps ensure that the employees do not 
become complacent, inattentive, sloppy, or wasteful. Measures, and thus rewards, that are 
delayed for significant periods of time lose most of their motivational impact. The sustained 
pressure can also encourage creativity by increasing the likelihood that employees will be stim-
ulated to repeatedly search for new and better ways to improve results.
As The Financial Times noted about deferred bonuses in banks, “beloved by the regulators 
because they allow the payout to be adjusted if conditions change, [they do, however,] reduce 
the motivational value of bonuses – by the time the employees receive the money they may not 
remember what was being rewarded,”52 making it also unlikely that the rewards will affect or 
adjust the behaviors that led to those results.
A second advantage is that timeliness increases the value of interventions that might be nec-
essary. If significant problems exist but the performance measures are not timely, it might not 
be possible to intervene to fix the problems before they cause (more) harm.

Conditions determining the effectiveness of results controls
45
Understandability
Two aspects of understandability are important. First, the employees whose behaviors are being 
controlled must understand what they are being held accountable for. This requires communi-
cation. Training, which is a form of communication, may also be necessary if, for example, 
employees are to be held accountable for achieving goals expressed in new and different terms, 
such as when an organization shifts its measurement focus from accounting income to, say, 
economic value added (more on this in Chapter 11).
Second, employees must understand what they must do to influence the measure, at least in 
broad terms. For example, purchasing managers who are held accountable for lowering the 
costs of purchased materials will not be successful until they develop strategies for accomplish-
ing this goal, such as improving negotiations with vendors, increasing competition among ven-
dors, or working with engineering personnel to redesign certain parts. Similarly, employees 
who are held accountable for customer satisfaction must understand what their customers 
value and what they can do to affect it. The same holds for teachers in universities who often do 
not understand what specific teaching skills or approaches result in better (or worse) teaching 
evaluations by their students at the end of the term.
When employees understand what a measure represents, they are empowered to work out 
what they can do to influence it. In fact, this is one of the advantages of results controls: good 
control can be achieved without knowing exactly how employees will produce the results.
Cost efficiency
Finally, measures should be cost efficient. A measure might have all of the above qualities and 
yet be too expensive to develop or use (e.g. when it involves third-party surveys of customers, 
say, to collect the data), meaning that the costs exceed the benefits. When that is the case, the 
firm may need to settle for an alternative, more cost-efficient measure. Advances in technology 
and data analysis, such as related to “big data,” have made data that had hitherto been hard to 
obtain or analyze more readily available. But data are not information, and these data do not 
uniformly have good properties, where much of it is unstructured. For example, understanda-
bility in terms of the claimed relationships with specific actions and decisions often is particu-
larly problematic. And even objectivity can be an issue, perhaps surprisingly, because, as it has 
been said, “torture the data long enough and they will confess to anything.”53
For example, California’s MemorialCare Health System is part of a movement by hospitals 
around the United States to change how doctors practice by monitoring their progress toward 
goals. What is different this time, some hospital executives argue, is that “new technology ena-
bles closer, faster tracking of individual doctors,” where MemorialCare is keeping detailed data 
on how the doctors perform on many measures, including adolescent immunizations, mammo-
grams, and keeping down the blood-sugar levels of diabetes patients. The results are compiled, 
number-crunched, and eventually used to help determine how much money doctors will earn, 
where the new insurance payments also factor in quality goals. An assessment of this “doctor-
data” system indicates that it has helped reduce the average stay for adult patients, trimmed the 
average cost per admitted adult patient, and led to improvements in indicators of quality, 
including patient re-admissions, mortality, and complications. This has not been unconten-
tious, however. Cardiologist Venkat Warren said that he worried that “some bean-counter will 
decide what performance is” and wondered whether doctors would be pushed to avoid older 
and sicker patients who might drag down their numbers.54
Overall, many measures cannot be classified as either clearly good (effective) or poor (inef-
fective). Different tradeoffs among the measurement qualities create some advantages and dis-
advantages. For example, measures can often be made more congruent, controllable, precise 
and objective if timeliness is compromised. Thus, in assessing the effectiveness of results 

Chapter 2 • Results Controls
46
measures, many difficult judgments are often necessary. These judgments are discussed in 
more detail throughout several chapters of this text.
Conclusion
This chapter described an important form of control, results control, which is used at many lev-
els in most organizations. Results controls are an indirect form of control because they do not 
focus explicitly on the employees’ actions or decisions. However, this indirectness provides 
some important advantages. Results controls can often be effective when it is not clear what 
behaviors are most desirable. In addition, results controls can yield good control while allowing 
the employees whose behaviors are being controlled high autonomy. Many people, particularly 
those higher in the organizational hierarchy but also so-called knowledge workers, value high 
autonomy and respond well to it, although they may not always respond well to the measures 
used, particularly when these suffer from significant weaknesses in terms of the various meas-
urement properties we discussed.
Results controls are therefore clearly not effective in every situation. Failure to satisfy all 
three effectiveness conditions – knowledge of the desired results, ability to affect the desired 
results, and ability to measure controllable results effectively – will impair the results controls’ 
effectiveness, if not render them impotent. Worse, it could produce dysfunctional side effects, 
various forms of which we discuss in later chapters.
That said, results controls usually are the major element of the management control system 
(MCS) used in all but the smallest organizations. However, results controls often are supple-
mented by action and personnel/cultural controls, which we discuss in the next chapter.
Notes
	 1	 “Lord of the Rigs,” Forbes (March 29, 2004), p. 68.
	 2	 “Measuring People Power,” Fortune (October 2, 2000), p. 
186.
	 3	 “Bank Bonuses: Bashing Ignores the Benefits for Inves-
tors,” Financial Times (November 27, 2015), online at on.
ft.com/1kXpBJ9.
	 4	 Ibid. See also “Geithner: Link Executive Pay to Perfor-
mance,” The Washington Times (June 10, 2009), online at 
washingtontimes.com.
	 5	 “Performance Pay Likely for Doctors,” The Australian 
(May 6, 2009), online at www.theaustralian.com.au.
	 6	 “Hospitals Prescribe Big Data to Track Doctors at Work,” 
The Wall Street Journal (July 11, 2013), online at www.
wsj.com.
	 7	 “Medicare’s $963 Million Experiment,” Business Week 
(September 6, 2012), online at www.bloomberg.com.
	 8	 “From Alpha to Omega,” The Economist (August 15, 
2015), online at econ.st/1J5S3AE.
	 9	 S. J. Condly, R. E. Clark, and H. D. Stolovitch, “The Effects 
of Incentives on Workplace Performance: A Meta-Analytic 
Review of Research Studies,” Performance Improvement 
Quarterly, 16, no. 3 (2003), pp. 46–63.
	10	 I. Friis, A. Hansen, and T Vamosi, “On the Effectiveness of 
Incentive Pay: Exploring Complementarities and Substi-
tution between Management Control System Elements in 
a Manufacturing Firm,” European Accounting Review, 24, 
no. 2 (2015), pp. 241–76.
	11	 As an example of several results-control issues that can 
arise when these conditions are not met, see S. Kerr, “The 
Best-Laid Incentive Plans,” Harvard Business Review, 81, 
no. 1 (January 2003), pp. 27–40.
	12	 See, for example, K. H. Blanchard, J. P. Carlos, and W. A. 
Randolph, The Three Keys to Empowerment (San Fran-
cisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 1999). Also see “C. 
Oswick, “Engaging with Employee Engagement in HRD 
Theory and Practice,” Human Resource Development 
Review (2015), pp. 1–9, particularly Figure 1, p. 2.
	13	 M. Hammer, Beyond Reengineering: How the Process-Cen-
tered Organization is Changing Our Work and Our Lives 
(New York: Harper Business, 1996).
	14	 A. P. Sloan, My Years with General Motors (New York: Dou-
bleday, 1964).
	15	 “For DuPont, Christmas in April,” Business Week (April 
24, 1995), p. 130.
	16	 Ibid., p. 129.
	17	 “Sanofi Seeks Efficiencies with New Model,” The Boston 
Globe (August 16, 2010), online at www.boston.com.
	18	 “Air Products Unveils Widespread Reorganization,” The 
Wall Street Journal (September 18, 2014), online at on.
wsj.com/1w5yrGy.

47
Notes
	19	 “In Break with Past, No More Passing the Buck at Opel,” 
Reuters (December 6, 2009), online at www.reuters.com.
	20	 R. H. Chandler, quoted in “Sunrise Scam Throws Light on 
Incentive Pay Programs,” The Los Angeles Times (January 
15, 1996), p. D3.
	21	 The details of Lincoln Electric’s legendary Incentive Perfor-
mance System are described in the case bearing the compa-
ny’s name at the end of Chapter 4. See also “Ohio Firm 
Relies on Incentive-Pay System to Motivate Workers and 
Maintain Products,” The Wall Street Journal (August 12, 
1983), p. 23; and “Lincoln Electric: Where People Are Never 
Let Go,” Time (June 18, 2001), p. 40. Today, the company’s 
website states that “Every year since 1934, eligible employ-
ees have received a profit sharing bonus in December. 
Lincoln’s pay-for-performance culture, rewards employees 
for their contributions to the success and profitability of the 
Company. The average bonus award over the last 10 years 
is 40% of an employee’s year to date, base earnings” 
(www.lincolnelectric.com/en-us/company/careers/Pages/
lincoln-tradition.aspx; accessed December 2015).
	22	 “This Is the Answer,” Business Week (July 5, 1982), pp. 50–2.
	23	 J. Roberts, The Modern Firm: Organizational Design for 
Performance and Growth (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2004).
	24	 “Lampert Cuts Sears Below 50% to Meet Redemptions,” 
Bloomberg (December 4, 2013), online at bloom.
bg/1RodSO2.
	25	 “Embracing the J&J Credo,” Barron’s (December 14, 2013), 
online at www.barrons.com.
	26	 Ibid.
	27	 “OECD Casts Doubt on Indonesia Growth View,” The Wall 
Street Journal (September 27, 2012), online at on.wsj.
com/1Oao9zG.
	28	 “Carrefour Contends with Bribes in China,” Forbes 
(August 27, 2007), online at www.forbes.com.
	29	 “Lampert Cuts Sears Below 50% to Meet Redemptions,” 
op. cit.
	30	 “Airbus Chief Bregier to Empower Local Sites in Company 
Overhaul,” Bloomberg (September 10, 2012), online at 
www.bloomberg.com.
	31	 “Huawei’s Chief Breaks His Silence,” Business Week (May 
9, 2013), online at www.bloomberg.com.
	32	 “Samsonite Sees Rapid Growth in Asia,” The Wall Street 
Journal (December 29, 2013), online at on.wsj.
com/1zDPRcr.
	33	 See, for example, J. Brickley, C. Smith, and J. Zimmer-
man, Managerial Economics and Organizational Architec-
ture (Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill Irwin, 2001).
	34	 For the so-called “selection effect” benefits of (results) 
controls, see, for example, D. Campbell, “Employee Selec-
tion as a Control System,” Journal of Accounting Research, 
50, no. 4 (September 2012), pp. 931–66.
	35	 See, for example, D. Campbell, S. Datar, S. L. Kulp, and V. 
G. Narayanan, “Testing Strategy with Multiple Perfor-
mance Measures: Evidence from a Balanced Scorecard at 
Store 24,” Journal of Management Accounting Research, 
27, no. 2 (Fall 2015), pp. 39–65.
	36	 “Shareholders vs. Stakeholders: A New Idolatry,” The 
Economist (April 24, 2010), pp. 65–6.
	37	 “Patents, Yes; Ideas, Maybe,” The Economist (October 14, 
2010), pp. 78–9.
	38	 “Citi’s CEO Is Keeping Score,” The Wall Street Journal 
(March 4, 2013), online at www.wsj.com.
	39	 Ibid.
	40	 See, for example, R. Benabou and J. Tirole, “Bonus Cul-
ture: Competitive Pay, Screening and Multitasking,” 
Working Paper 18963 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau 
of Economic Research, 2013).
	41	 “Banker Bonuses Get a Nobel Dis,” Bloomberg View (Octo-
ber 13, 2014), online at bv.ms/1toxQQN.
	42	 “Making a Killing,” The Economist (July 16, 2009), p. 36.
	43	 D. Campbell, “Nonfinancial Performance Measures and 
Promotion-Based Incentives,” Journal of Accounting 
Research, 46, no. 2 (2008), 297–332.
	44	 G. P. Latham, “The Motivational Benefits of Goal-Setting,” 
Academy of Management Executive, 18, no. 4 (November 
2004), pp. 126–9.
	45	 “Performance Reviews by the Numbers,” The Wall Street 
Journal (June 29, 2010), online at online.wsj.com.
	46	 See, for example, D. Campbell, “Nonfinancial Perfor-
mance Measures and Promotion-Based Incentives,” Jour-
nal of Accounting Research, 46, no. 2 (2008), 297–332.
	47	 “A Safer New York City,” Business Week (December 11, 
1995), p. 81.
	48	 V. H. Vroom, Work and Motivation (New York: Wiley, 
1964).
	49	 E. P. Jansen, K. A. Merchant, and W. A. Van der Stede, 
“National Differences in Incentive Compensation Prac-
tices: The Differing Roles of Financial Performance Meas-
urement in the United States and the Netherlands, 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 34, no. 1 (January 
2009), pp. 58–84.
	50	 D. Solomons, Divisional Performance: Measurement and 
Control (Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, 1965), p. 83.
	51	 K. J. Arrow, “Control in Large Organizations,” in M. Schiff 
and A. Y. Lewin (eds.), Behavioral Aspects of Accounting 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1974), p. 284.
	52	 “Bank Bonuses: Bashing Ignores the Benefits for Inves-
tors,” op. cit.
	53	 “A Different Game: Information Is Transforming Tradi-
tional Businesses,” The Economist (February 25, 2010), 
online at http://econ.st/KA1qb8.
	54	 “Hospitals Prescribe Big Data to Track Doctors at Work,” 
op. cit.

48
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
 In December 2014, Bob Mairena, president of Offi  ce 
Solutions, Inc., an offi  ce supply distributor based in 
Southern California, was considering making a signifi -
cant change in the compensation plan for his sales per-
sonnel. The company’s current compensation plan for 
all sales personnel was based on sales commissions, 
plus the potential for an incentive of 2–4% for achieve-
ment of some specifi c sales goals. 
 However, Bob had come to believe that a commis-
sion-based compensation system was appropriate 
only for the few individuals bringing in signifi cant 
amounts of new business, those whom he called 
“hunters.” Most of the company’s salespeople were 
not hunters; they were not generating significant 
amounts of  new business. They were more like account 
managers who, Bob thought, should be compensated 
with a lower-risk plan based on a relatively high pro-
portion of guaranteed salary, supplemented with a 
performance-dependent bonus. Because of lower job 
pressure and more stable compensation, the account 
managers should be paid less than sales reps. Offi  ce 
Solutions could use the cost savings to funnel more 
money to the relatively few salespeople who were 
generating growth opportunities for the company. 
But Bob was not yet totally sure how the new system 
should be designed and what kind of transition would 
be required to get the salespeople comfortable with 
the change. 
 The company 
 Offi  ce Solutions, Inc., headquartered in Yorba Linda, 
California, sold and distributed a full range of offi  ce 
supplies to customers in Southern California, from San 
Diego in the south to Santa Barbara in the north. The 
company was founded in 1984 by a husband-and-wife 
team, Bob and Cindy Mairena. 
 Prior to starting Offi  ce Solutions, Bob worked for 
UPS and Cindy worked for an offi  ce supply company. 
Both Bob and Cindy had an entrepreneurial spirit and 
were looking for an opportunity to start their own busi-
ness. They saw an opportunity in the early 1980s. Per-
sonal computers were just coming into prominence, 
creating a new need for computer supplies. Traditional 
office supply companies did not have the technical 
expertise to sell computer supplies eff ectively. Bob and 
Cindy prepared themselves by taking computer classes 
at night. By 1984, they had gained enough expertise to 
start a company called Data Extras, the predecessor to 
Offi  ce Solutions. 
 For several years, Data Extras successfully pro-
vided supplies to companies with computers. Eventu-
ally, however, computer supplies became a commodity, 
and the expertise and consulting services that Data 
Extras offered were no longer as valuable and the 
business was not scalable. Bob and Cindy made a stra-
tegic decision to expand the business to carry a full 
line of offi  ce supplies. In 1989, the Data Extras name 
was changed to Offi  ce Solutions to refl ect the change 
in service scope. 
 Over the years, Offi  ce Solutions grew both organi-
cally and by acquisition. In 2014, it was generating 
approximately $36 million in annual revenue. The 
company had 110 employees, including 40 salespeople 
who sold four product lines: offi  ce supplies, offi  ce furni-
ture, facility supplies, and print services. ( Exhibit  1 
shows an organization chart.) Offi  ce Solutions used 
23 company-owned trucks to deliver its products to 
customers. 
 Offi  ce Solutions used sophisticated management 
techniques. Its distribution system was very effi  cient. 
The company carried only the most basic supplies in 
its own warehouse. Most of the products sold were 
delivered to them on the following morning and 
delivered to the customer with a 98.5% fi ll ratio. The 
company was also metrics-driven. A vital-factor 
spreadsheet, which tracked sales, sales leads, and 
multiple other measures, was produced regularly. An 
 CASE STUDY 
 Offi  ce Solutions, Inc. 

Office Solutions, Inc.
49
electronic ticker on the wall tracked call-service sta-
tistics in real time.
Office Solutions had many long-tenured employees 
and a fun working atmosphere. For example, Bob was a 
proponent of fitness. He encouraged employees to wear 
exercise gear at work, and most of them participated in 
a company exercise break twice a day.
Office Solutions offered every employee, excluding 
those included in any other incentive plan, a quarterly 
incentive of 1% of salary if the company made its 
quarterly profit numbers. This incentive was designed 
both to enhance unity of purpose and to share profits 
and risks with the employees.
Industry environment
Until the mid-1980s, the office supply industry was 
dominated by small, independently owned dealers, 
some owned by the same families for generations. Then 
three large big-box retailers – Staples, Office Max, and 
Office Depot – as well as consolidators – such as Corpo-
rate Express, USOP, and BT, who were more focused in 
the commercial contract space – entered the market. 
These office supply giants built nationwide distribution 
networks and retail presence. They enjoyed economies 
of scale, and they shaved margins. Among other things, 
they offered “loss leaders,” selling some popular prod-
ucts at or below cost to attract new customers. In 2013, 
Staples, the largest office supply retailer, had annual 
revenues of $23 billion. Office Depot and Office Max 
merged in November 2013 and had combined 2013 rev-
enue of $17 billion. The success of the big-box stores 
drove thousands of independent dealers out of busi-
ness. But in 2014, the office supply industry still 
included the two remaining big-box companies, thou-
sands of independent retailers, and, increasingly, 
online retailers such as Amazon that had moved into 
the office supply space. By early 2015, an additional 
merger between Staples and Office Depot had been 
negotiated and was awaiting FTC approval.
The independent dealers that survived consolida-
tion and the onslaught of the retailers were strong deal-
ers that were competitive. Independents still owned 
about 35–45% of the market, and they were especially 
strong in the small and medium business space. Two 
major wholesalers served this market. They both pro-
vided depth and breadth of product offerings and pub-
lished the two major marketing catalogs that were 
customized by the individual dealers to provide brand-
ing consistency in their specific markets.
Adding to the management challenges in the indus-
try, sales of office supplies were shrinking. As customers 
moved toward digital information sharing, they needed 
fewer supplies such as paper, toner, files, and binders. 
Some privately owned distributors posted small posi-
tive, single-digit sales growth in 2013,1 but the big-box 
companies in the industry were reporting continuing 
sales declines. Sales at Office Depot fell 4% in 2013, 
excluding effects of the merger with Office Max. Staples’ 
sales declined 5% in 2013, and the company announced 
plans to close more than 225 of 2,000 stores.2
The Office Solutions strategy
Office Solutions managers’ understanding of the com-
petitive landscape allowed it to carve out a successful 
competitive niche. They categorized industry custom-
ers using a pyramid paradigm (see Figure 1). At the 
bottom of the pyramid were small customers, defined 
as businesses with 1–15 employees. These customers 
typically bought office supplies directly from retail out-
lets or online.
At the top of the pyramid were enterprise custom-
ers, defined as businesses with 250+ employees. These 
businesses typically had multiple employees purchas-
ing office supplies, but prices and product choices were 
controlled with a contract between the company and 
the dealer that was negotiated at the corporate level. 
Staples and Office Depot served most of the enterprise 
customers. Pricing strategy was the key to winning 
enterprise business. Dealers in this market segment 
offered popular products at low prices to win contracts; 
margins for some products could be as low as 5%. 
These dealers had to bid carefully and have an excel-
lent understanding of product mix so that they could 
win contracts and still earn a reasonable profit.
Retail customers:
1–15 employees
Commercial customers:
15–250 employees
Enterprise customers:
250+ employees
Figure 1  Customer pyramid
1	 M. E. Biery (2014). Office Supply Stores Seeing Profit Margins Erased, 
Forbes.com, April 13.
2	 SEC filings.

50
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
Office Solutions’ primary market included those 
companies in the middle of the pyramid, commercial 
customers with 15–250 employees. These businesses 
typically worked with dealers and had a single decision 
maker responsible for all of the office supply purchases. 
Commercial customers were the most likely to value 
strong relationships and excellent customer service.
Office Solutions had recently started moving up the 
customer pyramid, competing for enterprise-level con-
tracts. Bob recognized the mergers of the big-box sup-
pliers as an opportunity. Enterprise customers usually 
considered three bids. With only two, or maybe only 
one, big box distributors remaining, Bob reasoned that 
Office Solutions could be a viable second or third option.
The role of the sales representatives was different at 
the enterprise level. They were responsible for initially 
requesting participation in the RFP and for building 
enough of a relationship to understand the expectations 
and priorities of the customer. The formal bid response 
and margin management was wholly provided by cor-
porate. Once the contract was established, the role of 
the representative became less important as customer 
service provided more direct and immediate contact 
and problem resolution.
Bob also recognized the move towards e-commerce. 
He committed a growing share of company resources 
towards the company website and online marketing.
A major growth engine for Office Solutions was the 
acquisition of other office supply dealers. Over the 
years, Office Solutions had acquired quite a few smaller 
companies. The purchase of an office supply company 
was, in essence, the purchase of the target’s salespeo-
ple and their customer relationships. Every effort was 
made to retain the target’s salespeople for at least a 
year, at which point their customer relationships were 
transferred to Office Solutions.
The sales role
The role of the sales personnel at Office Solutions was 
threefold:
1.	 Retention: Sales reps were responsible for keeping 
their current customers happy. Customer service 
responsibilities included consultative services, 
ensuring that customer orders were handled cor-
rectly and on time, handling rush orders and other 
special requests, and general relationship building.
2.	 Penetration: Sales reps were responsible for increas-
ing sales to their existing customers. They could 
increase product penetration by introducing, mar-
keting, and selling additional products and services 
to existing customers.
3.	 Acquisition: Sales reps were expected to open 
doors for the acquisition of new customer accounts. 
After the door was opened, Office Solutions sup-
ported the reps as needed with specialists in the 
areas of furniture, printing, and janitorial sup-
plies. At the enterprise level, sales reps were 
expected to identify when current contracts 
expired and to register Office Solutions for the con-
tract bid process. Once in the bid process, Office 
Solutions management became involved with the 
contract negotiations (e.g. pricing) and responded 
directly to customer queries without the input of 
the sales rep.
Sales personnel were also charged with maintaining 
the accuracy of the information in Office Solutions’ 
sales-related systems.
The reps were not responsible for pricing because 
they did not understand the business well enough to 
consider all the relevant factors and all of the dynamics 
affecting pricing.
The office supply market in Southern California was 
huge, estimated at $1.2 billion per year, so plenty of 
opportunities existed for Office Solutions sales person-
nel. The sales people were free to develop new busi-
ness wherever they thought their potentials were 
highest; they were not assigned to sales territories. 
They could use Office Solutions’ customer-relation-
ship-management (CRM) system and identify poten-
tial customers that were not already buying from 
Office Solutions. The salespeople lived all over South-
ern California, and they tended to call on customers 
near where they lived.
The existing sales compensation 
program
Sales personnel were included in a commission-plus-
bonus program.3 They earned a commission of 25% of 
the gross profit generated by sales to their customers. A 
commission-based compensation structure had the 
obvious benefit of making the sales compensation costs 
3	 In 2014, a few sales personnel were in different compensation 
programs. They had joined Office Solutions as part of an acquisition, 
and they remained on the compensation structure provided by their 
former employer.

Office Solutions, Inc.
51
variable. If sales declined, costs declined with them, 
thus reducing profit risk.
Bonuses were paid only if the sales personnel met or 
exceeded their gross profit goal. The goal was set by top 
management based on a targeted growth rate. Sales 
managers met with their sales reps to explain the goal 
and to secure commitment to the goal. They spent time 
breaking down the goal by month, category, and cus-
tomer and discussing how it could realistically be 
achieved.
The base bonuses ranged in value from 0.4% to 0.8% 
of the gross profit earned by the sales rep’s accounts 
according to the step function shown in Table 1. The 
sales reps could earn an additional bonus of 0.15% of 
gross profit for each of three smaller product categories 
(furniture, facility supplies, printing) if they exceeded 
a category revenue goal. These sales categories were 
smaller and more volatile than the office supply cate-
gory, but they were also more profitable.
Under this system, bonuses amounted to a rela-
tively small part of the overall compensation package, 
maxing out at less than 4.8%4 of a sales rep’s total 
compensation.
Additional accountability
Office Solutions tracked several measures in addition 
to the official gross profit goal in a report called the 
vital factor spreadsheet (VFSS). (Exhibit 2 shows an 
excerpt from a VFSS.) This report tracked sales leads 
all the way from initial contact to a yes-or-no decision, 
as reported by the sales reps. The sales reps did not like 
reporting their leads in such detail, but the information 
was vital for management to correct slumps before they 
materialized into low sales numbers.
Managers and sales reps met together as a group 
every month to discuss their performance against 
their official goals and the other measures on the 
VFSS. The meetings could be unpleasant for those 
who did not meet their goals. Performance against 
goals was also discussed during annual performance 
reviews.
Finally, Office Solutions held annual sales meetings 
where the top sales reps were recognized. Bob found 
that the recognitions were surprisingly motivating. He 
explained:
I can think of some sales reps who were perfectly 
content with their compensation, but became very 
unhappy when they were no longer recognized as 
one of the top sales reps at the sales meeting.
Concerns
Bob recognized some shortcomings in the current com-
pensation structure. First, it did not seem to provide 
adequate motivation to generate new business. Bob 
noted that while there were some exceptions,
Most people don’t enjoy hunting. Hunting only hap-
pens when you have to and that happens when you 
are building your book of business.
Bob wanted the sales reps to generate more new busi-
ness. He had ambitious growth goals for the company. 
But many, perhaps even most, of the sales personnel 
could seemingly earn enough money to satisfy their 
lifestyle needs just by retaining the customers that they 
were already serving.
Second, the compensation structure was perhaps 
too lucrative. Office Solutions was competing with the 
big-box stores that had lower costs of sales. Bob wanted 
to reduce his company’s overall cost of sales so that 
they were more in line with the competition.
Finally, the commission structure attempted to moti-
vate the reps with “carrots.” The reps acted too much 
like independent contractors. Bob thought that he 
needed a better way to express dissatisfaction with job 
performance, and he needed objective criteria for ter-
minating underperforming employees. He explained:
In addition to setting the pay structure, you need to 
manage the activity. You have to monitor what they 
are doing and motivate them to sell more. People 
slack off when they have met their own needs. For 
Table 1  Calculation of base bonus
Achievement 
of gross profit goal
Bonus earned 
(% gross profit)
100.00–104.99%
0.4%
105.00–109.99%
0.5
110.00–114.99%
0.6
115.00–119.99%
0.7
> 120%
0.8
4	 Maximum bonus is 1.25% of GP. Maximum total compensation is 25% 
of GP (commission) + 1.25% of GP (bonus). Max percent of incentive 
compensation in the form of bonus is 1.25%/26.25% =4.76%.

52
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
example, one of our reps—I’ll call him Tom—seems 
perfectly happy earning $40,000 a year. I suspect 
that he spends as much time as a tennis instructor 
as he does as a sales rep. We reprimand Tom 
privately after every monthly sales meeting, but 
that seems to be of no consequence to him.
By age 50, most of the reps are cruising. They 
are not out generating new accounts. I need to 
grow the business. Should I fire all of my estab-
lished reps who are not willing to hunt?
A proposal for change
In determining what changes to make, Bob decided 
that he should divide the sales personnel into two 
groups – sales reps and account managers – and differ-
entiate their compensation programs. Those desig-
nated as sales reps would be just those personnel who 
were bringing in significant amounts of new business. 
The sales reps’ compensation structure would continue 
to be based almost exclusively on commission.
To illustrate the characteristics of a near-ideal sales 
rep, Bob thought immediately of Marsha:
Marsha is in her late 40s. She will do about $3 mil-
lion in sales this year. She is a pure hunter, and she 
loves competing. She lost a $600,000 account last 
year because her client was acquired, but she has 
replaced it already. Her weakness is that she deals 
with too much minutiae. When she is ready, I will 
give her an assistant to do computer set-ups and 
the like. I want her focused on new business.
The non-hunter sales reps would be placed into the 
account manager category. Many of these personnel 
were excellent at customer relations and retention of 
accounts, but, for whatever reason, they did not bring 
in significant amounts of new clients. Bob explained:
If a sales rep is only retaining existing customers, 
his or her job description should be changed to an 
account manager with a pay structure that makes 
sense for those job responsibilities. Theoretically I 
would love to have a company full of sales reps who 
are aggressively pursuing new business, but I don’t 
want to use a sales rep compensation model to pay 
someone who is actually functioning as an account 
manager or really working as an outside customer 
service representative.
William is a good example of someone who 
should be an account manager. He has been with us 
for many years and is our #2 salesperson, responsi-
ble for $2.5 million in sales. He works 24/7. He is up 
all the time checking backorder reports. The cus-
tomers love him. He micro-manages their accounts 
to make sure that nothing goes wrong. He does a 
great job of customer retention and selling more cat-
egories of products to his accounts. But he hasn’t 
generated even two new accounts each year. I have 
had a sales manager go with him to help him develop 
new leads, but that is just not what he is good at.
Bob’s instinct was to leave the compensation plan for 
those in the sales rep category just as it was. The com-
pensation mix for the account managers would change 
dramatically to a targeted 70% base salary and 30% 
variable compensation, which included both commis-
sion and bonus. The expected total compensation of 
the account managers would be set to be slightly lower 
than the current compensation levels, reflecting the 
reduced compensation risk.
Transition
Through some early, casual discussions, Bob had got-
ten some indications that the transition to a new com-
pensation structure for the account managers would 
not be easy. Bob raised the subject first with William, 
someone who was important to the company but also 
the perfect candidate for the switch to account man-
ager. Bob offered William what he thought was a gener-
ous package: a base salary that was 90% of William’s 
current commission level, with the potential to earn an 
additional 10–15% as a bonus. (Exhibit 3 shows Wil-
liam’s compensation calculations.) But William 
resisted. He insisted that he wanted to continue as a 
sales rep despite Bob’s warnings that there would be a 
lot more pressure to win new accounts should he 
choose to remain in that role.
Bob suspected that the conversations would be 
even more difficult if the change in structure was 
combined with the reduction in expected compensa-
tion, as Bob thought it should. For the reps who wished 
to stay on the commission structure, should he add a 
negative consequence if they failed to acquire new 
accounts?
Bob knew that he still had some details to work out.

Office Solutions, Inc.
53
CEO
Bob
Mairena
Director,
HR
Michelle Marsh
SVP,
Operations
John Acampora
Manager,
Marketing
VP,
Sales
Manager,
Accounting
Manager,
Customer
Service
Manager,
Purchasing
Manager,
Distribution
Sales
Manager
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales Rep
Sales
Manager
Sales
Manager
Exhibit 1  Office Solutions Organization Chart, December 2014

54
Exhibit 2  Excerpt from the VFSS
New Accounts
Jan-14
Feb-14
Mar-14
Apr-14
May-14
Jun-14
Jul-14
Aug-14
Sep-14
Oct-14
Nov-14
Dec-14
Total
Manager 1
8
9
14
13
7
6
8
16
6
10
4
8
109
Manager 2
10
4
12
9
4
5
3
9
9
6
2
7
80
Manager 3
9
7
10
12
20
10
9
8
6
17
6
5
119
Manager 4
1
1
7
1
3
2
2
4
0
4
1
4
30
Manager 5
3
1
0
2
1
3
0
0
1
2
2
0
15
Total
31
22
43
37
35
26
22
37
22
39
15
24
353
Cumulative Revenue for New Customers in 2013
Manager 1
13,448
21,730
23,271
18,861
52,671
26,750
28,146
59,864
67,255
67,957
45,639
47,417
473,008
Manager 2
9,559
9,278
13,053
18,043
20,620
22,450
21,629
27,317
32,833
41,019
31,279
32,591
279,672
Manager 3
3,949
3,542
13,771
17,779
29,084
40,260
43,052
42,337
82,297
84,185
54,250
70,911
485,418
Manager 4
-
19,583
37,788
18,107
1,125
16,267
5,159
5,779
8,290
1,747
64,215
106,122
284,182
Manager 5
-
-
-
-
-
847
8,479
301
1,266
5,874
7,974
17,879
42,620
Total
26,956
54,133
87,882
72,790
103,500
106,574
106,465
135,598
191,941
200,782
203,358
274,921
1,564,899
Total Goal
37,750
69,000
100,750
132,400
169,750
206,500
238,750
264,500
296,250
333,250
353,000
364,500
2,566,400
Variance
(10,794)
(14,867)
(12,868)
(59,610)
(66,250)
(99,926)
(132,285)
(128,902)
(104,309)
(132,468)
(149,642)
(89,579)
(1,001,501)
Var %
−28.6%
−21.5%
−12.8%
−45.0%
−39.0%
−48.4%
−55.4%
−48.7%
−35.2%
−39.8%
−42.4%
−24.6%
−39.0%
Bids:
Jan-14
Feb-14
Mar-14
Apr-14
May-14
Jun-14
Jul-14
Aug-14
Sep-14
Oct-14
Nov-14
Dec-14
Total
Manager 1
5
27
35
21
17
18
19
14
11
10
11
4
192
Manager 2
16
13
17
12
11
9
17
6
11
6
3
10
131
Manager 3
5
12
13
13
10
9
14
7
12
8
4
4
111
Other
2
4
5
4
5
4
4
6
5
2
2
2
45
Total
28
56
70
50
43
40
54
33
39
26
20
20
479

55
Opportunities
Jan-14
Feb-14
Mar-14
Apr-14
May-14
Jun-14
Jul-14
Aug-14
Sep-14
Oct-14
Nov-14
Dec-14
Total
Stage 1 -  
Qualifying
430
484
507
544
545
541
520
577
552
566
576
394
Stage 2 - Initial 
Meeting
351
379
426
425
440
416
340
366
368
357
367
289
Stage 3 
- Developing 
Proposal
163
167
193
216
219
200
174
166
164
155
157
134
Stage 4 
- Presentation
118
114
113
114
121
108
146
149
157
169
162
127
Stage 5 
- Commitment 
to Buy
51
70
98
58
57
51
45
47
51
53
56
50
Total Current 
Opportunities
1,113
1,214
1,337
1,357
1,382
1,316
1,225
1,305
1,292
1,300
1,318
994
Stage 6 - Won
255
272
284
293
304
318
319
348
387
418
436
321
Stage 7 - Lost
180
192
226
244
270
268
299
318
413
440
468
333
Total All 
Opportunities
1,548
1,678
1,847
1,894
1,956
1,902
1,843
1,971
2,092
2,158
2,222
1,648
Exhibit 2  Continued
(Continued)

56
2013 Web 
Analytics
Jan-14
Feb-14
Mar-14
Apr-14
May-14
Jun-14
Jul-14
Aug-14
Sep-14
Oct-14
Nov-14
Dec-14
Sessions
20,812
17,825
18,806
18,780
18,182
34,969
37,566
35,964
37,869
39,959
31,827
28,523
Users
8,851
7,813
8,297
8,045
7,974
14,681
15,957
15,895
16,603
16,805
14,381
13,634
Pageviews
35,903
30,877
33,137
33,426
34,216
304,010
325,674
309,291
318,452
345,600
275,187
238,281
Pages/Visit
1.73
1.73
1.76
1.84
1.88
8.69
8.67
8.6
8.41
8.65
8.65
8.35
Visit Time
2:46
2:48
2:41
2:42
2:44
7:33
7:25
7:05
6:56
7:14
7:06
6:52
Bounce Rate
66.02%
66.55%
67.09%
66.57%
67.10%
42.62%
43.87%
44.11%
44.29%
43.22%
43.76%
45.86%
% New Visits
31.16%
30.63%
31.61%
30.11%
31.44%
35.92%
30.98%
31.52%
31.13%
29.45%
30.77%
31.69%
Session: A session is a period time where the user is actively engaged with your website.
User: Users have had at least one session within the selected date range. Includes both new and returning users.
Pageviews: The total number of pages viewed. Repeated views of a single page are counted.
Exhibit 2  Continued

Office Solutions, Inc.
57
William’s compensation under new proposal
AS OFFERED TO WILLIAM
90% base/10% bonus
If 70% base/30% bonus
Base Salary
$121,230
$94,290
Bonus Potential
$ 13,470
$40,410
Total Compensation
$134,700
$134,700
William’s 2014 compensation under commission structure
Percentage
Gross Profit Base
Compensation
Commission
25.00%
$538,799
$134,700
Base Bonus
.50%
$538,799
$2,694
Furniture Bonus
.15%
$538,799
$808
Facility Bonus
.15%
$538,799
$808
Printing Bonus
0
0
Total Compensation
$139,010
William’s 2014 performance
2014 Goal
2014 Actual
Variance
Variance %
Total Revenue
$ 2,104,350
$ 2,254,393
$ 150,043
7.1%
Office Supply Rev.
$ 1,411,512
$ 1,403,717
$ (7,795)
−0.6%
Furniture Rev.
$ 313,899
$505,495
$ 191,596
61.0%
Facility Supply Rev.
$ 228,071
$239,152
$ 11,081
4.9%
Printing Rev.
$ 150,868
$106,029
$ (44,839)
−29.7%
Gross Profit
$ 502,939
$538,799
$ 35,860
7.1%
Revenue from New Accounts
$ 39,000
$1,200
$ (37,800)
−96.9%
Exhibit 3  William’s Compensation Calculator
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant and Research Assistants Michelle Spaulding and Seung Hwan 
(Peter) Oh.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

58
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
 1  Toyota also required the use of a  service survey, which asked service 
customers a comparable set of questions focused on satisfaction with 
(1) making the service appointment, (2) writing up the service order, 
(3) work quality, (4) work timeliness, (5) price, and (6) the facilities. 
 In December 2003, Howard Hakes, vice president of 
Hitchcock Automotive Services, refl ected on some of the 
challenges his team faced in managing his company’s 
stable of automobile dealerships. He illustrated his points 
by discussing the challenges faced at Puente Hills Toyota, 
Hitchcock’s largest dealership, although all of the Hitch-
cock dealerships faced essentially the same problems. 
 This is very much a people business. It’s people 
who give us our biggest successes as well as our 
biggest challenges. At our Toyota store, in sales, I 
would say that about 20% of our people are loyal 
to the company and really want to do a good job. 
The other 80% are just in this for the money . . . and 
they can make more money here than anywhere 
else. Our compensation attracts some very tal-
ented people. But some of these people are 
sharks who try to get away with whatever they 
can. Others have personal problems. They live 
from paycheck to paycheck; that is their mentality. 
Still others are cancers whose bad habits can 
spread. We coach and counsel; we give written 
notices; and for most of the employees, once they 
get the message that is the end of the problems. 
But for some others . . . 
 I think the key to management in this business is 
all about managing attitude. How can we keep the 
team moving in the same direction, to get every-
body to be part of the team, and prevent the can-
cers from spreading? 
  The company and industry 
 Hitchcock Automotive Services was a privately held cor-
poration comprised of seven automobile dealerships – 
three Toyota dealerships and one each for Volkswagen, 
Ford, Hyundai, and BMW – and a large body shop. All of 
the entities were located in southern California. Four of 
the dealerships, including Puente Hills Toyota, were sit-
uated adjacent to each other in City of Industry, Califor-
nia, about 25 miles east of Los Angeles. The others were 
located in Anaheim, Hermosa Beach, and Northridge. 
 It was important for the dealerships to keep two 
important constituencies – manufacturers and custom-
ers – happy. The manufacturers allocated larger 
numbers of their best-selling models to their better 
performing dealers. The manufacturers evaluated 
their dealers in terms of their abilities to fulfi ll their 
market potential: to meet sales targets the manufactur-
ers set for each geographical trading area, known as 
the  primary market area . The dealerships also had to 
satisfy the manufacturers’ licensing and certifi cation 
standards. The manufacturers regularly performed 
compliance audits to evaluate dealership practices in 
comparison with the established standards. However, 
Howard Hakes believed that short of fl agrant violations 
of standards (e.g. selling competing brands under the 
same roof), fulfi lling market potentials was the pri-
mary factor aff ecting the dealers’ relationships with 
the manufacturers. 
 Customer satisfaction was obviously important in 
obtaining repeat sales and, hence, future profi ts. Cus-
tomer satisfaction surveys were given to every cus-
tomer who bought or leased a vehicle or had one 
serviced at a dealership. A copy of the survey given to 
all Toyota customers who purchased or leased a vehicle 
is shown in  Exhibit  1 . 1 The responses to these survey 
questions were mailed directly to the manufacturer 
and aggregated into a  customer satisfaction index (CSI), 
to which considerable attention was paid by both the 
manufacturer and dealership managers. Manufactur-
ers sometimes changed dealership vehicle allocations 
when CSI ratings fell below acceptable levels in three 
consecutive years. 
 Puente Hills Toyota 
 Puente Hills Toyota (PHT) was a large Toyota dealer-
ship. Annual sales were about $85 million, including 
 CASE STUDY 
 Puente Hills Toyota 

Puente Hills Toyota
59
approximately $10 million from the body shop, which 
provided services to all of the Hitchcock dealerships in 
City of Industry. PHT had a total of 145 employees, and 
annual profits totaled about $1.8 million.
PHT had won many awards for excellent perfor-
mance. For example, the dealership had been awarded 
Toyota’s President’s Award for overall excellence in 
each of the prior 13 years.
In 2003, PHT moved into a new, state-of-the-art, $13 
million facility with 119,000 square feet of space. The 
new building provided the latest in customer ameni-
ties, including a children’s play area, a movie theatre, 
efficient work layout areas, and room for growth.
PHT’s organization structure was fairly typical in 
the industry. Reporting to the dealership general man-
ager were a general sales manager whose organization 
included both new and used vehicle sales, a service 
manager, a body shop manager, a parts manager, and 
a director of finance and insurance (F&I) (see 
Exhibit 2). The one unique feature of the organization 
was the combined new and used vehicle sales depart-
ment. Only about one in five auto dealerships, typi-
cally the smaller ones, had such a combined vehicle 
sales department. More typically, the managers of the 
new and used vehicle sales departments reported 
directly to the dealership general manager. But PHT 
managers liked the flexibility of having their sales per-
sonnel sell whatever vehicle customers wanted, new or 
used, and some customers wanted to look at both new 
and used vehicles.
Each of PHT’s departments was managed as a profit 
center. Many indirect or overhead expenses, such as 
dealership administrative salaries and dealership 
advertising expenditures, were assigned or allocated to 
the departments. Only some infrastructure-related 
expenditures (e.g. rent and equivalent) and some other 
expenditures over which the department managers 
had little or no control (e.g. insurance, taxes, legal, and 
auditing) were not allocated to them.
Exhibit 3 shows one page of the financial statement 
report that PHT was required to submit monthly to 
Toyota Sales Corporation. The other pages in this report 
called for an extensive array of information, including 
the profitability of the other departments, balance sheet 
data, unit sales by model, personnel counts by depart-
ment and category, and a variety of performance ratios 
(e.g. total bonuses as a percentage of sales, gross profit 
average per unit of each model sold).
The profitability of PHT’s departments varied widely. 
As in most dealerships, new vehicle sales at PHT were 
only marginally profitable. Used vehicles provided a 
better profit source, as Howard Hakes explained:
This is one of the last barter businesses left. For 
some new vehicles, there is only an $800 difference 
between the window sticker price and dealer cost, 
so there is not much margin and not much room for 
bargaining. In used vehicles, we have a little more 
profit opportunity. We can sometimes take a trade-
in for $2,000, put $1,500 worth of work in it, and sell 
it for $6,000.
The service department was consistently PHT’s 
most profitable department, with margins typically 
in the range of 15–20%. (See comparison statis­tics 
from an industry consulting report shown in 
Appendix A.)
As required by Toyota, PHT managers kept separate 
records for new and used vehicle sales, as if they were sep-
arate departments, even though all PHT salespeople could 
sell both new and used vehicles. The separation of new 
and used vehicle profits required some allocations of 
expenses. With rare exceptions, all items of expense were 
split 70% to new vehicles and 30% to used vehicles, an 
allocation formula that was typical in the industry. How-
ard Hakes knew that this formula was somewhat arbitrary. 
For example, he knew that some forms of advertising, such 
as half-hour television shows or “infomercials” on Spanish 
language television stations, were solely aimed at selling 
used vehicles. But, he explained, “I’ll bet we aren’t off by 
more than 5% with the 70 –30 split. Maybe it’s 65 –35, one 
way or the other, but we won’t be further off than that.”2
All interdepartmental transfers were done at market 
prices. Thus, for example, when PHT’s used vehicles were 
serviced in the PHT shop, the sales department paid full 
retail price for parts and labor. This policy gave the used 
vehicle manager some negotiating power in the service 
area. Paying full retail price ensured that internal used 
vehicle service jobs would not be given lower priority.
Valuations of used vehicle trade-ins sometimes cre-
ated disagreements. These valuations were important 
primarily because the sales personnel earned commis-
sions based on the profits of the “deals” they closed. 
Such disagreements were common in dealerships 
2	 The industry consulting report showed that for FY 2002, the average 
overhead expenses (equivalent to line 57 in Exhibit 3) in the industry 
were $2.6 million for new vehicle departments, or 7.22% of sales 
(equivalent to line 1 in Exhibit 3) or 94.48% of new vehicle depart-
ment profit (equivalent to line 33 in Exhibit 3). For used vehicle depart-
ments, average overhead expenses in the industry amounted to $1.4 
million, or 8.12% of sales or 85.78% of used vehicle department profit.

60
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
because new car salesmen were often motivated to over 
pay the customer for trade-ins to secure the new car 
sale. And at PHT, and indeed all dealerships, needed 
repairs on trade-ins were sometimes not spotted at the 
time of the sales deal. This could happen anytime, but 
at PHT it was most likely to happen on Sundays when 
the service department was closed and no service 
advisor could be called in for a second opinion on esti-
mated trade-in repair costs. As Howard explained:
On Mondays, we often have animated discussions 
between sales and service about the repairs that the 
service department claims are required on trade-ins. 
But we stick to the market price rule! If the costs of 
repair are higher than what the salesmen had antici-
pated on Sunday, it eats into their deal profit. If they 
don’t agree with the service repair cost estimate, 
they are free to sell the trade-in “as-is” on the whole-
sale market. Sometimes they even get lucky when 
the repair problem isn’t spotted there either. That’s 
why some used vehicles come to be called “lemons.”
Performance measures and incentives
Compensation of line personnel at PHT was high, par-
ticularly given the employees’ generally relatively 
modest education levels. Even young salespeople, those 
still in their early 20s, could earn $6,000–$7,000 per 
month if they hustled and followed up effectively with 
customers. Top sales personnel could earn $20,000 per 
month, or even more. Some service technicians earned 
over $10,000 per month. Performance-based incen-
tives were a significant part of the compensation of all 
line personnel.
A. Incentives in the sales department
All personnel in the sales department were paid a rela-
tively modest base salary plus incentive pay. The sales-
men and assistant sales managers earned commissions 
on the deals they closed. The average commission rate 
was 20% and 7% of deal gross profit for salesmen and 
assistant sales managers, respectively. The general sales 
manager, used vehicle sales manager, and sales desk man-
agers’ bonuses were based on a proportion of depart-
mental profit after overhead expenses but before taxes 
(line 59 in Exhibit 3). The general sales manager and 
desk sales managers were paid 2.25% and 1.2–1.5% of 
this amount for the total sales department, respectively. 
The used vehicle sales manager was paid 5% of this 
amount for the used vehicle department only.
The bonuses, which were typically 250 –300% of the 
sales employees’ base salaries, provided a significant 
proportion of total compensation. The salaries were 
paid semi-monthly, and commissions and bonuses 
were paid monthly.
Howard Hakes explained that one side benefit of 
having a combined new and used vehicle sales depart-
ment was that, combined, the department was 
generally profitable, whereas new vehicle sales depart-
ments alone often were not.3 Howard wondered how 
managers provided “profit-based” incentives in sales 
departments that were losing money.
All of the sales managers’ bonus plan contracts also 
included the following wording:
Adjustments. “Any cancelled sales or subsequent 
changes to the account as a result of a returned 
product will be calculated into the commissionable 
gross profit and will be used to calculate your com-
missions earned for each month. Adjustments may 
also be made to correct errors, or for rewrites to 
the deal; unwinds, null and voided deals; customer 
receivables not collected (including, but not limited 
to down payments, drive-off fees, insurance 
coverage, or penalties on trade-in), or policy 
adjustments.”
Other Factors. “Other factors such as the Customer 
Satisfaction Index (CSI)4 and Employee Satisfac-
tion Index (ESI)5 score may be taken into account in 
determining bonuses.”
How these nonfinancial performance indices were 
taken into account for bonus determination was left 
vague. They could be used in a positive sense, to pro-
vide “discretionary” bonus awards, or they could be 
used to limit the formula bonuses. However, no one at 
PHT could remember any situations where they had 
made a substantive difference in the bonuses awarded, 
perhaps because at PHT, the indices had never fallen 
below acceptable levels.
For comparison purposes, Appendix B provides 
3	 The consulting report showed that about one in three new vehicle 
sales departments incurred a loss (see note (2) in Appendix A).
4	 CSI was explained earlier in the case. The sales customer survey 
form is shown in Exhibit 1.
5	 ESI was calculated from the results of a survey designed by a 
consulting firm given annually to all PHT employees. Each employee 
was asked to indicate the level of agreement, on a scale from 1 
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree), with 26 statements, such 
as “I feel my work is valued by the dealership” and “Overall the 
managers are honest and fair in their treatment of employees.”

Puente Hills Toyota
61
excerpts from a consulting report showing vehicle 
dealership department manager compensation data. In 
this appendix, Schedule 1 shows data about the amounts 
and forms of monetary compensation given to depart-
ment managers. Schedule 2 shows the measures used in 
allocating formula bonuses. Schedule 3 shows the inci-
dence and size of discretionary (nonformula) bonuses.
B. Incentives in the service department
The service technicians were paid from $10 to $23 per 
“flag hour” of work completed. The actual hourly rate 
depended on each individual’s technical specialty and 
their certifications (e.g. master technician). Flag hours 
were standards set by the manufacturer for the 
accomplishment of specific tasks. The standards were 
set so that an average qualified technician could 
achieve them. However, it took technicians at PHT, 
who were generally very experienced, about 45 min-
utes on average to do one flag hour of work. For some 
technicians the disparity between flag and actual 
hours was much higher. Jesus Barragan, PHT’s service 
manager, said “Our top guy, who is a ‘natural,’ beats 
the flag time by 600%.” The disparity also varied by 
area.
The service advisors earned a base salary of approxi-
mately $2,000 per month. They also earned bonuses as 
follows:
	
8% commission on customer-paid labor and parts;
	
6% commission on manufacturer-paid labor under 
warranty;
	
6% commission on labor and parts paid for internally 
at PHT.
The PHT service manager was paid a base salary of 
$3,000 per month plus a bonus based on a percentage 
of the service department gross profit (before overhead 
expenses). The percentage was 3.75% if the gross profit 
figure was $195,000 or less in any given month; the 
percentage rose to 4% if gross profit exceeded 
$195,000. The $195,000 was the total annual budgeted 
amount divided by 12.
C. Gameplaying temptations in the service 
area
Because they were paid by the job, service technicians 
had temptations to cut corners. For instance, for a 
typical Electronic Engine Control (EEC) repair, the 
technician might be required to diagnose the problem, 
replace the defective electronic module, hook up a test 
recorder, and test-drive the vehicle. The flag rate for 
this job might be 48 minutes. A technician who wanted 
to cut corners might skip the test drive. Knowing that a 
supervisor would check the vehicle’s mileage-in and 
mileage-out, he would have to put the vehicle up on a 
hoist and run it for, perhaps, three minutes to increase 
the odometer mileage. But by cutting corners, he might 
be able to complete the entire job in less than 
15 minutes.
PHT managers had two types of controls over these 
gaming behaviors. First, if the time spent on a job was 
very low, service managers asked the technician for an 
explanation of the anomaly. Second, management mon-
itored the number of “re-checks,” instances where the 
problem was “not fixed right the first time.” In the indus-
try, a 1% re-check rate was considered good. The re-
check rate usually could not go to zero because some of 
the re-checks were not the technician’s fault. The cause 
might be simply that a needed part was unavailable.
Technicians who cut corners were “written up,” that 
is, given notice, and their ticket was deducted. “Bad 
habits can be corrected; bad mechanics can’t,” Jesus 
Barragan observed.
Howard Hakes had some confidence that this gam-
ing problem was under control because the service area 
at PHT was averaging only about four re-checks per 
month for approximately 700 completed service jobs. If 
service technicians were cutting corners in a signifi-
cant way, he estimated that the re-check rate would be 
significantly higher.
The service technicians at PHT were very loyal to 
the company, because “we treat them as people, not 
mechanics,” Jesus said. “We also train and pay them 
well.” Turnover was virtually zero.6 But the mechanics 
had to buy their own tools. Jesus Barragan noted that 
“one of our guys has bought well over $535,000 worth 
of tools during his 36-year career with us, but then, he 
makes $130,000 per year too.”
Management Issues
Howard Hakes knew that his PHT management team 
had not solved all their problems. He lamented about the 
fact that, in general, sales personnel were not effective 
at following up with customers. Follow-up means that 
6	 This is in stark contrast with turnover in the sales department, which 
Howard described as “horrid” (about 60% per year, as opposed to 
only about 5% in service).

62
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
the sales staff keeps in touch with potential customers 
with whom there has been an initial contact. Follow-up 
includes outreaches (e.g. phone calls, thank you cards) 
to customers who visited the sales department but have 
not yet decided to purchase a vehicle, as well as sales 
approaches to customers who are driving an older vehi-
cle that has recently been serviced at PHT. PHT had 
established regular processes for both types of follow-
up. For example, service advisors were encouraged to 
explain to customers which service costs were likely to 
occur on their older vehicle in the coming years and to 
invite the client to visit the sales department. However, 
these activities consumed time, and the service advisors 
regularly ignored them. Could incentives be provided to 
encourage follow-up and referral behaviors?
Howard also worried that the CSI measure, which 
could provide useful information, sometimes had ques-
tionable validity. Howard had heard that some dealer-
ships regularly “gamed” the measures because they had 
become so important. The CSI ratings were important 
inputs for the influential ratings of automobile reliabil-
ity published by the firm J.D. Power & Associates and, as 
mentioned above, the manufacturers used those ratings 
to allocate their vehicles. As a consequence, in the quest 
for “perfect” ratings, customers were regularly 
“coached” on how to complete the questionnaire at the 
time they purchased a new vehicle. And, sometimes, 
dealerships asked customers to drive to the dealership 
when they received the questionnaire from the manu-
facturer. When they arrived, the customer would give 
the questionnaire to a dealership employee and receive 
a present, such as a full tank of gas. The employee would 
complete the questionnaire and send it to the manufac-
turer. Howard was not sure whether some of his “shark” 
salesmen also engaged in such practices, and if they did, 
what he should do about it.
Despite these issues, Howard was confident that 
PHT was one of the best-managed dealerships in the 
country.

Puente Hills Toyota
63
Exhibit 1  Puente Hills Toyota: Customer satisfaction survey
(Continued)

64
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
Exhibit 1  Continued

Puente Hills Toyota
65
Exhibit 2  Puente Hills Toyota: Organization structure

66
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
Exhibit 3  Puente Hills Toyota: Sample page of financial reporting package

Puente Hills Toyota
67
Exhibit 3  Continued

68
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
Appendix A Puente Hills Toyota: Excerpts from Consulting Report showing automobile dealership and 
department data (FY 2002)1
1st Quartile
Median
3rd Quartile
Average
St. Dev.
1. NEW VEHICLE DEPARTMENT
Sales ($000)
17,217
27,134
42,470
36,479
34,585
Net profit ($000)2
−49.7
197.2
706.7
530.0
1,195.7
Return on sales
−0.002
0.008
0.021
0.009
0.020
2. USED VEHICLE DEPARTMENT
Sales ($000)
10,000
14,533
21,016
17,240
11,601
Net profit ($000)2
− 22.7
20.0
451.4
258.6
470.4
Return on sales
− 0.003
0.014
0.026
0.013
0.025
3. SERVICE DEPARTMENT
Sales ($000)
1,560
2,257
3,594
32,846
1,926
Net profit ($000)2
54.8
180.8
346.3
246.6
324.1
Return on sales
0.028
0.081
0.130
0.072
0.093
4. TOTAL DEALERSHIP
Sales ($000)
34,326
49,933
73,502
62,236
47,286
Net profit ($000)2
43.4
100.2
1772.0
1,443.9
1,742.8
Return on sales
0.015
0.020
0.022
0.031
0.015
1Data obtained from 256 dealerships. The sum of the sales and profits of the service and the new and used vehicle departments do not add up to 
the dealership totals because sales and profits associated with body and parts are not included.
2Note that 30.2% of the new vehicle departments, 27.8% of the used vehicle departments, 16.9% of the service departments, and 5.1% of the dealerships 
incurred a loss.

Puente Hills Toyota
69
Appendix B Puente Hills Toyota: Excerpts from Consulting Report showing department manager compensation 
data (FY 2002)
Schedule 1: Department Manager Compensation: Total and Breakdown into Components – Base Salary, Formula 
Bonuses, and Discretionary Bonuses (overall averages)
Base salary
Formula bonus
Discretionary bonus
NEW VEHICLE DEPARTMENT MANAGERS
(Average total compensation = $78,428)1
Average ($)
$31,901
$44,829
$5,104
Percent receiving
79.23%
64.48%
23.50%
Average % of total compensation
44.89%
36.77%
4.26%
USED VEHICLE DEPARTMENT MANAGERS
(Average total compensation = $72,195)1
Average ($)
$31,672
$40,376
$4,046
Percent receiving
85.04%
66.14%
27.56%
Average % of total compensation
47.12%
38.32%
5.03%
SERVICE DEPARTMENT MANAGERS
(Average total compensation = $61,422)1
Average ($)
$33,278
$30,575
$2,302
Percent receiving
90.00%
68.00%
20.00%
Average % of total compensation
56.00%
34.26%
3.53%
ALL DEPARTMENT MANAGERS COMBINED
(Average total compensation = $70,189)1
Average ($)
$32,379
$37,993
$3,739
Percent receiving
84.90%
66.27%
23.14%
Average % of total compensation
49.80%
36.17%
4.17%
1 Total Compensation consists of any or all of the following components: Base Salary, Formula Bonuses (maximum of three), Discretionary Bonus, and 
Spiffs.
Definitions:
*Formula Bonuses are based on quantitative performance measures (e.g. department profit). Some contracts have up to three formula bonuses, although 
the majority of the managers (60%) receive one formula bonus only. Across departments, the first formula bonus is on average 85% of the total formula 
bonus. Also, the first formula bonus is on average more than seven times larger than the second formula bonus.
*Discretionary Bonuses are based on the supervisor’s subjective judgments of the managers’ performances.
*Spiffs are miscellaneous rewards (not reported above), which are difficult to characterize in a standard way. Common examples are the use of 
promotional vehicles and certain incentives provided by the vehicle manufacturers (e.g. vacation trips). Although receipt of spiffs is common (about 63% 
of the managers receive them), their economic significance is relatively low (about $4,593 for those who receive spiffs, compared at $15,000 to $20,000 
for those who receive a discretionary bonus).
(Continued)

70
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
Schedule 3: Average Discretionary Bonus for Managers Who Receive a Discretionary Bonus (dollars and percentage 
of total compensation)
Average discretionary bonus
Pct. receiving
Dollars
% tot. comp.
New vehicle department managers
23.5%
$21,958
18.1%
Used vehicle department managers
27.6%
$15,719
18.3%
Service department managers
20.0%
$11,801
17.7%
All department managers
23.1%
$16,664
18.0%
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede of the University of Southern California 
and Pieter Jansen of the University of Groningen (the Netherlands).
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant, Wim A. Van der Stede, and Pieter Jansen.
Schedule 2: Dealership Performance Measure Used in Department Manager Formula Bonuses (as a percentage of all 
formula contracts)
Formula bonus
#1
#2
#3
Dealership
Gross profit
1.8
1.7
0.0
Net profit
27.0
10.9
20.0
Gross profit
6.4
6.9
0.0
New vehicle sales
Net profit
5.8
1.7
2.9
Inventory
0.0
1.1
0.0
Unit sales
0.0
6.3
2.9
Gross profit
5.9
4.6
14.3
Used vehicle sales
Net profit
2.2
5.2
8.6
Inventory
0.2
2.9
14.3
Unit sales
0.5
7.5
2.9
Gross profit
14.5
4.6
2.9
New = used
Net profit
8.6
6.9
11.4
Inventory
0.0
0.0
5.7
Unit sales
0.3
8.6
2.9
Gross profit
2.7
1.1
0.0
Parts
Net profit
1.9
2.3
0.0
Revenue
0.2
0.0
0.0
Gross profit
9.4
4.0
0.0
Service
Net profit
8.6
6.9
5.7
Revenue
0.8
0.0
0.0
Body, parts, & service
Gross profit
2.6
5.7
2.9
Net profit
0.6
10.9
2.9
% Gross profit
43.3
28.7
20.0
% Net profit
54.8
44.8
51.4
Appendix B  (Continued)

Kooistra Autogroep
71
 When he took over as CEO of the Kooistra Autogroep in 
2002, Tom Kooistra made signifi cant changes to his com-
pany’s management control system. Most signifi cantly, 
he decentralized decision-making authority, developed 
a performance reporting system that included both 
fi nancial and nonfi nancial information, and introduced 
a pay-for-performance system for the company’s dealer-
ship and department managers. Tom explained: 
 My father had been running this company like a 
family, but we’ve become too big to operate like 
this. Besides, we need to be more competitive to 
survive. That’s why I am so keen on implementing 
the new pay-for-performance plan. With decentrali-
zation comes accountability for performance. If our 
people are willing to accept that accountability, 
then I am quite willing to share with them a fair pro-
portion of the company’s success.  
 But while the company’s managers seemed to value 
the increased authority and performance-related infor-
mation, their feelings regarding the pay-for-perfor-
mance system were mixed. In 2007, Tom was considering 
whether he should try to reinforce the system by telling 
the managers that the system was here to stay and that 
they needed to learn how to make it work, or whether he 
should revise, or possibly even abandon, the system. 
 The company 
 Kooistra Autogroep was a family-owned automobile 
retailing company founded in 1953. Over the years, 
Kooistra grew from a small company that sold and ser-
viced cars of only one or two brands from a single location 
to a top-20 player in the Dutch car dealership market. 
In early 2007, it owned and operated 13 dealership loca-
tions selling 10 brands of automobiles and employed 
approximately 325 people. 
 The Kooistra dealerships were located in the city of 
Tilburg and in smaller surrounding towns in the 
southern part of the Netherlands. Kooistra owned fi ve 
Opel dealerships, three Toyota dealerships, one Citroën 
dealership, one Suzuki dealership, one Saab dealer-
ship, one Alfa Romeo dealership, and one combined 
Chevrolet, Cadillac, Corvette, and Hummer dealer-
ship. Opel (a brand of General Motors) had been the 
market leader in the Netherlands since the 1970s, 
with a market share of almost 10% in 2006. Toyota 
was the sixth-largest brand, with a 7% market share. 
Citroën had a market share of 4%, and Suzuki and 
Chevrolet had market shares of about 2–3%. The 
other brands sold by Kooistra – Saab, Alfa Romeo, 
Cadillac, Corvette, and Hummer – all had market 
shares of less than 1%. For these smaller brands, the 
nearest competing dealership was typically located 
far away. In addition to the car dealerships, the Koois-
tra Autogroep also owned a body repair shop and a car 
lease company. 
 In the context of Dutch automobile retailers, Koois-
tra was large. Even in 2007, the typical Dutch car deal-
ership sold and serviced cars of only one brand from a 
single location. Most dealerships were family-owned, 
with about 20 employees on average. 
 In the early 2000s, as a consequence of the weak 
economic conditions and increased competition, the 
fi nancial performance of most Dutch car dealers dete-
riorated. This performance deterioration gave rise to 
many changes in the industry. One important change 
was industry consolidation. Many larger car dealer-
ships expanded through acquiring several formerly 
family-owned dealerships. Kooistra Autogroep was 
among the fi rst to expand the number of brands sold, 
standardize operating procedures, and exploit econo-
mies of scale. 
 In 2002, Tom Kooistra’s father retired, and Tom 
took over as the company’s CEO. Tom chaired the 
company’s top-management team (see  Exhibit  1 ). 
Also on the top-management team were Anna Lub-
bers, CFO, and eight managers. Five of the managers 
were dealership managers, each responsible for sev-
eral dealership locations selling between one and 
five brands. Each dealership location employed a 
sales manager, a service manager, a workshop 
 CASE STUDY 
 Kooistra Autogroep 

72
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
manager,1 and a parts manager. The other three top-
level managers were responsible for the body repair 
shop,2 the car lease company, and the group’s central 
after-sales department.3 These managers supervised 
receptionists, salesmen, technicians, and ware-
housemen. Also in the company was a central corpo-
rate staff responsible for finance and accounting, 
marketing, quality management, personnel and 
organization, used car auctions,4 and fleet sales.5
Although some of its dealerships had been perform-
ing quite well, recent overall performance of the Koois-
tra Autogroep was subpar, but still in line with industry 
averages. To ensure adequate resources necessary for 
business continuity, a rule of thumb in the Dutch car 
dealership business was that the return on sales (net 
profit over sales) should be at least 2%. However, due 
primarily to generally poor economic conditions, the 
average returns of Dutch car dealerships had not been 
near this level since the late 1990s (see Table 1).
The new management control system
As Kooistra Autogroep became a larger and more com-
plex organization, Tom Kooistra concluded that the 
company’s management control system needed to 
change. Tom’s father used to make most of the significant 
decisions across all the company’s operations. Tom, 
however, believed that he needed to decentralize deci-
sion-making. Tom thought that the dealership managers 
should have substantial authority for the critical deci-
sions in their business, including the hiring, firing, and 
supervising of their dealership personnel; advertising 
investments; sales promotions in their local markets; 
and price reductions that might be needed to move 
excess inventory or to meet the competition.
But Tom also believed that with decentralization 
came results accountability. To make this accountabil-
ity possible, Tom implemented three new systems when 
he took over as the CEO in 2002: performance report-
ing, budgeting, and pay-for-performance. These new 
systems were to be implemented by fiscal year 2003.
1. Performance reporting
The new performance reporting system included both 
financial and nonfinancial information. It was used as 
an instrument to communicate the company’s most 
important objectives to the dealership and department 
managers; to provide these managers with the infor-
mation they needed to do their jobs; and to provide 
feedback to top management so that they could moni-
tor the lower-level managers’ performances. Tom 
explained:
My father needed to inform the dealership manag-
ers and the department managers only about the 
most important performance indicators because 
he made most of the operational decisions. I decen-
tralized an important part of his decision-making 
authority. But when I made the operating managers 
responsible for achieving the required perfor-
mance, I also had to communicate much more 
detailed performance information to them.
One type of performance report, which was referred to 
as the “Balanced Scorecard” within the Kooistra organ-
ization, was distributed to the managers on a weekly 
1	 Some of the dealerships were located in close proximity. For these 
dealerships, Kooistra Autogroep maintained one central work-
shop managed by the after-sales department (see Exhibit 1), which 
serviced several brands. The dealerships in the other locations had 
their own workshop. The workshops essentially serviced both the 
sales and service departments. For service jobs, customers went 
through the service department, which determined the work that 
needed done as well as the (estimated) cost and time for completion 
of the work. In addition, the workshop performed get-ready work for 
new cars sold by the sales department, installation of accessories 
on new cars, and service and reconditioning work on used cars for 
resale by the dealership.
2	 Like the service workshop, the body repair shop obtained busi-
ness internally through the service department and from used car 
sales for reconditioning body work. The body repair shop, however, 
also had its own reception for walk-in customers, as not all Dutch 
car dealerships provided car body repair work. Another significant 
source of business consisted of contracts with insurance companies 
for repairs related to car accidents.
3	 Because the centralized service workshop was quite large, the role of 
after-sales manager was created to oversee several workshop super-
visors who, in turn, supervised the mechanics (see Exhibit 1).
4	 Customers who bought a car often expected the dealership to 
purchase their old car. Like most dealerships, Kooistra Autogroep 
classified these used cars into two categories. Cars that were in good 
enough condition were offered for sale by the dealership to used car 
customers. Cars in poor condition, however, considering the reputa-
tion of the dealership, were auctioned off in batches by the auction 
sales department to other companies that specialized in selling these 
(cheaper) cars outside of a brand name dealership network.
5	 The fleet sales department was responsible for establishing and 
maintaining relationships with, and selling cars to, companies that 
bought cars in large numbers.
Table 1  Average return on sales in the Dutch car 
dealership sector (2001–2005)
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Average 
Netherlands
1.02%
1.35%
1.19%
1.05%
0.31%
Source: BOVAG Autodealers 2006. Reproduced with permission.

Kooistra Autogroep
73
basis. It reported year-to-date summary performance 
on key metrics for each individual manager’s opera-
tions (e.g. a dealership) with an indication of progress 
towards budget target accomplishment. Exhibit 2 
shows this so-called Balanced Scorecard for the Toyota 
dealership. In addition to the weekly balanced score-
cards, the managers also received far more detailed 
monthly reports, with sometimes up to hundreds of 
line items pertaining to their areas of operation.
The dealership and department managers apparently 
used the performance reports actively. Tom explained:
Every Thursday at 2 o’clock, the dealership and 
department managers receive their Balanced 
Scorecards by email. When I walk through the 
company on Thursday afternoon and the reports 
have not yet been emailed, department managers 
ask me what’s up. The department managers are 
interested in their performance and, particularly, in 
comparing their performance vis-à-vis target.
2. Budgeting
At the same time, Tom introduced a formal annual budg-
eting process. Although various types of financial and 
nonfinancial information were considered during the 
budgeting process, the main focus was on determining 
net profit targets for the forthcoming year.
Net profit was defined as revenues minus controlla-
ble expenses, which in practice meant that most 
corporate overhead allocations were “below the line” 
on which the operating managers focused. However, 
Tom felt that continued decentralization would eventu-
ally lead the company to improve its methods of allo-
cating shared service costs to obtain more inclusive net 
profit numbers and, thus, to allow even better account-
ability at lower organizational levels.
The budgeting process was intended to be bottom-
up. The responsible managers prepared their own 
budget proposals. The budget proposals were then 
reviewed by Tom and the CFO, Anna Lubbers, followed 
by what they both described as “rather tough, some-
times vociferous, discussions” with each manager. Tom 
and Anna decided the final budgets.
The budget discussions served several useful pur-
poses. Most managers were inexperienced with budg-
eting and only few of them had had any formal business 
education. Anna noted that,
For these and other reasons we can’t always trust 
the initial budget proposals, so we have to have a 
very hard look at them. In the end, however, I 
believe that we find the proverbial happy medium 
for targets that we feel the manager should be will-
ing to commit to.
But not only did the budgeting discussions serve a 
training role, they also were a valuable communication 
tool to focus discussions about the business, which 
allowed Tom and Anna to solicit information from 
those who were closest to the day-to-day operations 
from which they themselves had become farther 
removed.
Tom and Anna monitored performance through 
weekly reviews of the Balanced Scorecards. When they 
saw performance patterns that were of concern to them 
because they were not consistent with the budget tar-
gets and/or the performance of other company entities, 
they had conversations with the managers. The entire 
top-management team also held monthly meetings to 
review performance issues and discuss other company-
wide business matters.
The net profit budget targets were believed to be 
achievable with considerable effort. As Exhibit 2 shows, 
the Toyota dealership had almost achieved its 2006 net 
profit target even though there were still five weeks to 
go in the budget year. When asked, the Toyota dealer-
ship manager estimated that at the time his budget was 
approved, his likelihood of achieving the net profit tar-
get was around 90%. He also pointed out that “Although 
I’ve made my budget in each of the past three years, it 
was rather close. But not all of my department manag-
ers met their budget each year. My workshop depart-
ment had some cost control issues and did not always 
achieve its net profit targets.” The Toyota dealership 
was among the best-performing entities in the Kooistra 
Autogroep.
Some of the other dealership managers, however, 
complained that they had trouble meeting their budget 
targets due to factors outside of their control. For exam-
ple, the combined Chevrolet, Cadillac, Corvette, and 
Hummer dealership complained that recent hikes in fuel 
prices had negatively impacted car sales beyond what 
could have been foreseen at budget time. He wasn’t sure, 
however, that Tom would be sympathetic if he failed to 
meet his budget, which he likely would this year.
But Tom also could sometimes “help” the dealerships 
make their target. Kooistra Autogroep had a sizable con-
tract with a big rental car company that specified the 
number and type of cars (e.g. small cars, medium-sized 
family cars, vans), but not the brand, that the rental car 

74
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
company purchased. Thus, when the Opel dealership 
was close to making its target but needed “a little help,” 
Tom could offer the Opel Astra model to the rental car 
company. Alternatively, if the Toyota dealership needed 
some help, he could propose the Toyota Corolla instead. 
Tom noted that, because of this leverage, he faced con-
siderable lobbying from the dealership managers to go 
with their brand. He said, “I never hear any complaints 
when good fortune comes their way. It’s only when they 
miss their targets that I hear them grumbling.”
3. Pay-for-performance
A third major change was the expansion of a pay-for-
performance system for salespeople and the implemen-
tation of a pay-for-performance system for dealership 
and department managers. Some salespeople already 
received a bonus. But now Tom introduced a pay-for-
performance bonus plan for the managers.
Traditionally, compensation for nearly all personnel 
in the Netherlands was not performance-dependent. It 
was based on a job rating, an assessment of the training 
and experience needed for executing a job, rather than 
on the individual performance of the employee. The job 
ratings were linked to pre-established salary increases. 
Hence, the relationship between levels of compensation 
and actual employee performance was usually weak.
To bypass the limits of salary increases for a certain 
job grade, top-performing individuals often were 
promoted to jobs with a higher job rating when those 
positions became available. For example, sometimes, 
excellent car salespeople were promoted to sales man-
ager positions. These promotions sometimes happened 
even when the dealership would have benefited more 
from the individual’s continued selling efforts than it 
would from their management skills.
For years at Kooistra, salespeople had had monthly 
sales targets, defined in terms of the number of (new 
and used) cars sold. Some of the salespeople were eligi-
ble for bonus payouts. In 2007, these bonus-eligible 
salespeople earned €18.50 per car sold. In addition, 
when the salesperson met his or her monthly sales tar-
get, the bonus amount was doubled to €37.00 per car 
for the month. On average, bonus payments were about 
25% of salary for salespeople who met their targets.
However, not all salespeople were yet eligible for 
bonuses. Of the 45 salespeople at Kooistra Autogroep, 
only 25 were bonus-eligible because some of them had 
negotiated a compensation package without a bonus 
contingency when they were hired, sometimes at a 
dealership that had been acquired. These contracts 
could not easily be renegotiated. Considering these fac-
tors, Kooistra’s top managers admitted that the sales 
bonus plan was limited in scope. It also was still subject 
to change. Anna Lubbers, CFO, explained that manage-
ment was considering fine-tuning the sales bonus plan 
by incorporating other performance criteria – perhaps 
gross, or even net, profit per car.
Tom’s new pay-for-performance system for managers 
added a bonus element to the managers’ compensation 
package. The bonuses were added on top of the manag-
ers’ salaries. Target bonuses for dealership managers 
were set between 10% and 20% of annual salary. Target 
bonuses for department managers were set at 8% of 
annual salary. For dealership and department manag-
ers, the bonuses were based on the extent to which the 
managers met their annual net profit targets as set dur-
ing the budgeting process. Only managers who met their 
net profit target earned their target bonus. No bonuses 
were paid for below- or above-target performance.
Both Tom and Anna believed that the bonus plan 
specifically, and the idea of pay-for-performance more 
generally, was putting the company on the right track. 
Tom explained:
I introduced bonuses primarily to make managers 
conscious of the fact that something had changed 
[…] that department managers were not only given 
more decision-making authority but that their 
responsibilities to meet expected performance also 
had changed. I think the plan had that desired effect.
Management also had the authority to reduce any or 
all bonus awards. However, in the first three years since 
implementation of the system, such discretion had 
never been applied. Moreover, the criteria that might 
justify a bonus reduction were not yet clear, as Tom 
explained:
Theoretically we might reduce bonuses because, 
for example, administrative procedures were not 
followed or customer satisfaction ratings were too 
low. But a bonus reduction would be a very subjec-
tive decision. We need to articulate the criteria for 
such decisions more clearly. This is a priority for 
the coming year.
Issues
Pay-for-performance was a relatively unknown phe-
nomenon in Dutch companies. For example, one study 

Kooistra Autogroep
75
showed that in 2001, only 10% of the department man-
agers in Dutch car dealerships received a formula 
bonus, and only 7% received a “discretionary” (subjec-
tively assigned) bonus (see Exhibit 3). For sales manag-
ers, these percentages were somewhat higher: 20% and 
7%, respectively (not tabulated in Exhibit 3).
However, several studies had shown that Dutch 
companies (not just car dealerships) were increasingly 
relying on pay-for-performance practices, which was 
commonly attributed to increased international com-
petition. One study concluded that although only a 
minority of Dutch companies applied some form of pay-
for-performance, the trend towards doing so was 
upward, with 33%, 36%, and 40% of a sample of Dutch 
firms using some form of pay-for-performance in 1997, 
1999, and 2001, respectively.6
Because such systems were rare in Dutch dealer-
ships, perhaps not surprisingly, Kooistra Autogroep 
faced considerable skepticism from its employees 
when it first introduced its pay-for-performance sys-
tem. A survey conducted by a consultant showed that 
the vast majority of Kooistra employees preferred a 
salary raise over a bonus, even if the raise was signifi-
cantly lower than the expected bonus. To illustrate this 
point, Edwin Vliering, a dealership manager, 
recounted the following conversation he had had with 
one of his salesmen:
In terms of profit and sales volume, the last three–four 
years were generally bad years for Dutch car dealer-
ships. At the beginning of 2006, one of my top sales-
men asked for a salary raise. I offered her a bonus 
instead. In her situation the bonus would have resulted 
in more money than the raise she had asked for, even 
in the poor last couple of years. Nevertheless, she 
was unhappy. She clearly valued the security of a 
fixed income. I’d say that she is quite representative 
of the vast majority of employees around here.
Did the pay-for-performance system provide a sig-
nificant motivational boost? Edwin thought the answer 
to this question was no:
Due to the economic situation, the last couple of 
years were not good years. Consequently, my 
dealership and some of my department managers 
did not make their targets and did not receive their 
bonus. In my opinion, however, this has not affected 
the motivation of any of us. We are all still working 
hard. On the other hand, even in good years the 
level of the bonuses is, I think, too low to motivate, 
particularly for the department managers. In all 
truth, I wouldn’t mind if we abolished the bonuses 
for department managers.
On the other hand, Tom Kooistra and Anna Lubbers 
were convinced that the bonuses could, and did, affect 
motivation. Tom explained:
Our managers are certainly highly motivated. This 
was true in recent years even though, due to the 
poor economic situation, some of them were una-
ble to realize their performance targets. But I am 
convinced that they make considerable extra effort 
when they have a chance to meet their targets. For 
example, they organize extra sales activities when 
realization of the target is possible. I also know that 
they feel good when they achieve their targets. 
That is part of the motivation. But the money is 
obviously important as well.
Anna Lubbers agreed that the bonuses could provide 
strong motivational effects, although she believed that 
that depended strongly on the likelihood that the man-
agers can meet their targets:
It is important to set realistic targets. Only bonuses 
that are based on realistic targets have a motivat-
ing effect. Setting realistic targets is particularly 
important in years of an economic slump, like in 
recent years. When the target is a pie in the sky, the 
bonus will not work.
6	 For example, see S. Bekker, D. Fouarge, M. Kerkhofs, A. Román, M. 
de Voogd-Hamelink, T. Wilthagen, and C. de Wolff, Trend-rapport: 
Vraag naar Arbeid 2002 (Tilburg, August 2003, ISBN 906566 0623).

76
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
Exhibit 1  Kooistra Autogroep: Organization structure

Kooistra Autogroep
77
Exhibit 2  Kooistra Autogroep: Sample summary performance report for a dealership (2006)
Eindhoven Toyota
1 Jan–17 Nov 2006 (47 wks)
2006
Target
2006
Actual
2006
Percent
2005
Actual
47/52 wks = 90%
Sales Department
New car units
250
229
92
221
Used cars units
225
231
103
225
New car revenues
5,900,000
5,467,522
93
5,298,521
Used car revenues
3,100,000
2,978,644
96
2,906,335
Sales revenues
9,000,000
8,446,166
94
8,204,856
New car net
125,000
112,135
90
107,154
Used car net
5,000
3,504
70
982
Sales net [1]
130,000
115,639
89
106,172
Sales net margin
1.44%
1.37%
1.29%
New car net /unit
500
490
485
Used car net /unit
22
15
−4
Used car warranty expenses
84,275
82,364
98
90,264
Warranty expense/used car
375
357
401
Manufacturer incentives
150,000
122,687
82
165,922
Service Workshop
Service revenues
860,000
815,367
95
845,648
Service net [2]
215,000
191,819
89
201,087
Service net margin
25.00%
23.53%
23.78%
Number of orders
1,650
1,621
98
1,648
Number of cars handled
1,050
1,002
95
1,010
Capacity (number of hours)
a
8,800
8,745
99
8,800
Productive hours
b
8,350
8,328
100
8,319
Invoiced hours
c
7,400
7,149
97
7,380
Productivity
b/a
95%
95%
95%
Invoiced hours percentage
c/a
84%
82%
84%
Parts Department
Parts revenues
1,325,000
1,318,879
100
1,291,820
Parts net [3]
275,000
276,312
100
256,562
Parts net margin
20.75%
20.95%
19.86%
Parts rev./invoiced hrs workshop
179
184
175
Interest Expenses [4]
245,000
216,560
88
232,487
Total revenues
11,185,000
10,580,412
95
10,342,324
Total net [1] + [2] + [3] − [4]
375,000
367,210
98
331,334
Total net margin
3.35%
3.47%
3.20%
Inventory
New cars in stock
50
47
58
New cars average days in stock
45
40
51
New cars in stock >90 days
10
8
14
Number of backorders
50
62
49
Used cars in stock
60
55
60
Used cars average days in stock
50
45
60
New cars in stock >90 days
0
1
12
Used cars stock (euros)
475,000
424,954
287,469
Parts in stock (euros)
135,000
133,659
136,953
(Numbers are disguised.)

78
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
 In late 2000, M.S. Lee, president/CEO of Houston Fear-
less 76, Inc. (HF76), was considering making a major 
change in the company’s sales incentive system: 
 We need revenue growth and consistent profi tabil-
ity, and right now we don’t have them. I think our 
primary problem relates to sales, which have 
slowed. Some of this is due to market conditions, 
but I also think that our sales eff ort and sales sup-
port can be improved. I want to take care of our 
people and give them opportunities to be success-
ful, but I also want the company to get to the next 
level of performance. Are our structures set up to 
motivate them to do that? 
 I think we have a range of problems. We’re clearly 
not doing enough to develop new markets, to 
expand our existing markets, or to develop syner-
gies among our markets. We have an obvious mis-
match between our company objectives and our 
 Exhibit 3  United States vs. Netherlands comparison of compensation plans used in car dealerships 
 US sample (1998) 
 Netherlands sample (2001) 
 Base 
salary 
 Formula 
bonus 
 Discretionary 
bonus 
 Spiff s 
 Base 
salary 
 Formula 
bonus 
 Discretionary 
bonus 
 Spiff s 
 General Managers 
 [N = 250] Avg. Tot. Comp. = $190,658 (n = 240) 
 [N = 61] Avg. Tot. Comp. = €58,303 (n = 61) 
 Comp. package breakdown 
 56.8% 
 36.5% 
 3.9% 
 2.9% 
 96.9% 
 2.6% 
 0.4% 
 0.1% 
 Number receiving 
 n = 238 
 n = 170 
 n = 49 
 n = 110 
 n = 61 
 n = 9 
 n = 3 
 n = 1 
 Percent receiving 
 95.2% 
 68.0% 
 19.6% 
 44.0% 
 100% 
 14.8% 
 4.9% 
 1.6% 
 Average amount 
 $82,262  $136,724 
 $36,449 
 $10,458  €56,029 
 €13,079 
 €6,000 
 €3,000 
 Avg. pct. of total comp. 
 58.2% 
 51.5% 
 18.9% 
 6.3% 
 96.9% 
 17.5% 
 8.1% 
 5.1% 
 Department Managers 
 [N = 526] Avg. Tot. Comp. = $72,390 (n = 510)  [N = 145] Avg. Tot. Comp. = €36,318 (n = 145) 
 Comp. package breakdown  49.8% 
 36.2% 
 4.2% 
 9.9% 
 98.7% 
 0.9% 
 0.2% 
 0.3% 
 Number receiving 
 n = 433 
 n = 338 
 n = 118 
 n = 323  n = 145 
 n = 15 
 n = 10 
 n = 30 
 Percent receiving 
 82.3% 
 64.3% 
 22.4% 
 61.4% 
 100% 
 10.3% 
 6.9% 
 20.7% 
 Average amount 
 $35,757  $53,751 
 $15,149 
 $4,585 
 €35,745 
 €3,992 
 €940 
 €457 
 Avg. pct. of total comp. 
 58.7% 
 54.6% 
 18.0% 
 15.6% 
 98.7% 
 8.6% 
 2.7% 
 1.2% 
 Capital “N” indicates the total number of managers in each sample; small “n” indicates those managers in each sample receiving the particular 
compensation element. Averages are computed for those that receive the respective compensation element (n), as opposed to being computed on the 
total sample (N).  ToTal CompensaTion is the sum of  Base salary, Formula Bonus, DisCreTionary Bonus , and  spiFFs .  spiFFs are miscellaneous rewards, such 
as the use of promotional vehicles and certain incentives provided by the car manufacturers (e.g. vacation trips). All numbers are annualized. 
  Source : Jansen, E. P., K. A. Merchant, and W. A. Van der Stede (2009), “National Diff erences in  Performance  Dependent Compensation Practices: The 
Diff ering Roles of Financial Performance Measurement in the United States and The Netherlands.” Accounting, Organizations and Society, 34(1): 58–84. 
 This case was prepared by Professors Pieter Jansen, Kenneth A. Merchant, and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
 Copyright © by Pieter Jansen, Kenneth A. Merchant, and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Houston Fearless 76, Inc. 

Houston Fearless 76, Inc.
79
sales force incentives because our commissions 
are based on sales, not product profitability. We use 
different compensation structures for different 
products, and I have heard some grumbling among 
the sales people about equality. And our sales fore-
casts are inconsistent. Forecast accountability is 
not strong since there is no downside for salesper-
sons for overstating forecasts. This sometimes 
causes production planning problems.
So we need to make some changes to improve 
performance. We need better systems now more 
than ever because we are entering some new mar-
kets that are more competitive than those to which 
we have been accustomed.
With these concerns in mind, Mr. Lee asked his son, 
James (who joined HF76 in 1998 and later became 
head of corporate development and operations, and 
who was attending the University of Southern Califor-
nia Executive MBA Program), to critically evaluate 
HF76’s sales function and to revamp the sales incentive 
plan. M.S. and James Lee planned to present a proposal 
for change at the annual sales meeting to be held in 
mid-December 2000.
Company history
Houston Fearless 76, Inc. was a privately held company 
headquartered in Compton, California. Annual company 
sales were approximately $15 million. The company had 
120 employees. HF76 was a worldwide leader in the 
design, manufacturing, marketing, and service of high-
quality micrographic products, photographic film and 
paper processors, photographic chemical handling 
equipment, and photographic quality control accessories.
HF76’s roots dated back to 1939 when H.W. Hou-
ston, one of Howard Hughes’s movie-making business 
partners, founded a company around the development 
of the first automatic roll film processor. Most of the 
H.W. Houston Co.’s early customers were closely con-
nected to the motion-picture industry. Later in the 
1940s, the company went public and expanded into a 
manufacturing company that produced a wide range of 
products, including film processors, hair-clips, turbine 
blades, and radar. At one time it was one of the largest 
manufacturing companies in the Los Angeles area. In 
1950, the company merged with Fearless Camera Cor-
poration of Culver City and became known as the 
Houston Fearless Corporation. Later, however, the 
company faced many problems, and it was forced to file 
for bankruptcy and to liquidate its assets.
In 1976, M.S. Lee, a former Houston Fearless employee, 
and two partners bought the Houston Fearless Photo Divi-
sion. They named their company Houston Fearless 76, 
Inc., both to take advantage of the excellent reputation 
the company had developed, especially in film-processing 
circles, and to commemorate the year of their acquisition. 
Mr. Lee later acquired all of his partners’ shares.
HF76 prospered in the 1970s and 1980s. In the 1990s, 
however, film-based product markets experienced a dra-
matic decline. Many corporate customers, including 
those in the banking, healthcare, and movie industries, 
were moving toward digital production and record-
retention technologies. Facing the declining market 
demand, several of HF76’s competitors had exited the 
film-product market. Mr. Lee believed, however, that 
“the demise of film was greatly exaggerated.” He wanted 
the company to continue serving its traditional film-
based market, particularly in good niche markets, as it 
repositioned itself in faster-growing markets.
In the 1990s, Mr. Lee aggressively expanded in both the 
traditional film market and growing digital market 
through a series of acquisitions. In 1990, HF76 acquired 
Extek Microsystems, an innovator of film-duplicating tech-
nology that served a customer base similar to that of HF76’s 
in the micrographics marketplace. Extek’s operations were 
integrated into HF76’s Compton facility. In 1997, HF76 
acquired Houston International, Inc. which manufactured 
large-volume, specialized (e.g. long roll) film processors. 
This division was renamed HF International, but its opera-
tions were not moved from its Yuma, Arizona, location. In 
1999, HF76 acquired 80% of Mekel Engineering, located in 
Brea, California, which produced scanners that converted 
microfilm and microfiche to digital format, lightweight 
film and video cameras, heads-up display units for fighter 
aircraft, and traffic photo-citation analyzers.
For over 30 years, HF76 also had a government divi-
sion, called HF North, that supported the US Air Force 
through a variety of special projects that involved film 
processers, power distribution systems, mobile shelters, 
climate control units, and pollution control systems. 
This division was located at Beale Air Force Base, near 
Sacramento.
HF76 was also attempting to diversify its product line 
by capitalizing on potentially sizable commercial appli-
cations of the pollution control systems developed by HF 
North originally for the US Air Force. These innovative 
pollution control systems separated practically all 
kinds of water contaminants, from heavy metals to toxic 
biohazardous waste. A production facility for these sys-
tems had just been started in the Compton location.

80
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
The company in 2000
After the 1999 Mekel acquisition, HF76 was organized 
into four product divisions (see Exhibit 1). Each divi-
sion operated as a profit center. Corporate staff pro-
vided support and coordination of activities. The 
pollution control business was being developed at the 
corporate level under the purview of James Lee.
The HF76 culture was close-knit, family-like, and 
casual. M.S. Lee, the president/CEO, was a former local 
“entrepreneur of the year.” He was a strong central fig-
ure, but he was also perceived as being highly caring, 
honest, and nurturing. Staff were given recognition 
and periodic awards (e.g. parties, logo merchandise).
M.S. Lee described the company’s strategy as follows:
We now have products at different market stages. 
We have some emerging products, particularly pol-
lution control systems and traffic photo-citation 
analyzers. We have some potentially high growth 
markets for some of our scanner products. And we 
have a lot of mature products, such as our proces-
sors and duplicators.
Each market requires a different strategy. For 
example, for products in the emerging and growing 
markets, we need our sales force to identify new 
customers and new markets. For products in the 
mature markets, our sales force should capitalize 
on our brand name and maintain as much volume 
as possible in the niche market, probably through 
targeting local government and accounting firms 
and through special trade-in programs to stimulate 
the replacement of old machines.
The HF76 divisions each did their own manufactur-
ing. Most product lines had some standard products, 
or at least subassemblies. In these cases, HF76 would 
build to inventory, based on demand forecasts. In the 
microfilm and motion-picture film processing markets, 
customers typically waited about 30 days for delivery 
of machines that required some customization. Largely 
custom products were built after the order was booked, 
and the wait in such cases could be several months.
HF76 suffered from the sales/operations frictions 
common to many companies. Operation managers 
often complained that salespeople were not aware of 
the required lead times and that some of their rush 
orders imposed significant overtime labor costs. Sales, 
on the other hand, complained that they sometimes 
lost orders because their operations department could 
not meet the required delivery schedule.
HF76 product gross margins averaged approximately 
28%, but they varied significantly across product lines 
and models. Relatively low profit margins (10–15%) 
were earned on processors and pollution control systems. 
Duplicator sales were relatively profitable (30–35% mar-
gins). However, HF76’s managers were selling some spe-
cific models of their older product lines at minimal, or 
even negative, gross margins. They did so because they 
wanted to retain their customer base in order to earn 
profits on forthcoming replacement part sales, the mar-
gins on which were usually in excess of 40%.
Industry performance benchmarks were difficult to 
establish accurately because HF76’s smaller competi-
tors were all privately held and their larger competitors 
(e.g. Eastman Kodak, Bell & Howell) were so large that 
they could bury their HF76-relevant financial results in 
aggregated financial statements. However, HF76’s 
managers believed that their company’s performance 
was lagging behind that of its major competitors on all 
dimensions. For example, in 1999, HF76’s profit margin 
(as a percentage of sales) was only 0.04%, while the 
industry benchmark, as given to HF76 management by 
a management consulting firm, was 5.7%. HF76’s 
inventory turnover was 2.6 compared to the industry 
benchmark of 4.9. The HF International division, which 
was operating at a loss, was creating concern.
Marketing and sales efforts
All of the HF76 products, with the exception of replace-
ment parts, sold for significant prices, so they were 
capital equipment for the buyers. For example, a typical 
new photo processing machine, one of HF76’s low-end 
products, sold for approximately $60,000, and some of 
the high-end products sold for several hundred thou-
sand dollars. Thus, the sales process usually involved 
more than just taking an order. For many of the prod-
ucts, the sales cycle was lengthy, a year or more. In 
many cases, particularly for the more advanced prod-
ucts, the salespeople had to serve as consultants, help-
ing their customers to solve problems.
Until the last few years, most of HF76’s sales were 
made through a network of dealers (sometimes referred 
to as “strategic partners”) and independent sales repre-
sentatives. The dealers and reps provided HF76 with a 
professional sales effort, local customer knowledge, 
and, in the case of the dealers, sales of complementary 
products and a service capability, with little or no fixed 
costs. However, most of the dealers and reps did no pro-
active marketing; they merely responded to inquiries. 

Houston Fearless 76, Inc.
81
Further, having the dealers and reps do the selling was 
expensive because HF76 had to offer them significant 
price concessions (typically 40% off list price) or high 
commission rates (typically 7–10%). One active inde-
pendent rep was also paid a fixed retainer fee. She was 
somewhat like an employee, but with a lower salary 
and no benefits, and a higher commission rate. She also 
had no obligation to serve HF76’s interests (e.g. market 
development) if she did not believe that those efforts 
would lead to her own commissions.
To provide a more effective and more company-
focused selling effort and, secondarily, to cut costs, 
HF76 managers were trying to build up the company’s 
own internal sales force. All of HF76’s competitors sold 
all their products direct to customers. For internal 
sales, HF76’s goal was to keep the sales costs (compen-
sation and expenses) to less than 10% of total sales, but 
they did not always achieve that goal.
The tasks required to sell the various HF76 products 
varied significantly depending on a number of factors, 
including the product characteristics, the market 
conditions, and the company’s customer relationships. 
Despite some redundancy (e.g. some of HF76’s sales-
people for different equipment lines called on the same 
customers), HF76 managers did not think that they 
could organize the company’s sales effort entirely geo-
graphically. Selling the HF76 products required consid-
erable technical knowledge, for example, about optics, 
micrographics, and software. Little of that knowledge 
was consistent across product lines.
The photo processing business (HF International) 
was mature. Most sales in this market involved replace-
ment of existing equipment and replacement parts, so 
the potential customer base was quite well known. The 
US photo processing market had 1,000–1,500 potential 
customers, mostly those who did wholesale photo fin-
ishing (e.g. school portraits, weddings). One HF76 
salesperson, Brett Hutchins, covered the eastern half of 
the country. Sales in the western half were made 
through independent sales reps.
The micrographics and motion-picture processing 
markets (Extek) were also mature. Most of the microfilm 
customers were local government entities. (Most corpo-
rations had moved to digital storage of documents.) The 
vast majority of sales in this market were made through 
a network of approximately 125 dealers, only some of 
which were active. HF76 had one salesman, Matt Petilla, 
working in the micrographics and motion-picture mar-
kets. Matt was also given the task of culling the dealer 
list to a smaller number. HF76 managers wanted their 
dealers to be more aggressive. They were planning to 
require the dealers to do some significant selling in order 
to remain on the dealer list. In return, they were going to 
promise some exclusive territory protection.
The scanner business (Mekel), which had more high-
tech products with higher growth potential, used all the 
sales channels. The company had two in-house salespeo-
ple. Jim Mancini sold throughout the United States. Ryan 
Chase was responsible for Asia and Latin America. And 
some sales were made through dealers and independent 
reps. One rep, Stephanie Eller, described earlier as being 
on retainer, generated almost one-sixth of Mekel’s total 
scanner sales in 2000. HF76 managers estimated that its 
customer base for scanner products numbered about 
300–400, but it did not know the names of all its custom-
ers because some distributors did not share their lists.
One HF76 salesman, Mark Fogarty, was responsible 
for selling pollution control systems. Mark was a 
technical person with little sales experience. By late 
2000, HF76 had just gotten to the point that it could 
build the pollution control systems in any volume, and 
only one system had been sold.
One constant across all the divisions was that the 
salespeople were not, by themselves, actively develop-
ing new customers. They generally relied on a list of 
regular customers to contact and on company advertis-
ing to interest customers. They then responded to tele-
phone and email inquiries.
The in-house salespeople reported to Bob Smith (VP 
Marketing), although in reality they worked relatively 
independently. The salespeople were geographically 
spread across the country. For example, Brett Hutchins 
(Houston International) lived in Maryland; Matt Petilla 
(micrographics) lived in St. Louis; Bob Smith lived in 
Atlanta. All of the salespeople traveled extensively to 
meet with their customers. The salespeople had the 
authority to discount up to 5% off list price. Larger dis-
counts had to be proposed to and approved by Mr. Lee.
Assistants at both corporate and division levels pro-
vided support to the sales force. Among other things, 
they made some follow-up telephone calls to customers, 
maintained the databases, delivered the sales contracts 
to production, designed the company’s advertisements, 
and set up the marketing shows. They also helped allevi-
ate some of the salespeople’s weaknesses. For example, 
one salesperson had no typing or computer skills. Thus, 
he needed more support in preparing sales contracts.
Bob Smith managed the sales function primarily by 
monitoring the weekly sales reports. He also periodi-
cally observed salespersons’ behaviors on sales trips 

82
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
and trade shows. About the evaluation process, Bob 
noted: “I can distinguish good performers from poor 
ones through the ways they deal with clients. But 
more directly, their performances are reflected auto-
matically in the reports of items shipped to their terri-
tory.” Bob also noted that HF76 had not had formal 
performance evaluations in two years. He said, “We 
can’t afford raises, so why bother evaluating people?”
HF76 had gradually been computerizing its sales track-
ing systems. Previously, all tracking had been manual.
Sales forecasts
The sales personnel were asked to provide an annual 
sales forecast at the beginning of each year. Then they 
were asked to update their forecasts on 30-, 60-, and 
90-day rolling bases. The forecasts were important for 
production planning purposes; for example, for deci-
sions about which parts to buy and what subassemblies 
to produce to inventory.
However, according to Mr. Lee, the sales forecasts 
were inconsistent:
Forecast accountability does not really exist in our 
current compensation structure. There is no mech-
anism to prevent salespersons from overstating 
forecasts or sandbagging. Thus, the salespeople 
tend to be optimistic, and efficient production plan-
ning sometimes becomes very difficult.
Bob Smith, on the other hand, thought that the sales 
forecasts were reasonably accurate. He noted:
Last year our sales goals were too tough. We worked 
hard, but the market was soft. This year’s targets are 
more realistic, so I think we’ll do better. But we can’t 
control all of the results. Things happen. For exam-
ple, some sales get held up past the period end. This 
year one of our big customers, Olin Mills, cut their 
budget at the last minute, and we did not get a large 
order that we expected. On the other hand, we 
sometimes get a “bluebird” [a large order that was 
not forecast]. We surely have to be out there working 
with our customers to know what is going to hap-
pen, but even so we can’t control everything.
Ryan Chase (Scanner Product Sales – Pacific Rim) 
explained the forecasts from his perspective:
I don’t have an annual forecast because I’m rela-
tively new on the job. I have no basis for a forecast. 
I guess if they forced me, I would forecast 10 scan-
ners per year. I got lucky last year with sales of 14, 
but my big sale took me two years of effort. The 
year before last I sold only two scanners . . . In my 
forecasts, I wouldn’t mention the name of a com-
pany if the probability of the sale is less than 80% 
or 90%. You often don’t get a solid answer from 
international customers until the last minute.
The old sales incentive plan
Up through 2000, all of the salespeople, except Mark 
Fogarty,1 were paid a base salary plus commission. 
The salespersons’ base salaries looked relatively low, 
typically $40,000–$60,000, but the total compensa-
tion packages and their structure were industry com-
petitive. Commissions were set at a defined percentage 
of sales, measured as revenue from items shipped 
within the salesperson’s assigned territory. The com-
mission rate differed across salespeople on a negoti-
ated basis with specific attention paid to product 
characteristics and market situation. Two salesmen, 
Brett Hutchins and Matt Petilla, earned a 4% commis-
sion. Ryan Chase earned a 2% commission because he 
was relatively new in his job. Bob Smith earned 1% on 
all company sales within the United States, Canada, 
and Mexico. The actual commissions the salespeople 
earned were typically in the range of 50% of base sal-
ary, but they could be substantially more.
The sales assistants shared a small bonus pool if 
HF76 met its overall sales goals. In 1999, each assistant 
was given approximately $1,000. One assistant, Eva 
Colton (Mekel), described her reaction to the bonus.
I had forgotten about the bonus. The $1,000 came 
as a total shock . . . If we make this year’s goal, and 
right now we’re behind, it’ll be great. But there is 
not much I can do to help us get there.
A new incentive plan being 
contemplated
M.S. Lee wondered what could be done to improve the 
company’s marketing and sales efforts. He explained:
Some causes of our low profits and cash flows are 
obvious, such as a declining film-based product 
market and our decision to invest strategically for 
1	 Mark Fogarty had been assigned to the job of marketing and sales 
of pollution control systems only recently, and he had not yet been 
included in the current incentive plan. However, he was lobbying for 
inclusion, and a decision on that had to be made soon.

Houston Fearless 76, Inc.
83
future gains. However, I believe that we are not fully 
exploiting market and profit opportunities for either 
our traditional products or our new products. In 
particular, our sales force has not done what I want 
them to do. I want them to open new markets, to 
sell in more profitable markets, and to give us more 
lead time for better operational planning.
After a series of discussions, M.S. and James Lee 
concluded that they needed to make a major change in 
the company’s sales incentive plan to attempt to alter 
behaviors in the desired ways. James observed:
It was pretty clear that the old incentive plan was 
not working. The commissions were exclusively 
based on sales volume. While we tried to tell the 
sales force which products were most profitable, 
they seemed to be willing to push sales at any cost 
or price. They also were paying little attention to 
other strategic goals, such as the opening of new 
markets or accounts or improving the accuracy of 
their forecasts. This is perhaps natural because 
they were not evaluated on those factors. In addi-
tion, the linkage between efforts and rewards was 
unclear. Sales people received compensation for 
items shipped within their territory regardless of 
whether they were instrumental in making the sales 
or not. So, overall, the old incentive plan created 
distorted incentives.
To overcome the problems in the old system, M.S. 
and James were considering a quite different incentive 
plan that they thought would translate HF76 missions 
and strategies into sales actions. They planned to leave 
base salaries at current levels but were planning to 
implement a new incentive plan consisting of three ele-
ments: (1) a commission based on product gross mar-
gins, but with no commissions paid until gross margins 
exceeded 70% of forecast; (2) a bonus based on fore-
cast accuracy; and (3) a bonus based on achievement of 
individual management-by-objectives targets.
The objective of basing commissions on product 
gross margins was to encourage salespeople to focus 
their effort where company profit potentials were 
greatest. M.S. and James hoped that the salespeople’s 
knowledge of product gross margins, combined with 
the incentive reinforcements, would affect their sales 
behaviors beneficially.
One unsolved issue: M.S. and James had not yet 
decided what commissions they should pay on negative 
and low-gross-margin products. They thought that it 
was sometimes in the company’s strategic interest to 
make some of these sales. Should they report “phony” 
gross margins to the salespeople to motivate them to 
sell these low margin products? Or should they weight 
the commission payouts according to the “strategic 
importance” of the sale? If the latter, how should strate-
gic importance be defined, and how should it be 
explained to the salespeople?
The actual commission slopes would be set for each 
individual so that at 100% of plan, each salesperson 
could expect to earn in commission slightly more under 
the new plan than they would have earned under the 
old plan. This feature was considered essential for 
securing the salespersons’ easy acceptance of the 
change. However, the commission structure (see 
Exhibit 2) would be quite different. No commissions 
would be paid for sales up to a minimum performance 
standard, defined as 70% of the annual gross margin 
forecast. This feature was intended to allow for greater 
payout leverage at high performance levels. Between 
70% and 100% of the planned annual gross margin, 
commissions would be paid at rates that were much 
higher than would be the case if commissions were 
paid on all sales. That is, if commissions were paid on 
all sales, the commission rate (as a percentage of gross 
margin) would be in the range of 10 –12% on high mar-
gin sales and 30–35% on low margin sales. Because of 
the leverage provided by the minimum performance 
standard, the actual commission rate paid on gross 
margins earned above the 70% threshold could be 
raised to 30–100%. For sales above 100% of the annual 
gross margin plan, the slope on the commission curve 
would be 25% higher than in the 70 –100% range, to 
encourage the higher performers to develop new mar-
kets and customers effectively. No cap was placed on 
the maximum commissions that could be earned. 
Salespeople were to be paid commissions on an annual 
basis, but monthly cash advances would be paid at a 
rate of 80% of annual plan to allow the salespeople to 
smooth out their cash flow.
To encourage the salespeople to take their sales fore-
casts seriously, a second element of the plan promised 
an extra bonus based on the accuracy of the sales fore-
casts. The salespeople would earn an extra 5% of base 
salary if their total gross margins were within 10% 
(plus or minus) of the annual gross margin forecasts. 
M.S. and James Lee hoped that this “truth-inducing” 
feature of the plan would motivate the salespeople to 
reveal their best estimates of their market prospects 
rather than be optimistic, as had been typical in the 

84
Chapter 2 • Results Controls
past, or conservative, as might be expected with the 
new 70%-of-forecast minimum performance standard.
The third element of the contemplated new plan, the 
MBO targets, was designed to facilitate communica-
tion and reinforcement of management desires and 
expectations in any of a variety of areas. The target 
areas and specific targets would be negotiated between 
each individual and management. Typical MBO targets 
might include items such as the following:
● adding a significant number of new customers;
● coordinating well with production;
● keeping annual travel expenses below travel 
expense forecasts;
● strengthening ties with professional associations;
● improving communications through effective use of 
email;
● learning and utilizing Microsoft Office and other 
software.
Assessment was subjective and intended to lean in 
favor of the employee. If top management deemed the 
salesperson’s performance in all of the defined areas as 
satisfactory, the salesperson would be given an extra 
5% of base salary.
No changes were planned to the bonus system for 
the sales assistants.
Concerns
M.S. and James were preparing to present their pro-
posal for the new sales incentive plan at the company’s 
annual sales meeting, to be held on December 13, 
2000. However, both of them were concerned. They 
knew that changes of this magnitude could be made 
only rarely, so it was important that this change be 
made correctly. They were offering to pay their sales-
men significantly more money. Would they be getting 
at least equivalent value in return? And even more 
importantly, was this plan what the company needed to 
push itself to a higher level of performance?
Exhibit 1  Houston Fearless 76, Inc., corporate organization chart, 2000

Houston Fearless 76, Inc.
85
Exhibit 2  Comparison of old and new commission structure
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede and Research Assistant Liu Zheng.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.

86
 Results controls are not the only form of control. Organizations can supplement or replace 
results controls with other forms of control that aim to make it more likely that employees will 
act in the organization’s best interest. 1 One such type of control,  action controls , involves ensur-
ing that employees perform (do not perform) certain actions known to be benefi cial (harmful) 
to the organization. Although action controls are commonly used in organizations, they are not 
eff ective in every situation. They are feasible only when managers know what actions are 
(un)desirable and have the ability to ensure that the (un)desirable actions (do not) occur. Other 
forms of control,  personnel controls , are designed to make it more likely that employees will 
perform the desired tasks satisfactorily  on their own because the employees are experienced, 
honest, and hard-working and derive a sense of self-realization and satisfaction from perform-
ing tasks well. Related,  cultural controls  exist to shape organizational behavioral norms and to 
encourage employees to monitor and infl uence  each other ’s behaviors. Action, personnel, and 
cultural controls are part of virtually every management control system (MCS). In some organ-
izations, they are so important they can be said to be the dominant form of control. 
 Action controls 
 Action controls are the most direct form of management control because they involve taking 
steps to ensure that employees act in the organization’s best interest by making their actions 
themselves the focus of control. Action controls take any of four basic forms: behavioral con-
straints, preaction reviews, action accountability, and redundancy. 
 Behavioral constraints 
 Behavioral constraints are a “negative” or, as the word suggests, a “constraining” form of action 
control. They make it impossible, or at least more diffi  cult, for employees to do things that they 
should not do. The constraints can be applied physically or administratively. 
 Most companies use multiple forms of  physical constraints , including locks on desks, com-
puter passwords, and limits on access to areas where valuable inventories and sensitive infor-
mation are kept. Some behavioral constraint devices are technically sophisticated and often 
expensive, such as magnetic identifi cation card readers and fi ngerprint or retina readers. In 
situations where a high degree of control is desired, such as in facilities where radioactive mate-
rials are processed, secret service agencies where classifi ed information is gathered, or casino 
count rooms where cash is handled, the benefi ts of such sophisticated controls outweigh their 
 CHAPTER 3 
 Action, Personnel, and Cultural 
Controls 

Action controls
87
costs. But physical constraints are important in more everyday settings, too, such as retailing. 
For example, a study by the Center for Retail Research indicated that theft by employees is the 
second-largest source of “inventory shrinkage” – that is, losses stemming from shoplifting, theft 
by employees, supplier/vendor fraud, or accounting errors. According to this study, in the year 
to June 2010, retailers spent $26.8 billion (or 0.34% of sales) on preventing theft.2 Or, as 
another report suggested:
“To put retail shrinkage in perspective, total dollars lost to shrinkage is almost the same 
amount as the total investment made each year by the entire Canadian retail industry in 
their Information Technology (IT) departments and more than what retailers invested in 
their Finance departments. Unlike IT and Finance spending however, shrinkage provides 
no benefits to retailers and requires significant time and expense to identify, manage and 
prevent,” said Paul Beaumont, Director of PwC’s Canadian Retail Consulting Services 
practice.3
To control losses in both store and warehouse environments, retailers use closed circuit TV/
DVR recording systems, observation mirrors, and “tip lines” to report incidents.
Effective physical constraints are also increasingly crucial in the context of data protection 
and privacy concerns faced by virtually all organizations, both private and public, that elec-
tronically store information about their clients, customers, patients, or citizens. In a survey 
focused on the issue of data theft, the vast majority of respondents (84%) perceived data theft 
as a significant risk to their business, while more than half of the respondents (52%) thought 
that the risk of data theft would only increase and become an even more serious threat. Further-
more, even though most data theft coverage focuses on the risks presented by external attack-
ers, nearly two-thirds of the respondents (64%) suggest that employees, who inevitably have 
access to company data in the normal course of business, are the most likely perpetrators of 
data theft.4
For example, venerable HSBC’s Swiss private bank arm had to apologize embarrassingly to 
its clients, whose data were stolen by a former employee who should not have had, but did 
retain, access to client information.5 Similarly, a US Internal Revenue Service (IRS) employee 
took home a computer thumb drive containing unencrypted data on 20,000 fellow workers, 
where “the Social Security numbers, names and addresses of employees and contract workers 
were potentially accessible online because the thumb drive was plugged into the employee’s 
unsecure home network,” IRS commissioner John Koskinen said, adding that, “this incident is a 
powerful reminder to all of us that we must do everything we can to protect sensitive data – 
whether it involves our fellow employees or taxpayers.” This IRS breach, significant as it was in 
terms of poor controls, nonetheless was much narrower in scope than the security incident at 
Target, the US retailer, where hackers stole credit-card information used by millions of shop-
pers; or at Barclays, the large UK bank, where confidential data of 27,000 of its customers 
(including their earnings, savings, mortgages, health issues, insurance policies, passports, and 
national insurance numbers) were allegedly stolen and offered for sale by the hackers.6
The growing importance of such data systems risks cannot be overstated, as suggested by a 
correspondent at The Economist:
Until recently, for most businesses security was a question of buying decent locks, doors 
and windows, installing CCTV, making sure that reception staff sign visitors in and out, and 
trying not to leave confidential papers in the photocopier. But attacks on their computer 
systems, be they by business rivals, political activists, criminals or foreign governments, 
are much harder to defend against – and can have far worse consequences than a physical 
break-in. A company can suffer a devastating blow to its reputation, its intellectual prop-
erty, or its ability to serve customers – not to mention its bank balances. It may never learn 

Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
88
who has attacked it or why, or how much information has been taken; so it may never be 
sure if it has done enough to plug the leak.7
Of course, the controls evolve, too. For example, companies can hire penetration testers to check 
their data defenses. They also set traps, called honeypots, which are bogus but convincing com-
puters, networks, or files to lure hackers while revealing their presence and tactics. And organi-
zations keep sensitive information in separate chunks with no single person in possession of 
them all, which is a variation of the physical world’s segregation of information principle.
In addition to, or in lieu of, physical constraints, administrative constraints can be used to 
place limits on an employee’s ability to perform all or a portion of specific tasks or actions. One 
common form of administrative control involves the restriction of decision-making authority. 
Managers at a low organizational level may be allowed to approve expenditures of up to, say, 
$1,000 only, those at a higher level up to $5,000, and so on. Above those limits, the purchasing 
department is instructed not to place the order. The senior managers who restrict the decision-
making authority in this way are trying to minimize the risk that resources are being disbursed 
by employees without proper approvals. However, this process of supervisory checks critically 
assumes that managers higher in the hierarchy are doing their job of checking and approving 
well and/or can be trusted. Survey evidence suggests that this, perhaps, should not be taken for 
granted and, thus, that the checkers also require checking. This is in evidence from the penulti-
mate bullet point below taken from a recent occupational fraud survey:8
● Survey participants estimated that the typical organization loses 5% of revenues each year 
to fraud.
● Occupational frauds can be classified into three primary categories: asset misappropriations, 
corruption and financial statement fraud. Of these, asset misappropriations are the most 
common, occurring in 85% of the cases in our study, as well as the least costly, causing a 
median loss of $130,000. In contrast, only 9% of cases involved financial statement fraud, but 
those cases had the greatest financial impact, with a median loss of $1 million. Corruption 
schemes fell in the middle in terms of both frequency (37% of cases) and median loss 
($200,000).
● Tips are consistently and by far the most common detection method. Over 40% of all cases 
were detected by a tip—more than twice the rate of any other detection method. Employees 
accounted for nearly half of all tips that led to the discovery of fraud.
● Organizations with hotlines were much more likely to catch fraud by a tip, which our data 
shows is the most effective way to detect fraud. These organizations also experienced frauds 
that were 41% less costly, and they detected frauds 50% more quickly.
● The higher the perpetrator’s level of authority, the greater fraud losses tend to be. Owners/
executives only accounted for 19% of all cases, but they caused a median loss of $500,000. 
Employees, conversely, committed 42% of occupational frauds but only caused a median loss 
of $75,000. Managers ranked in the middle, committing 36% of frauds with a median loss of 
$130,000.
● Collusion helps employees evade independent checks and other anti-fraud controls, enabling 
them to steal larger amounts. The median loss in a fraud committed by a single person was 
$80,000, but as the number of perpetrators increased, losses rose dramatically. In cases with 
two perpetrators the median loss was $200,000, for three perpetrators it was $355,000 and 
when four or more perpetrators were involved the median loss exceeded $500,000.
Another common form of administrative control is generally referred to as separation of 
duties. This involves breaking up the tasks necessary to accomplish certain sensitive duties, 
thus making it impossible, or at least difficult, for one person to complete the entire task on their 

Action controls
89
own. There are many examples of separation of duties. One common example involves making 
sure that the employee who makes the payment entries in the accounts receivable ledger is not 
the employee who receives the checks. If an employee who is diverting company checks to a 
personal account has only the payment-entry duties – that is, opening the mail and listing, 
endorsing, and totaling incoming checks – customers will eventually complain about being 
dunned for amounts they had already paid. But a person with both check-receiving and 
payment-entry duties could divert the checks and cover the action by making fictitious entries 
of returns of goods or, perhaps, price adjustments.
Separation of duties is one of the basic requirements of what is known as internal control, 
which is the control-oriented term used by the auditing profession. The effectiveness of separa-
tion of duties is limited, however, as it cannot completely eradicate possible collusion, such as 
between those with the check-receiving and payment-entry duties. Although collusion requires 
employees with malign intent to reveal their intentions to other employees whom they seek to 
engage in the scheme as their accomplice, survey evidence (such as in the last bullet point of the 
list above) suggests that it does occur, and that it can pay off. Regardless, inadequate internal 
controls heighten the risks of fraud and misconduct. Two-thirds of executives surveyed by 
KPMG admitted that when fraud and misconduct go unchecked in their organizations, it is 
likely due to inadequate internal controls.9
Sometimes physical and administrative constraints can be combined into so-called poka-
yokes that are designed to make a process or system foolproof.10 A poka-yoke is a step built into 
a process to prevent deviation from the correct order of steps; that is, where a certain action 
must be completed before the next step can be performed. A simple mechanical poka-yoke 
example is the inclusion of a switch in the door of a microwave oven so that the oven cannot be 
operated with the door open. Similar mistake-preventing poka-yokes can also be built into 
some production and administrative processes. For example, airlines make their pilots use 
idiot-proof software on laptops or handheld devices in the cockpit instead of letting them make 
manual preflight calculations that are error-prone. The software does not slip up on the math 
and flashes a warning if an out-of-range number is entered, such as a 10-ton mistake in the 
weight of the plane or fuel load.11 In hospitals, greater use of computerized provider order entry 
can substantially reduce costly and potentially harmful drug errors; a study of the Institute for 
Healthcare Improvement in Cambridge, Massachusetts, found that processing a prescription 
drug order through a computerized system led to a 48% reduction in the likelihood of an error.12 
Similarly, signature-verifying software can be used to authorize cash disbursements. Only after 
all the required signatures have been recognized by the software will the order be released or 
the transaction be approved.
It is often difficult to make behavioral constraints foolproof, especially when the organiza-
tion is dealing with disloyal, deceitful employees. For example, despite reasonable safeguards, 
a former secretary at Bear Stearns, a now-defunct global investment firm, used disappearing 
ink to write checks that her boss requested. After the manager signed the checks, she would 
erase the name of the payee and rewrite the checks for cash. In her eight months with the firm, 
she made more than $800,000 vanish from her boss’s bank accounts.13 Or at Tiffany’s, the jew-
eler, a manager allegedly stole, very slowly and systematically it seems, $1.3 million worth of 
jewelry by checking out the jewelry for professional reasons – marketing purposes, showing 
potential buyers, and so on – and then not returning them, and by being careful to keep only 
items that were valued under $10,000 because Tiffany’s has a policy of investigating only miss-
ing inventory valued over $25,000.
Chris McGoey, a security advisor, believes that other employees at Tiffany’s may have had 
suspicions long before the investigation, but were afraid to speak up. “I guarantee you that a 
company like Tiffany’s has checks and balances,” he says. “But it didn’t apply to her. People 

Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
90
reported to her, and they had to relinquish their inventory to her, based on her say-so.” Even if 
they had concerns about why the jewelry she was checking out wasn’t being returned, they 
might’ve been reluctant to raise any red flags – “nobody wants to rat out their boss,” he said.14
Preaction reviews
Preaction reviews involve the scrutiny of action plans. Reviewers can approve or disapprove the 
proposed actions, request modifications, or ask for a more carefully considered plan before 
granting final approval. A common form of preaction review takes place during planning and 
budgeting processes, characterized by multiple levels of reviews of planned actions and budgets 
at consecutively higher organizational levels (see Chapter 8).
Action accountability
Action accountability involves holding employees accountable for the actions they take. The 
implementation of action accountability controls requires: (1) defining what actions are accept-
able or unacceptable, (2) communicating those defined actions to employees, (3) observing or 
otherwise tracking what happens, and (4) rewarding good actions or punishing actions that 
deviate from the acceptable.
The actions for which employees are to be held accountable once properly defined are typically 
communicated through work rules, policies and procedures, contract provisions, and/or company 
codes of conduct. It is common in fast-food franchises to prescribe and communicate through pro-
cedures and clarify and reinforce through training how virtually everything should be done, 
including how to handle cash, how to hire personnel, where to buy supplies, and what temperature 
to keep the oil to fry chips. At McDonald’s, for example, a memo from the vice chairman stated:
While we don’t want to limit your creativity, from an operations standpoint there are three 
must-dos:
1.	 Staff your fry station all day long.
2.	 Check times and temperatures three times a day.
3.	 Remember to salt your fries properly.15
Similarly, nurses use preoperative checklists to help ensure that they prepare patients thor-
oughly for surgery. These checklists remind them to check on the patient’s allergies, drug-tak-
ing history, and time of last meal. Train operators are provided with detailed sets of procedures 
communicated through safety rules and procedures handbooks that they must know and fol-
low. The importance of the procedures is reinforced through training and examinations.
Sometimes the actions desired cannot be communicated in detail. In many operational 
audits, post audits of capital investment decisions, and peer reviews of auditors, lawyers, doc-
tors, and managers, individuals are held accountable for their actions that involve professional 
judgment. The desirability of the actions of professionals generally cannot be clearly prescribed 
in advance. Nonetheless, these individuals are held accountable for their actions under the 
premise that they are expected to ‘act professionally.’
Although action accountability controls are most effective if the desired actions are well 
communicated, communication is not sufficient by itself to make these controls effective. The 
affected individuals must understand what is required and be confident that their actions will 
be noticed and rewarded or punished. Actions can be tracked in several ways. Employee actions 
can be observed directly and nearly continuously, as is done by direct supervisors on production 
lines. This is called direct supervision or monitoring. They can be tracked periodically, such as 
retail stores’ use of undercover mystery shoppers to evaluate the service provided by store clerks. 
They can also be tracked by examining evidence of actions taken, such as activity reports or 
expense documentation. Examining evidence about compliance with pre-established action 

Action controls and the control problems
91
standards is a key function of internal audit (which we discuss in more detail in Chapter 14). 
Technological advances have allowed greater monitoring in terms of both scope and frequency:
Technology allows time-and-motion studies to be carried to new levels. Several firms, 
including Workday and Salesforce, produce peer-review software that turns performance 
assessments from an annual ritual into a never-ending trial. Alex Pentland of MIT has 
invented a “sociometric” badge worn around the neck that measures such things as your 
tone of voice, gestures and propensity to talk or listen. Turner Construction is using drones 
to monitor progress on a sports stadium it is building in California. Motorola makes termi-
nals that strap to warehouse workers’ arms to help them do their jobs more efficiently—but 
also to keep tabs on them.16
Action accountability is usually implemented with negative reinforcements; that is, with 
punishments instead of with rewards. For example, employees late for their shift might lose a 
day’s bonus, and those who miss their shift may lose their bonus for the week. Truck drivers 
whose every move is tracked with a GPS device can be disciplined for driving unsafely or for 
taking extra time on their lunch breaks.17
Redundancy
Redundancy, which involves assigning more employees (or equipment) to a task than is strictly 
necessary, or at least having backup employees (or equipment) available, also can be considered 
an action control because it increases the probability that a task will be reliably completed. 
Redundancy is common in computer facilities, security functions, and other critical operations. 
However, it is rarely used in other areas because it is expensive. Further, assigning more than 
one employee to the same task usually results in conflict, frustration, and/or boredom.
Action controls and the control problems
Action controls work because, like the other types of controls, they address one or more of the 
three basic control problems. Table 3.1 shows the types of problems addressed by each of 
the action controls.
Behavioral constraints are primarily effective in eliminating motivational problems. Employ-
ees who might be tempted to engage in undesirable behaviors can be prevented from doing so. 
Preaction reviews can address all three of the control problems. Because they often involve com-
munications to the employees about what is desired, they can help alleviate a lack of direction. 
They can also provide motivation because the review of an employee’s actions usually prompts 
Table 3.1  Control problems addressed by each of the action control types
Type of action control
Control problem
Lack of direction
Motivational problems
Personal limitations
Behavioral constraints
x
Preaction reviews
x
x
x
Action accountability
x
x
x
Redundancy
x
x
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 30.

Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
92
extra care in the preparation of the expenditure proposal, budget, or action plan. Preaction 
reviews also mitigate the potentially costly effects of the personal limitations, since a good 
reviewer can add expertise if it is needed. The reviews can prevent mistakes or other harmful 
actions from happening. Action accountability controls can also address all of the control prob-
lems. The prescriptions of desired actions can help provide direction and alleviate the types of 
personal limitations due to inadequate skills or experience. The rewards or punishments help 
provide motivation. Finally, redundancy is more limited in its application. It is primarily effective 
in helping to accomplish a particular task if there is some doubt as to whether the employee 
assigned to the task is either motivated to perform the task satisfactorily or capable of doing so.
Prevention vs. Detection
Action controls can also be usefully classified according to whether they serve to prevent or detect 
undesirable behaviors. This distinction is important. Prevention controls are, when they are effec-
tive, the most powerful form of control because the costs and harm stemming from the undesira-
ble behaviors will be avoided. Detection controls differ from prevention controls in that the former 
are applied after the occurrence of the behavior. Still, they can be effective if the detection is made 
in a timely manner and if it results in a cessation of the behavior and a correction of the effects of 
the harmful actions. Also, the promise of prompt detection of harmful actions is itself preventa-
tive; it discourages individuals from purposefully engaging in such behaviors.
Most action controls are aimed at preventing undesirable behaviors. The exception is action 
accountability controls. Although action accountability controls are designed to motivate 
employees to behave properly, one cannot verify whether proper actions were taken until evi-
dence of the actions is gathered. However, if the evidence-gathering is concurrent with the 
activity, as it is with direct supervision and real-time monitoring, then action accountability 
control can approach the desired state of prevention of undesired actions. For example, truck 
drivers are monitored by way of so-called “critical event reports” generated by a truck’s comput-
ers, recording things such as hard braking, activation of the vehicle’s stability control system, or 
other events that might indicate unsafe driving; and traders in banks are monitored by “trans-
actions reports,” which use aggregated data to spot insider trading and market manipulation.18
Table 3.2 shows examples of common forms of action controls classified according to whether 
their purpose is to prevent or detect problems.
Table 3.2  Examples of action controls classified by purpose
Control purpose
Type of action control
Prevention
Detection
Behavioral constraints
Locks on valuable assets
Separation of duties
N/A
Preaction reviews
Expenditure approvals
Budget reviews
N/A
Action accountability
Pre-specified policies linked to expectations 
of rewards and punishments
Compliance-oriented internal audits 
Cash reconciliations
Peer reviews
Redundancy
Assigning multiple people to an important task
N/A
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 31.

Conditions determining the effectiveness of action controls
93
Conditions determining the effectiveness of action controls
Action controls cannot be used effectively in every situation. They are effective only when both 
of the following conditions exist, at least to some extent:
1.	 Organizations can determine what actions are (un)desirable; and,
2.	 Organizations are able to ensure that the (un)desirable actions (do not) occur.
Knowledge of desired actions
Lack of knowledge as to what actions are desirable is the constraint that most severely limits the 
use of action controls. This knowledge is often difficult to obtain. Although the actions required 
of employees on a production line may be straightforward to define relatively completely, the 
definitions of preferred actions in highly complex and uncertain task environments, such as 
those of salespeople, research engineers, or managers, often are incomplete and imprecise. 
Most organizations do not have a good idea as to how employees in these roles should best spend 
their time.
Knowledge of the desired actions in feasible roles often can be established by analyzing 
the action patterns in a specific situation or similar situations over time to learn what actions 
produce the best results. For example, loan approval decisions in banks tend to be quite 
structured. Over time, lenders observe which borrowers are likely to fail their loan pay-
ments. In so doing, banks can develop a loan approval protocol, delegate loan approval deci-
sions, and monitor or audit the decisions in accordance with their adherence to the decision 
protocol.
It is important that the actions for which employees are to be held accountable are, in fact, 
the actions that will lead to the highest probability of accomplishment of one or more of the 
organization’s goals, or at least the proper implementation of the strategy being pursued. In the 
same respect as with results controls, which we discussed in Chapter 2, many organizations 
have actually found themselves encouraging employees to take the wrong actions. This hap-
pens, for example, when policies and procedures are not kept up to date or are applied too 
tightly (see Chapter 4), causing the action controls to produce unintended side effects, which we 
discuss in Chapter 5.
Ability to ensure that desired actions are taken
Knowing what actions are desirable is not sufficient by itself to ensure good control; organiza-
tions must have some ability to ensure or observe that the desired actions are taken. This ability 
varies widely among the different action controls.
The effectiveness of the behavioral constraints and preaction reviews varies directly with the 
reliability of the physical devices or administrative procedures the organization has in place to 
ensure that the (un)desired actions are (not) taken. Clearly, these devices and procedures are not 
always effective. For example, a rogue currency trader at Allfirst Financial, who had lost about 
$700 million in foreign exchange trading, was said to have “targeted every control point in the 
system and systematically found a way around them.” When called aside by managers for going 
over his trading limits, the trader complained that the computerized risk-monitoring system he 
used to check his risk exposure during the day was too cumbersome. He got away with it.19 To 
cover up his losses, the trader allegedly started selling bogus option contracts. This practice was 
not detected in a timely manner, either, in part, because the responsibility for the monitoring 
and reporting of the trader’s foreign-exchange risks was given to a junior, relatively inexperi-
enced staff member.20

Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
94
Examples such as these are consistent with the findings of numerous fraud surveys that sug-
gest that misconduct occurs and goes undetected not only because of poor internal controls 
(many of which fall into the category of what we call behavioral constraints) but also due to 
management override of the controls. According to the occupational fraud survey cited above, 
one-third of the reported cases could have been prevented if there had been better internal con-
trols; but one-fifth could have been prevented if managers had done a sufficient job of reviewing 
transactions, accounts, or processes; and yet another one-fifth could have been prevented had 
there not been an override of existing internal controls.21 Or, to quote another report, “compa-
nies find that one of the greatest challenges in countering fraud is that unscrupulous manage-
ment may override otherwise effective internal controls.”22
Action tracking also provides a significant challenge that must be faced in making action 
accountability controls effective. Usually some actions can be tracked even where employees’ 
actions cannot be observed directly. But this tracking is not always effective. The criteria that 
should be used to judge whether the action tracking is effective are precision, objectivity, time-
liness and understandability (as we also discussed in Chapter 2 in a results-control context). If 
any of these measurement qualities cannot be achieved, action accountability control will not 
be effective in evoking the desired behaviors.
Precision refers to the amount of error in the indicators used to tell what actions have taken 
place. If action tracking involves direct supervision, can the supervisors accurately distinguish 
good actions from bad actions? If action tracking involves scrutinizing transaction records, do 
those records reliably tell whether the proper actions were taken? For example, an initiative 
aimed at tracking whether salespeople spend enough time on market development activities, as 
opposed to direct sales activities, is doomed to fail until precise definitions can be developed as 
to which actions fall into each of these two areas. Here is an example of this:
Elaine Murszewski worked in customer service for more than 30 years. The job she found 
two years after getting laid off was in customer service too, but her new employer moni-
tored her closely, taking the personal touch out of the job, she said. The new employer, 
kept track of the length of her phone calls, the amount of time she took between calls, and 
the times she wasn’t at her desk. If a caller was particularly difficult, she said, the numbers 
didn’t reflect that. “Metrics are an employee’s worst enemy,” she said.23
A similar precision failure of an action control exists within the context of the US Foreign Cor-
rupt Practices Act. This act was intended to make ‘bribes’ to foreign officials illegal, but it 
allowed ‘facilitating payments’ to lower-level officials. The distinction between bribes and facil-
itating payments is not precise, however, causing concern for company officers who cannot be 
sure that their interpretations of the actions by company personnel in foreign countries will 
match those made by independent observers (such as a jury) at a later date in lawsuits of bribe 
allegations.
Objectivity, or absence of bias, is a concern because reports of actions prepared by those 
whose actions are being controlled cannot necessarily be relied upon. Project- and sales-ori-
ented personnel are frequently asked to prepare self-reports of how they spend their time. In 
most cases, these reports are precise, as the allocations may be in units of time as small as by the 
minute. But the reports are not objective. If the personnel involved want to obscure the true 
time patterns, perhaps to cover a bad performance or to allow some personal time, it is rela-
tively easy for them to report that most of their time was spent on productive activities. Most 
companies use direct supervisors and internal auditors to provide objectivity checks on such 
reports, as well as, increasingly, advanced monitoring technologies as mentioned above. With-
out objectivity, management cannot be sure whether the action reports reflect the actual actions 
taken, and the reports lose their value for control purposes.

Personnel controls
95
Timeliness in tracking actions is important as well. If the tracking is not timely, interventions 
are not possible before harm is done. Further, much of the motivational effect of the feedback is 
lost when the tracking is significantly delayed. Again, technology has allowed timeliness to be 
sometimes real time, which is often decried by those being monitored as oppressing.
Finally, it is important that the actions for which individuals are to be held accountable are 
understandable. Although employees presumably can easily understand prescriptions to arrive 
at work on time or to not steal, understanding and consistently acting in full compliance with 
the detailed rules and regulations contained in procedures handbooks is obviously much more 
challenging. Forensic investigations often suggest that incidents and accidents are often due to 
a lack of employees’ understanding of (and, hence, inevitably curtailed compliance with) all of 
the necessary procedures.
Implementing action controls where one of these action-tracking qualities cannot be 
achieved will lead to undesirable effects. (These are discussed further in Chapter 5.) However, 
like results controls, action controls usually cannot be made near-perfect, or at least it would be 
prohibitively expensive to make them near-perfect. As a consequence, organizations use per-
sonnel and cultural controls to help fill some gaps. These controls motivate employees to con-
trol their own behaviors (personnel controls) or to control each other’s behaviors (cultural 
controls).
Personnel controls
Personnel controls build on employees’ natural tendencies to control or motivate themselves. 
Personnel controls serve three purposes. First, some personnel controls help clarify expecta-
tions. They help ensure that each employee understands what the organization wants. Second, 
some personnel controls help ensure that each employee is able to do a good job; that they have 
all the capabilities (e.g. experience, intelligence) and resources (e.g. information and time) 
needed to do the job. Third, some personnel controls increase the likelihood that each employee 
will engage in self-monitoring. Self-monitoring is an innate force that pushes most employees to 
want to do a good job, to be naturally committed. Self-monitoring is effective because most 
people have a conscience that leads them to do what is right, and they are able to derive positive 
feelings of self-respect and satisfaction when they do a good job and see their organization suc-
ceed. Self-monitoring has been discussed in the management literature under a variety of 
labels, including intrinsic motivation and loyalty.
Personnel controls can be implemented through (1) selection and placement, (2) training, 
and (3) job design and resourcing. In other words, finding the right people to do a particular 
job, training them, and giving them both a good work environment and the necessary resources 
is likely to increase the probability that the job will be done properly.
Selection and placement
Organizations devote considerable time and effort to employee selection and placement. A 
large literature studies and describes how that should best be accomplished. Much of this litera-
ture describes possible predictors of success, such as education, experience, past successes, per-
sonality, and social skills.
Employee selection often involves reference checks on new employees, which many organi-
zations have stepped up in response to heightened worries over workplace security while ensur-
ing fair, inclusive and equitable recruiting practices.24 But beyond screening new employees to 
mitigate security issues, organizations primarily focus on matching job requirements with job 
applicants’ skills. For example, Home Depot, the large American retailer of home improvement 

Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
96
and construction products and services, has an in-house computer system that contains the 
names of pre-screened candidates who have the right skills and experience. This allows manag-
ers to find qualified candidates quickly when the need arises. But the automated system also 
provides cues about what interview questions to ask, what answers to listen for, and even what 
advice to give the interviewees.25
Social media also has emerged as a major background-check tool for employers, where one 
survey indicates that over two-thirds of them decide against hiring after finding negative details 
about the candidates. Meanwhile, though, many employers surveyed said they are likely to hire 
a person if they find on social media that the candidate’s personality is a good fit within the 
company culture, has strong communication skills, is creative, and possesses a wide range of 
interests, among other presumably desirable traits.26
Employee selection can be expensive, but the benefit is to help find the best talent and to 
avoid hiring someone who is a “poor fit” with the company. One estimate for the United States is 
that the cost per hire averages about $4,500, and the average time to fill ranges anywhere from 
25 days (production positions) to 88 days (executive positions).27
Training
Training is another common way to increase the likelihood that employees do a good job. Train-
ing can provide useful information about what actions or results are expected and how the 
assigned tasks can be best performed. Training can also have positive motivational effects 
because employees can be given a greater sense of professionalism, and they are often more 
interested in performing well in jobs they understand better.
Many organizations use formal training programs, both through in-company training and 
by supporting in-classroom continued education, to improve the skills of their personnel. This 
is important in all sectors because, for example, a global study of hospitals in developed coun-
tries found that competition, hospital size and independence, and professional management 
and decision autonomy were among the most important factors that explain hospital perfor-
mance.28 Factors such as professional management and decision autonomy, however, require 
training to help develop the skills for managers to perform well. But training is also important 
at the worker level, where some companies see “a mismatch in the labor market between what 
businesses need and the kind of education young people are getting,” said Nader Imani, chief 
executive of Festo Didactic, the stand-alone education division of Germany’s robotics company 
Festo AG.29
Much training takes place informally, such as through employee mentoring. For example, 
every month, new and some existing franchisees for The Pita Pit, a quick-service sandwich 
chain with more than 240 locations across the United States and over 580 worldwide, assemble 
in Coeur d’Alene, Idaho, for several days of training. However, Peter Riggs, vice president of The 
Pita Pit, wants to make sure that the franchisees also share their experiences after the formal 
training is completed. “Anyone can learn systems,” he said; but then he hinted at the need to 
continually transfer knowledge among employees, which he saw as perhaps the most important 
aspect of the training and the way it was provided.30 At Jaburg Wilk, a law firm in Phoenix, 
Arizona, junior colleagues have two monthly mentoring meetings for 30 minutes to an hour 
each with a senior colleague, which is seen as an effective way to help the junior colleagues 
improve their marketing and networking efforts to attract more sophisticated clients. Scott 
Allen, a consultant, notes that through mentoring, “you will get insights [from the] one-on-one 
face time that no market research report could ever give you; and if the mentor is lucky, [that 
person] may even learn a thing or two [too].”31 A similar approach is followed in other profes-
sional services firms. At Moneta Group, an investment adviser, its training program spans five 
years and includes extensive coaching on business development because “if we weren’t 

Cultural controls
97
intentional about replacing our top people who will be retiring in the next decade, our compa-
ny’s ability to stay independent would be in jeopardy,” said Gene Diederich, the firm’s chief 
executive.32
Firms also make growing use of social media for their training and coaching needs. “Social 
learning platforms” are redefining the learning experience by providing employees with a vir-
tual community to interact, engage, share, and learn; and social media are used to establish a 
dialogue with colleagues and instructors before, during, and after training sessions. These 
approaches expand the traditional classroom, creating a culture of collaboration and learning 
across multiple offices, job families, and teams.33
Job design and provision of necessary resources
Another way to help employees act aptly is simply to make sure that the job is designed to allow 
motivated and qualified employees a high probability of success. Some organizations do not 
give all their employees a chance to succeed. Some jobs are too complex. Salespeople may be 
assigned too many accounts to handle effectively. Employees also need a particular set of 
resources available to them in order to do a good job. Resource needs are highly job-specific, but 
they can include such items as information, equipment, supplies, staff support, decision aids, or 
freedom from interruption. In larger organizations, particularly, there is a strong need for 
transfer of information among organizational entities so as to maintain the coordination of 
well-timed, efficient actions and decisions. This latter point was illustrated pertinently in the 
example of The Pita Pit above, where the purpose of training, and the way in which it was deliv-
ered, also included and facilitated ways to allow transfer of knowledge, experiences, and best 
practices. But there are circumstances where the situation is less conducive:
Matt Taibi routinely works 12-hour days as a driver for UPS, the U.S. parcel company. The 
company would rather pay him and other drivers overtime instead of hiring more workers. 
Taibi has no complaints about his pay. He makes $32.35 an hour, plus benefits, and has job 
security as a teamster [union member]. But he wonders how much longer he can keep up 
the breakneck pace. “There’s more and more push towards doing more with less workers,” 
said Taibi. “There are more stops, more packages, more pickups. What’s happening is that 
we’re stretched to our limits and beyond.”34
Cultural controls
Cultural controls are designed to encourage mutual monitoring; a powerful form of group pres-
sure on individuals who deviate from group norms and values. In some collectivist cultures, 
such as Japan, incentives to avoid anything that would disgrace oneself and one’s family are 
paramount. Similarly, in some countries, notably those in Southeast Asia, business deals some-
times are sealed by verbal agreement only. In those instances, the dominant social and moral 
obligations are stronger than legal contracts. But strong cultural controls produced by mutual-
monitoring processes also exist within single organizations.
Cultures are built on shared traditions, norms, beliefs, values, ideologies, attitudes, and 
ways of behaving. The cultural norms are embodied in written and unwritten rules that govern 
employees’ behaviors. Organizational cultures remain relatively fixed over time, even while 
goals and strategies necessarily adapt to changing business conditions. To understand an 
organization’s culture, ask long-time employees questions like: What are you proud of around 
here? What do you stand for? What does it take to get ahead? If a strong organizational culture 
exists, the seasoned employees will have consistent answers to these questions even when the 

Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
98
answers are not otherwise codified. When that is the case, strong organizational cultures can 
prompt employees to work together and be aligned. It also implies, however, that despite the 
benefits of direction and cohesiveness, strong cultures sometimes can become a source of iner-
tia or create blind spots, which can get in the way of needed change and adaptation in rapidly 
changing environments.
Organizational cultures can be shaped in many ways, both in words and by example, includ-
ing by way of codes of conduct, group rewards, intra-organizational transfers, physical and 
social arrangements, and tone at the top.
Codes of conduct
Most organizations above minimal size attempt to shape their organizational culture through 
what are known, variously, as codes of conduct, codes of ethics, organizational credos, or state-
ments of mission, vision, or management philosophy. These formal, written documents provide 
broad, general statements of organizational values, commitments to stakeholders, and the 
ways in which management would like the organization to function. The codes are designed to 
help employees understand what behaviors are expected even in the absence of a specific rule; 
that is, they are to some extent principle-based rather than merely rule-based. They may include 
important messages about dedication to quality or customer satisfaction, fair treatment of 
employees and customers, employee safety, innovation, risk taking, adherence to ethical princi-
ples, open communications and willingness to change. To be effective, the messages included in 
these statements should be reinforced through both formal training sessions and informal dis-
cussions or mentoring meetings among employees and their superiors.
A recent study from the Institute of Business Ethics (IBE) estimated that four-fifths of FTSE 
100 companies had an explicit code of conduct or equivalent in 2010, increasing from only an 
estimated one-third in 1993.35 But codes of conduct can vary considerably in form across firms. 
There are an increasing number of defensive, compliance-oriented, or legitimizing reasons to 
establish or review a code, but a more meaningful motive proactively and regularly communi-
cates the organization’s distinctive culture and shared sense of purpose. The latter may involve 
developing the code to properly calibrate the organization’s rules-based policies with a more 
values-based approach to drive ethical decision-making. As such, other than to comply with 
legal requirements, effective codes aim to shape a shared company culture and to protect or 
improve the organization’s reputation. The most commonly cited values embedded in the codes 
are integrity, teamwork, respect, innovation, and client focus. In addition to general policy 
statements, which almost all codes of conduct necessarily elaborate, some codes provide guid-
ance on specific issues, such as regarding confidential information, accuracy of reporting 
(fraud), protection of corporate property, and dealing with gifts and entertainment. If such 
guidance is included, then the detailed behavioral prescriptions provide a form of action 
accountability control because employees who violate the prescriptions can be reprimanded. 
Many companies use e-learning modules to implement their code and have an ethics hotline 
and whistle-blower mechanisms to report violations and misconduct.36
Do codes of conduct work? The evidence is equivocal. One study in the financial services sec-
tor found that:37
● Over two-thirds of the firms in the survey had raised awareness of the importance of ethical 
conduct over the last three years, and roughly the same number had strengthened their for-
mal code of conduct and the system for evaluating employee behavior, but only two-fifths 
said their firms had introduced career or financial incentives to encourage adherence to eth-
ical standards.
● While respondents admitted that an improvement in employees’ ethical conduct would 
improve their firm’s resilience to unexpected and dramatic risk, half think that career 

Cultural controls
99
progression at their firm would be difficult without being flexible on ethical standards; the 
same proportion thinks their firm would be less competitive as a consequence of being too 
rigid in this area; and less than two-fifths think their firm’s financials would improve as a 
result of an improvement in the ethical conduct of employees at their firm.
All told, even though two-thirds of FTSE 350 respondents stated that ethics plays a part in 
their company’s recruitment process, and over four-fifths stated that conformity to the compa-
ny’s code of ethics is included in contracts of employment,38 the weakness remains that three-
fifths also believe that, when push comes to shove, the code of conduct is not taken seriously.39
Overall, the latter survey suggests that the most commonly cited factors that contribute to 
misconduct in the workplace were not only cynicism toward the organization’s code of conduct, 
but also pressure to meet targets; fear of job loss if targets are not met; systems that rewarded 
results over means; lack of understanding of standards that apply to the job; lack of resources to 
get the job done without cutting corners, and a belief that policies or procedures are easy to 
bypass or override. The sum of these issues underlines the importance of the types of controls 
we have discussed throughout this chapter.
Group rewards
Providing rewards or incentives based on collective achievement also encourages cultural con-
trol. Such incentive plans based on collective achievement can come in many forms. Common 
examples are bonus, profit-sharing, or gain-sharing plans that provide compensation based on 
overall company or entity (rather than individual) performance in terms of accounting returns, 
profits, or cost reductions. Encouraging broad employee ownership of company stock, with 
effective corporate communications to keep employees informed and enthusiastic, encourages 
all employees to think like owners. According to Sarah McCartney-Fry, member of Parliament 
and the All Party Parliamentary Group on Employee Ownership, there is a “growing interest in 
[…] businesses [that] are substantially or majority owned by its employees, [because] co-owned 
firms appear adept at managing innovation and change and are underpinned by very high lev-
els of productive employee engagement.”40
Indeed, evidence suggests that group-based incentive plans create a culture of “ownership” 
and “engagement” to the mutual benefit of organizations and their employees.41 Specifically, a 
review of 70 studies over a 25-year period found that both employee ownership and profit-shar-
ing programs improved employee productivity, company performance, and company survivor 
rates.42 According to an employee engagement study by the Corporate Executive Board’s Corpo-
rate Leadership Council, employees most committed to their organizations put forth 57% more 
effort and are 87% less likely to leave their company than employees who consider themselves 
disengaged. The study concluded that “it should be no surprise then that employee engage-
ment, or lack thereof, is a critical factor in an organization’s overall financial success.”43
Group rewards are discussed here as a type of cultural control rather than as a results control 
(as we do in Chapter 9) because they are quite different in character from rewards given for indi-
vidual performance. With group rewards, the link between individual efforts and the results being 
rewarded is weak, or at least weakened. Thus, motivation to achieve the rewards is not among the 
primary forces affected by group rewards; instead, communication of expectations and mutual 
monitoring are. That is not to suggest that group rewards cannot have positive effects on motiva-
tion, even if only indirectly. Group rewards can encourage teamwork, on-the-job training of new 
employees (when assigned to teams that include experienced colleagues), and the creation of peer 
pressure on individual employees to exert themselves for the good of the group. All told,
[…] for many organizations, teamwork is a fundamental building block in their culture, and is 
a feature the CIPD [Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development] research showed 

Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
100
they wanted to keep. Although personal achievement was rewarded, it was also seen as 
important to develop a way of acknowledging and promoting teamwork since good company 
results are not achieved by a single person. […] At UKFast, a business-to-business hosting 
company, reward is a device to reinforce team culture. Rather than giving high-performing 
people individual cash rewards, the money is pooled to fund a team event. […] These rewards 
create shared memories, help team bonding, increase appreciation of people’s different per-
sonalities and reinforce the company’s values of being supportive, caring and fun.44
Other approaches to shape organizational culture
As mentioned earlier, other common approaches to shape organizational culture include intra-
organizational transfers, physical and social arrangements, and tone at the top.
Intra-organizational transfers or employee rotation help transmit culture by improving the 
socialization of employees throughout the organization, giving them a better appreciation of 
the problems faced by different parts of the organization, and inhibiting the formation of incom-
patible goals and perspectives.
Physical arrangements (such as office plans, architecture, and interior decor) and social 
arrangements (such as dress codes, institutionalized habits, behaviors, and vocabulary), can 
also help shape organizational culture. Some organizations, such as technology firms in Silicon 
Valley, have created informal cultures, with open office arrangements and casual dress codes 
that deliver messages about the importance of innovation and employee equality. For example, 
Alibaba – not a Silicon Valley company, but one that accounts for more than three-quarters of 
China’s retail ecommerce – “credits its awesome growth over the past 15 years to a uniquely 
corporate culture and the visionary leadership of founder Jack Ma,” replete with distinctive, 
cult-like features:
Both admirers and detractors alike credit the creativity and drive that got the company this 
far to Alibaba’s somewhat cult-like esprit de corps – and the quirky Mr. Ma. […] Investors 
[must] decide what stomach they have for Alibaba’s quirks – its governance structure gives 
virtually all power to 27 board members, and very little to ordinary shareholders. They will 
also have to have a high tolerance for sometimes bizarre antics by senior managers, and a 
corporate culture that is more colorful than its world-spanning peers like Google and Face-
book. […] The Chinese company’s 22,000 employees, known as Aliren, appear to be fuelled 
by adrenalin and inspired by Kung Fu novels. […] “Corporate culture is still Chinese, [the] 
appraisal system is that of a Chinese company,” said Jasper Chan, formerly Alibaba’s sen-
ior corporate communications manager, who worked for the company from 2007–12. 
Employees are constantly evaluated by managers on their commitment to six core values: 
teamwork, integrity, customer first, embrace change, commitment and passion. “An 
employee could have great sales, they could bring in a ton of revenues, but if they don’t 
score well in core values, they could still lose their job,” she said.45
But many other “old-economy” companies also possess, and are reputed for, their unique 
cultures. At Disneyland, employees are called cast members; being on the job is being onstage 
(off the job is offstage); a work shift is a performance; and a job description is a script. This vocab-
ulary, which is imparted on joining the company and is reinforced through training, separates 
Disney employees from the rest, brings them closer together, and reminds them that they are 
performers whose job is to help fulfill the company’s mission—that is, that “every product tells 
a story” and that “entertainment is about hope, aspiration and positive resolutions.”46
Finally, management can shape culture by setting the proper tone at the top. Their statements 
should be consistent with the type of culture they are trying to create, and, importantly, their 
actions and behaviors should be consistent with their statements. Managers serve as role 

Effectiveness of personnel/cultural controls
101
models and, as the various surveys quoted earlier in this chapter suggest, are a determining fac-
tor in creating a culture of integrity in their organizations. Management cannot say one thing 
and do another. That said, management sometimes sets the wrong tone by not responding 
appropriately to matters brought to their attention, such as ethics concerns or reports of mis-
conduct.47 All too common, whistle-blowers (employees who draw attention to suspected mal-
practice) are ignored, and so forth. Several studies, indeed, paint a rather gloomy picture of 
tone at the top. For example, a survey commissioned by PwC suggests that while tone from the 
top is vital in developing and maintaining the ethical integrity of the business, nearly half of the 
respondents reported that leaders do not always act as role models in setting the right tone.48
Personnel/cultural controls and the control problems
Taken together, personnel/cultural controls are capable of addressing all of the control prob-
lems although, as shown in Table 3.3, not each type of control in this category is effective at 
addressing each type of problem. The lack-of-direction problem can be minimized, for example, 
by hiring experienced personnel, by providing training programs, or by assigning new person-
nel to work groups that will provide good direction. The motivational problems, which may be 
minimal in organizations with strong cultures, can be minimized in other organizations by hir-
ing highly motivated people or by assigning people to work groups that will tend to make them 
adjust to group norms. Personal limitations can also be reduced through one or more types of 
personnel controls, particularly selection, training, and provision of necessary resources.
Table 3.3  Control problems addressed by the various ways of effecting personnel 
and cultural controls
Lack of direction Motivational problems
Personal limitations
Ways of effecting personnel controls
Selection and placement
x
x
x
Training
x
x
Job design and provision 
of necessary resources
x
Ways of effecting cultural controls
Codes of conduct
x
x
Group-based rewards
x
x
x
Intra-organizational transfers
x
x
Physical arrangements
x
Tone at the top
x
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 130.
Effectiveness of personnel/cultural controls
All organizations rely to some extent on their employees to guide and motivate themselves. 
Some corporate control systems are dominated by personnel controls. William F. Cronk, 
now-retired president of Dreyer’s Grand Ice Cream (since acquired by Nestlé), said at the time 
that, “We consider hiring the most important decision we can make. We hire the smartest, 

Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
102
most inspired people we can find, give them the resources they need, then get out of their 
way.”49 Cultural controls can also, by themselves, dominate a control system.50 The best 
chance to create a strong culture, however, seems to be early in an organization’s life when a 
founder can imbue the organization with a distinctive culture. Examples are the “cult-like” 
cultures created by the late Steve Jobs at Apple, Jack Ma at Alibaba, Jeff Bezos at Amazon, 
and Herb Kelleher at Southwest Airlines, just to name a few notorious ones.51 Cultural con-
trols often have the advantage of being relatively unobtrusive. Employees may not even think 
of the shared norms or “the way we do things around here” as being part of the “control” 
system. As such, organizational cultures can substitute for other formal types of controls. In 
other words:
A company’s culture is likely to affect every aspect of how the organization operates and 
how people work. Research from the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development 
(CIPD) has consistently found that culture will affect a business’s success because, 
unlike strategy, it is hard to imitate and can differentiate organizations from their com-
petitors. In the words of management guru Peter Drucker, “culture eats strategy for 
breakfast.”52
As such, personnel/cultural controls can have distinctive advantages over results and action 
controls. They are usable to some extent in almost every setting, their cost is often lower than 
more obtrusive forms of controls, and they might produce fewer harmful side effects. Moreover, 
“soft” personnel/cultural controls have also been shown to make “economic sense” as surveys 
and evidence suggest that “it pays to be nice to employees.”53 At the SAS Institute, the large, 
privately held software and business intelligence systems company, employee loyalty is instilled 
with an unusual array of perks for its roughly 3,000 headquarter employees. These include a 
profit-sharing plan; a free health clinic; daycare centers; private offices for everyone; flexible 
35-hour weeks; free sodas, fresh fruit, and pastries in the coffee-break rooms; and even a pia-
nist in the subsidized lunch and recreation room. SAS’s turnover rate has been about 4% for 
years, compared to an industry average of about 20%. Stanford University professor Jeffrey 
Pfeffer concluded, “The roughly $50 million per year that SAS saves with its low turnover pays 
for all the family-friendly stuff. And, while the free company clinic costs $1 million per year to 
operate, that is $500,000 less than what it would cost the company if employees were treated 
elsewhere.”54
However, the degree to which personnel/cultural controls are effective can vary signifi-
cantly across individuals, groups, communities, and societies. Some people are more honest 
than others, and some communities and societies have stronger ties among their members. Cul-
tures that are “too strong” can also be a disadvantage, especially when they need changing.55 
Culture change requires strong “culture carriers” – role models who embody the new values – 
and strong reinforcements, such as changes in emphasis in the reward systems:
“Take somebody who’s produced millions of revenues but is sometimes a bit disruptive: 
how do you judge them against somebody who has lower financial performance but is a 
great culture carrier?” Colin Fan, the co-head of investment banking at Deutsche Bank, 
asks. “We used to have those debates. Today, it’s not even a debate. The first group gets 
knocked out of that year’s promotion process.”56
And sometimes it requires a change at the top, such as at Toshiba, the Japanese electronics-
to-nuclear conglomerate, where top executives played a role in a company-wide accounting 
scandal involving at least Y152 billion ($1.2 billion) in inflated profits over a seven-year period:
In an 82-page summary of its findings, a panel of external lawyers and accountants detailed 
what it said were “institutional” accounting malpractices and a corporate culture in which 

103
Notes
employees were afraid to speak out against bosses’ push for increasingly unachievable prof-
its. “There existed a corporate culture at Toshiba where it was impossible to go against the 
boss’ will,” the report said. Pressures to meet aggressive, short-term profit targets – known 
as “the challenge” – existed from the presidency of Atsutoshi Nishida, who headed the com-
pany from 2005 to 2009. Those pressures escalated as the company’s earnings deteriorated 
in the wake of the global financial crisis and the March 2011 earthquake and the Fukushima 
nuclear accident. Top executives pressured employees to achieve their targets with sugges-
tions that the company may withdraw from underperforming businesses such as television if 
they were not met. […] Hisao Tanaka, chief executive, stepped down after making a 15-sec-
ond bow of contrition at a packed news conference in Tokyo, saying that “Toshiba had suf-
fered what could be the biggest erosion of its brand image in its 140-year history.”57
Conclusion
In this chapter, we provided an overview of the most direct type of controls, action controls, 
which take any of several different forms: behavioral constraints, preaction reviews, action 
accountability, and redundancy. Action controls are the most direct type of management con-
trol because they ensure the proper behaviors of the people on whom the organization must rely 
by focusing directly on their actions.
We also described personnel and cultural controls, which managers implement to encourage 
either or both of two positive forces that are normally present in organizations: self- and mutual-
monitoring. These forces can be encouraged in a number of ways, including effective personnel 
selection and placement, training, job design and provision of necessary resources, codes of conduct, 
group rewards, intra-organizational transfers, physical and social arrangements, and tone at the top.
Personnel and cultural controls, sometimes referred to as soft controls, have become more 
important in recent years. Organizations have become flatter and leaner. Managers have wider 
spans of control, and elaborate hierarchies and systems of action controls (bureaucracies) have 
been dismantled and replaced with empowered employees. In this environment, shared organ-
izational values have become a more important tool for ensuring that everyone is acting in the 
organization’s best interest.58
Notes
	 1	 See, for example, M. A. Abernethy, H. C. Dekker, and A. K. 
Schulz, “Are Employee Selection and Incentive Contracts 
Complements or Substitutes,” Journal of Accounting 
Research, 53, no. 4 (September 2015), pp. 633–68.
	 2	 “Five-Fingered Discounts,” The Economist (October 23, 
2010), p. 80.
	 3	 “Stealing Retailer’s Thunder: PwC Estimates Canadian 
Retailers Are Losing over $10 Million a Day to Shrinkage,” 
PwC (October 31, 2012), online at www.pwc.com/ca/en/
media/release/2012-10-31-canadian-retailers-losing-
ten-million-a-day-shrinkage.html.
	 4	 European Data Theft Survey 2012 (KPMG, 2012), online at 
www.kpmg.de/docs/central-and-eastern-european-data-
theft-survey-2012.pdf. See also “Business Warned of 
Enemy Within on Fraud and Cyber Crime,” The Financial 
Times (November 23, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1lDkSwe.
	 5	 “Mass Leak of Client Data Rattles Swiss Banking,” The 
Wall Street Journal (July 8, 2010), online at on.wsj.
com/1mnN0U0.
	 6	 “IRS Employee Took Home Data on 20,000 Workers at 
Agency,” Bloomberg (March 18, 2014), online at bloom.
bg/1MjMWKM; see also “Barclays Launches Investiga-
tion after Reported Customer Data Leak,” The Financial 
Times (February 9, 2014), online at on.ft.com/1J9wSdF.
	 7	 “Manage Like a Spymaster,” The Economist (August 29, 
2015), online at econ.st/1U8j8KK.
	 8	 Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse 2014 
Global Fraud Study (Association of Certified Fraud Examin-
ers, 2014), online at www.acfe.com/rttn/docs/2014-
report-to-nations.pdf (hereafter 2014 Global Fraud Survey).
	 9	 Effectiveness of Fraud Risk Management Efforts (KPMG 
LLP, 2009).

104
Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
	10	 D. Stewart and R. Chase, Mistake-Proofing: Designing 
Errors Out (Portland, OR: Productivity Press, 1995). 
Poka-yoke is the Japanese term for foolproof. It was intro-
duced to the management literature by the Japanese 
quality guru Sigeo Shingo.
	11	 “At Some Airlines, Laptops Replace Pilots’ ‘Brain Bags,’” 
The Wall Street Journal (March 26, 2002), p. B1.
	12	 “Computer Systems Cut Hospital Drug Errors,” Medpage 
Today (February 22, 2013), online at www.medpagetoday.
com/HospitalBasedMedicine/GeneralHospitalPractice/ 
37496.
	13	 “Bear Stearns Ex-Staffer Pleads Guilty to Taking Funds in 
Check Scheme,” The Wall Street Journal, (February 26, 
2002), p. C14.
	14	 “How a Tiffany’s Employee Stole $1.3 Million in Jewelry,” 
Business Week (July 8, 2013), online at www.bloomberg.
com/bw/articles/2013-07-08/how-a-tiffanys-employee-
stole-1-dot-3-million-in-jewelry.
	15	 “Memorable Memo: McDonald’s Sends Operations to War 
on Fries,” The Wall Street Journal (December 18, 1997), 
online at on.wsj.com/1xjJzSy.
	16	 “Digital Taylorism,” The Economist (September 12, 2015), 
online at econ.st/1QqLUAM.
	17	 “Tracking Workers’ Every Move Can Boost Productivity – and 
Stress,” The Los Angeles Times (April 8, 2013), online at www.
latimes.com/la-fi-harsh-work-tech-20130408,0,6413037.
story.
	18	 “Driver Fatigue Cited as Cause of Crash that Injured 
Comedian,” AP (August 11, 2015), online at bigstory.ap.
org/urn:publicid:ap.org:d1bab7054636428c81e75ea540
a3c619; “Deutsche Bank Fined £4.7m by FCA over Report-
ing Blunders,” The Financial Times (2014), online at on.
ft.com/1fylDCW.
	19	 “Allfirst Officials Raised Concern about Trader in a 1999 
Memo,” The Wall Street Journal (February 25, 2002), p. C16.
	20	 “Controls at Allied Irish’s Allfirst Likely Failed in Important 
Ways,” The Wall Street Journal (February 20, 2002), p. C1.
	21	 2014 Global Fraud Study, op. cit.
	22	 Driving Ethical Growth: New Markets, New Challenges 
(Ernst & Young 11th Global Fraud Survey, 2010); see also 
Integrity Survey 2013 (KPMG Forensic, 2013) – where 57% 
of the respondents reported that they “believe that policies 
or procedures are easy to override” as a root cause for man-
agers and employees to engage in misconduct – online at 
www.kpmg.com/CN/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPubli-
cations/Documents/Integrity-Survey-2013-O-201307.pdf.
	23	 “Tracking Workers’ Every Move Can Boost Productivity – 
and Stress,” op. cit.
	24	 “New Background Check Survey Reveals Security Issues 
in the Screening Process,” Security Info Watch (July 3, 
2014), online at www.securityinfowatch.com/arti-
cle/11545613/new-hireright-survey-highlights-poten-
tial-security-gaps-in-the-screening-process. See also “Are 
Workplace Personality Tests Fair?,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal (September 29, 2014), online at on.wsj.com/1KHI7cY.
	25	 “To Hire a Lumber Expert, Click Here,” Fortune (April 3, 
2000), pp. 267–70.
	26	 “Social Media Emerges as Major Tool for Background 
Check of Employees: Survey,” DNA (September 14, 2014), 
online at dnai.in/cn4m; “Survey: Social Media Back-
ground Checks, Policy Enforcement,” HR Daily Advisor 
(September 4, 2014), online at shar.es/1GNk1e.
	27	 “Three Approaches to Pre-Screening Job Candidates,” ERC 
(July 14, 2013), online at www.yourerc.com/blog/post/ 
3-Approaches-to-Pre-Screening-Job-Candidates.aspx.
	28	 “How to Save Lives,” The Economist (October 23, 2010), p. 72.
	29	 See, for example, “German-Style Training for American 
Factory Workers,” The Wall Street Journal (September 9, 
2014), online at on.wsj.com/1lU4XsG.
	30	 “Improve Your Employee Training Sessions,” Business Week 
(February 2, 2010), online at www.businessweek.com.
	31	 “Mentors Make a Business Better,” Business Week (March 
20, 2008), online at www.businessweek.com.
	32	 “Firm Shares Tips for Succession Planning,” The Wall Street 
Journal (January 24, 2014), online at on.wsj.com/1caDnQH.
	33	 “Skillsoft Selected as Gold Winner in Excellence in Social 
Learning by Chief Learning Officer Magazine,” Business 
Wire (September 26, 2012), online at www.businesswire.
com/news/home/20120926005748/en/Skillsoft-
Selected-Gold-Winner-Excellence-Social-Learning.
	34	 “As Employers Push Efficiency, The Daily Grind Wears 
Down Workers,” The Los Angeles Times (April 7, 2013), 
online at fw.to/yxImz0M.
	35	 Codes of Conduct: A Barrier or Breakthrough for Corporate 
Behaviour? (PwC, 2013), online at www.ibe.org.uk/
userassets/surveys/pwccodesofconductreport2013.pdf.
	36	 “Business Codes of the Global 200: Their Prevalence, 
Content and Embedding,” KPMG (June 16, 2008); 2013 
UK and Continental European Survey (Institute of Busi-
ness Ethics, 2013), online at www.ibe.org.uk/userfiles/
codes_survey_2013_interactive.pdf.
	37	 A Crisis of Culture (The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2013), 
online at https://www.cfatoronto.ca/cfast/Content/Site_
Navigation/Publications/EIU_Crisis_of_Culture.pdf.
	38	 2013 UK and Continental European Survey, op. cit.
	39	 Integrity Survey 2013, op. cit.
	40	 “Employee Benefits: Share Ownership Schemes – Should 
You CoCo?,” HR Magazine (September 1, 2008), online at 
www.hrmagazine.co.uk. See also “Could the John Lewis 
Model Work in Any Industry,” The Telegraph (November 14, 
2014), online at www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/festival-
of-business/11229674/Could-the-John-Lewis-model-
work-in-any-industry.html; and “TSB Bank to Move 
Towards John Lewis Model,” The Financial Times (June 5, 
2014), online at on.ft.com/1kN8dhN.
	41	 C. Rosen, J. Case, and M. Staubus, Equity: Why Employee 
Ownership Is Good for Business (Boston, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press, 2005).
	42	 J. Blasi, D. Kruse, and A. Bernstein, In the Company of Own-
ers: The Trust about Stock Options (and Why Every Employee 
Should Have Them) (New York: Basic Books, 2003).
	43	 “The Role of Employee Engagement in the Return to 
Growth,” Business Week (August 13, 2010), online at www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2010-08-13/the-role-of-

Witsky and Associates, Inc.
105
employee-engagement-in-the-return-to-growth . See also 
“Organizations in Central and Eastern Europe with High 
Employee Engagement Are Achieving Better Business 
Results, Says Aon Hewitt, ” PR Newswire  (December 3, 
2012), online at  www.prnewswire.co.uk ; and  State of the 
American Workplace (Gallup, 2013), online at  www.gallup.
com/services/178514/state-american-workplace.aspx .  
 44  “Reward Culture: Strong Foundations,”  Pay & Benefi ts 
(August 27, 2014), online at  www.payandbenefi tsmaga-
zine.co.uk/article/reward-culture-strong-foundations . 
 45  “Method in the Madness of the Alibaba Cult,”  The Financial 
Times (September 7, 2014), online at  on.ft.com/WAoqTa .  
 46  See the company’s website, online at  corporate.disney.
go.com/careers/culture . 
 47  See, for example, “Tone at the Top: Why Investors Should 
Care,”  Strategic Finance  (March 2013), online at  www.
imanet.org/docs/default-source/sf/03_2013_king-pdf.
pdf?sfvrsn=0 . 
 48  Tone from the Top – Transforming Words into Action (PwC, 
2013), online at  www.ibe.org.uk/userimages/pwc_tone_
from_the_top_2013.pdf . 
 49  Quoted in D. Ferguson, “Do Entrepreneurial Companies 
Lose Their Innovative Spark as They Grow Larger?”  Cal 
Business (Fall 1995), p. 12. 
 50  In addition to the brief description of the Alibaba culture 
earlier in this chapter, Southwest Airlines is another 
poster child of a fi rm with an acclaimed corporate cul-
ture. See, for example, G. Smith, “An Evaluation of the 
Corporate Culture of Southwest Airlines,”  Measuring 
Business Excellence , 8, no. 4 (2004), pp. 26–33; and M. 
Thomas, “Strategic Principles at Southwest Airlines,” 
 Strategic Direction , 31, no. 8 (2015), pp. 10–12.  
   51   Many articles have been written about these and other lead-
ers, but to mention one as an illustration, see “Jeff  Bezos 
Reveals His No. 1 Leadership Secret,”  Forbes  (April 4, 2012), 
online at  www.forbes.com/forbes/2012/0423/ceo-com-
pensation-12-amazon-technology-jeff -bezos-gets-it.html .  
 52  “Reward Culture: Strong Foundations,” op. cit. 
   53   See, for example, “People Work Harder When They’re 
Happy, Study Finds,”  The Telegraph (March 21, 2014), 
online at  www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/10713606/
People-work-harder-when-theyre-happy-study-finds.
html ; “Virgin Pulse Named One of  Boston Business Jour-
nal ’s Healthiest Employers,”  Business Wire (March 27, 
2014), online at  www.businesswire.com . 
 54  “An Idyllic Workplace under a Tycoon’s Thumb,”  The Wall 
Street Journal (November 23, 1998), online at  on.wsj.
com/1sMFu7O . 
 55  See, for example, “Satya Nadella: This Is How I’m Really 
Going to Change Microsoft’s Culture,”  Business Insider 
(July 15, 2014), online at  read.bi/1wpztta . 
 56  “Colin Fan, Deutsche Bank: ‘OMG, Colin’s Video Has Gone 
Viral,”  The Financial Times (October 12, 2014), online at 
 on.ft.com/1tlRYDc ; “Deutsche Bank Warns Traders in 
Video over Boasting and Vulgarity,”  The Financial Times 
(May 16, 2014), online at  on.ft.com/1jl1ocj . 
 57  “Scathing Report Says Toshiba CEOs Had Role in 
Accounting Scandal,”  The Financial Times (July 20, 
2015), online at  on.ft.com/1KgFnZB ; “Toshiba Chief 
Hisao Tanaka Resigns over $1.2bn Accounting Scandal,” 
 The Financial Times (July 21, 2015), online at  on.ft.
com/1edzVbE .  
 58  For further study and a recent academic perspective and 
overview of the control literature in the area of what we 
call personnel/cultural controls, see M. Loughry, “Peer 
Control in Organizations,” in S. Sitkin, L. Cardinal, and K. 
Bijlsma-Frankema,  Organizational Control (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2010), chap. 11. 
 Brayton McLaughlin was a young associate at Witsky 
and Associates, Inc., a management consulting fi rm 
that helped small and family businesses with a vari-
ety of issues, including strategy, operations, logistics, 
and corporate governance. Brayton had joined Wit-
sky two years ago immediately after completing his 
MBA degree. 
 In early June, Brayton was assigned to do time-and-
motion studies at an offi  ce supply warehouse and distribu-
tion center located in Riverside, California. Management 
needed accurate cost data to be able to negotiate profi ta-
ble contract terms in the forthcoming year. They were also 
concerned that some of the warehouse personnel were 
not performing all of their activities effi  ciently. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Witsky and Associates, Inc. 

106
Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
 It was expected that Brayton would have to be on 
site for approximately 30 hours, at various times since 
the center operated 24/7, to observe the proper mix of 
activities with enough detail. Then Brayton would have 
to prepare and submit his report. As Brayton was also 
working on other projects, the due date for his report 
was the end of June. 
 Brayton reported to Pete Mahlendorf, Witsky’s man-
aging partner and the lead consultant on the job, that 
he visited the warehouse and distribution center on 
several days in June, both during the day and night 
shifts. He submitted his report on time and on budget. 
 On July 1, Pete got a phone call from Jeremiah 
Jones, operations manager at the Riverside distribution 
center. Jeremiah wanted to know when he could see 
Brayton’s report. Pete said that he had just received it, 
and he would send it right over. But Jeremiah expressed 
surprise that the report was fi nished. He told Pete that: 
 As far as I know, Brayton only visited the ware-
house once, and that was for a quite brief time. 
How could he have fi nished his report? Maybe he 
was here when I was out, but I have not heard oth-
ers mention his presence either.  
 Pete checked again with Brayton, and Brayton 
assured him that he had completed all the needed work. 
 A few days later, rather by chance, Pete mentioned 
Jeremiah’s surprise reaction to Priscilla Musso, Wit-
sky’s chief financial officer. After some reflection, 
Priscilla suggested that they perhaps should check 
the location-tracking data provided by Brayton’s cell 
phone. Witsky paid the cell phone bills for the firm’s 
staff, and location tracking was one of the applica-
tions that the staff was required to keep turned on.  1 
The firm had never had an occasion to use these 
data, but Priscilla thought that it might be useful to 
look at it in this instance. Pete and Priscilla checked 
the computer records and found, indeed, that Bray-
ton had been near Riverside only once in the month 
of June.  
 Pete called Brayton into his offi  ce and asked him to 
explain the discrepancy. Brayton immediately broke 
down in tears. He explained that because of some per-
sonal problems he was way behind in his work. To try to 
cope, he took the shortcut of creating a report based 
mostly on data he had found on the Internet. He admit-
ted that he had not spent the requisite time at the River-
side warehouse and distribution center. 
 1  The fi rm’s legal advisors were of the opinion that use of these data 
did not violate any laws. 
 This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 In early December 2006, Harry Hepburn, president of 
the Southern California Division of Robinson Broth-
ers Homes, was faced with a signifi cant challenge. 
The markets his division served had slowed consider-
ably. To sell its homes, the division often had to make 
signifi cant price concessions. But construction costs 
were continuing to rise, so margins were getting 
squeezed. It was clear that the division was not going 
to achieve its 2006 sales and profi t plan. But what 
was worse, corporate executives were recommend-
ing a signifi cant downsizing of the division in 2007 
to wait until the housing market rebounded. Harry 
resisted this idea. He thought he had assembled a 
great employee team. The division’s performance had 
been outstanding during the good years in the early 
2000s. He wanted to keep his team intact. But that 
 CASE STUDY 
 The Platinum Pointe Land Deal 

The Platinum Pointe Land Deal
107
required finding a continuing stream of good projects 
for them to work on.
One promising project on the horizon was called 
Platinum Pointe. It was a large project that promised to 
provide over $100 million in revenue and nearly $14 
million in profits in the 2008–11 time period. It would 
keep a lot of employees productively busy. Harry really 
wanted to do the project. However, the financial projec-
tions suggested that the project would not quite earn 
the returns that the corporation required for projects 
with this level of risk. He contemplated preparing pro-
jections that were a “little more optimistic” to ensure 
that the project would be approved.
The company
Robinson Brothers Homes (RBH) was a medium-sized 
homebuilder. The company built single-family and 
higher-density homes, such as townhouses and condo-
miniums. By 2006, RBH built almost 2,000 homes per 
year. Because it was much smaller than the largest 
homebuilders who had economies-of-scale advan-
tages,1 RBH focused on building higher quality/higher 
price homes for first and second move-up buyers. In 
2006, the average closing sales price for an RBH home 
was slightly more than $400,000.
RBH’s stock had been traded publicly since 1995. 
The company had been highly profitable throughout 
the past decade, but finances were expected to be much 
tighter in 2007 because of the homebuilding slowdown 
that had started in early 2006. The stock price had 
declined almost 50% from the all-time peak in 2005.
RBH’s organization was comprised of a headquar-
ters staff located in Denver, Colorado, and 15 divisions 
located in most of the metropolitan areas of the Cen-
tral, Mountain, and Southwest areas of the United 
States. The headquarters staff was small, comprised 
mainly of specialists in the areas of finance, account-
ing, legal, information systems, sales and marketing, 
and customer service, and their staffs.
Each division was largely self-contained, with its 
own construction supervision, customer care, purchas-
ing, sales and marketing, land development, land 
acquisition, and accounting staffs. The only major func-
tion that was outsourced was construction. RBH’s con-
struction superintendents supervised the general 
contractors who built the homes to RBH’s specifications.
Exhibit 1 shows the organization chart for the 
Southern California division. This division, one of 
RBH’s largest, employed approximately 120 people. In 
2006, it was projected to sell 637 homes, generating 
$235 million in revenue and $40 million in net income.
Land acquisition
Land acquisition was a key function in the homebuild-
ing business. RBH’s land acquisition personnel had to 
find land on which the company could build homes that 
could be sold at a good profit. The lag between acquisi-
tion of the land and sale of the final house built was 
typically three to five years. Sometimes the permit-
acquisition process itself dragged on for years, with the 
company fighting lengthy, emotional battles with city 
councils and other permit-granting organizations. On 
the other hand, sometimes land was acquired at “retail 
price,” with all the permits already having been 
granted.
As a standard part of the land acquisition process, 
RBH’s land acquisition personnel were required to 
prepare a detailed land acquisition proposal. These 
proposals provided detailed information on:
● the nature of the request;
● the location;
● entitlements;
● infrastructure;
● product design;
● market overview;
● environmental considerations;
● development fees and costs;
● special assessments and homeowner association 
dues (if any);
● school information;
● project milestones;
● risk evaluations; and,
● financial projections.
Many of the detailed proposals were 100 or more pages 
in length and often included detailed maps, product 
sketches, and excerpts from consultants’ reports.
An important part of the proposal-writing process 
was a detailed evaluation of the project’s risk in four 
areas: political, development, market, and financial. 
The risk in each area was evaluated subjectively into 
three categories: low, moderate, or high. The risk 
1	 For example, D. R. Horton, Inc., the largest homebuilder in the 
United States, was building over 50,000 homes per year.

108
Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
assessments in these areas were translated into a mini-
mum internal rate of return (IRR) requirements for the 
project, according to the procedure shown in Exhibit 2.
Many land acquisition ideas failed to progress to the 
approval stage for any of a number of reasons, includ-
ing inadequate financial returns, excess risk in the per-
mit-granting process, or a mismatch between the needs 
of the market and the company’s capabilities. If the pro-
posals were approved by the division president and 
RBH’s CEO and CFO, the division president then pre-
sented them to the Executive Land Committee of the 
Board of Directors for final approval. Only then could 
the monies be released.
The Platinum Pointe site
The Platinum Pointe site was identified by Michael 
Borland, the vice president of land acquisition for the 
Southern California Division. The Platinum Pointe site 
was located in the Emerald Estates master planned 
community being developed by Jackson Development 
Company.
Jackson Development was recently formed by Tom 
Jackson, who had formerly worked as division presi-
dent of one of RBH’s competitors. Michael Borland and 
Tom Jackson were long-time friends, back to their time 
together as fraternity brothers at San Diego State Uni-
versity. Michael called Tom soon after he learned of the 
formation of Jackson Development. He looked forward 
to developing some projects jointly with Tom.
Michael discussed with Tom several sites in the 
planned Emerald Estates community. They finally set-
tled on a 21-acre site on the northeast corner of the 
master planned community. The proposed purchase 
price was $22,500,000 plus a profit participation by 
Jackson Development in the amount of 50% above 9% 
net profit, with a soft cost allowance of 20%.2
Michael’s experience suggested to him that higher-
density housing, rather than single-family detached 
homes, would provide the best use of this site. Over the 
forthcoming several months, he fleshed out the idea 
with the division and corporate specialists, particularly 
in the areas of sales and marketing and construction. 
He also contracted for special studies from two outside 
consulting firms. One consulting firm prepared a report 
detailing projections of the costs needed to develop the 
site. The other prepared a marketing study that pro-
vided pricing and absorption rate estimates based on 
analyses of competitive offerings and forecasts of mar-
ket trends in the geographical area.
Michael wrote a detailed proposal for building 195 
homes in two formats: a triplex townhome and a six-
plex cluster home. Other RBH divisions had produced 
similar homes, but the format had not been previously 
offered in Southern California, and some modifications 
were made to appeal to southern California buyers. 
The homes would range from 1,628 to 2,673 square 
feet and be priced from $445,000 to $705,000. 
The executive summary of the detailed proposal, 
with the required risk assessments and financial pro-
jections, is shown in Exhibit 3.
Michael was disappointed when he saw the pro-
jected IRR for the project. It was only 21%, which was 
below the minimum required for a project with this 
level of risk – 24.5%. He decided to discuss the problem 
with Harry Hepburn to see what, if anything, could 
be done.
What to do?
Harry, too, was disappointed. He had hoped that the 
Platinum Pointe project would provide a significant 
proportion of the revenues and profits that the division 
would need over the next four-year period. He still 
wanted to do the project. So he and Michael sat down 
to take another look at the detailed proposal. What 
modifications could they make to lower the required 
IRR or to raise the projected IRR to ensure that the pro-
ject would be approved?
2	 Soft costs are costs related to items in a project that are necessary to 
complete the nonconstruction needs of the project, which typically 
include such items as architecture, design, engineering, permits, 
inspections, consultants, environmental studies, and regulatory 
demands needing approval before construction begins.

109
Exhibit 1  Robinson Brothers Homes, Southern California Division, organization chart

110
Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
Land acquisition opportunities and the related product choices continue to expand for Robinson Brothers Homes. Given 
that risks can vary greatly from opportunity to opportunity, guidelines to assess risk and the required minimum returns 
have been established. The risks to be assessed are as follows:
1. Political/Entitlement – ability to achieve expected entitlements and timing;
2. Development – site conditions and ability to accurately project development costs;
3. Market – experience with proposed product type, product price points, buyer types, current market conditions both 
current and future;
4. Financial/Financing – ability to achieve projected results and obtain proposed financing.
Based on these factors, a minimum unleveraged IRR is to be established. Risk ratings are to be assessed based on the 
projects’ specific characteristics. Each area is to be rated as Low, Moderate, or High. A numerical value is to be attached 
to assessment as follows:
The minimum IRR for the project is assessed as the sum of the ratings assigned in each of the four assessment areas.
Low
Moderate
High
Political
5.0
6.5
8.0
Development
5.0
6.5
8.0
Market
5.0
6.0
7.0
Financial/Financing
4.0
5.0
6.0
Exhibit 2  IRR requirements

The Platinum Pointe Land Deal
111
The Southern California Division is requesting approval to acquire the 21-acre site known as Platinum Pointe in Carlsbad, 
CA. The site will yield 198 detached and attached homes. The purchase price is $22,500,000. The projected IRR is cur-
rently 21%, and the required IRR is 24.5%. Close of escrow is projected to occur in June 2007.
LOCATION
The site is located on the east side of Interstate 5 in the City of Carlsbad, located 30 miles north of San Diego. The site 
is in the Emerald Estates community being master planned by Jackson Development Company, Inc. The master planned 
community is comprised of just over 200 acres to yield approximately 1,000 units. The community will have a range of 
product from townhomes to duplexes, as well as single-family homes on lots ranging in size from 4,500 to 7,500 s.f.
PURCHASE
The Seller is Jackson Development Company, Inc. The purchase price of the property is $22,500,000 for 21 net acres. 
The purchase price is not tied to unit count. We are currently projecting construction of 123 townhome units and 72 
cluster units. The Master Development Plan approval is a closing contingency. Should the Master Development Plan not 
be approved, we have the option to waive the condition or terminate the Agreement. The close of escrow is targeted for 
June 1, 2007. We have the option to purchase two non-refundable nonapplicable 30-day extensions should our tentative 
tract map not yet be approved. Should the Seller cause a delay that would prevent us from processing our entitlements 
in a timely manner, we will be granted the right to have the extensions without payment of the extension fee. This project 
includes profit participation by the Seller for the amount of 50% above 9% net profit, with a soft cost allowance of 20%. 
We have run multiple scenarios to include interest rate increases, financing options, construction delays, and a slow 
down in absorption. We are comfortable that we will stay below the 20% threshold.
We have explored the option of negotiating this deal with no profit participation. Jackson was open to negotiations 
where we would increase the land price and move forward with no profit participation on the back end of the deal. But 
the increase in land price would decrease the projected IRR on the project.
RISK EVALUATION
▶ Political
The property is located within the Emerald Estates Master Plan area. It is zoned PCD (Planned Community Develop-
ment). The Seller is preparing a detailed Master Development Plan (MDP) that will be submitted to the City of Carlsbad 
in early January 2007. Our proposed project will be part of that submission. The Seller has been working with the City 
throughout the creation of the MDP and has gained support of the project. If one contingency – preservation of habitat 
for the Western Speckled Toad possibly located in the area – can be solved, the Seller projects that the guidelines will be 
approved by the City in March 2007. A neighbor claims that the site is habitat for the Toad, but the Environmental Impact 
report has not yet been completed. If the Toad issue is real, we will have to place a permanent habitat on the property. 
We think we can do this without losing any buildable lots.
With the approval of the MDP, our review by the Design Review Committee will be expedited. Our proposed project 
will be designated R-M (Medium Residential, 8 –10 duplexes/acre). Our current site plan shows a total of 195 units, 
which is approximately 9.29 duplexes/acre. We have met with the Director of Development Services three separate 
times. We believe that our latest site plan incorporates the City’s requests. We will need to process a tentative map and 
to obtain approval from the Design Review Board for the site plan and architecture. The tentative map is expected to be 
received by May 2007, and all appeal periods are expected to expire before we close in June 2007.
• Overall political risk is moderate.
▶ Development
Site Development
The site is currently raw land, but it will be delivered as a mass-graded pad. The Seller received the grading permit on 
November 7, 2006, and has started grading. Grading will be completed in January 2007. The Seller will construct all offsite 
backbone sewer, water, storm drain, dry utility, street improvements, and perimeter landscaping. The street and storm 
drain plans are approved, as well as the sewer and water plans. Backbone utility plans are currently being designed. The 
Seller will provide utility stubs to the site if we are able to give them fixed entry locations prior to their installing the 
improvements. Otherwise, we will have to connect to the systems. The Emerald Estates master development infrastruc-
ture will not be completed prior to our close, but the Seller will soon begin the improvements. The improvements are being 
funded by the CFD [Community Facilities District]. Should the Seller fail to make the improvements in the timeline pre-
sented in the agreement and their failure to complete the improvements affects our site specifically, we have the right to 
Exhibit 3  Platinum Pointe investment proposal – executive summary (initial draft)
(Continued)

112
Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
assume responsibility for completion of the remaining Seller work, and Seller shall reimburse Buyer at 110% of the third 
party direct costs. In addition to cooperating with Buyer without limitation, Seller shall insure that Buyer is able to draw 
against or obtain reimbursement from the CFD for completing the remaining improvements.
As mentioned above, the CFD will be funding the entire infrastructure for the site. The CFD has an approved Resolution of 
Intent. The Resolution of Formation went to City Council and was continued to January 12, 2007. The CFD is confident that the 
formation will be heard at the January 13th meeting. The bonds will be sold in two issues. The first bond sale, expected to be 
$30–35 million will cover backbone infrastructure, including sewer, water, streets, and storm drain. This is expected to occur in 
March 2007. The second bond sale will occur approximately six months later and will include dry utilities and landscaping. The 
CFD has told us that the appraisal is underway and should be completed shortly. They do not see any issues with the appraisal 
meeting the 3:1 coverage requirement. The bid package for the first bond sale is complete and will be submitted for City review 
in January/February 2006. Furthermore, the City of Carlsbad is the lead agency and is pushing to get the backbone infrastruc-
ture constructed. The improvement plans have been through multiple plan checks and the tax rate will be approximately 1.8%.
In addition to the infrastructure, the CFD will be funding certain impact fees. We are expecting to receive a $8,500 
plus credit per unit from the CFD to cover a portion of the fees. The fees that will be covered by the CFD include webbed 
toed lizard, drainage fees, signalization fees, sewer and water connection fees, supplemental water fees, and Art in Pub-
lic Places fee. Our in-tract development costs are derived from a cost estimate based on our current site plan, which was 
prepared for us by the Evensen Group. These costs, including fees and net of the planned CFD reimbursement, come to 
$63,088 per unit. This total includes a 15% contingency on construction items and a 10% contingency on fees.
A site visit was performed by an environmental consultant and previous Phase I report were also reviewed. Other than 
the possible Western Speckled Toad issue, there are no potential environmental concerns and no additional assessment 
appears to be necessary. A geotechnical investigation concluded that the site was suitable for the intended use.
The Seller will also be establishing a Master Homeowners Association to maintain the perimeter and median landscap-
ing. We will create our own sub-association to maintain our on-site landscaping detention basin and recreation facilities.
The Seller will be mass grading the well and park sites and designing the park. We will be responsible for con-
structing the well site improvements, excluding the well itself, and construction of the park. We have included $1.0 
million for the park and well site. The well site improvements consist of a block perimeter wall, some landscaping 
iron drive gates and drive approach. The park improvements are in the preliminary planning stages and are 
expected to include landscaping, a tot lot, picnic tables, shade structures, walkways and lighting, and possible 
restroom facilities. The costs of the park and well site will be initially funded from equity in the short term but will be 
reimbursed through the CFD. The well site will be deeded to the Carlsbad Water District (CWD), and the park will be 
deeded to the City of Carlsbad. Both the well site and the park will be maintained by each entity respectively.
Direct Construction
The townhome product consists of new plans that we have not built before and direct construction costs continue to 
rise. However, the cluster product is a modification of product our Phoenix Division has built before. The direct construc-
tion estimates we have used are derived from our actual costs in building the 10-plex product in El Cajon, which is 
coming in at about $80 psf. There we added an additional $10 psf to account for the increased specs we are including 
in these new townhomes.
Overall we conclude that the risks associated with both site development and direct construction are moderate.
• Overall development risk is moderate.
▶ Competitive Analysis/Market Risk
We will be building two product types, a triplex townhome and a six-plex cluster product. The triplex townhome ranges in 
square footage from 1,753 square feet to 2,442 square feet and will be priced from $445,000 to $595,000. We feel this 
product will appeal to buyers who work in north San Diego County and second home owners (weekend or seasonal) who 
are attracted to a low maintenance home with a larger yard. The cluster will range in square footage from 1,628 square 
feet to 2,673 square feet and be priced from $450,000 to $705,000. These pricing projections are the exact prices recom-
mended from our marketing consultant, the Blackfield Group. This is an upgrade version of a product that was very suc-
cessful in Phoenix. It will be highly amenitized. The master baths have been revised to meet the new “wow” factor that is 
pervasive in this submarket. There is currently very little competition for attached or mid-density product in the Carlsbad 
area. We are currently unaware of any other 8 –10 units/acre development projected within the City of Carlsbad at this 
time, but we continue to monitor new development projects within the City. We have a completed marketing study by the 
Blackfield Group that supports our product type and pricing. We are comfortable with the absorption recommendation 
from Blackfield given the two very separate product lines. The models in our estimates are currently slated to open in July 
2008. Our absorption would maintain 15 homes per month average as recommended by the Blackfield Group. But there 
Exhibit 3  Continued

The Platinum Pointe Land Deal
113
is risk. The north San Diego County market has experienced a noticeable downturn in the last 12–18 months. If interest 
rates continue to increase and if prices in markets throughout north San Diego County continue to moderate, we may not 
be able to maintain our absorption rate, or we will have to shave our margins.
• The risk associated with the market is moderate to high.
▶ Financial/Financing Risk
All indications are that interest rates will continue to rise. In the event that interest rates increase substantially during the 
life of this project, our product will still be positioned in a more affordable segment of the market. Given the size of 
the transaction ($48 million at March 2009), some form of outside capital will be used. Lot option and or joint venture 
will be considered and leads to the moderate financial risk.
• The financial/financing risk is moderate given the previously discussed political and development risks.
IRR REQUIREMENTS
Based on the above analysis and assessed risk, the IRR requirements are as follows:
FINANCIAL SUMMARY
Political
Moderate
6.5
Development
Moderate
6.5
Market
Moderate/High
6.5
Financial
Moderate
5.0
Required IRR
24.5%
Total Sales Revenue:
$112,050,000
Profit ($):
$13,707,000
Profit (%):
12.2%
Equity Required:
$8,722,000
Home Size Triplex:
2,151 sf weighted average
Home Size Cluster:
2,126 sf weighted average
Direct Costs Triplex:
$93/sf weighted average
Direct Costs Cluster:
$82/sf weighted average
Base Sales Price Triplex:
$531,667/unit weighted average
Base Sales Price Cluster:
$571,667/unit weighted average
Base Sales Price Triplex: ($/sf)
$247.17/sf weighted average
Base Sales Price Cluster: ($/sf)
$268.89/sf weighted average
IRR Leveraged:
41.4%
IRR Unleveraged:
21.0% (Required 24.5%)
TOTAL PEAK EQUITY
$11,809,000
Exhibit 3  Continued
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

114
Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
 In early 2016, Frank DeMartino, senior vice president 
of Science and Technology at EyeOn Pharmaceuticals, 
Inc., refl ected on his concerns about the challenges his 
company faced in controlling its research and develop-
ment (R&D) activities: 
 R&D is the most critical part of EyeOn’s business. 
The company will thrive only if we are eff ective at 
developing new breakthrough products. In manag-
ing the research function, we have to address 
three diffi  cult but important issues. First, we have 
to decide how much to spend on R&D. Then we 
have to decide how to allocate the resources 
among the various programs and projects. And, 
fi nally, we have to ensure that the resources are 
used eff ectively. How we address these issues 
determines how productive our research activity 
will be. 
 I am especially concerned about the third issue 
– how to control the use of our resources. I don’t 
think we do a very good job of measuring our pro-
ductivity. At the time we are spending our 
resources, both money and time, and even for 
some time after they have been spent, it is very dif-
fi cult to tell how productive we are being and have 
been. We could be missing some important infor-
mation about problems we might be having. I feel 
we should do some thinking about this issue and 
what we can do to improve the tracking of our R&D 
productivity.  
  The company and its products 
 EyeOn Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (EyeOn) focused on the 
ophthalmology segment of the pharmaceutical mar-
ket. It developed, manufactured, and sold a wide 
range of products for the diagnosis and treatment of 
ophthalmic disorders; that is, those used in the treat-
ment of defects and diseases of the eye. The company 
marketed both prescription and nonprescription 
drugs, a wide variety of products for use in ophthalmic 
surgery and for the care of hard, soft, and gas-perme-
able lenses, and a few dermatological products. 
Despite continuing price pressure from the cheaper 
generic drugs entering the market, EyeOn revenues 
and profits nearly tripled over the period between 
2005 and 2015. In 2016, EyeOn sold products in over 
80 countries, and worldwide sales totaled almost $1 
billion. 
 EyeOn used a traditional product-line organization 
structure. Reporting to EyeOn’s CEO were the manag-
ers of each of the product lines, and the managers of 
Science and Technology (Mr. DeMartino), Finance and 
Administration, International, and Legal. 
 The R&D organization 
 R&D was critical to the maintenance of EyeOn’s rate of 
growth. Over 25% of 2016 sales were from products 
released in just the past fi ve years. 
 The company’s R&D department was headed by Dr. 
Prakash Kumar, who reported to Mr. DeMartino. The 
department included 350 people – 290 scientists (80 of 
whom had PhD degrees) and 60 support staff . The pur-
pose of the R&D organization was to develop new, mar-
ketable eye-care products that would fuel the 
company’s growth. EyeOn’s board of directors estab-
lished broad research policies based on the long-term 
strategies of the marketing divisions, but the board 
depended heavily on Mr. DeMartino and Dr. Kumar to 
provide the guidance and direction necessary to ensure 
eff ective research activities. 
 Mr. DeMartino and Dr. Kumar complemented each 
other well in terms of knowledge and experience. Mr. 
DeMartino had an in-depth knowledge of EyeOn’s 
products and markets because he had advanced 
through the sales organization. Dr. Kumar was a 
chemist. 
 The R&D department was organized in matrix form, 
with eight key senior directors (plus staff support) 
reporting to Dr. Kumar. On one dimension of the matrix 
were four medical specialty groups: ophthalmology, 
 CASE STUDY 
 EyeOn Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 

EyeOn Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
115
optical, dermatology, and basic research. Personnel in 
these groups specialized in particular types of diseases. 
The basic research group was distinguished from the 
other three medical specialty groups in that its work 
took place early in the drug development cycle 
(described below). On the other dimension of the 
matrix were four preclinical science departments: 
microbiology, chemistry, toxicology, and pharmaceuti-
cal sciences. Personnel in these departments were 
experts in one of these scientific fields. Each research 
program and project was managed by a medical spe-
cialty expert. The preclinical science personnel were 
assigned to programs and projects when needed. They 
often had more than one assignment at any particular 
time.
The personnel on the research staff had needs and 
characteristics that were different from those of 
employees in other parts of the EyeOn organization. 
Managers in the R&D department had to be sensitive to 
those differences. The senior director of the basic 
research group explained:
We’re not an organization comprised of conform-
ists, and we don’t want to be. The other companies 
can have those people. Good researchers are 
unique. They are creative and intelligent, and 
although they can be aloof and seemingly disen-
gaged, they will work their tails off when they get on 
a project they like. But their feelings are easily hurt. 
It’s very easy to kill ideas. We have to be careful 
because if we use punishment, discouragement or 
penalties for failure, we may never get another idea.
Product development cycle
The product development cycle in pharmaceutical com-
panies such as EyeOn was long, typically totaling up to 
15 years for a totally new drug and from. 3 to 5 years for 
a simple product. Often the cycle started with some 
basic research designed to provide a better understand-
ing of the underlying biochemistry of the disease pro-
cesses at the molecular level. In 2016, EyeOn had five 
basic research programs underway, all in the area of 
ophthalmology: inflammation, immunology, glaucoma, 
diabetic retinopathy/cataracts, and drug delivery.
When a new product concept was formed, the prod-
uct development cycle was said to begin. Development 
consisted of a number of relatively distinct steps. First 
was the discovery phase of development, the purpose 
of which was to identify compounds with potential 
commercial applications. Scientists designed and 
tested new drug compounds against the characteristics 
of the diseases they were studying both in test tubes 
and later in live animal subjects. For most new drug 
concepts, these screening and testing activities would 
last from two to five years.
When the compounds moved into the discovery 
phase of development, EyeOn management assigned 
the effort a development program number. This num-
ber identified the effort until the product entered the 
clinical phase of testing. In 2016, EyeOn had a total of 
11 development programs underway, 4 each in oph-
thalmology and optical, and 3 in dermatology.
A successful culmination of the discovery phase of 
development was marked by the identification of a 
compound that showed promise. Such compounds 
were moved into the optimization phase of develop-
ment. This phase usually involved one to two years of 
studies of how the compound might act in the body. 
Scientists would study how the compound was 
absorbed, distributed, metabolized and excreted in 
animal subjects. They would do some exploratory test-
ing of toxicity (i.e. harmful side effects) and stability 
(i.e. length of time the drug retains its effectiveness 
when stored). By the end of this phase of development, 
the scientists would prescribe a preliminary chemical 
formulation and make a preliminary packaging deci-
sion (i.e. mode of delivery and size of dosage).
Drugs continuing to show promise were moved into 
the preclinical phase of development. This phase 
involved better controlled laboratory experiments to 
validate the results of the exploratory tests conducted 
in the optimization phase of development. The preclin-
ical phase of development usually lasted about 6–12 
months. The drugs that continued to show promise 
were filed as IND (Investigation of a New Drug) candi-
dates with the US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA). At this point, a reasonably complete composi-
tion and specification existed, and a manufacturing 
procedure suitable for the preparation of clinical sup-
plies was in place.
Once the IND was filed, the project moved into the 
clinical phase of development. This phase involved tox-
icity and stability testing of a longer-term nature than 
had been done previously. The testing was performed 
on live subjects: first normal human subjects and then 
diseased human subjects. During this testing, the sci-
entists would make judgments of the safety and effi-
cacy of the drug candidates and make final decisions 
about the dosages and modes of delivery to be used.

116
Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
The clinical phase of development generally lasted 
between five and eight years. When a product entered 
the clinical phase of development, a project number 
was assigned. This number would stay with the effort 
until the product received FDA approval or the effort 
was abandoned. In 2016, EyeOn had a total of 30 active 
projects.
A drug that passed clinical testing was filed as an 
NDA (New Drug Application) with the FDA. The FDA 
approval process took from one to three years. 
Approval was needed before the drug could be mar-
keted in the United States. However, the product could 
be sold in many other countries after it had passed 
clinical testing.
Exhibit 1 shows an overview of the product develop-
ment cycle. The times shown in the exhibit for comple-
tion of each of the phases in the cycle are for 
development of major drugs. For fairly simple drugs 
and optical devices, the times were considerably 
shorter where INDs were often filed within 12 months, 
and clinical testing took between 12 and 18 months.
A shift in emphasis
Through most of its history, EyeOn had relied heavily 
on other pharmaceutical companies not involved in 
ophthalmic markets as sources of new product ideas. 
EyeOn scientists would screen compounds developed 
from these companies, and if they showed promise, 
EyeOn would license the compounds and introduce tai-
lored forms of them into ophthalmic markets. Com-
pounds screened in such a manner were entered into 
the product development process in the preclinical 
phase of development because the properties of the 
compounds were already understood.
In recent years, however, EyeOn management had 
been shifting their R&D efforts to emphasize more 
basic research. As the ophthalmic markets had grown, 
other pharmaceutical companies had entered some of 
EyeOn’s market segments. These companies were less 
prone to offer EyeOn their newest compounds. Thus, 
the research focus had been evolving toward larger-
scale, longer-term studies of more complex and sophis-
ticated diseases of the eye. This is because EyeOn 
already had a broad product line covering most niches 
in the eye-care market, and to meet the company’s 
aggressive growth targets, new breakthrough products 
were needed. The inevitable shift toward more basic 
research made management even more concerned 
about having measures of research productivity 
available for control purposes because the investments 
in basic research were longer-term and riskier. As Mr. 
DeMartino explained:
What’s important in conducting research is to keep 
achieving progress on a daily basis. When it takes 
ten years to develop a product, you can’t wait until 
tomorrow to get the work done. The important 
questions are: Are we doing everything we can to 
ensure that we are being productive every day? 
And how can I tell if we’re being productive?
Drug investments and payoffs
New product development involved high-risk invest-
ments for potentially lucrative payoffs. Across the 
industry, only about 1 of every 10,000 compounds 
investigated in the early exploratory research stages 
eventually proved to be commercially successful. The 
probabilities of failure of a typical compound in each of 
the phases of the product development cycle were 
approximately as follows:
Phase
Probability of Failure
Discovery
90%
Optimization
50%
Preclinical
25%
Clinical
70%
FDA & Patent
Negligible
The payoffs from the research were highly depend-
ent on the magnitude and duration of the competitive 
advantage that EyeOn enjoyed when the new products 
were developed. Some drugs were breakthrough prod-
ucts that provided significant advantages over the com-
petition in large market segments. Others were either 
minor modifications of already-existing EyeOn prod-
ucts or were aimed at small market segments. Some-
times competing firms developed alternatives to 
commercially successful new drugs in periods as short 
as two to three years, while on other occasions EyeOn 
products were sold for 20 years or more with little or no 
competition. As Mr. DeMartino noted:
From my perspective, it’s not very important 
whether a product costs $30 million or $60 million 
to develop. When we are working on a drug that will 
give us several billion dollars in sales over 15 years 

EyeOn Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
117
and a 75 percent gross margin, overspending a 
little on research doesn’t matter much as long as 
the drug gets created.
The timing of the development efforts was critical. If 
the development of a particular drug was pursued too 
early, the company could be subject to a high probabil-
ity of failure and/or significant extra development 
expenses and, if problems were found after introduc-
tion, possible legal liability expenses. If the develop-
ment was pursued too late, the result would be a 
“me-too” product.
Planning and budgeting
EyeOn used a well-developed set of management sys-
tems to help manage its R&D effort. Planning and 
budgeting was done on an annual cycle, which took 
place from mid-July to mid-September. Planning was 
an iterative process. Mr. DeMartino and Dr. Kumar 
began the process by setting program and project 
objectives and priorities and by outlining an overall 
budget for the R&D department. In establishing these 
guidelines, they met with EyeOn directors and top-
level managers to ensure that they had a good under-
standing of market trends and the amount of resources 
the company was willing to spend on R&D. Then direc-
tors and managers in each medical specialties group 
and each preclinical science department determined 
the labor hours and resources required to satisfy pro-
ject and program objectives. This process was accom-
plished through a series of meetings between directors 
and managers.
As compared to plans for the development projects, 
plans for the basic research programs were easier to 
prepare because they used few resources from the pre-
clinical science departments. Thus, very little cross-
organizational coordination was required. Most 
development projects required the assistance of all, or 
at least most, of the preclinical science groups, so many 
meetings between the managers of the medical spe-
cialty groups and the director of Pre-Clinical Sciences 
were required to ensure that resources were allocated 
appropriately and, if necessary, that steps were taken 
to procure additional resources.
After the plans were prepared, Dr. Kumar reviewed 
them and made suggestions and adjustments as neces-
sary. Then the plans were consolidated and compared 
with the overall targets. Sometimes further adjust-
ments were necessary.
By February, all EyeOn employees were required 
to develop, in consultation with their immediate 
supervisor, personal objectives for the year. The 
company did not require the use of a standardized 
form or format for documenting these objectives, but 
the objectives had to be written down, and this docu-
ment had to be signed by both the employee and the 
supervisor.
During the year, budget updates were prepared on a 
quarterly basis consistent with the planning schedule. 
The budget analysis process, like the annual planning 
processes, was very informal because, as Dr. Kumar 
explained:
We do not expect the scientists to act like busi-
nessmen when they plan new product activity. We 
want to encourage them to develop new ideas with-
out many constraints, and they don’t like a lot of 
paperwork.
Indeed, one research program manager explained his 
dislike for paperwork requirements:
We work only on programs with payoffs so poten-
tially large that a monkey can run the figures show-
ing that the investment is worthwhile. The trick is to 
make the new product work, not to try to figure out 
that a new breakthrough therapy for glaucoma will 
pay off. It will!
Mr. DeMartino had two main concerns about the 
planning process. First, he wondered if too much detail 
was still being required. Second, he wondered if requir-
ing numbers about the research activities made the 
managers and scientists conservative in presenting 
their ideas. Given the company’s need for good ideas, 
he thought it was important that no administrative bar-
riers to ideas be erected.
Measurement and reporting
Accounting in the R&D department was done on a full 
absorption cost basis. Direct expenses, both labor and 
materials, were charged to specific programs and pro-
jects. Labor was charged on the basis of time sheets 
completed weekly by R&D personnel. Costs not specifi-
cally identifiable with a particular project or program 
were allocated monthly on the basis of direct labor 
hours.
EyeOn produced an extensive set of cost reports. 
Many of the reports were on a project, program, or 
medical specialty basis. They showed costs by line item 

118
Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
compared to budget. These reports were available on a 
monthly basis. Another set of reports showed expenses 
aggregated by cost center. The R&D department was 
divided into 75 cost centers. The cost reports were sum-
marized by type of medical specialty and by type of 
project or program. The program/project cost account-
ing system provided the information necessary to mon-
itor the flow of resources to medical specialty areas, 
research versus development, and long term versus 
short term.
The project/program and cost center reports were 
sent to the managers responsible for the costs. The 
managers reviewed the reports, but they were not 
required to explain variances. This was because most 
of the variances were caused by changes in the scope or 
timing of the project/program, and such changes were 
almost always preapproved by Mr. DeMartino and/or 
Dr. Kumar.
EyeOn management recognized that the cost 
reports were useful for measuring the inputs to the 
R&D processes, but they were not useful for measur-
ing the productivity of the R&D activity because they 
did not reflect any outputs. The outputs, which might 
be measured in terms of profits generated or value 
created, would not be known for years. The signifi-
cant lag between the investments in R&D and the 
returns generated ensured that traditional account-
ing measures, such as return on investment, were not 
very meaningful except in very long measurement 
windows.
To date, Mr. DeMartino and Dr. Kumar had focused 
their attention on the department’s consolidated finan-
cial summary (actual versus plan) and on the major 
R&D achievements of the year. In the last few years, 
these achievements were as follows:
2013
2014
2015
INDs filed
3
4
3
NDAs filed
6
5
3
Research publications
25
19
17
Patent applications filed
15
9
8
Patents indicated allowable
7
8
5
Patents issued
5
6
4
They realized, however, that none of these indica-
tors was a totally reliable indicator of forthcoming com-
mercial success.
Incentive plans
EyeOn used two formal incentive plans offering cash 
awards for good performance, one for scientists and 
one for senior-level managers. The scientist incentive 
plan was introduced in the R&D department in 2013. 
Four cash awards of $25,000 each were made annually 
for technical excellence. The awards were split between 
scientists doing basic research and those involved in 
development activities.
Candidates for the scientist award were nominated 
by senior directors in the R&D department. The candi-
dates’ accomplishments were judged by a seven-person 
committee which included four working-level scien-
tists, two director-level managers, and one person from 
outside R&D (e.g. from corporate marketing). The com-
mittee assigned the awards based on “perceptible con-
tributions or unusual problem-solving capabilities 
which are perceptible to fellow workers.”
The management incentives were provided through 
a company-wide program which provided stock options 
and bonuses to managers down to the director level of 
the firm. Each year an incentive award pool was 
assigned to the R&D department based on a predeter-
mined percentage of EyeOn profits. This pool was allo-
cated by R&D management to R&D employees included 
in the plan in conjunction with the annual performance 
review.
For purposes of assigning the awards in the R&D 
department, R&D employees were classified into 
three categories of achievement: (1) distinguished 
performance (DP), (2) superior performance (SP), 
and (3) good solid performance (GSP). (A fourth cate-
gory called “Needs Improvement” was also used on 
occasion, but, as Dr. Kumar observed, “these col-
leagues don’t get to stay very long.”) Table 1 shows the 
approximate percentage of people who were classified 
in each category of achievement and the bonuses that 
could be expected in an average year in each of the 
categories.
Table 1 
Category of 
Achievement
Percent So 
Evaluated
Average Award 
(% of salary)
DP
< 1%
30–35%
SP
50–60%
15–20%
GSP
40–50%
10%

EyeOn Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
119
The evaluations were based on a weighted average 
of three factors: (1) meeting the technical milestones in 
the annual plan; (2) discovering new product candi-
dates; and (3) getting new products with commercial 
potential through FDA approvals. The factors used for 
weighting accomplishments in each of these areas were 
pre-established at the beginning of the year. In general, 
the highest weightings were given to the accomplish-
ments that could be measured in a tangible fashion in 
the next 12 months.
The weighting factors varied significantly among 
the various areas of the department. For example, man-
agers in development areas (as opposed to those in 
basic research) were expected to have products pro-
gress through the FDA approvals, but they were not 
expected to generate many new product leads.
The standards used to assess performance also 
varied significantly among the areas, reflecting the 
probability of payoffs of the various activities. For 
example, to be evaluated as SP (superior perfor-
mance), managers of basic research activities might 
be expected to achieve 40% of their objectives in a 
given year. For managers of ophthalmology drug 
development activities, however, the achievement of 
50% of their objectives might qualify only as GSP; SP 
might require the achievement of 70%. For product 
development managers in optical, GSP might require 
achievement of 60% of their objectives, and SP might 
require achievement of 80%.
Management concerns
EyeOn managers felt they had an excellent research 
team that had produced an ever-increasing set of new 
products that had fueled the company’s growth. Mr. 
DeMartino highlighted a critical success factor – hiring:
Eighty percent of the really good ideas – those that 
lead to breakthrough products – come from 20 per-
cent of our colleagues. It is important for us to hire 
as many of those good people as we can, and per-
haps even more important not to lose any we’ve 
already employed. But it is very difficult to tell who 
the really good people are until their accomplish-
ments are apparent, and that might not be for some 
years after they were hired.
Mr. DeMartino’s continuing concern was that EyeOn 
did not have a good early warning system in place to 
signal potential problems on a timely basis because of 
the difficulty in measuring R&D productivity, and this 
might be particularly costly as the emphasis shifted 
toward more basic research.
Mr. Kumar had two related concerns. One was the 
challenge he faced in demonstrating the productivity of 
his department to his boss and the board of directors.
In defining what we mean by productivity, we have 
to be careful in how we define our terms and the 
measures that we rely on. For example, we rarely 
terminate projects, but we do adjust priorities and 
let some of them sit in an inactive state until a solu-
tion to a particular problem surfaces. Should the 
inactive projects reflect negatively on our produc-
tivity? . . . It’s important that whatever measures we 
use be simple enough to assemble and use without 
devoting too much time away from the job at 
hand – doing promising, leading research.
His second major concern was about the growing com-
plexity in his department:
We now have 11 programs and 30 projects under-
way, and the growth has made coordination of the 
groups more difficult. It is increasingly difficult to 
keep up with the status of each program and pro-
ject well enough to be able to decide priority 
issues. In the last six months, we have started an 
effort to try and identify a set of standard product 
development milestones and decision points 
around which a computerized information system 
could be built and used for control purposes. 
Because of the great variance among projects, 
however, not everybody is convinced how much 
use there is to organize an information system 
around a standardized process that doesn’t really 
match any real project.

120
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.
Phase of
development
Tasks
Typical Slapsed 
Time for Major 
Systemic Drug
Major 
Milestones/ 
Decision Points
Basic 
Research
Exploratory
Studies
Several 
Years
Discovery
Synthesis
Material 
    Characterization
Screening 
    Studies
2–5 Years
Optimization
Preliminary 
    Formulation
Exploratory
    Testing
1–2 Years
Preclinical
Formulation
Laboratory
Testing
6 months– 
1 Year
3 months– 
1 Year
2–3 Years
Clinical
Clinical 
Testing
2–4 Years
FDA
FDA Review
1–3 Years
NDA
Approved
NDA
Filed
International 
Product
Release
Lead 
compound
Identiﬁcation
Domestic
Product
Release
Eﬃcacy
Viability
Decision
Safety
Viability
Decision
IND
Candidate
Decision
Preliminary
Packaging
Decision
Licensing
Agreement
New Drug
Concept
Drug 
Performance 
Criteria
IND
Filed
Final
Dosage
Decision
Final
Process
Decision
Exhibit 1  Product development cycle

Axeon N.V.
121
 In October 2016, Anton van Leuven, managing 
director of Axeon N.V., a large Dutch chemical com-
pany, was faced with a difficult decision. Ian Wall-
ingford, managing director of Axeon’s British 
subsidiary, Hollandsworth, Ltd., and Jeremy Noble, 
a member of Hollandsworth’s board of directors, 
were frustrated that an investment proposal that 
had been presented some time ago had not yet been 
approved. The board member had even threatened 
to resign his post. But Mr. van Leuven had received 
advice from some of his other managers to reject the 
Hollandsworth proposal. 
 The company 
 Axeon N.V. was headquartered in Heerlen, in the south-
ern part of the Netherlands. Axeon produced an exten-
sive product line of industrial chemicals in 24 factories. 
 Early in its history, Axeon had a simple functional 
organization structure, with just one manufacturing 
division and a sales division. Over the years, however, 
Axeon acquired some foreign companies. These 
included Saraceno, S.p.A., in Milan; Hollandsworth, 
Ltd., in London; and KAG Chemicals, AB, in Gothen-
burg, Sweden. To take advantage of the geographical 
expertise in these acquired companies, each of these 
subsidiaries was asked to assume responsibility for 
sales of all Axeon products in their assigned territory: 
Southern Europe for Saraceno; the United Kingdom for 
Hollandsworth; and Scandinavia for KAG. Southern 
Europe, the United Kingdom, and Scandinavia, respec-
tively, accounted for 8%, 14%, and 6% of Axeon’s total 
sales. All other sales were handled by Axeon’s organi-
zation in the Netherlands (see  Exhibit  1 ). 
 The style of Axeon’s top-level managers was to 
emphasize a high degree of decentralization. Hence, 
the subsidiary managers had considerable autonomy 
to decide what to sell in their territories. For products 
produced in the Netherlands, the Axeon Dutch sales 
organization would quote the subsidiaries the same 
prices as they quoted agents in all countries. The sub-
sidiaries could bargain, but if, in the end, they did not 
like the price, they did not have to sell the product. 
 In some cases, the foreign subsidiaries produced 
products that competed with those produced by Axeon 
factories in the Netherlands. To date, little attempt 
had been made to rationalize the company’s produc-
tion. The subsidiaries were allowed to continue to pro-
duce whatever mix of products they deemed 
appropriate. The subsidiary managers were also 
encouraged to propose the development of new prod-
ucts, and they were allowed to build their own manu-
facturing plants if they could justify the investment in 
their own markets. 
 Management personnel were included in a bonus 
plan that provided rewards based on achievement of 
divisional revenue growth and “economic profi t” tar-
gets set as part of the company’s annual planning and 
budgeting process. Economic profit was defined as 
operating profi ts less a capital charge on the division’s 
average assets, computed monthly. The capital charge 
was adjusted annually based on Axeon’s weighted aver-
age cost of capital. In 2016, the annual charge was set 
at 10%. In prior years, it had been as high as 14%. 
Achievement of the annual targets could earn divi-
sional managers bonuses of 50% or more of base salary. 
If they exceeded their targets, they could more than 
double their base salaries. 
 Hollandsworth, Ltd. 
 Hollandsworth was purchased by Axeon in 2009. 
During the first three years of Axeon’s ownership, 
Hollandsworth’s sales were in slow decline. In 2012, 
they totaled £111 million. Hollandsworth’s board of 
directors 1 decided that the company needed a new 
management team and a major overhaul. Mr. Ian Wall-
ingford, a 39 year old with university degrees in 
 1  The outsiders on the Hollandsworth board included Anton van 
Leuven from Axeon; Jeremy Noble, a prominent London banker; 
and James Bedingfi eld, the managing director of a large industrial 
company located outside of Manchester, England. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Axeon N.V. 

122
Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
engineering and commerce, was hired. Ian had experi-
ence as a manufacturing engineer, a marketing manager 
for a British subsidiary of an American company, and a 
profit center manager in a large UK industrial company.
In the first four years of Ian’s presidency, Hollands-
worth’s sales increased to £160 million, and profits 
improved markedly, to levels that Axeon’s management 
deemed acceptable. The board concluded that a num-
ber of factors contributed to Hollandsworth’s turna-
round. An important part was Ian’s ambition, hard 
work, and management skill. Ian made some good per-
sonnel hires and implemented a number of effective 
changes in production methods, marketing strategy, 
market research, financial planning, and organization 
structure. In addition, industrial activity in the United 
Kingdom increased significantly during this period.
In an article in a local English business publication, 
Ian was quoted as saying:
This has been an enjoyable challenge. When I took 
the job, I had several offers from other companies, 
and I am still getting calls from executive recruiters, 
but I thought that Hollandsworth had potential. The 
Axeon management team promised me considera-
ble freedom to make the changes that I thought 
were necessary. And I was able to put into practice 
many of the modern management practices that I 
learned in my previous jobs. I know that if I do a 
good job here, I will have the confidence of the 
executives in Heerlen, and succeeding here will 
make me an even better manager.
The proposal
In late 2015, Ian informed the Hollandsworth board that 
he proposed to study the feasibility of constructing a fac-
tory in England to manufacture a protective coating 
chemical known as AR-42. He explained that Hollands-
worth’s product engineers had developed a new way of 
helping users to store and apply this coating. In his judg-
ment, Hollandsworth could develop a market in the 
United Kingdom that would be almost as large as Axeon’s 
present worldwide market for AR-42. Approximately 
600 tons of AR-42 was then being produced annually in 
an Axeon plant in the Netherlands, but none of this out-
put was being sold in the United Kingdom. Ian observed 
that the board seemed enthusiastic at this initial meet-
ing, but they wanted to see the detailed plan.
Hollandsworth managers developed the proposal 
over the following six months. They interviewed poten-
tial customers and conducted trials in the factories of 
three of them and proved that the large cost savings 
would indeed materialize. In the end, they estimated 
the total UK market potential for AR-42-like coatings at 
800 tons per year. If they could sell the product for 
£3,700 per ton, they would capture half of the total 
market, or 400 tons per year, within a three-year period.
Ian asked the head of the Corporate Engineering 
Division in Heerlen for help in designing a plant to pro-
duce 400 tons of AR-42 per year and in estimating the 
cost of the investment. A team comprised of engineers 
from both Corporate Engineering and Hollandsworth 
estimated that the plant could be built for £1,400,000.
In July 2016, Ian presented the results of the analysis, 
the net-present-value calculations and supporting expla-
nations (Exhibits 2–5) at a Hollandsworth board meeting. 
With Ian were his directors of manufacturing, sales, and 
finance. Here are some excerpts from Ian’s presentation:
● “You can see from the summary chart [Exhibit 2] 
that this is a profitable project. We will obtain a rate 
of return of 20% and a present value of £916,000 for 
an initial investment of £1,400,000 for equipment 
and £160,000 for working capital. I used an 8% dis-
count rate because I can borrow money in England 
at that rate to fund this project …”
● “The second chart [Exhibit 3] shows the operating 
cash flows that we expect from the AR-42 project in 
each of the seven years. The sales forecast for the first 
seven years is shown in row (2). We did not extend 
the forecast beyond seven years because our engi-
neers estimate that production technologies will con-
tinue to improve, so major plant renovations will be 
called for around the end of the seventh year. Actu-
ally, we see no reason why demand for this particular 
product, AR-42, will decline after seven years …”
● “The estimated variable cost of £2,000 per ton, 
shown in row (3), is our estimate of the full operat-
ing cost of manufacturing AR-42 in England. This 
figure takes into account out-of-pocket fixed costs 
such as plant supervision, but excludes depreciation. 
These fixed costs must, of course, be included 
because they are incremental to the decision …”
● “As row (4) shows, we are confident that we can enter 
the market initially with a selling price of £4,000 per 
ton, but in order to gain market share and achieve full 
market penetration, we will reduce the selling price 
to £3,700 at the beginning of the second year …”
● “These figures result in variable profits shown in 
rows (5) and (6). Row (7) presents the marketing 

Axeon N.V.
123
expenditures that are needed to promote the prod-
uct and achieve the forecasted sales levels. Row (8) 
shows the net operating cash flows before tax, based 
on figures in the preceding columns …”
● “The cost of the plant can be written off for tax pur-
poses over a five-year period. As shown in row (9), the 
taxable income figures are computed by subtracting 
this amount from the before-tax cash flow. The tax in 
row (10) is then subtracted from the before-tax cash 
flow to yield the after-tax cash flow in row (11) …”
● “My third chart [Exhibit 4] summarizes our estimates of 
the requisite investment in working capital. We’ll need 
about £160,000 to start with. We’ll need small addi-
tional amounts of working capital in the next two years. 
These amounts are shown in row (4). Altogether, our 
working capital requirements will add up to £190,000 
by the end of our second full year of operations …”
● “The last chart [Exhibit 5] shows some asset recov-
ery values. At the end of seven years, the plant 
should be worth £1,400,000, at the very worst. We’d 
have to pay tax on that because the plant would be 
fully depreciated, but this would still leave us with a 
positive cash flow of £840,000. The working capital 
should also be fully recoverable. So the total value at 
the end of seven years would thus be £1,030,000 …”
● “Gentlemen, it seems clear from these figures that we 
can justify this investment in England on the basis of 
sales to the UK market. It meets your policy of having 
all new investments yield at least 12%. This particu-
lar proposal promises to return 20%. My manage-
ment team and I strongly recommend this project.”
Ian and his managers answered the few questions 
raised by the board members.
At the end of the meeting, Ian and his team went to a 
neighborhood pub to celebrate. They all felt that the 
meeting went extremely well. Soon thereafter, they 
were pleased to learn that the proposal was placed on 
the agenda for the next meeting of the Axeon board of 
directors, which was scheduled in three weeks’ time.
The board meeting
The presentation to the Axeon board also went well. 
Ian explained:
It took only an hour. Mr. van Leuven said in the 
meeting that the decision seemed to be clear.
Some board members asked some interesting 
questions, mainly about the likelihood that we 
would eventually be able to sell more than 400 tons 
of AR-42 per year and about how we would finance 
the project. I explained that we in the UK believed 
strongly that we would reach 400 tons per year 
even in the first year, but we felt constrained to 
show a conservative estimate and a conservative 
transition period. We also showed how we could 
finance further expansions through borrowings in 
the UK. If our 400 tons were reached quickly, banks 
would easily lend any further expansion. The UK 
member of the board supported our conclusion.
At the end of the hour, the Axeon board voted unani-
mously to allow construction of the plant.
Dispute between parent and subsidiary
About a week later, Mr. van Leuven called Ian and said, 
“Since the board meeting, I have been through 
some additional discussions with the product and 
marketing people here in the Heerlen. They agree 
with your engineering design and plan cost projec-
tions, but they think you are too optimistic on your 
sales forecast. I must ask you to justify this more.”
Ian pushed for an immediate meeting, which was 
scheduled for the following week. The meeting was 
attended by Ian and his key functional directors and 
four Axeon managers based in Heerlen: Anton van Leu-
ven, Willem Backer (senior VP-Dutch operations), Marc 
Oosterling (director of manufacturing), and Geert De 
Rijcke (director of sales).
Ian described the meeting from his perspective:
It was one of the most frustrating meetings of my 
life. It lasted all day. Mr. De Rijcke said that from their 
sales experience in other countries our estimates of 
the UK market potential and our share were too opti-
mistic. I explained to him several times how we 
arrived at our figures, but he wouldn’t change his 
over-optimism argument. He said that Axeon’s cur-
rent total worldwide market for AR-42 for Axeon was 
only 600 tons a year, that it was being produced in 
the Netherlands at this level, and that it was incon-
ceivable that the UK alone could take 400 tons.
Then Mr. Oosterling started preaching that 
AR-42 production is complicated and that he had 
had difficulties producing it in the Netherlands, even 
with trained workers who have long experience. I 
told him I only needed five trained workers and that 
he could send me two men for two months to train 

124
Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
our people to do the job. I told him that, “If you can 
manufacture it in the Netherlands, you can manu-
facture it for us in England until we learn, if you don’t 
have confidence in English technology.” But he kept 
saying over and over that the difficulties in manufac-
turing were great. I stressed to him that we were 
prepared to learn and to take the risk, but for some 
reason I just couldn’t get him to understand.
At 6 p.m., everybody was exhausted. Mr. Backer 
had backed up his two functional directors all day, 
repeating their arguments. Mr. van Leuven seemed 
just to sit there and listen, occasionally asking 
questions. I can’t understand why he did not back 
me up. He had seemed so agreeable in the previous 
meetings, and he had seemed so decisive. Not so at 
this meeting. He seemed distant and indecisive. He 
stopped the meeting without a solution and said 
that he hoped all concerned would do more investi-
gation of this subject. He vaguely referred to the 
fact that he would think about it himself and let us 
know when another meeting would be held.
Ian returned home to London and reported the 
meeting to his own staff and to the two English mem-
bers of his board. They were all extremely disap-
pointed. One of the Hollandsworth staff members said, 
“Axeon’s management seem to talk decentralization, 
but at the same time they act like emperors.”
Mr. Noble, the English banker on the Hollandsworth 
board, expressed surprise:
I studied this proposal very carefully. It is sound 
business for Hollandsworth, and AR-42 will help to 
build one more growth company in the English econ-
omy. Somehow the management in Heerlen has 
failed to study this, or they don’t wish the English 
subsidiary to produce it. I have today dictated a let-
ter to Mr. van Leuven telling him that I recognize that 
the Dutch managers have the right to their own 
thoughts, but I don’t understand why the proposal is 
being delayed and possibly rejected. I am prepared 
to resign as a Hollandsworth director. It is not that I 
am angry or that I believe I have a right to dictate 
decisions for the whole worldwide Axeon. It is simply 
that if I spend my time studying policy decisions and 
my judgments do not serve the right function for the 
business, then it is a waste of my time to continue.
In the meeting with Mr. Noble, Ian said:
While I certainly wouldn’t say this in a broader 
meeting, I think that those Dutch production and 
sales people simply want to build their own empire 
and make the money in Axeon Netherlands. They 
don’t care about Hollandsworth and the UK. Theirs 
is a slippery way to operate. We have the ideas and 
initiative, and they are trying to take them and get 
the payoff.
After Mr. van Leuven received Mr. Noble’s letter, he 
contacted Messrs. Backer, Oosterling, and De Rijcke 
and Arnold Koonts (Axeon’s VP-finance). He told them 
that the English AR-42 project had become a matter of 
key importance for the whole company because of its 
implications for company profits and for the autonomy 
and morale of subsidiary management. He asked them 
to study the matter and report their recommendations 
in one month. Meanwhile, he sent Ian the following 
e-mail message: “Various members of the division and 
corporate headquarters are studying the proposal. You 
will hear from me within about six weeks regarding my 
final decision.”
Report of the director of manufacturing
A month later, Marc Oosterling (director of manufac-
turing) sent Mr. van Leuven a memorandum explaining 
his reasons for opposing the UK AR-42 proposal, as 
follows:
At your request, I have reexamined thoroughly all of 
the cost figures that bear on the AR-42 proposal. I 
find it highly uneconomical to manufacture this 
product in England for two reasons: overhead 
costs and variable costs would both be higher than 
projected.
As to the former, we can produce AR-42 in the 
Netherlands with less overhead cost. Suppose that 
Hollandsworth does sell 400 tons per year so that 
our total worldwide sales increase to 1,000 tons. 
We can produce the whole 1,000 tons in the Nether-
lands with basically the same capital investment as 
we have now. If we produce 1,000 tons, our fixed 
costs will decrease by £240 per ton.2 That means 
£144,000 in savings on production for domestic 
and export to countries other than the UK and 
£240,000 for worldwide production including the 
UK (1,000 tons).
2	 The total fixed cost in the Netherlands is the equivalent of £360,000 
per year. Divided by 600, this equals £600 per ton. If the cost were 
spread over 1,000 tons, the average fixed cost would be £360 per ton.

Axeon N.V.
125
Regarding the variable costs, if we were to pro-
duce the extra 400 tons in the Netherlands, the 
total production of 1,000 tons per year would allow 
us to have longer production runs, lower set-up 
costs, and larger raw material purchases, which 
lead to mass purchasing and material handling and 
lower purchase prices. My accounting department 
has studied this and concludes that our average 
variable costs will decrease from £1,900 to £1,860 
per ton (Exhibit 6). This £40-per-ton difference 
would save us £24,000 on Dutch domestic produc-
tion and £40,000 on total worldwide production, 
assuming that the UK takes 400 tons per year. 
There would be some additional shipping and duty 
costs, but these would be negligible. Taxes on 
these added profits are about the same in the Neth-
erlands as in the UK.
So I conclude that that UK plant should not be 
built. Ian is a bright young man, but he does not 
know the coatings business. He would be over his 
head with costly production mistakes from the 
very beginning. I recommend that you inform 
Hollandsworth management that it is in Axeon’s 
interest to buy their AR-42 product from the 
Netherlands.
Report of the Vice President-Finance
The same day, Mr. van Leuven received the following 
memorandum from Arnold Koonts (VP-Finance):
I am sending you herewith estimates of the working 
capital requirements if Axeon increases its produc-
tion of AR-42 in our Dutch plant from 600 to 1,000 
tons per year (Exhibit 7). Initially we will need 
£120,000, mostly for additional inventories. By the 
end of the second year, this will have increased to 
£160,000. I have also looked at Marc’s calculations 
for the fixed and variable manufacturing costs, and 
I am in full agreement with them.
Ian’s thoughts at the time
In an interview about this same time, Ian expressed 
impatience.
I have other projects that need developing for Hol-
landsworth, and this kind of long-range planning 
takes a lot of time and energy. It’s not like this is all I 
have to do. I also have to keep on top of a lot of nor-
mal operating problems. Sometimes I feel like giving 
up, telling them just to go and sell AR-42 themselves.
Managing Director
Anton van Leuven
Senior VP
Dutch Operations
Willem Backer
Saraceno S.p.A.
Managing Director
Hollandsworth Ltd
Ian Wallingford
KAG Chemicals
AB
VP Finance (Arnold Koonts)
VP Personnel
VP Research & Engineering
VP Administration
Director, Sales
Geert De Rijcke
Director, Mfg
Marc Oosterling
Manufacturing
Sales & 
Marketing
R&D
Finance
Paper industry sales
Food industry sales
Customer products
  industry sales
Export sales
Marketing research
19 plants
Exhibit 1  Axeon N.V. organization chart

126
Chapter 3 • Action, Personnel, and Cultural Controls
Exhibit 2  Axeon N.V. proposal for manufacture of AR-42 in England – Financial Summary (£000)
Year
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Total
Equipment
(1,400)
Working capital
(160)
(10)
(20)
Cash operating profit
196
328
460
460
460
348
348
Recovery value of equipment 
and working capital
1,030
Total
(1,560)
186
308
460
460
460
348
1,378
2,040
Net present value (@ 8%)
£ 916,000
Payback period
4½ years
Internal rate of return
20%
Exhibit 3  Axeon N.V. estimated operating cash flows from manufacture and sale of AR-42 in England
(Figures in rows (3) – (5) in £; rows (6) – (11) in £000)
(1)
Year
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Total
(2)
Sales (in tons)
200
300
400
400
400
400
400
2,500
(3)
Variable costs per ton
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
2,000
(4)
Sales price per ton
4,000
3,700
3,700
3,700
3,700
3,700
3,700
(5)
Variable profit margin per ton (4) – (3)
2,000
1,700
1,700
1,700
1,700
1,700
1,700
(6)
Total variable profit margin (2) x (5)
400
510
680
680
680
680
680
4,310
(7)
Promotion costs
260
150
100
100
100
100
100
910
(8)
Net operating cash flows before tax (6) – (7)
140
360
580
580
580
580
580
3,400
(9)
Depreciation
280
280
280
280
280
-
-
1,400
(10)
Tax 40% of (8) – (9)
−56
32
120
120
120
232
232
800
(11)
Net cash flow after tax (8) – (10)
196
328
460
460
460
348
348
2,600

Axeon N.V.
127
Variable costs per ton:
Manufacturing	
£1,860
Shipping from Netherlands to United Kingdom	
100
UK import duty	
100
Total variable cost per ton	
£2,060
Total variable cost, 400 tons to United Kingdom	
£824,000
Exhibit 6  Axeon N.V. estimated variable cost of manufacturing AR-42 in the Netherlands for shipment 
to the United Kingdom
Exhibit 7  Axeon N.V. estimated working capital required for manufacture of AR-42 in the Netherlands for sale 
in the United Kingdom (£000)
Year
0
1
2
3 and later
Total
(1)
Inventory at cost
100
110
120
120
(2)
Other current assets less current liabilities
20
30
40
40
(3)
Working capital (1) + (2)
120
140
160
160
(4)
Change from previous year
120
20
20
0
160
Exhibit 4  Axeon N.V. estimated working capital required for manufacture and sale of AR-42 in England (£000)
Year
0
1
2
3 and later
Total
(1)
Inventory at cost
160
180
200
200
(2)
Other current assets less current liabilities
0
−10
−10
−10
(3)
Working capital (1) + (2)
160
170
190
190
(4)
Change from previous year
160
10
20
0
190
Plant	
£1,400,000
Less: tax on gain if sold at this price	
560,000
Net value of plant	
	
840,000
Working capital recapture	
	
190,000
Net value of UK assets after 7 years	
	
£1,030,000
Exhibit 5  Axeon N.V. estimated end-of-life value of UK assets
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede, with the research assistance of Xiaoling 
(Clara) Chen.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.

Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
128
        The benefi t of any management control system (MCS) is derived from the increase in the likeli-
hood that the organizational objectives will be achieved relative to what could be expected if 
the MCS were not in place. This benefi t can be described in terms of MCS  tightness  (or  loose-
ness ). Tighter MCSs should provide greater assurance that employees will act in the organiza-
tion’s best interest. 
 How tightly to apply management controls is a major management decision that has received 
relatively little attention in the literature, and when it has, it has been primarily discussed in a 
results-control context. The concept of tight control can certainly be applied to results controls. 
Tight results controls might involve detailed (often line-by-line) and frequent (monthly or even 
weekly) budget reviews of performance as well as appropriately geared incentives. 1 But there 
are many other ways to eff ect tight management control, both with the other forms of control 
and with reinforcing combinations of control types. 
 Conceptually, eff ective implementation of tight control requires that management has a 
good understanding of how one or more of the control objects – results, actions, and personnel/
culture – relate and contribute to the overall organizational objectives. The following sections 
describe how each of the management control types can be used to generate tight control. 
 Tight results control 
 The achievement of tight results control depends on characteristics of the defi nitions of the 
desired result areas, the performance measures, and the reinforcements or incentives provided. 
 Defi nitions of desired results 
 For management control to be considered tight in a results-control system, the results dimen-
sions must be congruent with the “true” organizational objectives; the performance targets 
must be specifi c; the desired results must be eff ectively communicated and internalized by 
those whose behaviors are being controlled; and, if results controls are used exclusively in a 
given performance area, the measures must be complete. 
 Congruence 
 Chapter  2 discussed congruence as one of the main determinants of the eff ectiveness of results 
controls. Results-control systems may suff er congruence problems either because managers do 
 CHAPTER 4 
 Control System Tightness 

Tight results control
129
not understand the organization’s true objectives well or because the performance dimensions 
on which the managers choose to measure results do not reflect the true objectives well.
For many types of organizations and many specific areas within organizations, it is a rea-
sonable assumption that the true objectives are well understood. For example, it is clearly 
desirable for production workers to be more efficient and for sales personnel to sell more, all 
else being equal. In many other organizations, however, a good understanding of the true 
objectives and/or how they should be prioritized is not a reasonable assumption.2 In many 
types of government agencies and non-profit organizations, key constituents often disagree as 
to the organization’s objectives. Is the primary objective of a government agency to provide 
more services or to reduce its costs (and tax burden)? Clarity of objectives is a necessary pre-
cursor for congruity.
Moreover, choosing measurable performance dimensions that reflect an organization’s 
true objectives is also often challenging. For example, are annual profits a good indicator of 
the success of a company with significant growth prospects? Is the number of patents granted 
a good indicator of a research and development entity’s contribution to its company’s perfor-
mance, which depends critically on developing commercially successful ideas for new prod-
ucts?3 Is the number of visitors a good indicator of the success of a museum? If the chosen 
measurable performance dimensions are not good indicators of the organization’s true objec-
tives, then the results-control system cannot be tight, regardless of any of the other systems 
characteristics.
Specificity
The degree of tightness of results control also depends on having performance expectations 
described in specific terms. Specificity of performance expectations, or targets, requires disag-
gregation and quantification, such as a 15% return on assets per year; less than 1% customer 
complaints; or $2.29 in labor costs per unit of production. Organizations usually can, and do, 
set such specific, quantified targets in financial terms. But in many performance areas, such as 
with respect to sustainability and environmental performance, control is loose(r) because 
organizations do not set specific, quantified targets and merely evaluate the global performance 
area subjectively. “Profits are easy to measure; the many and often conflicting demands [arising 
from corporate social responsibility] are not.”4 Control in the difficult-to-measure areas can be 
tightened by disaggregating the global performance area into its various components, such as 
energy usage, volume and type of waste generated, and extent of recycling. In some perfor-
mance areas, however, detailed and specific targets and measures are not feasible. It is difficult 
to be specific about how many cases a lawyer should handle in a year or about what is meant by 
ethical behavior or social justice. Nonetheless, specificity of expectations is one of the elements 
necessary for the implementation of tight results controls.
Communication and internalization
For results controls to be tight, performance targets must also be communicated effectively and 
internalized by those charged with their accomplishment. Only then can the results controls 
influence performance. The degree to which goals are understood and internalized is affected 
by many factors, including the qualifications of the employees involved, the perceived degree of 
controllability over the measured results areas, the reasonableness of the goals, and the amount 
of participation allowed in the goal-setting processes. Internalization is likely to be low when 
employees perceive they lack the ability to perform well in the expected performance area, 
when they consider the desired results to be unduly affected by factors outside of their control, 
when they believe the goals are unachievable, or when they were not allowed to participate in 
setting the goals. We discuss the conditions for effective target setting further in Chapter 8.

Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
130
Completeness
Completeness is the final requirement for tight results controls. Completeness means that the 
result areas defined in the MCS include all the areas in which the organization desires good 
performance and over which the employees involved can have some impact. What is not meas-
ured becomes less visible, or perhaps even invisible. Thus, when the defined result areas are 
incomplete, employees often allow performance in the unmeasured areas to slip. For example, 
purchasing personnel evaluated solely on meeting cost standards might allow quality to slip. 
Similarly, salespeople who are asked to meet sales volume quota are likely to strive for volume, 
possibly at the expense of smaller but more profitable sales.
Thus, results-control systems should capture, as completely as possible, all information 
about employees’ effects on firm value, weighted properly, so that employees’ efforts are appro-
priately balanced across the multiple dimensions of their jobs. At managerial levels, however, 
where jobs are complex, results controls are almost inevitably incomplete. Commonly, then, 
managers direct their efforts only to measured tasks and may ignore other important-but-
unmeasured tasks (such as by focusing on improving short-term profits at the expense of long-
term customer relations).5 This is a typical example of managerial myopia due to incomplete 
results controls, which we discuss further in Chapters 10 and 11.
When the results controls are incomplete, other types of control, including action and 
personnel/cultural controls, should be designed to try to fill the void left by the incomplete 
results controls. Examples of complementary control mechanisms are action controls that 
include quality controls, or cultural controls that aim to instill a mind-set toward sustainable 
performance or innovation to counter myopic results-driven behaviors.
Performance measurement
Tight results control also depends on the adequacy of the performance measures that are used. 
As discussed in Chapter 2, results controls rely on measures that are precise, objective, timely, 
and understandable. A results-control system that is used to apply tight control requires that all 
of these measurement qualities are met to a high degree. If the measurements fail in any of 
these areas, the control system cannot be characterized as tight because behavioral problems 
are likely. Chapters 10–12 deal with the complex nature of designing effective performance 
measurement systems.
Incentives
Results controls are likely to be tighter if meaningful rewards are directly and definitely linked to 
the accomplishment of the desired results. A direct link means that the accomplishment of results 
translates explicitly and unambiguously into rewards. A definite link between results and rewards 
means that no excuses are tolerated. Both elements are pertinently illustrated in a quote from a 
former president at Bausch & Lomb: “Once you sign up for your target number, you are expected 
to reach it.” Managers who failed to achieve annual profit targets by even a small amount received 
“paltry” bonuses, while those who exceeded them earned “hefty” payouts.6 Equally, in the public 
sector, the head of the Philippines’ Bureau of Internal Revenue, the tax authority which brings in 
most of the government’s revenues, resigned over the agency’s “failure to meet its targets.” Upon 
announcing the resignation, the president’s office stated: “He has not performed well and he said 
he takes responsibility for it.”7 And, in the United Kingdom, the gas and electricity markets regu-
lator Ofgem slapped an £11.1 million fine on British Gas because the firm failed to meet deadlines 
to insulate homes under two energy-efficiency schemes that ran until the end of 2012. Although 
British Gas did ultimately reach its targets, the delay meant that thousands missed out on the 
measures during the winter of 2012–13. Sarah Harrison, an Ofgem senior partner, said: “British 
Gas’s failure to deliver two environmental obligations on time is unacceptable.” The sector 

Tight action controls
131
riposted, saying that they were “deeply disappointed” with the penalty and that they “believe the 
design of the CESP [Community Energy Saving Program] was flawed and significant problems 
were encountered with scheme delivery.” However, these arguments – perhaps excuses – did not 
sway the regulator in deeming the targets to be definitively missed, thus warranting the fine.8
Although most organizations, including non-profit and public sector organizations, appear 
to make the link between incentive compensation and performance more direct and more defi-
nite, there is much debate and controversy about this important topic. We discuss the key fac-
tors that determine the effectiveness of, and issues arising from, performance-linked incentives 
in more depth in Chapter 9.
To end this section with an example, there also is a fine line between tight results control and 
results control that is too tight or “too controlling.” Put another way, “there is a fine line between 
micromanaging and house arrest,” as the Irish Independent says when commenting on Tesco’s 
use of Motorola armbands to monitor employees at the large grocer’s Dublin distribution center. 
Each armband “measures employee productivity so closely that the company even knows when 
they take a bathroom break”:
The armbands, officially known as Motorola arm-mounted terminals, look like something 
between a Game Boy and Garmin GPS device. The terminals keep track of how quickly and 
competently employees unload and scan goods in the warehouse and gives them a grade. It 
also sets benchmarks for loading and unloading speed, which workers are expected to meet. 
The monitors can be turned off during workers’ lunch breaks, but anything else – bathroom 
trips, visits to a water fountain – reportedly lowers their productivity score. Tesco did not 
respond to requests for comment, so it’s hard to know if the arm bands have been a success.9
Analytically, however, Tesco’s system provides a good example of tight results control. It 
pushes its workers hard, but Tesco claims that workers are also well paid and that worker condi-
tions are good. Tesco compares each worker’s performance every day with a computerized pro-
jection of what performance should have been – the so-called benchmarks. Workers who cannot 
meet the standards are given suggestions for improvement. Hence, this control system meets 
every characteristic of tight results control. The results measures seem to be congruent with the 
company’s goal of efficiency, as its “every little helps” corporate tagline suggests. The measures 
seem to be complete at the worker level. Distribution center workers have no other significant 
responsibilities beyond handling merchandise with care and efficiency. The performance tar-
gets are specific; measurement is thorough and done on a frequent basis (in real time, actually); 
and the rewards, which include job security, are important to the employees involved, where 
the company states that the goal is to improve productivity while improving conditions.10
America’s Wal-Mart, the giant retailer, has similar systems in place to “have better control 
over operating expenses” through “improving supply chain efficiency” and “tight control over 
its distribution and transportation expenses”:
The retailer’s work assignment projects such as MyGuide and OneTouch have helped it in 
effective handling and movement of merchandise. MyGuide is designed to keep track of 
Wal-Mart’s employees’ time spent on each task. As a result of these initiatives, cases han-
dled per hour increased by 3% in the quarter.11
Tight action controls
Since the action-control types are quite different from each other, we discuss the ways in which 
each action-control type might be used to achieve tight control separately. Overall, action-control 
systems should be considered tight only if it is highly likely that employees will engage  

Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
132
consistently in all actions critical to the operation’s success and will not engage in harmful 
actions.
Behavioral Constraints
Behavioral constraints, either physical or administrative, can produce tight control in some 
areas of an organization. Physical constraints come in many forms, ranging from simple locks 
on desks to elaborate software and electronic security systems. No simple rules can be provided 
as to the degree of control they provide except, perhaps, that extra protection usually costs 
more.
Administrative constraints also provide widely varying degrees of control. Restricting deci-
sion authority to higher organizational levels provides tighter control if it can be assumed that 
higher-level personnel will make more reliable decisions than lower-level personnel. At Super 
Micro Computer, a California-based computer maker, co-founder and CEO Charles Liang 
“obsesses over every detail of the business, from approving the custom orders that are the com-
pany’s specialty to dictating the environmentally themed, green neckties that executives wear 
to customer meetings.” Despite its peculiarities, Super Micro has been a thriving, publicly 
traded business, beating its competitors to market by three to six months and offering the fast-
est, most compact, energy-efficient computers to demanding corporate customers such as eBay 
and Yahoo. “[Mr. Liang] is the person who approves and looks at everything the company is 
doing – every new product, marketing effort, sales effort, anything you want to do or promote,” 
said Scott Barlow, a former sales manager at Super Micro. “If [Mr. Liang] says a product will be 
on schedule, it will be on schedule,” added Don Clegg, a vice president. However, despite the 
seemingly effective control arising from centralized decision-making, Mr. Liang “is considered 
so vital to the operation that the company warns investors in regulatory filings that his loss 
could derail the company’s business, culture and strategic direction.”12
Separating duties between two (or more) employees, another type of administrative con-
straint, makes the occurrence of a harmful activity less likely because one person cannot com-
plete the entire task without involving another person. Good separations of duties make the 
control system tighter.
Netflix, the global provider of on-demand internet streaming media, sued Mike Kail, its for-
mer vice president of information technology (IT) operations, for fraud, breach of fiduciary 
duties, and other improper actions, alleging that Mr. Kail accepted commissions of 12–15% 
from the $3.7 million the company paid to IT service companies, which he then funneled into 
his personal consulting company, according to the complaint:
Experts seized on one line from the suit, filed in California Superior Court, Santa Clara 
County, that suggests Netflix may have granted Mr. Kail too much freedom: “Kail was a 
trusted, senior-level employee, with authority to enter into appropriate contracts and 
approve appropriate invoices. This is a classic segregation of duties violation,” said 
Christopher McClean, a corporate governance analyst at Forrester Research Inc., adding 
that “individuals should not have the authority to both choose and approve payment to a 
vendor because it opens the door for corporate malfeasance.”13
For administrative constraints to be effective, however, those who do not have authority for 
certain actions or decisions cannot violate the constraints that have been established. Evidence 
suggests, however, that both overrides of internal controls and collusion among employees con-
tribute significantly to fraud in organizations:
[There is a] strong correlation between a fraudster’s level of authority and the financial 
impact of the fraud. In our 2014 data, owners/executives accounted for less than one-fifth 
of all frauds, but the median loss in owner/executive cases was $500,000, approximately 

Tight action controls
133
four times higher than the median loss caused by managers and nearly seven times that of 
employees. Authority tends to be strongly correlated with loss because high-level fraud-
sters generally have greater access to organizational assets and are better able to evade 
or override controls than lower-level employees. [. . .] Additionally, because higher-level 
fraudsters are typically in a better position to circumvent controls, it generally takes longer 
for victim organizations to detect these schemes.14
This is echoed by Richard Powell, a partner at KPMG Forensic in the United Kingdom: “Com-
panies clearly have a challenge on their hands [when] the perpetrators [of fraud] are members 
of senior management, whose status in the company makes it easier for them to bypass internal 
controls and inflict greater damage on the company.”15
Preaction reviews
Preaction reviews can make MCSs tight if the reviews are frequent, detailed, and performed by 
diligent, knowledgeable reviewers. Preaction reviews are invariably tight in areas involving 
large resource allocations because many investments are not easily reversible and can, by them-
selves, affect the success or failure of an organization. Tight preaction reviews of this kind 
involve formal scrutiny of business plans and requests for capital by experts in staff positions, 
such as in the Finance Division, and multiple levels of management, including top manage-
ment.
But some organizations also use tight preaction reviews before employees can spend even 
small amounts of money. For example, at Amazon, the retailing giant, founder and CEO Jeff 
Bezos:
[. . .] keeps an eerily tight rein on expenses, eschewing color printers in favor of trusty old 
black-and-white models. No one flies first class (though Bezos sometimes rents private 
jets at his own expense). Experiments are hatched and managed by the smallest teams 
possible; if it takes more than two pizzas to feed a work group, Bezos once observed, then 
the team is too big. Offices still get cheap desks made of particleboard door planks, a 
1990s holdover that Bezos refuses to change.16
But Bezos’s approach is tight not only just in terms of control for control’s sake, but also in the 
sense of being consistent with strategy, thus providing “good control” as defined above:
Lots of retailers talk about holding down costs and passing the savings to the consumer. 
Few do so as intently as Amazon, where “frugality” is one of eight official company values. 
The reward for putting up with cheap office furniture: a $90 billion stock market valuation 
and 35% revenue growth.17
Tight preaction controls can also be exercised at the level of the board of directors. For exam-
ple, Ted Turner, while chair of Turner Broadcasting, had made decisions that several times 
pushed the company close to insolvency. As a consequence, his board of directors would not let 
him spend more than $2 million, a tiny amount for such a large company, without the board’s 
approval.18
The extent to which organizations tighten their controls also often varies with their fortunes. 
For example, as Citigroup sought to recover from its crippling losses following the 2008 finan-
cial crisis, it tried many fixes, some involving major restructurings and consequent layoffs. But 
the banking giant apparently was not satisfied. A memo by John Havens, head of Citigroup’s 
Institutional Clients Group (ICG), urged employees to be much more frugal in their expenses. 
“Managing our expenses is not only a critical aspect of our strategy, it is also an important part 
of our jobs,” Mr. Havens wrote. “Each of us must do our part to manage our expenses by chal-
lenging every dollar we spend to ensure that it is truly necessary and in compliance with our 

Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
134
policies.” Many of the policy changes include stricter controls on how much bankers can spend 
on client meetings and how often executives can call upon management consultants. “Our cur-
rent usage of management consultants is too high,” Mr. Havens declared. “Management con-
sultants should only be engaged for those limited instances where a specific expertise which 
does not reside within our organization is absolutely required.” He also noted that “color pres-
entations are unnecessary for internal purposes, therefore [. . .] color copying and printing 
should only be used for client presentations. Also whenever possible, presentations should be 
printed double sided to reduce unnecessary paper usage.” He emphasized that these “expense 
policies and pre-approval procedures will take effect immediately [and that] these policies and 
procedures apply to all ICG employees and the functional support areas dedicated to ICG, in all 
regions.”19
The requirement of reviews by top-level officers or committees or even the board of directors 
does not, however, automatically signify that the preaction control is tight. Many busy top man-
agers and even capital committees do not take the time to examine carefully all expenditure 
proposals, particularly smaller ones. They merely rubber stamp them. Or, when cajoled into 
signing off on exceptions such as to allow an “exceptional” expense claim for a “special” client, 
the authorizing manager caves and the tight policy loses its bite.
Action accountability
Action-accountability controls produce tight control in a manner quite similar to tight results 
controls. The amount of control generated by action-accountability controls depends on charac-
teristics of the definitions of desirable (and undesirable) actions, the effectiveness of the action-
tracking system, and the reinforcements (rewards or punishments) provided.
Definitions of Actions
To achieve tight action-accountability control, the definitions of actions must be congruent, 
specific, well communicated, and complete. Congruence means that the performance of the 
actions defined in the control system will indeed lead to the achievement of the intended organ-
izational objectives.
Tighter control can also be achieved by making the definitions of actions specific in the form 
of work rules (such as prohibiting alcohol during work) or policies (such as the requirement to 
obtain three competing bids before releasing a purchase order), as opposed to relying solely on 
less specific guidance (such as to exercise good judgment or to treat colleagues and customers 
with respect).
Tight action control depends on the understanding and acceptance of the work rules, policies, 
or guidance by those whose behaviors are being controlled. If the employees involved do not 
understand the rules, policies, or guidance, they will be inconsequential. If the employees do 
not accept the rules, they may try to find ways to avoid them. Understanding and acceptance 
can be improved through communication and training and by allowing employees to partici-
pate in the development of the rules, policies, or guidance.
If the MCS relies extensively on action accountability, the definitions of (un)desired actions 
must be complete. Completeness means that all the important, acceptable (and unacceptable) 
actions are well defined. “We have procedures for everything” is an indicative comment from 
someone who is working in a tight action-accountability environment. Indeed, in the words of a 
manager at a care home for the elderly:
We have procedures for everything . . . including a policy on confidentiality; a staff com-
plaint procedure; a comprehensive job description; a record of training in care; and com-
pany rules. [The company rules] include a variety of policies from health and safety to 
smoking, and a section on gross misconduct.20

Tight action controls
135
The co-owner at another care home for young people stated:
A disciplined environment underpins everything that we do; adherence to regulations and 
procedures is part and parcel of everyone’s work. Government regulations on care home 
and child protection require documentary evidence on most aspects of our day to day 
operations. I can tell you what a child resident ate on a particular day six years ago, what 
mood he got up in, what social worker s/he was with . . . The social workers have to write 
all this down; it all gets typed up. We keep the records for 10 years.21
Although tight action controls can be relied on extensively for the proper functioning of 
organizations in certain environments, such as banks, nuclear power facilities, hospitals, and 
critical healthcare homes, they are not effective in all circumstances. In some situations, the 
desired actions cannot be defined nearly completely because the tasks are complex and require 
considerable discretion or creativity. When the desired actions cannot be properly defined, 
action-accountability controls will not produce tight control; they may even be counterproduc-
tive, as they are likely to limit professional judgment, stifle creativity, erode morale, and cause 
decision delays and slow strategic responses to changing market conditions. At SAP America, a 
division of the world’s largest provider of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) software, the 
tight control exercised by SAP’s headquarters in Germany was seen as utterly irritating.22 As an 
example of improving strategic responsiveness,
[. . .] even at companies known for their engaging cultures, rule killing can improve 
business – or even shift business models. In the early days of Zappos, the company 
focused simply on providing the best online selection of shoes. But after receiving tons of 
customer feedback, they learned that surprise shipping upgrades and positive customer 
communication had a tremendous impact on loyalty. So they got rid of approvals for free 
shipping and VIP perks so call-center employees had access to the same tools as manag-
ers. Nowadays, Zappos’ customer service is as renowned as its product selection.23
But “there is a fine line between restoring trust and strangling opportunity through high 
compliance costs; [. . .] worse, the environment for bankers has been made so suffocating 
that the best leave, desperate to breathe again in a lighter-regulated landscape.”24 Apply the 
reins too tightly, and the controls become stifling; leave the reins looser, and face the risk of 
improprieties.
Action Tracking
Control in an action-accountability control system can also be made tighter by improving the 
effectiveness of the action-tracking system. Employees who are certain that their actions will 
be noticed, and noticed relatively promptly, will be affected more strongly by an action-
accountability control system than those who feel that the chance of getting “caught” is small. 
Constant direct supervision is one tight action-tracking method. Detailed audits of action 
reports are another (e.g. detailed reviews of expense reports). For example, banks or the regu-
lator can employ so-called analytics – sophisticated technological tools for analyzing millions 
of trades for patterns that suggest suspicious activity by comparing a broker’s or investment 
advisor’s trades against significant events such as merger announcements to flag possible 
insider trading, say.25
A new generation of workplace technology is allowing white-collar jobs to be tracked, 
tweaked and managed in ways that were difficult even a few years ago. Employers of all 
types – old-line manufacturers, nonprofits, universities, digital start-ups and retailers – are 
using an increasingly wide range of tools to monitor workers’ efforts, help them focus, 
cheer them on and just make sure they show up on time.26

Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
136
But there is a catch:
“People in sales are continually measured and always know where they stand. Now this is 
happening in the rest of the white-collar work force,” said Paul Hamerman, a workplace 
technology analyst with Forrester Research. “Done properly, it will increase engagement. 
Done in the wrong way, employees will feel pressured or micro-managed.”27
Action Reinforcement
Finally, control can be made tighter by making the rewards or punishments more significant to 
the employees affected. In general, significance varies directly with the size of the reinforce-
ment. Whereas rewards (incentives) are the most common form of reinforcement that organi-
zations provide in results-control settings, punishments (disciplinary actions) are common in 
action-control settings because they often involve employee violations of rules and procedures. 
Although, as with rewards, different individuals react differently to identical punishments, one 
type of significant disciplinary action – the threat of dismissal – is likely universally understood.
The way commercial airlines control the actions of their pilots provides a good example of a 
tight action-accountability control system. The pilots are given detailed checklists specifying 
nearly all required actions, not only for normal operations but also for all conceivable contin-
gencies, such as engine failure, fire on board, wind shear, and hijacking. Intensive training 
helps ensure that the procedures are understood, and frequent checking and updating help 
ensure that they remain in the pilot’s active memory. The tracking of irregular actions is precise 
and timely, as all potential violations are thoroughly screened by objective investigators. 
Finally, reinforcement is significant because pilots are threatened with severe penalties, includ-
ing loss of profession, not to mention the fear for loss of life when accidents do happen.
Even the most detailed action specifications can be undercut by the lack of action tracking 
and reinforcement. For example, rules and procedures will not be followed if top management 
does not show interest in having them followed. Thus, for action accountability to be tight, 
all of the elements of the action-control system – definitions of actions, action tracking, and 
reinforcement – must be properly designed. Moreover, action controls are sometimes seen as 
hindering efficiency. As such, reengineering efforts focused on improving efficiency sometimes 
imprudently downgrade preaction reviews, segregation of duties, paper trails, and reconcilia-
tions as non-value-added. While these controls might seemingly not add value, they can help 
prevent losses that might arise from accidents or misconduct.
Surveys of practice, however, suggest that sophisticated frauds have been on the rise, in part 
explained by an increase in computer-based transactions as part of complex IT systems that 
handle virtually all company transactions including sales accounts, cost accounts, personnel 
administration, and general ledger. Although computer-based transactions are now common-
place in most organizations, control of such transactions is sometimes loose (compared to con-
trol of “old-economy” paper-based transactions). There is no reason why control of 
computer-based transactions cannot be tight, even tighter than paper-based transactions; but 
due to system complexity, companies do not always fully understand the control risks involved.
Moreover, and as a recent study by KPMG pointed out, “although IT systems form a core part 
of [most business], many organizations suffer from not having people in the business clearly 
identified to be responsible and accountable for their usage.” The study showed that more than 
two-thirds of the executives surveyed believe that effective control is hampered because they 
put too much focus on technology and fail to address the organizational and procedural changes 
that are required. Moreover, although more than three-quarters of the sampled organizations 
cite that they lack the skills or capabilities in the area of internal audit of information technol-
ogy, only one-third bring in external support.28 These weaknesses, due to lack of attention and/
or resources, can lead to major security weaknesses, even in organizations where one would not 

Tight personnel/cultural controls
137
expect it. For example, the US Government Accountability Office (GAO) said that the US Securi-
ties and Exchange Commission (SEC), the stock market watchdog, failed to consistently protect 
against possible cyber intrusions or encrypt sensitive data on a key financial system, among 
several information security weaknesses:
“Cumulatively, these weaknesses decreased assurance regarding the reliability of the data 
processed by the key financial system and increased the risk that unauthorized individuals 
could gain access to critical hardware or software and intentionally or inadvertently 
access, alter, or delete sensitive data or computer programs,” the GAO said. Moreover, the 
GAO report stated that “while the SEC generally protected physical access to its facilities, 
the SEC didn’t sufficiently control access to one sensitive computing area at its headquar-
ters. It also didn’t update and test its contingency and disaster recovery plans or consist-
ently require tough user passwords.29
Several GAO audits have raised concerns about the SEC’s internal controls over the years. The 
latest report quoted above says the information security weaknesses collectively led the GAO to 
conclude that “the SEC had a significant deficiency in its internal controls over financial report-
ing.”30 Top financial institutions face similar vulnerabilities in their IT systems, making them 
susceptible to cyber attacks and crime either for financial gain or to disrupt services.31
But the spotlight has been put back on the importance of internal controls also following 
major corporate scandals in the early 2000s, such as at Enron and WorldCom. For example, Sec-
tion 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (see also Chapter 13) requires that publicly traded 
companies in the United States provide in their annual reports a statement by management on 
the effectiveness of the company’s system of internal controls, many of which are of the action-
control type. Section 404 further stipulates the responsibilities of the company’s independent 
auditor in performing an audit of the internal controls in conjunction with an audit of financial 
statements.32 As a consequence of the required compliance with Section 404 of the act, many 
public companies in the United States have both improved the documentation of their internal 
controls and made them significantly tighter.
Tight personnel/cultural controls
In some situations, MCSs dominated by personnel/cultural controls also can be considered 
tight. In charitable and voluntary organizations, personnel controls usually provide a signifi-
cant amount of control, as most volunteers derive a keen sense of satisfaction just from doing 
a good job, and thus are motivated to do well. Tight personnel/cultural controls can also exist 
in for-profit businesses. They are common in small, family-run companies where personnel/
cultural controls may be effective because of the overlap or congruence between the organi-
zational interests and those of the individuals on whom it must rely for pursuing them.
Some organizations use multiple forms of personnel/cultural controls that, in combination, 
produce tight control. For example, among the controls used in production areas of Wabash 
National Corporation, a truck-trailer manufacturer located in Lafayette, Indiana, are:
● Walk and talk interviews in which job applicants get to observe the frenetic factory pace.
● Group incentive plans, including a profit-sharing plan that gives employees 10% of after-tax 
earnings and a retirement plan that bases contributions on profit margins.
● Required training. New employees are strongly encouraged to take two specified Wabash 
improvement classes on their own time and are rewarded with pay raises for doing so. 
Supervisors are promoted only after they take special classes and pass a test.

Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
138
Visitors to Wabash often remark that they have “never seen a work force that motivated,” which 
the company’s attributes to its focus on “a strong emphasis on maintaining good employee rela-
tions and development through competitive compensation and related benefits, a safe work 
environment and promoting educational programs and quality improvement teams.”33
In a different context – in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis and a series of scandals and 
reputational blows – all employees of Deutsche Bank and Barclay’s, and all senior bankers at 
Goldman Sachs, were taken through programs aimed at reinforcing codes, values, behavior, 
and a strong, positive corporate culture.
Given the recent record of the banks, such programs invite skepticism. Even assuming the 
companies can cement good behavior, it is hard to guarantee their managers will success-
fully monitor, measure and maintain adherence to the values, particularly when competi-
tive pressure mounts as markets revive. Dan Ostergaard, Managing Partner of 
Integrity-By-Design, a Swiss-based group that advises on culture change and ethical 
training, is cautiously optimistic, pointing out that if banks do not address organizational 
structure, including the whole process of recruitment, promotion, remuneration and how 
they take day-to-day business decisions, it could be “an expensive dog-and-pony show.”34
In many instances, indeed, the degree of control provided by personnel/cultural controls 
alone is less than tight. In most firms, the natural overlap between individual and organiza-
tional objectives is smaller than that in family firms or tight-knit organizations. Moreover, a 
divergence between individual and organizational objectives often comes unexpectedly, 
although, as studies suggest, it is not a rare occurrence. For example, a survey by KPMG Forensic 
suggests that “the typical company fraudster is a trusted male executive who gets away with 
over 20 fraudulent acts over a period of up to five years or more.” More generally, “61 percent of 
fraudsters are employed by the victim organization; of these, 41 percent were employed there 
for more than 6 years; in 70 percent of frauds, the perpetrator colluded with others.”35 The 
steps that might be taken to increase the strength of personnel controls are difficult to assess 
and potentially unreliable. Factors such as education, experience, rank, and tenure are not une-
quivocally reliable predictors of misconduct. Or, to combine the prior section with this one by 
way of a quote from the KPMG report (p. 6): “Having good internal controls is important, but 
with any control you are ultimately relying on the human element.”
Cultural controls can help make people more reliable and affect an organization’s ability to 
sustainably generate value.36
A strong ethical culture at a company is widely seen as a bulwark against compliance fail-
ures, because it makes employees more prone to question what they see as unethical 
behavior. At the same time, it’s hard to go about establishing such a culture. Enron famously 
had a high-sounding code of ethics that failed to deter its executives from an accounting 
fraud that brought down the company.37
For example, Kellogg, the cereal maker, decided they needed to embed its code of ethics more 
effectively within the businesses. In so doing, they wanted to make the code less a series of rules 
and more a means to promote and incorporate its so-called K-values of integrity, accountability, 
passion, humility, simplicity, and results through targeted training. The company went through 
each section of its ethics code and picked out what was relevant in terms of each K-value. It then 
structured the revised code so employees could refer to it daily as they worked through ethical 
issues, and it included real-life examples of situations in which employees could recognize them-
selves. In addition to a main training for all employees, there is also a targeted training for spe-
cific roles depending on the level and the audience with which employees in these roles interact. 
The idea is that, “together, this should guide employees’ decisions, which should lead to better 
outcomes,” Vice President of Internal Audit and Compliance Jim Sholl said.38

Conclusion
139
Dell, the PC maker, also overhauled its ethics code with the aim to get employees to be 
“believers” rather than “obeyers”:
While both believers and obeyers need to follow the rules, having believers makes them 
ambassadors for the company’s ethics and values and gets them to inspire others to do 
the right thing. “They feel a sense of pride,” Dell Chief Ethics and Compliance Officer Mike 
McLaughlin said. “I think if they’re infused with that kind of pride it helps with their interac-
tions with customers and others. It shows externally and internally.”39
To accomplish that, the company made its code more aspirational in tone. To get more employee 
buy-in, Dell asked employees worldwide for input; so when the code was released, it would 
“truly feel to them what we believe in, as opposed to being told what you should believe in,” 
Mr. McLaughlin said. The message was spread through various channels, including blogs, social 
media, and even a game called the Honesty Project. The game was designed to reinforce the les-
sons of why ethics and compliance are important by allowing employees to describe the dam-
age that corruption and bribery can cause, recognize red flags that may indicate corruption or 
bribery, and identify who to contact if they are asked to pay a bribe or witness a bribe being 
paid. In the first six days after the game was introduced, more than 5,200 employees completed 
it – some taking it more than once. Is all this effective?
To measure how effective the effort has been, Dell sent out a voluntary survey to its employ-
ees, and received back more than 33,000 responses, Mr. McLaughlin said. “In that data we’ve 
seen employees with increased engagement and awareness of these topics,” he said.40
All told, however, tight control probably cannot be achieved with the use of personnel/cultural 
controls alone, and tight control will inevitably involve relying on a combination of action, 
results, and personnel/cultural controls.
Conclusion
This chapter focused on an important characteristic of MCSs: their degree of tightness. We 
defined tight control in terms of a high degree of assurance that employees will behave in the 
organization’s best interests. All of the control types discussed in Chapters 2 and 3 can be used 
to provide tighter control, but none of them in isolation is likely to be sufficient to provide fully 
tight control. Table 4.1 presents a summary of the characteristics of each of the control types 
that can be varied to affect tight control.
In some organizations, a particular type of control can be replaced or supplemented with 
another type that provides a better fit with the situation for the purpose of tighter controls.41 
Some organizations, perhaps because they have suffered major losses due to breaches of author-
ity and weak internal controls, tighten controls by recalibrating their results controls toward 
using additional detailed, procedures-based action controls. Others, often as they grow and 
become more decentralized, go the other direction by placing increasingly more emphasis on 
results controls.
But managers are not limited to tinkering with the characteristics of just one form of control 
or to replace one for another. To tighten controls, organizations must inevitably rely on multiple 
forms of controls and align them with one another. For example, large, decentralized organiza-
tions can develop strong, supporting ethics codes to guide their largely results-control-driven 
delegated decision-making. The controls then either reinforce each other or overlap, thus filling 
in gaps so that they, in combination, provide tight control over all of the factors critical to the 
organization’s success. Lincoln Electric, whose case study appears at the end of this chapter, is a 

Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
140
good example of a company that effectively uses multiple-overlapping and mutually reinforcing 
results, action, and personnel/cultural controls.
It should also be recognized that organizations sometimes deliberately choose to loosen their 
controls. They do so because an inappropriate use of controls causes harmful side effects, such 
as operating delays or employee frustration and demotivation. These side effects cause many to 
have negative feelings when they hear the mere mention of tight control. In the next chapter, we 
discuss more fully the costs and negative side effects associated with some control types and, 
particularly, with imperfect, overly tight, or inappropriate uses of controls.
Table 4.1  A summary of the characteristics that make a control “tight”
Type of control
What makes it tight
Results or action accountability
Definition of desired results or actions:
• Congruent with true organizational skills
• Specific
• Effectively communicated and internalized
• Complete (if accountability emphasized)
Measurement of results or tracking of actions:
• Congruent
• Precise
• Objective
• Timely
• Understandable
Rewards or punishments:
• Significant to person(s) involved
• Direct and definite link to results or actions
Behavioral constraints
Reliable
Restrictive
Preaction reviews
Frequent
Detailed
Performed by informed person(s)
Personnel/cultural controls
Certainty and stability of knowledge linking personnel/cultural 
characteristics with desired actions
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 166.
Notes
	 1	 See, for example, W. A. Van der Stede, “Measuring Tight 
Budgetary Control,” Management Accounting Research, 
12, no. 1 (March 2001), pp. 119–37.
	 2	 For a general discussion on priorities among “stakehold-
ers,” see, for example, “Shareholders vs. Stakeholders: A 
New Idolatry,” The Economist (April 24, 2010), pp. 65–6.
	 3	 “Patents, Yes; Ideas, Maybe,” The Economist (October 14, 
2010), pp. 78–9; “Ford Applies for Record Number of Pat-
ents as CEO Eyes Innovation,” Bloomberg Business 
(December 22, 2015), online at bloom.bg/1MtesVD.
	 4	 “Companies Aren’t Charities,” The Economist (October 21, 
2010), p. 82.
	 5	 See, inter alia, W. A. Van der Stede, “The Pitfalls of Pay-
for-Performance,” Finance & Management (December 
2007), pp. 10–13; W. A. Van der Stede, “Designing Effec-
tive Reward Systems,” Finance & Management (October 
2009), pp. 6–9. See also J. Roberts, The Modern Firm 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2004), and other 
work by John Roberts and colleagues, as well as R. 
Benabou and J. Tirole, “Bonus Culture: Competitive Pay, 
Screening and Multitasking,” Working Paper 18963 
(Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 
2013).
	 6	 “Blind Ambition: How the Pursuit of Results Got Out of 
Hand at Bausch & Lomb,” Business Week (October 23, 
1995), p. 81.
	 7	 “Manila’s Tax Chief Resigns for Not Meeting Targets,” 
Forbes (November 2, 2009), online (www.forbes.com).

Conclusion
141
	 8	 “British Gas Told to Pay £11.1m Penalty by Ofgem,” BBC 
News (December 4, 2014), online at www.bbc.co.uk/
news/business-30324764.
	 9	 “Tesco Monitors Employees with Motorola Armbands,” 
Business Week (February 13, 2013), online at www.
bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2013-02-13/tesco-moni-
tors-employees-with-motorola-arm-bands.
	10	 Ibid. See also “Wearables at Work: The New Frontier of 
Employee Surveillance,” The Financial Times (June 8, 
2015), online at on.ft.com/1IB7dz1.
	11	 “Wal-Mart’s Worth $80 Despite Soft Quarter,” Forbes 
(May 22, 2013), online at onforb.es/10lPJMF.
	12	 “Super Micro Computer: A One-Man, or at Least One-
Family, Powerhouse,” The New York Times (November 23, 
2008), online at nytimes.com. See also Super Micro 2014 
Annual Report, particularly p. 18, in respect of the com-
pany’s dependence on Charles Liang, the company presi-
dent, CEO, and chair.
	13	 “Netflix Complaint against Mike Kail Suggests Govern-
ance Problems, Experts Say,” The Wall Street Journal 
(November 26, 2014), online at blogs.wsj.com/
cio/2014/11/26/netflix-complaint-against-mike-kail-
suggests-governance-problems-experts-say.
	14	 Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse 
2014 Global Fraud Study (Association of Certified Fraud 
Examiners, 2014), online at www.acfe.com/rttn/
docs/2014-report-to-nations.pdf.
	15	 “Adequate Procedures Report – Blessing in Disguise,” 
KPMG (July 10, 2010), online at http://rd.kpmg.co.uk.
	16	 “Jeff Bezos Reveals His No. 1 Leadership Secret,” Forbes 
(April 4, 2012), online at www.forbes.com/forbes/2012/ 
0423/ceo-compensation-12-amazon-technology-jeff-
bezos-gets-it.html.
	17	 Ibid.
	18	 R. Goldberg and G. Goldberg, Citizen Turner: The Wild 
Rise of an American Tycoon (New York: Harcourt Brace, 
1995).
	19	 “Trimming Expenses, Citi Holds Back on Color Copying,” 
The New York Times (August 26, 2008), online at 
nytimes.com.
	20	 Quoted in P. Edwards, M. Ram, and J. Black, The Impact of 
Employment Legislation on Small Firms: A Case Study 
Analysis, Employment Research Series No. 20 (London: 
Department of Trade and Industry, September 2003), 
p. 52.
	21	 Ibid., p. 128.
	22	 “SAP’s U.S. Chief Plans Reorganization of Unit,” The Wall 
Street Journal (May 26, 2000), p. B7.
	23	 “Struggling with Employee Complacency? Kill Your Stu-
pid Rules,” Forbes (October 30, 2013), online at onforb.
es/17wUbzd.
	24	 “Strict Rules Are Changing How Financial Institutions Do 
Business,” The Financial Times (October 18, 2015), online 
at on.ft.com/1kfJvOR.
	25	 “SEC Deploying New Tool to Spot Insider Trading, White 
Says,” Bloomberg (January 27, 2014), online at bloom.
bg/1hkljZn.
	26	 “Data-Crunching Is Coming to Help Your Boss Manage 
Your Time,” The New York Times (August 17, 2015), online 
at http://nyti.ms/1IXM5yx.
	27	 Ibid.
	28	 “Too Much Faith in Technology Leads to Lapses,” KPMG 
(June 16, 2008), online at rd.kpmg.co.uk; KPMG’s 2013 IT 
Internal Audit Survey (KPMG, 2013), online at www.iia.
nl/SiteFiles/ITA_Survey_ok_web.pdf.
	29	 “GAO Faults SEC for Lax Cybersecurity,” The Wall Street 
Journal (April 17, 2014), online at on.wsj.com/1eF2HkW.
	30	 Ibid.
	31	 “Bank of England to Oversee ‘Ethical Hacking’ of Finan-
cial Groups,” The Financial Times (April 21, 2014), online 
at on.ft.com/1nDfO6f.
	32	 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (107th Congress of the 
United States of America, January 23, 2002).
	33	 This example is taken from “Hard Driving: A Productivity 
Push at Wabash National Puts Firm on a Roll,” The Wall 
Street Journal (September 7, 1995), p. A1. See also 
Wabash National Corp. 10-K SEC Filing (February 27, 
2015), p. 15.
	34	 “Bankers Back in the Classroom,” The Financial Times 
(October 16, 2013), online at http://on.ft.com/19OvxpC.
	35	 “Profile of a Fraudster: Trusted Male Manager – and Get-
ting Away with It for Years,” KPMG (April 17, 2007), 
online at rd.kpmg.co.uk; “Global Profiles of the Fraudster: 
White-Collar Crime – Present and Future” (KPMG, 2013), 
online at assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/
pdf/2013/11/global-profiles-of-the-fraudster-v2.pdf.
	36	 “UK Boards Urged to Take Control of Ethical Values,” The 
Financial Times (July 21, 2014), online at on.ft.
com/1zVgono. See also “The Top Companies for Culture 
and Values,” Forbes (August 22, 2014), online at onforb.
es/1lm7hIv.
	37	 “Turning Employees into Ethics Believers,” The Wall 
Street Journal (September 26, 2014), online at blogs.wsj.
com/riskandcompliance/2014/09/26/turning-employ-
ees-into-ethics-and-compliance-believers.
	38	 Ibid.
	39	 Ibid.
	40	 Ibid.
	41	 “Siemens CFO: Our Internal Control System Works Like a 
Charm,” The Wall Street Journal (January 15, 2013), online 
at blogs.wsj.com/corruption-currents/2013/01/15/sie-
mens-cfo-our-internal-control-system-works-like-a-charm.

142
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
  In our world, good controls mean good business. A lot of 
our controls are dictated to us by the Nevada Gaming Con-
trol Board, but we would institute most of the same con-
trols they require anyway. The State wants its share of the 
revenue. We want to earn profi ts. 
 Trent Walker, Bellagio Casino Controller 
  MGM MIRAGE and its properties 
 The Bellagio was one of 23 properties of MGM MIRAGE 
(NYSE: MGM), one of the world’s leading hotel and 
gaming companies. In addition to the 23 properties 
shown in  Exhibit  1 , MGM MIRAGE was also developing 
a major resort in Macau (with a joint-venture partner) 
and a new multibillion dollar “urban metropolis” on 
66 acres of land on the Las Vegas strip. At the end of 
2005, the company had over 66,000 employees and 
total assets of over $20 billion (see  Exhibits  2 and  3 ). 1 
 MGM MIRAGE operated primarily in one industry 
segment, the operation of casino resorts, which 
included gaming, hotel, dining, entertainment, retail, 
and other resort amenities. All the MGM MIRAGE 
casino resorts operated 24 hours a day, every day of the 
year. Over half of the company’s net revenue was 
derived from nongaming activities, a higher percent-
age than many of MGM MIRAGE’s competitors. 
 Primary casino operations were owned and man-
aged by the company. Other resort amenities sometimes 
were owned and operated by the company, owned by 
the company but managed by third parties for a fee, or 
leased to third parties. The company, however, gener-
ally had an operating philosophy that preferred owner-
ship of amenities, since guests had direct contact with 
staff in these areas and the company preferred to 
control all aspects of the guest experience. However, 
the company did lease space to retail and food and bev-
erage operators in certain situations, particularly for 
branding opportunities. 
 As a resort-based company, MGM MIRAGE’s operat-
ing philosophy was to provide a complete resort experi-
ence for guests, including nongaming amenities that 
commanded a premium price based on quality. The 
company’s operating results depended highly on the 
volume of customers at its resorts, which in turn 
impacted the price it could charge for hotel rooms and 
other amenities. MGM MIRAGE also generated a sig-
nifi cant portion of its operating income from the high-
end gaming segment, which also caused variability in 
operating results. Results of operations tended not to 
be highly seasonal in nature, but a variety of factors 
could aff ect the results of any interim period, including 
the timing of major Las Vegas conventions, the amount 
and timing of marketing and special events for high-
end customers, and the level of play during major holi-
days, including New Year’s Day and the Chinese New 
Year. However, the company’s signifi cant convention 
and meeting facilities allowed it to maximize hotel 
occupancy and customer volumes during off-peak 
times such as midweek or during traditionally slower 
leisure travel periods, which also allowed for better 
labor utilization. 
 MGM MIRAGE’s casino resorts generally operated in 
highly competitive environments. They competed 
against other gaming companies as well as other hospi-
tality and leisure and business travel companies. At the 
end of 2005, Las Vegas, for example, had approximately 
133,200 guestrooms. 
 The principal segments of the Las Vegas gaming mar-
ket were leisure travel; premium gaming customers; 
conventions, including small meetings and corporate 
incentive programs; and tour and travel. The company’s 
high-end properties, which included Bellagio, MGM 
Grand Las Vegas, Mandalay Bay, and the Mirage, 
appealed to the upper end of each market segment, bal-
ancing their business by using the convention and tour 
 1  In April 2005, MGM MIRAGE acquired Mandalay Resort Group at a 
total acquisition cost of approximately $7.3 billion. As a result of the 
acquisition, MGM MIRAGE became a much larger company with, for 
example, over 66,000 employees versus 40,000 and total assets of 
over $20 billion versus $11 billion (see Exhibit 3). 
 CASE STUDY 
 Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort 

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
143
and travel segments to fill the midweek and off-peak 
periods.2 The company’s primary methods of compet-
ing successfully in the high-end segment consisted of:
● locating resorts in desirable leisure and business 
travel markets, and operating at superior sites 
within those markets;
● constructing and maintaining high-quality resorts 
and facilities, including luxurious guestrooms along 
with premier dining, entertainment, and retail 
amenities;
● recruiting, training, and retaining well-qualified 
and motivated employees to provide superior and 
friendly customer service;
● providing unique, “must-see” entertainment attrac-
tions; and
● developing distinctive and memorable marketing 
and promotional programs.
A key element of marketing to premium gaming cus-
tomers was personal contact by marketing personnel. 
Direct marketing was also important in the convention 
segment. MGM MIRAGE maintained Internet websites 
that informed customers about its resorts and allowed 
customers to book hotel rooms and make restaurant 
and show reservations. The company also operated call 
centers to service customers by phone to make hotel, 
restaurant, and show reservations. Finally, MGM 
MIRAGE utilized its world-class golf courses in market-
ing programs. The company’s major Las Vegas resorts 
offered luxury suite packages that included golf privi-
leges, such as golf packages at special rates or on a com-
plimentary basis for premium gaming customers.
In this environment, the company’s key revenue-
related performance indicators were:
● Gaming revenue indicators, such as table games 
drop and slot machines handle (volume indicators) 
and win or hold percentages (profitability indica-
tors). These performance indicators are discussed in 
detail in the later sections of the case.
● Hotel revenue indicators, such as hotel occupancy 
(volume indicator), average daily rate (ADR – a price 
indicator), and revenue per available room 
(REVPAR – a summary measure of hotel results that 
combined ADR and occupancy rate).
Most of MGM MIRAGE’s revenue was cash-based. 
Customers typically wagered with cash or paid for non-
gaming services with either cash or credit cards. The 
business, however, was capital intensive, and the com-
pany relied heavily on the ability of its resorts to gener-
ate operating cash flow to repay debt financing, fund 
maintenance capital expenditures, and provide excess 
cash for future developments.
MGM MIRAGE was making increasing use of 
advanced technologies to help maximize revenue and 
operational efficiency. For example, the company was 
in the process of combining its player-affinity pro-
grams, the Players Club and Mandalay’s One Club, into 
a single program. This integration would link all MGM 
MIRAGE’s major resorts and consolidate all slots and 
table-games activity for customers with a Players Club 
account. Under the combined program, customers 
qualified for benefits (“comps”) across all of the com-
pany’s resorts, regardless of where they played. This 
program enabled the company to get to know its better 
customers and to market to them more effectively.
A significant portion of the slot machines at the 
MGM MIRAGE resorts operated with the EZ-Pay™ 
cashless gaming system, including the Mandalay 
resorts that had recently converted their slot machines. 
This system enhanced both the customer experience 
and increased the revenue potential of the slot 
machines.
Technology was a critical part of MGM MIRAGE’s 
strategy in nongaming operations and administrative 
areas as well. For example, the hotel systems included 
yield management modules that allowed maximizing 
occupancy and room rates. Additionally, these systems 
captured most charges made by customers during their 
stay, including allowing customers of any of the com-
pany’s resorts to charge meals and services at other 
MGM MIRAGE resorts to their hotel accounts. In short, 
this system enhanced guest service and improved yield 
management across the company’s portfolio of resorts.
The Bellagio
The Bellagio, located in the heart of the Las Vegas strip, 
was widely recognized as one of the premier casino 
resorts in the world. Inside the richly decorated resort 
was a conservatory filled with unique botanical dis-
plays that changed with the season. In front was an 
2	 MGM MIRAGE’s marketing strategy for Treasure Island, New York-
New York, Luxor, and Monte Carlo was aimed at attracting middle- 
to upper-middle-income guests, largely from the leisure travel and, 
to a lesser extent, the tour and travel segments. Excalibur and Circus 
Circus Las Vegas generally catered to the value-oriented and middle-
income leisure travel and tour and travel segments.

144
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
eight-acre lake featuring over 1,000 fountains that per-
formed a choreographed ballet of water, music, and 
lights. Amenities and entertainment options at the 
Bellagio included an expansive pool, a world-class spa, 
exquisite restaurants, a luxuriant nightclub and several 
bars and lounges, and shows by Cirque du Soleil, as 
well as a gallery of fine arts. The Bellagio also featured 
200,000 square feet of convention space.
In the casino operations area, the Bellagio operated 
2,409 coin-operated gaming devices (slot machines) 
and 143 game tables (see Exhibit 1), slightly over half of 
which were blackjack tables. The other table games 
included primarily baccarat, craps, and roulette. The 
casino also operated a keno and poker area. The games 
operated on a 24/7 basis in three shifts per day: day 
(8 a.m.– 4 p.m.), swing (4 p.m.–midnight), and grave-
yard (midnight–8 a.m.) shifts. Approximately 1,000 
people were employed in casino operations.
As in most companies in this industry, the gaming 
(casino) and nongaming operations in each of the MGM 
MIRAGE properties such as the Bellagio were run as 
separate profit centers. Exhibit 4 shows the Table 
Games Division organization chart. Bill Bingham, vice 
president of table games, reported directly to Bill 
McBeath, Bellagio’s president/CEO. The vice president 
of the separate Slot Machines Division of the casino 
also reported directly to Bill McBeath.
The unique feature of a casino resort organization, 
as compared to that in most corporations, was the rela-
tively large size of the finance staff. In the Bellagio, 
about 1,000 of the total of approximately 4,000 employ-
ees were in the finance organization, reporting in a 
direct line to Jon Corchis, executive vice president/
CFO (Exhibit 5). Strict separation was maintained 
between operations and recordkeeping. The finance 
organization was large because it had responsibility for 
cash control and recordkeeping, both important func-
tions in the casino and food and beverage parts of the 
business, particularly. Thus, the finance organization 
included credit operations personnel, casino change 
personnel (cage operations), pit clerk personnel, and 
count room personnel, in addition to people who were 
normally part of a finance organization, such as 
accounting clerks and financial analysts.
Laws and regulations over 
gaming activities
This case is focused on the controls used in the casino, 
especially in the difficult-to-control table games areas 
such as the blackjack pits. Many of these controls were 
legally mandated because the gaming industry was 
highly regulated. Each company had to maintain its 
licenses and pay gaming taxes to be allowed to con-
tinue operations. Each casino was subject to extensive 
regulation under the laws, rules, and regulations of the 
jurisdiction where it was located. These laws, rules, 
and regulations generally concerned the responsibility, 
financial stability, and character of the owners, manag-
ers, and persons with financial interest in the gaming 
operations. Violations of laws in one jurisdiction could 
result in disciplinary action in other jurisdictions. 
Exhibit 6 shows a more detailed description of some of 
these regulations as applied in the State of Nevada.
In connection with the supervision of gaming activi-
ties at the company’s casinos, specifically, MGM 
MIRAGE maintained stringent controls on the record-
ing of all receipts and disbursements. These controls 
included:
● locked cash boxes on the casino floor;
● daily cash and coin counts performed by employees 
who were independent of casino operations;
● constant observation and supervision of the gaming 
area;
● observation and recording of gaming and other 
areas by closed-circuit television;
● timely analysis of deviations from expected perfor-
mance; and
● constant computer monitoring of slot machines.
Used in the casino, these controls were intended to 
ensure that the casino and the various governmental 
entities each kept their fair share of the money that was 
wagered.
Some of the regulations required extensive training 
of casino personnel to ensure compliance. For example, 
the last paragraph of the regulations shown in Exhibit 6 
dealt with the reporting of so-called suspicious activi-
ties related to money laundering and/or the structuring 
of transactions by customers to avoid reporting to the 
US Internal Revenue Service (IRS) tax authority. This 
regulation, particularly, had regained importance sub-
sequent to the signing into law of the US Patriot Act of 
2001 following the terrorist attacks on the United 
States. Because a casino is not a bank, where every 
transaction can be more easily traced, and because the 
law required the reporting of any cash transaction in 
excess of $10,000 as a result of one or a combination of 

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
145
transactions over a 24-hour period, the company pro-
vided extensive training to standardize the handling, 
aggregation, and reporting of same type or dissimilar 
cash transactions by single customers on a single or 
multiple visits within a 24-hour period.
The company’s businesses were also subject to vari-
ous other federal, state, and local laws and regulations 
in addition to gaming regulations. These laws and reg-
ulations included, but were not limited to, restrictions 
and conditions concerning alcoholic beverages, envi-
ronmental matters, employees, currency transactions, 
taxation, zoning and building codes, and marketing 
and advertising.
The game of blackjack and the roles 
of dealers
In a short case, it is not possible to describe all of the 
many controls that were employed in the casino. To 
simplify the discussion, all references will be to the 
table game of blackjack.3 The following section pro-
vides a brief description of blackjack and the personnel 
involved in running it.
Blackjack is a very popular card game where up to 
seven patrons play against the house. The players’ 
object is to draw cards whose total is higher than the 
dealer’s total without exceeding 21.
Each blackjack table was run by a dealer whose job 
was to sell chips to customers, deal the cards, take los-
ing wagers, and pay winning wagers. Dealing was a 
skilled profession that required some training and con-
siderable practice. Experience was valuable, as the 
dealer’s value to the casino increased with the number 
of games that could be dealt within a given time period, 
and speed usually increased with experience. Experi-
ence was also valuable in identifying players who might 
be cheating.
Dealers assigned to a table worked for one hour and 
then were replaced by a relief dealer during their 
20-minute break. Relief dealers worked at three differ-
ent tables. The frequent breaks were required because 
the job was mentally and physically taxing – dealers 
were required to be standing up while they dealt; they 
had to maintain intense concentration, as errors in pay-
ing off bets were not tolerated; and they had to main-
tain good humor under sometimes difficult conditions 
(e.g. dealing to players who became irritable because 
they were losing).
Bill Bingham, vice president of table games, 
described a good dealer as follows:
A good dealer makes a minimum number of mis-
takes and is productive in terms of hands per hour. 
But we don’t clock our dealers. We believe that cus-
tomers gravitate towards a dealer they are comfort-
able with, and that means different things for every 
customer. Some players prefer a slower pace.
We only hire experienced dealers, and so we 
assume that they have mastered the technical 
aspect of dealing. For us, customer satisfaction is 
key, meaning that dealers have to be welcoming 
and engaging. They smile; they make eye contact 
and conversation with the players; and they wish 
them well. We also value attendance. Dealers with 
perfect attendance over a six-month period earn an 
extra vacation day.
Regarding speed, you may have noticed as you 
walked through the casino that some tables have 
only one or two customers. You might ask why I 
don’t close these tables. As a matter of fact, a low 
number of customers at a table doesn’t worry me at 
all. If a good dealer can do 60 hands per hour on a 
table with, say, five customers, then that same 
dealer probably can do nearly 300 hands with just 
one customer! And, as I said, some customers 
don’t like to join a busy table, and so it all works out 
in the end.
Bellagio dealers were paid well. While they earned a 
base wage of only $6.15 per hour, their total compensa-
tion was usually in the range of $85,000–$100,000 per 
year, including tokes (tips), which were shared equally 
among all dealers. Because the total compensation was 
high, perhaps among the top two or three casinos in Las 
Vegas, the Bellagio was seen a desirable place to work. 
The company hired only dealers with a minimum of 
two years’ experience. Dealer turnover was low – less 
than 3%.
The blackjack tables at Bellagio were spread across 
six pits containing 16–30 blackjack tables each. Floor 
supervisors (also called floor persons) supervised three 
to six blackjack tables, depending on the so-called table 
minimum (i.e. the minimum dollar amount to be 
wagered at the table). Each shift was also staffed by 
3	 This is done with little loss of generality. Control over all the table 
games in the Bellagio was nearly identical. The one major exception 
was that one extra level of supervision (box person) was used at the 
crap tables (see Exhibit 4). In the slot machines area, control was 
simpler because machines eliminated the human element (dealers). 
The machines did, however, have to be inspected regularly for 
evidence of tampering.

146
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
three to five pit managers (also called pit bosses), as well 
as a shift manager and an assistant shift manager. Hence, 
for example, when fully operating during a busy day 
shift, pit number 4, which contained 30 blackjack tables, 
employed about 30 dealers (depending on the number 
of tables that were open in the pit), 10 relief dealers, up 
to 10 floor persons, and one pit manager (plus relief).4 
In total, the Bellagio employed about 775 dealers, 
225 floor (and box) supervisors, and 16 pit managers. 
Because they did not share in tokes, floor persons and 
pit managers earned less than dealers; on average about 
$62,000 and $85,000 per year, respectively.
Controls over cash and credit
Because most of the casino business was conducted in 
terms of cash or cash equivalents (i.e. chips), having 
good control over the many stocks of cash and chips 
located within the casino and over movements of these 
stocks without loss was essential. Moreover, because 
marker play (play on credit) represented a significant 
portion of the table games volume at Bellagio, the com-
pany also maintained strict controls over issuing credit. 
Overall, then, Bellagio’s cash and credit control system 
can be described in terms of four main elements: 
(1) individual accountability for cash and (cash equiva-
lent) stocks; (2) formal procedures for transfers of 
cash; (3) strict controls over credit issuance; and 
(4) tight control in the count rooms.
A. Individual accountability for cash stocks
All cash stocks – with the exception of those kept at a 
game table or those taken from a game or slot machine 
for counting – were maintained on an imprest basis. 
This meant that most personnel who dealt directly with 
cash, such as change personnel, coin redemption per-
sonnel, cashiers, and chip fill bank personnel, were 
held individually accountable for a specific sum of 
money that was charged out to them. These personnel 
were required to turn in the exact amount of money for 
which they were given responsibility, and any large 
shortages or persistent patterns of shortages were 
grounds for dismissal.
B. Formal procedures for transfers
Strict procedures had to be followed when transferring 
cash or chips to or from nonimprest funds (e.g. a game 
table). All transfers required the creation of formal 
transactions signifying the transfer of accountability 
for the money involved. These procedures can be illus-
trated by describing the so-called drop standards and 
what was required to move cash or chips to and from a 
blackjack table.
When the Bellagio casino opened in 1998, the drop 
box affixed to each table was removed and its contents 
were counted at the end of each shift. But little or no 
use was made of the shift-by-shift information, so in 
2004, the practice was changed to just one drop per 
day, a so-called 24-hour drop.
The drop for each table had to be reconciled with 
other recorded transactions that occurred during the 
day. First, at the close of each shift, the incoming and 
outgoing pit managers proceeded through their pits 
and counted the chips (for blackjack) on each table, 
and recorded them on a table inventory sheet (see 
Exhibit 7). Table inventory sheets indicated the date, 
shift, game table number, and count by denomination 
and in total. Both the incoming and outgoing pit man-
agers were required to sign the table inventory sheet 
verifying the accuracy of the count. When completed, 
one copy of the table inventory sheet was dropped in 
the pit drop box and the duplicate copy was delivered to 
the casino cage,5 where the cage cashier or cage super-
visor entered the table inventory amount (by denomi-
nation and in total) for each table into the computer 
system. Pit managers did not have access to the com-
puter system that would allow them to add, change, or 
delete table inventory amounts.
As the game was played, several transactions could 
take place. One involved players buying chips from the 
dealer for cash or credit. Cash was deposited immedi-
ately in the drop box. Players could not make reverse 
exchanges (chips for cash) at the tables. They had to 
take their chips to the casino cage where this type of 
exchange was made. Credit had to be approved by 
checking the customer’s credit authorization limit 
through the use of a computer terminal located in the 
pit. If the credit was approved, a so-called marker was 
prepared. This process is described in the next section.
Transfers of chips to and from a gaming table were 
also common. Chip transfers to a table took place each 
time a table was opened for play or when additional 
chips were needed at an already open table. When the 
pit boss decided to open a blackjack table, or a floor 
4	 This pit also contained a few other table games, such as roulette 
wheels.
5	 This was a secure work area within the casino where the casino 
bankroll was kept.

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
147
person noticed that additional chips were needed at a 
table, a request for a particular mix of chips was input 
into the computer terminal in the pit (using a so-called 
input form) and relayed to the fill bank cashier in the 
casino cage, where a four-part, serially numbered fill 
slip was printed (see Exhibit 8). The fill bank cashier 
then summoned a security guard and filled the order 
in the guard’s presence. Both the chip bank cashier and 
the security guard then signed copies 1, 2, and 3 of the 
fill slip. Copy 4 of the fill slip was retained by the cage to 
forward to casino accounting daily. The security guard 
then transported copies 1 and 2 of the fill slip and the 
fill to the table where the fill was required. The chip 
bank cashier retained copy 3 of the fill slip. The guard 
then gave copies 1 and 2 of the fill slip to the pit man-
ager and placed the fill on the table. The dealer counted 
the fill by breaking down the chips in public view, 
agreed the count to the fill slip, and signed copies 1 and 
2 of the fill slip. The pit manager also signed copies 1 
and 2 of the fill slip. The dealer then placed the fill in 
the table tray and inserted copy 2 of the fill slip and 
copy 2 of the input form into the drop box. Copy 1 of the 
fill slip was given to the security guard who returned it 
to the chip bank cashier in the cage. Copies 1 and 3 of 
the fill slip were later forwarded to the casino account-
ing department.
A similar process was followed when a table was 
closed or an overabundance of chips had to be trans-
ferred to the cage, in which instance the transaction 
was traced through the use of an input form and credit 
slip (instead of a fill slip).
The so-called drop procedure, the process through 
which the table drop box was removed at the end of 
each gaming day, operated as follows. At least two 
security guards first obtained the soft count room key, 
locked storage carts with empty drop boxes, and the 
drop box release keys from the cage. They then pro-
ceeded to the table game pits where they unlocked the 
cart padlocks utilizing the drop box storage cart keys, 
removed the empty drop boxes, and placed them on 
their respective table. Pit managers and security 
guards observed the empty drop boxes from the time 
they were removed from the carts until placed on 
their respective gaming table. After setting out the 
empty drop boxes, the security guards removed the 
full drop boxes from the table using the drop box 
release keys. Empty drop boxes were then locked on 
the tables and the full drop boxes were immediately 
stored in carts. When the drop was complete but prior 
to transport, the carts were secured with a different 
padlock designated for carts with full drop boxes. Nei-
ther security guards nor pit managers had access to 
the keys for this padlock. At a minimum, two security 
guards and one pit manager transported the full drop 
boxes in the locked carts to the soft count room where 
they were secured until the count took place. Multiple 
drop teams were utilized such that each made only 
one trip to and from the casino floor for the placement 
and collection of drop boxes. The security guards 
completed the drop cycle by returning the keys to the 
cage.
C. Strict controls over credit issuance
When players wanted to gamble with money borrowed 
from the casino, as was common, they were issued 
what was called a marker (or counter check). Players’ 
credit limits had to be preapproved.
Strict controls were applied over the issuance of 
markers. Marker paperwork contained multiple 
parts; (1) the original, which was maintained in the 
pit until the marker was settled, after which it was 
transferred to the cage; (2) an issuance stub, signed 
by the dealer and floor supervisor and inserted into 
the table drop box when the marker was issued; and 
(3) a payment stub. If the marker was paid in the pit, 
the payment stub was signed by the dealer and floor 
supervisor and inserted in the table game drop box. 
If paid at the table, there were strict rules for the 
dealer to follow when advancing the chips in the 
amount of the marker to the customer (e.g. the dealer 
had to break down the chips in full public view – and, 
obviously, in full view of the surveillance camera 
overhead – prior to advancing the chips). If the 
marker was not paid, the payment stub was trans-
ferred to the cage with the original marker. All these 
documents contained a check number, customer 
number, shift, pit number, type of table game, table 
number, date and time, and the approved dollar 
amount, in addition to the required employee signa-
tures and ID numbers. There was also a time limit 
(30 minutes) within which the marker issuance pro-
cess had to be completed, as well as strict rules for 
voiding markers.
Because marker play represented a significant por-
tion of the table games volume at Bellagio, the com-
pany also aggressively pursued collection from those 
customers who failed to pay their marker balances 
timely. These collection efforts were similar to those 
used by most large corporations when dealing with 

148
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
overdue customer accounts, including the mailing of 
statements and delinquency notices, personal contacts, 
the use of outside collection agencies, and civil 
litigation. A significant portion of the company’s 
accounts receivable, for amounts unpaid resulting from 
markers which were not collectible through banking 
channels, was owed by major casino customers from 
Asia. In this instance, the collectability of unpaid mark-
ers was affected by a number of factors, including 
changes in currency exchange rates and economic con-
ditions in the customers’ home countries.
D. Tight security in count rooms
Wins (or losses) on a particular game table could not be 
determined until the funds in the drop box were 
counted. All counting from table games was done in the 
soft count room,6 a highly secure room located adjacent 
to the casino cage. Tight security and supervision was 
necessary in the count rooms to ensure that the win-
nings were tallied accurately and that all the money to 
which the casino was entitled was added to stores in 
the casino cage.
All cash and chips inventory storied in the soft 
count room was secured from unauthorized access at 
all times. Access to the count room during the count 
was restricted to members of the drop and count 
teams, authorized observers, supervisors for resolu-
tion of problems, authorized maintenance personnel, 
and personnel performing currency transfers. Access 
to stored table game drop boxes, full or empty, was 
restricted to authorized members of the drop and 
count teams. When counts from various revenue cent-
ers occurred simultaneously in the soft count room 
with the table game count, each count table could con-
tain funds from only one revenue center and the tables 
had to be adequately spaced to prevent commingling 
of funds. During the count, a minimum of three per-
sons had to be in the count room until the monies were 
transferred and accepted into cage accountability. 
Full-time count personnel independent of the pit 
department and the subsequent accountability of 
count proceeds had to be maintained by the casino to 
ensure the staffing of a count team with at least three 
members each day.
The count began with the opening of the first table 
game drop box and ended when a member of the cage 
signed the master games worksheet and assumed 
accountability of the drop proceeds. During the actual 
counting process, very strict procedures were followed, 
as described in Exhibit 9. The counting process was 
filmed by the cameras located in the room. After the 
money was counted, it was transferred to the casino 
cage.
Only after the cash and markers in the drop box 
had been counted was it possible to calculate the win-
nings for each table. Specifically, the win for a par-
ticular gaming table was calculated by determining 
the total drop (= cash + markers in the drop box) 
adjusted for table inventory (= beginning table inven-
tory + fills − credits − ending table inventory), as 
illustrated in the following (simplified) example taken 
from the Bellagio master games worksheet for January 
17, 2006:7
GAME: BJ
SHIFT: ALL
PIT: ALL
DATE: 01/17/06
TOTAL BEGINNING INVENTORY
29,497,800.00
TOTAL FILLS
3,923,960.00
TOTAL CREDITS
21,500.00
TOTAL ENDING INVENTORY
32,548,000.00
TOTAL CASH DROP
583,008.00
TOTAL COUNTER CHECKS
626,500.00
WIN (LOSS)
357,248.00
As illustrated in this example for the blackjack game, 
the results for all games for each shift were reported on 
the master games worksheet, which was produced daily 
and summarized by type of game. The uses of this doc-
ument as a control report are described further in a 
later section of the case.
6	 This money was mostly bills and markers; hence the name soft count 
room. Coins taken from the slot machines were counted in the hard 
count room, which was about to disappear due to the use of slot 
machine tickets, rather than coins.
7	 Numbers in this example were disguised to safeguard company 
restrictions on the release of internal operating data.

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
149
Control of games
As discussed, the table games and the slot machines 
provided the only ways by which the casino made 
money. The table games were particularly difficult to 
control because of the need to rely on people who might 
be tempted by the extremely large amounts of money 
that could exchange hands very quickly.
In response to this difficult control problem, multi-
ple forms of control were required by the Nevada 
Gaming Control Board (GCB) and used in the Bella-
gio to help ensure that the casino kept the cash to 
which it was entitled. These included: (1) licensing of 
casino personnel; (2) standardization of actions of 
personnel running the games; (3) careful supervision 
and surveillance of the actions taking place at the 
table; (4) monitoring of results; and (5) strict audit-
ing procedures. These are discussed in the following 
sections.
A. Licensing
All employees of the casino (referred to by the GCB as 
gaming employees)8 had to be registered with the 
GCB. The casino was required to submit a report to 
the GCB containing the name, social security num-
ber, position held, and date of hire of each gaming 
employee hired during the previous month. In addi-
tion, a registration packet had to be submitted for 
each employee. The key contents of the registration 
packet were the gaming employee registration applica-
tion (which contained all the basic information about 
the employee [name, address, social security num-
ber] and employer), the gaming employee question-
naire (which contained additional information 
relating to the background of the applicant), and the 
fingerprint form. The registration process itself essen-
tially involved a background check of gaming employ-
ees against police department records. When 
applicants did not pass the registration process, they 
could not be kept in employ by the casino. Successful 
registration, on the other hand, resulted in the issu-
ing of a gaming card (essentially a gaming work per-
mit), which expired after five years, at which time a 
new application had to be filed.
Similarly, on or before the 15th of the month after a 
calendar quarter, the casino was required to submit a 
report to the GCB containing the name, social security 
number, position held, and date of termination of each 
gaming employee terminated or separated from ser-
vice within the previous quarter.
The Bellagio, however, performed its own 
employee screenings independent of the required reg-
istration process. The intent of these background 
checks was to avoid hiring people who had been 
involved in crimes or violations of casino rules, or 
those who might be attracted because of a need for 
quick cash. In the words of Bill Bingham, vice presi-
dent of table games, “We know from experience that 
dealers with addiction issues, either alcohol, drugs, or 
gambling, are the ones to watch out for; they need 
cash to satisfy their addiction, and there is plenty of 
cash around here.”
Moreover, Robert Rudloff, vice president of inter-
nal audit, noted that, “Dealers who, say, steal at one 
casino could still get in under the radar screen at 
another casino if the stealing was not reported to the 
police, which is basically what the GCB checks 
against. Our own preemployment screening hopefully 
can catch this.” Trent Walker, casino controller, 
added: “What we really need though is a casino-wide 
system, kind of like an alert system, that links the 
whole city.”
While the required background checking for gam-
ing employees was relatively simple, checks on so-
called key employees were more elaborate. Key 
employees included any executive, employee, or agent 
of a gaming establishment having the power to exercise 
a significant influence over decisions concerning any 
part of the gaming operation. The GCB required key 
employees to be licensed, a process that involved com-
prehensive background checks and extensive informa-
tion, including the scrutiny of employment history, 
personal financial statements, and tax returns.
B. Standardization of actions at the tables
At the gaming tables, most of the dealers’ physical 
motions were standardized in order to make supervi-
sion and surveillance easier. For example:
1.	 All cash and chip exchanges were to be made in the 
middle of the gaming table in full public view to 
make them easier to see by supervisory personnel 
and the surveillance camera overhead.
2.	 Tips were to be accepted by tapping the cash or chips 
on the table and placing them in a clear, locked toke 
8	 Simply put, gaming employees essentially included all casino 
personnel except bartenders, cocktail waitresses, or other persons 
engaged exclusively in preparing or serving food or beverages.

150
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
box attached to the gaming tables. This was done to 
distinguish these exchanges from wagers.
3.	 Before dealers left their tables, they were required 
to place their hands in the middle of the table and to 
show both the palm and back of their hands. This 
was done to prevent them from palming money or 
chips in order to take it from the table as they left. 
Dealers were also required to wear attire that was 
designed to make it more difficult for them to pocket 
cash or chips.
C. Supervision and surveillance
Front-line gaming personnel (e.g. dealers) were 
subje­cted to multiple forms of supervision and 
surveillance. Direct supervision was provided by the 
floor persons and pit bosses. One of their primary 
functions was to watch the gaming activity and spot 
events that were out of the ordinary. As highly expe-
rienced gaming people, they had a keen sense of the 
activity going on around them and, thus, were gener-
ally good at spotting nonroutine events, such as 
dealers paying losing bets in blackjack or customers 
marking cards in blackjack or switching dice in 
craps.
Extra surveillance of the table games was provided 
through a system of closed-circuit cameras, one fixed 
above each gaming table. In total, the Bellagio 
employed 2,000 cameras located throughout the prop-
erty. The cameras had lenses powerful enough to zoom 
in to view objects as small as the date on a dime on the 
table. The pictures were viewed in a security room 
located on the mezzanine level of the casino. The sys-
tem provided the capability to record the activities 
shown on videotape for later viewing, or, if necessary, 
as evidence (e.g. if malfeasance was suspected). The 
tapes from each camera were retained for a minimum 
of seven days. But in some cases where problems were 
identified, the tapes were retained indefinitely. To 
ensure that the surveillance was done objectively, strict 
separation was maintained between the personnel 
working on the casino floor and those working in the 
surveillance areas.
The Bellagio also used mystery shoppers to evaluate 
the dealers. A mystery shopper evaluated each dealer at 
least once every 1.5 years. The mystery shoppers evalu-
ated only customer service, not speed. Each dealer was 
rated as superior, expected, needs improvement, or 
unsatisfactory. Eighty-five percent of the dealers were 
rated superior or expected. The mystery shoppers 
revisited the other 15% at a later time. No dealer was 
ever fired based on the mystery shopper ratings. If the 
poor performance persisted, supervisors worked with 
the dealer to improve. Dealers that consistently per-
formed poorly usually did not need to be told; they usu-
ally did not get as many customers at their table. Bill 
Bingham explained, “The mystery shopper program is 
geared more towards keeping our customer orientation 
in check rather than being a performance evaluation 
tool of dealers per se.”
The levels of casino management above the pit 
bosses, such as shift managers and the vice president of 
table games, did little direct supervision of the gaming 
activity. They were mainly involved in trouble shooting 
(e.g. resolving cases of malfeasance), keeping good cus-
tomers happy, resolving special problems that arose 
(e.g. staffing issues), and improving the casino 
operations.
D. Monitoring of results
The master games worksheet provided three key indica-
tors of the results of the gaming activity: drop, win, and 
hold percentage.
1.	 The drop, which was essentially the sum of cash drop 
and credit amounts (markers), was interpreted as 
the total amount of money the customers were will-
ing to bet against the casino. However, the drop 
number had some limitations as an activity indicator 
of some table games (e.g. blackjack) as it was biased 
upward when table game players exchanged money 
for chips at the table but did not bet, thereby creat-
ing what was called false drop; and it was biased 
downward when players gambled with chips bought 
at another table, perhaps even on another shift or 
day. A better indicator of activity would have been 
the handle, the total value of wagers made, but there 
was no way to determine this number for blackjack 
and some other table games.
2.	 The win was the casino’s gross profit number. It was 
calculated as shown in the example in the previous 
section of the case.
3.	 The hold percentage was the primary measure of 
casino profitability. It was defined as the win divided 
by the drop.
An example of a master games worksheet summary 
report is shown in Exhibit 10. However, a comprehen-
sive set of reports also was produced that provided 
these performance measures in various levels of detail, 

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
151
by table, shift, and time period. One such report is 
shown in Exhibit 11.
Bellagio’s management watched the total drop and 
hold numbers carefully. The drop number was the 
best available measure of the volume of betting activ-
ity, and as such, it was useful as an indicator of the 
success of the company’s marketing strategies and 
credit policies.
The hold percentage was the best available measure 
of casino profitability. Using these numbers, Bellagio’s 
management looked for patterns. They knew that each 
table game should maintain a certain hold percentage; 
for example, Bellagio’s normal table games win per-
centages were in the range of 18–22% of the table 
games drop.9 If the hold percentage was low across the 
casino table games operation, on all shifts and all 
tables, and that pattern persisted for a period of, say, 
several days, the managers in casino operations, 
including the vice president of table games, had a hard 
look at the operations and control system to try to tie 
down the root cause of the unfavorable trend in the 
hold percentage. Moreover, the drop, win, and hold 
percentage measures were standard throughout the 
gaming industry, and competitive analyses were facili-
tated because summaries were prepared and distrib-
uted through several industry sources and trade 
associations.
The managers in casino operations also looked at 
the hold generated on each shift in each pit and at each 
table, but dealers and floor people were not always 
assigned to the same tables, so management did not 
have information to tie them to hold percentages. Also, 
because of the 24-hour drop procedure described 
above, at least six dealers were at a given table during 
that time period (that is, at least one dealer and one 
relief dealer during each shift, times three shifts), and 
sometimes personnel did not work exact shifts. Thus, 
Bellagio management did no analysis of results – hold 
percentage – at the table level. Bill Bingham explained, 
“We used to monitor the reports on a table-by-table 
basis, but we never caught anybody doing anything. We 
did use surveillance on one dealer whom we suspected, 
but to no avail.”
Pit bosses had to make independent estimates of the 
drop by shift for each table in their pit, which were rec-
onciled with the actual count. This was done on a so-
called cash drop variance report, as shown in Exhibit 12. 
When unusual deviations were observed, game table 
supervisory personnel, such as the shift manager or 
even the vice president of table games, could go back 
and ask the pit personnel to explain why the deviation 
occurred. Sometimes, the reason for the deviation was 
just due to a high roller on a hot streak, but if there 
were any doubts about the explanation, or if the devia-
tion could not be pinpointed easily, extra surveillance 
was called in. Estimated versus actual data were also 
aggregated on a daily basis for the Table Games Divi-
sion as shown in Exhibit 13. This report, as mandated 
by the GCB, required that a deviation between the 
actual and estimated drop exceeding +/−10% had to 
be investigated and explained.
Finally, the GCB required the casino controller to 
investigate on a monthly basis all statistical fluctua-
tions by game type in excess of +/−5% resulting from 
the comparison of the previous calendar year to that of 
the current month. Reasons for the deviations could 
include the activity of customers whose play materially 
affected the results of the month (the so-called high-
roller-on-a-hot-streak explanation); the effects of any 
changes to the rules, types of wagers, or game play pro-
cedures; the effect of any errors or mistakes made dur-
ing the operation of the game during the month; the 
effect of any thefts or other improper acts by employees 
or patrons; or any other unusual occurrences during 
the month being reviewed.
E. Auditing procedures
As a final control mechanism, personnel independ-
ent of the transactions and the accounting thereof 
were assigned to perform stringent and frequent 
auditing procedures. There were audits of all types 
of transactions and their accompanying documenta-
tion, such as of transfers and their accompanying 
fill and credit slips, for one day of each month. The 
audits involved reconciling each document’s multi-
part stubs, checking their proper completion and 
the propriety of signatures, verifying their sequen-
tial numbering, and tracing their amounts to the 
master games worksheet. Any issues, such as unac-
counted for slips or variances between the source 
documents and the master games worksheet, were 
investigated, documented, and retained. Other 
audits involved, for example, the recalculation of 
the win (loss) for one day of each week. Because of 
the extensive internal auditing procedures, the 
internal audit organization of MGM MIRAGE, 
9Normal win percentages in the slot machines area were in the range 
of 6.5% to 7.5% of slots handle.

152
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
headed by Robert Rudloff, vice president of internal 
audit, employed 63 people.
Bonuses
Results measures were considered in bonuses paid to 
management personnel. Most executives received 
annual bonuses averaging about 30% of salary based 
on both the bottom-line performance of the casino and 
a set of individual performance objectives. For exam-
ple, Bill Bingham’s annual bonus was based on growth 
in volume (drop) supplemented with factors that were 
more difficult to quantify, such as customer relations, 
employee relations, and/or the successful completion 
of a casino floor reconfiguration, depending on the 
focus in any given year. For reasons including lack of 
control, no bonuses were based on win. Bob Rudloff 
explained, “We obviously don’t want games where the 
win is too high, as that might jeopardize the enjoyment 
guests derive from gambling and coming into our 
casino in the first place.”
Even though the standard measures of performance 
were important indicators of success, corporate execu-
tives were careful not to place too much emphasis on 
them because they did not want to encourage casino 
managers to sacrifice everything for annual bottom-
line growth. A good example of a situation where a 
careful tradeoff was required was customer relations. 
If a customer had a complaint, casino personnel had to 
take care to make the customer happy, even at some 
immediate cost, so that the customer would come 
back.
There were no bonuses for any other casino person-
nel, who received only salary and, where applicable, 
tokes (tips). But there were some nonmonetary awards, 
such as employee of the month and employee of the 
year. For example, dealers with consistently superior 
mystery shopper ratings could earn this award. 
Employees of the year were invited to an annual gala 
honoring all outstanding employees from across all 
MGM MIRAGE properties.
Future controls
In response to a request for speculation as to what con-
trols in the casino might look like in the future, casino 
controller Trent Walker responded:
In the table games area, we don’t have a detailed 
understanding of what happens at the tables as it 
happens because we can’t track the play at the 
table. We don’t really know how much money we 
have until we count. In other words, we have no 
way to account for the inventory of cash when it 
comes to us; we can only do that 24 hours or so 
later when the cash comes through the count 
room. The ultimate form of control for us would be 
to track every play at the tables, as we can with the 
slot machines because they are machines. If a slot 
machine over- or underperforms, we can shut it 
down and fix it. Controls in the slot world are virtu-
ally real time.
But even slot machines, I must add, are not with-
out their control failures. A couple of years ago, for 
example, we encountered a slot scam where an 
individual had figured out a way to put bills in a slot 
machine, get them validated, thus receiving credit 
to play, and yet got the machine to spit the bill 
back. We just have to live with the fact that there 
are always people out there trying to rip us off. 
That’s just the nature of this business.
Bill Bingham, vice president of table games, added:
There are new technologies out there that poten-
tially could alter and improve the control envi-
ronment in the table games area. For example, 
we could use RFID (radio frequency identifica-
tion) technology in our chips. If that technology 
[was] perfected, that could allow us to track 
every transaction by every customer at the gam-
ing tables. Then we’d be able to capture a lot of 
information that would be very valuable for deci-
sion-making purposes; e.g. average bets, wins 
and losses, time played. The better we can iden-
tify players’ betting patterns, the better we can 
market to our better customers. But RFID is now 
only about 75% accurate. We’d need it to be 
close to (if not exactly) 100% accurate to make it 
worthwhile.
Bob Rudloff, vice president of internal audit, explained:
We should be able to improve our player ratings. 
There are essentially four parameters to determine 
player profiles: the theoretical odds of the game 
(which we know), the average bet, time played, and 
the number of decisions (hands) per hour. With this 
information, we can determine how much a player 
should have won. We currently use this theoretical 
number to comp players. To the extent that we 
could tie these parameters with precision, however, 
the better our comp program would perform. A 

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
153
combination of player cards and RFID technology, 
for example, would make that possible. We would 
also be able to easily detect counterfeit chips. 
These are just some of the potential benefits. With 
these benefits in mind, some casinos have already 
begun experimenting with RFID.
But we currently have a wait-and-see attitude, 
as the costs may outweigh the benefits. One 
obvious cost is the nontrivial expense of replacing 
all our chips. But there are probably some more 
subtle, indirect costs too. For example, what will be 
the customer impact of RFID? Having too much 
information – knowing to the penny who wins or 
loses how much – isn’t always the best for the cus-
tomer. At some point the customers might lose 
some entertainment value if we monitor every little 
thing that happens. And we’re not sure that we 
understand all the privacy implications of this just 
yet. What if the IRS comes to us and asks for this 
information? We are in the entertainment business, 
and so we shouldn’t do anything that diminishes 
customer enjoyment.
Control issues and areas for improvement were 
always being addressed or contemplated, however. 
Trent Walker explained:
In the surveillance area, our controls are possibly 
now about as good as they are going to get. We 
have cameras trained on every game table, and 
we cover just about every square inch of the 
casino floor. This has allowed us to do away with 
certain old-style controls such as pocketless 
dealer uniforms and human supervision from 
overhead catwalks or through one-way mirrors. If 
we suspect foul play by employees or customers, 
we can always go back to the tape and verify. We 
are currently digitizing the surveillance record-
ings. That will allow us to get rid of the tens of 
thousands of tapes we currently handle, and it will 
facilitate the streaming and archiving of the 
recordings.
In the slot machine area, the hard count is about 
to disappear as everything is almost completely 
ticket-based now. Eliminating the human element 
in handling and counting coins is both more effi-
cient from a cost perspective and more effective 
from a control perspective.
But, there are always the inevitable human 
errors, such as pit personnel signing a marker for 
the wrong person. Even though this doesn’t happen 
more than a few times a year, it does happen, and 
the risk of it happening is higher when volumes are 
up. We don’t fire people for making human errors; 
instead we work with them to prevent the errors 
from happening again.
As I said, however, there always are, and will 
be, people trying to rip us off. There are a lot of 
hands in the pot – dealers, counters, and money 
strappers. But we are also getting smarter in 
catching them. For example, dealers and custom-
ers working together have pulled off scams where 
the dealer simulates the shuffle so that the cus-
tomer can count cards. We’ve done away with 
that problem through automatic shufflers and 
regular updates of the shuffle programs. Custom-
ers have tried to scratch key cards with a tiny 
piece of glass glued to their finger. Improved 
camera surveillance now can catch that too. All in 
all, I’d say that our controls are very good. We 
have gone above and beyond mere compliance 
with what is required by the GCB. We have learned 
many valuable lessons where we have been 
burned over the years.
Bob Rudloff concluded with the following observation:
The industry has changed a lot in the last decade 
or two. Customers used to be interested in the Las 
Vegas that offered $2.99 buffets and $49.99 rooms,  
which were part of a gig to tease people onto the 
casino floor to gamble. In that era, gaming was 
where the money was made. Today, most of the 
MGM MIRAGE properties, and many of the prop-
erties of our competitors on the Vegas Strip, don’t 
offer such deals anymore. Now we have the 
$26.99 buffets and $229.99 rooms, yet occupancy 
rates have stayed about the same, which is 
remarkable given that total room numbers have 
gone up dramatically. This tells me that customer 
tastes have changed. They don’t just come to 
Vegas anymore to gamble; rather, they are 
attracted by shopping, dining, spas, shows, and 
entertainment. They want to have a good time; 
not just gamble. This has resulted in a shift in rev-
enues from gaming to nongaming. Good controls 
obviously will always be critical in the gaming 
side of our business, no matter what the shift in 
proportion of total revenues; it’s just good busi-
ness sense. Strategically, however, our business 
is not just about controlling the gaming part of 
revenues any longer.

154
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
Exhibit 1  MGM MIRAGE operating casino resorts
Name and location
Number of guestrooms 
and suites
Approximate Casino 
square footage
Slots1
Gaming 
tables2
Las Vegas Strip, Nevada3
Bellagio
3,933
155,000
2,409
143
MGM Grand Las Vegas
5,044
156,000
2,593
172
Mandalay Bay4
4,756
157,000
1,949
127
The Mirage
3,044
118,000
2,056
109
Luxor
4,403
100,000
1,778
88
Treasure Island (“TI”)
2,885
90,000
1,800
64
New York-New York
2,024
84,000
1,867
85
Excalibur
3,990
100,000
1,762
73
Monte Carlo
3,002
102,000
1,726
74
Circus Circus Las Vegas5
3,764
133,000
2,364
92
Subtotal
36,845
1,195,000
20,304
1,027
Other Nevada
Primm Valley Resorts (Primm)6
2,642
137,000
2,854
94
Circus Circus Reno (Reno)
1,572
69,000
1,369
52
Silver Legacy – 50% owned (Reno)
1,710
87,000
1,707
68
Gold Strike (Jean)
811
37,000
737
15
Nevada Landing (Jean)
303
36,000
733
14
Colorado Belle (Laughlin)
1,173
50,000
1,167
39
Edgewater (Laughlin)
1,356
57,000
1,099
33
Railroad Pass (Henderson)
120
13,000
347
6
Other domestic operations
MGM Grand Detroit (Detroit, Michigan)
N/A
75,000
2,841
72
Beau Rivage (Biloxi, Mississippi)7
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Gold Strike (Tunica, Mississippi)
1,133
40,000
1,345
48
Borgata – 50% owned (Atlantic City, 
New Jersey)
2,000
125,000
3,572
133
Grand Victoria – 50% owned (Elgin, Illinois)
N/A
34,000
1,100
37
Grand total
49,665
1,955,000
39,175
1,638
This table provides certain information about MGM MIRAGE casino resorts as of December 31, 2005. Except as otherwise indicated, MGM MIRAGE 
wholly owns and operates the resorts.
1Includes slot machines, video poker machines and other electronic gaming devices.
2Includes blackjack (“21”), baccarat, craps, roulette and other table games; does not include poker.
3Excludes Boardwalk, which closed in January 2006.
4Includes the Four Seasons Hotel with 424 guest rooms and THEhotel with 1,117 suites.
5Includes Slots-a-Fun.
6Includes Primm Valley, Buffalo Bill’s and Whiskey Pete’s, along with the Primm Center gas station and convenience store.
7Beau Rivage sustained significant damage in late August 2005 as a result of Hurricane Katrina and has been closed since. We expect to reopen Beau 
Rivage in the third quarter of 2006.
Source: MGM MIRAGE 2005 Form 10-K.

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
155
Exhibit 2  MGM MIRAGE operating results – detailed revenue information
Year ended December 31
2005 $ (000)
Pct. change
2004 $ (000)
Pct. change
2003 $ (000)
Casino revenue, net:
Table games
$1,140,053
21%
$943,343
9%
$866,096
Slots
1,741,556
43%
1,218,589
9%
1,115,029
Other
100,042
61%
62,033
10%
56,389
Casino revenue, net
2,981,651
34%
2,223,965
9%
2,037,514
Non-Casino revenue:
Rooms
1,673,696
84%
911,259
9%
833,272
Food and beverage
1,330,210
58%
841,147
11%
757,278
Entertainment, retail and other
1,098,612
58%
696,117
7%
647,702
Noncasino revenue
4,102,518
68%
2,448,523
9%
2,238,252
Total revenue
7,084,169
52%
4,672,488
9%
4,275,766
Less: Promotional allowances
(602,202)
39%
(434,384)
5%
(413,023)
6,481,967
53%
4,238,104
10%
3,862,743
Table games revenue, including baccarat, was flat on a same-store basis in 2005. A 4% increase in table games volume was offset by a slightly lower hold 
percentage, though hold percentages were within the normal range for all three years presented. In 2004, table games volume increased 9%, with 
particular strength in baccarat volume, up 18%. In both 2005 and 2004, key events such as New Year, Chinese New Year and other marketing events, 
were well-attended.
Slots revenue increased 8% on a same-store basis, following a 9% increase in 2004. Additional volume in 2005 was generated by the Spa Tower at 
Bellagio – Bellagio’s slots revenue increased over 30% – and the traffic generated by KÀ and other amenities at MGM Grand Las Vegas, where slots 
revenue increased almost 10%. In both periods, MGM MIRAGE benefited from the continued success of our Players Club affinity program and marketing 
events targeted at repeat customers.
Hotel revenue increased 19% on a same-store basis in 2005. MGM MIRAGE had more rooms available as a result of the Bellagio expansion and 2004 
room remodel activity at MGM Grand Las Vegas, and company-wide same-store REVPAR increased 13% to $140 (REVPAR = Revenue per Available 
Room). This was on top of a 10% increase in 2004 over 2003. The increase in REVPAR in 2005 was entirely rate-driven, as same-store occupancy was 
consistent at 92%. The 2004 increase was also largely rate-driven.
Source: MGM MIRAGE 2005 Form 10-K.

156
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
Exhibit 3  MGM MIRAGE selected financial data
For the years ended December 31 (in thousands, except per share data)
2005
2004
2003
2002
2001
Net revenues
$6,481,967
$4,238,104
$3,862,743
$3,756,928
$3,699,852
Operating income
1,357,208
950,860
699,729
746,538
599,892
Income from continuing operations
443,256
349,856
230,273
289,476
160,440
Net income
443,256
412,332
243,697
292,435
169,815
Basic earnings per share
Income from continuing operations
1.56
1.25
0.77
0.92
0.51
Net income per share
1.56
1.48
0.82
0.93
0.53
Weighted average number of shares
284,943
279,325
297,861
315,618
317,542
Diluted earnings per share
Income from continuing operations
1.50
1.21
0.76
0.90
0.50
Net income per share
1.50
1.43
0.80
0.91
0.53
Weighted average number of shares
296,334
289,333
303,184
319,880
321,644
At yearend
Total assets
20,699,420
11,115,029
10,811,269
10,568,698
10,542,568
Total debt, including capital leases
12,358,829
5,463,619
5,533,462
5,222,195
5,465,608
Stockholders’ equity
3,235,072
2,771,704
2,533,788
2,664,144
2,510,700
Stockholders’ equity per share
11.35
9.87
8.85
8.62
7.98
Number of shares outstanding
285,070
280,740
286,192
309,148
314,792
In June 2003, MGM MIRAGE ceased operations of PLAYMGMMIRAGE.com, the company’s online gaming website (“Online”). In January 2004, MGM 
MIRAGE sold the Golden Nugget Las Vegas and the Golden Nugget Laughlin including substantially all of the assets and liabilities of those resorts (the 
“Golden Nugget Subsidiaries”). In July 2004, MGM MIRAGE sold the subsidiaries that owned and operated MGM Grand Australia. The results of Online, 
the Golden Nugget Subsidiaries and MGM Grand Australia are classified as discontinued operations for all periods presented. The Mandalay acquisition 
occurred on April 25, 2005.
Source: MGM MIRAGE 2005 Form 10-K.

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
157
Exhibit 4  Bellagio Casino Resort: Table games organization chart

158
Exhibit 5  Bellagio Casino Resort: Finance organization chart

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
159
The ownership and operation of our casino gaming facilities in Nevada are subject to the Nevada Gaming Control Act 
and the regulations promulgated thereunder (collectively, the “Nevada Act”) and various local regulations. Our gaming 
operations are subject to the licensing and regulatory control of the Nevada Gaming Commission (the “Nevada Commis-
sion”), the Nevada State Gaming Control Board (the “Nevada Board”) and various county and city licensing agencies 
(the “local authorities”). The Nevada Commission, the Nevada Board, and the local authorities are collectively referred to 
as the “Nevada Gaming Authorities.”
The laws, regulations and supervisory procedures of the Nevada Gaming Authorities are based upon declarations of 
public policy that are concerned with, among other things:
–	 The prevention of unsavory or unsuitable persons from having a direct or indirect involvement with gaming at any 
time or in any capacity;
–	 The establishment and maintenance of responsible accounting practices;
–	 The maintenance of effective controls over the financial practices of licensees, including the establishment of mini-
mum procedures for internal fiscal affairs and the safeguarding of assets and revenues;
–	 Providing reliable record keeping and requiring the filing of periodic reports with the Nevada Gaming Authorities;
–	 The prevention of cheating and fraudulent practices; and
–	 Providing a source of state and local revenues through taxation and licensing fees.
. . . . .
The Nevada Gaming Authorities may investigate any individual who has a material relationship to, or material involve-
ment with, the registered corporations or any of the licensed subsidiaries to determine whether such individual is suita-
ble or should be licensed as a business associate of a gaming licensee. Officers, directors and certain key employees of 
the licensed subsidiaries must file applications with the Nevada Gaming Authorities and may be required to be licensed 
by the Nevada Gaming Authorities. Officers, directors and key employees of the registered corporations who are actively 
and directly involved in the gaming activities of the licensed subsidiaries may be required to be licensed or found suita-
ble by the Nevada Gaming Authorities. The Nevada Gaming Authorities may deny an application for licensing or a finding 
of suitability for any cause they deem reasonable. A finding of suitability is comparable to licensing, and both require 
submission of detailed personal and financial information followed by a thorough investigation. [. . .]
If the Nevada Gaming Authorities were to find an officer, director or key employee unsuitable for licensing or to continue 
having a relationship with the registered corporations or the licensed subsidiaries, such company or companies would have 
to sever all relationships with that person. In addition, the Nevada Commission may require the registered corporations or 
the licensed subsidiaries to terminate the employment of any person who refuses to file appropriate applications. [. . .]
. . . . .
We are required to maintain a current stock ledger in Nevada that may be examined by the Nevada Gaming Authori-
ties at any time. [. . .]
. . . . .
License fees and taxes, computed in various ways depending on the type of gaming or activity involved, are payable 
to the State of Nevada and to local authorities. Depending upon the particular fee or tax involved, these fees and taxes 
are [. . .] based upon either:
–	 A percentage of the gross revenues received;
–	 The number of gaming devices operated; or
–	 The number of table games operated.
The tax on gross revenues received is generally 6.75%. A live entertainment tax is also paid on charges for admission 
to any facility where certain forms of live entertainment are provided.
. . . . .
Because we are involved in gaming ventures outside of Nevada, we are required [. . .] to comply with certain reporting 
requirements imposed by the Nevada Act. We would be subject to disciplinary action by the Nevada Commission if we:
–	 Knowingly violate any laws of the foreign jurisdiction pertaining to the foreign gaming operation;
–	 Fail to conduct the foreign gaming operation in accordance with the standards of honesty and integrity required of 
Nevada gaming operations;
Exhibit 6  Description of Regulations and Licensing by the Nevada Gaming Authorities

160
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
–	 Engage in any activity or enter into any association that is unsuitable because it poses an unreasonable threat to the 
control of gaming in Nevada, reflects or tends to reflect discredit or disrepute upon the State of Nevada or gaming in 
Nevada, or is contrary to the gaming policies of Nevada;
–	 Engage in any activity or enter into any association that interferes with the ability of the State of Nevada to collect 
gaming taxes and fees; or
–	 Employ, contract with or associate with any person in the foreign gaming operation who has been denied a license or 
a finding of suitability in Nevada on the ground of personal unsuitability, or who has been found guilty of cheating at 
gambling.
. . . . .
[. . .] Pursuant to a 1985 agreement with the United States Department of the Treasury (the “Treasury”) and provisions 
of the Money Laundering Suppression Act of 1994, the Nevada Commission and the Nevada Board have authority, 
under Regulation 6A of the Nevada Act, to enforce their own cash transaction reporting laws applicable to casinos which 
substantially parallel the federal Bank Secrecy Act. Under the Nevada Act, the licensed subsidiaries are required to 
monitor receipts and disbursements of currency related to cash purchases of chips, cash wagers, cash deposits or cash 
payment of gaming debts in excess of $10,000 in a 24-hour period, and file reports of such transactions with the United 
States Internal Revenue Service. The licensed subsidiaries are required to file suspicious activity reports with the Treas-
ury and provide copies thereof to the Nevada Board, and are also required to meet the reporting and record keeping 
requirements of Treasury regulations amended by the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001.
Exhibit 6  Continued
Source: Excerpts from MGM MIRAGE 2005 Form 10-K.

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
161
Exhibit 7  Bellagio Casino Resort: Master games inventory sheet

162
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
Exhibit 8  Bellagio Casino Resort: Fill slip

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
163
Exhibit 9  Bellagio Casino Resort: Soft count room procedures
The soft count supervisor and two count team members had to be present when the soft count room key was obtained 
from the cage. The soft count supervisor and two count team members had to be present when the keys to remove the 
full drop boxes from their cart and the keys to remove the drop box contents were obtained from the master vault. The 
count team then entered the soft count room.
A currency counter was used to count the table game drop proceeds. Immediately prior to beginning the count pro-
cedures, a test of the currency counter’s accuracy was performed by two count team members using a precounted 
batch of currency obtained from the master vault consisting of all denominations. The results of the test were recorded 
on the grand totals report produced by the currency counter. The supervisor and one count team member had to sign 
the report. Quarterly, casino accounting personnel performed unannounced counter tests, the results of which were also 
documented and maintained.
Each drop box was individually opened and emptied on the count table. The contents of the subsequent drop box to 
be opened were prohibited from being emptied onto the count table until the previous box’s contents had been entirely 
removed and stored to prevent the commingling of funds between drop boxes. The empty drop box was shown to 
another count team member and to the surveillance camera to verify that the box was empty. The empty box was then 
placed in a storage cart. When the storage cart was full of empty drop boxes, it was locked with a padlock. The count 
team members did not have access to the key for this padlock.
Each drop box’s contents were segregated into stacks of currency, chips, and documents. The chips were counted 
and verified by two count team members, and the chip count was recorded on the back of the so-called header card. 
The header card contained a bar code wherein the table game’s pit, game type, and table game number were encoded. 
The bar code on the header cards were then read by the currency counter’s bar code reader and the chip count manually 
entered into the currency counter.
Currency was prepared for the currency counter and was placed in a rack with the header card. When full, 
the rack of currency was given to the count team member responsible for operating the currency counter, who 
placed the currency and header card into the hopper of the currency counter to start the counting. During the opera-
tion of the currency counter, count team members other than the count team member operating the currency counter 
had to witness the loading and unloading of all currency at the currency counter, including rejected currency.10 
The drop box count for each drop box was then individually recorded by denomination and in total in an electronic 
file generated by the currency counter.
Upon completion of the drop count (currency and chips), the currency counter generated a master games sheet that 
detailed the count by table, denomination, and in total. The master games sheet was then forwarded to a count team 
member who manually entered the drop count into the computerized master games worksheet.
A count team member also individually traced other documents obtained from the drop boxes (fill slips, credit slips, 
markers) to the master games worksheet. Fill or credit input forms were stapled to their corresponding fill or credit slip. 
Fill and credit slips also had to be inspected for correctness. Similarly, table inventory sheets reflecting chip inventory 
counts by table game were examined and traced to the master games worksheet.
Corrections to information, originally input in the computerized master games worksheet, were made by inputting the 
correct figure. An audit trail of corrections was recorded in the computer. Count team members did not have access to 
the audit trail file. Correction to information originally recorded by the count team on manual soft count documentation 
were made by crossing out the error, entering the correct figure, and then obtaining the initials of at least two count team 
members who verified the change.
Upon conclusion of the table games drop count, the soft count supervisor and one other count team member verified 
and agreed the currency and chip count to the total count as recorded on the master games sheet and master games 
worksheet. If the totals did not agree, the error had to be located, corrected, and documented. All count team members 
then signed the master games worksheet certifying the accuracy of the count.
Currency transfers out of the soft count room during the table games soft count process were strictly prohib-
ited. To prepare a transfer, a three-part transfer slip was completed with the amount (by denomination and in total) 
of funds being transferred, dated, and signed (all copies) by the soft count supervisor and one other count team 
member. Part 3 of the transfer slip was retained in the soft count room. The cash, chips, and parts 1 and 2 of the 
transfer slip were transferred to the cage where a cage cashier counted the cash and chips, agreed the total to the 
amount recorded on the transfer slip, and signed to verify that the amounts agree. The cage cashier retained part 
2 of the transfer slip, which was later forwarded to the casino accounting department. Part 1 was returned to the 
soft count room by a soft count team member, matched and agreed to part 3, and both forwarded to casino 
accounting.
10There were also very stringent procedures to handle rejected currency, which we omit here due to space constraints.
(Continued)

164
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
Exhibit 10  Bellagio Casino Resort: Master games worksheet summary report
RUN DATE – 04/28/06
BELLAGIO – RESTRICTED
PAGE – 1
RUN TIME – 10:14:46
MASTER GAMES WORKSHEET SUMMARY FOR 01/17/06
GAME DESC
DROP/HANDLE
WIN/RESULT
%
CRAPS
168,552
9,452
5.61
BLACKJACK
727,508
–124,752
–17.15
PG POKER
78,278
104,748
133.82
RED DOG
0
0
.00
WHEELS
170,218
48,428
28.45
SINGLE RW
33,710
20,610
61.14
BIG SIX
3,364
1,864
55.41
BACCARAT
461,420
55,425
12.01
PAI GOW
5,800
–120
–2.07
MINI BAC
70,828
6,468
9.13
CARRIB ST
19,581
5,323
27.18
LET RIDE
19,815
4,435
22.38
CASINOWAR
13,632
1,312
9.62
3 CARD PK
56,315
14,155
25.14
SIC BO
0
0
.00
CRZY 4 PK
14,066
106
0.75
PYRMD PKR
0
0
.00
HOLD POKER
6,697
3,517
52.52
1,849,784
150,971
8.16
Note: Numbers in this table were disguised to safeguard company restrictions on the release of internal operating data.
The cage cashier then agreed the currency and chip transfers as recorded on the transfer slip to the drop recorded 
on the master games worksheet and signed the master games worksheet verifying that the transfer and drop 
amounts agree. Any variances had to be reconciled and documented. The master games worksheet then had to be 
returned to the soft count room by a count team member. The cage cashier then assumed accountability of the drop 
proceeds.
After the entire count was completed, the soft count supervisor locked the soft count room and returned the drop box 
keys and drop box cart keys to the master vault, after which the soft count supervisor returned the soft count room keys 
and the master vault keys to the cage. A count member team then promptly transported the master games worksheet 
and all supporting documents including the transfer slip directly to casino accounting.
Exhibit 9  (Continued)

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
165
Exhibit 11  Bellagio Casino Resort: Table games daily operating report
BELLAGIO
RESTRICTED – DAILY OPERATING REPORT
APRIL 12, 2006 WEDNESDAY
2006
2005
BUDGET
CASINO REVENUE
Today
M.T.D.
M.T.D.
Variance
Var.%
M.T.D.
Variance
Var.%
PIT
1,336,818
9,424,151
7,017,092
2,407,059
34.3
8,900,800
523,351
5.9
KENO
2,523
22,835
83,937
(61,102)
(72.8)
24,000
(1,165)
(4.9)
CASINO DATA
TODAY
2006 MONTH-TO-DATE
2005 MONTH-TO-DATE
PIT GAMES:
DROP
WIN
WIN%
DROP
WIN
WIN%
DROP
WIN
WIN%
Baccarat
810,560
511,160
63.1
7,915,818
2,236,938
28.3
7,026,171
2,211,900
31.5
Blackjack
1,240,594
192,664
15.5
23,682,129
2,906,769
12.3
19,770,201
2,268,698
11.5
Craps
762,035
389,435
51.1
8,172,150
2,147,850
26.3
6,825,554
1,376,077
20.2
Mini-baccarat
220,602
8,422
3.8
2,303,889
874,109
37.9
1,648,907
268,340
16.3
Wheels
195,169
39,509
20.2
2,768,677
604,277
21.8
2,070,914
504,128
24.3
Single Wheels
96,865
92,765
95.8
977,110
362,110
37.1
466,963
29,458
6.3
Pai Gow
28,245
(16,305)
(57.7)
439,714
39,814
9.1
423,369
102,565
24.2
Pai Gow Poker
135,457
56,237
41.5
1,078,854
156,774
14.5
865,283
364,233
42.1
Caribbean Stud
20,020
7,465
37.3
321,004
81,570
25.4
384,669
102,279
26.6
Let It Ride
20,140
(1,240)
(6.2)
255,806
58,466
22.9
382,297
100,480
26.3
Casino War
10,760
3,500
32.5
249,191
67,061
26.9
279,498
80,066
28.6
Big Six
4,354
434
10.0
67,070
34,010
50.7
70,411
35,467
50.4
3 Card Poker
61,780
36,460
59.0
974,149
365,069
37.5
930,783
266,134
28.6
Crazy 4 Poker
28,645
7,905
27.6
290,074
72,294
24.9
284,393
74,328
26.1
Pyramid Poker
0
0
0.0
0
0
0.0
17,443
8,436
48.4
Hold ‘Em Poker
13,587
8,407
61.9
215,928
61,048
28.3
23,275
0
0.0
Sic Bo
0
0
0.0
0
0
0.0
0
0
0.0
Total Pit Games
3,648,813
1,336,818
36.6
49,711,563
10,068,159
20.3
41,470,131
7,792,589
18.8
LESS:
Discount Accruals
0
(371,008)
(775,107)
Promotional 
Expenses
0
(273,000)
(390)
Net Pit Games
1,336,818
9,424,151
7,017,092
KENO
4,630
2,523
54.5
66,892
22,835
34.1
278,971
83,937
30.1
CREDIT DROP%
1,251,500
34.3%
17,935,325
36.1%
14,513,079
35.0%
Note: Numbers in this table were disguised to safeguard company restrictions on the release of internal operating data.

166
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
Exhibit 12  Bellagio Casino Resort: Table games cash drop variance report
Run Date: 04/11/06
PAGE – 2
Run Time: 10:59:15
CASH DROP VARIANCE REPORT FOR 04/10/06 ALL SHIFTS
PIT/GAME
------------------ ESTIMATED DROP --------------
TABLE
GRAVE
DAY
SWING
TOTAL
ACTUAL DROP
VARIANCE
VARIANCE %
02 BJ 01
0
0
2,500
2,500
1,840
660
35.87
02 BJ 02
0
0
11,000
11,000
11,030
– 30
– 0.27
02 BJ 03
0
0
8,000
8,000
6,630
1,370
20.66
02 BJ 04
0
0
6,500
6,500
4,720
1,780
37.71
02 BJ 05
11,000
13,500
6,500
31,000
32,100
– 1,100
– 3.43
02 BJ 06
7,000
19,000
12,500
38,500
37,480
1,020
2.72
02 BJ 07
6,500
17,000
13,500
37,000
39,220
– 2,220
– 5.66
02 BJ 08
4,000
11,000
22,500
37,500
40,650
– 3,150
– 7.75
02 BJ 09
3,000
9,000
6,500
18,500
21,170
– 2,670
– 12.61
02 BJ 10
6,500
25,000
13,500
45,000
48,680
– 3,680
– 7.56
02 BJ 11
6,000
22,500
13,500
42,000
45,120
– 3,120
– 6.91
02 BJ 12
10,500
4,500
11,000
26,000
30,010
– 4,010
– 13.36
02 BJ 13
0
4,500
4,500
9,000
7,830
1,170
14.94
02 BJ 14
0
12,500
4,500
17,000
14,590
2,410
16.52
02 BJ 15
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
02 BJ 16
0
7,000
6,500
13,500
14,430
– 930
– 6.44
02 BJ 17
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
02 BJ 18
0
4,500
11,500
16,000
20,720
– 4,720
– 22.78
02 BJ 19
0
2,000
8,000
10,000
13,990
– 3,990
– 28.52
02 BJ 20
14,500
2,500
11,500
28,500
34,970
– 6,470
– 18.50
02 BJ 21
12,500
16,000
9,000
37,500
37,400
100
0.27
02 BJ 22
0
0
4,500
4,500
3,860
640
16.58
02 BJ 23
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
02 BJ 24
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.00
Note: Numbers in this table were disguised to safeguard company restrictions on the release of internal operating data.

Controls at the Bellagio Casino Resort
167
Exhibit 13  Bellagio Casino Resort: Table games cash drop estimate vs. actual comparison
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant, Leslie R. Porter, and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant, Leslie R. Porter, and Wim A. Van der Stede.

168
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
 PCL was a leading European consumer electronics, 
lifestyle, and healthcare company that had entered 
the Chinese market in 1985. While its consumer elec-
tronics business grew steadily in China, the costs of 
returned sets in its TV division amounted to 5% of 
the division’s total sales in 2008. Even more worry-
ing was that 37% of the returned TVs were of good 
quality and had been returned without good reason. 
PCL taskforces set up to study the situation found that 
control measures designed to handle returns were 
simply not being carried out by staff  and third-party 
after-sales service centers. What could PCL do to rem-
edy the situation? 
  The consumer electronics industry 
in China 
 With a population of 1.3 billion and rising disposable 
incomes, China had become the second-largest market 
for consumer electronics in the world. 1 Analysts fore-
casted a compounded annual growth rate of 9.8% 
through to 2014 for consumer electronics, with grow-
ing demand for TV sets and computers in smaller cities 
and rural areas being the main driver. 2 As the market 
in the big cities had become saturated, market competi-
tion had moved increasingly to smaller cities and rural 
areas. Sales of consumer electronics products in these 
markets were further enhanced by the government’s 
subsidy program, which off ered rebates for purchases 
of consumer electronic goods in rural areas. Another 
government program that allowed consumers to trade 
in old electronic appliances for new ones in nine pro-
vincial areas since 2009 had also helped to stimulate 
demand. 
 The television market in China 
 It was no surprise that China, a country that produced 
42% of the world’s total shipment of TV sets,  3 had a 
strong TV market. Domestic manufacturers alone 
accounted for three-quarters of its liquid-crystal dis-
play (LCD) TV market in 2009. 4   Driven by consumers’ 
preference for large-sized TVs and by falling prices, 
China was forecasted to surpass North America as the 
largest LCD TV market in the world, with sales reach-
ing 29 million units in 2010, translating to more than 
30% in growth year-on-year. 5 The growth would be 
driven by consumers replacing their cathode ray tube 
(CRT) sets with LCD sets, especially in third- and 
fourth-tier cities. 6 International brands faced fierce 
competition from domestic brands, which enjoyed 
advantages in both cost control and distribution, and 
price wars were common as domestic brands lowered 
their prices to increase their market share. Large retail 
chains played a critical role in the retail market for con-
sumer electronics in China, and competition for shelf 
space in such chains was fi erce. Manufacturers became 
involved with the promotions, marketing, and supply 
chain management of these chain stores in order to 
build relationships with them. 7 Others opened their 
own branded stores so they could have a direct hand in 
shaping consumers’ purchase experience.  
 1  “Consumer Electronics in China,”  Euromonitor (April 2009), online 
at  www.euromonitor.com/Consumer_Electronics_in_China (accessed 
June 20, 2010). 
 2  “China Consumer Electronics Report Q3 2010,”  Business Monitor 
International  (2010), online at  www.pr-inside.com/china-consumer-
electronics-report-q-r1905491.htm (accessed June 10, 2010). 
 3  K. Zhang, “China TV Market to Enjoy Solid Growth in 2014,”  iSuppli 
(April 26, 2010), online at  www.isuppli.com/Display-Materials-
and-Systems/MarketWatch/Pages/China-TV-Market-to-Enjoy-
Solid-Growth-in-2014.aspx (accessed June 20, 2010). 
 4  Ibid. 
 5  “Corning: China to Become World’s Biggest LCD TV Market,”  Sino-
Cast Business Beat (April 14, 2010), online at  www.tradingmarkets.
com/news/stock-alert/glw_dtek_corning-china-to-become-world-
s-biggest-lcd-tv-market-910387.html (accessed June 20, 2010). 
 6  “Overview of China’s LCD Market,”  GfK Retail and Technology 
(March 29, 2010) online at  www.gfkrt.com/news_events/market_
news/single_sites/005606/index.en.html  (accessed June 30, 2010). 
 7   I. B. Von Morgenstern and C. Shu, “Winning the Battle for the 
Chinese Consumer Electronics Market,” (September 2006), online 
at  www.mckinseyquarterly.com/High_Tech/Hardware/Winning_
the_battle_for_the_Chinese_consumer_electronics_market_1855 
(accessed June 20, 2010). 
 CASE STUDY 
 PCL: A Breakdown in the Enforcement of Management Control 

PCL: A Breakdown in the Enforcement of Management Control
169
PCL Consumer Electronics – background
PCL was a high-tech multinational company based in 
Europe. Since its establishment in the late nineteenth 
century, it had diversified into multiple industry seg-
ments. The diversification strained its resources and, 
consequently, PCL reshaped the organization to 
focus on the healthcare and electronics sectors. In 
2010, it had a sales and service presence and manu-
facturing sites in more than 100 countries around  
the world.
PCL’s consumer electronics division (PCL Con-
sumer Electronics) was a global player in digital and 
electronic devices, bringing the latest technology 
and human-centered designs to the market. Its prod-
uct portfolio included color TV sets, DVD players, 
audio products, PC monitors, and PC peripherals. 
PCL Consumer Electronics had a sales and service 
presence in more than 50 countries and manufactur-
ing sites in France, Hungary, Belgium, Brazil, Mex-
ico, and Argentina even though it outsourced its 
production heavily. PCL Consumer Electronics placed 
a strong emphasis on emerging markets such as 
China and India. It entered China in 1985, and by 
2008, its sales organization on the mainland had 
grown to 550 people with annual sales of US$752 
million (See Exhibit 1).
Repairing the broken system
Returned sets
In 2008, the handling of returned TV sets cost PCL an 
average of US$6 million, equal to about 5% of its 
annual TV sales. The costs covered freight from the 
dealer to PCL’s warehouse, repair, and refurbishment at 
the factory workshop. While PCL spent a hefty sum 
each year servicing returned goods, about 37% of the 
returned goods were no-fault-found (NFF) returns, 
translating to a loss of US$2.2 million for PCL. NFF 
returns also included demo sets and slow-moving 
goods that were not supposed to be returned (see 
Exhibit 2).
The TV return process
After-sales service for PCL’s TV division was handled by 
authorized service centers (ASCs), which were third-
party service centers authorized and managed by PCL’s 
after-sales service team. Under China’s consumer law, 
consumers could return a defective TV set to the 
retailer from whom they made the purchase within five 
days or exchange it for a new one within 15 days. 
Retailers sent PCL sets returned by customers to the 
company’s ASCs, which would decide whether to 
accept the return and repair them. If the defect was 
serious, the ASC would send the set back to PCL’s fac-
tory for repair.
Investigation
In response to the high volume of returned sets and 
high NFF returns, PCL’s management appointed the 
product marketing manager of the TV division, who 
was also familiar with the return process, to look into 
the matter so appropriate actions could be taken. He 
formed a task force that brought together the sales 
operation manager, the service manager, and the finan-
cial controller of the TV business. The team set out to 
investigate the situation and uncovered a number of 
causes for the problem.
Neither retailers nor ASCs had been trained in edu-
cating customers about product performance or the cri-
teria for accepting returns. Retail stores usually used 
high-definition signals for product demonstrations, but 
most consumers used cable TV at home. As a result, 
consumers often became dissatisfied with the picture 
quality after they took the TV set home and would try 
to exchange it for a new set or simply return it. While 
PCL had established return criteria that were as strin-
gent as those of its competitors, retailers and ASCs 
often failed to execute them properly, accepting returns 
without proper screening.
Chain retailers were significant players in China’s 
consumer electronics market, and consumer electron-
ics companies could not maintain their market share 
without selling through them. Because no interna-
tional TV brand possessed unique product features or 
technical advantages that differentiated its products in 
the market, the manufacturers’ best option was to 
make concessions in their negotiations with chain 
stores in order to maintain good relationships with 
them and in turn receive higher visibility at the point of 
sale. PCL, for instance, cut its profit margins and 
accepted returns of slow-moving models and demo sets 
in order to secure prominent display locations in the 
stores. In addition, PCL salespeople had to meet sales 
targets and required the support of dealers to achieve 
these targets. This made it hard for many salespeople 
to say no to unreasonable returns because doing so 
might jeopardize their relationship with the dealers. 

170
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
Moreover, they put little effort into investigating the 
returns, despite established approval procedures for 
returned goods.
PCL’s after-sales service team, which was respon-
sible for overseeing the ASCs, did not report to the 
TV division directly, but instead reported to the gen-
eral manager of the organization, a line of reporting 
that reduced the incentive for the after-sales team to 
control TV returns or to monitor the third-party 
ASCs stringently. Not only did the ASCs fail to 
inspect the returned sets carefully, but they some-
times faked their inspection records instead of 
rejecting the return of TV sets. The situation was 
­further aggravated by the fact that PCL had no pun-
ishment policy for fraud or incompliance on the part 
of ASCs.
Action
The team came up with a series of actions based on 
their initial assessment of the situation. The sales 
team’s annual performance appraisals would be 
linked with TV returns and the cost of servicing 
returns, and this new measure was communicated  
by the TV sales director to all the salespeople. The 
service manager also communicated to ASCs a new 
policy whereby they would be fined three times  
the labor charge for each fake inspection record 
­discovered.
The project team forecasted that their plan would 
reduce the return rate to 3.5% and the NFF rate to 
20% within two months, but their projection did not 
materialize. In fact, the NFF return rate went up to 
40% after two months. Upon further investigation, 
the general manager and the production manager of 
the TV division discovered two reasons for the rising 
rate of NFF returns, despite their efforts. First, the 
sales team was under enormous pressure to meet 
their sales targets, which was set at 132% of the sales 
of the previous year, a rate that exceeded actual mar-
ket growth. In order to reach their targets, they put 
pressure on the dealers to increase their purchase 
volumes, leading to higher inventory levels and 
tighter cash flow. To counter these problems, dealers 
negotiated with salespeople to accept returns and to 
allow exchanges of demo sets and slow-moving 
goods for new models. The second reason was that 
the after-sales service team had failed to take puni-
tive action against the ASCs for fake inspection 
records. There was little incentive for the service 
team to respond to the ASCs’ transgressions, as it did 
not report to the TV division and its performance 
indicators were not linked to the amount of goods 
returned.
Second try
Dissatisfied with the outcome, the general manager of 
PCL Consumer Electronics appointed the service direc-
tor, who reported directly to him, to lead the task force. 
The service director was also given the authority to 
handle issues that did not usually fall within his scope 
of responsibilities in order to tackle the problem. Once 
appointed, the service director put together a new 
cross-functional team, with each member responsible 
for a specific area for improving the return rate and 
NFF return rate, as follows:
● service director – served as team leader;
● service manager – managed the ASC network;
● chief financial officer – responsible for the financial 
results of the team;
● TV sales operation manager – engaged in dealer 
management;
● service financial controller – performed service cost 
computation and analysis;
● TV product manager – concerned with process 
implementation and improvement.
The team set specific targets:
● TV NFF return rate to be reduced from 40%  
to 20%;
● TV return and exchange rate to be reduced from 5% 
to 3.5%;
● total savings of US$1.13 million within six months.
The service director also applied for some US$4,500 
as a bonus for the team, to be used for an outing or 
teambuilding exercise if it could meet its targets. The 
general manager of the consumer electronics division 
endorsed the proposal and also incorporated the pro-
ject targets into the bonus scheme of the team members 
such that they would lose their annual bonuses if the 
targets were not met.

PCL: A Breakdown in the Enforcement of Management Control
171
The team analyzed the situation and the following 
actions were drawn up to remedy the situation:
● Given that both the sales team and the ASCs were 
failing to enforce the established criteria for 
accepting returned goods, PCL had ended up being 
more accepting of returned goods than its competi-
tors. To manage the situation, the TV sales operation 
manager was put in charge of rotating the regional 
sales managers and salespeople geographically in 
order to prevent the sales team from becoming too 
friendly with the dealers.
● The TV sales operation manager and service direc-
tor were put in charge of ensuring that no models 
that had been phased out for more than six months 
would be accepted for return.
● The TV sales operation manager and service direc-
tor were also put in charge of defining clear and 
sound criteria for the inspection and acceptance of 
returned merchandise.
● The TV product marketing manager and service 
director were put in charge of organizing training 
on the return process and criteria for all individu-
als involved in making decisions in the return 
­process.
The team quickly got to work, defining the criteria and 
monitoring measures to control the return process:
● For goods that were defective upon arrival at the 
dealers’ warehouses, PCL would accept return only 
if they were functionally defective or there were 
serious cosmetic failures vis-à-vis PCL’s standards 
for finished goods.
● For defective goods returned within 15 days after 
purchase by consumers, only functional failures 
would be accepted as grounds for return.
● Returned goods were to be accepted only after 
approval by cross-functional personnel.
● Returned goods would be required to come in  
their original PCL packaging, with all the original 
accessories.
● Models that had been phased out for more than six 
months would not be accepted for return or 
exchange.
PCL’s regional service managers and engineers would 
also visit the top 10 ASCs for returned goods – which 
together were responsible for 40% of monthly returns 
– and provide training sessions with detailed working 
instructions to the ASCs. A new incentive and penalty 
scheme for ASCs was also drawn up, with the following 
mandates:
● increased labor charges for inspection of returns;
● penalties for NFF returns;
● quarterly bonuses to those with the highest levels of 
compliance.
On the sales team side, the TV sales operation man-
ager worked closely with the TV sales directors to 
draw up a detailed rotation plan. Field salespeople 
were required to visit top dealers within their respec-
tive regions on a weekly basis to solicit feedback and 
to implement follow-up actions. The plan was ful-
filled after seven months and extended to 52% of the 
salespeople.
The project team met every two weeks for reviews as 
remedy measures were implemented. Immediate 
actions were taken to correct any weaknesses that had 
materialized and warnings were issued to those 
responsible for them. The team was able to adhere 
closely to the project schedule.
After six months, the NFF return rate was reduced 
to 12%, surpassing the team’s target of 20%. The 
return and exchange rates dropped to 3.2%, surpass-
ing the team’s 3.5% target. The team did not meet the 
target of US$1.13 million in savings, though it came 
quite close at US$1.1 million, and thus the team was 
awarded its bonus.
Epilogue
After the hard work of PCL’s two taskforces, PCL 
finally managed to bring the issue of the high return 
rate of its TV sets under control. The work of the two 
taskforces had revealed a major issue in enforcement 
within the organization. Even the best strategy or 
business plan could only be effective if it was prop-
erly executed. What could PCL do to ensure that 
internal control measures would be enforced prop-
erly to achieve organizational objectives in the 
future?

172
Chapter 4 • Control System Tightness
This case was prepared by Grace Loo under the supervision of Professor Neale O’Connor.
Copyright © by The Asia Case Research Centre, The University of Hong Kong.
Exhibit 1  PCL Consumer Electronics in China: Organization chart
Exhibit 2  Flow of TV sales and returns

Direct costs
173
        Management control systems (MCSs) provide one primary benefi t: a higher probability that 
employees will pursue organizational objectives. Managers are willing to incur sometimes sig-
nifi cant direct, out-of-pocket costs to try to obtain this benefi t. But managers must also consider 
some other, indirect costs that can be many times greater than the direct costs. Some of these 
indirect costs arise from negative side eff ects that are inherent in the use of specifi c types of 
controls. Others are caused either by a poor MCS design or by implementation of the wrong 
type of control in a given situation. To make informed cost-benefi t judgments, managers must 
understand these side eff ects, their causes, and their consequences (costs). Finally, costs may 
also arise from the need to adapt MCSs to the context in which they operate, which is particu-
larly pertinent in multinational operations. Adaptations to local circumstances can be costly, 
but not adapting may render the MCSs less eff ective and give rise to indirect costs. 
 Direct costs 
 The direct costs of a MCS include all the out-of-pocket, monetary costs required to design and 
implement the MCS. Some direct costs, such as the costs of paying cash bonuses (arising from 
incentive compensation for  results control ) or the costs of maintaining an internal audit staff  
(needed to ensure compliance with  action-control  prescriptions) are relatively easy to identify. 
Other costs, however, such as those related to the time employees spend in planning and budg-
eting activities or preaction reviews, can only be estimated. Even of the time spent, it is hard to 
estimate how much of it is “value-added.” For example, a recent survey of practice suggests that 
of all the time spent on fi nancial analysis and planning, “only 28% is spent on the analysis that 
drives insightful business decisions,” with the rest being spent on validating data and adminis-
tering processes. 1 
 Many organizations often are unaware of, or do not bother to calculate accurately the size of, 
all of these direct costs. But all that is required for our purposes is to acknowledge that these 
costs are not trivial and, thus, should be put against the benefi ts that MCSs have or are expected 
to have. This is pertinently illustrated here: 
 With the process costs of internal audit [which we discuss in more detail in  Chapter  14 ] for 
the  Fortune 500  representing between 0.026% and 0.126% of revenue (variable based on 
company size, industry, and adoption of leading practices), extracting greater value from 
such an investment is paramount. Moreover, since many Chief Audit Executives (CAEs) still 
report administratively to the CFO (70% in the Fortune 500, according to the 2013 Global 
 CHAPTER 5 
 Control System Costs 

Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
174
Audit Information Network Annual Benchmarking Survey), it behooves Finance to equip the 
function with capabilities to deliver more-informed audit reports. And given the continuing 
desire of CFOs to play more-strategic roles, having a forward-looking Internal Audit depart-
ment can be a valuable weapon in their arsenal.2
What is more, there is an intricate link between direct costs and indirect costs, as the follow-
ing quote suggests with regards to the costs for banks to comply with US regulations on finan-
cial transactions with countries on the US sanctions list, where:
“The cost of not being squeaky clean is phenomenal.” For example, BNP Paribas’s guilty 
plea to violations of sanctions against Sudan, Iran and Cuba was accompanied by a block-
buster fine of nearly $9bn plus a one-year ban on conducting certain transactions in dollars.3
This is a huge indirect cost of the failure of compliance, which has led to more direct costs 
incurred on internal controls to enhance compliance:
As a result, costs are rising fast. BNP Paribas, for example, took a £200m charge related to 
an overhaul of compliance procedures as it responded to its fine by setting up a special 
unit in New York, aimed at ensuring that it stays on the right side of US rules. Macquarie, 
the Australian investment bank, announced in May that its direct compliance costs had 
tripled in three years, to A$320m. HSBC took on 1,500 extra compliance staff in the first 
half of the year, lifting its compliance spend by about $150m.4
Indirect costs
Challenging as estimating the direct costs of control may be, they can be dwarfed by indirect 
costs of control caused by any of a number of harmful side effects, including behavioral dis-
placement, gamesmanship, operating delays, and negative attitudes, as the example above 
illustrates and which we discuss further below. Moreover, Chapters 10 and 11 discuss in more 
detail some of the harmful side effects that commonly arise from the use of financial results 
controls, especially management short-termism or myopia.
Behavioral displacement
Behavioral displacement is a common MCS-related side effect that can expose organizations to 
significant indirect costs; it occurs when the MCS produces, and actually encourages, behaviors 
that are not consistent with the organization’s objectives. Behavioral displacement is most com-
mon with accountability-type controls (either results or action accountability), where the speci-
fication of the results or actions desired is incongruent. But some forms of personnel/cultural 
control can also produce the problem.
Behavioral Displacement and Results Controls
In a results-control system, behavioral displacement occurs when an organization defines sets 
of results measures that are incongruent with the organization’s “true” objectives. For example:
● When companies give their salespeople monthly sales quotas, the salespeople tend to work 
on the easiest sales, which are not necessarily the most profitable sales or sales with the high-
est priority.
● When brokerage firms reward their brokers through commissions on client trades, some bro-
kers respond by churning accounts, engaging in more transactions than are in the customers’ 
best interests and that run the risk of client dissatisfaction and turnover.

Indirect costs
175
● When companies reward their computer programmers for output measured in lines of code 
per day, the programmers tend to generate programs with lengthy code even when the com-
pany’s problems can be better addressed by simpler programs or by off-the-shelf applications.
● When software testers are evaluated in terms of the number of “bugs” they find, the bug 
count goes up. But more of the bugs found will be minor. Bug counts also create incentives 
for superficial testing, penalizing testers to take the time either to look for the harder-to-find 
but more important bugs or to document their findings thoroughly. Bug counts also penalize 
testers who support other testers through coaching, helping, and auditing.
● When companies reward their research scientists for the number of patents filed, they are 
likely to see an increase in the number of patents filed. However, this incentive may lead to 
patent proliferation only and may not enhance, and may even erode, researchers’ concerns 
for the eventual commercial success of their discoveries.
Why do organizations, then, use measures that are not congruent with their true objectives? 
Most commonly, incongruence arises because organizations focus on easily quantifiable results 
that lead them to incompletely capture all of the desired results. When that is the case, employ-
ees are induced to concentrate on the results that are rewarded by the control system and to 
snub other desired but unmeasured result areas.5 For example, when a major personal com-
puter (PC) maker started paying its sales reps higher commissions for selling add-on services 
than for selling PCs, the sales reps became lax about selling no-frills PCs. Sometimes they would 
even hang up on customers who did not want add-ons. As a result, customer satisfaction went 
down as did the referral business on which the company had relied for its growth in a highly 
competitive market.6
Similarly, when city officials wanted to tackle overtime in their garbage collection service, 
they offered the garbage collectors an incentive scheme where they would be paid full time 
even if they reported back early. It worked. Garbage collectors came back consistently early and 
received full pay for the shift. Despite this good effect on overtime reduction, however, there 
was an increase in preventable traffic accidents, missed pickups of garbage, and trucks filled 
over the legal weight limit. Because the incentive scheme emphasized time, employees nearly 
exclusively focused on time at the expense of safety, service and obeying work rules.7
Garbage collection is not exactly what comes to mind when thinking of multitasking, yet 
even this job is presumably complex enough to be subject to the effects of distorted incentives (a 
form of behavior displacement, as we call it here). Consider, then, the complexity involved in 
determining appropriate weights on the multiple dimensions of, say, managerial jobs, and one 
can see how easily incentives can have potentially displacing effects. All told, there are very few 
jobs, even presumably simple jobs, where what is counted is all that counts – in other words, 
results controls are almost invariably incomplete. If the relative importance of the various 
aspects of the job is not captured correctly, employees are unlikely to allocate their efforts prop-
erly, and outcomes will be distorted. Later chapters offer various possible remedies to this dis-
placement problem, such as by using baskets of measures (Chapter 11) and/or relying on 
subjective performance evaluations (Chapter 12) to try to cover more completely all the impor-
tant drivers of performance. The following example nicely summarizes the crux of the issue:
“Compensation should reflect the performance of the firm as a whole, according to the 
principles. Assessment areas should include productivity, teamwork, citizenship, commu-
nication and compliance.” That was true until 2005, when the company determined work-
ers’ annual awards “not just on how much business you’d brought in, but also on how good 
you were for the organization,” alleges Greg Smith, a former Vice President, in Why I Left 
Goldman Sachs: A Wall Street Story. “From 2005 until the present day, the system has 
become largely mathematical: you were paid a percentage of the amount of revenue next 

Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
176
to your name,” a figure that could vary from 5 to 7 percent, wrote Smith. “The problem with 
the new system was that people would now do anything they could – anything – to pump 
up the number next to their name.”8
Behavioral Displacement and Action Controls
Behavioral displacement can also occur with action controls. One form of action control-related 
displacement is often referred to as means-ends inversion, meaning that employees pay atten-
tion to what they do (the means) while losing sight of what they are to accomplish (the ends). 
For example, managers who are given an approval limit for capital expenditures have been 
known to invest in a series of small projects, each of which fall just within their authorization 
limits. Although the action-accountability controls may not be breached, the resulting pattern 
of small, incremental investments may be suboptimal.
Sometimes action control-related displacement occurs simply because the defined actions 
are incongruent. As with results controls, this problem arises in an action-accountability con-
text. For example, the PC maker mentioned above also implemented a policy to put a time limit 
on customer service calls. Specifically, customer service reps who spent more than 13 minutes 
talking to a customer would not earn their commission. Not surprisingly, service reps began 
doing just about anything possible to get customers off the phone, such as pretending that the 
line was not working or just hanging up. As a result, the company’s customer satisfaction rat-
ings, once the best in the industry, dropped dramatically and fell below the industry average.9
Some action controls cause behavioral displacement because they promote compliant yet 
rigid, non-adaptive behaviors, a pathology commonly associated with bureaucratic organiza-
tions. For example, US automobile manufacturers focused on elaborate action prescriptions for 
their assembly workers to try to optimize assembly-line operations. On Japanese assembly 
lines, in contrast, the control systems in use for assembly workers were much more flexible. 
Workers were encouraged to experiment with different ways of doing their jobs – for example, 
by putting the doors on the car before the locks were installed, and then alternating the order to 
see which was more efficient. By giving their workers more flexibility, the Japanese gained a 
competitive advantage. Similarly, at Continental Airlines, there used to be a rule for just about 
everything conceivable in the nine-inch-thick procedures manual known as the “Thou Shalt 
Not” book. As one company observer noted, “No one could possibly know everything in [the 
book], so most employees played it safe by doing nothing at all.” To overcome the undesired 
rigidity fostered over time by the rule book, the new management team ceremoniously burned 
the “Thou Shalt Not” book in the company parking lot to provide a clear signal that, from then 
onward, employees had “permission to think for themselves.”10 Action controls and bureaucra-
tization can be good in stable environments with considerable centralized knowledge about 
what actions are desired because they help establish compliant, reliable, and efficient work rou-
tines. In changing environments, however, they may hinder the change that is required to stay 
competitive.
A recent study in Australia suggested that the direct costs of red tape also can be significant:
Global accounting firm Deloitte says internal red tape and self-imposed rules are costing 
businesses twice as much as government regulations. “Our survey found that the average 
worker spends essentially a day a week jumping through the hoops of this self-imposed 
red tape,” Chris Richardson from Deloitte Access Economics observed. “Much of it is a 
good thing. To take a simple example, over the past decade, miners and the construction 
sector have become safer. Industrial accidents have gone down,” he said. But not all of it is 
a good thing. “Partly it’s because businesses never look back. You know, they don’t do the 
audit, and they don’t ask ‘why are we doing this, you know, not just this new rule, but all our 
rules, do they actually make sense anymore?’ What we are saying is that our existing rules 

Indirect costs
177
are costing us a fortune; they’re not necessarily making us that much better off, or that 
much less risky.”11
Behavioral Displacement and Personnel/Cultural Controls
Behavioral displacement can also occur with personnel/cultural controls. It can arise from 
recruiting the wrong type of employees or providing insufficient training, and when personnel/
cultural controls are implemented in the wrong setting, they will be rendered ineffective and 
encourage unintended behaviors. For example, when Levi Strauss wanted to raise productivity 
and reduce costs, particularly those incurred by injured workers pushing to make piecework 
goals, it turned to teamwork, which Levi’s felt would be more humane, safe, and exemplary of 
workplace standards in an industry notorious for poor working conditions. The old piecework 
system – under which a worker repeatedly performs a specialized task (such as attaching pock-
ets or belt loops) and gets paid by the amount of work completed – was abandoned and replaced 
by teams consisting of 10–35 workers who shared the tasks and were paid according to the total 
amount of trousers the group completes.
Despite these praiseworthy intentions, however, the nature of the work at Levi’s may not be well 
suited for teamwork. Garment manufacturing consists of a series of specific tasks (pocket setting, 
belt looping). The speed of these tasks relates directly to a worker’s skill for the grueling, repetitive 
motions involved in stitching fabric. Some workers are much faster than others. Although team-
work was expected to reduce monotony, enable workers to perform different tasks, and reduce 
repetitive injuries, it failed. When skilled workers were pitted against slower co-workers, the 
wages of top performers fell while those of lower-skilled workers went up. This not only eliminated 
savings for Levi’s but also caused infighting among co-workers. Longtime friendships were dis-
solved, and faster workers tried to banish slower ones. Morale was damaged, efficiency dropped, 
and labor and overhead costs surged. The teamwork concept did not fit the context.12
Gamesmanship
We use the term gamesmanship to refer generally to the actions that employees take to improve 
their performance indicators without producing any positive effects for the organization. 
Gamesmanship is a common harmful side effect faced in situations where accountability forms 
of control, either results or actions accountability, are used. We discuss two major forms of 
gamesmanship: slack creation and data manipulation.
Creation of Slack Resources
Slack involves the consumption of organizational resources by employees in excess of what is 
required to meet organizational objectives. The propensity to create slack often takes place 
when tight results controls are in use; that is, when employees, mostly at management levels, 
are evaluated primarily on whether or not they achieve their budget targets (see also Chapter 8). 
Managers who miss their target face the prospect of interventions in their jobs, the loss of 
organizational resources, the loss of annual bonuses and pay raises, and sometimes even the 
loss of their job.
Under these circumstances, managers may look for ways to protect themselves from the 
downside risk of missing budget targets and the stigma attached to underachievers. One way in 
which managers keep tight results control from hurting them is by negotiating more easily 
achievable targets; that is, targets that are deliberately lower than their best-guess forecast of 
the future. This is called budget slack; it protects the managers against unforeseen contingen-
cies and improves the probability that the budget target will be met, thus increasing the likeli-
hood of receiving a favorable evaluation and associated rewards (such as a raise, a bonus, 
recognition, or a promotion).

Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
178
On the negative side, the slack obscures true underlying performance and, hence, distorts 
the decisions based on the obscured information, such as performance evaluations and 
resource-allocation decisions. That said, slack should not be seen as producing only negative 
effects. On the positive side, slack can reduce manager tension and stress, increase organiza-
tional resilience to change, and make available some resources that can be used for 
innovation.13
In most situations, slack is nearly impossible to prevent. Theoretically, slack is feasible only 
where there is information asymmetry, where superiors have less-than-complete knowledge 
about what can be accomplished in a given area, and where subordinates are allowed to partici-
pate in setting the performance targets for that area. Thus, where performance can be accu-
rately forecast or be set in a top-down manner, it should be possible to prevent, or at least 
mitigate, slack. But these conditions exist only in rare situations – highly stable environments. If 
accountability controls are used in other situations, slack must be considered almost inevitable. 
We discuss various ethical considerations related to slack creation in Chapter 15.
Data Manipulation
Data manipulation involves fudging the control indicators. It comes in two basic forms: falsifi-
cation and data management. Falsification involves reporting erroneous data, meaning that the 
data are changed. Data management involves any action undertaken to change the reported 
results (such as sales numbers or profits) while providing no real economic advantage to the 
organization and, sometimes, even causing harm. Data management actions are typically 
undertaken to make performance look better, such as to achieve a budget target or to increase 
stock price. However, data management actions can also be undertaken to make performance 
look worse. Sometimes managers “save sales” for a future period when the current-year bonus 
has reached its cap. Sometimes they “take a bath” – that is, they make results look worse in bad 
times (while there are no bonus payouts, anyway) to get a head start on recording an improve-
ment in the subsequent period. Sometimes they report abnormally poor results to try to lower 
the stock price to coincide with, say, a stock option grant.14
Data management can be accomplished through either accounting or operating means. 
Accounting methods of data management involve an intervention in the measurement pro-
cess. Individuals engaging in accounting methods of data management sometimes violate 
accounting rules; more frequently, they use the flexibility available in either the selection of 
accounting methods or the application of those methods, or both, to “manage earnings,” as it 
is often called.15 To boost earnings, for example, managers might shift from accelerated to 
straight-line depreciation or change their judgments about accounting estimates (such as 
about reserves, allowances, and write-offs). IBM corporation used revenues from patent 
licenses and profits from asset sales to understate the company’s reported general and admin-
istrative (G&A) expenses, to make the company look “lean” as observers and investors 
expected it to be.16 A Fortune article called accounting treatments like these, which are con-
sistent with generally accepted accounting principles, “legal, but lousy.”17 Another analyst 
said: “They’ve got a lot of ways to beat earnings and they definitely take advantage of it; it’s 
part of how IBM operates.”18
Operating methods of data management involve the altering of operating decisions. To boost 
earnings in the current period, managers can, say, try to delay the timing of discretionary 
expenditures (such as maintenance) and/or try to accelerate sales. These methods affect the 
size and/or timing of cash flows, as well as reported earnings. Several companies have been 
charged with booking revenues on sales to distributors (as opposed to waiting until the prod-
ucts have been sold by the distributor), thus taking advantage of the ambiguity in accounting 
rules on revenue recognition. This rules ambiguity makes “channel stuffing” tempting by per-
suading distributors to take more product than they really need or want, particularly toward 

Indirect costs
179
the end of a poor quarter, to help earnings look better than they really are. A recent example 
occurred at Tesco, a large UK grocer, the analysis of which appears to allow for the possibility of 
operating as well as manipulating causes of the problems:
Suppliers make payments to supermarkets that meet certain sales targets for their prod-
ucts, run promotions or place the goods in eye-catching places, such as at the end of 
aisles. Tesco managers appear to have been too ambitious in forecasting these “rebates.” 
They may also have underreported the costs of stolen and out-of-date produce. The com-
plexity of Tesco’s promotional deals with suppliers may have left too much room for dis-
cretion, and honest mistakes, as well as deliberate distortions. But the risks around 
accounting for such payments are hardly new. The auditors of several big retailers have 
amplified their warnings in recent years as rebates have taken up more space on balance-
sheets. In its most recent report, in May, Tesco’s auditor, PwC, warned of the “risk of 
manipulation.”19
Because altering decisions can have adverse effects on real economic value, even when they 
improve reported accounting income, operating methods of data management can be harmful 
to the firm in the long term. The actions can harm customer satisfaction (arising from the 
aggressive sales tactics), employee productivity (arising from the unneeded overtime at quar-
ter’s end), and/or quality (arising from postponed maintenance or reduced quality inspections). 
Manipulation is a serious problem because it can render an entire control system ineffective. If 
the data are being manipulated, it is no longer possible to determine whether a company, entity, 
or employee has performed well. The effects of manipulation can also go far beyond the MCS 
because they affect the accuracy of an organization’s information system. If that is the case, 
management’s ability to make good, facts-based decisions will be curtailed. Thus, even though 
various data manipulation methods are not illegal, they can be costly to the firm in the long 
term. No wonder, then, that an article in the Harvard Business Review called the “earnings 
game” something that “everyone plays, [but] nobody wins.”20
Some data manipulation schemes involve outright fraud, however. At Sunrise Medical, 
four employees at one of the firm’s major divisions, including its general manager, engaged 
in falsifying financial reports. The scheme was intended to disguise a deteriorating financial 
situation. The company’s bonus plan was seen as a major cause of the fraud. The plan paid 
annual cash bonuses worth up to 50% of salary, but it paid no bonuses in divisions that failed 
to record a year-on-year earnings increase. It shocked many observers that such a fraud 
could occur at Sunrise, which “has long presented itself as a values-conscious health-care 
firm whose employees carry lofty corporate precepts about customers, shareholders and 
social responsibility on wallet cards.”21 When such frauds come to light, their financial 
impact can be huge. Reputations are ruined and billions of dollars of shareholder value can 
be destroyed.
Despite these costs, data manipulation schemes are often fostered by excessive short-term 
performance pressures and inadequate controls to prevent the dysfunctional side effects, which 
we discuss further in Chapter 15. In other situations, the blame is laid on the failure of auditors 
to perform their functions well. Auditors do not always understand the company’s business or 
its accounting methods well enough, or they do not pursue some of the observed improprieties 
far enough, perhaps in part because of a lack of independence from their clients. The 2008 
financial crisis has nudged regulators further toward enacting regulatory and legislative 
reforms focused on the roles and responsibilities of management and boards of directors in 
financial reporting as well as the roles and responsibilities of independent auditors in perform-
ing their audits of the financial reports. This falls broadly under the realm of corporate govern-
ance, which we discuss further in Chapters 13. The role of auditors is discussed further in 
Chapter 14.

Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
180
Operating Delays
Operating delays often are an unavoidable consequence of the preaction review types of action 
controls and some of the forms of behavioral constraints. Delays such as those caused by limit-
ing access to a stockroom or requiring the typing of a password before using a computer system 
are usually minor and are inevitable (although they can be made more effective and less time-
wasting or cumbersome through the use of technology, such as touch IDs or retina-recognition 
systems). However, other control-caused delays can be major, such as those arising from 
approvals requiring multiple signatures from managers at various levels in the hierarchy, or 
from endless memos through layers of higher-ups before anything gets cleared. In these cir-
cumstances, required approvals sometimes straitjacket operations and, hence, curtail market 
and customer responsiveness.
To enhance the market responsiveness of its North American operations, Toyota Motor Cor-
poration’s president Fujio Cho had the following message for its American division: “It’s all 
yours.” In response, Jim Press, executive vice president of Torrance, California-based Toyota 
Motor Sales USA, noted that, “These days, we don’t need so many approvals from Japan; we 
have more autonomy.” The American management used to have to go down to the docks to 
greet the boats to find out what the new-model-year cars looked like. Now, many Toyota cars 
and their interiors are designed in the United States. Toyota’s president Cho called this a “rein-
vention” of the carmaker, necessary because the market, especially in the United States, is so 
competitive. “Any company not willing to take the risk of reinventing itself is doomed,” Cho 
said.22 This example also dovetails nicely with the next category of MCS costs—adaptation 
costs, and benefits, of tailoring the systems to the local market.
Obviously, where fast action is important, as it is in many competitive markets, decision 
delays can be quite costly. Delays are a major reason for the negative connotation associated 
with the word bureaucracy. In organizations that tend to place greater emphasis on action con-
trols and suffer these bureaucratic operating delays as a consequence, many MCS changes are 
motivated by a desire to reduce the burdens caused by these types of controls, which are often 
seen as killing entrepreneurship.
Control-caused operating delays are not an independent problem. They can cause other 
managerial reactions that are potentially harmful, such as game-playing, or that are undermin-
ing the behaviors the controls were designed to keep in check, such as when managers or 
employees seek the required approvals after they spend the money in order to speed up the 
process; that is, they are said to act first, apologize later.
Negative attitudes
Management controls can also cause negative attitudes, including job tension, conflict, frustra-
tion and resistance. Such attitudes are important not only because they are indicators of 
employee welfare, but also because they are often coincident with other behaviors that can be 
harmful, such as gameplaying, lack of effort, absenteeism and turnover.
The causes of negative attitudes are complex. They may be precipitated by a large number of 
factors such as economic conditions, personal difficulties, or administrative procedures, which 
can be cumulative, as suggested by a recent  survey of more than 3,000 board members, execu-
tives, and managers across 36 countries, indicating that “cumulative pressures” have seen 
employees engage in accelerating the recording of revenues to meet short-term financial tar-
gets; under-reporting costs; and pushing customers to buy unnecessary stock to meet short term 
sales targets. John Smart, Partner and U.K. head of EY’s Fraud Investigation team, said: “The 
incentives for unethical conduct can be strong given the pressure on pay packets, job security 
and demand to deliver growth. At the same time, a focus on cutting costs can also weaken the 
systems and teams in place to prevent and detect these actions.”23

Indirect costs
181
Negative Attitudes Produced by Results Controls
Results controls can produce negative attitudes. One cause of negative attitudes arises from a 
lack of employee commitment to the performance targets defined in the results-control sys-
tem. Most employees are not committed to targets they consider too difficult, not meaningful, 
not controllable, or imprudent (and, of course, illegal or unethical). In the case of a tight 
results-control system at UPS, for example, commitment sometimes was low because the tar-
gets were too difficult, causing employees (e.g. delivery drivers, pilots) to feel too pressured. 
The company avoided major labor problems apparently because it provided generous sala-
ries. However, a gradual shift by UPS toward more part-time employment and subcontracting 
over time has triggered strikes protracted in time across different locations amid ongoing 
negotiations.24
Negative attitudes may also stem from problems in the measurement system. It is common 
for managers to complain that their performance evaluations are not fair because they are 
being held accountable for things over which they have little or no control. (We discuss this 
issue in more detail in Chapter 12.) Other potential causes of negative attitudes may be asso-
ciated with the rewards (or punishments) associated with the MCS. Rewards that are per-
ceived as inequitable, and perhaps most forms of punishment, tend to produce negative 
attitudes. Even the target-setting and evaluation processes themselves may produce nega-
tive attitudes, particularly when they are implemented with people-insensitive, non- 
supportive leadership styles. Allowing employees to participate in setting their targets often 
reduces negative feelings toward results-oriented control systems. (We discuss this further 
in Chapter 8.)
The collection of factors affecting attitudes is complex. Some evidence suggests that poor 
performers may react more negatively to better control systems because the limitations in their 
abilities are easier to discover. More critical, however, are system flaws that could cause nega-
tive attitudes in good performers. Attitudes are important MCS outcomes to monitor not only 
because they have their own value as indicators of employee welfare, but also because the pres-
ence of these negative attitudes may indicate the propensity to engage in any of a number of 
harmful behaviors, such as data manipulation or other forms of gamesmanship, withdrawal, or 
even sabotage.
Negative Attitudes Produced by Action Controls
Most people, particularly professionals, react negatively to the use of action controls. Preac-
tion reviews can be particularly frustrating if the employees being reviewed do not perceive 
the reviews as serving a useful purpose. For example, the European investment banking 
business at Bank of America Merrill Lynch was locked in a clash as former Merrill Lynch 
managers and Bank of America’s top executives argued over how the business should be run. 
At stake was whether the combined investment business would use the Merrill Lynch-style 
decentralized model or Bank of America’s centralized “command-and-control” model. Spe-
cifically, attempts by global banking head Brian Moynihan from Bank of America to remove 
individual managers’ power to rule on matters such as staff compensation and to impose the 
Bank of America model on Merrill Lynch caused widespread dissent. Prior to the takeover by 
Bank of America, Merrill Lynch’s investment banking business in Europe was largely left to 
run itself. One London-based former Merrill Lynch manager said: “Moynihan’s view is ‘we’ll 
do it the Bank of America way and no other,’ even though that got them nowhere in Euro-
pean investment banking for the past five years, whereas the Merrill Lynch model, which 
delegated a lot of authority, has proven very successful over the past 10 years.” The spat led 
to the resignations of more than 40 senior managing directors in London and New York, with 
more expected.25

Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
182
At 7-Eleven, the global convenience store chain, some managers described the action con-
trols in use in the Japanese locations as “draconian.” The company’s point-of-sale computer 
system, which registers every sale at each store location, is used to monitor how much time 
each manager uses the analytical tools built into the cash register system. Stores are ranked 
by how often their operators use the system, and if they are not using it “enough,” the store 
managers are told to “shape up.” One manager complained: “Sometimes I don’t know who’s 
really running the store. It’s like being under 24-hour surveillance; it’s like being enslaved.”26 
Even though 7-Eleven Japan has been called “the world’s best-run convenience store chain,”27 
efforts to import the computer-focused action control system to stores in the United States 
met with stiff resistance because it “goes against American workers’ desire for independ-
ence.”28 Moreover, although employee-monitoring software (some call it “spyware”) may 
provide what seems useful information, it may undermine employee morale and mutual 
trust. “If you have to check up on employees all the time, then you probably have bigger issues 
than just productivity,” notes Peter Cheese, managing director of Accenture’s talent and 
organization practice.29
Adaptation costs
In addition to direct and indirect costs, further costs related to running effective MCSs may 
arise from the need to adapt MCSs to the context in which they operate, which is particularly 
pertinent when operating multinationally, and which we will use as the case in point here. 
But adaptation costs are also incurred when firms adapt their MCSs across different strategic 
business units (SBUs) or across different business or product/service lines because these 
have adopted different business unit or competitive strategies. Regardless, adaptations to 
local circumstances can be costly, and firms may prefer to standardize their systems rather 
than to adapt them.30 However, not adapting them may render the MCSs less effective and 
trigger indirect costs like those we discussed above, for a number of reasons that we discuss 
in this section.
Adapting MCSs is particularly challenging in multinational environments. Managers of mul-
tinational organizations (MNOs) almost invariably face high information asymmetry between 
themselves and personnel in the foreign locations. The foreign personnel have specialized 
knowledge about their environments (such as about local norms, tastes, regulations, and busi-
ness risks). The information asymmetry limits the corporate managers’ abilities to use action 
controls, such as preaction reviews, because the corporate managers have limited knowledge to 
make the needed judgments. MNO managers also face the barriers of distance, time zones, and 
language, which limit the use of direct monitoring. They cannot easily visit their foreign-based 
subordinates, although advances in technology have made virtual communications easier. On 
top of that, they must deal with the significant problem of measuring performance in multiple 
currencies. All this carries extra costs – costs of operating and adapting the control systems in a 
multinational environment.
MNOs must understand how they must adapt their management practices, including manage-
ment control practices, to make them work in each of their international locations. MNOs have 
similarities with large domestic organizations in that they are usually characterized by a high 
degree of decentralized decision-making and by management control through financial results 
controls. That said, controlling MNOs is often more difficult than controlling domestic organiza-
tions because MNOs face a multidimensional organizational problem: they are organized not only 
by function and/or product line, but also by geography. Geographic spread requires managers to 

Adaptation costs
183
be sensitive to each of the national cultures in which they operate and to appreciate different insti-
tutional settings and local business environments.
National culture
Some of the effects, benefits, and costs of management controls are universal because, at a cer-
tain basic level, people in all countries have similar physiological needs and desires, say, for 
achievement and financial security. Despite such similarities in people around the world, there 
are also many differences. One important set of factors with potentially important influences on 
MCSs can be explained under the rubric of national culture.31 National culture has been defined 
as “the collective programming of the mind that distinguishes the members of one group or 
society from another.”32 As such, the national culture concept essentially recognizes that peo-
ple’s tastes, norms, values, social attitudes, personal priorities, and responses to interpersonal 
stimuli vary across nations. The notion of these differences is quite powerfully expressed in the 
following quote:
“The biggest difference between China and Western countries is that we pursue the goal of 
getting rich together,” Fu Chengyu, head of the country’s largest refiner, told reporters. “It 
doesn’t make sense to benchmark Chinese executives against Western – and especially 
American – executives,” said Kjeld Erik Brodsgaard, director of Asia research at the 
Copenhagen Business School. “They stay in China and move around as civil servants. In a 
Chinese context they are supermanagers.”33
An important factor that contributes to the effectiveness of MCSs is whether the employees 
perceive them as culturally appropriate; that is, whether they suit the shared values maintained 
by the society in which they operate. When groups of employees perceive things differently, or 
react to things differently, different control choices may have to be made.
Several taxonomies of national culture have been proposed. The most widely cited taxon-
omy consists of the four cultural dimensions identified in a study by Geert Hofstede: individual-
ism, power distance, uncertainty avoidance, and masculinity. The individualism (vs. 
collectivism) dimension of national culture relates to individuals’ self-concept; that is, whether 
individuals see themselves primarily as an individual or as part of a group. This affects people’s 
comfort levels with self-interests, their preferences for conflict resolution, and their attitudes 
toward interpersonal relationships. The power distance dimension refers to the extent to which 
people accept that institutional or organizational power is distributed unequally. Individuals 
who score high on uncertainty avoidance feel uncomfortable when the situation they face is 
ambiguous. The masculinity dimension relates to the preference for achievement, assertive-
ness, and material success (traits labeled masculine), as opposed to an emphasis on relation-
ships, modesty, and the quality of life (traits labeled feminine).34
Hofstede showed that people from different countries vary considerably on these cultural 
dimensions. For example, the US culture is much more individualistic and more masculine, 
while the Taiwanese culture is higher in both power distance and uncertainty avoidance.35 If 
that is true, then each of the cultural dimensions can be said to have MCS implications. To name 
just one implication, employees high in individualism are possibly more likely to prefer indi-
vidual rather than group-oriented work arrangements, performance evaluations, and pay.36
But these four dimensions do not explain all aspects of national culture and their differences 
across countries. For example, one aspect of cross-cultural differences not directly picked up by 
any of the four Hofstede dimensions relates to corporate goals. Managers in some countries, par-
ticularly those in Asia, are often more concerned with the interests of non-owner groups than are 
US managers.37 To illustrate, Jack Ma of China’s Alibaba emphatically noted that he had said on 

Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
184
numerous occasions that he will put “customers first, employees second, and shareholders third” 
even though he “can see that investors who hear this for the first time may find it a bit hard to 
understand.”38 Managers running a business for the benefit of many stakeholders, and not pri-
marily its shareholders, will make different decisions. With regards to MCS design, they are likely 
to choose, or respond better to, different performance measures (e.g. employee safety) and use 
different ways of rewarding employees (e.g. job security and employee benefits).
Local institutions
Corporate governance regulations, employment law, and contract law, as well as banking sys-
tems and governance interventions, also vary significantly across nations. Just as with national 
culture, such institutional factors can influence both the design and effects of an organization’s 
MCS. For example, organizations in countries with strong labor unions may find it difficult to 
provide incentive pay as unions often prefer seniority-based pay systems.
One set of institutional factors with potentially important MCS implications consists of those 
descriptive of the financial markets in various countries, their importance in raising capital, 
and the extent of disclosures and types of information they demand.39 The state of the capital 
markets in various countries may affect the extent to which firms provide stock-based incen-
tives, such as restricted stock or stock options. Where capital markets are less efficient and/or 
where trading is thin, stock market valuations are less likely to reflect firm value adequately, 
rendering stock-based incentives impotent. The quality of the required disclosures of (finan-
cial) information by publicly traded firms also varies across countries, in part because of differ-
ences in the organization and regulation of their auditing. Just as poor stock valuations may 
hamper the use of stock-based incentives, so may poor earnings quality affect the use of 
accounting-based incentives by the parent company for incentive purposes of its managers in 
some of its foreign entities. The strength of regulation, auditing, and enforcement also may 
affect managers’ abilities and propensities to engage in earnings management. Not all countries 
require the reporting of quarterly financial performance, which may affect managers’ 
focus on short-term financial performance and, hence, their propensity to engage in myopic 
decision-making.
Differences in local business environments
Business environments also differ significantly across countries. Elements of these environ-
ments can affect environmental uncertainty, inflation, and the availability of qualified person-
nel. Each of these factors, and many others in this realm, has MCS implications.
Uncertainty
Country-specific environmental uncertainty can be caused by many things. Some countries are 
inherently riskier places in which to do business. Military conflicts, kidnappings, terrorism, and 
extortion threats can create major security problems. Some countries are also prone to corpo-
rate espionage and theft of corporate secrets by local competitors, perhaps even with the tacit 
consent of the host government. Risk also differs across countries because of the stage of eco-
nomic development. As discussed, developing countries tend to have limited access to capital, 
relatively poor accounting regulation and oversight, weaker legal enforcement of contract vio-
lations, and other obstacles to doing business.
Government interventions also affect business risk. Governments have, to a greater or lesser 
extent, powers that enable them to serve certain objectives. These powers can have major 
effects on the value of companies’ assets and the expected returns on those assets. For example, 
governments can exercise bureaucratic control in issuing business permits, controlling prices, 
and restricting currency flows. They can implement laws that restrict foreign firms’ activities 

Adaptation costs
185
and/or favor domestic firms. They can design tax laws that redistribute income or affect the 
value of monetary compensation and other reward arrangements. They can apply constraints 
through labor policies designed to reduce unemployment such as by rigid labor laws to restrict 
layoffs.
Inflation
Inflation and fluctuations in inflation, which affect the relative values of currencies, create 
financial risk. Valued in terms of a fixed currency, high inflation can cause a company’s assets or 
an individual’s compensation to deteriorate significantly in value in a short period of time.
Inflation, especially when severe, may require the adoption of some form of inflation 
accounting, which involves either the expressing of accounts and financial statements in 
terms of real (rather than nominal) amounts or expressing all assets and liabilities at cur-
rent (or replacement) values. Or, when less severe, it may require the use of some form of 
flexible budgeting, to shield managers from uncontrollable inflation risk, or the partial 
abandonment of accounting measures of performance in favor of some nonfinancial 
measures.
Talent
Organizations operating in developing countries often face limited availability of skilled and 
educated personnel. When employees are not highly educated, decision-making structures are 
usually more centralized, and MCSs tend to be more focused on action controls rather than 
results controls. Small offices may contain only a few educated people. This makes it difficult to 
implement one of the basic internal control principles: separation of duties. All told, when talent 
is in short supply, both the firm’s ability to do business and its capacity to affect good control are 
more likely to be compromised.
Personnel mobility and retention also differ across countries, which the following quote 
nicely illustrates:
Japanese workers introduce themselves by their company name first and their own name 
second, and are far more likely to define themselves by whom they work for than by what 
they do. This is true even in Japan’s most global companies. In the United States you are 
always ‘dating’ the company; in Japan, employees ‘marry’ their company.40
When personnel mobility is low, there is less need for implementing long-term incentive plans 
that motivate managers both to think long term and to stay with the firm to earn their 
rewards.
Foreign currency translation
MNOs also face currency exchange and translation problems. At first glance, it is not obvious 
that results controls in MNOs should be complicated by the fact that the firms’ profits are earned 
in multiple currencies. Results controls over foreign entities can be implemented using the 
same practices employed in most domestic firms, by comparing performance measured in terms 
of the local currency with a pre-set plan also expressed in the local currency. However, MNOs 
bear economic risk caused by fluctuating currency values. The values of foreign investments 
appreciate or depreciate based on the relative values of the home and foreign currencies. 
Through their performance evaluation practices, MNOs can make their entity managers bear 
this risk or can shield them from it. The issues involved are discussed further in Chapter 12 
regarding uncontrollable factors. The extra measurement noise caused by uncontrollable for-
eign exchange risk, and various methods of measuring the gains and losses, can affect judg-
ments about the entity managers’ performances.

Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
186
One could argue that entity managers who can influence the amount of the foreign exchange 
gains or losses should bear the foreign exchange risk. Some entity managers can take actions 
that have foreign currency implications. Some have the authority to make significant cross-
border investments, product sourcing, or marketing decisions. Some have the authority to write 
purchasing or sales contracts denominated in one currency or another. Some even have the 
authority to enter into foreign exchange transactions, such as hedging, currency swaps, or arbi-
trage. But most of these specialized hedging transactions require special skills most operating 
managers do not have; thus, authority in this area commonly resides with the finance depart-
ment at corporate.
If corporate managers decide that the managers of their foreign entities should not bear the 
foreign exchange risk, they can instead use any of four essentially identical methods:
1.	 Evaluate the manager in terms of local currency profits as compared to a local currency plan 
or budget.
2.	 Treat the foreign exchange gain or loss as “below” the income-statement line for which the 
manager is held accountable.
3.	 Evaluate the manager in terms of profits measured in home currency, but calculate a “for-
eign exchange variance” and treat it as uncontrollable.
4.	 Re-express the home currency budget for the entity in local currency using the end-of-year, 
not beginning-of-year, exchange rate or some average for the period. This procedure creates 
a budget that “flexes” with exchange rates.
These are just some examples of the ways in which different situational factors may require 
adjustments to the MCS, which will trigger adaptation costs and increase complexity. These 
costs should be outweighed by the benefits of “better” control, however hard such is to estimate 
because these benefits also include the avoidance or mitigation of some dysfunctional side 
effects that may occur if the systems are not adapted.
Conclusion
The implementation of virtually all controls, as well as their adaptation to local or situational 
circumstances, requires companies to incur some direct, out-of-pocket costs. But sometimes 
those direct costs are dwarfed by the indirect costs caused by any of a number of harmful side 
effects.
We can make four general observations about the occurrence of these side effects. First, as 
Table 5.1 summarizes, the harmful side effects are not unique to one form of control. However, 
the risk of side effects seems to be smaller with personnel controls. Second, some of the control 
types have negative side effects that are largely unavoidable. It is difficult, or even impossible, 
for people to enjoy following a strict set of procedures (action accountability) for a long period 
of time, although the negative attitudes can probably be minimized if the reasons for them are 
well communicated and if the list is kept to a minimum. Third, the likelihood of severe harmful 
side effects is greatest when there is either a failure to satisfy one or more of the desirable design 
criteria or a misfit between the choice of type(s) of control and the situation. Fourth, when con-
trols have design imperfections or when they are inappropriately used, the tighter the controls 
are applied, the greater are both the likelihood and the severity of harmful side effects.
What makes dealing with these potential side effects difficult is that there is not always a 
simple one-to-one relationship between the control type and the effect. The need to adapt MCSs 
to different situations across various business units, with different strategies or operating in 

Conclusion
187
different regions of the world, adds to the complexity. Moreover, the existence of the side effects 
is often difficult to detect. For example, a failure to make the measurement processes more 
robust in a results- or action-accountability control system only offers the opportunity for data 
manipulation. Actual manipulation may not occur until an employee has a personal need for 
more money; poor performance creates additional pressure to perform; there is a lower chance 
of being detected or caught; and/or leadership creates a motivation to manipulate.41 That said, 
the better organizations can alleviate both the opportunity and motivation for undesired 
behaviors, the more likely their control systems will have predominantly desired effects and, 
hence, lower costs.
Even costs can have hidden or indirect benefits. For example, managers in diversified or multi-
national corporations are able to learn from potentially desirable practices used in their various 
businesses or foreign countries. Those practices are known by employees in their entities, and 
some of those practices can be readily adapted across other entities. Firms that grow by acquisi-
tion learn from the management systems, including MCSs, being used in the organizations they 
acquire. When firms grow by acquisition, they are likely to have to use, at least for a period of 
time, several variations of MCSs. The MCS variations may persist if they are superior for control-
ling the acquired businesses, even though it can be costly to maintain multiple sets of MCSs.
Table 5.1  Control types and possible harmful side effects
Type of control
Behavioral 
displacement
Gamesmanship
Operating 
delays
Negative 
attitudes
Results controls
Results accountability
x
x
x
Action controls
Behavioral constraints
x
x
Preaction reviews
x
x
Action accountability
x
x
x
Redundancy
x
Personnel/cultural controls
Selection and placement
x
Training
x
Provision of necessary resources
Creation of a strong 
organizational culture
x
Group-based rewards
x
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 224.
Notes
	 1	 2012 Budgeting, Forecasting, and Planning Survey (Quantrix, 
2012), p. 15.
	 2	 “CFO Insights: Can Internal Audit Be a Command Center 
for Risk?,” Deloitte (2014), online at deloi.tt/1OidCMB.
	 3	 “Banks Increase Efforts to Stay on Right Side of Law,” The 
Financial Times (September 28, 2014), online at on.ft.
com/1hNpwWl.
	 4	 Ibid.
	 5	 This problem is also known as multitasking – see J. Roberts, 
The Modern Firm (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004), 
and other work by John Roberts and colleagues. See also 
W. A. Van der Stede, “The Pitfalls of Pay-for-Performance,” 
Finance & Management (December 2007), pp. 10–13; W. A. 
Van der Stede, “Designing Effective Reward Systems,” 
Finance & Management (October 2009), pp. 6–9.
	 6	 “I Built This Company, I Can Save It,” Fortune (April 30, 
2001).
	 7	 This example is taken from J. Pfeffer and R. Sutton, Hard 
Facts, Dangerous Half-Truths and Total Nonsense (Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2006), p. 120.

Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
188
Notes
	 8	 G. Smith, Why I Left Goldman Sachs: A Wall Street Story 
(New York: Grand Central Publishing, 2012).
	 9	 “I Built This Company, I Can Save It,” op. cit.
	10	 “Just Think: No Permission Needed,” Fortune (January 8, 
2001), pp. 190–2.
	11	 “Business Costs Itself Billions in Internal Red Tape,” ABC 
(October 28, 2014), online at www.abc.net.au/
news/2014-10-29/business-costs-itself-billions-in-inter-
nal-red-tape/5849994.
	12	 “Jeans Therapy: Levi’s Factory Workers Are Assigned to 
Teams, and Morale Takes a Hit,” The Wall Street Journal 
(May 20, 1998), p A1.
	13	 See W. A. Van der Stede, “The Relationship between Two 
Consequences of Budget Controls: Budgetary Slack Crea-
tion and Managerial Short-Term Orientation,” Accounting, 
Organizations and Society, 25, no. 6 (August 2000).
	14	 For various manifestations of such practices, see, for 
example, M. Jones, Creative Accounting, Fraud and Inter-
national Accounting Scandals (Chichester, UK: Wiley, 
2010). See also I. Dichev, J. Graham, C. R. Harvey, and S. 
Rajgopal, “The Misrepresentation of Earnings,” Financial 
Analyst Journal, 72, no. 1 (2016), pp. 22–35, as well as 
other work by these authors on this issue.
	15	 See, for example, M. Nelson, J. Elliott, and R. Tarpley, 
“How Are Earnings Managed? Examples from Auditors,” 
Accounting Horizons, 17 (Supplement 2003), pp. 17–35.
	16	 “Full Disclosure,” Forbes (April, 2002), pp. 36–8.
	17	 “Legal, but Lousy,” Fortune (September 2, 2002), p. 192.
	18	 “IBM Uses Dutch Tax Haven to Boost Profits as Sales Slide,” 
Bloomberg (February 3, 2014), online at bloom.bg/1iVouId.
	19	 “Tesco’s Accounting Problems Not So Funny,” The Econo-
mist (September 27, 2014), online at econ.st/1qxwvPw.
	20	 H. Collingwood, “The Earnings Game: Everyone Plays, 
Nobody Wins,” Harvard Business Review, 79, no. 6 (June 
2001), pp. 5–13.
	21	 “Sunrise Scam Throws Light on Incentive Pay Programs,” 
The Los Angeles Times (January 15, 1996), p. D1.
	22	 “In the Driver’s Seat at Toyota: U.S. Execs Get more Inde-
pendence as the Automaker Focuses on Asia and Europe,” 
The Los Angeles Times (October 19, 2004), p. C1.
	23	 “Squeezed U.K. Employees under Increasing Pressure to 
Commit Fraud,” Ernst & Young (May 7, 2013), online at 
www.ey.com/UK/en/Newsroom/News-releases/13-05-07- 
Squeezed-UK-employees-under-increasing-pressure-to-
commit-fraud.
	24	 See, for example, “UPS Pilots Union Calls for Strike Vote,” 
The Wall Street Journal (September 9, 2015), online at on.
wsj.com/1hXhn1i.
	25	 “Power Struggle at BofA Merrill Lynch,” Market Watch 
(April 19, 2009), online at www.marketwatch.com.
	26	 “7-Eleven Operators Resist System to Monitor Managers,” 
The Wall Street Journal (June 16, 1997), p. B1.
	27	 A. Ishikawa and T. Nejo, The Success of 7-Eleven Japan: 
Discovering the Secrets of the World’s Best-Run Convenience 
Store Chain (Singapore: World Scientific, 2002).
	28	 “Power Struggle at BofA Merrill Lynch,” op. cit.
	29	 “Big Brother Bosses,” The Economist (September 10, 2009), 
pp. 71–2. See also “Monitoring the Monitors,” The Wall 
Street Journal (August 16, 2010), online at online.wsj.com.
	30	 See W. Van der Stede, “The Effect of National Culture on 
Management Control and Incentive System Design in 
Multi-Business Firms: Evidence of Intra-Corporate Iso-
morphism,” European Accounting Review, 12, no. 2 
(2003), pp. 263–85.
	31	 National culture has been deemed an important factor in 
several literatures, including finance – see, for example, 
C. S. Eun, L. Wang and S. C. Xiao, “Culture and R2,” Jour-
nal of Financial Economics, 115, no. 2 (February 2015), 
pp. 283–303.
	32	 G. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences: International Differ-
ences in Work-Related Values (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publi-
cations, 1980), p. 25; G. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences: 
Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions and Organizations 
Across Nations (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 
2001). See also www.geerthofstede.nl/dimensions-of-
national-cultures (accessed December 2015).
	33	 “China’s State Sector Leaders Embrace Pay Cuts of Up to 
60%,” The Financial Times (October 12, 2014), online at 
on.ft.com/1fBoBqu.
	34	 Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences: International Differ-
ences, op. cit.
	35	 Ibid., Figure 7.1, p. 315.
	36	 For a sample of several studies in this area, see C. Chow, 
M. Shields, and A. Wu, “The Importance of National Cul-
ture in the Design of and Preference for Management 
Controls for Multinational Operations,” Accounting, 
Organizations and Society, 24, no. 5/6 (July–August 
1999), pp. 441–61; and E. P. Jansen, K. Merchant, and W. 
Van der Stede, “National Differences in Incentive Com-
pensation Practices: The Differing Roles of Financial Per-
formance Measurement in the United States and the 
Netherlands,” Accounting, Organizations and Society, 34, 
no. 1 (January 2009), pp. 58–84.
	37	 See, for example, “Shareholders vs. Stakeholders: A New 
Idolatry,” The Economist (April 24, 2010), pp. 65–6.
	38	 “Dear Investors: Letter from Jack Ma as Alibaba Prepares 
Roadshow,” The Financial Times (September 5, 2014), 
online at on.ft.com/1JATJ7z.
	39	 See, for example, C. Leuz, “Different Approaches to Cor-
porate Reporting Regulation: How Jurisdictions Differ 
and Why,” Accounting and Business Research, 40, no. 3 
(Special Issue, 2010), pp. 229–56.
	40	 “Insiders and Outsiders,” The Economist (November 18, 
2010), pp. 7–9.
	41	 B. Litzky, K. Eddleston, and D. Kidder, “The Good, the 
Bad, and the Misguided: How Managers Inadvertently 
Encourage Deviant Behaviors,” The Academy of Manage-
ment Perspectives, 20, no. 1 (February 2006), pp. 91–103.

Philip Anderson
189
 It was three days to month end. Philip Anderson, the 
Phoenix branch manager of Stuart & Co., the largest 
brokerage fi rm in town, was dreading the monthly tel-
econference meeting with his bosses in New York. Once 
again his team had failed to deliver on some of the spe-
cifi c product sales targets set for them in the company’s 
sales budget. Specifi cally, the ratio of in-house to out-
side product sales of items such as mutual funds and 
insurance product off erings had not improved from the 
prior month; his team had not been successful in push-
ing equity issues syndicated or underwritten by the 
parent fi rm to the levels set by his boss a few months 
earlier; and his team had not increased the overall 
balance of margin accounts. On the positive side, the 
number of margin accounts had increased, new clients 
had been signed up, and overall branch revenues had 
increased. But Phil questioned how long he would be 
able to justify not meeting some of the specifi c targets 
the fi rm had given his branch. 
 Phil began his sales career right after college. His 
fi rst job was with a cereal producer, as an inside sales-
man. He switched to the brokerage business after just 
two years, lured by the potential for higher income and 
the opportunity to have direct contact with retail cli-
ents. Phil was an outgoing individual who had a talent 
for fi nancial matters, and he looked forward to a job 
that would allow him to interact with clients directly. 
Just fi ve months ago, Phil had celebrated his 30th year 
in the brokerage industry and his 21st year with Stuart 
& Co. Although he truly enjoyed being a manager and 
working with his team, some of the other demands of 
the job were beginning to wear on him. Things had not 
turned out as he had expected. Phil thought of himself 
as a hard-working and loyal employee, a good manager, 
and an ethical businessman. The “compromises” that 
his career seemed to demand were beginning to trouble 
him. He did not consider himself a saint, and he knew 
that his job required balancing confl icting goals, but he 
wondered how far he could bend without breaking. 
 Phil started his brokerage career with one of the 
largest fi rms in the industry. He moved to Stuart & Co., 
then a boutique fi rm, in the hope of breaking free from 
the high-pressure sales-oriented attitude prevalent in 
the industry. He thought that the perception that the 
large fi rms tried to perpetuate – that their advisors are 
experts at providing unbiased fi nancial advice – is for 
the most part wrong. Phil learned fi rsthand that bro-
kers are paid, fi rst and foremost, to sell products and 
services. Meeting the fi nancial needs of their clients 
was not paramount. 
 Stuart & Co. seemed to be diff erent. It was a fi rm 
that emphasized the development of long-term client 
relationships based upon rendering expert independ-
ent fi nancial advice. Its investment advisors were to be 
trusted counselors to clients on all fi nancial matters. 
But Phil was also lured by Stuart’s compensation pack-
age, which included a relatively large fi xed salary and a 
bonus based upon overall branch revenues, growth in 
the number of ties or relationships (fi nancial, insur-
ance, investment) developed with each customer, and 
the number of business referrals to other branches. 
 However, things had changed since he had joined 
the firm. As the investment and analysis units 
expanded, the demand on the branch managers to push 
specifi c products began to be incorporated into their 
annual sales budgets. Phil felt that those changes had 
compromised his ability to deliver investment options 
suited to his clients’ fi nancial situations. They risked 
the many long-term relationships with clients that he 
had worked hard to develop and created ethical dilem-
mas for him and his staff . Phil felt that pursuing some 
of the new budget goals could result in future fi nancial 
losses for some of his clients. However, Phil had worked 
in the brokerage industry and at Stuart & Co. long 
enough to know that it was dangerous to openly express 
those concerns to his boss. Additionally, Phil was trou-
bled with the recent scandals in the industry. It was 
mostly low-level employees like him who were the 
object of criminal prosecution, not the top executives. 
 As Phil saw it, his job was to develop and nurture 
profi table relationships with as many clients as possi-
ble, and the specific products and services sold to 
 CASE STUDY 
 Philip Anderson 

190
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
clients should be dictated by the needs of those clients. 
Consequently, he could never bring himself to pushing 
his team to adhere to the firm directives, and this 
approach had negatively impacted his total compensa-
tion in the last few years. Invariably, his annual bonus 
lagged behind those of other managers at Stuart & Co., 
even though his branch was one of the largest in the 
fi rm in terms of clients, sales volume, and net profi ts. 
Phil felt his current situation was unfair. He also was 
beginning to worry that his failure to meet specifi c 
product sales targets was eroding whatever measure of 
job safety his overall results had given him. To com-
pound the situation, Stuart & Co. had recently been 
bought by one of the largest brokerage fi rms in the 
country, and it seemed that the new hierarchy did not 
take well to independent-minded managers like Phil 
who did not aggressively pursue the objectives set out 
by corporate. 
 Phil was getting tired of the game but could not see 
how he could avoid playing it. He was almost 54 years 
old and was the sole provider for his family. His wife 
had retired a year before from her teaching job to take 
care of their three teenage sons. They had just recently 
bought a 4,000-square-foot home in an exclusive neigh-
borhood of Scottsdale. And last fall, Phil had fulfi lled a 
college dream by buying for himself a brand-new red 
Corvette. Phil feared that if he allowed his team of 
advisors to continue focusing on meeting their clients’ 
needs with little regard for corporate targets, more 
than his discretionary compensation would be at risk. 
 Phil had many questions and doubts, and few 
answers. Was he right in allowing his clients’ fi nancial 
goals to take precedence over his own family’s fi nancial 
security? Was he being unreasonable, naive, or imprac-
tical? Was there somewhere a proper balance? Was he 
being too ethical at a time when his family’s future 
should be his primary concern? Or perhaps it was time 
for him to fi nd another employer that shared Phil’s phi-
losophy, if one existed in the brokerage industry? But 
could he fi nd another good job at his age? Or should he 
even bother? After all, he had done his part. Maybe it 
should be the job of some younger managers to cham-
pion the cause of service to clients and continue the 
battle. 
 This case was prepared by Research Assistant Juan Jimenez and Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
 Shenzhen-based Sunshine Fashion was a Sino-Japanese 
venture that had grown from merely an OEM export 
manufacturer of cashmere sweaters to also a retailer 
with a chain of 220 retail points across China in 2010. 
In order to manage its retail operation, it had set up 
regional as well as branch offi  ces to handle stock as 
well as support and monitor its retail points. Nonethe-
less, fraudulent behavior among employees had cost the 
retail chain almost 5% of its domestic sales revenues. 
The implementation of an ERP system for tracking 
goods and sales had improved the situation somewhat. 
What were the challenges that Sunshine faced in trying 
to control fraudulent behavior among its staff ? What 
additional measures should the management under-
take, and how should the remedial measures be imple-
mented to achieve its target? 
 Company background 
 Shenzhen-based Sunshine Fashion Co. Ltd. was a Sino-
Japanese joint venture founded in 1993. It started out as 
an OEM 1   export manufacturer of cashmere sweaters and 
eventually grew to become an integrated manufacturer 
and retailer with activities that included material sourc-
ing, spinning, dyeing, design, distribution, marketing, 
and retailing. By 2010, it had three factories, located in 
 CASE STUDY 
 Sunshine Fashion: Fraud, Theft, and Misbehavior among Employees 

Sunshine Fashion: Fraud, Theft, and Misbehavior among Employees
191
Shenzhen, Shanghai, and Taiyuan of Shanxi province; 
220 sales counters in departmental stores across the 
country; and a workforce of more than 1,000 employees.
Sunshine produced some 300,000 pieces a year for 
domestic sales, which enjoyed a considerably higher 
profit margin than its export business. With a turnover of 
RMB 150 million, domestic sales made up more than two-
thirds of Sunshine’s business. Sunshine was positioned as 
a high-end fashion brand in the domestic market with 
design being the leading factor in determining the sales of 
its goods. At RMB 3,000 apiece,2 Sunshine’s cashmere 
sweaters were considered a luxurious item in China.3
We are concerned with the price at which we sell, not how 
many garments we sell. Volume is nothing for us. If we sell 
a lot of garments but at a very low price, there is no profit.
Kitty Li, Sales Manager of Sunshine
Since the customers of Sunshine were fashion conscious, 
the value of out-of-season items could fall to as low as 
one-third of their original price. Sunshine’s vertically 
integrated organization gave it a competitive edge over its 
competitors. It could complete the product cycle from 
design to distribution within 20 days, as compared with 
the three months it took for its major competitor Edor.
The operation
Sunshine’s 220 retail counters in departmental stores 
across the country were managed by 14 branch offices 
that reported to three regional offices in Beijing, Chong-
qing, and Nanjing. The three regional offices were all 
former branch offices promoted to regional offices.
Before the head office controlled almost everything, the 
price, the quantity, which branch office was to be allocated 
how much goods … These decisions and coordination was 
concentrated with one person. With three regional compa-
nies, [the work] can be separated and it reduces the load 
on this one person.
Kitty Li, Sales Manager of Sunshine
Sunshine had franchised some retail points outside of 
the major cities but remained cautious about expand-
ing its franchise network out of concern for operational 
control and brand integrity.
Stock
At the beginning of each season, Sunshine’s head office 
would prepare the stock, tagging each item with bar-
codes with prices, and send it to the branch offices. The 
branch offices were responsible for distributing the 
sweaters to the 220 retail counters and for replenishing 
the stock at each counter throughout the season. The 
head office sent the goods to the branch offices by air 
and sometimes also by courier. Roughly 3% of the 
goods was lost during transportation. At the end of 
each season, the branch offices were required to return 
all leftover stock to the head office and they would be 
refunded the cost of the returned goods. Over a two 
month period each year the head office would put ten 
people to work, counting and inspecting the returned 
items, repackaging them, and changing the barcodes to 
a new price if necessary ready for sale in the following 
season (see Exhibit 1).
Sales
The branch offices and retail points reported informa-
tion about stock and sales to the head office manually 
until 1998 when Sunshine implemented an RFID/ERP 
system. The system networked the branch offices and 
head office together, and this allowed the head office to 
receive updates on sales at all the retail points every 
four hours. Sunshine’s RFID/ERP system also stored 
information about inventory at the branch offices and 
retail counters, but the information had to be input 
manually by staff.
Theft and fraud by employees
In 2008, Sunshine faced serious fraud and misbehavior 
problems by employees with estimated losses of 
between RMB 9.3 million and RMB 10.5 million, trans-
lating to more than 5% of Sunshine’s total domestic 
sales. Although Sunshine’s RFID/ERP system provided 
the head office with an updated point-of-sales situation 
every four hours, managers who wanted to cheat took 
advantage of the head office’s inability to control dis-
counts and stock at the local level. Sunshine’s head 
office was responsible for setting the price and deter-
mining promotional time frames but these time frames 
were not necessarily followed by all the branch manag-
ers. Some branch managers postponed the start date of 
the promotional period without informing the head 
office so they could sell sweaters at the original price 
and pocketed the difference between the sale price and 
1	 OEM stands for original equipment manufacturer. It refers to manu-
facturers who produce products for another company that will be 
retailed under the brand name of that company.
2	 RMB 3,000 = US$451.35 at an exchange rate of $US1 = RMB 6.65.
3	 China’s national average GDP per capita of 2007 was RMB 18,665. 
(Source: Statistical Communiqué of the People’s Republic, February 
28, 2008.)

192
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
the discounted price, which was remitted to the head 
office. Other branch managers reported a higher dis-
count rate to the head office than what was actually the 
case and pocketed the difference. The situation was 
further complicated by the fact that the market situa-
tion varied widely across China, and each department 
store had its own policy with regard to the timing of 
sales promotions.
It depends on the different department stores. They each 
have different sales and celebrations and other things. 
It’s hard to control from the head office, they are far away 
from the office.
Kitty Li, Sales Manager of Sunshine
Sunshine had no choice but to allow some autonomy for 
decisions over promotions and discount rates at the 
local level, a practice that increased the risk of manag-
ers engaging in fraudulent behavior. The branch offices 
also engaged in a small amount of cash sales and there 
was no way for the head office to control such sales. The 
branch managers had total discretion over how much 
discount they wanted to give in such instances.
Fraudulent behavior was also encouraged by the fact 
that Sunshine had no mechanism in place to control 
stock at the local level. While the head office knew how 
many pieces it sent out to each branch office at the begin-
ning of the season, it had no information on how many of 
those pieces were at the branch office and how many had 
been distributed to each retail point at any moment in 
time. The branch office sent pieces to the retail points 
almost every day depending on their needs. This made it 
difficult for the head office to control promotions.
To check the stock before each promotion is impossible. 
The promotion each time depends on the different holi-
days and the policy of each departmental store … It’s hard 
to take stock before each promotion. We only control the 
inventory.
Kitty Li, Sales Manager of Sunshine
Sunshine’s ERP system could not update stock informa-
tion automatically. It stored stock information, but that 
information had to be inputted and updated manually. 
This meant that staff could input the stock information 
only after a promotion started, giving them an opportu-
nity to sell the sweaters at the original price and pocket 
the difference. Loss arising from such misbehavior was 
estimated to cost Sunshine RMB 3 million.
While barcoding the sweaters helped Sunshine to 
track its products, it had found that the barcodes of 
some of the sweaters had been changed, which altered 
the price upward by as much as 50% when the unsold 
goods were returned to the head office at the end of the 
season.
For example, given two garments priced at 1,000 yuan 
and 500 yuan, respectively, the salesman might sell one 
piece of 1,000 yuan, and return 500 yuan piece to the head 
office at the end of the season. The head office knows that 
the salesman has 1,000 yuan earning. But, if the salesman 
changes the barcode of the 500 yuan garment to the 1,000 
yuan barcode, then on returning the garment and barcode 
to the head office, the head office thinks that the salesman 
has only 500 yuan earning (cash). When auditing at the 
end of the season, the total quantity is not less, but the 
amount difference who knows?
Every year we have a big quantity and amount of sale, 
and the price changes all the time (because of festivals, 
shop anniversary, discount season …) it’s a huge workload 
to check every barcode, or the boss thinks that is it worth 
to do so? It’s another big cost …
Kitty Li, Sales Manager of Sunshine
Loss due to changed barcodes was estimated at RMB 
1.5 million. Sunshine’s accounting department visited 
the branch offices once or twice a year during the sales 
season to check their stock and their accounts, and the 
head office also arranged random visits to the retail 
counters, but to little avail.
Another misbehavior that Sunshine encountered 
was managers who used the relationship they built up 
with departmental stores as Sunshine managers to sell 
their own goods or brands.
… these managers, they use their own relationship with 
the department store manager to begin their own brand 
and business. Maybe they give money to the manager 
every year, but this money is from Sunshine, you know, so 
they use the company’s money to set up their own relation-
ship. That’s the problem.
Kitty Li, Sales Manager of Sunshine
To counter such misbehavior, the president of Sunshine 
regularly visited department stores with Sunshine 
retail counters around the country to reinforce the 
Sunshine brand and to build up a personal relationship 
with the department stores himself.
We don’t want the branch managers to get too close to one 
store manager. Once they have good relationship [with 
the departmental store manager], even better relationship 
than the general managers from our head office … they 
can begin their own brand easily, use this relationship to 
begin their own business may be at the same time.
Kitty Li, Sales Manager of Sunshine
Sunshine rotated the branch managers among the dif-
ferent branches periodically to control their power.

Sunshine Fashion: Fraud, Theft, and Misbehavior among Employees
193
A number of organizational factors also contributed 
to the rampant fraudulent misbehavior among employ-
ees. Guanxi, or relationship, with the departmental 
stores was critical for brands to set up retail points 
within departmental stores in China, and Sunshine 
branch managers were often recruited based on the 
strength of their relationships with the departmental 
stores rather than their management ability or integ-
rity. With branch managers having an average tenure 
of two years and a yearly turnover rate of 20%, their 
weak sense of belonging and loyalty to Sunshine 
encouraged greed and opportunistic behavior. Branch 
managers, leveraging the relationships they built with 
department stores while they worked at Sunshine, 
often became agents of other brands when they left, 
turning into competitors of Sunshine.
Branch managers received a fixed monthly salary of 
between RMB 3,000 and RMB 4,000 and a year-end 
bonus that was decided solely at the discretion of the 
general manager. While the standard of living and 
wage level varied widely across China, the salary of 
Sunshine’s branch managers was generally set on par 
with Shenzhen, where Sunshine’s head office was 
located and which had one of the highest wage levels in 
China.4 Nonetheless, the year-end bonus was decided 
solely at the discretion of the general manager, and the 
lack of transparency into how decisions over the 
bonuses were made gave branch managers little moti-
vation to act in the best interest of the company. To 
remedy the situation, Sunshine had begun setting sales 
targets for the branch managers each June based on 
their location, and the square footage and sales history 
of the retail points, and awarding year-end commis-
sions to branch managers who could meet their sales 
target. Under the new system, branch managers could 
receive commission that was as high as their annual 
salary if their sales performance was good.
Annual review
Sunshine’s management was due to meet soon for its 
annual review meeting, and employee fraud and mis-
behavior was on the meeting’s agenda. The CEO had 
decided on a target of reducing the fraudulent behavior 
to 2% of retail sales. The implementation of the ERP 
system had given the head office better control over its 
retail operation, but fraud and misbehavior among 
employees continued. Li knew that it was impossible to 
control everything.
If the manager knows you are to come, he will do some-
thing about it. Everything we do is to reduce risk but we 
cannot control perfectly. If you control them perfectly, 
they will resign.
Kitty Li, Sales Manager of Sunshine
But there must be more that could be done to control 
such misbehavior. What were the root causes of the 
staff’s misbehavior? What were the strengths and weak-
nesses of Sunshine’s current internal control system? 
Most of all, what could Li propose to the management to 
improve the situation? What measures should the man-
agement undertake, and how should the remedial 
measures be implemented? In what order would you 
implement the recommended actions for Sunshine?
4 According to the China Statistical Yearbook 2009, Shenzhen has the 
fifth-highest average wage and salary level among the major cities in 
China after Shanghai, Beijing, Lhasa, and Guanzhou. The average 
wage and salary of Shenzhen is RMB 43,731, compared to RMB 
56,565 in Shanghai. Kunming, which ranks 36th, has an average 
wage and salary level of RMB 22,432.

194
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
 This case was prepared by Grace Loo under the supervision of Professor Neale O’Connor. 
 Copyright © by The Asia Case Research Centre, The University of Hong Kong. 
 Exhibit 1  Sunshine’s operational fl ow for its retail business 
 In April 2013, Ted Williams, president of Better 
Beauty, Inc. (BBI), was reviewing the details of his 
company’s performance for the year 2012 and the 
fi rst quarter of 2013. Overall, performance had not 
been good. One of the major causes of the poor per-
formance was that the company was missing its cost 
improvement targets by substantial margins. BBI had 
put Cost Improvement Programs (CIPs) in place both 
to help off set some raw material price increases and 
to off set the eff ects of price pressures in an increas-
ingly competitive marketplace. Initially, these pro-
grams had been quite successful, but in recent years, 
failure had become the norm. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Better Beauty, Inc. 

Better Beauty, Inc.
195
One major CIP known as the A-53 project, which 
was the most important CIP for 2013, had not only 
failed to provide the projected savings, but according to 
Bryant Richards, the company controller, it might even 
end up costing the firm money. It was a major cause of 
BBI’s failure to meet its overall CIP goals.
If the A-53 project had been only an isolated inci-
dence, Mr. Williams would not have been quite as wor-
ried. In reality, however, it was just one of a long string 
of CIP project failures. Mr. Williams was convinced 
that he had to determine the root cause for these major 
shortfalls. He addressed his staff:
What is going wrong? We’ve had problems with a 
new assembly in toiletries, the start-up of our lean 
management initiative on the plant floor, and the 
new formulations for our latest shampoos. These 
are just this year’s problems. Are our problems in 
the design, testing, and/or implementation of the 
CIPs? Or perhaps we should reconsider the total 
cost reduction concept itself. Maybe it has run its 
course; maybe we’ve gathered all of the low-
hanging fruit. If we cannot do something to reverse 
this pattern of failure, we will have no chance of 
achieving our goals!
The company
BBI was a personal care company that sold its products 
internationally. In the past, the company’s primary 
focus had been on the manufacturing and sales of cos-
metics and fragrances. In the last five years, however, 
in direct response to shifts in the overall market for 
health and beauty products, more and more of the com-
pany’s revenue had come from toiletries, hair coloring 
options, and beauty care tools. In 2012, over half (60%) 
of BBI’s total revenues of just over $1 billion were in the 
domestic markets (which included Canada and Puerto 
Rico). The company also distributed products in Europe 
and Latin America through a direct sales force, and in 
the Middle East via a broker network.
Up until 2003, BBI, like many cosmetic-focused 
companies, was managed by its founder, Claudette 
Beauford. Upon Ms. Beauford’s retirement, the man-
agement and focus of the company changed substan-
tially. The new president, Ted Williams, had a financial 
background. He formalized the organizational struc-
ture along functional lines, as shown in Exhibit 1. 
Under its new management team, BBI’s strategy broad-
ened to include an expanded product line (toiletries 
and other health and beauty care products). It also 
shifted attention away from the company’s prior focus 
on top-of-the-line, or “prestige” products, which earned 
a premium price in the market, to a more mid-price 
strategy that emphasized mass market products. The 
new strategy required an increased focus on the cost 
efficiencies needed to generate the desired profits.
At first the change in strategy looked promising, but 
then the company reported operating losses in 2006–
2008. In more recent years BBI had been profitable (see 
Exhibit 2). During this period of strategic change, for-
mal cost reduction and financial targeting procedures 
were introduced in order to try to keep the BBI’s gross 
margins1 above 60%, even in a period where some 
costs were increasing rapidly.
The “easy” cost reductions and improvements 
caused a significant bump in profits in 2011. But 
Mr. Williams was concerned that if the company did 
not find some new cost reductions, profits might turn 
down again. He was even more convinced that cost 
improvement projects were the key to maintaining a 
profitable future for BBI.
Industry trends
In 2013, analysts were estimating that profits in the per-
sonal care industry, while sluggish, would improve 
modestly. Industry volume was expected to rise to 
$29.2 billion, up about 5% from the $27.8 billion spent 
at retail in 2012. The 2012 total reflected activity in the 
major categories of: cosmetics (35%), hair products 
(24%), shaving products (14%), toilet soaps and deodor-
ants (13%), fragrances (9%), and hand products (5%).
While the 1990s had witnessed robust growth, the 
recent trends had not been as favorable. Real (inflation-
adjusted) shipments had declined, and price competi-
tion had increased. Demand for personal care items, 
considered to be a discretionary purchase, was hurt by 
the sluggish economic activity in the 2008–2012 
period, as well as by the secular changes in the product 
markets. With less discretionary income available, con-
sumers had cut back on the impulse buying that had 
been responsible for up to two-thirds of all cosmetics 
and personal care purchases. The market had improved 
over the 2010–2012 period, returning BBI to profitabil-
ity, but margins were still slim.
Relatively flat sales in the 2010–2012 time period 
had made it possible for BBI and its competitors to 
1	 Gross Income ÷ Net Sales.

196
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
manage their inventories. That said, there was still 
intensified competition and price discounting in many 
lines as competitors sought to gain a higher share of the 
stagnant personal care market. The discounting at the 
company level was being augmented by inventory liq-
uidation moves at the retail level, as stores combated 
overstocking and decreases in overall consumer 
demand (inflation-adjusted). BBI had sold off one of its 
operating divisions in 2011 to a competitor, resulting in 
a one-time improvement in its bottom line. Once the 
impact of this sale was over, however, BBI’s profit 
trends largely mirrored those of the industry.
The overall softening of consumer demand for cos-
metics and fragrances resulted in a slowdown in new 
product development activity throughout the industry. 
While established firms were moving to secure their 
market position, Internet-based sales competitors were 
springing up with new lines of cosmetics produced in 
Asia that competed effectively with the traditional per-
sonal care companies’ integrated production and sales 
models. In response, many of the traditional companies 
had implemented lean manufacturing programs in the 
effort to improve their operating margins. This low-
cost, low-waste focus was seen as one way to increase 
the competitive power of a firm because it provided for 
greater pricing leverage and the ability to purchase 
market share through pricing policies. The mature 
nature of the industry was being reflected in increased 
competition based on price, the predominant role 
played by Internet start-ups in setting the trends in new 
product areas, and an overall profit squeeze. Exhibit 3 
shows a retail sales analysis for the personal care indus-
try for the years 2009–2012.
The main trends in the personal care industry, then, 
reflected the fact that the industry was in the mature 
phase of the industry life cycle. It also reflected a shift 
away from fragrances to cosmetics and hair products as 
the primary areas of competition and growth. While 
the “prestige” products had held their own during this 
period, the mid-price product lines were hurt as econ-
omy-minded consumers traded down to lower priced or 
generic products. BBI, having a majority of its products 
in this mid-price range, was particularly challenged by 
these trends.
Planning and budgeting
Since he assumed the presidency, Mr. Williams had 
taken steps to formalize some of BBI’s administrative 
processes and procedures. Long-range planning was 
still done informally at the top corporate level, and the 
company’s long-range goals and strategies were not 
communicated in detail to all functional managers.
The annual budgeting process, however, involved 
several levels of management. Budgeting began in mid-
July when top management gave each functional area 
preliminary targets for its operating and capital budg-
ets. Included in this package was a set of other perfor-
mance measures specific to the function. For example, 
marketing managers were given preliminary sales 
growth targets for each of the various categories of 
existing products, manufacturing managers were 
given preliminary cost targets by product category, and 
R&D managers were given cost improvement targets 
and timetables for the introduction of new products. 
The functional managers and their subordinates were 
expected to coordinate their plans with those of other 
functional managers and to prepare their plans down 
to the product level. A series of budget reviews was 
held in October and early November, and final budgets 
and performance targets were fixed by mid-November.
During the year, formal performance reviews were 
conducted on a monthly basis. Managers were expected 
to be able to explain any major variances in actual ver-
sus planned performance to a top executive committee. 
If significant variances were expected to continue, the 
budgets were revised, although it was understood by 
all the managers involved that the original budget 
would be the standard used to evaluate individual 
manager’s performance at year end.
Capital budgeting
Capital budgeting reviews took place in mid-Septem-
ber. Functional managers presented formal capital 
appropriation requests to a top management commit-
tee. For several years the company had published 
guidelines suggesting that each project being presented 
should be justified by showing a two-year payback2 on 
invested funds. This short-term focus was emphasized 
on a continual basis given the increasing price and 
profit squeeze facing the firm. The guidelines for devel-
oping and presenting a capital appropriations request 
were formalized in the budget manual and included 
the following instructions for 2013:
1.	 Budgeted capital spending proposals must be guided 
by the general trends indicated in the operating 
2	 A payback period is the period of time required to recoup the investment.

Better Beauty, Inc.
197
budget, especially as regards unit (volume) growth 
and new product introduction.
2.	 Capacity expansion projects should be restricted to 
those absolutely necessary to achieve 2013 profit 
and sales goals and objectives. They must also meet 
the criterion of providing the appropriate economic 
returns in a timely fashion.
3.	 Cost reduction projects should be given a high prior-
ity. However, serious consideration will be given by 
corporate to business constraints at the time 
approval is requested.
4.	 Spending of a replacement nature should be 
deferred unless a serious impediment to operations 
is threatened.
5.	 Spending for quality improvement should be consid-
ered only if the product’s marketability is seriously 
affected.
6.	 All non-research expenditures related to marketing 
of new products are to provide an economic justifi-
cation and reflect approval by the appropriate senior 
executive.
Incentive compensation
Incentive compensation was provided annually to man-
agers down to the director level in the firm (one organi-
zational level below vice president). In January, after the 
audit was finalized, a bonus pool was established as a 
pre-established percentage of corporate net income. In 
February, just after the annual performance review 
meetings, a bonus committee, consisting of the top com-
pany officers, allocated this pool to individual managers. 
The evaluations of performance were done subjectively, 
but based heavily on objective measures of performance.
In normal years, average bonuses for vice presi-
dents were approximately 50% of base salary. In good 
years, the bonuses could range up to 100% of salary. 
The average and maximum bonuses for director-level 
personnel (one level below vice president) were 60% 
of those for the vice presidents. Formal performance-
dependent bonuses were not paid to personnel below 
the director level.
Cost reduction program
An important part of Mr. Williams’s upgrading of BBI’s 
management systems was the implementation of a for-
mal cost-reduction program supported by a lean 
management philosophy.3 Cost reductions were 
deemed to be of two basic types: cost avoidance pro-
jects (CAPs) and cost improvement projects (CIPs).
Any project designed to reduce direct materials 
costs without a related change in existing products or 
manufacturing processes was designated as a CAP. The 
company’s CAP goal was an annual 5% reduction in 
materials costs.
CIPs were projects designed to effect cost reductions 
through process or product changes, such as reformu-
lation of a product to incorporate less expensive ingre-
dients. The company’s budgeting manual explained the 
CIP goal:
Each manufacturing location is to develop and 
implement Cost Improvement Programs (CIPs) as 
part of their annual budget package. CIPs are spe-
cific action programs directed towards a measura-
ble reduction in existing manufacturing cost levels. 
The annualized savings from these CIPs should be 
equal to or greater than 5% of the prior year’s total 
cost of goods manufactured, adjusted for the vol-
ume and mix changes. The action programs should 
encompass all factors of manufacturing, including:
● all labor costs associated with manufacturing
● all overhead expenses associated with manu-
facturing
● only those material costs resulting from:
– reduced usage and improved yields
–	 reduced freight-in costs.
The Purchasing and Value Analysis departments 
were most directly responsible for identifying CAP pro-
jects. R&D and Engineering were the departments who 
were directly charged with identifying CIP projects. 
The CIP ideas, however, had to be implemented by the 
operating manager most directly affected. In most 
cases, this manager was in manufacturing.
The CIP/CAP projects were expected to achieve a 
one-year payback where possible. CIP/CAP projects 
that did not promise to meet this payback criterion 
were subjected to close scrutiny by Mr. Williams’s staff 
before approval would be granted.
When the cost reduction program was first intro-
duced, the company realized many important and sig-
nificant cost savings. In recent years, however, the 
3	 Managers following a lean management philosophy consider all 
expenditures of resources for purposes other than creation of value 
for end customers to be wasteful and, hence, targets for reduction or 
elimination.

198
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
company had not been achieving its cost improvement 
targets. The targets and actual results of the cost reduc-
tions achieved for each of the years 2009–2013 are 
shown in Exhibit 4.
An example: The A-53 project
Some of the major problems in the cost reduction pro-
gram can be illustrated by describing one large CIP pro-
ject called the A-53 project. The A-53 project involved 
the substitution of an aqueous aerosol, Dymel-152a/
Hydrocarbon, for the existing fluorocarbon mixture.
As a liquefied gas propellant, Dymel-152a had obvi-
ous safety and quality benefits over the existing com-
pressed gas fluorocarbon being used. Designed for the 
low-pressure spray that defined perfume propellants, 
Dymel-152a had a much lower fill pressure when mixed 
with fragrance concentrate than the currently used 
compressed gas alternative. This meant that BBI could 
eliminate the use of bottles with relatively expensive 
plastic coatings that had been necessary with com-
pressed gas fluorocarbon currently in use. The plastic 
coating had been required to ensure the bottles’ integ-
rity and to pass industry safety standards, such as sta-
bility when placed in a warm water bath. The other 
advantage was that Dymel-152a was less flammable 
than the current fluorocarbon blend, providing advan-
tages in both safety and in the production procedures 
that could be used.
BBI and the other firms in the fragrance industry had 
used fluorocarbons as propellants almost exclusively up 
until the mid-1970s, when fluorocarbons were banned 
by the US government because of concerns about their 
destroying the ozone layer of the atmosphere. The pro-
pellant suppliers who had relied on fluorocarbons as 
their major sources of revenues were severely affected 
by the ban. Immediately following the ban, these com-
panies aimed much of their research toward developing 
a new ozone-safe fluorocarbon propellant. One of these 
improved gases was currently in use at BBI. That being 
said, hydrocarbons, especially products like Dymel-
152a, were still deemed superior in many ways.
Personnel in BBI’s R&D department noted the devel-
opment of Dymel-152a and immediately saw its poten-
tial advantages. They tested the new propellant in 
simulated production settings and found it superior to 
the propellants being used. Based on these results, they 
prepared a Capital Appropriation Request, the sum-
mary page of which is shown in Exhibit 5. A summary 
of their investment analysis is shown in Exhibit 6.
On January 14, 2013, BBI’s capital appropriations 
committee met and approved the money for the A-53 
project. Mr. Williams’s initial reaction to the project 
was very enthusiastic, as indicated in the memo shown 
in Exhibit 7. Shortly thereafter, Don Jacobi (VP-R&D) 
had people in his department draw up specifications for 
the use of Dymel-152a on the production line. The pro-
pellant switchover was scheduled to take place on 
March 1, 2013.
Right from the start, the A-53 project ran into sev-
eral serious problems. One problem was a production 
delay – the implementation could not be effected 
until the middle of April. More seriously, though, 
was when Dymel-152a was put into bottles that were 
not properly filled with fragrance, it became very 
unstable. The pressure inside the larger bottles then 
rose from 40 pounds per square inch (psi) to over 
200 psi, a level that the larger-sized bottles (2 oz. 
and larger) without a plastic coating could not 
always withstand. As a result, quality control had to 
reject many bottles because of cracking, and several 
bottles had even exploded while still in the produc-
tion area.
Review of the A-53 project
In late April 2013, Mr. Williams called a meeting with 
his top executives to review the problems with the A-53 
project.
Don Kelley (VP-Finance) started the meeting by 
showing the financial picture. As he handed out the 
analysis, presented in Exhibit 8, he noted:
Bryant Richards [BBI Controller] has been follow-
ing this project very closely. He now estimates that 
because of the problems we are all aware of – the 
implementation delay, reduced volumes, higher 
bottle prices, the problems with the large bottles, 
and the lost labor efficiency – the 2013 savings will 
be $319,900, down from the original estimate of 
$599,600. But if we have to write off our inventory of 
3¼ oz. bottles, we will actually lose almost $82,000 
on this project this year.
Ted Williams (president):
This is obviously not good news. Who can explain to 
me why we’ve missed the forecast so badly? I would 
like a few clarifications. First, are these labor charges 
noted as “additional” going to continue? And, what 
are we planning to do with the 3¼ oz. bottles?

Better Beauty, Inc.
199
Frank Martin (VP-Operations):
This project has been a disaster from the begin-
ning. I was involved in this project at the crucial 
point – implementation. I heard of the proposed 
switch from our standard fluorocarbon to Dymel-
152a from Don [Jacobi, VP-R&D]. He had pin-
pointed it as his major cost reduction program for 
the year. Then when it came time to put the plan in 
action, research dropped the ball – it became the 
plant’s responsibility to implement the project. 
Research was claiming the cost reduction but tak-
ing no leadership role in putting it in place.
R&D insisted that the glass bottles be handled 
more carefully to minimize the rubbing of one bottle 
on another. They said that rubbing is weakening the 
bottles and making them explode more easily. I 
think we now know that the rubbing has nothing to 
do with the problem. Some of the R&D engineers 
just made that excuse up to cover their failures. 
They didn’t have to bear the incremental costs. We 
bear the costs of the new procedures they have 
forced us to follow (see Exhibit 9).
I think we have to continue to incur the addi-
tional labor costs until we get a new piece of equip-
ment that will check the fill heights of the bottles 
before they enter the gas house. We’ve had some 
exploding bottles, and I have concluded that the 
safety factor had to come first, so I’ve had some 
people visually checking the fragrance levels 
before we add the Dymel-152a. We estimate that 
equipment that would automatically eject low fills 
would cost approximately $25,000 per line, so for 
our eight lines that would be an additional capital 
expenditure of $200,000. If we had this equipment, 
I think we could save the additional labor costs.
Finally, as to the 3¼ oz. bottles, I’m afraid we’re 
facing a direct write-off here. While we may be able 
to siphon off some of the product into stronger 
glass bottles, the rework, scrap, and other prob-
lems here will undoubtedly result in significant 
expense. We’re still working on this issue, looking 
for the best answer.
Don Jacobi:
Really, all this talk about dropping the ball and 
glass handling is not addressing what I see as our 
major concern. If production, namely the machine 
tenders and line personnel followed our specifica-
tions, these issues would not come up. We’ve 
known that the glass handling techniques were a 
long-standing problem, but it wasn’t critical before. 
All the new propellant has done is to decrease our 
margin of error and it has pinpointed operating 
deficiencies as a result.
These comments brought the meeting to a boiling 
point, as Frank Martin exploded:
Boy! It’s easy for R&D to point to us as the reason 
for the glass problems. I’ve already altered my 
whole decorating and glass process. But the real 
problem here is the gas, not the glass-handling 
techniques or the way my machine operators do 
their job! You guys in research still don’t know how 
sensitive this propellant is to variations in the con-
centrate/propellant ratio, yet you’re running 
around changing procedures in the entire plant 
without first documenting the characteristics of 
this gas!
Mr. Williams was disturbed by the conflict 
between individuals in his top management team, so 
he thought it was best to adjourn the meeting until 
the next day to allow tempers to cool. He asked each 
manager to consider not only the key issues of con-
cern in his own area, but also the future prospects of 
the company and their role in making this current 
problem an exception rather than a rule. As they left, 
Ted sat back and wondered once again where his 
company was going, and why these CIP projects had 
begun to go sour:
We have to stop this pattern of failure, whether it is 
due to implementation problems, lack of adequate 
testing, or the CIP/CAP concept itself. Where are 
we really headed? What has gone wrong with the 
cost reduction program?

200
Ted Williams
President
Don Jacobi
Vice President
Research &
Development
New
Products
Value
Analysis
Frank Martin
Vice President
Operations
Materials &
Logistics
Manufacturing
Engineering
Ellen James
Vice President
Marketing &
Sales
Sales
Advertising
Don Kelley
Vice President
Finance
Controller
MIS
Bryant
Richards
Exhibit 1  Better Beauty, Inc., organization chart

Better Beauty, Inc.
201
Exhibit 2  Better Beauty, Inc., Summary Income Statements (in millions)
Years Ended December 31
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
Net sales
$	1,036.1
$	 991.1
$	 971.9
$1,010.1
$1,025.3
$	 998.6
$	 999.2
Cost of Goods Sold
$	 369.5
$	 341.5
$	 356.0
$	 368.2
$	 379.3
$	 409.1
$	 381.1
Gross Income
$	 666.6
$	 649.6
$	 615.9
$	 641.9
$	 646.1
$	 589.4
$	 618.2
Selling, General & Administrative
$	 292.7
$	 283.1
$	 281.0
$	 318.6
$	 318.2
$	 347.1
$	 618.2
Advertising
$	 203.6
$	 198.9
$	 172.9
$	 195.2
$	 215.3
$	 241.2
$	 217.0
Research & Development
$	
17.9
$	
18.0
$	
17.9
$	
18.2
$	
18.3
$	
18.3
$	
19.6
Profit from Operations
$	 152.5
$	 149.6
$	 144.1
$	 110.0
$	
94.3
$	
(17.1)
$	
49.8
Interest expense
$	
0.9
$	
0.5
$	
0.4
$	
1.4
$	
1.5
$	
0.8
$	
4.4
Total Income
$	 153.4
$	 150.1
$	 144.5
$	 111.4
$	
95.8
$	 (16.3)
$	
54.2
Interest expense
$	
63.7
$	
67.9
$	
69.8
$	
89.8
$	 102.4
$	 111.6
$	
97.5
Miscellaneous
$	
1.1
$	
0.9
$	
0.4
$	
0.3
$	
(0.3)
$	
2.9
$	
6.4
Income taxes
$	
27.6
$	 (185.4)
$	
6.2
$	
12.1
$	
5.6
$	
15.1
$	
6.4
Net Income
$	
61.0
$	 266.7
$	
68.1
$	
9.2
$	
(11.9)
$	 (145.8)
$	 (49.4)

202
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
Exhibit 3  Better Beauty, Inc., Retail Sales of Selected Toiletries and Cosmetics (in millions of dollars)
Products
2009
2010
2011
2012
Hair Products
Shampoos
$	
2,366.3
$	
2,703.2
$	
2,980.5
$	
3,201.8
Rinses, tints, dyes
$	
904.4
$	
1,014.6
$	
1,454.1
$	
1,697.3
Men’s spray & dressings
$	
197.6
$	
189.7
$	
207.8
$	
220.3
Women’s hair sprays
$	
872.6
$	
928.3
$	
1,047.1
$	
1,084.6
Home permanent kits
$	
235.5
$	
242.7
$	
266.1
$	
290.9
Hand Products
Lotions
$	
471.7
$	
518.8
$	
568.2
$	
822.8
Nail polish and enamel
$	
625.4
$	
561.8
$	
601.2
$	
648.5
Cosmetics
Face creams
$	
1,051.5
$	
1,209.2
$	
1,324.2
$	
1,456.9
Makeup base
$	
1,137.8
$	
1,190.2
$	
1,238.7
$	
1,395.6
Face powder
$	
42.2
$	
260.8
$	
262.0
$	
218.4
Eye makeup
$	
2,823.4
$	
3,490.2
$	
3,411.1
$	
3,701.7
Talc and body powder
$	
138.4
$	
138.4
$	
138.4
$	
145.2
Lipsticks
$	
1,897.8
$	
2,028.4
$	
2,221.5
$	
2,399.2
Liquid facial cleansers
$	
185.5
$	
194.8
$	
408.7
$	
421.0
Fragrance Preparations
Perfumes
$	
274.8
$	
285.6
$	
300.0
$	
339.4
Toilet water & cologne
$	
1,443.7
$	
1,539.3
$	
1,633.9
$	
2,124.0
Other Toiletries
Toilet soaps
$	
2,325.2
$	
2,453.9
$	
2,682.9
$	
1,638.8
External personal deodorants
$	
1,463.6
$	
1,710.6
$	
1,844.1
$	
2,034.1
Shaving Products
Shaving preparations
$	
576.0
$	
615.6
$	
641.1
$	
671.8
After-shave lotions
$	
414.2
$	
455.6
$	
473.8
$	
497.6
Men’s cologne
$	
528.1
$	
580.9
$	
633.2
$	
677.6
Shaving accessories
$	
1,749.4
$	
1,909.5
$	
1,942.1
$	
2,112.6
Exhibit 4  Better Beauty, Inc., cost reduction program performance 2009–13
(in 000s of dollars)
Cost Reductions
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009
Cost improvement programs:
Target
$	
4,388
$	
4,452
$	
4,293
$	
4,039
$	
3,752
Actual
$	
2,520*
$	
3,922
$	
4,198
$	
4,049
$	
3,752
Cost avoidance programs:
Target
$	
3,465
$	
3,528
$	
3,402
$	
3,203
$	
2,982
Actual
$	
3,455*
$	
3,570
$	
3,381
$	
3,203
$	
2,993
* Projected

Better Beauty, Inc.
203
CAPITAL APPROPRIATIONS REQUEST
Better Beauty
CAPITAL CONTROL DATA
CASH
(SPENDING)
198—LOCATION
BUDGET
THIS CAR
CARS TO
DATE
TOTAL
BUDGET
PROJECTS $
DIVISION
PROJECT TITLE
INVESTMENT IMPACT
With the Project
Sales
Net Income A.T.
Sales
Net Income A.T.
Sales
Net Income A.T.
476.5
100%
Without the Project
Due to the Project
Return on Invest. %
REA-
SON
Cost Reduction
(Proﬁt
Improvement)
C
Expansion
Capacity
E
Quality
Improvement
Q
Replace-
ments
R
Safety
Security
(Regulatory)
S
Machinery
And Equip-
ment
M
Land
L
Autos
A
Buil-
dings
B
1
2
3
4
5
6
Furniture
& Oﬃce
Equipment
F
data
processing
equipment
D
Other
(Specify)
O
Other
(Specify)
O
TYPE
YEARS
1
2
3
4
5
6—10
LOCATION
Exchange Rate
U.S. $1.00
Description:
         Authorization for funds is requested to convert from propane to a A-53 propellant. With this
conversation the ﬁrst year after tax savings is estimated to be $476,500 due to bulk savings and the elimination of plastic
coating on the bottle which was previously required on ﬁlls greater than 1 oz. Equipment to handle the new bottles will
cost approximately $108,000 and will be purchased through contract with our Tool and Die Supplier. This particular cost
is not included in the ﬁxed capital sum of this C.A.R., but it is included in the investment analysis for the return on
investment calculations. 
CAPITAL
BUDGETED
P & L IMPACT
Yes XX
No
XX
Yes XX
No
XX
K
956
AR.
M01
DATE 12/17/12
This Project $
Years to Date $
VARIANCE
1. FIXED CAPITAL
2. WORKING CAPITAL
3. RELATED EXPENSES (Capitalized)
4. TOTAL CAPITAL APPROVAL
5. ANNUAL LEASE PAYMENTS NO OF YEARS
6. TOTAL PROJECT
7. RELATED RETIREMENTS
Group
Head
Chair-
man
Group
Contr-
oller
8. PAYBACK PERIOD
YEARS
0.7
AUTHORIZATION
272,230
12,044
284,274
392,274
AUDITED ACTUAL
REGIONS/DIVISIONS/
COUNTRIES
CAPITAL
REVIEW BOARD
Date
Date
Date
I
N
V
E
S
T
M
E
N
T
S
U
M
M
A
R
Y
A
P
P
R
O
V
A
L
Exhibit 5 

204
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
Exhibit 6  Better Beauty, Inc., A-53 project investment analysis
(annualized returns, $000s)
Material savings
$	
878.8
Additional depreciation
$	
(110.3)
Net income before tax
$	
768.6
Tax (38%)
$	
292.0
Net income after tax
$	
476.5
Add: Depreciation
$	
110.3
Net cash generated
$	
586.8
Total Project Expenditures
$	
392.3
Payback period in years
0.7
Return on investment
150%
Exhibit 8  Better Beauty, Inc., controller’s analysis of A-53 project (April 2013)
(000’s)
Original, 2013 lab commitment
$  586.8
Implementation delayed to April 25th
$  (36.5)
Production volume reduction
$  (54.8)
Material savings below original projection
$  (29.6)
Problems with larger bottles
$  (73.0)
Additional labor costs
$  (73.0)
Net cash flow savings – April revised forecast
$  319.9
Memo:
Inventory exposure
(115M pieces of filled 3-1/4 oz. bottles)
$  401.8
Exhibit 7  Better Beauty, Inc., president’s initial reaction to A-53 project
INTEROFFICE MEMO
DATE: April 14, 2013
TO: Don Kelley [Vice President, Finance]
FROM: Ted Williams [President]
SUBJECT: Cost Reductions
I was delighted to hear from Don that we have certain annual savings of almost $1 million as a result of a new propellant 
called A-53.
Frank Martin and Don Jacobi are going to make certain this occurs on a timely basis. Please put this down on our list of 
2013 savings. Don also believes that we have a prospect to reduce cost on several other products, which on a total sav-
ings basis will amount to a lot of money.
Attn: Frank and Don:
Most essential that we find this kind of savings in order to provide the money necessary to build the business in 2013. 
Please make certain that we take the necessary steps now in order to realize the full effects starting with the end of this year.

Better Beauty, Inc.
205
This case was prepared by Professors C.J. McNair-Connolly and Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright (c) by C.J. McNair-Connolly and Kenneth A. Merchant.
Date: April 20, 2013
To: Frank Martin (VP-Operations)
From: Don Jacobi (VP-R&D)
Subject: Revised Glass Handling Techniques
1.	 Incoming glass shipments from vendor to be pressure-checked by Q.C. as part of incoming inspection procedure.
2.	 All approved glass receipts released to Container Decorating to be handled in the following manner:
a.	 All containers to be removed from corrugated nests, i.e., corrugate nests to be removed from shipping cartons 
only after all glass has been removed.
b.	 Containers to be handled through decorating process avoiding contact with metal edges and minimizing surface 
contact.
c.	 Decorated containers to be placed on lehr belt so as to be able to be packed at discharge end directly off lehr belt 
avoiding plowing off belt or eliminating need to transfer onto packing belt.
d.	 Decorated glass to be spray-coated at discharge end with MYRJ 52S stearate spray being careful to spray only 
aerosol glass.
e.	 All decorated glass to be packed back into corrugate nests, i.e., nests are to be inserted into shipping carton 
before glass is loaded into carton.
3.	 In-process pressure checks will be performed by Quality Control after decorating to assure minimum pressure 
requirements exist in decorated glass. All decorated lots will be released to filling floor based upon those in-process 
audits.
4.	 Decorated glass to be handled on filling floor in the following manner:
a.	 All containers to be removed from corrugated nests and inserted directly into pucks, i.e., corrugate nests to be 
removed from shipping cartons only after all glass has been removed.
b.	 Containers to be handled through filling process avoiding contact with metal edges and minimizing surface contact 
prior to cartooning.
c.	 Any eight-stage pack must be fully corrugate nested.
Exhibit 9  Better Beauty, Inc., interoffice memo

206
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
 Our shareholders are demanding better performance from 
us. Our market valuation has been basically fl at for most 
of the last decade. At the same time, we need to be making 
larger investments in our future, to develop new products 
and to augment our sources of organic ingredients. So we 
need to ratchet up the performance pressure. We need to 
do better. 
 Sean Wright, CEO, Fit Food, Inc. 
 Sean made this pronouncement in May 2008 at a 
management meeting held just after the Fit Food 
annual shareholders’ meeting. The division managers 
responded to Sean’s call to action, but not all of their 
responses were what Sean had in mind. 
 The company 
 Sean Wright founded Fit Food, Inc. (FFI) in 1972. Sean 
had been working as the VP R&D in a large food com-
pany, but he had always wanted to start his own busi-
ness. In his spare time, he developed a new line of 
cookies, called “Smart Cookies,” that he could adver-
tise as being healthier because they were lower in fat 
and calories. After many struggles to get Smart Cookies 
placed in major supermarket chains, by 2000, Sean and 
his growing team were able to declare proudly that the 
Smart Cookie brand was being distributed nationally. 
With more products in development, and taking advan-
tage of the good stock market environment in 2000, 
Sean launched an FFI IPO. The company’s stock was 
listed on NASDAQ. 
 By the year 2009, FFI was a medium-sized food com-
pany that targeted “tasty-but-healthier” market seg-
ments. In 2001, Sean introduced several new snack 
products and started a Savory Snacks Division. In 
2003, he acquired an energy drink company, which 
became FFI’s Sport and Energy Drinks division. By 
2009, FFI’s annual revenues were approaching $500 
million. The company was consistently profi table but 
heavily leveraged, as Sean had funded the energy-
drink acquisition by increasing the company’s debt load 
signifi cantly. 
 FFI used a divisionalized organizational structure 
(see  Exhibit  1 ). The general managers of the three rela-
tively autonomous divisions – Cookies & Crackers, Savory 
Snacks, and Sports & Energy Drinks – reported directly 
to Sean, the CEO. Each division had its own sales and 
marketing, production, and R&D departments and a 
controller. The corporate staff  included human resources, 
MIS, fi nance, R&D, and legal departments. FFI did not 
have an internal auditing function. It had outsourced the 
documentation and testing work needed to comply with 
the Section 404 requirements of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. 
Recently, however, Joe Jellison, FFI’s CFO, had suggested 
that the company was becoming large enough that it 
should start bringing this work in house. 
 In 2008, Kristine Trodden was assigned as the exter-
nal auditing fi rm partner on the FFI account. Kristine 
considered FFI not to be a particularly desirable client 
because of persistent requests to reduce auditing fees 
amid threats to solicit bids from competing fi rms. 
 FFI’s board of directors included fi ve members. Sean 
was the chair. The other outside directors included a 
small-company CEO, a CFO of a medium-sized public 
company, a vice president of marketing at a large super-
market chain, and a practitioner in holistic nutrition. 
All of the outside directors had been suggested by Sean 
but approved by the board’s nominating and govern-
ance committee. The board met in person four times a 
year and also by conference call as needed. 
 Plans, reviews, and incentives 
 FFI’s planning process began in August when corporate 
managers sent to each division economic forecasts, 
other planning assumptions, and preliminary sales tar-
gets. The sales targets refl ected investor expectations 
of steady growth. Typically, each division was expected 
to increase annual revenues and profi ts by at least 5%. 
 Over the following two months, division manage-
ment created formal strategic plans, which included 
both a strategic narrative and a high-level summary 
profit and loss statement. The strategic plans were 
 CASE STUDY 
 Fit Food, Inc. 

Fit Food, Inc.
207
approved by corporate managers in early October. 
Then division managers developed the elements of 
their Annual Operating Plans (AOP) for the coming 
year, which included detailed marketing and new prod-
uct development plans and pro forma income state-
ments and balance sheets.
Developing the AOPs required many discussions 
between corporate and division management. The divi-
sion managers typically argued that they needed to 
increase their expense budgets to be able to achieve their 
sales goals, and corporate typically wanted to squeeze 
expenses to generate increased profits. A fairly standard 
planning exercise was to ask each division what pro-
grams or plans they would cut if their profit budget was 
cut by 10%. Once these programs were identified, the 
division managers had to justify adding them back into 
the budget. Tensions between division and corporate 
management increased in 2008 because corporate was 
asking the divisions to increase their growth rates to 7% 
to allow some new corporate investment initiatives to be 
funded internally. At the end of the negotiation pro-
cesses, the AOPs were presented to the board of directors 
for approval at its meeting held in early December.
During the year, performance review meetings were 
held quarterly. The focus of the meetings tended to be 
on explaining variances between revenue and profit 
performance goals and actual performance. The meet-
ings were quick and painless when performance 
matched or exceeded expectations, but the tone was 
dramatically different when the quarterly profit goals 
were not achieved. Catherine Elliott (marketing man-
ager, Cookies & Crackers Division) explained:
Corporate pushes us hard to make our numbers. 
There is never a good reason for not making our 
goals. We’re paid to be creative and come up with 
solutions, not excuses. Sean calls it “no excuses 
management.”
Division presidents and their direct management 
reports could earn annual bonuses based on achieve-
ment of AOP profit targets. The target bonuses ranged 
from 25% to 100% of the manager’s base salary, 
depending on organization level. No bonuses were paid 
if division profits fell below 85% of AOP plans. Maxi-
mum bonuses of 150% of the target bonus amounts 
were paid if profits exceeded AOP by 25%. Average 
bonuses exceeded target bonus levels in seven of the 
first eight years of FFI’s history as a public corporation.
Some corporate managers and division presidents 
were also included in a stock option plan. FFI stock had 
performed well in the early 2000s, but virtually all of 
the gains were lost in the stock market downturn of 
2008–2009. Most of the options were underwater.
The recession of 2008–2009 stressed company oper-
ations at the same time that Sean was calling for better 
financial performance. The Savory Snacks Division 
performed well and achieved the higher growth rates 
called for in both 2008 and 2009. The other two divi-
sions experienced more challenges, however, as is 
explained below. (Summary income statements for 
these divisions are shown in Exhibit 2.)
Sports & Energy Drink Division
The Sports & Energy Drinks Division (Drink Division) 
was formed in 2003 when FFI acquired a successful, 
regional energy drink brand. As part of the deal, Jack 
Masters, the former CEO of the acquired company, 
became president of the division. Performance in the 
first few years after the acquisition was good. The tar-
geted drink categories continued to grow; two brand 
extensions were successfully launched; and Drink Divi-
sion sales nearly doubled between 2003 and 2006. The 
division achieved its AOP profit targets easily, and Jack 
was able to operate without much interference from 
corporate.
By early 2007, however, Jack saw some clouds on the 
horizon. The energy drink category was becoming 
more and more competitive as more players, including 
some large, well-capitalized corporations, entered the 
category. At the same time, retailers were consolidat-
ing and becoming more powerful, increasing pressure 
on manufacturers to lower prices. Jack began to worry 
that he might not be able to deliver the growth that was 
expected of his division.
2007
Despite Jack’s worries, 2007 was another stellar year, 
with sales growth exceeding even Sean’s increased 
expectations. The category momentum continued, and 
Jack’s brands gained market share, due in part to a suc-
cessful grassroots advertising campaign.
With performance far exceeding the AOP targets 
and excellent bonuses assured for the year 2007, Jack 
thought it would be prudent to try to position the divi-
sion for success in the future. He met with his manage-
ment team to discuss his concerns and to come up with 
ideas to get better control over reported profits. Jack 
and his team decided on three courses of action. The 
first was to declare a shipping moratorium at the end of 

208
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
the year, which shifted some sales that would normally 
have been recorded in 2007 into 2008.
Not all of Jack’s managers were happy with the ship-
ping-moratorium plan of action. The production team 
was unhappy because the moratorium would cause 
scheduling problems. Some employees would have to 
be furloughed temporarily at the end of the year to 
minimize the buildup in inventory. Then, in early 2008, 
they would have to incur some overtime costs both to 
accelerate production and to ship the orders that had 
accumulated. The sales department was concerned 
that they would have to deal with customer complaints 
about shipment delays and product outages. Neverthe-
less, Jack decided to move forward with the shipping 
moratorium regardless of the costs, which he consid-
ered relatively minor.
The second plan was to build up accounting reserves 
against accounts receivable and inventory balances. In 
2007, the Drink Division controller was able to provide 
a justification for increasing reserves by $1 million over 
2006 levels.
The third plan was to prepay some expenses that 
would have normally been incurred in 2008. Among 
other things, some facility maintenance programs 
were accelerated, and supplies inventories were 
replenished before the end of the year. These items 
were not material, amounting to expenditures of only 
about $100,000. But, as Jack noted, “Every little bit 
helps.”
2008
In 2008, some of Jack’s fears were realized. As the 
economy slowed down, consumers became more fru-
gal. The once-exploding energy drink category began 
to stagnate; competition for market share grew fierce; 
and margins declined. In addition, there were rum-
blings of an impending soft drink “obesity” tax that 
could put even more pressure on profits.
The division was able to make its annual revenue 
targets in 2008, but the division managers did so by 
offering an “early order program” developed by the 
Sales and Marketing Department. Customers were 
offered discounts and liberal payment terms if they 
placed orders scheduled to be delivered before the year 
ended. Discounts ranged from 5% to 20% and custom-
ers were given 120 days to pay their invoices without 
incurring interest, rather than the traditional 30 days. 
However, Jack learned later that some of the more 
aggressive salespeople had told customers to accept the 
shipments now and “just pay us whenever you sell the 
product.”
While sales remained strong, profit margins 
decreased significantly. In order to make sure the divi-
sion would hit its AOP profit target, Jack and his con-
troller began to liquidate some of its accounting 
reserves in the third quarter, and by the end of the year, 
the reserves were reduced by a total of $1.7 million. 
The auditors noticed and questioned the change, and 
brought it to the attention of Joe Jellison, FFI’s CFO. Joe 
looked into the issue and concluded that the new 
reserve levels seemed justified based on historical per-
formance levels.
2009
Sales started out slowly in 2009, but in the second quar-
ter, the sales team landed a major new national account. 
Because of the uptake in demand, Jack had now become 
more concerned about meeting production schedules 
than he was about achieving sales goals. Thus, the 
early order program and almost all other promotions 
and discounts were eliminated.
Jack also told his controller to rebuild reserves, and 
a total of $2 million in reserves were restored in 2009. 
Once again the auditors questioned the change, but the 
controller provided a justification based on uncertainty 
in the economy and irregularities in some new custom-
ers’ payment patterns, Jack believed that his division 
was well positioned for success going into 2010.
Cookies & Crackers Division
The Cookies & Crackers Division (Cookie Division) was 
built around the “Smart Cookie” product, once FFI’s 
flagship brand. But the Smart Cookie product had been 
struggling for the last several years. Cookies was a low-
growth, low-margin product category with a strong 
private label presence, though quality health-oriented 
brands commanded a small price premium. The biggest 
problem for the Cookie Division, however, was a shift 
in consumer mindset. In recent years, “healthy” was 
less likely to be associated with low fat, and more likely 
to be associated with healthful ingredients such as 
whole grains, nuts, and natural antioxidants, a trend 
that the Cookie Division management had largely 
missed.
Scott Hoyt, the Cookie Division president, had been 
with FFI since its inception. Scott had a strong back-
ground in sales and was credited with selling Smart 

Fit Food, Inc.
209
Cookie to national accounts, but he was perceived as 
resistant to change, and his accounting and finance 
knowledge was relatively weak.
The Cookie Division traditionally relied heavily on a 
variety of seasonal trade promotions to achieve their 
volume targets. By 2008, Catherine Elliott, head of the 
Marketing Department, was concerned that the new 
required 7% growth rate was probably not attainable 
without both some aggressive marketing and develop-
ment of some good new products. During the annual 
planning process, she made a case for increasing the 
division’s advertising and new product development 
budgets, but her requests were denied. Sean explained 
that he did not think the advertising was necessary. He 
also believed that the projects being funded at the cor-
porate level would yield better returns than the pro-
posed investments in Cookies, and FFI could not afford 
both investments.
2008
It became obvious early in the first quarter of 2008 that 
Cookie sales were falling well below the levels forecast 
in the AOP. The Cookie sales department initiated a 
promotion to meet the first quarter goals. The specifics 
of the program were similar to those of the early order 
program being used in the Drink Division – generous 
discounts and extended payment terms for early 
orders. The early order program was implemented 
aggressively. The sales team was told to contact all of 
their customers and convince them to take early deliv-
ery of product. Many of these contacts were successful. 
In most cases, the sales staff received written authori-
zation from their customers, but in some cases the 
authorizations were only verbal.
In the final days of the first quarter, Catherine and 
Mitch Michaels, head of the Sales Department, asked 
shipping to work around the clock to ship as much prod-
uct as possible before the quarter end. In the last hours of 
the quarter, trucks filled with cookies drove a few blocks 
away from the loading docks and parked, so that product 
was technically “shipped” and sales could be booked.
The heavy sales volume at the end of the quarter 
attracted the auditors’ attention. They concluded, how-
ever, that the accounting treatment conformed to 
GAAP (generally accepted accounting principles) since 
ownership of the product officially changed at the time 
of shipment.
In the second quarter of 2008, Scott, Catherine, and 
Mitch knew they had a problem. Second-quarter orders 
were predictably slow given the amount of extra prod-
uct that had been shipped in the first quarter. The three 
managers then decided to ship additional, unordered 
product to their customers. The additional order vol-
umes were generated either by increasing the quanti-
ties of actual orders or by entering orders into the 
company’s billing system twice. When customers com-
plained about the unordered shipments, blame was 
attributed to human errors, and the sales team was 
charged with the task of making the unordered ship-
ments “stick.” They were offered a number of tools 
toward that end, such as special pricing and credit 
terms and product exchanges.
The program worked surprisingly well. Returns 
increased, but the program still effectively increased 
revenue by $2.3 million and profit by $460,000. Scott, 
Catherine, and Mitch were encouraged by the results 
and praised the sales team for their heroic efforts. They 
continued the program throughout 2008, being careful 
to rotate the “mistaken” shipments between customers. 
At the end of the year, the team managed to deliver 
97% of the AOP sales and profits.
2009
During the 2009 AOP process, Scott, along with Cathe-
rine and Mitch, made a strong plea to reduce the Cookie 
Division’s revenue goals. They argued that given the 
weak economy and sluggish category growth, a flat rev-
enue goal, or at most 2% growth, was a more reasonable 
target. However, Sean was unwilling to lower the goal. 
He understood the difficulties in the category, but he 
believed that the setting of aggressive goals and a com-
mitment to achieve them were cornerstones of FFI’s suc-
cess over the years, and he knew that FFI shareholders 
would be demanding better performance than that.
After the disappointing AOP meeting, Scott called a 
meeting with his management team to develop new 
ideas for increasing sales. He thought if the division 
could make it through 2009 successfully, they would 
face smoother sailing in 2010 because some new, prom-
ising products would be ready for launching. A decision 
was made to continue the programs used in 2008.
Irene Packard, head of the Production Department, 
came up with another idea. She thought she could 
decrease expenses significantly by rewriting contracts 
with suppliers who supplied both machines and parts. 
If she could convince suppliers to decrease the costs of 
parts, and charge the difference to machines, she 
would be able to capitalize costs that would otherwise 

210
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
have been expensed. Irene estimated that she could 
reduce expenses by $2.3 million, or $2 million after 
depreciation. Scott thought this was a good idea. He 
noted that the cost savings could bring them within 
striking range of the division’s profit goals.
In September, however, one of the junior account-
ants in the division was feeling unduly pressured to 
make accounting entries that she felt were not good 
practice, particularly related to some of the billings 
that seemed to lack adequate supporting documenta-
tion. The managers’ justifications for these entries 
seemed to her to be capricious rather than facts-based. 
She took it upon herself to discuss the issue with Joe 
Jellison, FFI’s CFO. Joe had one of his assistant control-
lers examine the accounting practices in the Cookie 
Division, and he reported finding multiple problems 
with potentially material financial statement effects. 
Joe had to decide what to do next. Should he have his 
people calculate the size of the errors, make the adjust-
ing entries, and fix the processes, or should he, at this 
point, inform the external auditors and/or the audit 
committee of the board of directors?
Exhibit 1  Fit Food, Inc.: Organization chart

Fit Food, Inc.
211
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant and research assistant Michelle Spaulding.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.
Exhibit 2  Fit Food, Inc.: Income statements for Sports & Energy Drinks and Cookies & Crackers Divisions, 
FYs ending December 31 ($ millions)
Sports & Energy Drinks Division
2007
2008
2009
AOP
Actual
AOP
Actual
AOP
Actual
Revenue
$110.0
$125.3
$130.3
$130.5
$137.0
$146.2
Cost of goods
 64.0
 73.6
 75.5
 76.6
 79.5
 87.5
Gross margin
$46.0
51.7
54.8
53.9
57.5
58.7
R&D expense
0.8
1.0
1.0
0.8
1.1
1.0
SG&A expense
 18.0
 20.0
 20.0
 19.2
 21.0
 22.0
Operating Profit
$28.2
30.7
33.8
33.9
35.4
35.7
Cookies & Crackers Division
2007
2008
2009
 AOP
 Actual
 AOP
 Actual
 AOP
 Actual
Revenue
$130.0
124.5
131.0
127.3
133.0
127.1
Cost of goods
 80.6
 77.2
 81.2
 80.2
 82.5
 76.7
Gross margin
$49.4
47.3
49.8
47.1
50.5
50.4
R&D expense
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.3
SG&A expense
 20.8
 18.8
 20.0
 18.3
 19.0
 19.2
Operating profit
$28.2
28.2
29.4
28.5
31.1
30.9

212
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
 In late 2011, managers at Atlantis Chemical Industries 
(Atlantis) were debating whether the company’s man-
agement systems needed to be changed in response to a 
major strategic shift that the company was making. The 
strategic shift involved a signifi cant redeployment of 
assets away from commodity chemical businesses and 
toward the discovery of new technologically advanced 
products that promised higher margins and growth 
rates. 
 James Rockman, corporate senior vice president of 
R&D and chief scientist, was an outspoken critic of the 
company’s current management systems: 
  Our system of evaluating performance based on 
short-term fi nancial results has trained our oper-
ating managers not to take risks. They will not bet 
on a horse until the race is almost fi nished and 
the horse is leading. They tend to think only about 
the current year’s profits, and that is natural 
because they are rewarded for only incremental 
improvements. They are penalized for missing 
budget targets but do not get big rewards for 
going way over plan.  
 Others, however, defended the company’s systems, 
which, they noted, had served the company well over 
the years. They noted that Atlantis was making large 
investments in R&D despite the need to maintain a 
solid earnings record. They were convinced that scien-
tists’ natural optimistic biases had to be tempered by a 
business-oriented focus on the projects’ potential for 
commercial success. These managers suggested that 
people with market knowledge should be involved 
intensively and early when new R&D investments were 
being considered to increase the likelihood that R&D 
eff orts lead to commercial success. 
 Since the intensity and rancor of the debate had 
been increasing, it was decided to put this issue on the 
agenda for discussion at the December 2011 meeting of 
Atlantis’ Executive Committee. 
 Company background 
 Atlantis, headquartered in Indianapolis, Indiana, was a 
large, publicly listed corporation engaged in 
developing, manufacturing, and marketing a broad 
range of high-quality chemicals and materials. Its 
sales reached $6.9 billion in 2010, and it employed 
42,000 people in 100 countries. 
 In 2011, the company had six operating companies 
(see  Exhibit  1 for a partial corporate organization 
chart). The largest group was Atlantis Chemical Com-
pany, the original business, which still accounted for 
about 50% of total corporate sales. 
 The Atlantis Agricultural Company, the second-larg-
est group, accounted for 17% of total sales. As shown in 
 Exhibit  1 , the Agricultural Company had two operating 
divisions, Crop Chemicals and Animal Sciences. The 
Crop Chemicals Division was a leading worldwide pro-
ducer of herbicides. The Animal Sciences Division 
focused on animal nutrition and growth products, only 
a few of which had already been introduced to the mar-
ket.  Exhibit  2 provides summary fi nancial data about 
these two divisions. 
 The strategic shift toward faster-growing markets, 
away from the commodity chemicals that had histori-
cally provided most of the company’s sales and prof-
its, started in 2005. The 2010 Annual Report stated 
that: 
  Atlantis is determined to be a leader in its chosen 
markets, but we must deliver results in the short 
term as well as generate the resources needed for 
the coming decades. We will achieve this by aggres-
sively managing good businesses, by inventing and 
licensing new products that meet customer needs, 
and by moving out of businesses that prove unable 
to meet targets. 
 One of these targets was explicitly mentioned in both 
the 2009 and 2010 letters from the CEO to the share-
holders: “For the shareholders … this promise means 
 CASE STUDY 
 Atlantis Chemical Industries 

Atlantis Chemical Industries
213
aiming for a return on equity year after year in the 20% 
range.”
Planning and budgeting
Atlantis used two distinct planning cycles, long-range 
planning and annual budgeting. The long-range plan, 
which covered a horizon of 10 years, projected growth 
rates for operating income, working capital, R&D, and 
fixed assets for each planning entity.
In June, after senior managers had reviewed and 
approved the long-range plan, they sent the guidelines 
contained in the long-range projections to the operating 
units. The managers of the operating units would then 
start preparing the following fiscal year’s budget (which 
coincided with the calendar year). The corporate phi-
losophy was that budgets should reflect stretch targets 
having approximately a 50% chance of being achieved. 
During October and November, the budgets the operat-
ing units submitted were consolidated and presented to, 
scrutinized by, and negotiated with, senior manage-
ment. In December, senior management, and then the 
board of directors, approved the final budget.
Performance measurement
The operating units’ primary financial measures of per-
formance were (1) net income, (2) return on capital 
employed (ROCE), and (3) net cash flow. Net income 
was defined as operating income less corporate 
charges, interest, and taxes. ROCE was computed as 
net income plus after-tax interest expenses divided by 
average capital employed. Net cash flow was calculated 
by a formula that adjusted the net income number to 
reflect actual cash uses and sources (e.g. depreciation, 
capital expenditures). These measures were intended 
to reflect the performance of each business unit as if it 
were a stand-alone company.
The weightings of importance among these meas-
ures could vary from year to year, depending on the 
areas that corporate management identified as critical 
for each operating unit to focus on. For example, the 
emphasis on cash flow was higher in the commodity 
chemical businesses, and that emphasis had been 
increasing in recent years.
Quarterly performance review meetings focused, in 
part, on reports comparing actual results to date with 
budget. Quarterly review meetings were also an oppor-
tunity for the managers of the operating units to give 
an update on any ongoing strategic initiatives, as well 
as to report any issues affecting the business. The 
budget served as the basis for incentive compensation 
and promotions.
Incentive compensation
Atlantis had used a formal annual Performance Incen-
tive Plan (PIP) since 2004. The first step in determining 
the PIP bonuses was to calculate the size of the bonus 
pool. This was done by comparing corporate net income 
with the target set as part of the annual budgeting pro-
cess. If corporate net income fell below 90% of target, 
the bonus pool was zero. If performance exceeded the 
targets by a significant margin, the pool could be as 
large as 8–10% of corporate net income.
Second, the CEO would provide recommendations 
regarding allocations of the bonus pool to each profit 
center to the Compensation Committee of the Board of 
Directors. These recommendations were based on how 
well each operating unit in terms of its three financial 
measures, which were weighted in importance, as com-
pared to its financial targets.
Finally, the bonuses were allocated to individual 
employees. The employee’s job level determined the 
maximum percentage of salary that could be paid out 
as bonus, although the CEO could grant exceptions in 
unusual circumstances. The actual allocation depended 
on the degree of attainment of annual personal goals. 
Typically, bonuses for division managers did not exceed 
50% of their base salary.
The PIP established that the bonuses would be paid 
two-thirds in cash and one-third in restricted stock. 
The restrictions on the company stock continued until 
Atlantis’ total shareholder returns performed at least as 
well as the average of the Standard & Poor’s 500 com-
panies for a subsequent three-year period.
In 2005, the Board approved a new Long-Term 
Incentive Plan (LTIP). Pursuant to the LTIP, incentive 
payments depended on the corporation’s achieving its 
goals for earnings per share and ROCE over overlap-
ping three-year performance cycles. The first perfor-
mance cycle was 2006–2008. However, because of the 
severe recession that began in 2008, corporate perfor-
mance had not reached the goals stated in the LTIP, so 
no payment of long-term awards had been made.
Research and Development Process
As an aid in managing its sizable R&D effort, Atlantis 
classified R&D activities into three categories. Class I 

214
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
was dedicated to maintaining existing businesses and 
the supply of technical services. Class II included efforts 
to expand business assets and markets and to reduce 
costs of existing processes. Class III activities focused 
on developing new products. Exhibit 3 illustrates how 
the company had been increasingly moving its empha-
sis from Class I to Class III R&D activities, reflecting a 
growing focus on the introduction of new products.
R&D activities in Class III normally went through 
three phases of development before commercializa-
tion. The first phase began when scientists discovered a 
new product lead. In biotechnology, a major R&D 
thrust, this phase involved the major technical efforts 
to isolate the specific gene responsible for the biological 
phenomenon under study (e.g. the gene responsible for 
growth in human cells, for disease resistance in plant 
cells, or for production of a certain hormone). Once the 
gene had been isolated, the process of duplicating it in a 
laboratory setting was greatly facilitated. Laboratory 
duplication still involved gene splicing techniques, but 
Atlantis scientists had leading expertise in this area. 
The first phase of research for new product develop-
ment could take two or three years to be completed. If 
successful, it generated a new probe.
The second phase of discovery involved applying the 
new technical concept or probe to the development of a 
new product candidate. The discovery phase of R&D 
was the most technically challenging, and it could take 
as long as four years. Only if this phase was satisfacto-
rily completed would the R&D activity constitute an 
ongoing project.
In the third phase, R&D for a new product became a 
multi-year project focused on commercial and regula-
tory issues. On the commercial side for biotechnology 
products, the emphasis was on defining delivery sys-
tems (e.g. spray, tablet, or injection), creating market-
ing programs, and minimizing production costs. On 
the regulatory side, the tests involved meeting all 
safety and clinical standards set by regulatory agencies 
until the product was finally approved for consumer 
use. Compared with the two other stages, the third 
stage of development was by far the most expensive 
and also the longest, often taking five years or more to 
complete.
R&D costs typically increased sharply as develop-
ment moved closer to the testing stage for commercial 
applications. As John Dover, R&D director of the Ani-
mal Sciences Division, noted: “It is at least ten times 
cheaper to discover a new concept than to make it into 
a product.”
Decentralization of R&D activities 
and assignment of costs
An R&D decentralization study conducted in 2008 con-
cluded that the company should continue to conduct 
R&D activities in emerging fields, such as biotechnol-
ogy, at the corporate level, but that the operating units 
should undertake an increasing role in the effort. As a 
result, Atlantis management started a major effort to 
place as much of the R&D activity as possible directly 
under the control of the operating unit whose business 
would benefit from the R&D investment. The general 
managers in charge of the operating units would 
become responsible for their unit’s R&D activities and 
costs.
The study also developed better bases for further 
assigning corporate R&D costs to the operating units. 
Until 2008, for example, most of the R&D costs associ-
ated with biotechnology were fully retained at the cor-
porate level; but after the changes, a larger part of 
these costs were assigned to the operating units.
By 2010, the R&D staffs at the operating unit level 
were capable of performing most types of R&D activi-
ties that were based primarily on existing technologies. 
When it came to developing new biotech-based tech-
nology, however, they were still dependent on corpo-
rate R&D. Corporate R&D also provided the operating 
units some support services, such as bioprocess 
research and use of analytical laboratories and an 
information center, on a fee-for-service basis.
Exhibit 4 shows where Atlantis’ R&D costs were 
incurred. The operating units directly controlled about 
80% of total R&D costs. Corporate R&D controlled the 
remaining 20% of total R&D costs, 10% of which was 
retained at corporate level in 2010 and the other 10% of 
which was charged back to the operating units, either on 
a fee-for-service basis (9%) or as an allocation based on 
net investment (1%). As shown in Exhibit 4, there was a 
marked increase in the extent of costs charged on a fee 
basis to the operating units between 2009 and 2010.
The R&D costs retained at corporate related to basic 
research, which served primarily the chemical and 
agricultural companies, and within the latter, the Ani-
mal Sciences Division. The returns from most corpo-
rate R&D investments were quite uncertain. It could be 
a decade or more between the time of initial invest-
ments and the completion of tests required to obtain 
final regulatory approvals. The regulator demanded 
extensive, multiyear trials to guarantee that the prod-
uct would not adversely affect safety when consumed 

Atlantis Chemical Industries
215
by humans. Most projects also presented significant 
risks on other dimensions, including technological 
uncertainties, potential competition from other chemi-
cal companies, and the inherent financial hazards asso-
ciated with substantial investments. As Ron Stovall, 
controller for the Agricultural Company, explained:
With many of our projects, we will probably have to 
invest several hundred million dollars before we 
have a commercial product. A product has to be a 
real commercial hit to pay off such major invest-
ments. Biotechnology is the highest risk this com-
pany has ever taken.
The operating units were not charged for R&D in 
emerging areas for two main reasons. One was that 
much of this kind of research was generic. It potentially 
benefitted several operating units simultaneously. For 
instance, research on technology for gene splitting 
could benefit product lines in either agriculture or 
healthcare and possibly other businesses in ways that 
were difficult to anticipate.
The other reason for retaining control over biotech-
nology expenditures at the corporate level was that this 
investment was crucial for the company’s long-term 
future, and there was a concern that these R&D invest-
ments should not be entrusted to the operating units, 
which operated under short-term pressure. As James 
Rockman explained:
Corporate can’t afford to fund all the R&D efforts 
alone. We need to push these costs down to the 
operating groups that generate enough cash flow to 
sustain these major investments. The ideal would 
be for corporate to engage only in the very basic 
research and to hand a project to the respective 
operating unit as soon as it reaches a stage when 
we can start talking about commercialization. The 
problem is that I have to be sure that there are 
enough people at the operating level who are really 
interested in the project. Otherwise, they will cut the 
R&D funding for the project as soon as they start to 
feel budget pressure. Operating managers often 
like to treat R&D expenditures as variable costs.
Effect of profit pressures on R&D
When the consolidated initial budget submissions from 
the operating units did not reach the corporate profit 
objectives, as was usual, senior management had to 
negotiate revisions with the operating unit managers. 
In December 2009, for example, Greg O’Connor, Atlan-
tis’ chairman and CEO, had to raise most operating 
entities’ profit budget targets for 2010 as well as to cut 
some corporate expense budgets. The operating man-
agers had the discretion to decide how the profit 
increases would be achieved (e.g. through sales promo-
tions, reductions in the cost of goods sold, or cuts in 
R&D expenditures).
The corporate R&D group, which was operated as a 
cost center, was affected. James Rockman had to 
reduce the 2010 budget for corporate R&D from nearly 
$93 million to $90.5 million. Exhibit 5 shows the final 
breakdown of the 2010 R&D budget by cost category.
Most of the operating units also concluded that they 
had to reduce their R&D budgets to meet the tougher 
bottom-line targets. For example, John Pastor, presi-
dent of Atlantis Agricultural Company, reduced his 
R&D budget by $15 million to a total of $135 million 
(about 12% of sales). The Agricultural Company 
divisions—Crop Chemicals and Animal Sciences—in 
turn revised their R&D budgets to adjust to the new 
targets. As was his practice, however, Pastor kept a 
reserve in his budget. This reserve could be used either 
for important purposes not foreseen at the time the 
budget was finalized or to cover budget overruns by his 
operating managers.
When deciding which R&D projects to cut, Pastor, in 
consultation with his operating managers, considered 
several aspects of the future potential of the projects in 
progress. A primary criterion was the level of capital 
requirements and how they affected the total portfolio 
of projects. He also assessed qualitative aspects, such 
as the probability of technological success, the total 
market potential for the new product, the market share 
that Atlantis could expect, and the regulatory require-
ments for final approval. He based his judgments on 
reports from the operating managers. Current projects, 
being closer to completion, usually had priority over 
new ones, which typically represented higher risks to 
the company.
In his original 2010 budget, Itzhak Rubenstein, gen-
eral manager of the Animal Sciences Division, submitted 
a budget proposing additions of 25% in technology 
expenses. John Pastor vetoed the additions because he 
felt that, to meet his financial goals, he could not afford 
any more increases. The Agricultural Company had 
spent more than 12% of sales on R&D in 2008, and cor-
porate had asked for tighter control over these costs. As a 
consequence, the Animal Sciences Division was asked to 
limit its R&D expenditures to a maximum of 50% of its 

216
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
sales. Exhibit 6 shows that even after these budget cuts, 
the Animal Sciences Division had $35 million in losses in 
2009 and a budget of $43 million in losses for 2010.
During the fiscal year, if division managers wanted 
to spend more on R&D than budgeted, they would first 
have to consult with their company’s president before 
making any commitments. On the other hand, if the 
operating managers had unexpected gains during the 
year, they could negotiate to invest the additional 
income in projects beyond the original R&D budget, as 
long as the financial performance targets were met and 
the actions taken did not result in permanent additions 
to R&D expense (e.g. people).
Funding new R&D projects
Generally, the closer a project was to the commerciali-
zation stage, the more the operating unit bore its costs. 
However, in the case of pioneering R&D projects, which 
required developing new technologies, corporate R&D 
funded the projects directly, with no charges to the 
operating units. In 2010, for instance, corporate R&D 
budgeted $42.9 million in R&D costs that it would 
retain – under the control of James Rockman – to fund 
new product discovery (Exhibit 6).
There was considerable discussion among the operat-
ing units about the use of corporate resources for a cen-
tralized R&D effort. The managers in the chemical 
businesses often felt that corporate management rejected 
their capital requests and favored the divisions engaged 
in, particularly, biotechnology research. Some Atlantis 
Chemical Company managers, who generated substan-
tial cash flow from their mature businesses, had been 
known to wish secretively that biotechnology efforts 
would fail so that corporate R&D would release more 
resources for them to invest in their own businesses.
Some managers of the growing businesses also were 
critical of the commitment of funds to corporate R&D 
efforts. They would have preferred to fund and manage 
R&D, even the technically sophisticated biotechnology 
discovery efforts, with their own resources. They 
argued that only with direct responsibility for R&D 
could they ensure that the projects being worked on 
were commercially relevant.
James Rockman felt differently, however. He com-
mented on the need for managing emerging technolo-
gies such as biotechnology at the corporate level:
Operating managers have a strong incentive to 
think short term, to focus on this year’s income, 
rather than the long-term potential of some R&D 
investments. If left on their own to fund innovative 
and risky R&D projects, they would simply choose 
not to. We could possibly change this short-term 
focus, or myopia, if we were willing to deemphasize 
budgets, but we don’t seem to want to do that.
General controversies about 
R&D funding
Atlantis’ chairman/CEO, Greg O’Connor, was person-
ally committed to making the company a leader in bio-
technology, but he was also under pressure from the 
financial community to ensure that Atlantis would 
report adequate earnings-per-share growth. O’Connor 
commented on the balance that must be struck between 
profit goals and R&D requirements:
We keep telling scientists that we’re in business for 
the pursuit of products, not knowledge. At the end 
of the line, everything has to turn into a product. 
Unless we sell products, nothing happens. But I 
also know that good research doesn’t happen 
overnight. I tell researchers I pray for patience 
every night—and I want it right now.
Greg O’Connor maintained that overfunding is one of 
the primary mistakes to avoid in industrial R&D:
If I look back on the research mistakes we have 
made, it was usually due to overfunding. If we agree 
to pay $25 million over three years to see the first 
tangible accomplishment, and after that time we 
don’t get it, I don’t want that project any more. But 
once the project has surfaced and has gotten up 
there, it is in the annual report, and it is hard to 
admit failure.
Greg and other corporate managers were particu-
larly concerned about the net unallocated R&D cost 
retained at the corporate level. This was the number 
that would become part of external reports and that 
would be closely monitored by the financial analyst 
community. Atlantis, with a reputation for making 
sound investments in R&D, wanted to ensure investors 
would not draw the erroneous impression that R&D 
expenditures were getting out of control just because 
more R&D was being funded at the corporate level.
Atlantis had to discontinue a few projects after years 
of R&D investments because they failed at the commer-
cialization stage. One example occurred in 2008, when 
a significant project focused on development of a plant 

Atlantis Chemical Industries
217
growth regulator was terminated. In general, however, 
the whole area of genetically engineered plants had 
yielded very impressive scientific progress. The Crop 
Chemicals Division, for example, had developed some 
plants that were genetically resistant to common dis-
eases without the need for herbicides.
Itzhak Rubenstein (general manager of the Animal 
Sciences Division) commented on how the uncertainty 
associated with R&D exacerbated the conflict among 
the various objectives he had to face:
On the one hand, I am supposed to invest in the long 
run and keep developing new products. I already 
spend 50% of my total revenues on R&D. But I also 
have a long-run target to reach a 20% return on 
equity, and I’m running sizable losses now. So I need 
to be very careful when allocating current resources. 
I wish we had a system to evaluate the commercial 
potential of new R&D investments more thoroughly. 
Some people believe that if you do good science, 
the market will follow, but it’s not always true.
The corporate R&D group maintained close contact 
with the operating units to assess the new products’ 
potentials for commercial success. One alternative for 
increasing discussions of commercial viability earlier 
in the R&D funding process was to form a commercial 
development group reporting directly to the CEO (at 
the same level of authority as Corporate R&D). This 
commercial group would get involved in all decisions 
about which research projects to fund. It would raise 
considerations about market needs, the company’s 
marketing competitive advantages, and assessment of 
competitive products at the earliest possible stages of 
the R&D process. Another alternative was to place a 
commercial staff function at the operating unit level, 
reporting to the operating general manager. The man-
agers who defended this suggestion asserted that the 
operating unit was the most knowledgeable about spe-
cific customer needs and maintained relationships with 
possible distribution channels thus being in the best 
position to assess market potential for new products.
R&D personnel were generally opposed to either of 
the aforementioned alternatives. They argued that if 
Atlantis allowed commercial emphasis to interfere 
with R&D projects at too early a stage, it would thwart 
most of its opportunities for innovation. As John Dover, 
director of R&D for Animal Sciences, commented:
The people responsible for current products are 
the ones who bring in the cash so that they are also 
the ones with the most power. The people who do 
exploratory R&D have very little bargaining power. 
It is obvious that today’s products will always get 
the division manager’s attention. Potential prod-
ucts just don’t provide enough motivation.
Other managers defended the current system. Will 
Carpenter, R&D director in the Crop Chemicals Divi-
sion, argued that:
R&D can’t be an end in itself. It is a means to get new 
products so that you can keep growing. But one will 
always need the financial discipline of controlling 
costs. And good financial controls are not incompat-
ible with good R&D; they actually force us managers 
to establish priorities and focus our development 
efforts in products with the highest potential. 
The multiyear nature of R&D projects posed some spe-
cial financial problems. Some R&D people criticized 
the current process of annual R&D budgets. John Dover 
explained:
All my projects have at least a four-year horizon. 
Yet, it seems that every year I have to justify myself 
by asking for funding. What am I supposed to do if I 
don’t get funding for my projects? Why don’t they 
give me funding for four years?
The assignment of corporate R&D costs also was prob-
lematic. In 2010, for example, there was considerable 
debate about how Atlantis would fund the maintenance 
of the corporate bioprocess development facility, which 
conducted basic research for several operating units. As 
stated in the 2010 first quarter report, the Atlantis Life 
Sciences Research Center, which housed the bioprocess 
development facility, was “one of the largest and most 
sophisticated facilities in the world devoted to under-
standing the chemistry and biology of life.” This $150 
million facility was dedicated in 2007 and employed 
approximately 1,200 scientists and support personnel. 
Until 2010, the bioprocess development facility had been 
conducting research related to several projects that were 
later handed over to the operating units. Yet, the prob-
lem remained about how corporate R&D would allocate 
the costs of that facility. The Animal Sciences Division, 
which typically had used more than half of the bio-
process development facility’s capacity, now had fewer 
projects in progress, and its managers argued that they 
should pay only for the facility costs directly related to its 
own projects. From a corporate perspective, however, 
the facility had to be fully maintained in a state of 

218
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
readiness because Atlantis was deeply committed to bio-
technology research and the company had to keep its 
scientists motivated and fully occupied. The company 
could not afford to have its scientists sit idle or leave 
when there was not enough volume to keep the facility 
fully operative. After several rounds of negotiations, cor-
porate R&D, after curtailing other important research 
projects, decided to absorb the bioprocess development 
facility costs that could not be charged to the operating 
units on a fee-for-service basis.
Don Pattison, the controller for corporate R&D, won-
dered how the operating unit managers’ increasing 
influence on R&D expenditures would affect the balance 
between the short-term pressure to meet the annual 
budget targets and the long-term need to invest in R&D:
Does increasing operating unit influence on our key 
R&D growth programs enhance or mitigate our 
chances of meeting our goal of becoming an indus-
try leader in innovative, high-quality products? I 
know there is pressure to level off our R&D spend-
ing across the company, including corporate R&D. 
We have got to make sure we get more bang for our 
R&D buck in terms of prioritizing those efforts to go 
after the most promising commercial opportunities 
if we are going to achieve our new product goals. 
How can we be sure we have the right incentive sys-
tem in place so that the operating managers will pri-
oritize these efforts toward increased commercial 
success? 
These questions reflected senior management’s con-
cern about whether Atlantis had a problem in the way it 
funded R&D. If there was really a problem, what 
changes should be made to the company’s management 
systems?
Chairman/CEO
(G. O’Connor)
Controller-R&D
(D. Pattison)
Corporate Senior
Vice President-R&D
(H. Rockman)
Other Corporate
Staﬀ
Atlantis Chemical
Company
Atlantis Agricultural
Company
(J. Pastor)
Crop Chemicals
Division
Staﬀ (e.g., Ron
Stovall, Controller)
Animal Sciences
Division
(I. Rubenstein)
Other Operating
Companies
R&D Director
(W. Carpenter)
Other functional
managers
Other functional
managers
R&D Director
(J. Dover)
Exhibit 1  Partial corporate organization chart

Atlantis Chemical Industries
219
Exhibit 2  Financial highlights of the two divisions of Atlantis Agricultural Company ($ millions)
Crop Chemicals
Animal Sciences
Sales
2010
1,067
86
2009
1,073
79
2008
1,256
82
Operating Income (Loss)
2010
318
(35)
2009
177
(92)
2008
438
(49)
R&D Expenses
2010
94
41
2009
110
32
2008
107
22
Exhibit 3  Corporate R&D costs by major category (%)
2010
2009
2009
2007
2006
Class I
26%
27%
29%
32%
32%
Class II
30
23
22
23
24
Class III
40
42
40
35
30
Other*
4
8
9
10
14
Total
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
*Includes corporate unclassified administrative costs, (e.g., maintenance of the central research laboratory.
Exhibit 4  Distribution of R&D costs between corporate and operating units
2010 (%)
2009 (%)
Directly controlled and administered by the operating units
80%
80%
Controlled and administered by corporate R&D:
- Charged to operating units:
- on a fee-for-service basis
9
4
- allocated as a “corporate charge” based on net investment
1
6
- Reported as part of corporate R&D
 10
 10
Total R&D Cost
100%
100%

220
Chapter 5 • Control System Costs
Exhibit 5  Corporate R&D costs, budget vs. actual ($ millions)
2010 Budget
2009 Actual
2010 Budget minus
2009 Actual Costs
Biotech Product Discovery1
$42.9
$40.6
$2.3
Technology Management2
2.4
2.4
0
Distributed Research and Development3
 45.2
 49.9
 (4.7)
Total corporate R&D
$90.5
$92.9
$(2.4)
1Retained by the corporate R&D function and reported as an operating segment.
2Allocated to the operating units as an element of corporate overhead.
3Charged directly to the operating units based upon measured services rendered and/or negotiated amounts.
Exhibit 6  Animal Sciences Division ($ millions)
2010 Budget
2009 Budget
Sales
$127
$86
R&D
61
41
Other operating costs
109
80
Operating income (loss)
$(43)
$(35)
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

What is desired and what is likely
221
 The preceding chapters described the range of management controls that can be used and how 
they aff ect behaviors. This chapter discusses a general framework that can be used to design 
management control systems (MCSs) or to improve those already in use. 
 The process of designing and improving MCSs requires addressing two basic questions: 
 What is desired?  and  What is likely to happen? If what is likely is diff erent from what is 
desired, then managers must subsequently address the following two MCS-design ques-
tions:  What controls should be used? and  How tightly should each be applied? The following 
sections in this chapter describe how to address each of these questions. The chapter con-
cludes with some observations about common management control issues faced when 
designing or improving MCSs. 
 What is desired  and  what is likely  
 MCSs cannot be designed or evaluated without an understanding of what the organization 
wants the employees to do.  Objectives and, more importantly,  strategies that are derived from 
a good understanding of the organization’s objectives often provide important guides to the 
actions that are expected. A better understanding of objectives and strategies yields a larger 
set of feasible control alternatives, provides a better chance that each control alternative is 
appropriately tightly applied, and reduces the chance of producing behavioral displacement 
problems. 
 Organizations must determine what is desired, but they also need to try to assess what 
is likely to happen. This essentially amounts to assessing the likelihood that each of the 
control problems are present or will occur: lack of direction, motivational problems, or 
personal limitations. In other words, organizations should ask whether their employees 
understand what they are expected to do (key actions) or to accomplish (key results), 
whether they are properly motivated, and whether they are able to fulfill their required 
roles. 
 If the likely actions or results diff er from the desired actions or results, more or diff erent 
MCSs might be called for, depending on the severity of the problems and the costs of the MCSs 
that could be used to solve the problems. In this situation, managers should then address the 
questions about what MCSs to use and how tightly to apply them. 
 CHAPTER 6 
 Designing and Evaluating 
Management Control Systems 

Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
222
Choice of controls
The different types of management controls are not equally effective at addressing each of the 
management control problems. Table 6.1 provides a summary of the control problems each of 
the types of management controls addresses. It shows, for example, that behavioral constraints 
do not help solve lack-of-direction problems; hence, if direction is a significant problem in the 
area of concern, managers will have to consider other forms of control.
The specific set of management controls to be selected from the feasible alternatives should 
be those that will provide the greatest net benefits (i.e. benefits less costs). The benefits of a MCS 
are derived from the increased probability of success or obtaining the desired outcomes. Since 
management controls are not costless to implement and operate, these costs must be put against 
the expected benefits of improved control.
Table 6.1  Control types and control problems
 
Control problems
Control types
Lack of direction
Motivational problems
Personal limitations
Results controls
 
 
 
Results accountability
x
x
 
Action controls
 
 
 
Behavioral constraints
 
x
 
Preaction reviews
x
x
x
Action accountability
x
x
x
Redundancy
 
 
x
Personnel/cultural 
controls
 
 
 
Selection and 
placement
x
x
x
Training
x
 
x
Provision of necessary 
resources
 
 
x
Creation of a strong 
organizational culture
x
x
 
Group-based rewards
x
x
 
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 253.
Personnel/cultural controls as an initial consideration
In deciding among the many management control alternatives, managers should start by con-
sidering how adequate personnel or cultural controls will be, or can be made to be. Personnel/
cultural controls are worthy of first consideration because they have relatively few harmful side 
effects and relatively low out-of-pocket costs. In some cases, such as in small organizations, 
personnel/cultural controls may provide effective management control by themselves even 
though they are unlikely to be sufficient.
For example, when Marc Brownstein, president of the Brownstein Group, a small family-run 
advertising and public relations firm in Philadelphia, decided to take advice from his managers 
to tackle high turnover (30% per year among a 20-plus-person agency) and low employee 

Choice of controls
223
morale, he was perplexed when he learned what his employees were asking for. They were not 
greatly concerned with the levels of salaries or bonuses (although there were some requests for 
better employee benefits and some “perks” such as office decorations and technology updates). 
Instead, they wanted to get more involved with the business, such as by having a say about 
which new accounts the firm should solicit. They also wanted better communication from top 
management. They felt that Mr. Brownstein did not listen very well and offered little perfor-
mance feedback. In other words, the important requests were more about communication and 
decision-making involvement (personnel and cultural controls) than about money (results con-
trol). Mr. Brownstein heeded his personnel’s advice. Soon after changes were made, the com-
pany’s billings were at record levels; turnover dropped by half; and, for the first time in its 
history, the agency won the “Oscar” of the ad world.1 Many of these changes were not expen-
sive, or cumbersome to implement, yet seemed to produce some good effects.
Even in settings where personnel/cultural controls are not sufficiently reliable by them-
selves, it is useful to focus on them first because they will have to be relied upon to some extent 
no matter what other forms of management control are used. Considering personnel/cultural 
controls first allows organizations to assess how reliable these forms of management control are 
and, then, determine the extent to which they should consider supplementing them with other 
forms of control.
Turning to some harder evidence about organizational culture as an important aspect of cul-
tural control, as we discussed in Chapter 3, a recent survey of more than 1,800 CEOs and CFOs 
around the world provided some striking findings:2
More than 90 percent of executives said culture is important at their firms, and 78 percent 
said culture is among the top five things that make their company valuable. But only 
15 percent said their own corporate culture is exactly where it needed to be, and 92 percent 
said they believe improving their firm’s corporate culture would improve the value of the 
company. More than 50 percent of executives said corporate culture influences 
productivity, creativity, profitability, the value of a firm and growth rates.
One of the authors of the study, Professor Shiva Rajgopal at Columbia University, added: 
“Our research provides systematic evidence that effective cultures are less likely to be associ-
ated with short-termism, unethical behavior or earnings management to pad quarterly earn-
ings."3 These are quite significant desirable outcomes for a control system to be able to attain, 
but equally, let us not ignore that only 15% said that their company culture was where it 
needed to be, thus underlining both the potency as well as the insufficiency of culture. Surely, 
culture is important, but how it can be made more effective to attain good control is poorly 
understood, where culture is often acclaimed when an organization succeeds, but blamed 
when it fails.
Because putting one’s finger on it is hard, culture is often the “residual” explanation for sus-
tained success or dramatic failure after all the other, more direct reasons or “causes” have been 
exhausted, such as internal control weaknesses (an action control) or misfiring incentive sys-
tems (a results control) in the case of failures. Culture was in that sense an oft-cited reason for 
the calamity in the financial services sector following the 2009 financial crisis;4 that said, many 
organizations have been credited for their strong cultures as well.5
Culture was also evoked in the recent Volkswagen “defeat devices” cheating scandal. Inter-
estingly–for reasons related to our inclusive term personnel/cultural controls–Andrew Hill, a 
columnist in The Financial Times, wrote the following in light of the Volkswagen case:6
The English version of [VW’s] statement said it had detected “a mindset in some areas of 
the company that tolerated breaches of rules.” The group was implementing structural 
reforms, it went on, but it had also initiated a “new mindset.”

Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
224
“We can have the best people, and a great organization, but we can do nothing without 
the right attitude and mentality,” explained Matthias Müller, the chief executive.
VW’s choice of words is instructive. We would have bet that corporate culture–that bat-
tered old scapegoat for many scandals–would come in for a further beating.
“Mindset” is in any case a more useful term. It is easy for people to blame bad culture, 
without themselves feeling any responsibility for the toxic atmosphere. At the same time, 
each bank, drug company, or defence contractor that promises to clean up its culture, only 
to mess up again, reinforces the impression that it is hard to change. Mindset is more per-
sonal, and plenty of studies show individuals are quite capable of reforming their attitudes 
and mentality.
All told, then, personnel/cultural controls will be, by themselves, inevitably insufficient. 
This resonates with the saying that if nobody stole cars, no car would have to be locked. But if 
no car were locked, somebody would start stealing them. While most employees are probably 
honest most of the time, there will always be some who are less than totally honest. Organiza-
tions therefore cannot fully rely on the absolute righteousness or trustworthiness of their 
employees. Equally, organizations can hardly count on employees who are so “fascinated by 
their assignments; jumping out of their skins with excitement about what’s next; eagerly pursu-
ing better solutions and new initiatives” that they can rule out using any other types of con-
trols.7 Therefore, it will be necessary to supplement personnel/cultural controls with controls 
over actions, results, or both.
Knowing the limitations of personnel/cultural controls, choices among the various forms of 
action and results controls should depend on the particular advantages and disadvantages each 
has in the specific setting in question.
Advantages and disadvantages of action controls
Perhaps the most significant advantage of action controls is that they are the most direct form of 
control. If it is absolutely essential that an action be performed properly the first time (e.g. a 
significant investment decision), perhaps because the decision is not easily reversible, action 
controls usually provide the best control because the control-action link is direct. Further, if 
controls over the actions themselves are judged to be adequate, there is no need to monitor 
results.
Action controls also provide several other advantages. Action controls tend to lead to docu-
mentation of the accumulation of knowledge as to what works best. The documents that are 
produced (e.g. policies and procedures) are an efficient way to transfer knowledge to the 
employees who are performing the actions. They also act as a form of organizational memory, 
so that the knowledge is not lost if, for example, key employees leave the organization.
Action controls, particularly in the form of policies and procedures, also are an efficient way 
to aid organizational coordination. They increase the predictability of actions and reduce the 
amount of inter-organizational information flows required to achieve a coordinated effort. As 
such, they are a key element in bureaucratic forms of organization in a positive sense; that is, in 
settings where standardization and routinization are desirable organizational attributes.
But action controls have a number of disadvantages. First, there is a severe feasibility limita-
tion. As we discussed earlier, excellent knowledge of what actions are desirable exists only for 
highly routinized jobs. Moreover, there is a tendency, with action-accountability controls in 
particular, to focus on known or established actions of lesser importance that are easy to moni-
tor, thereby potentially causing behavioral displacement, such as the means-ends inversion we 
discussed in Chapter 5.
A good example is a program that a commercial-industrial laundry company implemented to 
reduce tardiness and absence, which had hurt its productivity because if one tardy worker falls 

Choice of controls
225
behind on the job, other workers down the line were left to sit idle. The absence monitoring and 
reward program did produce one benefit the plant managers were looking for: it reduced the 
average level of tardiness. But it also quickly emerged that employees ended up “gaming” the 
program, such as by calling in sick rather than reporting late.8
Second, most action controls also often discourage adaptation, innovation, and creativity (of 
the right kind, unlike the creative “gaming” in the example above). Employees often react to 
action controls by becoming passive. They develop their work habits based on the work rules 
they are given. This adaptation may be so complete that they begin to depend on the rules, 
cease to think about how the processes could be improved, and become resistant to change. In 
some cases, however, creativity is not required, or indeed not desired. For example, creativity 
from casino blackjack dealers, airline pilots, or nuclear plant operators is rarely a desired fea-
ture. But in other cases, action controls cause significant opportunities for improvement and 
innovation to be foregone.
Third, action accountability, in particular, can cause sloppiness. Employees who are accus-
tomed to operating with a stable set of work rules are prone to cut corners. For example, in a 
public embarrassment for the US Air Force’s nuclear missile program, two crew members were 
disciplined for leaving silo blast doors open while they were on duty in an underground facility 
housing nuclear missiles. Under Air Force regulations, a two-man missile launch crew is required 
to keep the underground blast door shut when one crew member is asleep during their 24-hour 
shift. But the crew member was found “derelict in his duties as he left the blast door open in 
order to receive a food delivery” while the other crew member was on an authorized sleep 
break.9 Similarly, airplane accidents have been commonly traced to checklist errors in which the 
pilots carelessly rushed through their pre-takeoff and pre-landing procedures. These examples 
illustrate that action controls often cause sloppiness or/or encourage compliance of the “check-
the-box” type, rather than the required scrutiny and care to ensure fail-proof operations.
Another situation of sloppiness often arises when various software applications and com-
puter systems require too many different passwords. The users, then, start saving their pass-
words within spreadsheets or email messages, or change their system preferences to allow 
them to automatically log into, or stay logged on, the various systems. Circumventing the 
authentication systems in this way obviously leaves a security gap, the exact opposite result of 
what was intended. To prevent this from happening, organizations have had to roll out software 
packages specifically designed so that users can save their passwords securely.10
But it is not always the employees who are sloppy, cutting corners, or inattentive. In some cases, 
organizations have been criticized for not having nearly good enough or tight enough action con-
trols. For example, a recent critique suggested that “nuclear power plants around the world are 
harboring a ’culture of denial’ about the risk of cyber hacking, with many failing to protect them-
selves against digital attacks,” where it was further pointed out that “they are really good at safety; 
they’ve got really good physical security, but they have barely grappled with cyber.”11
Fourth, action controls often cause negative attitudes. Some, perhaps even most, people are 
not happy operating under them. Some people, especially the more independent, creative types, 
may leave to find other jobs that allow more opportunity for achievement and self-actualization.
Negative attitudes and frustrations with “bureaucracy” were a common issue with the so-
called “ObamaCare” healthcare reforms, or Affordable Care Act–a major reform initiative by 
President Obama in the United States. Aside from the intentions to increase healthcare cover-
age and other changes, the new law also:
“[…] turned the heavy flow of government red tape into a gusher. A 2012 Physicians Foun-
dation survey found that almost four of every five respondents identified too much regula-
tion and paperwork as a “very important” reason the medical profession is in decline. With 
more than 13,000 pages of regulations […], the Affordable Care Act will make running a 

Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
226
medical practice even more stultifying. In addition to the mountain of paperwork under 
which they already labor, doctors will be faced with reams of new bureaucratic require-
ments, such as new Medicare rules governing patient referrals and reporting, new rules 
governing practice standards, plus tougher civil monetary penalties and criminal sanc-
tions. None of this will make medicine more attractive or enticing. The November 9, 2010, 
edition of Medscape Family Medicine quotes an internist as saying: “If dealing with 
Medicare was a headache, dealing with the new bureaucracy will be an intracranial 
hemorrhage.”12
As a further example, perhaps a bit extreme but factual nonetheless, consider how managers 
at The South Bend (Indiana) Tribune newspaper ordered the newsroom staff to start writing 
daily memos detailing their every activity. They did this as the newspaper was scrambling to 
keep their remaining staffers motivated and productive in the midst of the chaos following a 
round of layoffs. The purpose of the daily staff memos presumably was to improve communica-
tion in order to make the organization as “productive as possible.” This was targeted to all 
reporters, who were instructed to send a daily email to their most immediate editor (and five 
others) as the last thing to do before they leave for the day. These email “memos” would lay out 
specifically what the reporters accomplished that day, what they needed to finish or follow up 
on the next day, and what they planned to do the next day. As such, management believed (or 
hoped, rather) that the organization would benefit from encouraging communication and shar-
ing information. The editor would be able to tell how busy the reporters had been and, more 
importantly, what they had accomplished and what they were struggling with. From that, it was 
expected that “[our] morning planning meetings can be even more efficient.” In her guidance as 
to what the organization was looking for in the memos, Assistant Managing News Editor Vir-
ginia Black provided an example of what she wanted by means of a 375-word sample memo that 
was “mind-numbing in its minute detail.” Needless to say, this was received with skepticism 
among the reporters. As one of them pointed out, “followed to its logical conclusion, this pro-
ductivity memo thing would produce a never-ending memo loop. Think about it: the last item 
on your memo must be, ’wrote a memo about how I spent my day,’ which, of course, requires you 
to then write, ’updated my memo to account for memo,’ and so on.” The reporters could not see 
how these memos would make the morning planning meetings more efficient. In the meantime, 
Ms. Black’s memo quickly spread through the blogosphere, stirring up plenty of counter-memos 
(of the sarcastic sort, that is). Someone summarized the ill-fated idea as follows: “Who thought 
this was a good idea? It would be faster to just tell [us] directly that they believe every single one 
of [us] is lazy, incompetent and untrustworthy.”13 Clearly, the intended action-accountability 
measure had created ill will and negative reactions from the independent, creative-minded 
reporters.
Similarly, in a “battle of humans versus machines,” equity traders in one brokerage firm were 
resisting a push by their firm to impose an ever-increasing amount of computer-based analysis 
of their trades. Although management may see such “electronic control regimes” as helpful 
when it comes to monitoring trading desk performance and ensuring regulatory compliance, 
which has been particularly important following cases of unethical and fraudulent behaviors in 
banks, others argue that they inevitably will have unintended consequences. One observer 
noted that traders, who are typically independent-minded, will be tempted to “game the system 
to produce results that maximize compensation” regardless.14 Or, as another observer notes: 
“The traders will be back saying to their compliance officers: There’s too much control; let us 
make money.”15
But even action control-type electronic or automated systems are not immune to misusage 
either. One response to the rigging of benchmark rates in banks (such as LIBOR) was to have the 
indices or benchmarks settled by actual transactions rather than by allegedly “conspiring traders” 

Choice of controls
227
who sometimes were personally vested in the final outcome, tipping each other off to pending 
orders, and seeking to get ahead of their clients and profit at their expense. Getting rid of the 
human factor, where indices would be set on the basis of actual transactions or “real trades” on 
electronic exchanges, therefore seemed like an obvious solution. But this seemingly comforting 
solution, however, has been thrown into sharp relief as it appeared that some electronic systems 
were allegedly also rigged by their capacity to hold trades for hundreds of milliseconds: if the 
markets moved against the bank in that period, the trades were denied; if they moved in 
the bank’s favor, the trades went through. The article in The Financial Times that reported on this 
issue as paraphrased above was incisively titled: “In modern banking, cheating can be 
automated.”16
Finally, some action controls, particularly those that require preaction reviews, are costly. 
The reviews must usually be performed by individuals who are as well, or more, qualified than 
those who are taking the actions. Thus, the reviewers must be highly knowledgeable, and their 
time and services are costly. If they do not take, or have, the time to perform their reviews thor-
oughly, then the intended control purposes will be rendered moot.
That said, ignorance or lack of time is no defense. As a response to the systemic failures in 
the financial sector, for example, it has been proposed that executives could be held liable for 
wrongdoing in activities for which they had responsibility even if they had no specific knowl-
edge of the improper conduct. Professor John Kay put the justification for this as follows:
Primary responsibility for rate-fixing scandals lies with those who allowed a culture in 
which such behavior was seen as normal. This is not to absolve the individuals who actu-
ally perpetrated the crimes.17
That said, there is the worry that the requirement that executives have to demonstrate that they 
had taken all reasonable steps to eliminate wrongdoing might encourage “box ticking” and 
“paper pushing” rather than substantive action to change organizational culture.18
This takes us back to the important point that neither of the various types of control should 
be seen as individually effective, nor to operate in isolation. It is also pertinent to note how often 
“culture” was evoked when discussing issues with action controls in the examples from practice 
above. Action and personnel/cultural controls are intricately related, and so are results con-
trols, to which we now turn.
Advantages and disadvantages of results controls
Results controls also have several advantages and disadvantages. One common advantage is 
feasibility. Results controls can provide effective control even where knowledge as to what 
actions are desirable is lacking. This situation is typical of many (even most) of the important 
roles in many organizations. We discuss this more fully in Chapter 2, and return to this also in 
the context of Chapter 7.
Another advantage of results controls is that employee behaviors can be influenced even 
while the employees are allowed significant autonomy. This is particularly desirable when crea-
tivity is required because autonomy allows room for new and innovative ways of thinking. But 
even where creativity is not important, allowing autonomy has some advantages. It usually 
yields greater employee commitment and motivation because higher-level personal needs (such 
as the need for self-accomplishment) are brought into play. Results controls can also provide 
on-the-job training. Employees learn by doing and by making mistakes. It also allows room for 
idiosyncratic styles of behavior (such as a unique sales approach, or a personal touch when 
dealing with employees), which can provide better results than standardization of one approach. 
Chapter 7 elaborates further on the features of decision autonomy and commensurate results 
accountability.

Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
228
A final advantage of results controls is that, as compared to some forms of action control, 
they are often relatively inexpensive. Performance measures are often collected for reasons not 
directly related to management control, such as for financial reporting, tax reporting, or strat-
egy formulation. If these measures can be used or easily adapted for results controls, the incre-
mental expense of the control can be relatively small.
Results controls, however, have some disadvantages or limitations. First, congruence or 
alignment problems may arise due to imperfect knowledge of desirable results. Furthermore, 
due to measurement issues, results measures usually provide less-than-perfect indications of 
whether good actions had been taken because the measures fail to meet one or more of the 
qualities of good measures: precision, objectivity, timeliness, and understandability. As dis-
cussed in Chapter 2, these congruence and measurement problems are often difficult to fix and, 
sometimes, even to recognize.
Second, when results are affected by anything other than the employee’s own skills and 
efforts, as they almost always are, results controls impose risk on the employees. This risk is 
caused by measurement “noise” created by any of a number of likely uncontrollable factors 
(which we discuss further in Chapter 12), including environmental uncertainty, organizational 
interdependencies, and sometimes just bad luck. Subjecting employees to this risk is often prob-
lematic because employees are, to varying degrees, risk averse. When organizations make their 
employees bear risk, they must offer them a higher expected level of compensation (a risk pre-
mium) compared to when the employees do not bear the risk. Failure to provide the correct 
premium for the risk borne is likely to lead to employee dissatisfaction, frustration, and percep-
tions of unfairness, making it difficult for the organization to attract and retain talented employ-
ees. Moreover, regardless of whether the correct risk premium is offered, the organization will 
have to guard against employees’ tendencies to take some risk-reducing and/or bonus-maxi-
mizing, rather than value-enhancing, actions or decisions.
Third, it is usually impossible to optimize the performance targets set as part of results-
control systems (such as budget targets). The targets are often asked to fulfill multiple impor-
tant, but competing, control functions.19 One is motivation-to-achieve. For this function, it is 
best for the targets to be challenging but achievable. Another is planning. The targets are used 
to make decisions about levels of cash and inventory to have on hand. For this function, the 
targets should be realistic. A third function is coordination. Plans are often treated as commit-
ments and shared among the various entities in an organization so that each entity knows 
what to expect from the other entities. For this function, the targets should be a best guess, or 
maybe even slightly conservative, to make sure they are achieved and no (wasteful) overcom-
mitments of resources take place. Obviously, one set of targets cannot serve all purposes 
equally well. One or more purposes must be sacrificed if results controls are used. We refer to 
Chapter 8 for a more detailed treatment of this important target-setting issue and how organi-
zations address it.
Aside from the difficulty involved in setting the right target for the right performance area(s), 
the measures themselves can be conflicting, and certainly overwhelming, when they are (too) 
numerous. For example, the Royal College of Nursing (RCN) told an influential group of Mem-
bers of Parliament in the United Kingdom that “the number of performance targets forced on 
healthcare professionals must be reduced from 400 to about 15 because staff were being ’bul-
lied’ into working harder,” and that “the government’s demands were ’crazy’ and demoralized 
staff.” To remedy the situation, RCN executive director Alison Kitson called on the MPs to scrap 
many targets and introduce instead focused standards based on skill mix, patient dignity, and 
clinical outcomes.20 As we discussed in Chapters 2 and4, a proliferation of measures can lead to 
confusion and conflicts, making it more likely that the combination of measures will be less 
congruent with the truly desired results. There clearly is a tradeoff to be made between meas-
urement completeness and congruence.

Choice of control tightness
229
Similarly, but for an added reason of autonomy, the United Kingdom’s home secretary 
Theresa May told senior police officers that they “had only one target–that is, to reduce crime.” 
She said this in response to criticisms that “micro-management was making a comeback,” or, as 
we said earlier, was risking interference with police officers’ autonomy and local knowledge as 
to how to best provide effective policing and fight crime.21
Finally, not all employees like being empowered to produce results as they best see fit. Some 
employees simply have no desire for autonomy; that is, they enjoy neither the responsibility that 
these controls impart on them nor the risks to which the controls subject them. However, (self-)
selection of employees into jobs that match their skills and ambitions, a form of personnel con-
trols, should mitigate this problem.22
Choice of control tightness
The decision as to whether controls should be applied more or less tightly in any particular 
organization, or in an area within the organization, depends on the answer to three questions: 
(1) What are the potential benefits of tight controls?; (2) What are the costs?; and (3) Are any 
harmful side-effects likely?
In any organization, tight control is most beneficial over the areas most critical to the organ-
ization’s success. The critical success factors vary widely across organizations. For example, 
inventory control is critical in retail superstores because carrying heavy inventories without 
tight controls amounts to inefficient use of resources without value-added for the customer 
experience, where the inventory control also must ensure that stockouts do not erode customer 
experience. Tight inventory control can be implemented by focusing on key results if employees 
can be trusted to determine how to keep inventory near the required service levels, or key 
actions that involve detailed inventory procedures and decision rules. In airlines, seat capacity 
utilization is one of the critical success factors: Revenue Passenger Kilometers, or RPK, as this 
key performance indicator (KPI) is called (the number of paying passengers multiplied by the 
number of kilometers flown). Most airlines achieve tight control in this area through extensive 
preaction reviews over airplane acquisition and replacement decisions.23
The potential benefits of tight controls also tend to be higher when performance is poor. For 
example, in reference to CEO Jack Welch’s management style at General Electric, a former man-
ager said, “If you’re doing well, you probably have more freedom than most CEOs of publicly-
traded companies. But the leash gets pulled very tightly when a unit is underperforming.”24
What are the costs involved in implementing tight controls? Some forms of control are costly 
to implement in tight form. As we discussed earlier, tight action controls in the form of preac-
tion reviews, for example, can require considerable top management time to do the reviews. 
Some other action controls, such as for compliance purposes, can require a lot of information 
gathering, checking, and reporting time, known colorfully as “paper pushing” for those com-
pleting and reviewing the reports. Tight results controls might require extensive studies to 
gather useful performance standards, or they might require sophisticated information systems 
to collect and analyze all the required performance data. Chapter 5 deals exclusively with the 
costs of management control systems, both direct and indirect costs.
Are any harmful side effects likely? All the conditions necessary to make a type of control 
feasible, such as knowledge about how the control object relates to the desired ends, may not be 
present. If so, harmful side effects are likely if the control is implemented, especially if the con-
trol is implemented in tight form. For example, if the environment is unpredictable and the 
need for creativity is high, such as in hi-tech firms, good knowledge does not exist about either 
the actions that are needed or the results that should be accomplished. Therefore, neither action 

Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
230
nor results control can be said to be clearly effective, and the implementation of either in tight 
form is likely to cause problems. Tight action controls would likely cause behavioral displace-
ment and stifle creativity. Tight results controls would likely cause problems in selecting the 
right results measures and setting adequately challenging targets, both of which are difficult in 
rapidly changing, knowledge-intensive and/or highly innovative settings.25
Simultaneous tight-loose controls
In a now-dated but still-seminal management book, In Search of Excellence, Peters and Water-
man observed that a number of companies they defined as “excellent” employed what they 
called simultaneous tight-loose controls.26 They observed that the MCSs used in these compa-
nies can be considered loose in that they allow, and even encourage, autonomy, entrepreneur-
ship, and innovation. But these same control systems can also be called tight because the people 
in the company share a set of rigid values (such as focus on customer needs). Peters and Water-
man observed that policies, procedures, and other types of controls are not necessary in these 
companies because “people way down the line know what they are supposed to do in most situ-
ations because the handful of guiding values is crystal clear”27 and “culture regulates rigor-
ously the few variables that do count.”28 In other words, the MCSs in these organizations are 
dominated by personnel or cultural control; or they can be said to be tight on objectives and 
core values, but loose on procedures.
At Southwest Airlines, tight control is presumably achieved by way of a clear strategic princi-
ple. Herb Kelleher, founder of Southwest, is rumored to have said that “[he] can teach you the 
secret to running this airline in thirty seconds: We are THE low-fare airline,” and that, “Once 
you understand that, you can make any decision about this company’s future as well as I can.”29
It sounds like nirvana: let culture or a strategic principle provide a high degree of reliance 
that the employees are acting in the organization’s best interest and avoid most of the harmful 
side effects. But this desirable state is difficult to achieve, as several examples earlier in this 
chapter have suggested. Many companies are dealing with employees who do not share a single 
set of values. Then what do managers of organizations without strong cultures do?
It may be possible to approach a similar type of simultaneous tight-loose control even where 
a strong culture does not exist. This can be accomplished by using tight controls over the few 
key actions or results that have the greatest potential impact on the success of the organization. 
More control should be exercised over strategically important areas than over minor areas, 
regardless of how easy it is to control the latter. None of the controls that might be substituted 
for culture can be assumed to be free of harmful side effects, but selective use of tight controls 
may limit these effects. Most individuals can tolerate a few restrictions if they are allowed some 
autonomy in other areas. In the context of a results-control example mentioned earlier, an 
organization probably does not need 400 measures if 15 will suffice, and even that may be too 
many in most situations.
Adapting to change
Most organizations emphasize one form of management control at a given point in time, but 
they often change their emphasis from one form to another as their needs, capabilities, and 
environments change. Small companies can often be controlled adequately through the super-
visory abilities of founding leaders who develop a staff of loyal employees, centralize most key 
decisions, and involve themselves personally in detailed reviews of budgets and expenditures. 
As organizations grow, however, these forms of personnel/cultural and action control may have 

Maintaining good control
231
to be replaced, or supplemented, with other forms of control. As a consequence, organizational 
growth typically pushes management controls in the direction of increased formalization of 
procedures for action-accountability purposes and/or development of more elaborate informa-
tion systems for results-control purposes.30 In addition to growth, many other situational fac-
tors, such as intensifying competition, global expansion, or technological change, inevitably 
drive organizations to (have to) adapt their management control systems to their changing 
environments lest they become uncompetitive or even displaced.
Keeping a behavioral focus
What makes the analysis of management controls so difficult is that their benefits and side 
effects are dependent on how employees will react to the controls that are being considered. 
Predicting these behaviors is far from an exact science. Significant behavioral differences exist 
among people in different countries, in different parts of a single country, in different organiza-
tions, and in different areas of the same organization. Managers must be aware of such differ-
ences because the effectiveness of the management controls used will vary depending on the 
reactions of the employees involved. As the earlier examples suggest, creative types such as 
advertising executives or design engineers, and independent-minded or autonomy-seeking 
types such as managers or traders, tend to react more negatively to action controls than do 
employees working in production scheduling or accounting. Equally, some employees seem to 
be relatively highly interested in, and hence motivated by, money as a reward, whereas others 
are more attracted to stimulating work, autonomy, and challenge.31
These differences make the implementation of MCSs particularly challenging, and it is cru-
cial to emphasize that no one form of control is optimal in all circumstances. What works best in 
one organization, or area within an organization, may not work in another. However, it is still 
important to keep the focus on the people involved, because their responses will determine the 
success or failure of the MCS. The benefits of management controls are derived only from their 
impacts on behaviors.
Maintaining good control
What causes control problems so serious that an organization is “out of control”? Although the 
term seems shattering, this condition is not rare. In addition to the many organizations that no 
longer exist because their MCSs failed, the list of surviving organizations that have been criti-
cized for poor (or lax) controls is long and often includes even the most “admired” companies by 
the business press at some point in their history (e.g. “Apple Computer” in the 1990s, which 
made a remarkably successful and iconic return from the brink in the early 2000s to this day, a 
transformation marked by a name change to just “Apple Inc.”).
The causes of the problems these companies have faced are often diverse. One cause is an 
imperfect understanding of the setting and/or the effect of the management controls in that 
setting. An imperfect understanding of the situation is often associated with rapid growth and/
or “transformational” or “disruptive” change in their markets.32 Rapid growth and transforma-
tional change often precipitates control problems because it causes the key factors that need to 
be controlled tightly to change.
Another cause is management’s inclination to subjugate the implementation of management 
controls to other, often more pressing, business demands. This, again, happens often in growth 

Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
232
and change situations, which cause managers to delay the development of adequate MCSs, usu-
ally while they choose to emphasize marketing or developing the business. The change at vener-
able Hewlett-Packard from an engineering-led to a marketing-focused company, as well as from 
a hardware to a services company, is a case in point, and is ongoing with the split into two com-
panies: Hewlett-Packard Enterprise (an IT operations company) and HP Inc. (a maker of PCs and 
printers).33 Personal style also makes some managers unwilling to implement proper, or the 
most suitable, management controls. Entrepreneurs, particularly, often find it difficult to relin-
quish the centralized control they exerted when their firm was small and wholly owned by them.
Criticisms, however, should be made carefully. While many organizations may have faced MCS 
weaknesses of various magnitudes, knowing what should be criticized is not unproblematic 
(including in the examples given in this chapter). It is not easy to keep a finely tuned set of MCSs in 
place over long periods of time, particularly when the organization is operating in rapidly chang-
ing environments. Further, some MCSs that are seemingly inadequate may actually be quite effec-
tive because they minimize some harmful side effects. Clearly, there is a tension between trying to 
fully “regulate” behaviors and allowing some “ambiguity” in the roles of relatively autonomous 
managers in decentralized entities, where it is difficult for organizations to always make the osten-
sibly correct tradeoff between control and autonomy.34 Organizations often oscillate between one 
and the other, sometimes overdoing it one way, and then drifting back the other way. In that sense, 
“optimality” is easy to say, but hard to achieve in constantly changing environments.
Hence, criticisms of MCSs must be made with caution. Controls that seem quite loose may have 
some unseen benefits, such as in terms of high creativity, a healthy spirit of cooperation, or low cost. 
Even the suffering of ill effects due to the occurrence of one or more of the control problems does 
not necessarily imply that a poor MCS was in place. MCSs only reduce the probability of poor per-
formance; they do not eliminate it. Most criticisms should be leveled only after a thorough investi-
gation of the situation. Control is a complex part of the management function. There is no perfect 
MCS. There is no single best way to accomplish good control. Many control benefits and costs are 
hard to discern, but for control systems to have desirable effects, organizations must inevitably fine-
tune them as the situation calls for, using the best assessments, knowledge, and insights available.
Notes
	 1	 “Self-Evaluation Brings Change to a Family’s Ad Agency: 
Executive Learns to Listen to Employees and Adopt New 
Work Habits,” The Wall Street Journal (January 6, 1998).
	 2	 J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, J. A. Popadak, and S. Rajgopal, 
“Corporate Culture: Evidence from the Field” (February 
21, 2017), 27th Annual Conference on Financial Econom-
ics and Accounting Paper, Duke I&E Research Paper No. 
2016-33, Columbia Business School Research Paper No. 
16-49, online at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2805602; “How Corporate Culture 
Affects the Bottom Line,” Duke’s Fuqua School of Business 
News Release (November 12, 2015), online at www.fuqua.
duke.edu/news_events/news-releases/corporate-culture.
	 3	 Ibid.
	 4	 See, for example, M. Power, S. Ashby, and T. Palermo, 
“Risk Culture in Financial Organizations,” CARR Research 
(Winter 2013), pp. 18–21.
	 5	 Southwest Airlines is the poster child of a firm possessing 
an acclaimed corporate culture, with many case studies 
and articles over time devoted to describing and studying 
it. See, for example, G. Smith, “An Evaluation of the 
­Corporate Culture of Southwest Airlines,” Measuring 
­Business Excellence, 8, no. 4 (2004), pp. 26–33; M. 
Thomas, ­“Strategic Principles at Southwest Airlines,” 
Strategic Direction, 31, no. 8 (2015), pp. 10–12.
	 6	 “VW Needs More Therapy to Change Its Flawed Mindset,” 
The Financial Times (December 14, 2015), online at on.
ft.com/1O4ILtl.
	 7	 “Why I Put My Employees Ahead of My Customers,” 
Forbes (June 18, 2010), online at www.forbes.com.
	 8	 “How to Demotivate Your Best Employees,” Forbes (April 
8, 2013), online at onforb.es/10LjBDU.
	 9	 “Missile doors Left Open While Air Force Nuclear Officer 
Slept,” CNN (October 24, 2013), online at edition.cnn.
com/2013/10/23/us/air-force-nuclear-silo-doors-
opened.
	10	 “Société Générale Bolsters Internal Controls,” Search 
Security (May 27, 2008), online at SearchSecurity.com.
	11	 “Nuclear Power Plants in ’Culture of Denial’ over Hacking 
Risk,” The Financial Times (October 5, 2015), online at on.
ft.com/1iXbLor.
	12	 “Will the Affordable Care Act Affect Doctors? Yes,” The 
Heritage Foundation (June 26, 2013), online at www.
heritage.org.

Diagnostic Products Corporation
233
 13  “Memo Madness, or, Does Busy Work Increase Productiv-
ity?,”  Business Week (February 2, 2009), online at  www.
businessweek.com . 
   14   “Traders Sceptical of Electronic Monitoring,”  The Globe 
and Mail (June 3, 2009), online at  www.theglobeand-
mail.com .  
 15  “Société Générale Trial Begins This Week,”  The New York 
Times (June 6, 2010), online at  www.nytimes.com . 
 16   “In Modern Banking, Cheating Can Be Automated,”  The 
Financial Times (November 20, 2015), online at  on.ft.
com/1I448Tw . 
 17  “Ignorance Is No Defence for Misconduct such as PPI and 
LIBOR,”  The Financial Times (December 8, 2015), online 
at  on.ft.com/1SLUcE4 . 
 18  Ibid. 
 19  See, for example, S. C. Hansen and W. A. Van der Stede, 
“Multiple Facets of Budgeting: An Exploratory Analysis,” 
 Management Accounting Research , 15, no. 4 (December 
2004), pp. 415–39. 
 20  “Too Many NHS Targets Are ’Bullying’ Staff , MPs Told,” 
 Nursing Standard (January 29, 2003). 
 21  “Police Forces Facing Dozens of New Performance Tar-
gets,”  BBC News (September 19, 2013), online at  bbc.co.
uk/news/uk-24148129 . 
   22   See, for example, D. Campbell, “Employee Selection as a 
Control System,”  Journal of Accounting Research , 50, no. 4 
(September 2012), pp. 931–66. 
 23  “Dubai Airshow: ’Gulf Three’ Deals Will Strike Fear into 
Rival Airlines,”  CNN (November 19, 2013), online at  edi-
tion.cnn.com/2013/11/17/business/dubai-airshow-
emirates-airbus-quest . 
 24  “Jack: A Close-up Look at How American’s #1 Manager 
Runs GE,”  Business Week (June 8, 1998), p. 104. 
 25  See, for example, T. Davila, M. Epstein, and R. Shelton, 
 The Creative Enterprise (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2007); 
T. Davila, M. Epstein, and R. Shelton,  Making Innovation 
Work: How to Manage It, Measure It, and Profi t from It 
(Philadelphia, PA: Wharton Business School Publishing, 
2006). 
 26  T. J. Peters and R. H. Waterman,  In Search of Excellence 
(New York: Harper & Row, 1982). 
 27  Ibid., p. 76. 
 28  Ibid., p. 105. 
   29   See M. Thomas, “Strategic Principles at Southwest Air-
lines,”  Strategic Direction , 31, no. 8 (2015), p. 10. 
 30  See, for example, E. Flamholtz and Y. Randle,  Growing 
Pains: Transitioning from an Entrepreneurship to a Profes-
sionally Managed Firm (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 
2000). 
 31  See, for example, “One-Fifth of American Workers Say 
Compensation is the Biggest Factor in Work Happiness,” 
 World-At-Work  (September 2, 2014), online at  www.
worldatwork.org . 
 32  Disruptive innovation is a term coined by Harvard profes-
sor Clayton Christensen to describe the relentless compe-
tition that established companies can face from new 
entrants at the bottom of the market; see  www.clayton-
christensen.com (accessed December 2015). 
   33   See, for example, “New HP Duo Disappoints on forecast 
Debut,”  The Financial Times (November 25, 2015), online 
at  on.ft.com/1R5mlaz . 
 34  See, for example, D. Marginson and S. Ogden, “Coping 
with Ambiguity through the Budget: The Positive Eff ects 
of Budgetary Targets on Managers’ Budgeting Behaviors,” 
 Accounting, Organizations and Society , 30, no. 5 (July 2005), 
pp. 435–456. 
 This incentive program is still in its infancy stages, but we 
believe that we are on the right path. What has amazed us 
throughout this process is just how diffi  cult it is to achieve 
a performance bonus program that truly inspires and 
acknowledges strong performance. I believe that for this 
reason most enterprises either “settle” for programs that 
look great on paper but are ineff ective in practice, or avoid 
this type of a program altogether in favor of compensation 
mechanisms that do not really examine individual perfor-
mance metrics that are (ironically) most essential to the 
success of the business plan. Though no plan is perfect, 
we are determined to develop this program in a way that 
is first and foremost a benefit to our customers, while 
addressing our values as a corporation. 
 James Sorensen, Field Service/Support Manager, 
Diagnostic Products Corporation 
 In the second quarter of 2004, Diagnostic Products Cor-
poration implemented a new Performance Bonus Pro-
gram for its US-based Field Service Engineers (FSEs). 
The new program provided rewards to FSEs based on 
their accomplishments, rather than for merely working 
 CASE STUDY 
 Diagnostic Products Corporation 

234
Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
long hours. The new program was still work in progress, 
however. Managers were still considering how some of 
the elements of the program should be structured, and 
they were not yet able to measure objectively the FSEs’ 
performances in all critical aspects of their jobs.
Diagnostic Products Corporation
Diagnostic Products Corporation (DPC) designed, man-
ufactured, and marketed laboratory instruments and 
reagents designed for immunodiagnostic testing. The 
tests were for the diagnosis, monitoring, management, 
and prevention of various diseases, including thyroid 
disorders, reproductive disorders, cardiovascular dis-
orders, allergies, infectious diseases, and certain types 
of cancer. All of DPC’s tests were performed in vitro, 
which is through samples removed from the body, such 
as blood, urine, tissues, or other bodily fluids.
DPC’s products were sold to hospitals, independent 
clinical laboratories, and physician office laboratories as 
well as forensic, research, references, and veterinary labo-
ratories. The company sold its products through inde-
pendent distributors as well as through its own sales force.
Historically, foreign sales accounted for more than 
70% of revenues, although in recent years, domestic 
sales growth had outpaced foreign sales growth. 
In 2003, the company generated slightly in excess of 
$60 million in profit after tax on revenues of nearly 
$400 million (see Exhibit 1). DPC stock was listed on 
the New York Stock Exchange (symbol: DP).
DPC’s primary instrument offering was the IMMU-
LITE series of instruments, which were first introduced 
in 1993. IMMULITE systems were fully automated, 
computer-driven modular systems that used specialized 
proprietary software to provide rapid, accurate test 
results to reduce the customers’ labor and reagent costs. 
DPC’s IMMULITE provided the capacity for walk-away 
processing of up to 120 samples per hour, on a random 
access basis, meaning that it could perform any test, or 
combination of tests, on any patient sample at any time.
DPC had two principal immunoassay platforms (see 
Exhibit 2). DPC’s IMMULITE 2000 addressed the needs 
of high-volume laboratories, while the IMMULITE 
served lower volume facilities and niche markets.
The IMMULITE 2000 had an innovative service fea-
ture that included a remote diagnostic capability. DPC’s 
service facility could access any IMMULITE 2000 world-
wide for the purpose of diagnosing system problems. In 
2002, DPC introduced Real Time Service (RTS) on the 
IMMULITE 2000 system. RTS enabled the IMMULITE 
2000 to monitor itself and to proactively contact DPC’s 
service facility if it sensed a potential problem. In this 
way, DPC was sometimes able to solve a problem before 
a customer was even aware that it existed.
In early 2004, DPC launched the IMMULITE 2500. 
This instrument was similar to the IMMULITE 2000 but 
reduced the time it took to get a result from certain tests, 
most importantly tests used in emergency rooms to aid 
in the diagnosis of cardiac conditions. DPC also expected 
to launch an enhanced version of the Sample Manage-
ment System (SMS) that would connect to two IMMU-
LITE 2000s or 2500s. The SMS would eventually 
function as a universal robotic interface that could be 
linked to almost any of the automated systems available.
The IMMULITE instruments were closed systems, 
meaning that they would not perform other manufac-
turers’ tests. Accordingly, an important factor in the 
successful marketing of these systems was the ability to 
offer a broad menu of individual assays and assay 
groups; that is, tests that jointly represent decision-
making panels for various disease states, such as thy-
roid disorders or infertility. DPC managers believed that 
the IMMULITE and IMMULITE 2000 had the most 
extensive menus of any automated immunoassay sys-
tems on the market. In 2004, DPC manufactured over 
400 immunodiagnostic test kits (also called reagents or 
assays). DPC’s research and development (R&D) activi-
ties continued to focus on expanding the test menus, 
giving special attention to complete implementations of 
clinically important assay groups, as well as on develop-
ing new generations of instrumentation and software.
In addition to breadth of menu, major competitive 
factors for the IMMULITE instruments included time-
to-results (how quickly the instrument performs the 
test), ease of use, and overall cost effectiveness. 
Because of these competitive factors and the rapid 
technological developments that characterized the 
industry, DPC devoted approximately 10% of its annual 
revenues to R&D activities.
DPC was organized functionally (see Exhibit 3). 
Headquarters were located in Los Angeles, California. 
Manufacturing facilities were located in New Jersey, 
California, Wales, and China. DPC also had a distribu-
tion network in over 100 countries.
The field service organization
DPC’s field service organization was part of its Instrument 
Systems Division (ISD), based in Flanders, New Jersey. 
ISD was comprised of DPC’s largest manufacturing 

Diagnostic Products Corporation
235
facility, its instrument R&D function, and its service orga­
nizations, which included technical services, service 
quality management, and US-based field service/support 
(see Exhibit 4). Technical services personnel provided 
telephone support to DPC customers and distributors on a 
24/7 basis. The service quality management maintained 
client databases and automated reporting systems, man-
aged regulatory affairs, and administered customer satis-
faction surveys.
The field service organization provided on-site sup-
port to customers and distributors. The goal of the field 
service organization was to be on site where needed 
within 4–6 hours on a 24/7 basis. The visits served 
multiple purposes, including repairs, installations, pre-
ventive maintenance, and instrument removals.
The US field service organization, which included 86 
FSEs based in 32 states, was divided into six regions. Most 
of the FSEs had an associate degree in a technical field, but 
some had bachelor degrees and/or were trained in the 
military. Their ages ranged from 25 to 60+. Their average 
base salary was slightly less than $50,000.1 The orienta-
tion of the DPC field service organization was different 
from that of some of the company’s competitors. DPC oper-
ated its field service organization as a cost center, with the 
emphasis on providing “total customer satisfaction.” Some 
of DPC’s competitors ran their field service organizations 
as profit centers, which sometimes caused them to focus 
more on cost-cutting rather than customer service.
Field service managers monitored their organiza-
tion’s performance with an extensive array of data that 
they summarized by product, region, and FSE. These 
data included repair rates, productivity, call-back rates, 
incomplete call rates (with reasons), return call rates, 
MTTR (mean time to repair), MTBF (mean time before 
failure), travel expense per call, and on-site response 
time. These data were reported monthly at a Quality 
Management Meeting.
Preventive maintenance (PM) procedures were an 
important part of the FSEs’ jobs. If a PM was done on 
time, there was a better chance of the customer hav-
ing no problems with the instrument. If a PM was not 
completed to standard, the chance of a “call back” 
increased significantly, which caused a disgruntled 
customer and caused DPC to incur more costs. A PM 
on an IMMULITE instrument took an average of 3.5 
hours to complete. On an IMMULITE 2000, a PM took 
5.5 hours. Most FSEs completed five to seven PMs per 
month. The total cost of a service call was significant, 
as it included direct labor costs, labor-related benefits, 
travel, and often other field service expenses.
Completing a job on the first visit was another impor-
tant performance factor. Most customers could not afford 
to have an instrument down for a few days, or sometimes 
even for a few hours. If the FSEs did not understand the 
job they would face in the field, they will not finish it on 
the first day, and customer satisfaction would be 
adversely affected. To be prepared, the FSEs should 
schedule the visit with the customer to reduce the 
chances that a failure to complete the job was caused by 
customer time constraints. And they should download 
the error log and look at the instrument’s service history 
so that they would have the parts they needed with them. 
As James Sorensen, manager of field service/support, 
expressed it, “The better the FSEs screen the job, and so 
the more thorough they are up front, the more likely they 
are to complete the call on the first visit. Ideally, the FSEs 
get the ‘oh by the ways’ on the phone, not at the site.”
After each visit FSEs left a short (five-question) satis-
faction survey for customers to complete and return. If 
the customer comments were favorable, they were 
always shared with the FSE and management. Unfavora-
ble comments were invariably addressed with the cus-
tomer and the FSE. The vast majority of the field service 
ratings (over 99%) were in the “very good” and “excel-
lent” categories. But the customer survey return rate was 
only just above 25%.2 To get better feedback, DPC hired 
an outside vendor to conduct phone follow-ups with a 
random sample of customers starting in January 2005.
Performance-dependent 
compensation
Because DPC FSEs were exempt employees who were 
not eligible for overtime, DPC created a Variable Com-
pensation Plan. This plan provided quarterly payments 
to FSEs for time worked beyond regular working hours. 
One part of the plan paid the FSEs a monetary “comp 
unit” for every period of time where a FSE worked for 12 
hours or was away from home for 24 straight hours. 
Long days were common for FSEs as customers’ needs 
were paramount, and some FSEs had to cover customers 
spread over large regions, so travel time was significant. 
Extra compensation was also paid for weekend work or 
for being “on call” during a weekend. In 2003, these 
extra payments totaled nearly 7% of the FSEs’ base pay.
1	 This figure and certain other facts in the case have been disguised.
2	 DPC field service managers believed that the average return rate for 
similar paper surveys across all industries was less than 10%.

236
Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
As DPC grew, the field service organization also grew. 
Approximately 15–20 FSEs were being added each year. 
The additional staff decreased the need for travel and, 
consequently, reduced the need to pay comp units.
DPC managers still wanted to provide their FSEs an 
opportunity to earn extra money, but they thought that 
the money would be better spent in paying for perfor-
mance, rather than for hours worked. Managers were par-
ticularly concerned that some FSEs who were merely 
spending too much time on their jobs were earning comp 
units, while the better FSEs were finishing their jobs early. 
Sunil Das, manager of regional field service engineering, 
explained a motivation for change: “We want to acknowl-
edge those who work at a ‘superior’ level.” As a conse-
quence, they designed a new Performance Bonus Program, 
which was implemented in the second quarter of 2004. 
The objective of the program was defined as follows:
The Bonus Program is designed to measure critical 
performance metrics of a Field Service Engineer as 
it pertains to aspects of the job that lead to total 
customer satisfaction. These metrics target the key 
facets that increase DPC’s value to our customers.
The new Performance Bonus Program awarded field 
service engineers both points and money. The money was 
designed to replace the compensation that was formerly 
paid in comp units and, hence, to leave the total-compen-
sation packages at competitive levels. But the change was 
phased in. The comp unit values were reduced by 50% in 
the third and fourth quarters of 2004 and were elimi-
nated in 2005. The points portion of the program was to 
be introduced to the field in 2005. Management wanted 
to take “baby steps” in the implementation of the pro-
gram and manage each quarter manually until they had a 
full understanding of the ups and downs of the data.
The awards of points and/or money were based on 
the FSEs’ performance in six areas:
1.	 Cross training. Engineers were awarded 10 “base” 
points for each instrument that they were qualified to 
service–IMMULITE, IMMULITE 2000, IMMULITE 
2500, SMS–for a maximum of 40 points.
2.	 Preventive maintenance (PM) completion. FSEs 
earned two points for each PM completed. To earn the 
points, the PMs had to be both scheduled with the 
customer and completed on time.
	
James Sorenson was confident that the FSEs could not 
easily manipulate the number of PMs completed, such 
as by reporting PM completion without actually having 
done the work. Each PM required a checklist of critical 
parts that must be changed, and each PM call was auto-
matically tracked in the software. And, Sunil Das added, 
“When FSEs do a poor job at preventative maintenance, 
it ’bites them back’ in the call back rate” (see below).
3.	 Teamwork factor for PMs. If the region met the 
specified PM goals for the quarter for instruments 
covered by warranty and/or service agreement, 
each FSE in that region would receive the following:
90–96% completed	
1% of base quarterly salary, 
plus 5 points
97–100% completed	
2% of base quarterly salary, 
plus 10 points
4.	 Complete first visit. Complete first visits were 
defined as service events completed on the first day 
of the visit. The following proportions of complete 
first visits were rewarded as follows:
Sunil Das explained that completing service calls 
on the first day was not always possible, “no matter 
how hard one tries,” due to parts delivery delays and 
other uncontrollable factors. The DPC national aver-
age first-day-completion of PMs was 97%; for repairs 
it was 93%.
5.	 Call back rate. Call back rates were defined as multi-
ple visits within 30 days of each other where: (1) the 
same module was worked on; (2) non-PM visits were 
for the same problem; (3) the subsequent visit was 
within three days of a PM; and (4) initial and subse-
quent visits were associated with the same client call. 
However, subsequent visits in the following categories 
were not considered call backs: (1) moves; (2) instal-
lations; (3) removals; (4) PM; (5) service check list; 
(6) proactive repair; (7) retrofit; and (8) peripheral.
Some of these exceptions were added after the bonus 
program was initially implemented. In their early experi-
ences with the program, managers noticed that some of 
the FSEs that they thought were among their best did not 
have the lowest call back rates. Sunil Das gave an example:
One of our sharp engineers noticed during a PM that 
the hinge on an instrument was a little weak. He went 
back the next week to fix it, but then we “dinged” him 
for a call back. So unintentionally we were penalizing 
an opportunity to “shine” before the customer. Now 
PMs	
Repairs
90–99%, 2–11 points	
85–95%, 1–11 points
100%, 20 points	
96–98%, 18–20 points
	
99–100%, 24–25 points

Diagnostic Products Corporation
237
we exclude this type of procedure as a proactive 
repair. It doesn’t affect the customer, and the machine 
is not down. We’re trying to get this right. But even 
the best engineers won’t have a 0% call-back rate. 
We do get some “hard” instrument failures that have 
nothing to do with the quality of their work.
The rewards for call back rate proportions were 
set as follows:
IMMULITE
IMMULITE 2000
Call-back rate
 % base
Call-back rate 
% base
proportions (%)
Points
quarterly salary
proportions (%)
Points
quarterly salary
10–9
2–3
1.33
20
2–4
1.33
8–7
4–5
1.67
19–17
5–7
1.67
6–5
6–7
2.0
16–14
8–10
2.0
4
10
2.33
13–12
11–12
2.33
3
20
2.67
11–10
13–14
3.33
2
25
3.0
9–7
20–25
4.0
1
40
3.33
6–5
30–35
4.67
0
60
4.0
4–3
40–45
5.33
 
 
 
2–1
50–55
6.0
 
 
 
0
60
6.67
A minimum of nine service visits per instrument 
type had to be attained each given quarter for eligi-
bility. The DPC national average for call backs was 
approximately 10%, which was less than the indus-
try average of slightly less than 20%.
	
The new instruments (IMMULITE 2500 and SMS) 
were not included in this reward schedule. They 
were too new to have well-established failure rates 
that distinguished inevitable start-up problems from 
FSE-related service quality issues. At the end of 
2004, only seven FSE specialists were qualified to 
work on these new products.
6.	 Administrative functions. Managers evaluated each 
FSE in each of the following performance areas:
1. Customer satisfaction	
0–25 points
2. Expense reports	
0–25 points
3. Service reports completion	
0–25 points
4. Dispatch feedback	
0–25 points
5. Synchronization	
0–25 points
6. Company car maintenance	
0–25 points
7. Conference call roll call	
0–25 points
8. Inventory management	
0–25 points
The evaluations were based on subjective judg-
ments of data that were monitored centrally. Manag-
ers considered several factors deemed important in 
each area. For example, the customer satisfaction rat-
ings were based on both the averages from the cus-
tomer survey as well as the return rate. The idea was 
to watch trends in customer survey return rates per 
FSE (relative to the overall average of about 25%), as 
some FSEs sometimes neglected to leave a survey for 
the customer to complete. Past experience had shown, 
particularly, that some FSEs had tended to “forget” to 
leave a survey with the customer when they suspected 
that the customer was dissatisfied about their work. 
Dispatch feedback was based on reports from the ser-
vice dispatchers. Which FSEs were not accepting 
calls? Which were “grabbing” them? Synchronization 
ratings reflected the extent to which the FSEs were 
inputting their service data to the centralized 
database within 48 hours. FSEs who were never 
“delinquent” ordinarily received 25 points for syn-
chronization; those who showed a pattern of delin-
quencies would receive no points and be called in for 
corrective action.
James Sorensen, manager of field service/support, 
explained that, “No dollar bonus amounts were attached 
to performance in the administrative function areas to 

238
Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
remove the possibility for perceived favoritism. All we 
were trying to do when we came up with this was to 
assess, at the margin, whether someone had put in an 
honest day’s work.”
Exhibit 5 shows a quarterly bonus calculation for a 
hypothetical FSE. This FSE would be paid a bonus of 
6.33% of his/her quarterly base salary and would also 
have earned 261 bonus points.
Field service managers were monitoring the point 
accumulations as indicators of successes and fail-
ures both of their function and those of individual 
FSEs. They used this feedback to make improve-
ments, such as in the content of training courses and 
the mentoring of individual FSEs, but they had not 
yet decided how to attach reward values to the 
points earned. One possibility that had been men-
tioned was to invite the top FSE point earner to the 
annual sales meeting, which was held in the winter 
in either Hawaii or Arizona. Other possibilities were 
an awards plaque, a monetary award, and/or a men-
tion in the service newsletter that was distributed 
company-wide.
Early experiences and plans 
for the future
At the end of 2004, field service managers were 
pleased with the initial effects of the new bonus 
program. From their perspective, the bonus program 
had introduced a lot more objectivity in the system. 
Managers had a quarterly, quantitative snapshot of the 
performance of each FSE. The managers also thought 
that the bonus program had positive influences on 
FSEs’ behaviors. They saw, for example, decreases in 
call-back rates, which they attributed to the FSEs pay-
ing more care to their jobs and not “trying to rush 
through the calls.”
The field service managers continued to compare 
the data against the performances of the FSEs whom 
they thought were the best to make sure the new bonus 
program was not critically flawed. That’s how they dis-
covered, and subsequently added, the new call-back 
exceptions, as was described above.
At the end of 2004, after much debate, FSE man-
agers decided to make a substantive change. They 
combined the instrument groups to calculate one 
overall call back rate per FSE. They concluded that as 
far as the company was concerned, a call back 
(regardless of instrument model) is a call back: The 
expenses incurred are the same, and customers are 
upset with a call back regardless of the type of instru-
ment they have. The field service managers also 
decided to have the payout increase based on the 
number of calls the FSE makes in a given quarter. So 
FSEs were promised higher payouts for more calls 
(productivity) and fewer call backs (customer 
responsiveness), as follows (minimum of 10 calls per 
quarter):
Calls per 
quarter
Call-back rate (%)
Payout (% base 
quarterly salary)
Calls per quarter
Call-back rate (%)
Payout (% base 
quarterly salary)
10
20
1.0
31–40
20
5.0
 
19–15
1.33
 
19–15
5.67
 
14–10
1.67
 
14–10
6.67
 
9–5
2.33
 
9–5
8.33
 
4–0
3.33
 
4–0
10.0
11–20
20
1.33
41–50
20
6.67
 
19–15
2.0
 
19–15
8.33
 
14–10
2.67
 
14–10
10.0
 
9–5
4.0
 
9–5
11.67
 
4–0
5.33
 
4–0
13.33
21–30
20
3.33
50+
20
8.0
 
19–15
4.0
 
19–15
9.33
 
14–10
5.0
 
14–10
10.67
 
9–5
5.67
 
9–5
12.0
 
4–0
6.67
 
4–0
13.33

Diagnostic Products Corporation
239
While they had proposed the schedule shown above, 
the field service managers were not yet sure if the pay-
out levels were correct. They were withholding their 
bonus recommendations to the payroll department 
while they examined the data further. The fourth-
quarter payments were to be made by the end of Febru-
ary 2005.
DPC’s field service managers knew that there was 
“still some wariness” among the FSEs regarding the 
new program. Many FSEs had expressed concerns. 
Some FSEs were concerned that the company had 
“taken something away from them.” Others were not 
sure that they were being held accountable for 
something “real.” And some complained that they were 
placed at an unfair advantage, as compared to other 
FSEs, because of their customer mix.
The field service managers knew that they would 
have to continue to “tweak and massage” the program 
to get it right, and feedback from the field service 
force would help the process. They knew that they had 
to decide how to reward the FSEs’ accumulations of 
“points,” something they had promised to do by 2005. 
And they knew that they had to enhance their perfor-
mance metrics and, hopefully, move some of the per-
formance areas, such as parts inventory, out of the 
subjectively assessed “administration” category.
Exhibit 1  Diagnostic Products Corporation: Income statements for years ending December 31 (all data in millions)
 
2003
2002
2001
2000
Net sales
381.39
324.09
283.13
247.61
Cost of goods sold
164.36
137.75
120.69
110.52
Gross profit
217.02
186.34
162.44
137.08
Research and development expenditures
40.68
36.82
31.45
26.46
Selling general and administrative expenses
99.02
84.15
76.47
70.52
Income before depreciation and amortization
77.33
65.37
54.52
40.10
Depreciation and amortization
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Nonoperating income
11.11
3.84
3.30
2.42
Interest expense
n/a
1.22
.01
n/a
Income before tax
88.44
67.99
57.82
42.52
Provision for income taxes
26.28
21.08
17.81
12.86
Minority interest
.36
(.40)
.98
1.41
Net income before extra items
61.80
47.31
39.03
28.25
Extra items discontinued operations
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Net income
61.80
47.31
39.03
28.25
Exhibit 2  Diagnostic Products Corporation: IMMULITE products

240
Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
Exhibit 3  Diagnostic Products Corporation: Corporate organization chart

Diagnostic Products Corporation
241
Exhibit 5  Diagnostic Products Corporation: Bonus program reward calculation for a hypothetical FSE
 
 
Points earned
Payout (% base quarterly salary)
Base points
Qualified on IMMULITE and IMMULITE 2000
20
–
PMs completed
10
20
–
Teamwork
97%
10
2
Complete first visit
PMs 95%
7
–
 
Repairs 90%
6
–
Call-back rate
IMMULITE 5%
7
2
 
IMMULITE 2000 13%
11
2.33
Administration
 
180
–
Total for quarter
 
261
6.33%
Exhibit 4  Diagnostic Products Corporation: Field service organization
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede. Some facts and names have been 
disguised.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.

242
Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
 David McDonald, fi nancial analyst for Game Shop, Inc. 
(GSI), had just hand-delivered invoices to ExcitoVision, 
Inc. (EVI), one of GSI’s largest customers. He did not 
have to make such deliveries often, and he hated the 
task, but he thought this trip was necessary to keep 
EVI happy. EVI had always been a diffi  cult client to 
deal with, but the relationship had become much more 
prickly since GSI had accidentally over-billed EVI for 
almost $1 million in a recent quarter. The over-billings 
occurred because of a series of errors, particularly 
double billings and incorrect calculations of rebates. 
In fact, GSI almost lost EVI as a customer as a result 
of this incident. David felt that when he delivered the 
invoices, he needed to greet the EVI managers “with a 
bow, and roses and chocolates.” In the past few months, 
David believed that he had made a lot of progress in 
mending the relationship with EVI and also with some 
other companies that had suff ered because of errors in 
GSI’s billing system. 
 GSI management knew that the company’s billing sys-
tem needed to be improved signifi cantly. In early 2010, 
top management had assigned David the task of improv-
ing GSI’s billing process. He had largely completed the 
fi rst phase of that task. He had designed new processes, 
conducted a series of training sessions, and started moni-
toring billing performance using a new “Billings Score-
card” that contained an extensive array of billing-related 
performance metrics. David hoped that the new, 
improved billing system would prove to be eff ective. The 
goal was perfection. He noted: “Expectations are high; 
even one mistake can have huge consequences.” 
 Company background 
 GSI, founded in 2002, was a leading video game servic-
ing house, providing services to video game publishing 
companies. GSI converted games from template back-
grounds, video, and computer code into fi nished digital 
products, mostly DVDs and secure downloadable fi les. 
GSI also provided related services such as menu creation, 
international dubbing, and audio enhancement. 
 GSI’s customers, video game publishing companies, 
developed or licensed video games, and then fi nanced, 
distributed, and marketed the games around the world. 
The video game publishing industry was an oligopoly; 
it consisted of a handful of very large companies that 
dominated the market, as well as many much smaller, 
niche companies. Six game publishing companies 
accounted for 90% of GSI’s revenue. 
 GSI was divided into 17 profi t centers or business 
units (BUs) (see  Exhibit  1 ). Seven of the BUs were organ-
ized around customers, 6 of them focused exclusively 
on the projects of a single, large customer. The other 
10 BUs focused on an area of expertise, such as Creative 
Content Production and International Dubbing, and 
worked on projects for numerous customers. The BU 
managers reported to Kevin Brink, senior vice president 
of Worldwide Operations and Business Execution, who, 
in turn, reported to the CEO. Functional departments, 
such as fi nance, sales and marketing, legal, and human 
resources, reported directly to the CEO. 
 The video game industry was dynamic. GSI employ-
ees had to work hard to stay on top of increasingly com-
plex and rapidly changing game features, specifi cations, 
and requirements. GSI had a reputation both for pro-
duction quality and for being able to tackle diffi  cult 
projects. Kevin Brink explained: 
 Throughout our business we try to create a culture 
of excellence. One of the signs on my wall says, 
“Perfect, that is all.” Our expectation is perfection, 
because our reputation can be ruined with just one 
mistake. Six sigma isn’t good enough. We have to 
operate at 15 sigma, or we go out of business. 
 Every month Kevin’s office published a 50-page 
Management Review, which was available to all 
employees on the company’s intranet. The report con-
sisted of dozens of scorecards, focused primarily on 
product quality. The report created transparency and 
allowed employees to learn from the reports of failures. 
Failures were measured and also addressed with a 
Corrective Action Report (CAR). The CAR outlined the 
 CASE STUDY 
 Game Shop, Inc. 

Game Shop, Inc.
243
reason for the failure, named the department and/or 
individual(s) responsible, and prescribed corrective 
action. CARs linked to an individual employee became 
part of that employee’s permanent record.
Kevin also managed a World Wide Knowledge Base 
that gave employees around the world access to the 
most recent work instructions, checklists, forms, and 
policies. He discouraged employees from sending out-
dated emails or storing outdated instructions on their 
PCs. Often when CARs were issued, the failure was at 
least partially addressed by updating instructions in 
the Knowledge Base. Kevin believed in knocking out 
failure modes with smart controls, or, as he explained, 
“I minimize discretion so that a process cannot con-
tinue until the right choices are made. I try to force 
things to be right.”
Billings and revenue recognition
GSI project managers (PMs) were responsible for man-
aging customer projects from start to finish. Their 
responsibilities included billing. Most PMs had no 
financial or technical background. All were high school 
graduates, and some also had a college degree, usually 
in a liberal arts field. The best of the PMs were smart 
generalists who were able to juggle multiple priorities.
In addition to the PM, a typical project involved at 
least eight employees, most of whom had a technical 
specialty such as video compositing. Projects required 
quality control personnel as well, usually two focused 
on the incoming stage of the project and two or three 
focused on the outgoing stage. Quality control checks 
were built into the process.
GSI’s policy was that no project was to be started 
without first securing a purchase order (PO) from the 
customer. The PMs regularly violated that policy, how-
ever, with tacit approval from corporate. As one PM 
explained, “[The big customers] are temperamental. 
We don’t want to upset them.” Even starting a project 
with a PO in hand did not solve all the billing problems. 
Not all the project contingencies could be foreseen, and 
overages above the amount specified in the initial pur-
chase order were common in the industry.
Revenue was recognized when it was earned. PMs 
would estimate the amount they would eventually bill 
for the work that had been done to date and enter it as 
accrued revenue. Once the project was billed, the 
amount changed from accrued revenue to an account 
receivable. Each PM was responsible for tracking time 
spent on projects, changes to the projects, and overages. 
Once the project shipped, the PM was also responsible 
for compiling a billing packet that the billing depart-
ment sent to the customer for approval and payment.
Bills, and in some cases even the billing processes, 
were tailored to each customer. For example, one cus-
tomer did not allow overages, so they would not sign a 
PO until the project was completed. The PO, shipping 
document, and invoice were all sent to this customer at 
the same time. In a practice somewhat unique to the 
industry, many customers were not billed when the 
project shipped, but were given a period of time to 
review and approve charges after the project was 
shipped. The period of time allowed varied by cus-
tomer. Kevin noted, “Sometimes it’s as difficult to bill 
the thing as to build the thing.”
Accuracy and timeliness issues
Billing accuracy and timeliness had become increas-
ingly important as the company matured. Kevin was 
concerned that GSI’s reputation for billing was not up 
to par with its reputation for delivering quality prod-
ucts, and billing problems were causing frictions with 
important customers. Partly because of the financial 
reporting and internal control requirements of the Sar-
banes-Oxley Act of 2002, most customers were now 
requesting better invoice accuracy. In addition, as GSI 
grew, its need for working capital also grew, so it was 
imperative to get invoices delivered and receivables 
collected as promptly as possible.
Friction with large customers had revealed some 
billing issues, and there was additional evidence that 
problems existed. The PM’s accrual estimates could be 
wildly inaccurate, and there were often several months 
of accrued revenue sitting on the books. In late 2010, 
GSI had over $5 million of working capital “trapped in 
accruals older than 60 days,” almost twice GSI’s aver-
age monthly revenue.
The improvement process
David was assigned the task of improving the billing 
system. He was given clear project goals: achieve 98% 
accuracy in accrued revenue calculations and reduce 
accruals to a maximum of 30 days of sales. If David’s 
project was successful, the accrued revenue amount 
would decrease from over $5 million to $1.3 million.
In early 2010, GSI management had a brainstorming 
session to identify the issues. They found that a lot of 
controls were missing. As a result, some billings were 

244
Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
not being turned in. Many that were turned in were 
inaccurate. Sometimes customers were double billed. 
PMs were a major cause of the problems. This was 
understandable, as Kevin noted, “They are busy peo-
ple. Sometimes they don’t get all the details right.”
To understand all the root causes of the problem, 
David built a “fault tree” (see Exhibit 2). The purpose of 
the fault tree was to diagnose the problem in enough 
detail so that the solutions would follow from the detailed 
diagnoses. David’s fault tree exercise exposed nearly 100 
causes of the inaccuracies and revenue accrual build-ups. 
These issues could be categorized as system or process 
issues, customer issues, and management issues.
System/process issues
The billing system had several flaws. Billing paperwork 
could only be submitted once a week, and reports could 
take upwards of 10 minutes to download onto a PM’s 
computer. There was also no redundancy in the pro-
cess. A single employee’s vacation could hold up the 
entire company’s billing cycle.
Theoretically, these issues could be addressed with 
changes to the system, but both the billing and IT 
departments were resistant to change. David thought 
that billing department resistance stemmed both from 
familiarity and comfort with the existing system and, 
probably, fear of job loss. Billing department personnel 
had also been burned once by the IT department when 
it tried to force a new alpha version of a system on 
them. This system was untested and full of bugs, so 
hard feelings had been created. The IT department had 
always given billing projects low priority. Historically, 
the IT focus had always been on systems designed to 
improve operations. Financial systems had always 
been an afterthought.
Customer issues
GSI’s policy was that nothing could be shipped without 
a PO, but some customers refused to issue a PO. They 
wanted to make changes along the way and have the 
bill from GSI reflect what was actually shipped. Even 
where POs were used, they often quickly became obso-
lete as changes were made to the work orders. Some 
customers insisted on a lengthy review process before 
they would approve a bill even though the order had 
already shipped. Some projects shipped over a long 
period of time, upwards of one year, but customers 
would not accept a bill until the final stage of the project 
was complete.
David accepted that customer behavior could not be 
controlled completely, but he also believed that PMs and 
managers could do more to try to influence customer 
behavior. PMs could try to insist on getting a customer PO. 
They could also try to get authorization to bill for parts of 
a job instead of waiting for the entire job to be complete. 
For example, one BU was able to persuade a customer to 
pay for international dubbing before the Japanese ver-
sion, by far the most technical and time-consuming dub-
bing task, was complete. This shortened the billing cycle 
on this job from over a year to just four months.
Management issues
Perhaps the biggest issue was that many GSI PMs did 
not track project changes and simply did not turn in 
billing paperwork in a timely manner. Some just 
accrued things randomly. For example, they would 
declare certain tasks as having been completed, forget 
what they had done in the prior period, and then bill for 
them again.
David discovered several causes of this problem. GSI 
did not have a set of written billing instructions, and 
many managers did not know how to use the billing tools 
available to them. In general, PMs did not understand 
the importance of correct and timely billing, and often 
were not aware that there was a problem; they assumed 
several months of accruals were the norm. Managers 
were also not terribly motivated to spend time on billing. 
They were much more focused on production. The prob-
lem was aggravated during the busy season when some 
managers complained that they were already in the 
office until past 11 p.m. every night making sure orders 
were shipped. Forced to choose between spending time 
on shipping or billing issues, they chose shipping.
While some of the problems could be seen as failures 
of specific individuals, David decided to focus on 
improving the process, rather than focusing on specific 
individuals’ failures. He provided training sessions that 
included instruction on billing and time management, 
and he added detailed billing instructions to the World 
Wide Knowledge Base.
Billings Scorecard
To focus attention on billing performance, David devel-
oped a new “Billings Scorecard,” a monthly report that 
tracked each BU’s billing performance. David hoped the 
Billings Scorecard would provide increased visibility 
about billing performance. Many PMs, and even their 
bosses, had not cared about billing-related performance 

Game Shop, Inc.
245
in large part because it was not measured or reported. 
He noted, “We are metrics centric in our culture.” David 
hoped that the scorecard would motivate better billing 
performance and, in the end, provide the basis for 
assessing the overall success of his project.
The Billings Scorecard (see Exhibit 3) rated each 
BU’s billing performance in terms of four measures 
(described below). David converted each of the scores 
into a 0-to-4-point scale, or “grade.” 
1.	 Percent of sales invoiced = monthly dollars 
invoiced/monthly dollars sold 
A perfect score of 1 would mean that every dollar 
sold was also invoiced. This measure was converted 
into a grade by multiplying by 4.
2.	 Adjusted number of weeks of sales accrued = 
accruals/(3 months of sales/13) − approval delay 
A week of sales was approximated using a 
13-week average to smooth the value. The measure 
was adjusted by an approval delay factor that was 
specific to each customer. Most customers had an 
approval delay built into their payment systems that 
allowed them a certain period of time to approve 
bills before they could be officially billed. The 
adjusted number of weeks accrued was calculated 
by subtracting the weeks a customer was allowed for 
approval from the number of weeks accrued. For 
example, if a business unit had six weeks of sales 
accrued, but their customer was allowed three 
weeks to approve bills, the BU’s adjusted weeks of 
accruals would be three (i.e. 6 − 3). BUs were 
allowed one week of slack. For each additional week 
or fraction thereof, one grade point was subtracted 
from a perfect 4.0 to convert the measure into a 
grade. So using the example above, a score of 3 
would produce a 2.0 or C grade (i.e. 4 − (3 − 1)).
3.	 Percent of sales shipped without a PO = sales 
shipped without PO/sales shipped 
This measure was only available for the five BUs that 
used GSI’s standard order management system. A per-
fect score for this measure would be 0; i.e. nothing 
shipped without a PO. The measure was converted to 
a grade by subtracting it from 1 and multiplying the 
result by 4.
4.	 Percent of accruals less than 30 days old 
This measure was a rough estimate of accrual aging. 
A perfect score of 100% (or 1 in decimal points) 
would mean that all of the accruals on the books 
were less than 30 days old. The measure was con-
verted to a grade by multiplying the decimal score 
by 4 (i.e. 75% or 0.75 would yield a score of 3).
The four grades were weighted equally to produce an 
overall average. The scores for each BU were published 
in an email message that was distributed to all BU direc-
tors, vice presidents, and senior vice presidents.
Detention
The managers of BUs with a grade of C and below (less 
than or equal to a 2.0 grade) were called to a “deten-
tion” meeting with Tyler Pizer, GSI’s vice president of 
finance. Kevin and David also attended these meetings. 
During the detention meetings, the participants went 
through each accrual in detail to determine what was 
causing a delay. If the delay was caused by client behav-
ior, the problem was noted and communicated to the 
sales department. If it was caused by managers who 
were “too busy to bill,” David would seek a commitment 
from the BU director to bill during the current period. 
Sometimes meeting participants uncovered “phantom” 
accruals, such as a project that had already been billed 
or a non-billable project with no accruable value.
Despite the punitive nomenclature, detention meet-
ings were intended to be productive. Sometimes 
grades were adjusted if it was determined that the 
poor grades were either caused by incomplete infor-
mation or were not the fault of the BU employees. 
David explained,
The purpose of the detention meetings is to under-
stand and correct the issues in the business unit. 
The Scorecard is a dialogue opener. In fact, often 
after discussing a particular BU’s performance dur-
ing detention, we realized that we needed to make a 
grade change. Sometimes they didn’t deserve the D 
because we were missing the right information. The 
detention discussions are part of the measurement 
system analysis.
For example, in June, the BU for Customer 7 received 
a D grade, mostly because of its very low score on 
Measure #4 (percent of accruals less than 30 days old). 
But the BU director, Quinton Ruiz, explained that 
though there was a low percentage of accruals less than 
30 days old, 100% of accruals were less than 60 days 
old. “We fell a little bit behind because of the busy sea-
son, but it hasn’t spun too far out of control.” The BU’s 
grade was adjusted upward by removing the offending 
items from the calculation.

246
Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
Managers of the Creative International Menu BU 
complained that it was not possible for them to improve 
their grade on Measure #4. The BU built menus several 
months in advance of a project completing, but most 
customers insisted on receiving the bill for menu 
charges together with the final project. David agreed to 
factor the menu charges out of Measure #4 in the 
future.
The Localization BU had similar issues. They could 
not bill until an entire project with dozens of languages 
and elements was complete, but they recognized accru-
als language by language, piece by piece. Tyler and 
David ultimately decided that due to the nature of their 
work, the Localization BU could not be expected to 
earn a grade above 2.0; it was acceptable for them to 
have significant unbilled accruals.
Sometimes the detention process uncovered simple 
clerical errors. One business unit called into detention 
had actually turned in a box of invoices that was mis-
placed by the billing department, so their grade was 
also adjusted upward.
P-CARs
David had one other motivational tool at his disposal; 
he could issue P-CARs (Process Corrective Action 
Reports) to managers who made billing errors. P-CARs 
were used to identify software glitches and broken pro-
cedures. The P-CARs described where a process went 
wrong, who the responsible parties were, and what cor-
rective actions should be prescribed. Unlike CARs, 
which were administered by the human resources 
department, P-CARs were not noted in an employee’s 
personnel file. The focus of a P-CAR was on the process, 
rather than the person. Still, no one who was issued a 
P-CAR was pleased about it.
At the time of the case, David was issuing an average 
of a few P-CARs per month. He expected that number 
to decline over time as the broken elements in the pro-
cesses were repaired. Eventually, he expected most of 
the errors to come from human mistakes more than 
from software or process design flaws.
Early results
David was generally pleased with the early results of 
his billing process improvements and, in particular, the 
BU managers’ responses to the scorecard. He said:
Their first reactions might be defensive, but they 
really do want to understand. They are curious. 
They want their metrics to go up, and they are intel-
ligent enough to realize that they need to under-
stand the metrics to improve them.
David expected that the scorecard grades would even-
tually be used as a “bonus modifier.” That is, the grades 
would be considered by managers in making their judg-
ments about performance. In normal economic condi-
tions, PMs earned an average annual bonus of 20% of 
salary. However, because the recession of 2008–2009 had 
adversely affected GSI’s performance, nobody within the 
company had earned any bonuses in the last two years.
In the three months since David had implemented 
the scorecard and related processes, deferred revenue 
accruals had dropped by half. Billing error rates had 
dropped to 0.3%, much lower than the 15% error rates 
of a year earlier. David expected that billing grades for 
the following month would be improved, partly because 
the busy season was over, but mostly because the GSI’s 
CEO had warned BU directors that there would be “dire 
consequences” if their grades did not increase.
David knew that his mission was far from being com-
plete. The scorecard was still new, and he was open to 
suggestions for refinements. He still wondered if the 
scorecard was built on the best measures, and if it made 
sense to weight them all evenly. He was particularly con-
cerned about Measure #1 because it was distorted by sea-
sonal sales spikes. For example, the BU for Customer #5 
had managed to increase its grade to a B− in August, but 
David knew the improvement was mostly due to declin-
ing sales and lagging invoices, not improved billing prac-
tices. More generally, David wondered if he would be 
able to meet his ambitious quantitative project goals 
without changing customer behaviors. He also wondered 
if even achievement of those goals would be sufficient in 
the long run, as the true objective was perfection.

247
Exhibit 1  Game Shop, Inc.: Organizational chart

248
Exhibit 2  Accrual fault tree

249
Exhibit 2  (continued)

250
Exhibit 3  The Billings Scorecard (June)
Business unit
June 
invoiced
June 
sales
% of 
sales 
invoiced
GPA 1
Weeks 
of sales 
accrued
Customer 
approval 
delay
Adjusted 
weeks of 
sales 
accrued
GPA 2
% shipped 
w/o PO
GPA 3
% accruals < 
30 days Old
GPA 4
Overall 
GPA
Grade
Customer 1
803.84
2,668.47
0.30
1.20
4.5
3.0
1.5
3.51
38%
2.48
54.7%
2.19
2.34
C+
Customer 2
345.88
762.40
0.45
1.81
9.0
3.0
6.0
0.00
9%
3.65
46.7%
1.87
1.83
C−
Customer 3
1,683.97
1,954.20
0.86
3.45
0.6
0.0
0.6
4.00
0%
4.00
100.0%
4.00
3.86
A
Customer 4
93.28
370.44
0.25
1.01
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.00
41%
2.37
100.0%
4.00
2.84
B−
Creative 
International Menu
74.82
134.81
0.55
2.22
5.1
5.0
0.1
4.00
 
n/a
73.8%
2.95
3.06
B
Creative Content 
Production
295.65
282.19
1.05
4.00
2.9
1.0
1.9
3.11
 
n/a
61.4%
2.45
3.19
B+
Creative Design
218.48
144.74
1.51
4.00
5.0
3.0
2.0
3.04
 
n/a
52.9%
2.12
3.05
B
Network Services
197.25
499.41
0.39
1.58
6.6
0.3
6.3
0.00
 
n/a
59.5%
2.38
1.32
D+
Digital Reference 
Services
152.13
152.13
1.00
4.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
n/a
 
n/a
100.0%
n/a
4.00
A+
Audio Services
137.33
137.33
1.00
4.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
n/a
 
n/a
100.0%
n/a
4.00
A+
International 
Dubbing
310.46
310.46
1.00
4.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
n/a
 
n/a
100.0%
n/a
4.00
A+
Customer 5
261.17
275.32
0.95
3.79
11.2
0.3
10.9
0.00
 
n/a
33.0%
1.32
1.70
C−
Customer 6
94.96
94.96
1.00
4.00
0.0
0.3
− 0.3
4.00
 
n/a
100.0%
4.00
4.00
A+
Customer 7
504.78
763.12
0.66
2.65
17.0
3.0
14.0
0.00
39%
2.42
13.9%
0.56
1.41
D+
Design, Eng. & Mfg 1
2,098.85
1,515.81
1.38
4.00
0.0
2.0
− 2.0
4.00
 
n/a
100.0%
4.00
4.00
A+
Design, Eng. & Mfg 2
−
418.93
−
0.00
2.7
2.0
0.7
4.00
 
n/a
100.0%
4.00
2.67
B−
Localization
918.26
1,827.66
0.50
2.01
7.6
4.0
3.6
1.39
 
n/a
34.0%
1.36
1.59
C−

251
Exhibit 4  Scorecard early trends (June–August)
 
GPA 1–% of sales 
invoiced
GPA 2–adjusted 
weeks of sales accrued
GPA 3–% shipped 
with PO
GPA 4–% accruals 
< 30 days old
Overall grade
Business unit
JUN
JUL
AUG
JUN
JUL
AUG
JUN
JUL
AUG
JUN
JUL
AUG
JUN
JUL
AUG
Customer l
1.20
3.19
2.12
3.51
4.00
1.60
2.48
3.39
3.54
2.19
2.72
2.20
C+
B+
C+
Customer 2
1.81
2.42
3.45
0.00
0.00
0.10
3.65
3.65
3.70
1.87
2.94
2.31
C−
C+
C+
Customer 3
3.45
4.00
3.99
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
A
A+
A+
Customer 4
1.01
2.59
3.94
4.00
3.52
3.60
2.37
4.00
0.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
B−
A−
B
Creative International Menu
2.22
4.00
3.32
4.00
3.97
3.05
n/a
n/a
n/a
2.95
2.75
3.11
B
A−
B+
Creative Content Production
4.00
4.00
2.53
3.11
4.00
2.92
n/a
n/a
n/a
2.45
1.34
1.98
B+
B+
B−
Creative Design
4.00
4.00
4.00
3.04
2.82
3.40
n/a
n/a
n/a
2.12
2.24
1.94
B
B
B
Network Services
1.58
4.00
3.31
0.00
0.76
0.00
n/a
n/a
n/a
2.38
2.72
0.87
D+
B−
D+
Digital Reference Services
4.00
4.00
4.00
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
A+
A+
A+
Audio Services
4.00
4.00
4.00
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
A+
A+
A+
International Dubbing
4.00
3.95
3.47
n/a
n/a
4.00
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
A+
A
A
Customer 5
3.79
3.46
4.00
0.00
0.00
2.44
n/a
n/a
n/a
1.32
1.88
1.97
C−
C−
B−
Customer 6
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
n/a
n/a
n/a
4.00
4.00
4.00
A+
A+
A+
Customer 7
2.65
4.00
4.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2.42
3.44
3.34
0.56
1.47
0.51
D+
C+
C
Design, Eng. & Mfg l
4.00
4.00
1.48
4.00
4.00
2.84
n/a
n/a
n/a
4.00
3.58
3.91
A+
A
B−
Design, Eng. & Mfg 2
0.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
4.00
n/a
n/a
n/a
4.00
4.00
4.00
B−
A+
A+
Localization
2.01
3.86
2.82
1.39
0.18
0.00
n/a
n/a
n/a
1.36
1.60
1.02
C−
C
D+
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant and research assistant Michelle Spaulding.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

252
Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
 On the afternoon of Saturday, January 9, 2010, Dr. Luis 
Samaniego, president of Family Care Specialists Medi-
cal Group, Inc. (FCS), pondered his proposal to revise 
the FCS physician compensation system. On the fol-
lowing Monday, the six physicians who comprised the 
Board of FCS would meet to discuss the Group’s accom-
plishments for 2009 and to consider, among other 
issues, improvements to the compensation system. 
 The Group’s pay scheme had been a continuing topic 
of discussion for years. FCS had used two very diff erent 
incentive plans over the past 10 years and management 
had spent a year discussing possible revisions, but Dr. 
Samaniego still had concerns. While he recognized 
that no scheme could be perfect and that whatever 
choices the Board made would involve tradeoff s, Dr. 
Samaniego knew that the scheme chosen would have 
real impacts on the physicians, the Group, and, most 
importantly, their patients. 
 Family medicine 
 Family physicians together with internists comprised 
the overwhelming majority of primary care physicians 
in the United States. Primary care physicians normally 
served as the fi rst point of contact for a patient with an 
undiagnosed, non-emergent health concern. In addi-
tion to acting as the fi rst point of contact, primary care 
physicians provided ongoing care and facilitated coor-
dination of care for patients who required the services 
of other medical specialists. In short, they are the peo-
ple that most of us think of when we think of our trusted 
family doctor. 
 Although sometimes referred to as general practice, 
family medicine is a recognized medical specialty. In 
the United States, upon receiving medical degrees, 
newly graduated doctors had to complete a medical 
residency program before they could be awarded 
licenses by their state board. Medical schools provided 
would-be physicians with general medical knowledge 
and some clinical skills. The residency programs pro-
vided more specialized knowledge and clinical skills 
through years of intensive work treating patients under 
the close supervision of an attending physician. Across 
all specialties including family medicine, residency 
programs were associated with, and primarily con-
ducted in, hospitals. 
 In March 2009, the Health Resources and Service 
Administration (HRSA) of the US Department of 
Health and Human Services designated 6,080 Health 
Professional Shortage Areas (HPSAs) with an aggre-
gate population of 65 million. The HRSA calculated 
that an additional 16,585 practitioners would be 
required to adequately service this underserved popu-
lation. The American Academy of Family Physicians 
calculated that to meet the anticipated needs for pri-
mary care physicians over the next decade, the United 
States would need to train 4,449 each year with the 
goal of increasing the number of family physicians by 
39% over the next 10–15 years. However, in 2007, the 
number of medical students choosing family care resi-
dency programs actually declined by 8% from the pre-
vious year to just over 1,100. 
 The consensus explanation for the growing short-
age was money. Due to the prevailing system of med-
ical reimbursements in the United States, which 
primarily paid providers for performance of specific 
procedures, the average compensation for family 
physicians was the lowest of any specialty. A study 
published in the September 9, 2008, issue of the 
 Journal of the American Medical Association docu-
mented a high correlation between average annual 
compensation and the number of filled residency 
positions by specialty. At the low end with average 
compensation and percentage of filled residency 
positions was family medicine, with $185,740 and 
42%. These compared unfavorably to radiology 
($414,875) and orthopedic surgery ($436,481), with 
the percentage of filled residency positions of 89% 
and 94%, respectively. These findings were hardly 
surprising given current studies estimating that the 
average graduating medical student carried 
$140,000 in student loan debt.  
 CASE STUDY 
 Family Care Specialists Medical Group, Inc. 

Family Care Specialists Medical Group, Inc.
253
Wealth and healthcare in Los Angeles
In 2009, Los Angeles County, California claimed 
nearly 10.4 million residents. In their 2008 annual 
report on America’s millionaires, TNS Financial Ser-
vices reported that Los Angeles County again topped 
the list with 261,081 households with net worth 
exceeding $1 million, excluding the value of their pri-
mary residences. The county boasted 108 licensed 
general acute care hospitals with a total of more than 
27,000 beds. Yet, at the same time, the HRSA database 
listed over 300 of its more than 6,000 Health Profes-
sional Shortage Areas within Los Angeles County. For 
physicians and other healthcare providers, the Los 
Angeles area offered a wide range of communities and 
facilities in which to practice. The choice of where to 
practice and whom to serve significantly affected 
compensation.
Family care specialists
In 1988, Dr. Samaniego together with six other Latino 
family physicians formed FCS with the mission of pro-
viding high-quality primary care to underserved com-
munities in East Los Angeles (see Exhibit 1). The FCS 
physicians’ strategy for fulfilling their mission devel-
oped along two main, complementary lines. First, the 
Group reached out to the community by growing into 
four clinical locations: one each in Montebello and 
Highland Park, as well as two clinics on the grounds of 
White Memorial Medical Center (WMMC) in the Boyle 
Heights neighborhood. The larger of the two Boyle 
Heights clinics provided the physical presence for the 
other line of the FCS physicians’ strategy, which was to 
provide the faculty for a Family Medicine Residency 
program.
Indeed, a number of FCS physicians also served as 
faculty for the Family Medicine Residency program at 
WMMC. Dr. Samaniego served as the program’s direc-
tor. In 2008, the three-year residency program was 
ranked first in California by the Office of Statewide 
Health Planning and Development (OSHPD) for the 
third straight year. FCS physicians supervised the clini-
cal training of 21 new doctors, graduating seven family 
medicine specialists each year with the training to 
meet the needs of underserved communities. Among 
the two dozen physicians currently in the FCS Group, 
five were graduates of the WMMC residency program.
The FCS clinicians–24 physicians, five physician 
assistants, three mental health practitioners, and one 
family nurse–together with the 21 WMMC residents 
served roughly 45,000 patients, including 32,000 HMO 
patients, tallying 80,000 individual patient encounters 
per year.1 FCS clinicians at all four locations, together 
with residents at the WMMC Family Health Clinic, saw 
patients on a pre-scheduled basis between 8:30 a.m. 
and 5:00 or 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. The 
Montebello and Highland Park clinics were also open 
for scheduled appointments each Saturday from 8:30 
or 9:00 a.m. until noon. The Family Health Center was 
open all day, from 8:30 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. on Satur-
days (see Exhibit 2).
Across the four clinics there were just over 200 half-
day Saturday sessions annually that required coverage, 
or roughly eight Saturday sessions per physician per 
year. As a service to the Medical Residency Program, 
FCS attending physicians provided weekend and off-
shift on-call service to the Medical Center. Each on-call 
shift required the services of two doctors. The role of 
first on-call attending was more demanding, requiring 
the attending to field all calls from the residents. The 
second on-call attending was required only for rounds. 
Newly hired physicians in their first year with the 
Group were required to carry a greater number of on-
call shifts, as they were deemed necessary for these 
new physicians to “learn the ropes.” Although all FCS 
physicians carried some on-call shifts, the requirement 
to do so decreased with seniority.
Even though its clinicians participated in more 
than 20 private insurance networks, nearly 40% of 
FCS patients were covered by Medicare and roughly 
30% by MediCal, the designation for the State of 
California Medicaid program (see Exhibit 3). Reim-
bursement rates from these public programs were 
generally lower than those from private payers, but 
these were the constituents that FCS had been 
formed to serve. For their contribution to the resi-
dency program, FCS received a fixed contribution of 
$1.6 million each year from WMMC. While teaching 
was a major part of the FCS mission, on an hourly 
basis it generated less revenue for the Group than 
clinical care. First-year residents could see on aver-
age just four patients per day. Second-year residents 
could see seven to eight, and third-year residents 
eight to nine. An FCS attending physician was 
required to act as a preceptor, supervising the patient 
care provided by the residents.
1	 Some of the company-specific data presented in this case have been 
disguised for confidentiality reasons.

254
Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
In addition to work in FCS clinics and teaching at 
WMMC, the terms of FCS employment agreements 
with its physicians required each physician to main-
tain privileges at a number of other area hospitals. To 
do so, each physician was required by the hospitals to 
attend and participate in medical staff meetings and 
other activities in these facilities, in addition to ren-
dering patient care. Within FCS clinics, the physicians 
were required to attend medical staff meetings and 
site quality improvement (QI) program meetings. 
Beyond the walls of the clinics and hospitals, FCS phy-
sicians were expected by the Group to volunteer in the 
community for about one week each year. All physi-
cians in California were required by the Medical Board 
of California to complete 50 hours of continuing medi-
cal education biannually in order to maintain licensing 
and certification.
Thus, FCS physicians’ time was a precious commod-
ity, and there was a limit to the number of hours each 
physician could devote to the clinical care that pro-
duced revenue for the Group. On average, FCS physi-
cians worked five to six 3.5-hour clinical sessions per 
week across an average of 46–47 weeks per year per 
physician. Full-time clinical physicians might see 
patients as many as seven or eight sessions per week, 
while physicians with more educational or managerial 
responsibilities might see patients as few as two or 
three sessions per week. Other full-time clinicians, 
such as the Physician Assistants (PAs), saw patients 
during as many as 10 sessions per week, though PAs 
saw, on average, 10 or fewer patients per session.
Nonetheless, it was not uncommon for physicians to 
work part time outside of their main practice. This 
“moonlighting” was common throughout the industry, 
not just amongst physicians. Primarily due to concerns 
about quality and image control, the FCS Group 
employment contract barred its clinicians from moon-
lighting except with explicit permission from the prac-
tice executive. Dr. Samaniego routinely granted such 
permission, as the Group’s clinicians knew what it took 
to make requests that would not raise concerns. A 
moonlighting physician could earn as much as $500 for 
taking a half-day shift on a holiday, making moonlight-
ing attractive even for very busy physicians.
Not all of the Group’s operating margin could be 
paid out to the physicians and other clinicians. On 
occasion, unfavorable changes in payers’ reimburse-
ment schedules or increases in operating costs forced 
the Group to operate at a deficit while the Group’s man-
agement implemented steps to mitigate the problem. 
During these periods, reserves established during bet-
ter periods maintained the Group’s solvency. Financing 
constraints dictated that the Group build reserves in 
order to fund major capital investments in facilities and 
technology. For example, upgrading its IT infrastruc-
ture and purchasing software systems to implement 
electronic medical record systems could cost a practice 
the size of FCS’s on the order of $1 million. Conse-
quently, the total pool available to fund any clinician 
compensation program was limited.
The evolution of the FCS physician 
compensation scheme
In the early days, FCS clinicians were paid fixed sala-
ries. Those more recently hired and less experienced 
were paid less; the experienced senior clinicians more. 
However, the salary range had always been relatively 
narrow. A physician could reach the upper end of the 
salary scale in five years with the Group. Over time the 
Group’s leadership came to believe that incentives 
would help drive better achievement of the FCS mis-
sion of service and benefit the Group.
Starting in 1994, and for the next six years, FCS 
operated what they called the Quality Improvement 
Incentive Program (QIIP). The stated purpose of the 
QIIP was “to reward behavior that reflects the highest 
standards in Family Medicine, medical education, and 
health care service to [FCS] patients and [the] commu-
nity.” The program assigned possible points (weights) 
to seven categories of quality improvement activities 
(see Exhibit 4). By design, the total points across the 
seven categories for each clinician totaled 100. Based 
on both objective and subjective criteria determined in 
advance for each category, the clinic medical directors 
in collaboration with the Residency Program co-direc-
tors scored each clinician’s degree of achievement in 
each area.
For example, an individual clinician might have 
10 points allocated to the category Provider Meetings. 
Achievement in this category would be judged by the 
objective criterion of attendance at both FCS and site 
provider meetings. Clinicians in attendance were 
required to sign in at such meetings, and the records 
were maintained and provided to the practice execu-
tives. At the same time, increasingly subjective criteria 
would also be considered, such as volunteering for spe-
cial projects, active participation in meetings, and 
assumption of leadership and responsibility for projects 
assigned. Hypothetically, the clinician might have been 

Family Care Specialists Medical Group, Inc.
255
awarded 9 of the 10 possible points for this category. 
The process would be repeated for each category and 
the points summed, yielding a score or percentage 
achievement for that clinician for the period.
Dr. Samaniego and others at FCS believed that small 
rewards were unlikely to motivate clinicians to modify 
their behavior. They believed that a figure of one-fifth 
to one-quarter of compensation was necessary to moti-
vate different behavior. Thus, a fraction of each clini-
cian’s potential total compensation equal to between 
20% and 25% would be multiplied by the total QIIP 
score for the period to determine payout of the at-risk 
portion of that clinician’s compensation.
While Dr. Samaniego was satisfied with the motiva-
tional dimension of the QIIP, with time it became evi-
dent that the program was failing FCS on other 
dimensions. The WMMC Family Medicine Residency 
Program was achieving its stated mission, placing 
nearly half of its graduates into family medical practice 
in East Los Angeles and most others into underserved 
communities outside the immediate area. FCS itself 
was experiencing more difficulty in the competition for 
its associated program’s own graduates. The Group 
also lost senior clinicians to larger and better-funded 
competitors in the local market, especially the national 
leader in managed care, Kaiser Permanente, which 
employed more than 14,000 physicians and covered 
more than 3 million patients in Southern California by 
2008. Dr. Samaniego was himself a product of Kaiser’s 
residency program.
Under competitive pressure to attract and retain 
increasingly scarce family medical specialists, FCS 
scrapped the QIIP in 2001 in favor of a new scheme 
that rewarded physicians willing to take extra initia-
tive and responsibility in return for higher compensa-
tion. Under the new system, FCS would permit its 
clinicians to work extra hours for FCS, placing the 
Group on a more even footing with its local competi-
tors for its clinicians’ time.
Under the new program, physicians seeking to 
increase their compensation could indicate their desire 
for extra sessions prior to the start of each scheduling 
period. Sessions were scheduled by the practice execu-
tive semi-annually, from January through June and 
from July through December. Schedules were prepared 
and posted one month prior to the start of each six-
month period. Physicians who requested an increased 
number of weekend sessions at FCS clinics would be 
paid for these extra sessions at a rate comparable to 
rates for moonlighting at non-FCS facilities. Further, 
the “extra” sessions assigned to these physicians would 
be deducted from the total pool to be shared among all 
physicians. That is, if five physicians requested an aver-
age of four extra weekend sessions for one six-month 
period, this reduced the pool of sessions to be shared by 
20 sessions, bringing the total shared pool to about 80. 
Consequently, the base number of weekend sessions 
required of all physicians would be reduced from about 
four to about three. For their extra effort, the “volun-
teering” five physicians might increase their compensa-
tion by as much as 7–10% for the six-month period. 
Likewise, on-call shifts would be compensated, though 
the rate of compensation for on-call shifts ranged from 
about 85% to less than 50% of that for Saturday clinic 
sessions, depending on factors such as holidays and 
first versus second on-call rolls.
To provide a productivity incentive for all of its phy-
sicians, with the new program FCS established targets 
for the number of patients each physician would serve 
in a typical half-day clinical session. The target number 
was set at 14 patients per session. On a monthly basis, 
the Group’s information systems began generating a 
productivity report showing the number of total patient 
encounters, the number of clinical sessions, and the 
average number of encounters per session for each phy-
sician (see Exhibit 5). Based on the average number of 
patients per session, a monthly bonus was computed 
according to the formula $250, $750, or $1,000 when 
the average was 12, 13, or 14, respectively. The total 
monthly productivity bonus was prorated by the per-
centage of time each individual physician dedicated to 
clinical care each month. So, for example, a physician 
who consistently achieved a productivity average of 13 
encounters/session while devoting half of her time to 
clinical duties would earn a total productivity bonus of 
$4,500 over the course of a year.
Under the new plan, it was possible for an ambitious 
doctor to earn compensation roughly equal to that of 
physicians employed by larger local competitors. How-
ever, base compensation for FCS doctors remained at 
about the 50th percentile for family physicians in com-
parable markets based on recent salary surveys, while 
physicians at the larger local competitors were closer to 
the 90th percentile. The difference was slightly more 
than 20% of total compensation. Dr. Samaniego 
believed that FCS offered other advantages over some 
larger competitors in the form of greater flexibility and 
intrinsic rewards, but the Group’s continuing chal-
lenges with retention left him wondering whether the 
new compensation system was doing all it could. At the 

256
Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
same time, he felt somewhat nostalgic for the QIIP, 
with its greater emphasis on FCS’s mission.
Constraints
The number of patients seen was an imperfect meas-
ure of clinical productivity. Some cases were more 
complex and required more time to deliver high-­
quality care. Some FCS clinicians specialized in treat-
ing certain types of patients who required on average 
more or less time per patient encounter. OB/GYN 
cases, for example, took somewhat less time while ger-
iatric cases required more. Also, the financial effect of 
seeing an additional patient varied widely. Private pay-
ers generally compensated FCS at higher rates than 
Medicare, while MediCal payments were typically 
only a fraction (e.g. 30%) of private rates. FCS was 
paid for managed care (HMO) patients primarily on a 
monthly basis with relatively little or no additional 
payments for specific patient encounters. Billings were 
prepared in batches, as many as six weeks apart. When 
combined with the time payers took to respond to bill-
ings, collections lagged treatments by a matter of 
months. In many cases, collections were received in 
the name of the patient’s primary physician of record, 
even though the patient may have been seen by another 
clinician. In any case, FCS would not provide different 
levels of care to patients with different health plans, 
making any incentive system based on billings or col-
lections questionable, regardless of the practical prob-
lems of implementation.
Moreover, clinicians had more control over the num-
ber of patients seen in each session than over the payer 
mix or average case complexity. Clinicians were given 
discretion over the maximum number of patients to 
schedule for a session as well as whether or not to 
accept patients arriving late for scheduled appoint-
ments and those seeking treatment on short notice. 
Some Saturday clinics were operated on a walk-in 
basis. However, FCS maintained a policy of not signifi-
cantly overbooking despite a no-show rate that often 
averaged as high as 30%.
Direct measurements of the quality of care provided 
by a given clinician were expensive to collect. As part of 
each clinic’s Quality Improvement program, so-called 
chart reviews were conducted on a weekly basis. These 
peer reviews of a very small sample of each clinician’s 
patient encounters were considered to be very power-
ful motivators, though they were not linked to compen-
sation. In the words of Dr. Samaniego, “It’s like a dagger 
through your heart when one of your peers says ‘Hey 
Louie, you forgot to do X here’.”
Various payers measured the quality of care provided 
based on metrics such as the proportion of diabetic 
patients covered by the payer’s plan that received annual 
eye exams or of women in targeted groups receiving 
scheduled mammograms. Bonuses paid to FCS for achiev-
ing targeted levels or improvements on such metrics had 
totaled as much as hundreds of thousands of dollars to as 
little as a few tens of thousands of dollars in some years. 
However, achievement of such targets depended heavily 
on patient compliance as well as on clinical diligence. As 
with collections, the fact that the same patient might be 
seen by multiple clinicians made linkage of performance 
on such metrics to the actions of individual clinicians 
practically impossible. Likewise, achievement on patient 
satisfaction surveys were seen as measures of the clinics 
as a whole more than as measures of individual clinicians.
A better way?
These constraints notwithstanding, Dr. Samaniego 
believed that the FCS compensation scheme had 
become overly focused on clinical productivity. Like a 
number of the other Board members, he felt that the 
original QIIP had been more balanced and better 
aligned with the Group’s mission. However, patient vol-
ume, payer mix, staffing, and productivity drove finan-
cial results and, ultimately, what the Group could 
afford to pay clinicians and staff. Even in the not-for-
profit world of hospitals like WMMC, there was a popu-
lar aphorism that without margin there is no mission, 
and despite the importance of their shared mission, 
FCS had never been a not-for-profit enterprise.
Dr. Samaniego questioned whether the current 
scheme was effective in achieving even its relatively nar-
row purpose. While some clinicians now requested addi-
tional Saturday sessions and even additional on-call 
shifts, only a few achieved bonus levels of average 
patients seen per session on a monthly basis. Further, 
while the new scheme had helped to narrow the gap 
between physician compensation at FCS and the local 
market level, periodic departures of experienced clini-
cians seeking better pay or hours and the perennial com-
petition to recruit new physicians only highlighted the 
fact that serving their target communities would never 
be as lucrative as treating the average patient population 
in the LA area. Dr. Samaniego felt certain that the FCS 
compensation scheme could be improved, but he was 
less certain of how to achieve the right balance.

Family Care Specialists Medical Group, Inc.
257
Exhibit 2  Locations and hours
Boyle Heights
8:30 a.m.–5:00 p.m. Monday–Friday
Highland Park
8:30 a.m.–5:00 p.m. Monday–Friday
 
9:00 a.m.–Noon Saturday
Montebello
8:30 a.m.–6:00 p.m. Monday–Friday
 
8:30 a.m.–Noon Saturday
White Memorial Medical Center 
Family Health Clinic
8:30 a.m.–6:00 p.m. Monday–Saturday
Exhibit 3  Patient mix
Patient mix by payer and type
 
Percentages 
Patients
Managed care
 
 
 
Medicare HMO
17%
 
7,650
MediCal HMO
5%
 
2,250
Private HMO
43%
65%
19,350
Fee-for-service
 
 
 
Medicare/Medi-Medi *
13%
 
5,850
PPO
10%
 
4,500
MediCal
5%
 
2,250
Other
7%
35%
3,150
 
 
100%
45,000
Exhibit 1  Mission statement
Family Care Specialists (FCS) Medical Corporation
Mission Statement
Family Care Specialists Medical Corporation is dedicated to the maintenance, restoration, and improvement of each 
family member’s health. The medical group provides high quality, compassionate and culturally responsive medical 
care, and is dedicated to improving community health and the education of family physicians.

258
Chapter 6 • Designing and Evaluating Management Control Systems
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant and research assistant David P. Huelsbeck.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.
Exhibit 5  Sample productivity report
Clinic B: Monthly summary
 
Providers
Total Patients seen
Number of sessions
Patients/session
1.
Clinician One, MD
45
4
11.25
2.
Clinician Two, MD
250
23
10.87
3.
Clinician Three, MD
255
21
12.14
4.
Clinician Four, MD
349
29
12.03
5.
Clinician Five, MD
210
19
11.05
6.
Clinician Six, MD
331
18
18.39
7.
Clinician Seven, PA-C
321
32
10.03
8.
Clinician Eight, PA-C
315
33
9.55
 
Totals
2,076
179
95.32
Exhibit 4  Quality Improvement Incentive Plan (1994–2001)
Quality Improvement Incentive Plan (QIIP)
“To reward behavior that reflects the highest standards in Family Medicine, medical 
education and health care service to our patients and community.”
Provider Meetings
10 points
Medical Staff Meetings
10 points
Community Service
10 points
Clinic Site Quality Improvement Program
20 points
Patient Satisfaction Survey
15 points
Site Medical Director
35 points*
Medical Education
 
TOTAL
100 points
*Allocated by percentage of physician time spent in clinical vs. education.

 
259
 SECTION III 
 Financial Results Control Systems

This page intentionally left blank

Advantages of fi nancial results control systems
261
 CHAPTER 7 
 Financial Responsibility Centers 
 The vast majority of organizations control the behaviors of many of their employees, particu-
larly their managers, through  fi nancial results control systems . In fi nancial results control sys-
tems, results are defi ned in monetary terms, most commonly in terms of accounting measures 
such as revenues, costs, profi ts, or returns (e.g. return on equity). At higher organization levels, 
fi nancial results control systems often are the most pervasive and dominant form of control. 
 Financial results control systems have three core elements: (1)  fi nancial responsibility cent-
ers , which defi ne the apportioning of accountability for fi nancial results within the organiza-
tion; (2)  planning and budgeting systems , which are used for a number of control-related 
purposes including the setting of performance targets for evaluating performance; and 
(3)  incentive plans or contracts , which defi ne the links between results and various rewards. 
 This chapter describes the advantages of fi nancial results control systems and then discusses 
in depth one important element of these systems: fi nancial responsibility centers. It also 
describes one common problem faced by organizations using multiple fi nancial responsibility 
centers: the transfer pricing problem. We discuss the other two fi nancial results control system 
elements (planning and budgeting systems and incentive systems) in  Chapters  8 and  9 , 
respectively. 
 Advantages of fi nancial results control systems 
 Several good reasons explain the ubiquity of fi nancial results control systems in organizations. 
First, fi nancial objectives are paramount in for-profi t fi rms. Profi ts and cash fl ows provide 
returns to investors and are among the primary measures outsiders use to evaluate for-profi t 
fi rm performance. Thus, it is natural that managers of for-profi t fi rms monitor their success in 
fi nancial terms and use the fi nancial measures to direct their employees’ actions toward impor-
tant organizational ends. Managers of non-profi t organizations, too, must monitor fi nances 
closely because cash fl ows usually create signifi cant constraints for their organizations. 
 Second, fi nancial measures provide a  summary measure of performance by aggregating the 
eff ects of a broad range of operating initiatives across a possibly broad range of markets, 
products/services, or activities into a single (or a few) measure(s). In so doing, they enhance the 
comparability of the eff ects of the initiatives and reduce the possibility of confl icting signals 
about their importance. The fi nancial measures remind employees that the various operating 
initiatives they take on, such as initiatives to improve response times, defect rates, delivery reli-
ability, or customer satisfaction ratings, benefi t the organization only if they result in improved 

262
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
financial performance. Because financial measures are a comprehensive summary measure of 
performance, they provide a relatively easy, standardized, and inexpensive way for the organi-
zation to evaluate the results of a variety of operational initiatives without necessarily needing 
to obtain and evaluate the intricate detail of each of the initiatives.
The ubiquity and usability of financial measures is particularly valuable for the management 
of complex, diversified firms (as we also discussed, and listed several examples, in Chapter 2). 
Management in these organizations can usually set corporate goals in financial terms, decom-
pose the corporate goals into multiple financial responsibility centers, and then monitor only 
one (or just a few) results measures – such as, accounting profits or returns and their compo-
nents (revenues, costs, assets, and liabilities) – which provide a good summary of the effects of 
most of the actions or decisions needing to be controlled. The managers then do not need to 
track either the actions that are affecting financial performance (e.g. how time was spent, how 
specific expenditures were made) or the specific line items that comprise the summary meas-
ures of performance (e.g. revenues by product line, cost line items) until problems (such as fail-
ures to achieve performance targets) appear in the summary measures. The process of getting 
involved only when problems appear is also known as management-by-exception. In this way, 
financial results controls reduce the amount of information that top managers need to process 
and evaluate. At the same time, financial results controls provide a relatively unobtrusive form 
of management control; that is, they provide control while allowing those being controlled con-
siderable autonomy.
Third, most financial measures are relatively precise and objective. They generally provide 
significant measurement advantages over soft qualitative or subjective information and over 
many other quantifiable alternatives (e.g. quality or customer satisfaction measures). Cash flow –  
the primitive financial measure – is relatively easy to observe and measure. Accounting rules, 
on which most financial measures are built, limit the managers’ measurement discretion, 
improve measurement objectivity, and facilitate the verification of the resulting measures.
Finally, the cost of implementing financial results controls is often small relative to that of 
other forms of management control. This is because the core financial results control measure-
ment elements are largely in place. Organizations already routinely prepare and transmit elab-
orate sets of accounting information to government agencies, creditors, shareholders, and other 
constituencies on either a mandated or voluntary basis. This information can be readily and 
inexpensively adapted for control uses. In Chapter 10, we provide a further in-depth analysis of 
the features, as well as the limitations, of financial measures of performance.
Types of financial responsibility centers
Financial responsibility centers are a core element of a financial results control system. The 
term responsibility center management denotes the apportioning of responsibility (or account-
ability) for a particular set of outputs and/or inputs to an employee (usually a manager) in 
charge of an organizational entity (the responsibility center). Responsibilities can be expressed 
in terms of quantities of inputs consumed, physical units of output generated, particular char-
acteristics of the production or service process (e.g. defects, schedule attainment, customer 
satisfaction), or financial indicators of performance in these areas.
Financial responsibility centers are responsibility centers in which the assigned responsibili-
ties are defined at least partially in financial terms. There are four basic types of financial 
responsibility centers: investment centers, profit centers, revenue centers, and cost centers. 
Table 7.1 shows that these centers are distinguishable by the financial statement line items for 
which the managers are held accountable in each type of center.

Types of financial responsibility centers
263
Revenue centers
Revenue centers are responsibility centers whose managers are held accountable for generating 
revenues, which is a financial measure of output. Common examples are sales managers and, in 
non-profit organizations, fundraising managers.
Revenues, rather than profits, provide a simple and effective way to encourage sales manag-
ers to attract and retain customers. However, it will encourage them to make profitable sales if, 
and only if, it can be ascertained that all sales are approximately equally profitable. But if all 
revenues are not equally “endowed,” controlling with a revenue center structure can encourage 
employees to make “easy” sales rather than those that are most profitable.
Most revenue center managers are also held accountable for some expenses. For example, 
many sales managers are accountable for their salespeople’s salaries and commissions and per-
haps some travel, advertising, and promotional expenses. These managers could be said to 
manage a net revenue center. But while these managers are held accountable for both revenues 
and some costs, they should not be considered profit center managers because there is no profit 
calculation relating outputs to inputs; that is, these revenue centers are not charged for the cost 
of the goods or services they sell.
Cost centers
Cost (or expense) centers are responsibility centers whose managers are held accountable for 
some elements of cost. Costs are a financial measure of the inputs to, or resources consumed by, 
the responsibility center.1 In standard cost centers (sometimes called engineered cost centers), 
such as manufacturing departments, the causal relationship between inputs and outputs is 
direct, and both inputs and outputs are easy to quantify. Thus, control can be exercised by com-
paring a standard cost (the cost of the inputs that should have been consumed in producing the 
output) with the costs that were actually incurred. Students of cost or management accounting 
will recall that these comparisons are typically done by way of so-called variance analysis.
Table 7.1  Typical examples of financial responsibility centers
Selected financial statement 
line items
Revenue 
center
Cost center
Profit center
Investment 
center
Income statement
Revenue
x
x
x
Cost of goods sold
x
x
x
Gross margin
x
x
Advertising and promotion
x
x
x
Research and development
x
x
x
Profit before tax
x
x
Income tax
x
x
Profit after tax
x
x
Balance sheet
Accounts receivable
x
Inventory
x
Fixed assets
x
Accounts payable
x
Debt
x
Note: x signifies that the responsibility center manager is (or could be) held accountable for some elements included in that 
financial statement line item.
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 303.

264
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
In discretionary cost centers (sometimes called managed cost centers), such as research and 
development departments and administrative departments (e.g. personnel, purchasing, 
accounting, estates), the outputs produced are difficult to value in monetary terms. In addition, 
the relationship between inputs and outputs is not well known. Thus, evaluations of discretion-
ary cost center managers’ performances often have a large subjective component to them. Con-
trol is usually exercised by ensuring that the discretionary cost center adheres to a budgeted 
level of expenditures while successfully accomplishing the tasks assigned to it.
That said, firms often turn some of their “service departments” such as, say, human resources, 
into profit centers by allowing them to charge the other divisions for the services they provide 
(e.g. for hiring employees or running training programs).2 This works well, however, only when 
the non-service departments (that is, the customers of the service departments) have the free-
dom to contract these services from external providers; that is, when they are not captive to the 
internal service provider. When this is the case, the service centers have an incentive to provide 
good service at competitive prices, where this discipline is imputed merely from setting them up 
as profit centers and thus making them instantly focused on being competitively responsive to 
the demand for their services (which generates their revenues) in an efficient (cost effective) 
way. As we will see next, profit responsibility makes managers focused on both revenues and 
costs, and not on each singularly as is the case in revenue and cost centers, respectively.
A good example of this is Cisco, the large technology firm, which in 2014 embarked on the 
concept of “revenue marketing” aimed at making marketing a revenue center rather than a cost 
center. Karen Walker, senior vice president of marketing at Cisco, said that “the goal was that 
making Cisco’s marketing division a profit center would drive $10 billion in sales-qualified leads 
and contribute 10 percent to company’s global sales revenues.” Simply put, the idea was that 
marketing would see revenues allocated from generating new accounts, but also the cost of 
generating them, where accounts already mapped to Cisco account managers would not count 
as net-new business.3
Another example can be found in some banks. The Royal Bank of Scotland runs its turna-
round division, an entity focused on businesses in default that it has lent to, as an “internal 
profit center” called the Global Restructuring Group (GRG), with its own profit and loss account 
based on the incremental income that it generates for the bank less its operating costs. Some 
have expressed concern about this as “there is clearly a risk that the [profit-driven] interests of 
the bank will take precedence over those of customers in financial difficulty, particularly in 
times of limited liquidity and capital constraints,” Simon Hart, a banking litigation partner at 
law firm RPC, said. The assertion is that, “on occasion, although purporting to be acting in the 
interests of a turnaround, GRG may in fact be acting to retrieve the maximum value for the 
bank by initiating a recovery or resolution process and thereby actually hastening the failure of 
businesses.”4
Profit centers
Profit centers are responsibility centers whose managers are held accountable for some meas-
ure of profits, which is the difference between the revenues generated and the costs of generat-
ing those revenues. Business terminology often is not precise, and many firms refer to their 
investment centers as profit centers. But there is a conceptual distinction between profit and 
investment centers (which we discuss below): profit center managers are held accountable for 
profits but not for the investments made to generate them.
Profit and investment centers are an important control element of the vast majority of 
firms above minimal size. Profit centers, however, come in many different forms, some of 
which are considerably more limited in scope of operations than others. In deciding whether 
or not a responsibility center manager truly has profit center responsibility, the critical 

Types of financial responsibility centers
265
question to ask is whether the manager has significant influence over both revenues and costs. 
Take Bonnaroo, a 100-band jamboree music and arts festival on a farm outside of Nashville, 
which is run as 16 on-site profit centers, including concessions, merchandise, and even paid 
showers. The managers of each of the on-site profit centers are responsible not only for gross 
revenues, but also for the costs they incur to generate the revenues. Maybe due to linking 
revenues and costs so directly, and assigning responsibility at the profit level, Bonnaroo has 
been one of the most financially successful music festivals in North America during the last 
decade.5
However, there are variations of full-fledged profit responsibility that organizations can 
tweak with. One such limited form of profit center is created when sales-focused entities are 
made into profit centers by charging the entity managers the standard cost of the products sold, 
thus making them accountable for gross margin. Even this limited assignment of costs provides 
the manager with useful information. Decisions, such as about sales and marketing direction 
and intensity, will be made based on the incremental contribution to the firm (i.e., gross mar-
gins) rather than just gross revenues.
Another limited form of profit center is created where cost-focused entities are assigned 
revenues based on a simple function of costs. A typical example exists where manufacturing 
and administrative departments supply unique products or services, for which sometimes 
external market prices cannot be determined, to internal customers only. Revenues for 
these entities might be calculated as cost plus a markup. Are these cost-focused entities 
profit centers? As we have discussed above, it depends on the extent to which the buying 
entities are captive, which they may well be due to the lack of an outside market alternative 
for these services. But when the assigned prices are reasonably, although imperfectly, set or 
benchmarked on a value-for-money basis, the service departments will at least be more 
motivated to produce quality intermediate products, parts, or services; to provide superior 
delivery schedules; and to provide friendly, hassle-free customer service to generate the 
allocated or assigned revenues lest their “internal customers” start complaining about the 
poor service or make noises to search for alternative suppliers. Thus, even though the reve-
nues are artificially imputed in these cost-focused profit centers, the main idea is to transmit 
the competitive pressures faced by a firm in the marketplace to its internal service groups. 
Internal profit centers that do not directly interface with the market and have no control 
over revenues in a competitive sense are also sometimes called micro profit centers.6 If the 
entities do not have significant control over the revenues assigned, however, they are merely 
pseudo profit centers. Assigning revenues to these entities to allow a profit figure to be shown 
is merely a way to charge the buying entities a cost-based approximation of a market price so 
that their profits are not overstated and can be compared more easily with entities that 
source externally.
In deciding whether an entity is a profit center, it is not important to consider either whether 
the entity’s goal is to maximize profits or whether any revenues are generated from outside the 
firm, however. The financial goal of profit centers, such as those in not-for-profit organizations, 
can be merely to break even. For example, hospitals can adopt a “profit center” structure to 
relate the costs of patient care in various clinical groups directly to revenues received either 
from the patient, through insurance payments, from government subsidies, or via other sources 
(e.g. grants). The primary goal of the “profit centers” in this case is not to maximize profit; 
instead it is to assess and manage the costs of medical care within the constraints applied by the 
funds available. Because the managers of these entities allocate resources (costs) in relation to 
the funds available (revenues), and thus essentially make cost-revenue tradeoffs, they should be 
considered “profit center” managers, even though that term is rarely used in the not-for-profit 
sector. Similarly, it is not necessary that a profit center generates revenues from outside the 
organization. Many profit centers derive most, or even all, of their revenues by selling their 

266
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
products or services to other entities within the same organization. These sales are made at 
transfer prices, which we discuss in detail later in this chapter.
Investment centers
Investment centers are responsibility centers whose managers are held accountable for both 
some income statement and some balance sheet line items; that is, for both the accounting 
returns (profits) and the investments made to generate those returns. A corporation is an invest-
ment center, so top-level corporate managers, such as the chief executive, often are investment 
center managers. So are the managers of many subsidiaries, operating groups, and divisions in 
large, decentralized organizations.
Accounting returns can be defined in many ways, but they typically involve a ratio of the prof-
its earned to the investment capital used. The varying definitions cause many different labels to 
be put on the investment centers’ bottom line, such as return on investment (ROI), return on 
equity (ROE), return on capital employed (ROCE), return on net assets (RONA), return on total 
capital (ROTC), risk adjusted return on capital (RAROC), and many other variations.7
Variations
Although the conceptual delineation of the four categories of financial responsibility centers is 
clear, there can be considerable variation within each financial responsibility type. For exam-
ple, Table 7.2 shows four quite different responsibility centers, each of which is a profit center 
even though the breadth of responsibility, as reflected in the number of income statement line 
items for which the managers are held accountable, varies considerably. Gross margin center 
managers may be salespeople who sell products of varying margins and who are charged with 
the standard cost of the goods they sell. The “profit” measure gives them an incentive to sell 
higher-margin products rather than merely generating additional, possibly unprofitable, reve-
nues. The incomplete profit center managers may be managers of product divisions but without 
authority for all of the functions that affect the success of their products or product lines, such 
as research and development or advertising. Complete profit center managers may be business 
unit managers who are accountable for all aspects of the worldwide performance of their busi-
ness segment. Similar variations are also common among the other responsibility center types, 
as the managers are held accountable for more or fewer financial statement line items.
Table 7.2  Four types of “profit” center
Selected financial statement 
line items
Gross margin 
center
Incomplete 
profit center
Before-tax 
profit center
Complete 
profit center
Income statement
Revenue
x
x
x
x
Cost of goods sold
x
x
x
x
Gross margin
x
x
x
x
Advertising and promotion
x
x
x
Research and development
x
x
Profit before tax
x
x
Income tax
x
Profit after tax
x
Note: x signifies that the responsibility center manager is held accountable for that financial statement line item.
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), 
p. 306.

Choice of financial responsibility centers
267
Choice of financial responsibility centers
The four financial responsibility center types can thus be contrasted in a hierarchy reflecting 
the breath of financial responsibility, or the number of financial statement line items for which 
the manager is held accountable, as shown in Table 7.1. Revenue and cost center managers are 
held accountable for only one, or sometimes a few, income statement line items. Profit center 
managers are held accountable for some revenue and some expense line items. Investment 
center managers are held accountable for a measure of profit that is related directly to the 
resources consumed by their entity as reflected by line items on the balance sheet.
One important point to keep in mind is that the lines between the financial responsibility 
center types are not always easy to discern, so responsibility center labels are not always 
informative. In actual practice, financial responsibility centers can be arrayed on an almost 
seamless continuum from cost or revenue centers to investment centers. For example, consider 
the case of manufacturing managers who are held accountable for meeting customer specifica-
tions, production quality standards, and customer delivery schedules, in addition to costs. In 
combination, these non-cost factors may largely determine the company’s success in generating 
revenues, and these managers clearly have to make tradeoffs between costs and factors that 
affect revenues. But, technically, these managers are cost center managers.
Much more important than the labeling of financial responsibility centers are the decisions 
that have to be made in designing financial responsibility structures. The important question to 
answer is: Which managers should be held accountable for which specific financial statement 
line items? These choices are obviously important because they affect behavior. Managers pay 
attention to the measures for which they are held accountable.8 Thus, from a behavioral angle, 
the answer to the question is relatively straightforward: Hold managers accountable for the line 
items you want them to pay attention to.
To a large extent, firms’ financial responsibility center structures are coincident with the 
managers’ areas of authority. Areas of authority are defined by organization structures and 
policies that define managers’ decision rights. In a typical functional organization (Figure 7.1), 
none of the managers has significant decision-making authority over both the generation of 
revenues and incurrence of costs, so revenues and costs (including the costs of investments) are 
brought together in a return measure only at the corporate level. The manufacturing, engineer-
ing, and administrative functions are typically cost centers, and the sales function is a revenue 
center. In a typical divisionalized organization (Figure 7.2), division managers are given 
authorities to make decisions in all, or at least many, of the functions that affect the success of 
Figure 7.1  Typical financial responsibility centers in a functional organization
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 308.

268
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
their division. Consistent with this broad authority, each division is a profit center (or invest-
ment center) comprised of multiple cost and revenue centers.
Decisions about an organization’s structure do not necessarily precede decisions about the 
type of responsibility centers that should be used; the responsibility structure decision can 
come first. For example, the desire to have managers make tradeoffs between revenues and 
costs may lead to the choice of a divisionalized organization structure. As such, there should be 
a close relationship between decisions about organizational structure and responsibility cent-
ers, as that is where decision authority and results accountability meet.
The desire to have managers pay attention to a particular line item does not necessarily 
mean that the managers need to have direct and complete control over the item, although it 
should mean that the managers have some influence over the line item. Some managers are pur-
posely held accountable for line items over which they have no direct control, such as corporate 
administrative expenses, to empower them to influence the behaviors of the managers with 
direct control. We discuss this further in Chapter 12.
Specific strategic concerns sometimes also affect the choice of responsibility center struc-
ture. A strategy focused on providing superior customer service may dictate that the managers 
of responsibility centers with direct customer interfaces (such as customer support) should be 
held accountable for revenue or profit because having these managers focus just on costs could 
cause behaviors that conflict with the company’s strategy (such as behaviors that reduce costs 
by skimping on customer service). Alternatively, these managers could be held accountable for 
costs plus a measure of customer satisfaction.
Some strategies might even suggest that managers not be held accountable for line items over 
which they clearly have influence. It may be desirable not to charge entity managers for the costs 
Figure 7.2  Typical financial responsibility centers in a divisionalized organization
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 309.

The transfer pricing problem
269
of certain activities (such as research and development costs or information technology costs) in 
order to stimulate greater use, or at least not to discourage use, of these services at the detriment 
of, say, business development or innovation. If the entity’s strategy depends on technological 
leadership, for example, corporate managers might not want the entity managers to make rigid 
cost-benefit tradeoffs on every expenditure in this critically important strategic area.
Finally, as business models change, so should responsibility center structures. For example, 
innovative corporations today are starting to look at energy management in an era of sustaina-
bility in a different way, focusing on how energy management can help the business rather than 
treating it just as a cost. Specifically, companies are finding that they can reduce energy use by 
investing in projects that can earn tax incentives, create new lines of business, and, in many 
countries, qualify as a tradable asset in financial markets. A shift in energy management from 
an “environmental cost” to an “environmental asset” calls for turning a cost into a profit through 
recycling waste into a source of energy (the excess of which can be sold) as well as through 
reducing energy usage, which not only saves costs, but also can earn tax incentives and carbon 
credits worth millions a year. This approach to energy management, in turn, creates the need 
for a profit center structure where there were previously only costs and risks.9
The transfer pricing problem
Profit (or investment) centers often supply products or services to other profit centers within the 
same firm. When that happens, some mechanism for determining the prices of the transfers 
must be established.10 Transfer prices directly affect the revenues of the selling (supplying) 
profit center, the costs of the buying (receiving) profit center and, consequently, the profits of 
both entities, thus essentially making transfer prices subject to “zero-sum” considerations (that 
is, more revenue for one is more cost for the other). The impact of these transfer prices depends 
largely on the number and magnitude of internal transfers relative to the size of each entity. 
When the amount of transfers is significant, failure to set the right transfer prices can signifi-
cantly affect a number of important decisions, including those regarding production quantities, 
sourcing, resource allocations, and evaluations of the managers of both the selling and buying 
profit centers. Put simply, when this is the case, it ups the stakes in the zero-sum game among the 
transferring entities.
Purposes of transfer pricing
Transfer prices have multiple organizational purposes, and these purposes often conflict. One 
purpose of transfer prices is to provide the proper economic signals so that the managers 
affected will make good decisions. In particular, the prices should properly influence both the 
selling profit center managers’ decisions about how much product/service to supply internally 
and the buying profit center managers’ decisions about how much product/service to buy inter-
nally. Ideally, then, the decisions that the transferring entities make should be “optimal” not 
only at their own entity level, but also for the corporation as a whole. Ill-devised transfer prices 
often do not achieve a global optimum even while being locally optimal – for example, because 
they cause the buying profit centers to source externally while there is excess capacity for the 
inputs in the supplying entities elsewhere in the corporation.
Second, the transfer prices and subsequent profit measurements should provide information 
that is useful for evaluating the performances of both the profit centers and their managers. 
Transfer prices directly affect the profits of both the selling and buying entities. Ideally, the 
transfer prices should not cause the performance of either entity to be either over- or under-
stated. Misleading profitability signals can adversely affect allocations of resources within the 

270
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
firm, thus rendering them suboptimal. They can also severely undercut profit center managers’ 
motivations because the managers will argue that they are not being treated fairly.
Third, transfer prices can be set to purposely move profits between firm locations. Several 
factors can motivate managers to use transfer prices in this way. When firms are operating in 
multiple tax jurisdictions (countries or states), their managers might be motivated to use trans-
fer prices to move profits between jurisdictions to minimize taxes. Corporate income tax rates 
differ significantly across countries, and managers can set transfer prices to earn profits in rela-
tively low-tax localities to maximize after-tax worldwide profits. Although this particular 
aspect of the transfer pricing problem is beyond the scope of this chapter, evidence suggests 
that the maximization of global profits remains a critical consideration of transfer pricing poli-
cies in multinational corporations.11 Clearly, such transfer pricing arrangements that deter-
mine how firms’ taxable profits are “allocated” between countries is politically controversial. 
They often make headlines in the press, where Apple, Google, Starbucks, Fiat, and other big-
name companies are chastised as tax dodgers, irking their customers and damaging their repu-
tations as socially responsible corporations.12
Profit repatriation limitations also may encourage companies to use transfer prices to move 
profits between entities across country borders. For a number of reasons, including balance of 
payments problems and a scarcity of foreign currency reserves, some governments prohibit 
repatriation of profits, either directly or indirectly. Indirect forms of restrictions include dis-
torted exchange rates or high withholding tax rates. When companies are unable to repatriate 
profits from their entities in foreign countries, they are motivated to set transfer prices to mini-
mize profits in those countries.
Companies also sometimes set transfer prices to shift profits between wholly owned subsidi-
aries and entities where the profits are shared with, say, joint venture partners. As a matter of 
fact, transfer prices are for this reason often strictly included and set out in great detail in the 
joint venture contract to avoid possible expropriation. Sometimes transfer prices are set to 
move profits to an entity being positioned for divestment in hopes of increasing its valuation 
and, hence, its selling price.
These multiple transfer pricing purposes often conflict.13 Except in rare circumstances, 
tradeoffs are necessary because no single transfer pricing method serves all the purposes well. 
The usual desire to have transfer pricing mechanisms operate automatically between entities, 
without frequent interventions from corporate management, provides another transfer pricing 
complication. Transfer pricing interventions undermine the benefits of decentralization. They 
reduce profit center (entity) autonomy and cause decision-making complexity and delay. 
They also increase organizational costs, particularly in terms of the management time needed 
to review the facts and to reach a transfer pricing “ruling” acceptable to all entities involved. 
Thus, firms seek to set transfer pricing policies that work without producing major exceptions 
and disputes.14
Transfer pricing alternatives
Most firms use any of five primary types of transfer prices. First, transfer prices can be based 
on market prices. The market price used for internal transfers could be the listed price of an 
identical (or similar) product or service, the actual price the selling entity charges external 
customers (perhaps less a discount that reflects lower selling costs for internal customers), or 
the price a competitor is offering. Second, transfer prices can be based on marginal costs, which 
are approximated as the variable or direct cost of production. Third, transfer prices can be 
based on the full costs of providing the product or service. Both marginal and full cost-based 
transfer prices can reflect either standard or actual costs. Fourth, transfer prices can be set at 
full cost plus a markup. Finally, transfer prices can be negotiated between the managers of the 

The transfer pricing problem
271
selling and buying profit centers. Information about market prices and either marginal or full 
production costs often provide input into these negotiations, but there is no requirement that 
they do so.
On balance, surveys of practice across sources and time seem to suggest that transfers at 
marginal cost are rarely used and that most companies internally transfer goods or services at 
either market prices or variations of full costs (e.g. full cost plus markup). In other words, what 
emerges is that both market price and “cost-plus” methods are the most widely used. Perhaps 
due to the increased scrutiny and enforcement by the tax authorities of the presumed arm’s-
length principle (see below), most companies use market-based transfer prices for international 
transfers more often than either cost-based or negotiated transfer prices.15 We discuss each of 
the transfer pricing methods next.
Market-based transfer prices
In the relatively rare situation where a perfectly (or at least highly) competitive external market 
exists for internally traded goods or services, it is optimal for both decision-making and perfor-
mance evaluation purposes to set transfer prices at competitive market prices. A perfectly com-
petitive market exists where the product is homogenous and no individual buyer or seller can 
unilaterally affect its price.
The case for using market-based transfer prices under competitive conditions is apparent. If 
the selling profit center cannot earn a profit by selling at the external market price, then the 
firm is better off shutting that profit center down and buying from an outside supplier, all else 
equal. Similarly, if the buying profit center cannot earn a profit by buying its inputs at the pre-
vailing market price, then the firm should shut that profit center down and have its selling profit 
center sell all its outputs to outsiders in the market. Hence, if transfer prices are set at market 
price, managers of both the selling and buying profit centers are likely to make decisions that 
are optimal from the firm’s perspective, and reports of both of their performances will provide 
good information for evaluation purposes.
Entities within organizations, however, rarely operate as they would as stand-alone firms in 
the open market.16 Therefore, many firms use quasi market-based transfer prices by allowing 
deviations from the observed market prices. The deviations allow for adjustments that reflect 
differences between internal and external sales. These differences can reflect the savings of 
marketing, selling and collecting costs, the costs of special terms offered only to external cus-
tomers (e.g. warranties), or the value of special features, special services provided, or differ-
ences in quality standards. Adjustments in market prices also may reflect the belief that the 
price quoted by the external supplier is not a sustainable competitive price. The price quoted 
might just be a low-ball bid designed merely to get the first order. The greater the number and 
size of these adjustments, however, the more the market-based transfer prices are like cost-
based prices, and the more difficult the transfer pricing tradeoffs become.
Marginal-cost transfer prices
When intermediate products and services are exchanged internally at marginal cost, it is easy 
to determine the total contribution generated by the final product or service to the firm as a 
whole. The total contribution is simply equal to the selling price of the final product or service 
minus the marginal cost of the last production or service process stage. Although this might be 
appealing from a cost accounting perspective, and sometimes from a price-setting perspective 
for short-term pricing decisions, it creates a problem when viewed from a responsibility center 
perspective. The reason is that the total contribution is not easily traceable to each of the sup-
plying entities, nor do any of the supplying entities even recuperate their full costs, which 
makes it unfeasible to evaluate them as profit centers. At best, they can be standard variable cost 
centers; that is, their performance evaluation depends on the extent to which their actual 

272
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
variable costs for a given output are at or below the standard variable cost. As we have dis-
cussed above, this obviously is a very limited form of financial results accountability.
This perhaps explains why the survey sources mentioned earlier indicate that companies 
rarely use marginal-cost transfers. Indeed, the rarity of use of this method is likely due to the 
fact that marginal-cost transfers provide poor information for evaluating the economic perfor-
mance of either the selling or the buying profit center. The selling profit center will typically 
have to record losses because it bears the full cost of production or provision while receiving in 
revenue only the marginal costs. Conversely, the profits of the buying profit center will be over-
stated because it does not have to pay for even the full cost of the transferred goods or services.
Marginal-cost transfer prices also are sometimes difficult to implement. Relatively few com-
panies can measure marginal costs accurately. Direct costs (direct material, direct labor) are 
not the problem; indirect costs are. Companies that use marginal-cost transfer pricing usually 
define marginal costs as standard variable costs, but there is no clean break between variable 
and fixed indirect costs. Indirect cost allocations sometimes are quite arbitrary. Marginal costs 
also are not always constant over the range of output. Sharp increases in marginal costs may 
occur if the selling profit center is operating near a capacity constraint.
Full-cost transfer prices
Transfers at full cost or full cost plus a markup are more widely used. Full-cost transfer prices 
offer several advantages. First, they provide a measure of long-run viability. For a product or 
service to be economically sustainable, its full cost – not just its marginal cost – must be recu-
perated, actually even generating a margin above full cost. Second, full-cost transfers are rela-
tively easy to implement because firms have systems in place to calculate the full costs of 
production (goods) or provision (services). Finally, full-cost transfers are not as distorting for 
evaluation purposes since the selling profit center is allowed to recover at least the full cost of 
production or provision.
Full-cost transfer prices are not a panacea, however. Full cost rarely reflects the actual, cur-
rent cost of producing the products or the services being transferred. Some of the distortions 
are caused by poor cost-accounting systems that involve arbitrary overhead cost allocations. In 
addition, strictly full-cost transfer prices do not provide an incentive for the selling profit center 
to transfer internally since they include no profit margin. If internal transfers are a significant 
part of the selling profit center’s business, then that entity’s profit will be understated. Transfers 
at full cost plus a markup, however, do allow the selling profit centers to earn a profit on inter-
nally transferred products or services. They also provide a crude approximation of the market 
price that can be used in situations where no competitive external market price exists. But 
because the markup is internally set, such transfer prices are not responsive to changes in mar-
ket conditions.
Negotiated Transfer Prices
Another transfer pricing alternative is to allow the selling and buying profit center managers to 
negotiate between themselves. This policy can be effective only if the profit centers are not cap-
tive to one another; that is, the selling profit center has some possibilities to sell its product out-
side the company, and the buying profit center has some outside sources of supply. Captivity 
obviously erodes bargaining power and undermines the negotiations.
Aside from that, negotiated transfer prices often cause several other problems. Negotiating a 
potentially large number of transactions is costly in terms of management time. Negotiation 
often accentuates conflicts between profit center managers, and resolution of the conflicts often 
requires mediation from corporate management. The outcome of the negotiations often depends 
on the negotiating skills and bargaining power of the managers involved, rather than its likely 
being economically optimal. If one of the entities has reasonably good outside selling or sourcing 

The transfer pricing problem
273
possibilities but the other does not, the bargaining power will be unequal. The unequal bargain-
ing power will be magnified if the transaction is a relatively small proportion of the business of 
one of the entities and a relatively large proportion of the business of the other. The managers of 
the small-proportion entity will have considerable bargaining power because they can walk 
away from the transaction without bearing serious consequences. And managers’ egos and self-
interest can sometimes lead them to try to gain an upper hand in the negotiations over peers 
with whom they compete for recognition, bonuses, and promotions, even at the expense of the 
corporation’s best interest.
Variations
Researchers have proposed several variations of one or more of the primary transfer pricing 
methods. All of these variations have some merit and so are worth mentioning, although their 
actual usage may vary in importance and with circumstances. One possibility is to transfer at 
marginal costs plus a fixed lump-sum fee. The lump-sum fee is designed to compensate the sell-
ing profit center for tying up some of its fixed capacity for producing products that are trans-
ferred internally. This method has some obvious appeal. It preserves goal congruence because 
additional unit transfers are made at marginal cost. It preserves information for evaluation pur-
poses because the selling division can recover its fixed costs and a profit margin through the 
lump-sum fee. It also stimulates intra-firm planning and coordination because the selling and 
buying entities must discuss the bases for the lump-sum fee.
The major problem with the marginal-cost-plus-lump-sum method is that the managers 
involved must predetermine the lump-sum fee based on an estimate of the capacity that each 
internal customer will require in the forthcoming period. If these estimates are incorrect, then 
the charges will be inaccurate, and the capacity will not be assigned to the most profitable uses. 
If the selling entity changes all the lump-sum charges after the fact to reflect each customer’s 
actual use of capacity, then the result will be nearly identical to transferring at the full cost of 
production.
Dual-rate transfer prices are another variation. In this case, the selling profit center is credited 
with the market price (or an approximation of it), but the buying profit center pays only the mar-
ginal (or full) costs of production. This scheme double counts the profits the corporation earns on 
each transaction. The accounting entries are balanced by putting the difference in a holding 
account at corporate, which is eliminated at the time of financial statement consolidation.
Dual-rate transfer prices have two basic advantages. First, the managers of both the selling 
and buying profit centers receive the proper economic signals for their decision-making. The 
seller receives the market price and is thereby not discouraged to transact internally. The buyer 
pays only the marginal (or full) cost and, thus, should normally be encouraged to buy inter-
nally. As such, the dual-rate transfer pricing method almost ensures that internal transactions 
will take place, making it possible to maintain a vertically integrated production process.
However, dual-rate transfer prices have disadvantages. Dual-rate transfer pricing can 
destroy the internal entities’ proper economic incentives. Since the buying profit centers pay 
only marginal (or full) cost, they have little incentive to negotiate with outside suppliers for 
more favorable prices. Hence, the selling profit centers find it easy to generate internal sales 
because the transfer pricing policy shields them from competition. Many corporations also dis-
like to double count profits because it is often difficult to explain to the profit center managers 
how the double counting has overstated their entity profits. Equally, when the dual rates involve 
bookings across international borders, the corporation may wish to avoid alarming the tax 
authorities by the double counting and the retrospective adjustments to the accounts. What 
may seem merely to be an internal accounting adjustment may not be seen this way by the tax 
authorities or the regulators and, for this reason, may also not be favored by the firm’s external 
auditors.17

274
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
Simultaneous use of multiple transfer pricing methods
One potential response to the need to serve multiple transfer pricing purposes is to use multiple 
transfer pricing methods at the same time. However, it is virtually impossible to use two differ-
ent transfer pricing methods and simultaneously serve both the decision-making and evalua-
tion purposes because managers make decisions in light of the numbers for which they are 
being evaluated. Tradeoffs here are usually inevitable.
When firms do use multiple transfer pricing methods, they typically use one method for 
internal purposes – both decision-making and evaluation – and another method to affect taxa-
ble profits across jurisdictions.18 But the countries in which multinational corporations operate 
obviously have incentives not to allow these firms to “optimize” reported profits through trans-
fer prices, as they will suffer tax losses if profits are moved out of their jurisdiction. Or they may 
suffer decreased market competitiveness if the firm manipulates its transfer prices to maintain 
a monopoly position as a supplier. Therefore, laws often require an arm’s-length transfer price; 
that is, a price charged to the associated entity as the one between unrelated parties for the 
same transactions under the same circumstances. The United States has no restrictions on 
domestic transfer pricing methods, but the Internal Revenue Service (the US tax authority) dis-
allows the shifting of income with international subsidiaries to avoid US taxes. This is true for 
many other countries as well. All told, then, it is easier for managers to claim that they are not 
manipulating reported income to evade taxes if they use the same transfer pricing method for 
tax purposes as for internal purposes. For this reason, and for reasons of system simplicity, mul-
tinational firms sometimes avoid using different transfer pricing methods for domestic and 
international transfers.
Conclusion
This chapter has provided an introduction to financial responsibility centers and transfer 
pricing. Financial responsibility centers are one of the core elements of financial results con-
trol systems. The definitions of financial responsibility centers are important because they 
provide managers signals about what financial statement line items they are expected to pay 
attention to. We discussed how the financial responsibilities usually are congruent with the 
managers’ authorities or decision rights, but there are exceptions. Sometimes managers are 
held accountable for financial statement line items over which they have no direct authority 
because the accountability empowers them to influence the actions of those who do have 
direct authority.
This chapter also discussed how the pricing of goods or services that are transferred from 
one organizational entity to another often causes problems in the measurement of an entity’s 
financial performance. Except in the rare situation where there is a perfectly competitive exter-
nal market for the internally traded good or service, no transfer pricing approach can guide 
profit center managers to make decisions that are optimal from the corporation’s perspective 
and simultaneously provide good information for evaluation. Incentives to move profits 
between firm locations with different tax jurisdictions cause additional transfer pricing consid-
erations. Transfer pricing methods based on market prices or full costs, and variations thereof, 
are in common use, but some companies also use negotiated transfer prices. No method is supe-
rior in all settings; each has its advantages and disadvantages.
The next chapter discusses planning and budgeting systems, the second core element of 
financial results control systems. Planning and budgeting systems also have several control 
purposes, some of which, like transfer pricing purposes, sometimes conflict.

Kranworth Chair Corporation
275
 Notes 
 1  The term  cost center also has a cost accounting meaning 
that is diff erent from its meaning here in the context of 
responsibility center management. Most fi rms are com-
prised of many cost centers set up for cost accounting pur-
poses to collect like-type costs and assign them to 
products and services, but these are not responsibility 
centers because they focus on cost categorizations rather 
than lines of authority over expenses by managers in 
charge of organizational entities with accountability for a 
cost budget. Firms typically use many more cost centers 
for cost accounting purposes than for responsibility 
center control purposes. 
 2  See, for example, “Study Finds Companies Profi t When 
They Track Product Parts,”  Forbes (December 20, 2013), 
online at  onforb.es/18WTvjT . 
   3   “Cisco India’s New Marketing Initiatives Ramp Up Lead Gen-
eration,”  CRN (January 15, 2015), online at  www.crn.com .  
 4  “RBS Finds Itself Back in Hot Water,”  The Wall Street Jour-
nal (November 25, 2013), online at  on.wsj.com/1ekyZ04 . 
 5  “Who Says the Music Industry Is Kaput,”  Business Week 
(May 27, 2010), online at  www.businessweek.com . 
 6  R. Cooper and R. Slagmulder, “Micro Profit Centers,” 
 Management Accounting , 79, no. 12 (1998), pp. 16–18. 
 7  For a further discussion of return measures and their 
eff ects, which we also treat in more detail in  Chapter  10 , 
see W. A. Van der Stede, “Discussion of ‘The Role of Per-
formance Measures in the Intertemporal Decisions of 
Business Unit Managers,’”  Contemporary Accounting 
Research , 30, no. 3 (2013), pp. 962–9. 
 8  Ibid. 
   9   “Why Energy Management Matters to CIOs,”  Forbes 
(September 15, 2010), online at  www.forbes.com . 
 10  Transfer pricing also applies to transfers involving cost 
centers. Transfers can be made, for example, at actual or 
standard cost or at full or variable cost between cost cent-
ers. However, since most transfer pricing problems 
involve profi t (or investment) centers, for reasons of sim-
plicity, this chapter refers to both the supplying and buy-
ing entities as  profi t centers . 
 11  See, for example,  Global Transfer Pricing Survey (Ernst & 
Young, 2016). 
 12  Examples are numerous, but for some recent cases, see 
“Brussels Opens Tax Probe into Apple, Starbucks and 
Fiat,”  The Financial Times (June 11, 2014), online at  on.
ft.com/1hJ2Ne7 . 
   13   M. Cools and R. Slagmulder, “Tax-Compliant Transfer 
Pricing and Responsibility Accounting,”  Journal of Man-
agement Accounting Research , 21 (2009), pp. 151–78. 
 14  See, for example, C. X. Chen, S. Chen, F. Pan, and Y. 
Wang, “Determinants and Consequences of Transfer Pric-
ing Autonomy: An Empirical Investigation,”  Journal of 
Management Accounting Research , 27, no. 2 (2015), 
pp. 225–59. 
 15  Global Transfer Pricing Survey , op. cit. 
 16  “The Nobel Prize for Economics: The Bigger Picture,”  The 
Economist (October 12, 2009), online at  econ.st/
JwM1wM ; “The Man Who Showed Why Firms Exist,”  The 
Economist  (September 7, 2013), online at  econ.
st/161DLgM . 
   17   For a recent academic treatment of dual transfer prices, 
see E. Johnson, N. B. Johnson, and T. Pfeiffer, “Dual 
Transfer Pricing with Internal and External Trade,” 
 Review of Accounting Studies , 21, no. 1 (March 2016), pp. 
140–64. 
   18   See, for example, S. Anderson, B. Zhou, R. Ghayad, and 
M. Cragg, “The Interaction of Managerial and Tax Trans-
fer Pricing,”  Tax Management Transfer Pricing Report , 24, 
no. 17 (January 2016). 
 In July 2003, Kevin Wentworth, CEO of Kranworth 
Chair Corporation (KCC), was considering a major 
reorganization – a divisionalization – of his company’s 
organization structure: 
  Like many entrepreneurs, I have always been 
focused on top-line sales growth, and I have con-
stantly been impressing on my managers to drive 
sales. My belief was that if you do that, everything 
else takes care of itself. Up until recently, I think our 
approach made sense. We had very little competi-
tion, and our margins were huge. 
 Now things are changing. We’ve got some major 
competitors who are making headway. I think we 
needed to take a fresh management approach to 
 CASE STUDY 
 Kranworth Chair Corporation 

276
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
find opportunities to do things better. Our new divi-
sionalized organization structure should help us 
serve our customers better and maybe force us to 
eliminate certain markets or products that are not 
producing results.
But I’m not sure it’s working very well. We’re 
seeing some finger pointing between the managers 
of the newly created divisions and the managers in 
charge of corporate departments. There is a lot of 
politics involved in defining the roles, responsibili-
ties, … and rights, of each of the responsibility 
centers, and it’s not clear to me yet exactly where 
to draw the lines.
The company
In the early 1980s, Weston Krantz, an avid outdoors per-
son, developed a new design for a lightweight, portable 
chair that could be stored in a bag and carried anywhere. 
Convinced that his design had commercial value, in 
1987 Weston cofounded Kranworth Chair Corporation 
(KCC) with his longtime friend, Kevin Wentworth, who 
had an MBA degree and financial expertise. (The corpo-
ration’s name was a contraction of the founders’ names: 
Krantz and Wentworth.) KCC was headquartered in 
Denver, Colorado, in the foothills of the Rocky Moun-
tains. KCC produced a broad line of high-quality and 
fashionable portable, folding chairs, which were branded 
as various models of the Fold-it! brand. In its early years, 
KCC sold its products exclusively to distributors.
Since its inception, KCC had been organized func-
tionally. In 2003, reporting to the cofounders were vice 
presidents in charge of sales, supply chain, and finance 
and administration, plus staff managers responsible for 
advertising and research and development (Exhibit 1).
Over the years, KCC expanded its product offerings. 
In 2003, it offered an extensive line of folding chairs. 
The chairs were produced in various sizes and models, 
including both adult and child chairs, single chairs and 
loveseats, and full- and beach-height chairs. Some 
chairs had additional features, such as cup holders, 
storage pockets, and trays. The chairs were produced at 
several price points, with varying fabrics, designs (e.g. 
single vs. double layer), and frame materials. KCC also 
offered some related products, such as folding tripod 
stools, ottomans, cots, and stadium seats. KCC also pro-
duced custom-designed products. It employed screen-
printing artists and seamstresses who applied custom 
logos, graphics, and lettering to the nylon. KCC 
products were often seen at corporate trade shows and 
tailgate parties at sporting events. The company kept 
track of approximately 1,500 stock keeping units 
(SKUs) – finished products and various piece parts that 
the company sold – although about 85–90% of the sales 
stemmed from only about 40 of the SKUs.
Gradually, KCC built sales by investing in more 
advertising and by adding other distribution channels. 
By 2003, it sold some products directly to major retail 
chains (Wal-Mart, K-Mart, Target), as well as other 
retailers (e.g. sporting goods stores) of various sizes. It 
sold to retailers using the KCC sales force, outside reps, 
and distributors. It also sold custom products directly 
to corporations and high school or university book-
stores and athletic departments. The retail channels 
provided the highest sales volumes, but those sales 
were made at lower margins.
In the 1990s, KCC moved its core manufacturing 
facilities to Mexico and China to take advantage of lower 
labor rates. Only some assembly (“kitting”) and custom-
izing facilities were retained in the Denver location.
In the company’s first decade of existence, KCC had 
little competition. Its chair designs were protected by 
more than 20 patents. Sales grew rapidly, and average 
margins were high, in the range of 40–50%, although 
some margins were sacrificed in later years in order to 
generate sales from large retail chains.
In 1999, KCC borrowed $30 million because the 
founders, particularly Kevin, wanted to take a signifi-
cant amount of cash out of the company. Kevin had 
become interested in ranching, and he wanted to buy a 
significantly larger ranch. Ranching had become his 
passion, and he was spending less and less time at KCC. 
(For years Weston had spent only a small portion of his 
time at KCC as he traveled and pursued his various avo-
cations.) The debt service on the loan reduced KCC man-
agers’ margin for error. Cash flow was tight, particularly 
at the slow time of the year – October to January.
Starting in the late 1990s, some significant competi-
tors, mostly from Asian countries, entered the market 
with comparable chair designs. Despite the fact that 
most customers perceived KCC as having superior 
designs and higher quality, and customer satisfaction 
was high, the higher competition and the worldwide 
recession of the early 2000s caused sales to flatten and 
profits to drop. The company’s management incentive 
plan did not pay out in either 2001 or 2002. In 2003, 
performance was slightly improved. KCC’s total reve-
nues were projected to be approximately $70 million, 
up from $68 million in 2002, and profits were expected 
to be slightly positive.

Kranworth Chair Corporation
277
Motivation for divisionalization
In 2002, Kevin began to think about changes that 
might stem from a change in organization structure. 
He thought that the KCC managers needed to focus 
more on the quality, and not just the quantity, of sales. 
To illustrate the point, he described an example in 
which KCC personnel had aggressively sought business 
from Target, the large retail chain. In order to develop 
this retail account, KCC designed a special chair model 
for Target and offered a special price with a lower 
gross margin. While Target did sell some Fold-it! 
chairs, they did not sell many. Part of the reason for 
the poor sales was that many of Target’s outlets did not 
display the Fold-it! chairs effectively. Instead of dis-
playing them in the sporting goods department, they 
shelved them wherever they had room. Kevin 
explained, “I walked into a Target store in a suburb of 
Denver and found that our products were sitting on the 
bottom shelf horizontally in the back corner of the 
Automotive Department, where nobody could ever see 
them!” Because of the “growth at all costs” philosophy, 
KCC incurred significant product development and 
marketing costs and ended up carrying a large amount 
of inventory; so, overall, the Target account, and some 
others like it, were very unprofitable. But to develop 
more focus on the quality of sales, KCC had to develop 
a stronger customer focus, to understand better cus-
tomers’ needs and wants, and to improve customer 
service levels.
Kevin also thought that divisionalization, if imple-
mented properly, could help KCC improve its efficiency 
and asset utilization. He thought that with an improved 
customer focus, it was almost inevitable that the com-
pany could reduce its SKUs, possibly outsource more 
functions, and generally learn to serve customer needs 
better while tying up less capital.
Divisionalization alternatives
What kind of divisionalization would be best? Kevin 
thought first about the relatively conservative approach 
of merely making the sales function a profit center. This 
approach would involve charging Sales for the full 
costs (or, perhaps, full costs plus a markup) of the prod-
ucts they sold. Sales would have to pay for the costs of 
customizing products and holding inventory. This 
approach would make Sales more aware of the cost 
implications of their decisions and, hence, more moti-
vated to generate profitable sales.
But Kevin concluded that KCC should probably go 
further to create true product divisions. The KCC man-
agers had frequent debates about what products and 
sales channels were most profitable, but those debates 
were not informed with hard data. A divisionalization 
would require some disaggregation of total costs and 
would facilitate profitability analyses.
If this was done, however, the KCC managers would 
have to consider how self-contained the new operating 
entities should be. Kevin wondered, “Should [the prod-
uct divisions] each have their own supply chain man-
agement, sales force, R&D, and human resources 
functions, or should those resources be shared?”
The obvious product split in KCC was between Retail 
Products and Custom Products. The Retail Division 
would focus on the higher volume, standard product 
sales to retail outlets. The Custom Products Division 
would focus on the smaller-volume custom sales.
In the approach that Kevin was planning to present 
to his management team, the two product divisions 
were to become profit centers. Each entity would be 
dedicated to its focused core business, but their manag-
ers would be free to choose how they did business and 
what they incorporated into their business model. 
Reporting to each of the division managers would be 
managers responsible for sales and marketing, pur-
chasing and inventory control, and finance and 
accounting. Supply chain, R&D, human resources, and 
advertising would still be centralized, although these 
functions would clearly have to work closely with divi-
sion managers.
Kevin hoped that this new structure would allow the 
Retail and Custom Products divisions to make some 
bold, new decisions. The new company focus would 
also be on creating value, rather than merely growing. 
For the divisions, creating value could easily mean con-
tracting sales to eliminate unprofitable or marginally 
profitable products and customers. The best customers, 
for example, were probably those that bought the most 
profitable products, placed inventory requirements on 
KCC that were reasonable and predictable, had a strong 
credit standing and payment history, and were rela-
tively easy to serve. The divisions might also decide 
that they should outsource some functions, such as 
warehousing, which might allow KCC to provide better 
customer service during the busy seasons and to 
employ fewer people and assets in the low seasons.
On July 28, 2003, Kevin presented his divisionaliza-
tion ideas to his management team. Figure 1 shows an 
excerpt from the presentation he gave.

278
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
Some of the KCC managers were enthusiastic about 
the proposed change. Others thought that the ideas 
were radical. A few managers were bewildered, as they 
had never worked in an organization with a divisional 
structure and had trouble visualizing how it would 
work. In the ensuing discussion, many questions arose, 
such as relating to the specifics as to who would 
be responsible for what and how performance would be 
measured and rewarded. It was decided that the idea 
needed more specifics.
A follow-up meeting was held two weeks later. By 
then most of the managers realized that top manage-
ment had already made this decision; the company was 
going to be divisionalized. They then became highly 
interested in shaping the details of the change. The 
focus of the second meeting was on defining division 
management responsibilities.
After considerable discussion, there was general 
agreement regarding the following general division of 
responsibilities:
Responsibilities of top management and corporate 
staff:
1.	 Overall vision and strategy for the company
2.	 Financing and other high-level financial matters
3.	 Engineering, design, and R&D
4.	 Facilities
5.	 Legal and intellectual property
6.	 Supply chain and quality
7.	 Corporate identity (e.g. public relations, some gen-
eral advertising)
8.	 Human resources
9.	 Information technology
10.	 Acquisitions and joint ventures
Responsibilities of division management:
1.	 Overall vision and strategy for their respective 
markets
2.	 Development and implementation of divisional 
annual budgets
3.	 Staffing
4.	 Operations, including purchasing of parts and mate-
rials specific to respective markets, receiving, ware-
housing, shipping, and inventory management
5.	 Controllership and accounting
6.	 Product-specific advertising and collateral material
7.	 Information technology support
With this general understanding of the distribu-
tion of responsibilities in the company in place, the 
next task was the development of ideas regarding 
performance measurement and incentives. This task 
was assigned to Robert Chang, VP – Finance and 
Administration.
Performance measurement 
and incentives
Robert developed a measure that he called controllable 
returns, which was defined as operating income (before 
tax) divided by controllable assets. To get to operating 
income, all the division direct expenses were sub-
tracted from division revenues, as were as many of the 
1	 If the division (corporate) plan was met, but the corporate (division) 
plan was not, division management would still receive the divisional 
(corporate) portion of the bonus.
The new product divisions will be lean, mean fighting 
machines with a direct purpose and the vision to carry 
that purpose out. With our [corporate managers’] 
help, they will look at how they do business now and 
what they can do better. They will have the 
opportunity to dream. If we were to start a new 
product-line business, think of the questions that 
would have to be answered:
1.	 How should we staff?
2.	 How should we source?
3.	 How should we warehouse?
4.	 How should we sell?
5.	 How should we ship?
6.	 How should we finance?
These are just some of the many questions that a new 
company has to address.
We have a certain advantage since we already have 
a baseline. But we also carry along a disadvantage. 
We have become entrenched in our ways and are the 
costliest product in the market. If we forced ourselves 
to completely reevaluate the business, could we 
significantly reduce costs, provide better customer 
service, and yield higher operating profits? That 
answer must be “yes” in order to stay in business in 
the future. Think of the fabulous business opportunity 
in front of us!
Figure 1  Excerpt from presentation given by Kevin 
Wentworth

Kranworth Chair Corporation
279
corporate expenses that could be reasonably allocated 
to the divisions. The assets deemed controllable by the 
divisions included their receivables, inventories, and 
an assigned cost of facilities they used.
Robert proposed an incentive plan that provided 22 
managers, down to the director level (one level below 
division manager), with a cash award based on achieve-
ment of annual targets set for controllable return at the 
divisional and corporate levels. For corporate manag-
ers, the bonuses would be based solely on corporate 
performance. For managers assigned to a division, the 
bonuses would be based 75% on division performance 
and 25% on corporate performance.
Robert proposed that the expected payouts be set 
initially at relatively modest levels. If the annual per-
formance targets were achieved, Kevin and Weston 
would be paid an award of 40% of salary, division 
managers would be paid 30%, and managers lower in 
the hierarchy would be paid 15–20%. No payouts 
would be made if actual performance was below 
plan.1 If actual performance exceeded plan, the pay-
outs could be increased by up to 50%, at the discre-
tion of top management and the company’s board of 
directors.
Robert explained that he proposed the relatively 
modest awards because the costs of this plan would 
probably be in excess of $500,000, a significant addi-
tional expense for the company. Maintaining competi-
tive total compensation levels was not an issue because 
KCC managers were currently not accustomed to earn-
ing a bonus, since the old sales growth-based incentive 
plan had not paid out anything in either 2001 or 2002. 
Plus, Robert thought the company needed to get some 
experience with setting division-level performance 
targets and measuring and evaluating performance in 
a new way before ratcheting the performance-depend-
ent rewards upward while probably reducing the pro-
portion of total compensation paid as fixed base 
salaries.
These suggestions were discussed in a staff meeting 
held on October 13, 2003.2 The major point of dissen-
sion was regarding the proposed assignment of some of 
the corporate expenses to the divisions. Some of the 
personnel who were slated for assignment to a division 
complained that they could not control the terms of 
deals that corporate staff negotiated for them, such as 
for insurance. Kevin headed off this discussion by 
explaining that these cost assignments would be built 
into the performance targets, so they would not affect 
the actual vs. targeted return comparison. Further, 
division managers would have near complete freedom 
of sourcing. If they did not like the services provided to 
them by corporate staffs, they were free to purchase 
those services from outside the company.
A follow-up meeting was scheduled for October 27, 
2003. That meeting was intended to be used primarily 
to design the new organization – who would be 
assigned to what division and in what role (see 
Exhibit 2). It was hoped that the new divisionalized 
structure would be completely in place by January 1, 
2004, and the first incentives based on controllable 
return would be paid based on 2004-performance.
Hopes and concerns for the future
Kevin was convinced that the new divisionalized 
organization structure would give KCC its best chance 
for future success:
Most of us are now convinced that this is a good 
idea. Although it creates a more complex organiza-
tion, it will make most of our managers feel more 
empowered. It will also force us to be more focused 
on returns, rather than revenues and cost control.
Privately, however, Kevin expressed concern that 
this major turning point in the company’s history was 
quite risky.
I’m delegating considerable decision-making 
power to the division managers. If they make mis-
takes, our business can go down the tubes. The 
managers will make out all right; they can go find 
another job. But the fortunes of my family and 
those of the other major owners would be 
devastated.
He had a specific concern about one manager, Joe 
Yarmouth, the current VP-Sales who would be 
appointed as general manager of the Retail Division.
Joe is in his early 50s, and he has a lot of experi-
ence. But most of the experience is in sales, rather 
than marketing and other functions, and all of his 
experience before KCC was in big companies – 
Clorox, Hershey’s. Culturally he does not have the 
small company mindset. He has no experience in 
2	 Sales personnel were still included in a sales-based commission 
plan. At this meeting the idea came up that the sales commissions 
should be weighted based on product profitability, but detailed 
discussion of this idea was deferred.

280
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
understanding costs, cash flows, and returns. I 
think he should have been able to set up more 
deals that don’t require any working capital invest-
ment, but he just doesn’t think that way.
So Kevin, and indeed most of the KCC managers, 
looked to the future with both eager anticipation and 
trepidation.
Early experiences
KCC’s early experiences with the divisionalized struc-
ture created more concern. The first major initiative of 
Ed Sanchez, the manager of the new Custom Division, 
was to propose the procurement of a more sophisti-
cated fabric-cutting machine. This machine would 
allow the fabric to be cut more efficiently and lower 
both material and labor costs slightly. A discounted 
cash flow analysis suggested that this machine was a 
worthwhile investment. But, Kevin explained:
In my opinion, this investment does not address the 
real issue in the Custom Division. Our real issue is 
turnaround time. We have plenty of margin in cus-
tom work, but we need to reduce our turnaround 
time to serve our customers better. I think Ed is 
turning the wrong dials.
Kevin also knew that in Retail, the newly installed 
division manager Joe Yarmouth, who had good con-
tacts in the advertising world through his prior jobs, 
was talking with a new advertising agency about the 
possibility of a new campaign to advertise retail prod-
ucts more aggressively. Kevin wondered whether this 
was in the best interest of the company. He commented:
I’m worried about losing economies of scale from 
dealing with different ad agencies and about what 
this “go-it-alone” advertising will do to our corpo-
rate identity. And in any case, lack of advertising 
was not the problem we faced at Target; it was 
product placement!
Joe, in turn, had already been grumbling to Robert 
about late deliveries and missed sales as well as prod-
uct returns due to quality problems, which were 
caused, in his opinion, by vendor problems that were 
under the purview of Carrie Jennings, the corporate 
head of Supply Chain and Quality. In the new organiza-
tion structure, Supply Chain was responsible for 
obtaining and maintaining an adequate vendor group, 
primarily in Asia and Mexico, to secure both high-qual-
ity subassemblies and on-time delivery, while reducing 
dependency on any given vendor. The divisions had 
responsibility only for placing the day-to-day purchas-
ing orders (POs) with these vendors. Joe complained:
If I keep having delivery and quality issues due to 
problems with our overseas vendors, over which I 
have no control, I’m sure going to miss my perfor-
mance target for the year. I am the one – not Carrie – 
who feels the pain of lower sales and higher costs 
due to product returns, because it directly affects 
the numerator of my controllable returns measure, 
and thus, my bonus that is totally based on it. I have 
already lobbied corporate to let me have control 
over vendor negotiations. If they won’t do that, they 
should at least adjust my targets so that my evalu-
ations aren’t affected by others’ failures. But so far 
they don’t seem to want to listen to me.
Robert estimated that the divisions had about 85% 
control over their own P&L results. He believed that 
was significant enough:
Joe’s arguments have some merit, but no manager 
ever controls everything. Our managers need to 
work with others in the organization within the con-
straints in which they are placed, to react to a lot of 
changing conditions, and to deliver the needed 
results. If Joe can’t do this, then we’ll find someone 
else who can.
Robert did not think that corporate managers should 
make any changes either to the assigned responsibili-
ties or the bonus plan.
Joe had also proposed some other ideas for a leaner 
Retail business that could potentially affect the design of 
the Supply Chain function. He wanted to enter into 
arrangements with large retailers that would provide 
favorable pricing in return for commitments to take 
delivery of full containers of finished products right at 
the port of entry (from either Asia or Mexico). This would 
eliminate further kitting in the Denver plant and reduce 
inventory significantly. Kevin thought this could be a 
good idea, but he was not sure who should take responsi-
bility for working out the details. He was also worried 
about the politics involved in redrawing the lines of 
responsibility so early into the new divisionalization.
Another issue that had arisen involved the R&D 
function. Corporate R&D was responsible for new prod-
uct designs and refinements. Even though most ideas 
for new products or product improvements came from 
the division managers and their sales people in the 
field, division management did not have much control 

Kranworth Chair Corporation
281
over which R&D initiatives received priority. Joe 
Yarmouth commented:
There is too much filtering by corporate R&D of the 
ideas that we feed them. We can’t get anything 
done without Ken Simmons’ [R&D manager] bless-
ing, and Ken really takes his orders from Weston 
[Krantz]. We ought to have more influence. We 
know our markets better than anyone else in the 
company, and we are paying for the function. We 
[the divisions] each fund 50% of the corporate R&D 
budget. I’m about to take a $150,000 hit for corpo-
rate R&D in my 2004 P&L, and what do I get for 
that? And why do we [the divisions] each have to 
share the burden equally? I’m also annoyed that 
Custom is getting a lot more R&D support than I do. 
Certainly Retail is much larger than Custom, but 
we’re not getting much support from R&D. All 
they’re doing for us are a few tweaks on our stand-
ard products.
Ed Sanchez (Custom), in turn, was complaining that 
R&D was much too “reactive” to new product features 
already introduced by competitors, despite the fact that 
he and his sales people has proposed many ideas for 
more radical changes.
Under this pressure from the division managers, 
Kevin was considering whether KCC should allow the 
divisions to do their own R&D. He knew doing so would 
solve the problems the divisions managers were com-
plaining about, but he wasn’t sure which new problems 
it might create. Kevin did not like the whining. But he 
also did not want to undercut the local initiative that 
the new organization promised to bring to KCC. And in 
any case, there were pressing issues to attend to on his 
new ranch.
Exhibit 1  Kranworth Chair Corporation: 2003 organization structure

282
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant, Wim A. Van der Stede, and research assistant Clara (Xiaoling) 
Chen.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Exhibit 2  Kranworth Chair Corporation: 2004 organization structure

Zumwald AG
283
  University of Southern California 
 Marshall School of Business 
 Leventhal School of Accounting 
 A203-01 
  Rev. 7-31-15 
 In August 2015, a pricing dispute arose between the 
managers of some of the divisions of Zumwald AG. 
Mr. Rolf Fettinger, the company’s managing director, 
had to decide whether to intervene in the dispute. 
 The company 
 Zumwald AG, headquartered in Cologne, Germany, 
produced and sold a range of medical diagnostic imag-
ing systems and biomedical test equipment and instru-
mentation. The company was organized into six 
operating divisions. Total annual revenues were 
slightly more than £3 billion. 
 Zumwald managers ran the company on a highly 
decentralized basis. The managers of each division 
were allowed considerable autonomy if their perfor-
mances were at least on plan. Performance was evalu-
ated, and management bonuses were assigned, based 
on each division’s achievement of budgeted targets for 
return on invested capital (ROIC) and sales growth. 
Even though the company was partly vertically inte-
grated, division managers were allowed to source 
their components from external suppliers if they 
so chose. 
 Involved in the dispute mentioned above were three 
of the company’s divisions – the Imaging Systems Divi-
sion (ISD), the Heidelberg Division (Heidelberg), and 
the Electronic Components Division (ECD). 
 ●   ISD sold complex ultrasound and magnetic reso-
nance imaging systems. These systems were expen-
sive, typically selling for £500,000 to £1 million. 
 ●  Heidelberg sold high-resolution monitors, graphics 
controllers and display subsystems. Approximately 
half of its sales were made to outside customers. ISD 
was one of Heidelberg’s major inside customers. 
 ●  ECD sold application-specifi c integrated circuits and 
subassemblies. ECD was originally established as a 
captive supplier to other Zumwald divisions, but in 
the last decade its managers had found external 
markets for some of the division’s products. Because 
of this, ECD’s managers were given profit center 
responsibility. 
 The dispute 
 ISD had recently designed a new ultrasound imaging 
system called the X73. Hopes were high for X73. The 
new system offered users advantages in processing 
speed and cost, and it took up less space. Heidelberg 
engineers participated in the design of X73, but Heidel-
berg was compensated for the full cost of the time its 
employees spent on this project. 
 After the specifications were set, ISD managers 
solicited bids for the materials needed to produce 
X73 components. Heidelberg was asked to bid to sup-
ply the displays needed for production of the X73 
system. So were two outside companies. One was 
Bogardus NV, a Dutch company with a reputation for 
producing high-quality products. Bogardus had been 
a longtime supplier to Zumwald, but it had never 
before supplied display units and systems to any 
Zumwald division. Display Technologies Plc, was a 
British company that had recently entered the mar-
ket and was known to be pricing its products aggres-
sively in order to buy market share. The quotes that 
ISD received were as follows: 
 Supplier 
 Cost per X73 system (£) 
 Heidelberg Division 
 140,000 
 Bogardus NV 
 120,500 
 Display Technologies Plc 
 100,500 
 After discussing the bids with his management team, 
Conrad Bauer, ISD’s managing director, announced that 
 CASE STUDY 
 Zumwald AG 

284
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
ISD would be buying its display systems from Display 
Technologies Plc. Paul Halperin, Heidelberg’s general 
manager, was livid. He immediately complained to 
Mr. Bauer, but when he did not get the desired response, 
he took his complaint to Rolf Fettinger, Zumwald’s 
managing director. Mr. Fettinger agreed to look into the 
situation.
A meeting was called to try to resolve the dispute. 
Mr. Halperin asked Christian Schönberg, ECD’s GM, to 
attend this meeting to support his case. If Heidelberg 
got this order from ISD, it would buy all of its electronic 
components from ECD.
At this meeting, Mr. Bauer immediately showed his 
anger:
Paul wants to charge his standard markup for these 
displays. I can’t afford to pay it. I’m trying to sell a 
new product (X73) in a very competitive market. 
How can I show a decent ROIC if I have to pay a 
price for a major component that is way above mar-
ket? I can’t pass on those costs to my customers. 
Paul should really want this business. I know things 
have been relatively slow for him. But all he does is 
quote list prices and then complain when I do what 
is best for my division.
We’re wasting our time here. Let’s stop fighting 
amongst ourselves and instead spend our time fig-
uring out how to survive in these difficult business 
conditions.
Mr. Fettinger asked Mr. Halperin why he couldn’t 
match Display Technologies’ price. Paul replied as 
follows:
Conrad is asking me to shave my price down to 
below cost. If we start pricing our jobs this way, 
it won’t be long before we’re out of business. We 
need to price our products so that we earn a fair 
return on our investment. You demand that of 
us; our plan is put together on that basis; and I 
have been pleading with my sales staff not to 
offer deals that will kill our margins. Conrad is 
forgetting that my engineers helped him design 
X73, and we provided that help with no mark-up 
over our costs. Further, you can easily see that 
Zumwald is better off if we supply the display 
systems for this new product. The situation here 
is clear. If Conrad doesn’t want to be a team 
player, then you must order him to source inter-
nally! That decision is in the best interest of 
all of us.
In the ensuing discussion, the following facts came 
out:
1.	 ISD’s tentative target price for the X73 system was 
£340,000.1
2.	 Heidelberg’s standard manufacturing cost (mate-
rial, labor, and overhead) for each display system 
was £105,000. When asked, Mr. Halperin estimated 
that the variable portion of this total cost was only 
£50,000. He treated Heidelberg’s labor costs as fixed 
because German laws did not allow him to lay off 
employees without incurring expenses that were 
“prohibitively” high.
3.	 Because of the global business slowdown, the produc-
tion lines at Heidelberg that would produce the sys-
tems in question were operating at approximately 
70% of capacity. In the pre ceding year, monthly pro-
duction had ranged from 60% to 90% of total capacity.
4.	 Heidelberg’s costs included £21,600 in electronic sub-
assemblies to be supplied by ECD. ECD’s full manufac-
turing costs for the components included in each 
system were approximately £18,000, of which approx-
imately half were out-of-pocket costs. ECD’s standard 
policy was to price its products internally at full manu-
facturing cost plus 20%. The markup was intended to 
give ECD an incentive to supply its product internally. 
ECD was currently operating at 90% capacity.
Near the end of the meeting, Mr. Bauer reminded 
everybody of the company’s policy of freedom of sourc-
ing. He pointed out that this was not such a big deal, as 
the volume of business to be derived from this new 
product was only a small fraction (less than 5%) of the 
revenues for each of the divisions involved, at least for 
the first few years. And he also did not like the potential 
precedent of his being forced to source internally 
because it could adversely affect his ability to get 
thoughtful quotes from outside suppliers in the future.
The decision
As he adjourned the meeting, Mr. Fettinger promised to 
consider all the points of view that had been expressed 
and to provide a speedy judgment. He wondered if 
there was a viable compromise or if, instead, there were 
some management principles involved here that should 
be considered inviolate.
1	 The cost of the other components that go into X73 is £72,000. ISD’s 
conversion cost for the X73 system is £144,000, of which £117,700 is 
fixed.

Global Investors, Inc.
285
 This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
  I have a basic “gut” discomfort with the proposition that 
investment management as a profi tmaking function exists 
only in New York. 
 Alistair Hoskins, Chairman/CEO, 
Global Investors, London 
 Bob Mascola, CFO of Global Investors, Inc. (GI), took a 
last look at his notes as he walked into the conference 
room where he and the other members of the trans-
fer pricing task force would meet with Gary Spencer, 
GI’s CEO. The transfer pricing task force supervised by 
Mascola was meeting with Spencer to discuss the lat-
est transfer pricing models that the task force mem-
bers had identifi ed. Mascola hoped the meeting would 
result in a final decision about the transfer pricing 
method that should be used to recognize profi ts in GI’s 
subsidiaries. 
 Mascola knew that the meeting would be diffi  cult. 
On repeated occasions, two of the members of the 
transfer pricing task force, Alistair Hoskins and Jack 
Davis, had engaged in heated debates about which 
transfer pricing model should be selected. Hoskins, the 
chairman/CEO of GI’s London office, believed that 
regional offi  ces – or at least the regional offi  ce he led – 
should be treated as largely autonomous profi t centers 
so that the value created by these offices would be 
refl ected in their fi nancial statements. However, Davis, 
GI’s corporate vice president of operations, argued that 
virtually all of the investment strategies used to man-
age the clients’ funds were designed by the research 
team located in New York. Consequently, Davis 
believed that the revenues generated by investment 
activities should be recognized in New York, even if a 
few investment services were offered by a regional 
offi  ce. The essence of Hoskins’s reply to Davis was that 
expressed in the epigraph. 
 The company 
 Global Investors, founded in 1965, was a privately 
owned investment management company headquar-
tered in New York. A number of directors and execu-
tives based in New York, Spencer among them, held 
majority ownership of GI’s outstanding stock. GI, 
started as a domestic equity investment management 
fi rm, had grown to manage US$160 billion for a variety 
of clients, including corporations, insurance compa-
nies, public and private pension funds, endowments, 
foundations, and high-net-worth individuals. 
 GI focused on two activities: investment manage-
ment (which included research, portfolio manage-
ment, and trading) and client services (which 
included marketing and investor advisory services 
provided to institutional investors and independent 
brokers/dealers). Although the company initially 
focused on direct sales to institutional investors 
(such as endowments and pension funds), it was 
increasingly selling its investment products through 
independent brokers/dealers who both served 
wealthy individual investors and invested in GI funds 
on their behalf (see  Exhibit  1 ). GI generated its invest-
ment management revenues by charging a percent-
age fee for the amount each of its clients invested in 
GI funds. 
 GI’s investment philosophy diff erentiated the fi rm 
from most of its competitors. Since its inception, GI 
based all of its investment strategies on fi nancial mar-
ket theories emerging from academic research. The 
company developed a prominent New York-based 
research team composed mostly of PhD-qualified 
investment experts, who were supported by contracted-
for advice from some of the world’s most highly 
regarded academic fi nancial economists. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Global Investors, Inc. 

286
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
The company’s investment philosophy revolved 
around the theory that markets are affected by judgmen-
tal biases of the market participants. That is, under certain 
circumstances and for certain time periods, investors, and 
hence markets, overreact or underreact to information 
that is publicly available regarding companies’ expected 
risks and returns. Instead of focusing on the valuation of 
individual securities and actively selecting securities 
based on their estimated value (as most of its competitors 
did), GI developed its different funds by focusing more 
directly on the types of securities that academic research 
had shown to be undervalued by the market.
As part of its strategy, GI was also committed to low-
ering its trading costs through economies of scale, 
technological investments aimed at increasing liquid-
ity, and crossing activities (that is, matching clients’ 
buy and sell requests).
GI focused mostly on equity investments in coun-
tries committed to free markets and with reasonably 
well-functioning capital markets, but it also invested in 
fixed income and commodity securities. Over the years, 
GI had expanded its activities throughout Asia, Europe, 
and the Americas (as shown in Exhibit 2).
GI’s subsidiaries
Most of GI’s 415 employees were located in New York, 
but GI also offered its services through four remote sub-
sidiaries (see Exhibit 3). The largest subsidiaries 
located in Tokyo and London employed 52 and 
40 employees, respectively. The other two subsidiaries 
located in Singapore and San Francisco employed 
fewer than a dozen individuals each. About 80% of the 
personnel employed in these offices were dedicated to 
trading financial assets following guidelines estab-
lished by headquarters, 15% were dedicated to selling 
GI’s funds, and the rest were involved in operations. 
Recently, three highly competent senior portfolio man-
agers in Tokyo and four in London had started both to 
act as subadvisors for the Japanese, Pacific Rim, and 
European portfolios and to manage a series of trusts for 
their regional clientele. Many of the sales personnel at 
those subsidiaries were using these local funds to 
attract new clients. However, all clients attracted by 
the subsidiaries, regardless of the location of the sub-
sidiary or the fund they invested in, were assigned a 
contact person in New York in addition to their local 
representative. They also received timely information 
resulting from the internal and sponsored research 
generated in New York.
GI’s subsidiaries were separately incorporated com-
panies. Their ownership composition resembled that of 
GI’s parent company, but additional shares were issued 
to the subsidiaries’ chairmen/CEOs. The chairman/
CEO of GI London (Hoskins) owned 23% of the London 
subsidiary; the chairman/CEO of GI Tokyo (Paul 
Hashi) owned 5% of the Tokyo subsidiary; and the 
chairmen/CEOs of GI Singapore and GI San Francisco 
each owned 3% of their respective subsidiaries.
GI’s subsidiaries had historically been treated as 
cost-focused profit centers, while the administrative 
departments providing support were treated as cost 
centers. Expenses and revenues were recorded accord-
ing to the following accounting model:
1.	 Expenses (see Exhibit 4, presenting the format of a 
consolidated statement):
● Any expenses that could be traced directly to the 
subsidiaries or the cost centers were recorded 
in the Direct Controllable Cost category. When 
expenses could not be directly traced, an alloca-
tion method was followed. (The last column of 
Exhibit 4 describes the allocation bases.)
● Royalty expenses (paid to academics for develop-
ing trading strategies) were charged to the New 
York office, the center of the firm’s investment 
management activities.
● Allocations from the cost centers were based on 
cost center manager estimates of the proportions 
of the cost centers’ services that were consumed 
by each of the center’s internal “clients” (other 
cost centers or subsidiaries).
● After the proportions of each cost center’s expenses 
were established, GI utilized a reciprocal cost al-
location method, using a system of simultaneous 
equations, to identify the total costs incurred by 
each cost center and the dollar amount that should 
be allocated from each cost center to its “internal 
clients,” both cost centers and subsidiaries.
2.	 Revenues
● GI New York retained all of the revenues generated 
worldwide (from fixed fees charged to the clients 
based on the amount of money they invested in 
GI) and assigned GI’s subsidiaries a portion of the 
revenue based on local costs (direct controllable 
costs and other costs allocated to the subsidiaries) 
plus a 10% markup over the direct controllable 
costs.

Global Investors, Inc.
287
A report of GI subsidiaries’ profits for 2006 is pre-
sented in Exhibit 5. The cost-plus revenue-allocation 
method resulted in a small profit for all subsidiaries. 
This profit guaranteed that the subsidiaries would com-
ply with capital requirements imposed by local finan-
cial authorities. The subsidiaries also used these profit 
reports both as a benchmark to calculate their taxes 
and as disclosures to institutional investor clients inter-
ested in learning about the financial health of the sub-
sidiary holding their investments. On a few occasions 
where GI executives discussed the possibility of selling 
the firm or a subsidiary, the executives also used sub-
sidiary profits to obtain a rough estimate of the worth 
of each subsidiary (calculated as a multiple of their 
EBITDA).
Subsidiary profits were not explicitly tied to the 
managers’ compensation. A bonus pool based on GI’s 
total profits was allocated to each executive based on 
the relative number of bonus points that each had 
earned. The compensation committee (comprising 
three members of the board of directors and the vice 
president of human resources) assigned these bonus 
points to each executive at the beginning of the year 
based on its subjective assessments of both the execu-
tive’s performance in the prior year and his or her con-
tribution to the company.
Alternative transfer pricing models
Some subsidiary CEOs expressed discomfort with the 
way the firm was calculating their units’ profits. During 
the last quarter of 2006, Hoskins had been particularly 
vocal in pointing out to Spencer that treating GI’s sub-
sidiaries as cost-focused profit centers was wrong. He 
argued that the resulting profits did not portray a fair 
picture of the subsidiaries’ performance, which could 
have an adverse effect on the subsidiaries’ sales prices, 
if they were ever spun off. The inaccurate profits also 
could be viewed negatively by financial and tax regula-
tors in the countries where the subsidiaries were 
located.3
Gary Spencer was not convinced that the current 
structure created problems that were worth fixing. 
However, in December 2006, primarily to appease 
Hoskins, he asked Mascola to create a committee to 
evaluate the situation, to address both Hoskins’ and the 
tax concerns and, if appropriate, to propose an 
improved transfer pricing system. Mascola was selected 
to lead the evaluation process because of his financial 
expertise, his independence (he did not own any GI 
stock), and his personality (he was widely regarded as 
being thoughtful and impartial).
Right after his meeting with Spencer, Mascola began 
recruiting the people that he believed needed to par-
ticipate in the process if a new transfer pricing model 
were to be both well designed and successfully imple-
mented throughout the company. Every person invited 
accepted the invitation to become part of what became 
known as the Transfer-Pricing Model Task Force. 
Mascola chaired the task force, which also included 
Jack Davis (operations vice president), Michael 
Freeman (research director), Hashi (GI Tokyo), and 
Hoskins (GI London).
The task force met periodically over a seven-month 
period. During that time, they evaluated a number of 
different transfer pricing alternatives. In an early 
meeting, Hoskins took the initiative by proposing that 
GI revenues should be allocated to the subsidiaries 
using “assets under management” as the allocation 
base and that the subsidiaries pay a royalty of (around) 
50% to New York as compensation for the R&D and 
trading strategies developed by headquarters. Accord-
ing to his model, the London office would receive 20% 
of total revenues, since it managed $32 billion of the 
$160 billion of assets under management at GI (see 
Exhibit 2). Thus, according to Hoskins, the London 
office would have been allocated the following reve-
nues in 2006:
London subsidiary 
revenues ($000)
Allocated revenues
20% * 619,949.1 = 123,989.8
Minus royalty expense
50% * $123,989.8 = 61,994.9
Net revenues
61,994.9
3	 Many countries’ tax authorities were concerned that multinational 
corporations use transfer prices to shift income out of their country 
to countries with lower income taxes. Consequently, laws in the 
United States as well as other countries constrained transfer-pricing 
policies. For example, Section 482 of the US Internal Revenue Code 
required that transfer prices between a company and its foreign 
subsidiaries equal the price (or an estimate of the price) that would 
be charged by an unrelated third party in a comparable transaction. 
Regulators recognized that transfer prices can be market-based or 
cost-plus-based, where the plus should represent margins on compa-
rable transactions.
Tax rates varied significantly across countries: In GI’s case, 
Singapore had the lowest effective tax rate (approximately 20%), 
followed by the United Kingdom and Japan (25–30%). The United 
States’ subsidiaries paid the highest tax rates (around 40%).

288
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
However, Davis and Freeman did not agree that London 
should record all of those revenues. They argued that 
the fact that London was managing those funds did not 
mean they were generating a significant proportion of 
the value associated with them. Davis argued that, in 
fact, most of the assets managed by the subsidiaries 
belonged to New York clients. Further, to manage those 
assets, the subsidiary employees were just following 
instructions from headquarters, since the investment 
management research group in New York was the unit 
in charge of developing GI’s trading strategies. Instead 
of allocating revenues based on assets under manage-
ment, Davis believed a more accurate way of allocating 
revenues would be based on the origin of the clients (the 
source of the fixed fee revenues generated at each sub-
sidiary), distributed as follows in 2006:
Subsidiary
Asset distribution based on the 
origin of the clients ($bn)
New York
150.6
London
2.2
Tokyo
4.2
Singapore
1.0
San Francisco
2.0
Total
160.0
Under this proposal, GI London’s 2006 revenue 
would have declined from its actual $26.5 million to a 
mere $8.5 million and would have resulted in a subsidi-
ary loss of over $16 million.
Totally dissatisfied with Davis’s counterproposal, 
which he considered ridiculous, Hoskins decided to 
conduct some research to learn whether (and how) GI’s 
competitors were allocating revenues to their subsidi-
aries. Hoskins learned that the industry standard was 
to split fee revenues 50–50 between Client Services 
and Investment Management. Thus, he proposed, GI’s 
business units should be split into these two categories. 
Half of the revenue would be allocated to Client Ser-
vices (including two business units: Institutional Inves-
tor Sales, and Independent Broker/Dealer Sales), and 
the other half would be allocated to the Investment 
Management unit. This would allow GI to treat both 
activities separately.
Hoskins went on to propose that 50% of the fee rev-
enues be assigned to Client Services based on the reve-
nues generated in each subsidiary (or equivalently, 
based on the origin of clients, which were directly pro-
portional to the revenues in each subsidiary), while the 
50% assigned to Investment Management be allocated 
based on assets under management. He proposed still 
to pay a 50% royalty to New York. Under this proposed 
scheme, Hoskins calculated GI London’s 2006 revenues 
as follows:
London subsidiary revenues ($000)
Client revenues
1.375% * 50% * 619,949.1 = 4,262.1
Investment 
management 
revenues
20% * 50% * 619,949.1 = 61,994.9
Minus royalty 
expense
50% * $61,994.9 = 30,997.5
Net revenues
35,259.6
Hoskins’s new proposal also met with the disap-
proval of most of the task force members. Although 
most agreed with the concept of the subsidiaries’ 
recording of revenues from Client Services, Davis reit-
erated that Investment Management should be consid-
ered a New York business unit only, since almost all of 
the investment strategies were developed at headquar-
ters. Consequently, Davis and Freeman proposed that 
the fee revenues corresponding to Investment Manage-
ment (50% of total revenues) be fully recognized by the 
headquarters office. The subsidiaries, on the other 
hand, would be reimbursed by headquarters for any 
expenses related to investment management activities 
in their units plus a 10% markup if these expenses qual-
ified as direct controllable costs. Using the 2006 finan-
cial results, Davis and Freeman estimated that the 
operating incomes recorded for the different subsidiar-
ies under their proposed model, would be those shown 
in Exhibit 6.
This model was unacceptable to Hoskins. He argued 
that the London and Tokyo subsidiaries were actively 
participating in investment management, and they 
should be rewarded for the value these activities cre-
ated. He explained:
Clearly there is activity under the broad banner of 
Investment Management in London and Tokyo. The 
issue is whether our offices add value or not. We 
are building resources in London on the basis that 
GI London is at least responsible for the investment 
management function for locally sourced clients. 

Global Investors, Inc.
289
We have established an Investment Committee to 
oversee policies for our fixed income portfolios in 
the UK and continental Europe as well as for the 
Irish funds, and we have initiated the development 
of a local research function. I accept that the local 
activity is primarily, though not exclusively, one of 
policy tailoring and implementation rather than 
original intellectual capital investment, but 
most companies would regard this as a source of 
added value.
Hashi supported Hoskins by adding,
Local value-added is not the same for all products 
or for all clients. It is clear, for example, that GI 
Tokyo adds little when it simply implements pro-
grams of trades suggested by GI New York, but it is 
also clear that it adds a significant share of value 
when it is managing money for its own clients in 
products designed specifically for them using local 
inputs.
Hoskins also expressed a concern about the effect 
that not recording the investment management reve-
nues at the subsidiary level would have on external 
parties. Hoskins believed that local tax authorities 
might disapprove such treatment, as the profitability 
from investment management operations would be 
constrained to 10% or less. He claimed that, in prac-
tice, it seemed acceptable that support services (such as 
those provided by the cost centers) would be trans-
ferred at cost (or at a slight markup), but functions that 
formed part of a group’s offering to clients (in this case, 
client services and investment management) were 
expected to be transferred in exchange for a proportion 
of revenues, following an “arm’s-length standard.”4 
Departures from arm’s-length prices could be inter-
preted by the local authorities as an attempt to shift 
taxable income out of their countries. Hoskins 
explained:
Our main competitors in the UK allocate revenues 
to the location actually carrying out the fund man-
agement. The alternative of a cost-plus arrange-
ment, such as we have historically maintained, is 
probably no longer tenable where we now have 
local clients from whom we are receiving revenues 
for local investment activities.
Another external party that Hoskins worried about 
was his own clients. Hoskins believed that key local cli-
ents would be hesitant to appoint GI London to manage 
their assets if they knew their funds were considered to 
be managed in New York.
Davis disagreed with Hoskins’s and Hashi’s conten-
tions. He believed that the contributions made to the 
local investments managed in London and Tokyo were 
minimal. Davis argued that the majority of operations 
at the subsidiaries consisted of selling the investment 
funds managed in the headquarters or executing a few 
investment operations, following strategies and guide-
lines developed by the investment management unit in 
New York.
Although Freeman agreed that the transfer pric-
ing model should adhere to tax regulations, he 
believed that the model he and Davis proposed was 
appropriate. It should not trigger regulators’ con-
cerns since it already allowed the subsidiaries to 
record revenues for the services provided to institu-
tional investor and independent broker/dealer cli-
ents (which he considered the main value-added 
activity performed by the subsidiaries). Additionally, 
GI’s executives believed that the model used to pre-
pare the subsidiaries’ financial statements was not all 
that crucial to other financial regulators since GI was 
required to report consolidated (rather than subsidi-
ary) financial statements.
The meeting
As Mascola prepared for the meeting with Spencer, he 
recognized the tensions among the task force mem-
bers. He had carefully considered the advantages and 
disadvantages of the models proposed by Hoskins and 
by Davis and Freeman. He wondered how he could 
direct the meeting toward a final selection of a trans-
fer pricing model that would both benefit the firm and 
be accepted by all, or at least most, members of the 
task force.
4	 “Arm’s-length” prices are those charged after bargaining between 
unrelated persons or those charged between related persons that 
approximate the result of independent bargaining.

290
Chapter 7 • Financial Responsibility Centers
Assets under management by subsidiary (in billions of dollars, as of December 2006)
Subsidiary managing the assets
Equity
Fixed income
Commodities
Total
New York
70.2
36.3
5.9
112.4
London
14.5
14.5
3.0
32.0
Tokyo
6.2
4.0
2.2
12.4
Singapore
2.1
0.3
0.0
2.4
San Francisco
0.0
0.2
0.6
0.8
 Total
93.0
55.3
11.7
160.0
Exhibit 1  Global Investors, Inc.: Total assets under management
Exhibit 2  Global Investors, Inc.: Types of funds (December 2006)

Global Investors, Inc.
291
Exhibit 3  Global Investors, Inc.: Organizational structure

292
Business units
Cost centers
Headquarters 
and subsidiaries
Trading
Research
Technology
Financial 
services
Legal
Operations Admin.
HR & 
commun.
Allocation if actual 
is not available
Fee revenue
yyy
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Less: royalties
zzz
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
 Fixed percentage of fee 
revenues (NY office only)
Direct controllable costs
Sales commissions
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 50% of the clients’ 
first year fees
Salaries
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Actual
Bonuses
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Actual
Payroll taxes
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Actual
Employee benefits
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Actual
Professional fees
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Actual
Occupancy 
(rent/utilities)
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Pro rata based on sq. ft.
Depreciation office 
equipment
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Actual
Maintenance
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Actual
Travel expenses
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Based primarily 
on reason for trip
Other administrative:
Equipment rentals
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Actual
Advertising
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Actual, or else pro-rata 
based on revenue
Bank charges
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Charge to Financial area
Stationery & supplies
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Pro rata based on sq. ft.
Meetings
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Pro rata based on sq. ft.
Gifts
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Pro rata based on sq. ft.
Postage
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
xxx
 Pro rata based on sq. ft.
Miscellaneous admin.
 xxx
 xxx
 xxx
 xxx
 xxx
 xxx
 xxx
 xxx
 xxx
 Pro rata based on sq. ft.
 Total direct 
controllable costs
DCCbu1:DCCbu5
DCCtr
DCCres
DCCtech
DCCfin
DCCleg
DCCop
DCCad
DCChc
Exhibit 4  Consolidated statement following traditional transfer pricing model

293
Business units
Cost centers
Headquarters 
and subsidiaries
Trading
Research
Technology
Financial 
services
Legal
Operations Admin.
HR & 
commun.
Allocation if actual 
is not available
 Other allocated costs
Trading
a1:a5
–
a7
a8
a9
a10
a11
a12
a13
GI employed a reciprocal 
allocation method (a 
system of simultaneous 
equations) to find the 
cost allocations (a1,…, 
h12) and the total costs 
of the cost centers (A, B, 
… , H), using for each 
cost center the following 
equation: Total Costs = 
(Direct controllable 
Costs) + (Other alloc. 
Costs) e.g. A = DCCtr + 
b6 + c6 + d6 + e6 + f6 + 
g6 + h6. In turn, each 
cost center got 
reimbursed by allocating 
its total costs to its 
“internal” clients 
(business units or other 
cost centers) e.g. A = a1 
+ a2 + a3 + … + a13
Research
b1:b5
b6
–
b8
b9
b10
b11
b12
b13
Technology
c1:c5
c6
c7
–
c9
c10
c11
c12
c13
Financial services
d1:d5
d6
d7
d8
–
d10
d11
d12
d13
Legal
e1:e5
e6
e7
e8
e9
–
e11
e12
e13
Operations
f1:f5
f6
f7
f8
f9
f10
–
f12
f13
Administration
g1:g5
g6
g7
g8
g9
g10
g11
–
g13
HR & communications
h1:h5
h6
h7
h8
h9
h10
h11
h12
–
 Total direct and 
allocated costs
TCbu1:TCbu5
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Reimbursement 
to cost centers
_
–A
–B
–C
–D
–E
–F
–G
–H
 Profit or loss
Profit or loss
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Exhibit 4  Continued

294
Business units
Cost centers
Totals
Headquarters 
or subsidiaries
Trading
Research
Technology
Financial 
services
Legal
Operations
Admin.
HR & 
communic.
New York
Global fee revenue
619,949.1
619,949.1
Reimbursement to subsidiaries
(59,529.0)
(59,529.0)
Royalties expense
(41,587.0)
(41,587.0)
Direct controllable costs
(151,411.0)
(27,654.1)
(10,519.1)
(5,966.5)
(6,287.1)
(12,283.7)
(4,620.2)
(2,399.5)
(58,943.0)
(280,084.2)
Other allocated costs to
(111,650.5)
(6,766.5)
(6,315.4)
(2,968.4)
(3,529.5)
(8,866.5)
(2,938.3)
(2,040.5)
(13,071.2)
(158,146.8)
Other allocated costs away
0.0
34,420.6
16,834.5
8,934.9
9,816.6
21,150.2
7,558.5
4,440.0
72,014.3
175,169.5
 Operating income
255,771.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
255,771.6
 London
Reimbursement from parenta
26,507.0
26,507.0
Direct controllable costs
(7,903.7)
(5,231.7)
(163.3)
(23.4)
(1,494.0)
(647.5)
(33.3)
(402.7)
(1,686.4)
(17,586.1)
Other allocated costs to
(16,844.6)
(664.0)
(72.3)
(3.6)
(11.7)
(15.8)
(4.0)
(113.1)
(330.8)
(18,059.9)
Other allocated costs away
0.0
5,895.8
235.6
27.0
1,505.7
663.3
37.3
515.8
2,017.2
10,897.6
 Operating income
1,758.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1,758.6
 Tokyo
Reimbursement from parenta
20,180.1
20,180.1
Direct controllable costs
(6,452.2)
(6,165.6)
0.0
0.0
(1,028.0)
0.0
(565.3)
(290.6)
(2,707.2)
(17,208.9)
Other allocated costs to
(12,007.0)
(113.9)
(89.3)
(67.6)
(232.8)
(1,080.2)
(417.1)
(96.8)
(1,465.0)
(15,569.7)
Other allocated costs away
0.0
6,279.5
89.3
67.6
1,260.8
1,080.2
982.4
387.4
4,172.2
14,319.4
 Operating income
1,720.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1,720.9
 Singapore
Reimbursement from parenta
4,776.1
4,776.1
Direct controllable costs
(1,613.0)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
(1,613.0)
Other allocated costs to
(3,001.8)
0.0
0.0
(16.9)
(58.2)
(270.1)
(104.3)
(24.2)
(366.3)
(3,841.6)
Other allocated costs away
0.0
0.0
0.0
16.9
58.2
270.1
104.3
24.2
366.3
839.9
 Operating income
161.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
161.3
 San Francisco
Reimbursement from parenta
8,065.9
8,065.9
Direct controllable costs
(2,233.5)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
(2,233.5)
Other allocated costs to
(5,609.0)
0.0
0.0
(1.1)
0.0
(289.7)
(3.6)
(56.0)
(178.6)
(6,138.0)
Other allocated costs away
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.1
0.0
289.7
3.6
56.0
178.6
529.0
 Operating income
223.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
223.3
 Consolidated operating 
income
 259,635.7
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 259,635.7
a The reimbursement from parent is equal to the total costs of the subsidiaries plus 10% of the total direct controllable costs incurred in the subsidiaries.
Exhibit 5  Operating income using traditional transfer pricing model ($000)

295
Fee revenues by subsidiary
Institutional
Indep. broker/dealer
New York
227,003.4
356,370.6
London
7,512.0
1,110.5
Tokyo
3,630.4
12,620.6
Singapore
907.6
3,155.2
San Francisco
4,342.3
3,296.5
 Total fee revenues
 619,949.1
Exhibit 6  Operating income using Davis and Freeman’s proposed transfer pricing model ($000)
Business units
Cost centers
Investment management
Institutional 
sales
Indep. Broker/ 
dealer sales
General
Trading
Research
Technology
Financial 
services
Legal
Operations
Admin.
HR & 
communic.
Totals
 New York
Fee revenues
619,949.1
619,949.1
Commission revenue/ (expense)a
113,501.7
178,185.3
(309,974.5)
(18,287.6)
Investment management 
reimbursement to subsidiaries
(19,027.7)
(19,027.7)
Royalties expense
(41,587.0)
(41,587.0)
Direct controllable costs
(38,897.6)
(53,415.7)
(59,097.7)
(27,654.1)
(10,519.1)
(5,966.5)
(6,287.1)
(12,283.7)
(4,620.2)
(2,399.5)
(58,943.0)
(280,084.2)
Other allocated costs to
(23,922.9)
(19,229.3)
(68,498.3)
(6,766.5)
(6,315.4)
(2,968.4)
(3,529.5)
(8,866.5)
(2,938.3)
(2,040.5)
(13,071.2)
(158,146.8)
Other allocated costs away
0.0
0.0
0.0
34,420.6
16,834.5
8,934.9
9,816.6
21,150.2
7,558.5
4,440.0
72,014.3
175,169.5
 Operating inome
50,681.3
105,540.2
121,763.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
277,985.3
 London
Commission revenue/ (expense)a
3,756.0
555.3
4,311.3
Investment mgmt reimb from 
parentb
11,068.5
11,068.5
Direct controllable costs
(3,829.5)
(4,074.2)
0.0
(5,231.7)
(163.3)
(23.4)
(1,494.0)
(647.5)
(33.3)
(402.7)
(1,686.4)
(17,586.1)
Other allocated costs to
(2,735.7)
(3,579.9)
(10,529.0)
(664.0)
(72.3)
(3.6)
(11.7)
(15.8)
(4.0)
(113.1)
(330.8)
(18,059.9)
Other allocated costs away
0.0
0.0
0.0
5,895.8
235.6
27.0
1,505.7
663.3
37.3
515.8
2,017.2
10,897.6
 Operating inome
(2,809.3)
(7,098.9)
539.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
(9,368.6)
(Continued)

296
Business units
Cost centers
Investment management
Institutional 
sales
Indep. Broker/ 
dealer sales
General
Trading
Research
Technology
Financial 
services
Legal
Operations
Admin.
HR & 
communic.
Totals
 Tokyo
Commission revenue/ (expense)a
1,815.2
6,310.3
8,125.5
Investment mgmt reimb from 
parentb
4,906.1
4,906.1
Direct controllable costs
(1,862.4)
(4,589.7)
0.0
(6,165.6)
0.0
0.0
(1,028.0)
0.0
(565.3)
(290.6)
(2,707.2)
(17,208.9)
Other allocated costs to
(2,682.6)
(5,034.8)
(4,289.6)
(113.9)
(89.3)
(67.6)
(232.8)
(1,080.2)
(417.1)
(96.8)
(1,465.0)
(15,569.7)
Other allocated costs away
0.0
0.0
0.0
6,279.5
89.3
67.6
1,260.8
1,080.2
982.4
387.4
4,172.2
14,319.4
 Operating income
(2,729.8)
(3,314.3)
616.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
(5,427.5)
 Singapore
Commission revenue/ (expense)a
453.8
1,577.6
2,031.4
Investment mgmt reimb 
from parentb
1,072.4
1,072.4
Direct controllable costs
(465.6)
(1,147.4)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
(1,613.0)
Other allocated costs to
(670.6)
(1,258.7)
(1,072.4)
0.0
0.0
(16.9)
(58.2)
(270.1)
(104.3)
(24.2)
(366.3)
(3,841.6)
Other allocated costs away
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
16.9
58.2
270.1
104.3
24.2
366.3
839.9
 Operating income
(682.4)
(828.6)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
(1,511.0)
 San Francisco
Commission revenue/ (expense)a
2,171.1
1,648.3
3,819.4
Investment mgmt reimb 
from parentb
1,980.7
1,980.7
Direct controllable costs
(18.6)
(2,214.9)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
(2,233.5)
Other allocated costs to
(192.2)
(3,436.1)
(1,980.7)
0.0
0.0
(1.1)
0.0
(289.7)
(3.6)
(56.0)
(178.6)
(6,138.0)
Other allocated costs away
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.1
0.0
289.7
3.6
56.0
178.6
529.0
 Operating income
1,960.3
(4,002.7)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
(2,042.4)
 Consolidated
 Operating income
 46,420.1
 90,295.8
 122,919.8
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 259,635.7
aCommission revenue is equal to 50% of the fee revenues generated by the clients of the subsidiary. In New York, the commission expense is equal to 50% of the total fee revenues (allocated 
to the subsidiaries).
bThe investment management reimbursement from parent is equal to the total investment management costs of the subsidiaries plus 10% of the investment management direct  
controllable costs (general/trading).
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Tatiana Sandino.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Tatiana Sandino.
Exhibit 6  Continued

Purposes of planning and budgeting
297
 Planning, and especially budgeting systems, which are the focus of this chapter, are a pivotal 
element of fi nancial results control systems. One important output of a planning and budgeting 
system is a written plan that clarifi es where the organization wishes to go (objectives), how it 
intends to get there (strategies), and what results should be expected (performance targets). 
 Planning and budgeting systems vary considerably in form and use across organizations, 1 
but nearly all commonly involve the setting of fi nancial performance targets used for perfor-
mance evaluation and incentive purposes, although we will discuss various other purposes of 
budgeting as well. 
 According to extensive research by two economists – Nicholas Bloom of Stanford and John 
Van Reenen of the London School of Economics – setting targets ( Chapter   8   ), rewarding perfor-
mance ( Chapter  9 ), and measuring results ( Chapter  10 ) are  key to management . Their study of 
more than 10,000 organizations in 20 countries suggests that these factors are tightly linked to 
improved performance measured in terms of productivity, profi tability, growth, and survival. 2 
 But not every organization does their planning and budgeting well, and not all benefi ts, and 
also several issues, arise around the  targets-incentives-measurement triad, although this triad 
will be our focus. Some of the organizational benefi ts of planning and budgeting come from the 
processes of developing the plans. Planning processes force managers and employees to think 
about the future, to discuss their ideas with others in the organization, to prepare their projec-
tions carefully, and to commit to achieving objectives that will serve the organization’s inter-
ests. For plans and budgets to serve a useful role, then, the issue is not whether to prepare a plan 
or budget, but rather  how to do it. 3 
 Purposes of planning and budgeting 
 Planning and budgeting systems serve four main purposes. Obviously, the fi rst purpose is  plan-
ning ; that is, making decisions in advance. Employees tend to become preoccupied quite natu-
rally with their seemingly urgent, day-to-day exigencies. Unless they are encouraged to engage 
suffi  ciently in strategic, long-term thinking, they often fail to do so. Planning and budgeting 
systems provide the needed encouragement. They serve as a potent form of  action control , forc-
ing managers to propose plans of action when thinking about the future, considering business 
prospects, resource constraints, and risks. In doing the forward thinking, the managers develop 
a better understanding of their organization’s opportunities and threats, strengths and weak-
nesses, and the eff ects of possible strategic and operational decisions. This forward-thinking 
decision-making process sharpens the organization’s responses to its competitive environment. 
 CHAPTER 8 
 Planning and Budgeting 

298
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
Decisions regarding strategies, staffing, and operational tactics can be adjusted based on 
predictions of outcomes before the organization suffers major problems. This is a classic exam-
ple of what is called feed-forward control. Effective planning processes make control systems 
proactive, not just reactive. They help managers shape the future, not just respond to the condi-
tions they face and performance they observe.
For example, Berendsen (previously called Davis Service Group), a large public UK-based 
service contractor that sources, cleans, and maintains industrial textiles, protective clothing, 
and textiles, considers its good business performance to be, at least in part, “the result of careful 
budgeting, [which] involves making detailed financial plans for every aspect of the business, 
identifying risks and ensuring that managers are committed to the outcomes that they have 
agreed.”4 Similarly, the success of Zara, “the fast expanding, ‘fashion-right’ company headquar-
tered in the remote northwest corner of Spain in La Coruna,” suggests that “if a retailer can 
forecast demand accurately, far enough in advance, it can enable mass production under push 
control and lead to well managed inventories, lower markdowns, higher profitability (gross 
margins), and value creation for shareholders in the short- and long-term.”5 These examples 
suggest that planning and flexibility or responsiveness do not have to repel, although as we will 
see, this will depend on the rigidity in the planning and budgeting process; that is, how the 
plans and budgets are used or how the planning and budgeting is done, rather than the plans 
and budgets themselves.6
A second purpose of planning and budgeting is coordination. The planning and budgeting 
processes force the sharing of information across the organization. The processes involve a top-
down communication of organizational objectives and priorities, as well as bottom-up commu-
nication of opportunities, resource needs, constraints, and risks. They also involve lateral 
communication that enhances the abilities of organizational entities (e.g. business units, divi-
sions, functional areas, and administrative units) working together toward common objectives. 
Everyone involved becomes more informed, so the process is more likely to result in decisions 
that consider all perspectives. The sales plan is coordinated with the production plan so that 
shortages or surpluses of inventory and personnel are less likely and resources are synchro-
nized as needed. The production plans are coordinated so that the potentials for bottleneck 
constraints are minimized. Plans for growth and investments are communicated to the finance 
function, which takes steps to ensure the needed capital. And so on.
A third purpose of planning and budgeting arises from facilitating top management over-
sight. This oversight occurs in the form of preaction reviews (a type of action control discussed in 
Chapter 3) as plans are examined, discussed, and approved at successively higher levels in the 
organization before actions are taken. Top management also uses plans as the performance 
standards used to implement the management-by-exception form of control (a type of results 
control discussed in Chapter 2). The planning and budgeting processes provide a forum that 
allows the organization to arrive at challenging but realistic performance targets by balancing 
top managers’ wishes for desired performance with lower-level managers’ information about 
possibilities. Negative variances – that is, measured performance below target levels – provide 
top managers an early warning of potential problems and justification for either reconsidering 
the organization’s strategy or for interfering in the business of subordinate managers.
The final purpose related to planning and budgeting is motivation. The plans and budgets 
become targets that affect manager motivation because the targets are linked to performance 
evaluations and, in turn, various organizational rewards. As mentioned briefly in Chapter 2, 
merely telling employees to “do their best” is not nearly as motivating as asking them to attain 
specific performance targets that are neither too easy nor too difficult to achieve. In an interview 
with The Economist, Gary Latham of Locke and Latham’s original Goal Setting Theory fame noted 
that “there is a wealth of evidence that setting well-designed targets does improve employee 
performance – there have been more than 1,000 academic experiments in goal-setting, of which 

Planning cycles
299
over 90% have produced positive results.” Latham added, “The studies show that an employee 
with a goal that is clear and simple, and challenging yet attainable, will perform better than one 
whose only instruction is to do as good a job as possible. Among other things, such a goal helps 
an individual or team to focus, to evaluate performance, to assess whether to maintain or change 
course, and to enjoy a sense of achievement when they succeed.”7
While all performance targets can provide these benefits, this chapter focuses on financial 
performance targets, which are the most common type of targets derived from firm’s annual 
budgeting processes.
Planning cycles
Organizations often use three hierarchical, sequential planning cycles, which are called 
strategic planning, capital budgeting (or programming), and (operational) budgeting.
Strategic planning
Strategic planning includes the relatively broad processes of thinking about the organization’s 
missions, objectives, and the means by which the missions and objectives can best be achieved, 
i.e. strategies. Strategic planning processes typically involve senior executive corporate and 
entity managers who are the most broadly informed. They also consider both analyses of the 
past and forecasts of the future. Although a detailed treatment is outside the scope of this chap-
ter, strategic planning typically involves developing (1) an overarching vision or mission and 
objectives for the organization as a whole; (2) an understanding of the organization’s present 
position, its strengths and weaknesses, and its opportunities and risks; (3) an agreement about 
the types of activities or businesses the organization should (and should not) pursue; and (4) a 
strategy for each of the core activities or businesses the organization has decided to pursue – 
that is, a plan that sets out the path of action by which each business or entity’s objectives will be 
achieved building on its strengths.8
A complete, formal strategic planning process leads to the establishment of the organization-
wide strategy as well as, as applicable, strategies for various entities within the organization; 
identification of resource requirements; and statements of tentative performance goals, usually 
projected 3–5 or 10 years into the future. Strategic planning provides a framework for the more 
detailed planning that takes place in the planning cycles that follow, although there is some 
variation in practice. Recent survey evidence, for example, suggests such variation at least in 
terms of company size. Not surprisingly, perhaps, the larger the company, the more likely it will 
engage in both strategic planning and developing or integrating a budget with it each year; 
whereas 26% of companies with fewer than 50 employees use a budget only, involving (as we 
will see later) a detailed financial plan with a one-year-only horizon.9
Capital budgeting
Capital budgets are situated between long-range, strategic plans and annual budgets. Capital 
budgeting (also sometimes called programming) involves the identification of specific action 
programs (projects to be implemented or investments to be made) over the next few years (usu-
ally 1–3 or 5 years) and specification of the resources each will consume. Programs should 
translate each entity’s strategy, which is generally focused externally, into an internally focused 
set of activities designed to implement the strategy and, in turn, lead to the achievement of the 
entity’s goals. Programs can be developed at various levels of detail, ranging from that of a com-
plex program covering all the activities necessary for an entity to sell its products in a new 

300
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
geographical territory, down to that of simply purchasing a single new machine for an existing 
production line. Capital budgeting is constrained in that the program options considered must 
be consistent with the tentative agreements reached during the strategic planning process. Cap-
ital budgeting often involves many people with expert knowledge in areas such as investment 
analyses, forecasting, and financing. Capital budgeting also typically requires substantially 
more planning detail than does strategic planning.
The capital budgeting process usually starts with discussions between the entity managers 
and their subordinates about the programs needed in the near future. As part of this process, 
managers must inevitably review ongoing programs to judge whether they are fulfilling their 
intended purposes and whether they should be modified or discontinued. Scarce resources are 
then allocated to specific programs. Much of the existing theory of resource allocation focuses 
on allocation of capital funds, where the screening and comparisons of potential investments is 
structured in financial terms using discounted cash flow or similar finance-based analyses, 
again with some variation in method usage in practice.10
However, rarely is resource allocation a mechanical process dependent solely on the finan-
cial calculations. Other resources, which may be scarce in the time period being considered and 
which are more difficult to quantify in financial terms (such as talent (human resources), 
essence of timing to reap potential first-mover advantages, and concerns arising from escalating 
commitment due to prior investments), often also influence the final allocation decisions.11 
Moreover, the outcomes of capital budgeting processes are likely also dependent on the track 
record, preparation, arguing skill, and political power of the managers involved. Managers 
have to compete for resources. Those making the most persuasive arguments and presentations 
are generally those whose requests are supported.
A subset of corporate managers is usually involved in reviewing larger program or invest-
ment proposals, often as part of a capital or resource allocation committee. These reviews allow 
the corporate managers another opportunity to communicate corporate priorities to entity 
managers (helping to alleviate potential lack-of-direction problems) and to exercise another 
preaction review (an action control). They also serve to help lower-level managers, particularly 
functional managers, understand how their activities fit into the organizational portfolio of 
activities and how they influence or relate to initiatives in other parts of the organization (again, 
addressing potential lack-of-direction problems). But the reviews also have an important bot-
tom-up communication function: they serve as a forum for lower-level managers to communi-
cate opportunities, threats, and requests for capital funds to the corporate managers. If capital 
budgeting is done well, the programs receiving resources are individually consistent with cor-
porate objectives and strategies and mutually consistent with other related programs.
(Operational) budgeting
Operational (or annual) budgeting – budgeting for short – involves the preparation of a short-
term financial plan, a budget, usually for the next fiscal year. Budgets match the organization’s 
responsibility structure (see Chapter 7) and provide as much revenue, expense, asset, and lia-
bility line-item detail as appropriate. This, unsurprisingly, is how budgeting is defined in a 
recent survey of practice – as a one-year financial plan of detailed revenues and expenses by 
organizational entity (responsibility center), where budgeting is shown to be used by 93% of the 
sampled companies.12 We suspect that the remaining 7% either comes from survey measure-
ment error or includes responses from companies that have presumably “replaced” budgets or 
have gone “beyond budgeting,” which we discuss later in this chapter.13 In budgeting, quantita-
tive (particularly financial) data are emphasized.
Every effectively run organization performs the functions of each of the three planning 
cycles – strategic planning, capital budgeting (programming), and budgeting – although the 

Target setting
301
formality and distinguishability of the cycles vary greatly from one organization to the next. In 
smaller firms, particularly, one or more of these cycles are usually relatively informal, and 
many firms combine two, or sometimes all, of these cycles as part of one planning or budgeting 
process, which they typically do annually. As organizations grow, however, a more elaborate 
and formal planning process evolves, one closer to a full three-cycle system. In non-profit 
organizations, the planning processes may be less focused on capital funds, although capital is 
often a major constraint for them as well, forcing them to consider tradeoffs among various 
programs and designate available funds annually in their operating budget to well-chosen 
courses of action that help further their charitable objectives (see Chapter 16).
Target setting
Beyond producing written plans that clarify the organization’s goals, strategies, and expected 
results, plans and budgets become targets that affect managers’ motivation because the targets 
are linked to performance evaluations and, often, various incentives (which we discuss in 
Chapter 9). The use of pre-set performance targets in business organizations is almost univer-
sal. We quoted Professor Latham earlier on the robust evidence supporting the positive motiva-
tional effects of targets.14 In addition, budgets are the primary performance target to evaluate 
performance at managerial levels and to award incentives. Review discussions, which tend to 
focus on variances between actual performance and targets, can lead to improved understand-
ing of what is, and what is not, working and provide a useful forum for intra-organizational 
communication. Even in the absence of explicit incentives, managers are motivated to achieve 
their performance targets if for no other reason than to avoid having to explain to their bosses 
and colleagues why they missed their targets. For example, China’s Haier, the large consumer 
appliances company, extensively uses a name-and-shame approach. Photographs of managers 
are prominently displayed throughout the company with a red smiley face for good perfor-
mance and a yellow frowning one for those doing poorly.15 Moreover, in committing to a target, 
managers direct attention toward goal-relevant activities. Targets also motivate managers to 
use the knowledge they have, or discover the needed knowledge, to help them attain the goal.
The most commonly used performance targets at management levels in for-profit organiza-
tions arise during the budgeting process, the last stage of the three-cycle planning system. As 
mentioned earlier, budgeting targets typically are financial in nature, expressed on a fiscal-year 
or annual basis, match the firm’s responsibility center structure, and tie into the annual perfor-
mance reviews and incentive plans of their managers. For example, the financial targets of 
profit center managers are defined in terms of profit, or at least in terms of selected line items of 
controllable revenues and expenses in some combination. For these reasons, our focus in this 
section is primarily on financial performance targets in a budgeting context.
Types of financial performance targets
Financial performance targets can be distinguished in a number of ways; that is, whether the 
targets are (1) model-based, historical, or negotiated; (2) fixed or flexible; and (3) internal or 
external.
Model-based, historical, and negotiated targets
Performance targets can be (1) derived from a quantitative model of what performance should 
be, (2) based on historical performance, or (3) derived from a process of negotiation between 
lower- and higher-level managers.

302
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
Model-based targets are derived from predictions of possible performance in subsequent 
measurement periods. When model-based targets are used in areas where activities are pro-
grammable (where there is a direct and relatively stable, deterministic causal relationship 
between inputs and outputs) they are said to be engineered targets. For example, in production 
departments, which are often cost centers, input-output relationships for materials and labor, 
say, can often be derived directly from the product(ion) specifications. The physical quantities 
for material and labor requirements can then be turned into financial targets by multiplying the 
standard quantities by their standard unit costs. But models are also used to try to derive per-
formance targets in contexts other than standard costing applications. For example, firms often 
develop quantitative models of profit plans at the organization or entity levels, which are built 
on a financial accounting model and other inputs. Such models inevitably require many fore-
casts and planning assumptions, such as about the total available market, competitor actions, 
product mix, prices, and so forth. However, the target that is ultimately adopted arising from 
such models is often negotiated (which we discuss later in this section) based on the range of 
outcomes that the model predicts before managers commit to it as the “final” target.
Historical targets are derived directly from performance in prior periods. They sometimes 
involve what is called ratcheting, such as when, for example, a profit center manager is asked to 
increase profits by 10% over last year’s numbers.16 When budgets are set without taking history 
as a reference, they are called zero-based. Under so-called zero-based budgeting, managers must 
build budgets from scratch rather than base them on the previous year’s plan, requiring the 
justification of every expense. Zero-based budgeting is not commonly used, although it is the 
preferred budgeting method of private equity companies or activist hedge fund investors after 
they take control of a company in which they seek major efficiencies through cost cutting – they 
want every line item and each expense to be justified.17
At managerial levels, however, most performance targets are negotiated between hierarchi-
cal superiors and subordinates, such as when division managers negotiate their profit (or invest-
ment) center budgets with corporate. Negotiation is common due to the limitations of 
model-based approaches and the planning assumptions that they inevitably incorporate (see 
earlier), as well as due to information asymmetry in decentralized organizations. Higher-level 
managers generally are more knowledgeable about the overall organization’s objectives and 
resource constraints. Lower-level managers generally have superior knowledge about the busi-
ness prospects and constraints at the operating level. Negotiations about performance targets, 
therefore, should allow for making use of each level’s relative information advantage and 
induce superiors and subordinates to share at least some of their information.
Tight results control is easiest to implement when targets are engineered because the link 
between effort and results is direct. Consumption of inputs greater than, or production of out-
puts lower than, an engineered target indicates a performance problem with little ambiguity. 
Managers can also use historical targets to affect tight results control if the processes being 
controlled are stable over time. Tight results control is more difficult when important assump-
tions about the future are necessary or if negotiation is used, unless the negotiation is tightly 
constrained by good performance models or good historical performance data. In these latter 
situations, performance variances from the target might indicate a performance problem, but 
they also might indicate that the original assumptions were wrong or that the negotiation pro-
cess was biased.
Fixed versus flexible targets
Another way to distinguish targets is in terms of whether they are fixed or flexible. Fixed targets 
do not vary over a given time period. Flexible targets are changed according to the conditions 
faced during the period. The targets may be set to vary, for example, with changes in the volume 
of activity, the price of inputs (e.g. oil or rare minerals), interest rates, or currency exchange rates.

Target setting
303
Surveys of practice suggest that firms typically use fixed targets (that is, targets that remain 
commitments for the year), but these surveys also suggest that such fixed, annual budget targets 
can inevitably become obsolete, especially in rapidly changing, competitive environments. In 
the Quantrix survey, three-quarters of the sample companies reckon this to be the case, with 
more than half the respondents saying they reach that point within the first six months. One-
eighth of the respondents even suggest that their budget targets have already become obsolete 
before the start of the year, whereas one-quarter of the respondents feel that their targets 
remain useful throughout.18
For this reason, many firms “recast” their budget during the year (monthly or quarterly). 
“Recast” means reforecast; not re-budget – that is, the original budget targets are not being re-
set. Instead, firms reforecast at regular intervals to be able to compare their budgets with the 
most recent, updated information available, while usually expecting their managers to remain 
committed to the original budget target. The Quantrix survey suggests that, on average, 58% of 
the sample firms recast their budgets quarterly, with larger firms doing this more frequently, 
where about one-third of the firms with more than 1,000 employees recast budgets monthly 
compared to only 19% of companies overall.19
Clearly, then, financial targets are fixed in most firms, at least at profit center levels and 
above. This means that managers are held accountable for achieving their budgets regardless of 
the business conditions they face, and if they fail to do so, they stand to lose some important 
forms of rewards, such as their annual bonus.
Where targets are made flexible, this tends to be done at lower organizational levels. 
Manufacturing (standard cost center) managers, for example, are usually not held account-
able for achieving a fixed total cost budget. Instead, their total cost budgets are typically 
flexible, meaning that their budget varies with the volume of production (e.g. $350,000 
for production of 100,000 units) or involves the use of unit cost standards (e.g. $3.50 per 
unit). This is easily demonstrated with an example from the service sector, where the 
budget (for soap, say) of the manager in charge of the room service unit of a hotel property 
will be adjusted upward or downward depending on a decline or increase in occupancy 
relative to the budgeted number of visitors. The hotel manager, however, will not normally 
have that budget adjusted for variability in occupancy; instead, that person will be 
expected to manage the property effectively to “hit” the occupancy target and generate 
the budgeted profit.
Targets can also be made flexible by stating them in terms of relative performance; that is, 
relative to the performance of others facing identical, or at least similar, conditions. Any given 
manager’s performance is evaluated not in terms of the absolute level of his or her own perfor-
mance, but relative to the performance of others. Most typically, the comparisons are relative to 
managers in the organization in charge of like entities (e.g. fast food outlets or bank branches of 
similar size in similar demographic locations). We discuss relative performance evaluations in 
more detail in Chapter 12.
Internal versus external targets
Almost all planning and budgeting processes involve target-setting approaches that are inter-
nally focused. Managers consider what is possible within the organization and focus on period-
over-period, continuous improvements. But planning and budgeting processes can also involve 
target-setting approaches that are externally focused. This is the case when an organization 
uses relative performance evaluations and benchmarks its performance and practices with 
those of other organizations. For example, Volvo, the large truck maker, said that it will set tar-
get operating margins for trucks and buses based on the performance of Scania, Daimler, MAN, 
and Iveco, and its construction equipment and marine engine business operating targets will be 
benchmarked against those of Caterpillar, Deere, and CNH.20

304
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
One would expect that firms in competitive environments would engage in at least some 
form of benchmarking. Corus, a large steel maker, used to rely on “tons of steel rolled” as the key 
measure of performance in its steel plants. This measure, however, did not show whether it met 
customer needs or whether the steel needed rework because it did not meet quality standards. 
Therefore, Corus started to monitor and measure how its operations compare with other pro-
ducers and competitors in the steel industry. This process of benchmarking means that Corus 
continually reviews its activities to try to become best-in-industry instead of just meeting inter-
nally generated, often historically determined targets.21
Benchmarking can involve comparing the organization’s performance against the best-in-
industry (direct competitors), as in Corus, or best-in-class (companies generally recognized for 
superior performance on the dimension of interest; that is, companies known for their best prac-
tice). Many aspects of performance can be benchmarked, including specific product or service 
characteristics (e.g. mean time between failures), specific activities or processes (e.g. customer 
service), or overall organizational outcomes (e.g. return on assets). When the benchmarking 
focus is on organizational outcomes (performance), rather than on best practices, as in the Volvo 
example, the benchmarks are often used as performance standards for purposes of relative per-
formance evaluations. The idea is that if one aspires to become the best, performance should be 
compared with the best. (In Chapter 12, we discuss the use of relative performance evaluations 
for another purpose, that of filtering uncontrollable factors from measured performance.)
Common financial performance target issues
The effects of any results-control system can be undermined if the wrong targets are set or if the 
targets are not set properly. Two of the most important financial performance target issues are 
related to (1) the appropriate amount of challenge in a target, and (2) the appropriate amount 
of influence to allow subordinates in setting targets.
How challenging should financial performance targets be?
The first financial performance target-setting issue is how difficult, or challenging, to make the 
targets. Should targets be set at stretch levels, should they be a best guess as to what will happen 
in the forthcoming periods, or should they be set conservatively to help ensure that they will be 
achieved? The answer to this question depends on the planning process purpose(s) that are 
emphasized.
For planning purposes, budget targets should be an unbiased best-guess. They should equal 
expected performance; that is, in probabilistic terms, with a 50% chance of achievement – thus, 
as likely to be missed as to be exceeded. As such, the targets will provide the best decision-
making guidance for managers who are planning resource levels without (or less) risk of over- 
or under-committing resources (such as employee hiring numbers, production levels, and 
financing) due to either optimistic or conservative performance expectations that may subse-
quently be either not forthcoming or overshot.
For motivational purposes, however, appropriate target levels should have at least some 
stretch in them. The theory regarding the effects of performance targets on motivation is com-
plex. As management gurus such as Jack Welch and Gary Hamel as well as other pundits have 
pointed out, if organizations do not set high performance expectations, their employees will not 
produce superior results.22 Challenging or stretch performance targets push employees to per-
form at a higher level. They lead to innovation, rather than just incrementalism.23
On the other hand, performance targets can be set too high. Research in psychology has 
shown a fairly consistent, nonlinear relationship between target difficulty and motivation (and, 
hence, performance), as shown in Figure 8.1.24 If the targets are perceived as quite easy to 
achieve, there is virtually no relationship between target difficulty and motivation. People’s 

Target setting
305
levels of aspiration (and, hence, motivation and performance) are low because they are able to 
achieve their targets with a minimum of effort, persistence, or creativity. Above a threshold 
level of difficulty, motivation seems to increase with target difficulty up to the point where peo-
ple approach the perceived limits of their ability. After that, the relationship levels off and even-
tually turns down. At high levels of difficulty, most people get discouraged, lose their 
commitment to achieve the target, and exert less effort – they give up trying. Motivation is high-
est when performance targets are set at an intermediate level of difficulty, point A in Figure 8.1, 
which can be called challenging but achievable.
Where, specifically, is the point of optimal motivation – the inflection point in the target dif-
ficulty-performance relationship? In other words, where do perceptions of excessive difficulty 
and, hence, lack of commitment to achieve the target set in? The point varies undoubtedly 
depending on such things as the personalities (such as the degree of confidence and risk toler-
ance), capabilities, and experiences of the individuals involved. As we will see, it also depends 
on the setting (such as the degree of uncertainty or the prevalence of uncontrollable factors). 
This is why some research findings, or sometimes merely anecdotal claims, vary widely in the 
“recommended” level of challenge that targets should have for “optimal” motivation, ranging 
from as low as a 25–40% chance of achievement, to as high as an 80–90% chance.
Studies of practice suggest that at corporate and entity (profit center) levels in firms, most 
annual profit targets are set to be highly achievable. The budget targets are set to be achievable 
80% to 90% of the time by an effective management team.25 These targets should not be 
described as easy, because they require competence and a consistently high level of effort. These 
highly achievable budget targets have many motivation, planning, and control advantages, as 
discussed next: increased manager commitment, protection against optimistic projections, 
higher achievement, reduced cost of interventions, and reduced gameplaying.
Increased manager commitment. Highly achievable budget targets increase managers’ com-
mitment to achieve the targets. Most managers operate in conditions of considerable uncer-
tainty; their performance is affected by many unforeseen circumstances. Highly achievable 
targets protect the managers to a considerable extent from the effects of unfavorable, unfore-
seen circumstances and allow them few, if any, rationalizations for failing to achieve their tar-
gets. They have no choice but to commit to achieve their targets regardless of the business 
Figure 8.1  Relationship between performance target achievability and motivation/performance
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 388.

306
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
conditions faced. This increased commitment causes the managers to prepare their budget 
plans more carefully and to spend more of their time managing rather than preparing ration-
alizations to explain away failure to meet them.
Because of the lengthy budget performance period – typically one year in most firms – the 
costs of a lack of commitment to achieve budget targets are high. If highly difficult targets are 
set and some negative circumstances arise early in the year, the loss of commitment and 
decreased motivation may persist for many months. In contrast, if the budget targets are highly 
achievable, managers can withstand some adverse circumstances, even quite early in the 
period. They retain the motivation to try to make up for the unforeseen negative effects and are 
more confident that they will be able to get back on track.
Corporate managers have other possibilities for insuring managers against the effects of 
unforeseen, negative circumstances. They could shorten the planning horizon and set targets for 
periods shorter than a year. However, budget target-setting processes are expensive, and profit 
measures for short-time periods require many inter-period revenue and expense allocations. 
Another possibility is to flex the budget when unforeseen effects arise. However, most profit cent-
ers, and sometimes even cost centers, are affected by many unforeseen events, some positive and 
some negative. It is costly to analyze the effects of each unforeseen effect and make a judgment 
as to whether and to what extent it should be corrected. For these reasons, highly achievable tar-
gets are often seen as the more workable, though imperfect, approach. Here, managers are left to 
deal both with “the rough” and “the smooth” themselves while maintaining a reasonable expec-
tation, and motivation, that they can meet the target in the end, ups and downs notwithstanding.
Protection against optimistic projections. Highly achievable budget targets protect the 
organization against the costs of optimistic revenue projections. The first step in budgeting is 
usually preparation of sales forecasts. Production (or service) levels are then geared to the fore-
casted level of sales. If the budgets have optimistic revenue projections, managers will be 
induced to acquire resources in anticipation of revenue (activity) levels that may not be forth-
coming. Some of these acquisition decisions are at least partially irreversible. It is often difficult 
and expensive to shed people and specific assets. It is usually safer to forecast sales and profits 
relatively conservatively and acquire additional resources only when their need is assured. This 
conservatism implies that budget targets should be highly, or at least reasonably, achievable.
Higher manager achievement. In the minds of most managers, budget achievement defines 
the line between success and failure. Highly achievable budget targets are motivating; they 
make most managers feel like winners. Managers who achieve their budgets are given a pack-
age of rewards – bonuses, autonomy, and higher probability of promotion – and their self-
esteem is given a boost. Organizations derive advantages when their managers have good 
self-esteem and feel like winners. Managers who feel good about themselves and their abilities 
are more likely, among other things, to be eager to work hard, to be entrepreneurial, and to 
increase their levels of aspiration for the future. In contrast, when managers fail to achieve 
their budget targets, they live with that failure for an entire year and even beyond, due to the 
stigma often associated with failure; such frustration is likely to undermine their confidence 
and commitment, which can be quite costly to the organization. When Tesla, the manufacturer 
of electronic cars, faced disappointment from analysts about its 2016 forecast for production of 
1,600 to 1,800 vehicles per week when the company has said production capacity would be 
2,000 per week, Elon Musk, Tesla’s founder and chief executive, said: “We don’t want to set high 
expectations – we want winning to feel like winning, if that makes sense.”26
Reduced costs of interventions. Highly achievable budget targets reduce the costs of needed 
interventions from higher up in the organizational hierarchy. Most corporations use a manage-
ment-by-exception philosophy. Higher-level managers intervene in the affairs of their subordinate 

Target setting
307
managers only when unfavorable variances from budget signal the need. When 80% to 90% of 
the managers are achieving their budgets, top management attention is directed to the relatively 
few situations where the operating problems are most likely and most severe.
Figure 8.2 illustrates this point by showing two probability distributions of forthcoming 
profits, one for an effective, competent, hard-working manager and one for an ineffective man-
ager. Because the scaling shows better performance to the right, the distribution for the ineffec-
tive manager is to the left of that for the effective manager. If the budget target is set at point A, 
the vast majority, perhaps 90%, of effective hard-working managers will achieve their targets. 
But a much smaller proportion of ineffective managers, perhaps only 20% given the way this 
curve is drawn, will likely achieve their targets. Thus, higher-level managers will spend rela-
tively little time intervening in the affairs of effective managers; instead, most of their interven-
tion efforts will be directed at ineffective managers, where it probably should be directed.
Reduced gameplaying. Highly achievable budget targets also reduce the risk of gameplaying. 
The stakes associated with budget achievement in most firms, which include bonuses, promo-
tions, and job security, are so significant that managers who are in danger of failing to achieve 
their budget targets have powerful motivations to play games, either with the numbers or 
through foolhardy decisions (that is, either through accounting or operating methods as dis-
cussed in Chapter 5). In other words, and in those circumstances, managers may engage in 
manipulative actions and decisions to make their performance indicators look more favorable, 
knowing that their actions or decisions are having no positive effects on real performance and 
might actually be harming it.27
However, the primary risk organizations face by setting highly achievable budget targets is 
that manager aspirations, and hence motivation and performance, might be lower than they 
should be, thereby causing the managers to not perform at their best. To mitigate this, organiza-
tions can provide incentives to exceed budget targets. Figure 8.3 shows a typical results-reward 
function for entity (profit center) managers. It shows that managers earn all (or sometimes 
most) of their bonuses by exceeding their budget targets (up to a pre-specified maximum). If the 
rewards given for exceeding budget targets are sufficiently high relative to those given merely 
for achieving the budget targets, managers will have incentives not to retreat after the achieve-
ment of their budget targets is assured.
Figure 8.2  Probability distributions of forthcoming profits for effective and ineffective managers
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 390.

308
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
While the use of highly achievable budget targets is the typical observed practice, not all 
budget targets should be set to be highly achievable. If the firm is in danger of failing or default-
ing on a significant loan, corporate managers may set highly challenging profit targets to signal 
to operating managers the short-term exigency.28 Top managers sometimes also set high profit 
targets to limit managers’ discretionary investments, both to signal to lower-level managers 
that the strategy has changed (that is, that short-term profits now have priority over growth) 
and to enforce that change. They sometimes set high targets because they suspect organiza-
tional fat or because they want to set up a rationale to replace a manager. They may also set high 
targets to penalize managers for earning high bonuses or “windfall gains” in prior periods 
based on good fortune rather than good effort.
Another budget target-setting possibility is to set multiple levels of targets, such as optimis-
tic, realistic, and worst case, each designed to serve a different budget purpose (motivation, 
planning, or control). This is a budget-focused approach to contingency, scenario, or what-if 
planning. The key tension that these approaches try to address is, on the one hand, ensuring 
that target setting is flexible enough to incorporate uncertainty (to serve the planning purpose) 
while, on the other hand, preserving the motivational effects of fixed targets (to try to meet the 
motivational and control purposes).29
How much influence should subordinates have in setting their targets?
Another important issue in designing a financial results control system when targets are negoti-
ated is the extent of influence subordinates should be allowed in setting their targets; that is, to 
what extent should the planning and budgeting process be top-down or bottom-up? Many organ-
izations lean toward bottom-up target-setting processes at managerial levels. For example, the 
Quantrix survey concludes that “the financial planning and analysis (FP&A) process extends far 
beyond the FP&A team, as survey respondents report a broad range of managerial input. While 
it’s expected to find heavy involvement from C-level executives and financial executives, compa-
nies look for input from departmental, regional, channel, and product managers.”30 Allowing 
employees to participate in, and to have influence on, the process of setting their performance 
targets can have several benefits.
Involvement in the setting of targets enhances the focal manager’s commitment to achieve the 
target. Those who are actively involved in the process of setting their performance targets are 
Figure 8.3  Typical rewards/results function for a profit center manager
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 391.

Target setting
309
more likely to understand why the targets were set at the levels they were, so they are more likely 
to accept the targets and be committed to achieving them. A second benefit is information sharing. 
As discussed above, target setting in most firms involves a process of sharing information about 
local business possibilities and corporate objectives and resources. Managers who are closest to 
the local business can provide useful information to superiors about both business potentials and 
risks. Corporate managers can provide information about corporate priorities and constraints. A 
third benefit is cognitive. Allowing participation in target setting has the beneficial effect of clari-
fying expectations and encouraging managers to think about how best to achieve their targets.31
However, all employees, and not even all managers, should always be highly involved in 
planning and budgeting processes and, in particular, the setting of performance targets. Situa-
tions where target-setting processes can be completed effectively in a predominantly top-down 
manner include the following. First, targets can effectively stem from a top-down process when 
corporate management has sufficient knowledge of their entity business prospects and issues 
for setting properly challenging performance targets, or when corporate management has the 
knowledge that essentially subsumes the knowledge possessed by the entity managers. This 
occurs most commonly when a given activity or operation is programmable, where targets can 
be engineered or set with great reliability by projecting historical trends. Related to this, knowl-
edge can also be sufficient for setting performance targets when corporate managers have a 
good understanding of the local business, perhaps because they formerly ran it and conditions 
are stable. But even when budgets are prepared in a seemingly bottom-up process, when higher-
level managers have this knowledge, they exert greater influence on the final decisions about 
performance targets, thereby shifting the balance of power in the target negotiation process.
Second, top-down target setting can be effective when higher-level managers have the infor-
mation available for evaluating performance on a relative basis. For example, they may be man-
aging a large number of relatively homogenous entities operating in a stable environment. 
These situations exist in some industries, such as where firms manage large numbers of like-
concept retailing outlets, including fast food restaurants, car dealerships, or bank branches.
Third, top-down target setting can be effective, and should even be preferred, when lower-
level managers are not good at budgeting. Top-down target setting is common in small busi-
nesses for just this reason. Small-business operating managers are often technically skilled, but 
their management and financial education and experience might be limited.
Fourth, top-down target setting should be preferred when lower-level managers’ thinking is 
dysfunctionally bound by historical achievements. Corporate management may know how to 
set standards according to a learning curve model that has proven accurate in the past; or they 
may know that a new technology will cause structural changes in the business, thus obsolescing 
historical performance standards.
Finally, top-down target-setting can be used to try to mitigate biases that lower-level manag-
ers are prone to impart to the budgeting process. Biases can lead the organization to set perfor-
mance targets either higher or lower than is desired. Most operating managers have a 
conservative bias, and they use the opportunity of involvement in the target-setting processes 
to set lower targets. Lower targets increase the probability of target achievement, enhance the 
managers’ reward potentials, and make it possible for them to achieve their targets with less 
effort. But some operating managers, particularly entrepreneurial and sales-oriented manag-
ers, may have an optimistic bias. Some managers want a challenge that will give them a feeling 
of accomplishment. Some want to signal to their bosses that they are aggressive, perhaps to 
compete for additional resources. Neither such optimism nor pessimism is desirable, and 
higher-level managers may have the perspective or experiences to mitigate these biases.
While top-down target setting has advantages in some settings, organizations who rely on 
this type of process must be careful not to forego too many of the benefits of a bottom-up pro-
cess. Perhaps most importantly, they risk losing their managers’ commitment to achieve the 

310
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
targets. Corporate managers may set targets that capable and consistently hard-working man-
agers should be able to achieve with high probability, but if those asked to achieve those tar-
gets do not share that perception of achievability, they may be discouraged.32 The resulting 
lack of motivation may lead to a low probability of achievement, in which case perception 
becomes reality.
Planning and budgeting practices, and criticisms
The ways in which planning and budgeting systems are used reflect the outcome of a large 
number of management design and implementation decisions. Planning and budgeting sys-
tems can vary in terms of their planning horizon. Most firms’ planning horizons are relatively 
short: one year or less (22%), two years (10%), three years (29%), four or more years (39%).33 
One key factor affecting firms’ planning horizons is the length of the business cycle; that is, 
the lag between investments and their payoffs. Firms in different industries have very differ-
ent planning horizons. Those in the power utility industry, say, often plan quite far in the 
future, 25 years or more. Firms in the retail industry, say, might consider a one- or two-year 
plan to be adequate. Another key factor in determining the proper planning horizon is uncer-
tainty. Sometimes the future is so uncertain that only short-term plans can be made. For 
example, a firm in the fashion industry might be able to plan only a season or two ahead, 
although the example of Zara, the “fast fashion” retailer we mentioned before, is an interest-
ing case in point.
There is also variation across firms in the timing of, and the time devoted to, planning and 
budgeting. Firms run their long-range planning with greater variation than they run their 
budgeting, which follows a rather standard, annually recurring pattern familiar to most in 
large firms. Most firms start their budgeting process four to six months before the end of the 
fiscal year and complete it during the last two months of the year. The budgeting process takes 
about four months to complete in most firms. This suggests that budgeting consumes a non-
trivial portion of time, over a significant time period each year, of many managers and employ-
ees in both line and staff positions. This is confirmed in the Quantrix survey. What is more, the 
larger the company, the more people that are involved. For companies with fewer than 
50 employees, 92% report that between 1 and 10 people are involved; for companies with more 
than 5,000 employees, 31% rely on more than 100 people in the process.34
Once the budget is set, firms are unlikely to revise it during the year for evaluation purposes, 
although they may frequently update it for planning purposes. In the Quantrix survey, the 
majority of respondents reported that they provided “ad-hoc scenarios,” a fancy term for revised 
or additional analyses during the year: 32% reported that they provided between four and six 
per year, and another 29% reported that they provided one to three per year.35 But as we dis-
cussed earlier, despite these revised, additional, or ad-hoc analyses or scenarios, companies 
typically require that their managers remain focused on achieving their original budget targets 
no matter which business conditions they face. This is also the idea behind the use of the term 
“ad-hoc scenario” by Quantrix: an ad-hoc plan to analyze variation to budget or plans and/or to 
a specific business event or request.36
Budgeting is thus costly, particularly in terms of management time. It is not uncommon to 
hear managers complain that they spend so much time with the budget that they have little 
time to do any work. They never stop budgeting. That said, it is hard to envision any other way 
to run large, decentralized organizations with complex reporting structures that inevitably 
have a high need for coordination and that are managed mainly by the numbers (using results 
controls) through a management-by-exception approach.

Planning and budgeting practices, and criticisms
311
Relatively recently, however, there has been a spate of criticisms of planning and budgeting 
processes, particularly by the Beyond Budgeting movement, asserting, obviously with some jus-
tification, that budgets:
● Are rife with politics and gameplaying;
● Produce only incremental thinking and minor modifications to the plans and budgets pre-
pared in the preceding periods;
● Lock the organization into a “fixed plan” and are not responsive to changes in today’s fast-
moving economy;
● Centralize power in the organization and stifle initiative;
● Separate planning (thinkers) from execution (doers);
● Cause too many costs for too few benefits; and so on.
The more moderate critics make a number of suggestions for improvement involving (rela-
tively minor) modifications to traditional planning and budgeting processes, such as updating 
plans more frequently (rolling plan processes) and using relative performance standards and 
subjective performance evaluations rather than relying exclusively on fixed budget targets and 
pre-agreed incentive formulas. But some of the critics go further, imploring managers to aban-
don traditional budgeting and to move beyond budgeting.37
One of the budgeting-abandonment success stories cited by many critics is that of the 
Swedish-based Svenska Handelsbanken, which eliminated budgets in 1972 and has never 
looked back to reintroduce them. Svenska Handelsbanken has no annual budgeting process, 
and it produces no budgets; instead, it evaluates the bank’s and its managers’ performances by 
comparing them with measures of competitors’ performances on key performance dimensions, 
such as return-on-capital, cost-to-income ratio, and profit-per-employee. Whereas Svenska 
Handelsbanken has been successful in managing the firm without budgets, it must be noted 
that most firms are not in an industry with such homogeneous entities as banking. Therefore, 
many firms do not have such good relative performance data available to them. Moreover, 
Svenska Handelsbanken still has to engage in many of the standard planning and budgeting 
elements described above to fulfill all the other purposes, other than motivation, such as plan-
ning, coordination, and facilitation of top management oversight.
The critics are correct, however, that many firms’ planning and budgeting processes are inef-
fective.38 Designing and implementing planning and budgeting systems is complex and diffi-
cult. The purposes for which the systems are needed often conflict, necessitating some difficult 
tradeoffs.39 Business conditions are prone to shift, yet it is difficult to adapt plans and budgets 
quickly. In any case, it is sometimes counterproductive to set performance targets because they 
can focus employees unnecessarily narrowly, and they can encourage unethical risk taking or 
earnings management (as will be discussed further in Chapter 15).40
The spirit of the beyond-budgeting management model can be seen perhaps more as a man-
agement philosophy rather than a mere issue of planning and budgeting, or planning and budg-
eting alone. Its key aim, instead, is to increase the adaptability of organizations. Companies 
that follow the beyond-budgeting principles tend to have simple organizational structures (or 
aim to simplify them), flat hierarchies (or aim to make them flatter, less hierarchical), and flex-
ible peer-to-peer networks used to provide and exchange the benchmarking data and share best 
practices. They operate with an assumption that organizations, like natural systems, are capa-
ble of self-organization and self-regulation. Their managers do not require negotiation of fixed 
performance targets, as is done in a traditional budgeting system. Allocations of resources are 
event-driven, not calendar-constrained. Allocated resources are not treated as entitlements 
that must be spent. Unconstrained by a fixed and outdated plan, employees strive to improve 

312
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
their performance relative to their peers or some other benchmark. Creativity and rapid 
response to customer needs and unpredicted events are encouraged.
However, there are no “quick fixes” when it comes to improving an organization’s adaptability 
and responsiveness in highly competitive, uncertain, and turbulent environments. To improve 
the design of a planning and budgeting system, or anything that presumably takes its place, 
managers must be aware of all of the purposes for which the systems can be used and wisely 
choose the combinations of system elements that best serve these purposes in their settings.
The beyond-budgeting “management model” has been developed and refined as its use has 
spread to several organizations around the world.41 That said, many organizations continue to 
consider budgets as indispensable,42 although many of them also continually struggle to make 
them more effective.43
The key difficulty is to get the needed flexibility while maintaining the features of plans and 
planning that stem from drawing managers away from fighting day-to-day fires, encouraging 
them to think about the future, and helping them shape that future. But as useful as plans and 
planning can be, when they become fixated on a single number or target, they can hinder rather 
than help and even become detrimental. Even the best laid plans must allow for some, or even 
any, carefully considered adjustment and flexibility to respond to any of a number of changes in 
the environment. This can be done, as suggested earlier, and as the setting requires, through 
updating budgets more frequently, using subjective performance evaluations, rolling forecasts, 
and possibly other means, some of which we discuss in later chapters, especially Chapter 12. A 
survey of over 500 senior finance professionals by Deloitte, however, suggests that striking this 
balance is inevitably difficult, as gleaned, for example, from the following two points:44
Integrating planning, budgeting and forecasting – 37% of respondents admitted to a failure to 
align their planning, budgeting and forecasting effectively. In these circumstances there is a risk 
that the activities of the organisation will be misdirected, lack focus, alignment and cohesion.
Using forecasting properly – 61% of survey respondents recognised the importance of fore-
casting as a way of compensating for the static nature of budgeting. However, there is a fail-
ure to appreciate how forecasting can enhance corporate agility and specifically a lack of 
understanding of how it fundamentally differs from planning, budgeting and target-setting.
As we said at the start of this chapter, some of the organizational benefits of planning and 
budgeting come from the processes of developing the plans. For plans and budgets to serve a 
useful role, then, the issue is not whether to prepare a plan or budget, but how.45
Conclusion
Planning and budgeting systems are potentially powerful management tools that serve multiple 
purposes. They provide a way of converting managers’ visions into an organized set of tactics that 
are employed throughout their organizations. They provide a standard that can be used to judge 
organizational success or progress. And they have many behavioral implications, such as regarding 
the effort invested in thinking about the future and commitment to achieve performance targets.
Many of the criticisms of planning and budgeting systems, such as those made by devotees of 
the so-called beyond-budgeting movement, focus on the flaws of negotiating performance tar-
gets. It is true that allowing target negotiations has drawbacks. The negotiating processes are 
costly, particularly in management time. Hence, firms are willing to engage in the processes 
relatively infrequently, typically annually. Targets that are fixed that far in advance can easily 
become obsolete, particularly in fast changing environments. Moreover, allowing negotiation 
of targets can also enhance gameplaying, such as the reluctance to share private information to 

313
Notes
be able to create budgetary slack and to maximize incentive payouts associated with achieving 
the targets. Still, negotiating targets has its advantages, as this chapter has described. Although 
annual budgets have been criticized for inducing gameplaying behaviors and for being incapa-
ble of meeting managers’ needs in rapidly changing environments, evidence suggests that they 
remain in widespread use and continue to play a crucial role in coordinating and motivating 
employee actions and behaviors.
However, just because an organization prepares a plan does not mean that it is engaging in 
useful planning. Frequent criticisms voice that strategic planning is overly bureaucratic and 
absurdly quantitative. Often plans are prepared but not used; they just take up shelf space. For 
plans to be effective, they must match the business conditions the firm is facing so that they can 
be used as a near-constant guide for employee actions. The plans should also assign responsibil-
ity and accountability for performance. This is an important role for budgets. Budgets turn 
plans into performance targets that affect employee motivation, particularly because the tar-
gets are often linked to performance evaluations and rewards, which we discuss in the next 
chapter, and which must be implemented judiciously as well to have good effect.
Notes
	 1	 See, for example, 2012 Budgeting, Forecasting, and Plan-
ning Survey (Quantrix, 2012).
	 2	 In addition to the original academic articles and working 
papers by Bloom, Van Reenen, and colleagues, see “Meas-
uring Management,” The Economist (January 18, 2014), 
online at econ.st/1b4aTUl.
	 3	 See, for example, “Companies Get Budgets All Wrong,” 
The Wall Street Journal (July 22, 2013), online at on.wsj.
com/1OfjJaR.
	 4	 “Planning a Budget (Davis Case Study),” Times 100 
(2010), online at www.thetimes100.co.uk.
	 5	 “Zara’s Secret to Success: The New Science of Retailing,” 
Forbes (October 14, 2013), online at onforb.es/16ZsH74.
	 6	 See also M. D. Mumford and M. Frese, The Psychology of 
Planning in Organizations: Research and Applications 
(New York: Routledge, 2015).
	 7	 Quoted from “The Quantified Serf,” The Economist 
(March 7, 2015), online at econ.st/1GZAcbw.
	 8	 In large, diversified corporations, the question as to which 
businesses the corporation should (and should not) be in is 
often referred to as “(corporate) diversification strategy.” 
The individual strategies for each of the businesses that 
the corporation has decided to pursue are, in turn, referred 
to as “(strategic business unit) competitive strategies.”
	 9	 2012 Budgeting, Forecasting, and Planning Survey, op. cit., p. 5.
	10	 See, for example, P. A. Ryan and G. P. Ryan, “Capital 
Budgeting Practice of the Fortune 100: How Have Things 
Changed,” Journal of Business and Management, 8, no. 4 
(2002), pp. 355–64. See also U. Götze, D. Northcott and 
P. Schuster, Investment Appraisal: Methods and Models 
(Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 2015).
	11	 See, for example, J. J. Gong, W. A. Van der Stede, and S. 
M. Young, “Real Options in the Motion Picture Industry: 
Evidence from Film Marketing and Sequels,” Contempo-
rary Accounting Research, 28, no. 5 (2011), pp. 1438–66.
	12	 2012 Budgeting, Forecasting, and Planning Survey, op. cit., 
pp. 3, 5.
	13	 See also T. Libby and R. M. Lindsay, “Beyond Budgeting or 
Budgeting Reconsidered? A Survey of North-American 
Budgeting Practices,” Management Accounting Research, 
21, no. 1 (March 2010), pp. 56–75.
	14	 “The Quantified Serf,” op. cit. See also A. Locke, “Goal-
Setting Theory and Its Applications to the World of Busi-
ness,” Academy of Management Executive, 18, no. 4 
(November 2004), pp. 124–25.
	15	 “Grow, Grow, Grow,” The Economist (April 17, 2010), p. 13.
	16	 For a recent series of papers on the issues of target ratchet-
ing, see J. H. Evans, “A Forum on Ratcheting and Incen-
tives,” The Accounting Review, 89, no. 4 (July 2014), p. 1195; 
C. Aranda, J. Arellano, and A. Davilla, “Ratcheting and the 
Role of Relative Target Setting,” The Accounting Review, 
89, no. 4 (July 2014), pp. 1197–1226; R. J. Indjejikian, M. 
Matejka, K. A. Merchant, and W. A. Van der Stede, “Earn-
ings Targets and Annual Bonus Incentives,” The Accounting 
Review, 89, no. 4 (July 2014), pp. 1227–58; R. J. Indjejikian, 
M. Matejka, and J. D. Schloetzer, “Target Ratcheting and 
Incentives: Theory, Evidence, and New Opportunities,” 
The Accounting Review, 89, no. 4 (July 2014), pp. 1259–67.
	17	 See, for example, “Burger King Chief Takes Aim at 
McDonald’s,” The Financial Times (August 26, 2014), 
online at on.ft.com/1tHvCIY; “Hedge Fund Manager Bill 
Ackman Seizes 7.5% Mondelez Stake,” The Financial 
Times (August 6, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1DsumCk.
	18	 2012 Budgeting, Forecasting, and Planning Survey, op. 
cit., p. 8.
	19	 Ibid., p. 6.
	20	 “Volvo Aims for Profit Margins at Top of Heavy-Equip-
ment Industry,” Bloomberg (September 22, 2011), online 
at www.bloomberg.com.
	21	 “Continuous Improvement as a Business Strategy: Target 
Setting (Corus Case Study),” Times 100 (2010), online at 
www.thetimes100.co.uk.
	22	 J. Welch, Jack: Straight from the Gut (New York: Warner 
Business Books, 2001); G. Hamel, Leading the Revolution 

314
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
(Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2000); S. 
Kerr and S. Landauer, “Using Stretch Goals to Promote 
Organizational Effectiveness and Personal Growth: Gen-
eral Electric and Goldman Sachs,” Academy of Manage-
ment Executive, 18, no. 4 (November 2004), pp. 134–8.
	23	 “Grow, Grow, Grow,” op. cit., pp. 12–13.
	24	 As mentioned earlier in this chapter, Edwin Locke and 
Gary Latham are renowned researchers in the area of 
goal setting theory. For a recent reflection by them on 
research in the target-setting area, see E. Locke and G. 
Latham, “Building a Practically Useful Theory of Goal 
Setting and Task Motivation: A 35-Year Odyssey,” Ameri-
can Psychologist, 57 (2002), pp. 705–17.
	25	 See, for example, K. A. Merchant and J. F. Manzoni, “The 
Achievability of Budget Targets in Profit Centers: A Field 
Study,” The Accounting Review, 64, no. 3 (July 1989), 
pp. 539–58; and K. A. Merchant, “How Challenging 
Should Profit Budget Targets Be,” Management Account-
ing (November 1990), pp. 46–8.
	26	 “Tesla Warns Vehicle Sales Target at Risk,” The Financial 
Times (August 5, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1W2HaVR.
	27	 See also M. Jensen, “Corporate Budgeting Is Broken: Let’s 
Fix It,” Harvard Business Review (November 2001), 
pp. 94–101; and M. Jensen, “Why Pay People to Lie?,” 
The Wall Street Journal (January 8, 2001), p. A32.
	28	 See, for example, M. Matejka, K. A. Merchant, and W. A. 
Van der Stede, “Employment Horizon and the Choice of 
Performance Measures: Empirical Evidence from Annual 
Bonus Plans of Loss-Making Entities,” Management Sci-
ence, 55, no. 6 (June 2009), pp. 890–905.
	29	 See, for example, W. A. Van der Stede and T. Palermo, 
“Scenario Budgeting: Integrating Risk and Performance,” 
Finance & Management, no. 184 (January 2011), 
pp. 10–13. See also N. Frow, D. Marginson, and S. Ogden, 
“Continuous Budgeting: Reconciling Budget Flexibility 
with Budgetary Control,” Accounting, Organizations and 
Society, 35, no. 4 (May 2010), pp. 444–61; “Managing in 
the Fog,” The Economist (February 26, 2009), pp. 67–68.
	30	 2012 Budgeting, Forecasting, and Planning Survey, op. cit., 
p. 12.
	31	 There is an extensive stream of research in the area of 
budget participation going back nearly half a century. For 
a study that speaks to some of the benefits discussed here, 
among many other studies too numerous to list here, see 
M. Mahlendorf, U. Schaffer, and O. Skiba, “Antecedents of 
Participative Budgeting: A Review of Empirical Evi-
dence,” in M. J. Epstein and J. Y. Lee (eds.), Advances in 
Management Accounting, 25 (2015), pp. 1–27.
	32	 T. Libby, “The influence of Voice and Explanation on Per-
formance in a Participative Budgeting Setting,” Accounting, 
Organizations and Society, 24, no. 2 (February 1999), 
pp. 125–37.
	33	 2012 Budgeting, Forecasting, and Planning Survey, op. cit., 
p. 5.
	34	 Ibid., p.13.
	35	 Ibid., p. 7.
	36	 Ibid., p. 3.
	37	 See, for example, J. Hope and R. Fraser, Beyond Budget-
ing: How Managers Can Break Free from the Annual Per-
formance Trap (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School 
Press, 2003); B. Bogsnes, Implementing Beyond Budget-
ing: Unlocking the Performance Potential (London: John 
Wiley & Sons, 2008). For an academic perspective, see S. 
C. Hansen, D. T. Otley, and W. A. Van der Stede, “Recent 
Developments in Budgeting: An Overview and Research 
Perspective,” Journal of Management Accounting 
Research, 15 (2003), pp. 95–116; T. Libby and R. M. 
Lindsay, “Beyond Budgeting or Budgeting Reconsid-
ered? A Survey of North-American Budgeting Practices,” 
Management Accounting Research, 21, no. 1 (March 
2010), pp. 56–75.
	38	 “Companies Get Budgets All Wrong,” op. cit.
	39	 S. C. Hansen and W. A. Van der Stede, “Multiple Facets of 
Budgeting: An Exploratory Analysis,” Management Account-
ing Research, 15, no. 4 (December 2004), pp. 415–39.
	40	 L. Ordonez, M. Schweitzer, A. Galinsky, and M. Bazerman, 
“Goals Gone Wild: The Systematic Side Effects of Over-
prescribing Goal Setting,” Academy of Management 
Perspectives, 23, no. 1 (2009), pp. 6–16.
	41	 For more information, see the Beyond Budgeting Institute, 
online at bbrt.org (accessed December 2015).
	42	 Libby and Lindsay, “Beyond Budgeting or Budgeting 
Reconsidered?” Op. cit. See also B. Ekholm and J. Wallin, 
“Is the Annual Budget Really Dead,” The European 
Accounting Review, 9, no. 4 (2000), pp. 519–39; T. Libby 
and R. Lindsay, “Beyond Budgeting or Better Budgeting?” 
Strategic Finance (August 2007), pp. 47–51.
	43	 J. Orlando, “Turning Budgeting Pain into Budgeting 
Gain,” Strategic Finance (March 2009), pp. 47–51; “How 
to Better Connect Planning, Forecasting, and Budgeting,” 
Journal of Accountancy (February 20, 2014), online at 
shar.es/1Gxnwf.
	44	 Integrated Performance Management (Deloitte, 2014), 
online at www.planbudgetforecast.com/report.
	45	 For an academic study on the use and usefulness of budg-
eting (in times of economic crisis, for example), see S. D. 
Becker, M. D. Mahlendorf, U. Schaffer, and M. Thaten, 
“Budgeting in Times of Economic Crisis,” Contemporary 
Accounting Research (2016), in press.

Royal Wessanen NV
315
 In early February 2009, Sjoerd Schaafsma, CFO 
Europe at Royal Wessanen, was pondering on the 
budget for the remainder of 2009 as well as the stra-
tegic outlook for 2010 and beyond. An era with a lot 
of strategic uncertainty laid ahead. The uncertainty 
arose not only from the global economic crisis 
resulting in lower revenue growth, but also from 
recent corporate decisions to change the company’s 
strategy. 
 Since the late 1990s, Wessanen’s main market of 
organic food had shown a very satisfying annual 
growth at well above 10%. Since 2008, however, 
growth began to slow and had stabilized at less than 
5%, thereby no longer meeting corporate expecta-
tions. Worse, the economic recession led manage-
ment to believe that 2009 was likely to show a decline 
in the market for organic food. Because of the high 
level of uncertainty, and not ruling out the possibility 
of negative growth, Mr. Schaafsma considered devel-
oping an alternative forecast for 2009 to take into 
account a “worst-case scenario” of declining reve-
nues. But to effectively pursue this, he knew he 
needed the support and commitment of the full Exec-
utive Board. 
 Royal Wessanen NV 
 In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, The 
Netherlands was one of the world’s most prominent 
trading nations, with a huge merchant fleet that car-
ried new and exotic materials between Europe and 
the far-flung ports of the Far East, the Americas, the 
Caribbean and Africa. Amsterdam was the hub of 
this trading activity where many of the ships docked 
and unloaded their cargoes into the warehouses that 
lined the River Zaan. One of the owners of those 
warehouses was Adriaan Wessanen, a renowned 
trader of that time. In 1765, the 41-year-old Mr. Wes-
sanen teamed up with his 31-year old nephew, Dirk 
Laan, to trade in “Mustard, Canary and other seeds.” 
The then-new company was called Wessanen & 
Laan. 
 By about two-and-a-half centuries later, in 2008, Royal 
Wessanen NV developed into a group with operations in 
seven countries in Western Europe and North America. 
Royal Wessanen NV was listed on the Midcap Euronext 
stock market in Amsterdam. Revenues were £1.6 billion 
split 40–60 over Europe and North America, respectively. 
(See  Exhibit   1    for a combined overview of the revenues 
and EBIT of Wessanen by business and location.) 
 Wessanen had a two-tier board structure. The Board 
consisted of the chief executive officer (CEO), chief 
financial officer (CFO), and president of the North 
American operations. The CEO also acted as president 
of the European activities. Under the Executive Board, 
there were two leadership teams: one for the European 
and one for the North American markets, respectively 
(see   Exhibit  2 ). 
 In the second half of 2008, revenue growth dropped 
from 10% to below 5%. Key challenges were to keep 
growing the top line while protecting margins. Stalled, 
or even declining, growth became a serious business 
reality. The existing strategy set out to cope with these 
challenges focused on three diff erentiating capabilities: 
 ●  Strong and focused brands and excellent branding 
skills; 
 ●  Best-in-class distribution services; 
 ●  Excellence in category management. 
 2009 – a year of transformation 
 In February 2009, the CEO left the company. A member 
of the Supervisory Board filled the CEO position 
 ad interim , while the search for a new CEO was on. At 
that time, a radical change in the global strategy was 
announced to increase the company’s focus on the Euro-
pean market and concentrate on its leading brands in 
organic foods. In Europe, Wessanen aimed to become a 
“one-system” company with considerably more 
 CASE STUDY 
 Royal Wessanen NV 

316
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
harmonized brands and centralized sourcing. The plan 
was to eventually divest all US businesses, which con-
sisted of four entities, namely Panos, Liberty Richter, 
Tree of Life, and American Beverage Company (ABC).
Two business lines – Organic and Frozen – were to 
constitute the core of the company’s operations in 
Europe. First, Wessanen Europe was a dedicated player 
in organic food with a strong presence primarily in the 
Benelux (including, chiefly, Belgium and the Nether-
lands), the United Kingdom, France, and Germany. The 
strategy for this business line consisted of a so-called 
“multichannel approach with channel-specific solu-
tions.” Wessanen Europe’s two sales channels were 
grocery stores on the one hand, and Health Food Stores 
(HFS) on the other hand, with channel-specific solu-
tions ranging from Wessanen-owned brands to private 
labels. Innovation was key at this time. New brands 
were launched and existing product ranges were 
extended or changed with high frequency, with mixed 
levels of success, however, as is common in fiercely 
competitive consumer product markets.
Frozen Foods, the second main business line, was 
involved in the distribution and marketing of snack 
foods. The Wessanen brand in the Benelux for this was 
Beckers. Private labels were distributed and sold 
through the Dutch-based Favory Convenient Food 
Group, a joint venture with Rabo Private Equity. The 
activities of the companies in Germany and Italy – Karl 
Kemper and Righi, respectively – were deemed low on 
potential synergies with the Benelux frozen food oper-
ations. For this reason, they were sold.
In the latter half of the year, the American Panos 
brands and Liberty Richter were sold, too. The sale of 
Tree of Life was announced in December 2009, leaving 
ABC the main operation to divest in the United States. In 
the summer of 2009, however, irregularities were dis-
covered in ABC’s books, resulting in a restatement of its 
accounts. During that period, the local management 
team was restructured and a recovery plan to regain 
profitability was established. The turmoil, however, 
meant that ABC’s divestment plans had to be put on hold.
Evaluating 2009, it seemed that after two difficult 
years, including poor growth, CEO turnover, and fraud 
in the American operations, Wessanen had turned a 
corner and was back on track with a clear strategy going 
forward. The company had transformed from a widely 
diversified conglomerate with many house brands, 
cocktails, snacks, and biological food, to a more focused 
corporation concentrating chiefly on the European 
organic and frozen food markets. The reorganization 
and concentration of activities resulted in an expected 
drop in revenues from £1.6 billion to approximately 
£700 million by the completion of the divestment pro-
cesses (Exhibit 1). That said, it would also result in a 
strengthened balance sheet due to an improved debt-
equity ratio and lower working capital.
The new strategy of less diversification also intro-
duced a stronger dependency on a few core markets, 
both business- and location-wise. However, stock mar-
ket analysts pointed to the risks associated with such 
concentration especially due to the large uncertainty in 
the development of the organic food market which had 
not yet taken up much space in a typical consumer’s 
grocery cart.
Planning and control
To enable the Executive Board and the management of 
the operating companies (OPCOs) to manage and con-
trol the organization, Wessanen’s internal governance 
structure was based on a performance framework that 
consisted of annual budgets and a monthly and quar-
terly review cycle. All planning and performance 
reporting was done in Hyperion, an Enterprise Perfor-
mance Management (EPM) tool from Oracle.
Budgeting was essentially a bottom-up planning 
process, which was guided by the Executive Board with 
specific targets on the three KPIs that formed the back-
bone of the reporting in this company: Net Sales (and 
by comparison to prior periods, the expected growth in 
Net Sales), Earnings Before Interest and Taxes (EBIT), 
and Working Capital.
Net Sales were essentially Gross Sales adjusted for 
discounts. Net Sales were also sometimes referred to as 
the “Top Line” or simply “Revenues.”
EBIT was calculated from Net Sales by subtracting 
Cost of Goods Sold (COGS),1 Marketing, Advertising & 
Promotion costs, and Sales, General & Administrative 
costs (SG&A). What is broadly known as SG&A included 
many detailed line-item accounts, often referred to as 
“overheads” although not all of these costs were fixed.
Working Capital conformed to its usual accounting 
definition, including inventory, accounts payable (ven-
dors), and accounts receivable (debtors). Working Capi-
tal was turned into a KPI by dividing it by the last three 
months of Net Sales that was extrapolated for the year 
by multiplying it times four. This method was chosen 
1	 As was customary in accounting terms, revenues minus COGS was 
also separately reported as Gross Margin.

Royal Wessanen NV
317
and introduced in the budgeting process of 2009 to get 
the best possible match between the working capital 
closing position of a specific quarter, aligned with the 
respective Net Sales, and taking into account seasonal-
ity effects (see Exhibit 3).
Each September, “Corporate Guidelines for the Prep-
aration of the Royal Wessanen Budget” were issued to 
the managing directors (MDs), financial directors 
(FDs), and controllers of the OPCOs by Dick van der 
Wardt’s Corporate Accounting & Control Department. 
These corporate guidelines communicated the top-level 
targets (see Exhibit 4). The guidelines also set out the 
procedures and timetable for the budgeting process as 
well as the specifications for use of Hyperion. Technical 
information about interest rates, currency rates, tax 
rates, and capital expenditures were also provided. The 
time horizon for the planning process covered the 
budget year (t + 1) as well as the two subsequent years 
(t + 2; t + 3). Planning for the second and third years 
was referred to as the “Strategic Update.” The strategic 
updates were designed to corroborate the espoused 
strategic plan and to inform corporate management on 
both the threats and opportunities for the coming years, 
including their potential effects on P&L and cash flows 
of the OPCOs in light of their strategic plan. Strategic 
updates were reported (and entered into Hyperion) 
with substantially less detail than the detail that was 
required for budgets.
The budget had to be prepared in a period of approx-
imately six weeks during September–October of each 
year. As part of this process, Mr. Schaafsma met with 
the local management teams to discuss the major busi-
ness challenges on how to establish the required tar-
gets. Mr. Schaafsma noted that these meetings usually 
had “an informal character and were all about impor-
tant performance drivers, such as the customer port­
folio, product portfolio, operational excellence and the 
quality of the personnel involved in the local business 
processes.”
The budget was reported via two formats. One, 
based on Hyperion including all the financial data, ena-
bled the Corporate Accounting & Control department 
to roll up the financials of the different OPCOs to a cor-
porate performance overview. The other was a Power-
Point reporting format which included the main 
overviews from Hyperion, but also allowed for more 
commentary. Here the OPCOs had to report their anal-
ysis on the changes to prior years and both the pre-
sumed risks and upside potentials that were embedded 
in their forecasts.
In early November of each year, the MD and FD of 
each OPCO presented their budget to the Executive 
Board. It was not unusual within Wessanen that corpo-
rate “upped” the initially proposed targets by the OPCO 
managers. In the end, however, the targets were set in 
agreement with the Executive Board, containing what 
they believed was the “optimal” amount of stretch. 
OPCO managers, however, considered their targets 
“challenging” in most of the years.
The targets for Net Sales, EBIT, and Working Capital 
were used for the bonus schemes of the MDs of each 
respective OPCO. Specifically, the annual bonus pay-
ments of MDs reflected their OPCO’s actual results rela-
tive to these targets, including minimum, on-target and 
stretch target levels. Bonus payouts were calculated as 
shown in Exhibit 5. The minimum target level was set at 
90% of the on-target level, whereas the stretch target 
level was set at 110% of the on-target level. The three 
performance targets were weighted 20-40-40 in the 
bonus scheme; that is, 20% of the bonus potential was 
based on target achievement of Net Sales, 40% on EBIT, 
and 40% on Working Capital. Target achievement on 
each performance measure was independent from tar-
get achievement on any of the other two performance 
measures. In other words, target achievement on each 
performance measure was strictly cumulative in the 
determination of the overall bonus payout. Seventy per-
cent of an MD’s incentive pay was determined in this 
way – that is, based on meeting the targets, and hence, 
determined formulaically. The other 30% was based on 
an MD’s “individual performance,” which was assessed 
subjectively (see Exhibit 6).
The base amount of the incentive pay was 10% of 
annual salary. The maximum bonus for MDs was set at 
25% of salary or 250% of the incentive pay base 
amount. Thus, for the formulaic part of the incentive, 
at target performance, an MD earned 70% of 10% of 
salary. On average, incentive awards at Wessanen 
amounted to between 5% and 10% of salary. As is cus-
tomary in most organizations, the remuneration com-
mittee (a committee of the Supervisory Board) reserved 
the right to cap or change incentive payouts on a discre-
tionary basis, but this was done only rarely.
During the budget year, OPCOs had to submit 
revised forecasts each quarter to provide the Executive 
Board with a latest estimate of the projected financials 
for the year. These forecasts were reported next to the 
budget, which was considered the “fixed plan.” This 
was all done in Hyperion in order to provide the com-
pany its “integrated” EPM for which the system was 

318
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
designed. The reforecast for the third and fourth quar-
ter (done at the end of the second quarter, or end of 
June) also required an update for the subsequent two 
years on the three KPIs. In September, then, corporate 
guidance was established for the upcoming year, which 
was the starting point for the upcoming budget discus-
sions.
Monthly, actual financial performance was reported 
against the budget-to-date and the latest forecast-to-
date. Variances were discussed monthly during half-
hour conference calls between the Executive Board, 
Mr. Schaafsma, and the respective OPCO’s MD and FD. 
Much more extensive face-to-face discussions took 
place among the same group of people each quarter in 
order to vet the performance of the previous quarter 
and the forecast for the remainder of the year. This 
was called the Quarterly Business Review (QBR). 
Mr. Schaafsma commented:
Our QBRs are not just “talking shops.” We require 
the OPCO managers to make detailed reports in 
preparation for these meetings. These meetings 
easily last for two hours, and they are “honest” – 
sometimes brutally honest. We discuss perfor-
mance on the financials, based on reporting formats 
in Hyperion, but we also drill deep into nonfinancial 
performance indicators to discuss and grasp the 
current state of the business. These nonfinancials 
can have to do with credit notes, customer com-
plaints, sick-leave percentages and employee turn-
over. Any and all exceptions are flagged up and fair 
game for discussion. Our QBRs are, however, not 
just about operational performance. We also use 
them to discuss, and decide as appropriate, the 
launch of new brands; to evaluate progress on pro-
jects; to assess key investments and/or to raise 
other issues we suspect may be lurking in our 
OPCOs. All told, the QBRs allow us to spend some 
“quality time” with our OPCO managers …
Finally, two other components of Wessanen’s inter-
nal control and governance structure were the com-
pany-wide Framework of Internal Control (FIC) and 
the Wessanen Company Code (WCC). The FIC provided 
a clear overview of the control activities applied to the 
most important process-level risks of the main business 
functions. The purpose of these control activities was 
to ensure effective and efficient operations, reliable 
financial reporting, and compliance with laws and reg-
ulations. In May of each year, the OPCOs were required 
to perform their annual control self-assessments based 
on the FIC. The results were communicated to Internal 
Audit and the Executive Board. A summary was com-
municated to the Supervisory Board. For any identified 
control weaknesses, an action plan was put in place by 
management. Progress on these action plans and fol-
low-ups on any internal audit issues were reported and 
discussed during the QBRs. A risk and control database 
was kept to keep track of all the reported risks and 
improvement or “mitigation” plans.
The WCC provided employees with a set of moral 
and ethical guidelines for how to do business and how 
to achieve results in an appropriate manner. It included 
Wessanen’s Mission, Core Values, Business Principles, 
and Guidelines. The Guidelines dealt with several top-
ics, including information security, insider trading, 
gifts and favors, bribery and corruption. The WCC also 
referred to Wessanen’s whistle-blowing policy, fraud 
policy, sustainability policy and applicable authority 
limits.
Challenging times (early 2009)
To get the management support he knew was required, 
Mr. Schaafsma urgently requested a meeting with the 
new interim CEO. The CEO supported the idea to 
develop a cost-cutting scenario that would “stress test” 
a possible drop in revenues of 10%. The idea had been 
floated before in 2008 by the former CEO. At that time, 
however, the implementation was not pushed through. 
But by this time around, the economic situation had 
deteriorated more than it had then, so Mr. Schaafsma 
felt that it was now-or-never to press on with the idea:
Looking back, and happy about having convinced 
the new CEO, I knew that all eyes were trained on 
me to take charge of what turned out to be a fre-
netic process to implement a “hurricane proof” 
scenario. I was happy to have joined forces with 
Dick [van der Wardt, VP Corporate Accounting & 
Control]. The two of us together, with our teams, 
worked hard to get this done as swiftly as possible.
Time was running short, though, because revising 
an annual plan made little sense the further they were 
down into the year. This was March 2009. The primary 
objective was to keep EBIT at budget level while antici-
pating a drop in revenues of approximately 10% rela-
tive to the original budget. Given that Net Sales 
projections were revised down, and given that EBIT 
targets stayed the same, that implied that budgeted 
costs had to come down.

Royal Wessanen NV
319
Mr. Schaafsma’s team developed a model based on 
what they had determined to be the relevant cost cate-
gories. These categories included all expenditures that 
had a fixed component in them, but at the same time 
were deemed to have minimal negative impact on 
potential growth in Net Sales. The marketing, advertis-
ing, and promotion budgets were ring-fenced to protect 
the top line. During this period, management’s atten-
tion was primarily focused on Net Sales and EBIT. Fur-
ther reducing Working Capital was, while important, 
subjugated to the focus on Net Sales and EBIT.
The financial modeling taking into account these 
parameters was done in close cooperation with Mr. Van 
der Wardt who facilitated the technical management 
accounting part of the process by working out the details 
in Hyperion and Excel. Messrs. Schaafsma and Van der 
Ward analyzed all cost accounts per country primarily in 
the SG&A category, and contemplated new targeted cost 
levels on a line-by-line basis. For example, they scruti-
nized travel, car fleet, personnel, advisory services, and 
other expenses related to costs such as warehousing and 
shipping. As it turned out, on most accounts they simply 
put down a target to reduce the spending by 10–20%. 
They also reviewed all Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) 
projects. For new projects, they kept those that they 
deemed offered a sufficiently compelling business case 
to improve EBIT. Most ongoing projects were continued. 
The last thing they wanted to do was to upset high-
impact change programs that focused on improving 
longer-term profitability. An example of one of the ongo-
ing projects was the European rollout of the ERP system.
Based on the modeling and analysis, guidance was 
worked out for the local management teams. Mr. 
Schaafsma explained:
The influence of our newly installed interim CEO was 
clear here. He, but also the other board members, 
understood clearly that action was required. How-
ever, they were resolute in their desire to see a sce-
nario that reflected the economic crisis while not 
jeopardizing potential growth. Their idea was also to 
safeguard the margins, by reducing SG&A and over-
heads. The CEO felt strongly that this was the right 
approach, and somehow reckoned that it would keep 
the management teams in the OPCOs on board, too.
OPCO MDs and FDs were asked to discuss the guid-
ance with their respective management teams and to 
come back with plans to meet the targeted lower cost 
levels. During this process, Mr. Schaafsma had lengthy 
talks with the local management teams to discuss the 
impact of the many tough decisions that had to be 
made. Examples of the actions taken were the renego-
tiation of vendor contracts, salary freezes, and leaving 
vacancies open. In some cases, even layoffs were on the 
table, which made the process in one or two of the 
OPCOs rather painful for those involved. Mr. Schaafsma 
observed:
How the teams handled this challenge varied 
clearly between those who had dealt with this 
before and those who had little or no experience 
with cost cutting. Interestingly, and fortunately to a 
degree, many of our managers had been groomed 
in successful companies, and made great careers, 
during times of mainly growth. They had gotten 
used to ‘the-sky-is-the-limit’ sorts of attitudes. 
They were now facing a new reality. For them, the 
rather hard-nosed meddling from Corporate came 
as somewhat of a surprise.
That said, Mr. Schaafsma gathered from the discus-
sions with the vast majority of the management teams 
that the purpose of the exercise was, all things consid-
ered, quite well understood and its necessity not 
doubted, at least not in conversations with him. “Maybe 
there is some truth in the proverbial wisdom that 
‘necessity is the mother of …,’” he mused.
The Executive Board was very serious about the pro-
cess – they considered the space for negotiations as 
quite limited. For most OPCOs, the “hurricane proof” 
scenario was completed after only one round of discus-
sions and negotiations. In other cases, the cost saving 
plans developed by the OPCO’s did not meet the Board’s 
expectations. In these cases, Messrs. Schaafsma and 
Van der Wardt guided the management teams of the 
respective OPCO to reach the savings in alternative 
accounts and asked them to stretch further, thus requir-
ing an additional round to converge on an agreed plan.
The numbers were compiled in Excel outside of 
Hyperion. With the new numbers now available, how-
ever, two issues had to be addressed. First, it was not 
clear how, and as what, to upload the revised numbers 
into Hyperion. The Hyperion version that the Corpo-
rate Accounting & Control department was running 
could not accommodate two budgets. An upload, there-
fore, would require an override of the original budget 
with the newly developed scenario. If the original 
budget was not replaced, the only way to proceed 
would be to report the alternative scenario outside of 
the system by way of an “extra” set of books. But evalu-
ating actual results versus the latest forecast and two 

320
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
budget versions across two systems seemed almost like 
“too much of a good thing,” sighed Mr. Van der Wardt.
The second and possibly more contentious quandary 
was whether to change the targets in the OPCO manag-
ers’ bonus schemes. After an already tough reporting for 
most cost line-items even against the original budget, 
the Executive Board decided to drop the original budget 
and to fix the alternative “hurricane proof” scenario 
into the systems and bonus schemes. “The original 
budget was history,” said Mr. Schaafsma. “It was now 
hurricane season, and the correspondingly named ‘hur-
ricane scenario’ became the new plan for 2009.”
Fiscal Year 2009 operational results came in close to 
the hurricane budget. It helped that reorganization 
costs came in lower than expected. These costs were 
related to re-organizing the legal entity structure fol-
lowing the split of business lines into Organic and Fro-
zen. Moreover, locations had been rejigged yielding 
further efficiencies. On the other hand, some layoffs to 
help reduce overhead had caused one-off staff-related 
redundancy costs. Advertising and promotion expendi-
tures also were substantially higher than forecast. This 
was mainly because the interim CEO and Mr. Schaafsma 
felt the need to boost the retained frozen food brands in 
the second half of the year to try to grow this business in 
the face of negative “publicity” from the discontinued 
brands, which had by themselves, however, helped to 
streamline costs.
The divestments in North America had been 
delayed. Tree of Life was eventually sold, but later than 
planned. The fraud case that had surfaced in ABC in 
the summer of 2009 required a restructuring, which 
delayed the timing by which this business could be 
even put up for sale.
The future
Mr. Schaafsma and Mr. Van der Wardt contemplated on 
how they could possibly better translate business 
uncertainty into alternative scenarios of the budget:
Should we develop these alternative scenarios 
beforehand rather than during the year? Would there 
be enough support in the operating companies to do 
this even if there was no “hurricane” coming?
What they obviously could not know is whether the 
budget would have been met even if it had not been 
reset … but would that have been a good thing?
Exhibit 1  Key figures, FY 2008 and FY 2009 (in € million), Royal Wessanen NV
Structure 2008
Structure 2009
Revenues
Ebit
Wessanen Europe (Biological 
Food)
Continued
2009
2008
2009
2008
France
Wessanen Europe
€	493
€	 501
€	
3-
€	 41
Benelux
United Kingdom
Frozen Foods
€	 120
€	 123
€	
3
€	
2
Germany
Italy
ABC
€	 90
€	 102
€	 30-
€	
2
Frozen Foods
Non-allocated
€	 14-
€	
8-
Food Group
Total Continued
€	 703
€	 725
€	 44-
€	 37
Benelux: Backers
Germany: Karl Kemper
Italy: Righi
Discontinued
2009
2008
2009
2008
Frozen Foods
€	 30
€	
35
€	
2-
€	 1-
North Amerca
American Beverage  
Company (ABC)
Panos Brands
€	 36
€	
35
€	
3
€	
3
Panos Brands
Liberty Richer
Tree of Life
€	 817
€	 802
€	
1
€	 11
Tree of Life
Total Didcontinued
€	883
€	 872
€	
3
€	 14
Source: Royal Wessanen NV, Annual Report 2009, pp. 12–13.

Royal Wessanen NV
321
Corporate Staﬀ: Management
Accounting and Control,
Business Development, Supply
Chain, Marketing, Comms,
HRM
North American Leadership
Team
President NA and CFO NA  
European Leadership Team
President Europe and CFO
Europe (Mr. Schaafsma)  
Management Teams
Operating Companies
Europe:
Organic:
The Netherlands
Belgium
France
Germany
Italy  
Frozen:
Benelux: Beckers
Benelux: Favory
Convenience Food Group
Germany: Karl Kemper
Italy: Righi 
Management Teams
Operating Companies North
America:
  American Beverage
Company
  Panos
  Liberty Richter
  Tree of Life   
Executive Board
CEO (president Europe), CFO,
President North America (NA)
Supervisory Board
Four (non-executive) members
Exhibit 2  Organization chart, Royal Wessanen NV
New Working Capital KPI =
	
Working Capital at Month End
(Actual Month Third Party Net Sales 1 Prior 2 Months Third Party Net Sales)*4
Exhibit 3  Working capital as percentage of sales – new definition for the 2009 budget, Royal Wessanen NV

322
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
Exhibit 4  General budget guidelines for the 2009 budget, Royal Wessanen NV
Autonomous Sales Growth
EBIT
In %
Branded
Distribution
Branded
Distribution
Europe
7–8%
5–7%
Based on ROS >10%
Based on ROS >5.5%
North America
7–8%
7–8%
Based on ROS >10.5%
Based on ROS >2.3%
*) ROS = Return on Sales
Exhibit 5  Financial targets incentive calculation scheme Royal Wessanen NV
Reslts versus Financial Targets
Financial Targets Incentive Score
Below minimum target
0%
Minimum target to On-Target
Linear increase from 25% to 100%
On-Target to Stretch Target
Linear increase from 100% to 250%
Above Stretch Target
250%
Personal Targets
30%
Financial Targets
70%
Weighting Financial Targets
20%
40%
Net Sales
EBIT
40%
Working Capital
25%
100%
250%
Targets
Min.
Max.
25%
25%
100%
100%
250%
250%
Targets
Min.
Max.
25%
100%
250%
100% of 
Incentive Pay
10% of 
Base Annual 
Salary
Max.
250%
Max 25% of 
Base Annual 
Salary
Exhibit 6  Distribution of incentive payment, Royal Wessanen NV
This case was prepared by Professor Wim A. Van der Stede (London School of Economics) and Dimitri Kruik (Erasmus University 
Rotterdam).
Copyright © by Wim A. Van der Stede and Dimitri Kruik.

The Stimson Company
323
 Henry Stimson, president/CEO of The Stimson Company, 
a small engineering company and manufacturer of dust 
control systems and equipment, explained the problem: 
 We have a considerable amount of tension present 
in our professional staff  now, with most of the dis-
satisfaction focused on the project budgeting sys-
tem. Everybody has strong feelings on the subject. 
The project leaders and operations people feel 
that the original estimates made by the sales engi-
neers are not very realistic and, therefore, not very 
useful for planning workloads and schedules. The 
sales engineers, on the other hand, feel that a lot 
of the budget changes are motivated only to pro-
duce a zero variance, and that there is not enough 
thought or eff ort invested to try to meet the budget.  
 The company 
 The Stimson Company (TSC) was founded by Henry 
Stimson’s grandfather. The company was privately 
held, with the Stimson family still controlling nearly all 
of the stock. In 2015, annual revenues were approxi-
mately $15 million, and the company had just under 
130 full-time employees. In the recession of the late 
2000s, TSC’s fi nancial position was weak, but under 
Henry Stimson’s leadership the fi nances had strength-
ened to the point where the company had no long-term 
debt and was earning modest profi ts. 
 TSC’s personnel had a particular expertise in pro-
viding dust control systems for general industrial appli-
cations. The systems fi ltered the air from machines 
which generated dust or particulate air pollution and 
passed the clean air back into the plant. In the past 
15 years TSC had generated most of its revenues and 
profi ts from clients in the paper industry. 
 Exhibit  1 shows a picture of a core dust control sys-
tem component: the separator. Separators and some 
other system components were more or less standard-
ized products, although they varied somewhat 
depending on the type of dust generated, the size of 
the application, and the desired methods of emptying 
the dust bags. The other components, such as main 
and branch pipes, hoods and conveyers, had to be cus-
tom-designed to fit the customer’s equipment and 
plant layout. 
 TSC managers preferred to sell complete systems, 
meaning that company personnel would handle the job 
all the way from design through installation and test. 
TSC was the dominant supplier of such systems to the 
paper industry in the Northwest region of the United 
States, but company managers were beginning to con-
sider diversifying both into other industries and into 
other products that would utilize their engineering 
expertise. 
 Project management 
 Because a large proportion of TSC’s revenues were 
derived from a limited number of large-scale projects, 
project management was very important to the com-
pany. Two roles in the organization were specifi cally 
project-oriented: sales engineers and project leaders 
(see organization chart in  Exhibit  2 ). The sales engi-
neers were responsible for the initial customer contact, 
analysis of the problem, defi nition of the system con-
cept, selling, original job cost estimating, and pricing. 
The project leaders were responsible for the detailed 
technical development (design) of the project and the 
management of the job from time of order entry to 
completion. Throughout the remainder of this case, 
Project 14321 will be used to illustrate the functioning 
of these roles and the company’s management systems. 
 Project 14321 
 In 2014, TSC was asked by the Oregon Paper Corpora-
tion (OPC) to submit a proposal for a complete dust 
control system for the converting area of a toilet-paper 
processing plant. The machines in the converting area 
took tissue paper from the mill, rolled it into logs 
96 inches wide, slit it into widths of 4½ inches, and 
 CASE STUDY 
 The Stimson Company 

324
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
packaged it for sale. OPC was interested in a dust control 
system because it would reduce maintenance on the con-
verting machines, make a less dusty product, and keep 
the plant safely within federal safety standards.
TSC submitted an estimate for the entire job, but for 
their own internal reasons, OPC asked that the project 
be broken into two phases. Thus, TSC submitted a 
phase I proposal for part of the job. This proposal was 
accepted and TSC began the work. The request for a 
proposal for phase II, a job which eventually was 
assigned number 14321, followed as expected.
Proposal
For all potential jobs where the customer was consid-
ered serious about adding equipment, the sales engi-
neer prepared formal estimating sheets. These required 
detailed estimates for each element of direct cost, built 
up by pounds of material and hours of labor for each 
system component. These units were converted to dol-
lars by multiplying by standard costs, which the 
accounting department updated every six months, and 
by getting quotes for special materials or service.
To get to a full-cost estimate, overhead was applied 
based on pounds of material or hours of labor. Account-
ing personnel updated annually the 16 overhead rates, 
eight each for variable and fixed overhead categories.
The price was determined by adding a profit percent 
onto the full-cost estimate. The company’s goal was to 
maintain a 10–15% net profit margin on sales (before 
tax). Because time was often limited, Jonathan Hem-
mer, sales engineer, used a rough rule-of-thumb based 
on dollars per required volume of air (cubic feet per 
minute) to estimate the total cost and price for Project 
14321. For the breakdown in costs, Jonathan compared 
this job with a similar, large job completed the year 
before. Steve Davis, proposals manager, explained:
First of all, you have to realize that these estimates 
involve a lot of guesses. This project is now being 
installed, but portions of the new OPC building are 
being remodeled, and the work is not yet finished. 
Their equipment is not in location. So with this as 
with many other jobs, we had to estimate it based on 
their drawings. For more or less standardized com-
ponents, such as separators, those do not cause a 
big problem. But for customized components, such 
as branch lines, the estimates are only guesses.
To protect the company against these project uncer-
tainties, sales engineers typically added a “contingency” to 
the estimate. The contingency was done on an entire job 
and not on an individual component unless the risk was 
high on a particular section of the job, perhaps because of 
lack of information about it. The contingency was intended 
to protect TSC from cost uncertainties. It was not affected 
by what the market would bear. However, some extra rev-
enue dollars might be added if TSC managers felt the com-
pany was in a strong competitive position.
The proposed price of $3,197,640 for the Phase II 
work was presented to OPC. It was accepted on 
November 12, 2014, and that is when the project was 
assigned number 14321.
Project kickoff
On November 13, the project kickoff meeting was held. 
The primary purpose of this meeting was to transfer the 
responsibility for the job from the sales engineer, Jona-
than Hemmer, to the project leader assigned to the job, 
Sanjiv Kumar. Also in attendance at the meeting were 
Steve Davis (proposals manager), Bob Stimson (design 
manager), Bruce McIntosh (operations manager), Mike 
Giordano (plant manager), Gary Blasiar (a separator spe-
cialist), and Mary Fiore (job cost accountant). Most of the 
discussion at the two-hour meeting was on technical sub-
jects, such as about what filter media and fan size were 
required, and the expert team provided their inputs.
After this meeting, Sanjiv, the project leader, planned 
the project, broke the tasks into work orders starting with 
the design work, established the schedule, and began the 
process of coordinating manpower and material needs.
Project control
Control of the project was an ongoing process, with fre-
quent communications required between Sanjiv, the 
project leader, and personnel in both OPC and the vari-
ous TSC work areas: design, operations, and installa-
tion. Each month, Sanjiv was required to assemble a 
Job Status Report which showed the percent physical 
completion at the end of the month and the predicted 
dollar variance to completion for each element of cost. 
This report was built up from the work order level and 
summarized by the project leader to the level of detail 
provided in the original project budget.
The estimates of percent complete were an impor-
tant part of the control process because they directly 
affected the percent of the budget used for comparison 
with actual expenditures to date and, therefore, the 
variances. In estimating the percent complete in the 

The Stimson Company
325
design area, Sanjiv used drawings as his gauge. Draw-
ings represented a relatively small element of work, and 
that work did not normally stretch out over several 
reporting periods. It was generally not difficult either to 
estimate how long the work represented by a drawing 
should take or to judge whether that work was done.
In the fab area, Sanjiv relied on inputs from the fabrica-
tion department. Based on their experience and accumu-
lated records, the fabrication department broke down the 
work orders into individual operations and established 
standard hours for each operation to come up with a total 
standard for each work order. Then they looked at how 
much they had accomplished and calculated the total per-
cent complete on each work order. Sanjiv believed their 
estimates were generally quite good, better than he could 
make, but he noted that errors could occur on occasion:
For instance, they may say their fabrication is so 
many percent complete on a given work order, but I 
know we have already shipped all of it. Or the records 
may show only 50% of the material on a job has been 
withdrawn, but they are indicating 100% fabrication.
Field installation was a bigger problem, since TSC 
was only beginning the establishment of standards for 
installation. Sanjiv had to rely on the estimates of instal-
lation foremen who were generally optimistic. For 
example, a foreman might say that he was 99% com-
plete with a work order when the reality was perhaps 
more like 85%. Since Sanjiv often worked with new 
foremen, it was impossible for him to judge which were 
most optimistic and which were relatively pessimistic. 
But the foremen were able to tell Sanjiv which items on 
a work order were complete, so Sanjiv had some infor-
mation on which to apply judgments on the estimates.
The Job Status estimates were input to the computer, 
and the portion of the budget determined by the percent 
complete was compared with actual costs to date. Three 
monthly reports were produced. The Detailed Job Cost 
Report showed a comparison of actual costs (and labor 
hours) with fraction of budget (total budget multiplied by 
percent complete) for variable cost categories only. The 
Summary Job Cost Report summarized variable costs by 
component and showed variance-to-date and forecast-
to-completion. The Job Cost Fully Accounted Summary 
summarized variances by component and showed vari-
ances to date for variable cost, full cost, and net profit.
The projects were monitored by accounting staff. 
Shortly after the reports were produced, Mary Fiore, 
job cost accountant, asked the project leaders for expla-
nations of cost category variances greater than $2,500 
appearing during the month and of any obvious errors 
(e.g. expenses incurred but showing zero percent com-
pletion). She was trying to determine whether an 
actual problem existed or whether, for example, the 
variance was merely a timing problem or was the result 
of a recording error. Any large input errors were cor-
rected before the financial statements were produced.
Around the 10th working day of each month, a com-
pany-level financial review meeting was held with the 
key managers in attendance: Henry and Bob Stimson, 
Charles Cowsill, Bruce McIntosh, Kristina Boyd and 
Steve Davis. About 30 minutes of this meeting was 
devoted to a review of the top 6 to 10 projects, which 
typically covered about 80% of the costs incurred dur-
ing the month. Mary Fiore would present a summary of 
the project variances with the explanations provided by 
the project leaders. The discussion would focus mostly 
on overall performance, not the specifics of the jobs.
Budget adjustments
A number of budget adjustments were made for Project 
14321. Appendix A explains the rationale and general pro-
cedure for budget adjustments. The following are two illus-
trative examples of budget adjustments for Project 14321:
A. Blow-back dampers
In December and January, work proceeded on Project 
14321, mostly on project design. On January 23, 2015, 
Sanjiv Kumar submitted a budget adjustment for $7,613 
for the inclusion of three blow-back dampers. Normally, 
the blow-back dampers had to be specifically called out in 
the budget, since they were unique and required a certain 
amount of time to be fabricated. However, sales engineer-
ing allocated the dollars for the blow-back dampers to M 
(Main Line), instead of separating them under V (Valves) 
or some other designation. But because the blow-back 
dampers were shown in the drawing as part of A (mani-
fold), Sanjiv released them on an A work order. (He later 
admitted that he should have gone back to sales engineer-
ing and requested that the blow-back dampers be shown 
as part of the manifold.) On the job cost report, these 
choices made A look bad and M look unnaturally good.
Sanjiv observed, however, that “Even with these dol-
lars allocated to the manifold, the sales engineering 
estimate was extremely low.” It did not include enough 
pounds for the three blow-back valves. Based on actual 
drawings, Sanjiv submitted the budget adjustment.
Even after the budget revision, however, when fab 
actually built the dampers, the actuals were way off 

326
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
budget. Sanjiv guessed that the material requirement 
calculation done in design from actual drawings failed 
to include scrap, or it may have been based on metal 
cuttings of sizes of sheets that did not exist. These dif-
ferences between estimate, design, and fab showed up 
as budget variances because a budget adjustment could 
not be made after work was started. Jonathan Hem-
mer, the sales engineer, commented:
I agree that in comparison with what was actually 
built, the material estimate was low. However, it’s 
my contention that the manifold was over-designed 
and thus over-built for this application. Before this 
happened, design should have met with sales engi-
neering to discuss the anticipated variances to 
attempt to develop corrective action.
B. Platforms
On June 16, a second formal meeting was held. Design 
had progressed to the point where it was possible to tell 
operations that they could look for specific work orders 
on a specific schedule. In attendance at this meeting 
were Sanjiv Kumar, Bob Stimson, and Bruce McIntosh. 
The next day, because of what he learned at the meet-
ing, Sanjiv submitted an adjustment which increased 
the budget by $38,170, the details of which are shown 
in Exhibit 3. Sanjiv elaborated on the largest item, 
which individually caused a $39,910 increase:
In order to estimate accurately, we can’t extrapolate 
directly from past data. We need to look more 
closely at what’s required from the current job. Last 
year we built a very similar collector and used that 
as a gauge for estimating. But this collector required 
a minimum of four platforms that weren’t in the esti-
mate … I think sales engineering basically took their 
estimate from their old estimate. But not only did 
they overlook the platforms, we overran their origi-
nal estimate. They should have looked at the actu-
als on that job and not reproduced a bad estimate.
Jonathan Hemmer explained from his perspective:
We have to use last year’s job as a guide. Both col-
lectors have 18 hoppers. The configuration is slightly 
different, and the size of the OPC collector is a little 
smaller. I checked against the actuals on last year’s 
job when that job was about 98% complete, and the 
separators were 100% complete at that time Based 
on that check I estimated we should come in at 
about 135,000 pounds of material. Allowing for some 
additional bracing and reinforcing, I forecast the 
actuals would come in closer to 140,000 pounds. 
But we are predicting this job will come in at about 
165,000 pounds. Not only is the material way off, but 
installation on last year’s job took 2,300 hours, and 
we’re now forecasting 2,800 on this job. The plat-
form will make a difference, but not 500 hours.
We did include some hours for the platforms in 
the original estimate, although I admit we didn’t 
have anything specific in mind, and that’s an obvi-
ous shortcoming. We certainly didn’t think in the 
grand scale that was eventually drawn up. I don’t 
know how to explain the extra 25,000 pounds of 
material. There must be some over-designing. But 
our original estimate for fab hours was 3,864, and 
on the latest cost sheets we’re running at about 
3,000 hours. That’s obviously to the good, and it’s 
not consistent with the material overrun.
Scope changes/budget revisions
When a scope change required the customer price to be 
renegotiated, a budget revision was also required. 
Appendix B describes this price renegotiation and 
budget revision process in general and the rationale for 
involving the sales engineer in it. The following are two 
examples of budget revisions for Project 14321.
A. Move collectors
In February, after the manifold was released for fabri-
cation, Sanjiv, the project leader, provided OPC some 
additional information about where the collectors 
would be located on the roof and the static and wind 
loads that would be imposed on the roof. OPC decided 
that these loads were unacceptable and asked that the 
collector be shifted 150 feet north and to the grade 
level of the building. Even though TSC was well into 
production at that point, an acceptable alternative for 
the collectors could not be found. Substantial modifica-
tions were required to incorporate the existing mani-
fold with some additional piping that had to be 
installed. This necessitated a re-estimate of the job, 
agreement on a new price, and revision of the budget.
Jonathan Hemmer, the sales engineer, was responsi-
ble for negotiating the price change. OPC accepted the 
proposed price increase of $203,500, and Jonathan 
revised the budget to reflect the needed changes.
A short time later, Sanjiv also submitted two adjust-
ments which increased the budget by just under 
$47,500 because the final drawings showed the job had 
expanded beyond where sales engineering had figured. 

The Stimson Company
327
Since this occurred after TSC had received the addi-
tional money from the customer, Sanjiv had to adjust 
the budget. He explained:
One of the problems we had with this change, and it 
happens on occasion, is a definitional problem of 
where the manifold left off and where the main pipe 
began. I may report the costs against the manifold, 
while the sales engineer had figured the budget in the 
main. The sum total for the manifold and main may be 
the same, but we would show a variance for each.
We also had a problem with the total dollars 
budgeted. This is only speculation, but what may 
have happened here is that sales engineering fig-
ured we couldn’t ask the customer for all of the dol-
lars for the change and they decided that TSC 
would absorb part of the cost.
Jonathan Hemmer was not aware of this budget 
adjustment at the time but he commented on it several 
months later:
I wish Sanjiv had let me know what was happening. 
There is nothing worse than knowing after the fact 
that, for example, your manifold is 10,000 pounds 
over budget. It may have ended up that way any-
way, but we can’t provide suggestions or learn from 
problems if we don’t know about them.
B. Pipework supports
On June 24, another budget revision was necessary. 
OPC insisted that the pipework did not meet their stand-
ard, even though TSC maintained that it met the indus-
try standard. OPC managers felt that the change should 
be made at no cost to them, since they gave TSC the 
total job without soliciting competing bids. TSC manag-
ers protested. The disagreement was finally settled with 
a price increase of just $15,000. The total cost estimate, 
however, which went through as a budget revision, was 
around $42,500. Sanjiv Kumar commented:
This revision is a good example of a major problem we 
have with sales – their budget changes are often pain-
fully slow. In this case, we had known for months that 
the budget needed revising, and I had to keep prod-
ding them to make the change. These expected 
changes can often span several reporting periods, and 
it creates confusion as to whether we should be report-
ing against the budget or what we expect the budget 
will be. Sometimes the revision takes so long that the 
work is done before the revision comes through.
Status at August 2015
From the beginning, Project 14321 had had its share of 
problems as reflected by the numerous budget adjustments 
and budget revisions. The Summary Job Cost Report for 
14321 at July 31 showed a small unfavorable total variance 
versus the budget at the estimated 43% complete, caused 
mainly because of the problems in the collector part of the 
separator component. Sanjiv Kumar described the current 
problems and his remaining concerns:
A gross estimation error has just recently surfaced. 
The budget for “Material-Sundry” in the S (separa-
tor) component is $41,865. We have already spent 
over $45,000, and our forecast to complete is in 
excess of $67,500. It could be argued that we should 
have recognized this problem earlier, but this is also 
a notable example of poor estimating. I’m going to 
have to adjust the budget upwards in this area.
We could also have more trouble with the budget 
for management hours. Each addition to project 
scope or extension of the project schedule extends 
the number of reporting periods and increases 
management time. Since the company has grown, 
we have progressed from just “doing” a project to 
“managing” a project, but the budgets haven’t 
reflected this. On a large project, management time 
can be 20%–22% of the total design budget, but 
the original budget for 14321 allowed only 4%–5%.
In addition, I’m a little worried about the esti-
mates for getting painting and pneumatic piping 
done on this particular project. We’re not as good 
as we could or should be at estimating other trades, 
such as printing, plumbing and electrical, and I’m 
not sure there are enough dollars in there to get the 
job done … And finally, we could always run into 
some problems in installation.
Since the budget changes had increased the planned 
costs much faster than the price had been negotiated 
upward, the project’s planned profit margin had slipped 
from an original 11% to less than 6% (see Exhibit 4), a 
level considered below the company’s desired range of 
between 10% and 15%. The margin would slip even 
lower if the budget had to be adjusted upward any fur-
ther, and Sanjiv seemed to think it would have to be. Steve 
Davis looked back at the job and summarized his feelings:
I don’t think this was a particularly difficult job. I still 
feel that in an overall sense our original estimate 
was accurate, although I will agree that there were 
numerous discrepancies in the components. At this 

328
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
point, however, it’s even hard to tell that. We may be 
seeing variances because conservative estimates 
of percent complete are making the jobs look worse 
than they really are. Design and fabrication seem to 
like to hold back a few percent as a hedge against 
something going wrong or just the unknown.
But more importantly, what seems to be missing 
is a commitment to bring a job in at the minimum 
cost possible. If we involved the various groups in 
setting the budgets, the numbers would be so 
super-conservative that they would be meaning-
less. We’d either be planning projects at a loss or 
we’d be pricing ourselves out of the market. Not all 
of the budgets set by sales engineering are tight. 
They should be a target to shoot for; an incentive for 
superior performance, so we are motivated to 
search for creative solutions to our problems. We’ve 
got to get this commitment internalized because 
standards of performance aren’t available for eve-
rything we do. We’re not trying to punish anybody, 
but the company does have to exist, after all.
Appendix A Budget adjustments
Over time, many changes were likely to be made to the 
system as it was originally planned and estimated. 
More information would be gathered as to the precise 
customer requirements, such as for the layout of the 
exhaust piping, and as company personnel reviewed 
the technical design, suggestions would be made to 
improve performance or cut costs.
In addition, while the sales engineers were consid-
ered excellent at estimating the total cost of a job, very 
often their estimates for specific phases of a job (e.g. 
main, exhausters) were very inaccurate, overestimated 
for some parts and underestimated for others, and the 
dollars in the budget would have to be moved between 
components. The custom elements of the systems, such 
as branch piping, presented the greatest estimating 
uncertainty. Some definitional problems also existed, as 
the boundary between components was not clear. A pro-
ject leader might build on a branch line work order what 
a sales engineer estimated as part of the main piping.
The job budgets were intended to reflect the compa-
ny’s best estimate of what it should cost to do the work 
described. This was because while the projects were in 
process, the budgets were important tools for planning 
and control, and after a job was completed, budgets 
which proved to be accurate were useful as an aid for 
estimating future similar jobs. As the project unfolded, 
the detailed breakdown in original budget was likely to 
become less and less realistic. Thus, the company insti-
tuted a budget adjustment procedure to allow the pro-
ject leader to change the budget to reflect a realistic 
standard, but with the following constraints:
1.	 No budget adjustments were allowed once work within 
a labor category (e.g. design, fabrication, installation) 
was started within a job section (e.g. separators, main, 
exhausters), with the exception of general job costs.
2.	 No budget adjustments were allowed unless the 
adjustment totaled at least eight hours and 10% of 
the total hours in the work order.
3.	 All budget adjustments had to be approved by the 
operations manager.
Appendix B Budget revisions
If for any reason the customer price had to be renegoti-
ated, such as for a scope change or customer-caused cost 
overruns (e.g. schedule delay), the sales engineer was 
notified to prepare a budget revision. This involved a re-
estimate of costs, using the same Estimating Sheets used 
when the project was proposed, and a renegotiation of 
price. When the price change was agreed upon, the new 
cost estimate was entered as the revised project budget.
Even though at the time of most of these budget revi-
sions, the project leader’s detailed knowledge far exceeded 
that of the sales engineer on the job, because they had 
been following progress daily, it was seen as desirable to 
involve the sales engineer in the budget revision because:
1.	 More realistic estimates were likely. The sales engi-
neers had been exposed to a broader range of jobs, and 
they had begun to accumulate a database of standards 
for recurring operations that could facilitate the esti-
mating process. They were also more skilled at prepar-
ing estimates at the concept stage; i.e. before detailed 
drawings and specification sheets were available.
2.	 It was a good opportunity to develop the sales engi-
neer/customer relationship because it was a chance to 
meet without a new sale being the explicit intent. In 
addition, it would provide a relationship continuity for 
the customer as the sales engineer may have made 
agreements regarding the specifications of the system 
that were not put explicitly in the written agreement.
3.	 It was a good learning opportunity for the sales 
engineers. By getting out in the field and seeing how 
the project was progressing, they could learn, both 
technically and in their estimating.

The Stimson Company
329
Dirty air in
Input plenum
Downward
air ﬂow
Clean air
out
Specially shaped and
treated tubes minimize
hang-up
Door for clean-side
inspection access
Steep hopper
discourages bridging
Collected dust
Optional bagging
system for dustless,
online emptying
without rotary value
or other powered
equipment
Patented cleaning
mechanism keeps tubes
and plenum clean
Exhibit 1  Anatomy of the Stimson Type C Separator

330
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
Henry Stimson
President/CEO
Steve Davis
Associated Director, Sales
Engineering and
Proposals Manager
Project Leaders,
Sanjiv Kumar
and 4 others
Charles Cowsill
Director of Sales
Engineering
Bob Stimson
Design Manager and
Technical Director
Bruce Mcintosh
Director of
Operations
Kristina Boyd
Controller and Manager
of Corporate Planning
Mike Giordano
Manager of 
Manufacturing &
Installation
Material Planner
Manufacturing 
Foreman
(2)
Installation
Foreman
(6)
Material
Leadman
Purchasing
Manager
Material Planning
Accounting
Sales Engineering
Jonathan Hemmer
and 4 others
Exhibit 2  Organization structure

The Stimson Company
331
Exhibit 3  June 17, 1980 budget adjustment – Project 14321
Component
Increase 
(Decrease) in Budget
Reason
S
$39,910
Sales had not included enough for access platforms. Fab time estimates 
were based on performance on 14019 collector which was very similar.
E
(3,543)
Design decided that fan adjustments would be made by fan supplier.
E
(6,340)
Design felt sales had overestimated fabrication time.
B
19,543
Design felt sales had underestimated fabrication time.
A
6,625
Input from the field.
Z
(18,025)
Design reevaluation based on improvement in method of fabricating 
and installing.
$38,170
Exhibit 4  Plan and forecast for Project 14321
Original Plan
Forecast at 7/31/15
Selling price
$3,197,640
$3,426,248
Variable costs
1,910,288
2,125,680
Contribution margin
$1,287,352
$1,300,568
Allocated fixed overhead
933,603
1,102,898
Net profit
$ 353,750
$ 197,670
Contribution margin %
40.26%
37.96%
Net profit percent
11.06%
5.77%
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

332
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
 It was a Sunday. The fi rst day of the annual Strategic 
Planning retreat of the Board of Directors of Anderson 
Industries, Inc. had fi nally arrived. 
 Anthony Rizzo, a young financial analyst, had 
been working for Thom Thomson, Anderson’s 
recently-appointed chairman/CEO, for the last six 
months. He had been given the assignment to present 
the newly developed Corporate Restructuring Pro-
gram to the Board. Anthony was both excited and 
nervous. 
 The Corporate Restructuring Program was one of 
Mr. Thomson’s key management initiatives, largely 
because Anderson had frequently been criticized for 
having unusually high expenses. Composed of 83 pro-
jects, the program was complex, with many moving 
parts. However, a key element of the program was to 
reduce expenses by $100 million while maintaining 
current revenue levels, thus providing dramatic 
improvement in a key metric known as the operating 
expense ratio (operating expenses/revenues). Manage-
ment viewed this expense reduction goal to be a 
stretch, but they also considered it necessary, and they 
wanted to build credibility by demonstrating the com-
pany’s ability to meet an important goal. The Board of 
Directors was aware of the program and its objectives, 
but Anthony’s presentation was intended to provide 
much deeper insight. 
 The prior week had been unexpectedly easy. Because 
of Mr. Thomson’s desire to avoid any surprises, all of 
the presentations had been fi nalized by Wednesday, 
and the dry run took place on Thursday. On Sunday, 
Anthony planned to arrive at the hotel early to have a 
chance to check the meeting room before the presenta-
tion. The meeting was to start at 2:00 p.m., and 
Anthony was one of the fi rst presenters. 
 Traffic was light, and Anthony was well ahead of 
schedule. Upon arriving at the hotel, he checked to see if 
his room was available. He learned that he could not 
check in for a few hours, but the front desk delivered an 
urgent message asking him to call Sharon Carpenter, 
Anderson’s head of fi nancial planning, as soon as possible. 
 On the call, Sharon explained that she had received 
the newest budget submissions from the business 
units just before leaving the offi  ce on Friday after-
noon. Wanting to get a head start on next week’s 
work, she began her review of the company-wide roll-
up on Sunday morning. Initially, everything looked 
fi ne, but she noticed that a few ratios were a little off . 
One was the operating expense ratio, so she wanted 
to inform Anthony before his presentation to the 
Board. Sharon and Anthony discussed some of the 
most likely explanations for the exceptions, but lacked 
the data to reach any conclusions. Sharon commented 
that the budgeting process tended to be somewhat 
iterative this early in the cycle, so she almost regret-
ted her decision to take a quick look on Sunday morn-
ing. Nevertheless, Sharon and Anthony both knew 
that some very ambitious goals had been set causing 
them to be concerned that real slippage had occurred. 
Focusing on Anthony’s presentation, the potential 
impact was clear. To meet the targeted operating 
expense ratio, either revenues would have to increase 
by $25 million, which was unlikely given the current 
economic conditions, or the expense reductions 
would have to increase by an additional $15 million, 
which was slightly less than 2% of total company-
wide expenses. 
 After speaking with Sharon, Anthony asked if the 
hotel could provide him with space to work. He was led 
to the hotel engineer’s offi  ce, a very small offi  ce deep in 
the guts of the hotel. There, he got back on the phone 
with Sharon, and they considered the alternatives. The 
focal point of Anthony’s presentation could be impacted 
in a small, but still material, way; they could only spec-
ulate about the reasons for the change in projections; 
and they could not reach Mr. Thomson. Further, time 
was very short. Should Anthony simply proceed with 
the presentation as previously approved, should he try 
to incorporate the new projections into the presenta-
tion, should he “hide” the slides showing numbers and 
try to fi nesse his way around the issue, or should he be 
upfront about the uncertainty in the numbers? How 
 CASE STUDY 
 Multiple Versions of the Plan 

Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation
333
would the Board react if uncertainty was demon-
strated? How would Mr. Thomson respond if surprised 
during the Board meeting? 
 Anthony tried again to speak with Mr. Thomson, 
who was meeting with the Audit Committee of the 
Board, but that Committee meeting ran longer than 
expected. Mr. Thomson rushed to the Board Meet-
ing, flanked by a few of the Audit Committee mem-
bers, getting there just in time for the scheduled 
start. 
 This case was prepared by Fred Magner and Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Fred Magner and Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 In the semiconductor industry, picking the right 
R&D investments and then turning those invest-
ments into successful products largely determines 
success. To help with that decision process at Vitesse 
Semiconductor Corporation, Marty McDermut 
(CFO) and Patty Heinen (manager of Financial 
Planning and Analysis) had spent the last several 
months developing a business model designed to 
put R&D successes at Vitesse in the proper perspec-
tive. The model showed that the company would 
achieve its long-term goals only if R&D projects 
generated at least 35% returns. They proposed 
implementing a minimum IRR hurdle rate of 35% 
for R&D investments. 
 In the first resource allocation meeting after they 
made their proposal, however, Marty and Patty 
were disappointed that the senior management 
team had just approved one particular R&D pro-
posal, to build a new Carrier Ethernet product, with 
a forecast that was much lower than the desired 
35% IRR. Marty and Patty tried to make the case 
against investing in this project, but they lost the 
argument. 
 Industry background 
 Firms in the semiconductor industry face some unique 
challenges. Significant R&D spending is necessary to 
drive future revenues and profi ts. Because new products 
have limited life cycles, chip manufacturers must continu-
ously develop new products to replace revenues from 
declining products. In order to grow, they must accelerate 
new product growth or improve the returns that the new 
products generate. Most of the spending is focused on 
applying and extending existing technologies, but occa-
sionally investments are made to try to develop ground-
breaking technologies that might open new markets. 
 Semiconductor chips are components in customers’ 
products, so chip design is guided by the technological 
advances and changing requirements of those custom-
ers. Marketing and sales personnel work closely with 
existing and potential customers to understand their 
needs. “Design wins” are often secured before chips are 
fully developed and available for sale. At the design-win 
point, customers design the chips into their products, so 
the chip manufacturers begin to have an idea about how 
much revenue and profi t a specifi c project will generate. 
Some risk still exists even after a design win. The 
 CASE STUDY 
 Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation 

334
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
­customers can drop a product, miss a product cycle, or 
even introduce new technology too early. Vitesse miti-
gates its risk by collaborating closely with customers.
Revenues from new products ramp up slowly. Using 
Vitesse Semiconductors’ product lines as examples: Chips 
sold to phone carriers to include in their routers and 
switches typically have a 10-year life cycle, with revenues 
peaking in years 5, 6, and 7. Chips designed for enter-
prise-level networking devices1 have shorter, quicker rev-
enue cycles, but revenues typically still do not peak until 
three years after the product is introduced. (See Exhibit 1 
for Vitesse’s carrier and enterprise revenue cycles.) Oper-
ating margins are lower in the first few years of a prod-
uct’s life cycle because the R&D expenses are recognized 
immediately, whereas the revenues come later.
Many new products are followed by “derivative” 
products that build on the earlier technology but are 
somehow improved in subsequent iterations, for exam-
ple, with more features, better performance, lower 
power consumption, and/or lower costs. It is not unusual 
for a new product platform to generate four to six deriva-
tive products. The first product is typically the least prof-
itable because of the high initial development costs, but 
profit often increases with each derivative. When a new 
product platform is launched, the rough plan for deriva-
tive products is outlined in a “product roadmap.”
Chip costs decline over time. The most dramatic cost 
reductions take place between the first and second year 
of production. Yields, or the proportion of chips that 
are found to perform properly, typically improve with 
volume and experience and can increase by as much as 
50% in the second year of production. Costs are often 
reduced further by lowering material costs and by 
transferring processing and testing functions overseas.
Vitesse Semiconductor
Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation, headquartered in 
Camarillo, California, designed and marketed advanced 
semiconductor chip solutions for the growing network 
and communication industries. Founded in 1984, Vitesse 
continued to innovate in response to its customers’ 
demands for more data and more sophisticated devices. 
The company was known for engineering excellence and 
developed several industry leading technologies. Vitesse 
stock was traded on NASDAQ under the symbol VTSS.
In 2006, some former executives at Vitesse were 
indicted for backdating stock options. The charges 
were resolved with a $3 million settlement with the 
SEC. Although there was no guilty verdict or admission 
of guilt, the scandal was distracting and expensive.
About that same time, the telecom industry began to 
shift to packet-based Ethernet networking technolo-
gies. Vitesse brought in a new management team that 
included Marty McDermut as its CFO. The new team 
shut down development of many legacy products and 
focused its R&D spending on the development of a new 
line of products based on Ethernet technologies. The 
move was risky, as Marty explained:
There were no new products for three to four years, 
and Vitesse had to continue servicing its significant 
debt load at the same time that revenues from its 
existing legacy product lines were declining. The 
strategy killed operating margins for a while 
because all the new products were at the same 
early stage of the bell-curved revenue cycle.
The shift to Ethernet turned out to be a good decision, 
and by 2013, the investment began to pay off. Marty and 
the rest of the new management team successfully 
explained the turnaround story to Wall Street analysts 
by categorizing Vitesse’s products as new, mature, or 
end-of life, and by demonstrating strong revenue growth 
from new products. Revenues from new products dou-
bled in 2012 and were projected to double again over the 
next two years, to approach $60 million by 2014.
The communications industry was seeing exponen-
tial growth on public and private communications net-
works. These networks included those used by 
long-distance, local exchange service providers and 
wireless service providers (“Carriers”), as well as spe-
cialized networks, such as those used by Internet ser-
vice and over-the-top (“OTT”) content providers. 
Driving the traffic growth was the rapid adoption of 
data-intensive applications and services such as web 
access, web-delivered content, Internet Protocol (“IP”) 
video conferencing and telepresence, IP television and, 
more recently, Cloud storage, Cloud computing, and 
Software-as-a-Service (“SaaS”) by Enterprises. Power-
ful mobile devices like smartphones and tablets that 
rivaled and often exceeded the capabilities of desktop 
machines also consumed these types of services. In the 
not too distant future, the industry expected that a 
majority of devices, appliances, sensors, machines, ter-
minals, vehicles, as well as public and private power 
distribution systems (“Smart-Grid”) would all be 
1	 Enterprise-level networking devices are used in large companies 
or enterprises. The word enterprise implies multi-site, multi-server 
applications. Cisco is an example of an enterprise customer.

Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation
335
connected to these ever-expanding worldwide commu-
nications networks, leading to what is commonly 
referred to as the Internet of Things (“IoT”). While all 
independent, this expanding conglomerate of networks 
faced common challenges: how to provide service 
delivery, synchronization and timing, and security.
To address the challenges, packet-based Ethernet 
networking technologies increasingly formed the basis 
to deliver these new applications and services. Long 
present in Enterprise networks, Ethernet was expand-
ing rapidly in both Carrier and Industrial networks, 
replacing older technologies. In addition, so-called vir-
tualization technologies that started in Ethernet-based 
Cloud data centers were making inroads into Enter-
prise and Carrier Ethernet networks, promising even 
more efficient network resource utilization. Even in 
Industrial Process Control, Smart-Grid Energy Distri-
bution, Transportation and Automotive networks, the 
nascent transition from proprietary legacy networks to 
ubiquitous Ethernet-based networks was taking place. 
Substantial portions of the Carrier, Enterprise and IoT 
networks were expected to be rebuilt based on these 
new technologies over the next 5 to 10 years.
Current Business Plan Review Process
In 2013, Vitesse spent approximately $40 million annu-
ally on R&D. Close to 60% of that spending was for sal-
aries, 20% was for other project-specific costs, and 20% 
was for use of shared resources, such as engineering 
software. Only the “other project-specific costs” could 
be reduced without taking drastic measures with long-
term consequences, such as layoffs.
R&D assets and spending were allocated to specific 
projects through the Business Plan Review (BPR) pro-
cess. Every product derivative was considered a new 
product and went through the BPR process individu-
ally. (See Exhibit 2 for excerpts from the official BPR 
procedure document.) Marketing initiated the BPR, 
and the entire executive team was required to approve 
it before a project could move forward.
Projects were initiated throughout the year, often in 
response to a customer’s need. Some financial disci-
pline was designed into the project selection process; 
BPRs included detailed revenue and cost projections. 
Marketing department performance was evaluated, in 
part, by whether or not new products delivered the rev-
enue and profit projections in the BPRs. But there was 
no clear financial measure or criteria for selecting pro-
jects, or for ensuring that a project’s financials were 
consistent with short- or long-term business plans. Gen-
erally, projects were expected to have a 4–5 times ROI2 
or positive NPV at a 20% discount rate, which was 
thought to be close to the cost of capital for Vitesse. 
Marty acknowledged, however, that this rate was 
somewhat arbitrary; 20% was a commonly used hurdle 
rate, but it was not based on any current analysis spe-
cific to Vitesse. The positive NPV guideline was not 
closely adhered to in the BPR processes, either. Every-
one understood that new projects usually returned less 
than future derivatives, even though that was not 
explicitly stated or quantified with a lower hurdle rate. 
Most of the scrutiny during the BPR process was on the 
marketing and engineering design data, not on the 
financial data.
The current issue
In 2013, Vitesse was enjoying strong revenue and profit 
growth driven by R&D investments from prior years. 
However, the number of new product launches had 
slowed down significantly in 2012, from an average of 
30 new products to less than 10. Management knew that 
the company had a few “grace” years during which it 
would continue to realize growth driven by the increas-
ing revenue stream of current products. But a board 
member asked Marty if the current portfolio of R&D pro-
jects could be expected to drive long-term revenue 
growth at the rates that were forecasted in the long-term 
business plan. It was a good question. Marty explained,
Projects are approved one at a time, but someone 
needs to be concerned with the bigger picture, the 
financial implications of the complete product port-
folio. In this industry you can make big decisions 
that dig big holes. You might be OK for a few years, 
but if you don’t have enough new products in the 
pipeline, you won’t be able to sustain growth.
The difficulty was that the BPR process was some-
what disconnected from the company’s business model. 
Vitesse’s business model assumed that new, yet unde-
fined projects would be introduced regularly to replace 
revenue from obsolete projects. However, the project 
selection process did not guarantee that revenue from 
selected projects would be sufficient to meet those long 
term revenue goals. The 4–5 times ROI and 20% hurdle 
rate was not informative. Marty and Patty wondered if 
2	 ROI was calculated as the 15-year cumulative gross margin divided 
by R&D investment.

336
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
they could develop a more useful benchmark to guide 
project selection decisions and make sure that invest-
ment decisions were consistent with the company’s 
long term business model. Was there a straightforward 
way to communicate whether or not a project was 
acceptable?
IRR target development
Marty and Patty’s solution was to calculate the IRR 
on R&D project spending that was assumed in 
Vitesse’s long-term business model. Then they could 
compare the IRR they calculated from the model to 
the IRRs that the current portfolio of R&D projects 
was forecast to generate. If the IRR assumed in the 
business model was close to the IRR of actual pro-
jects, they could infer that they were on track to 
achieve the model’s revenue goals. Perhaps more 
importantly, the IRR calculated from the model could 
become a functional hurdle rate for future R&D pro-
jects that would link project selection to long-term 
business goals.
The IRR calculations were based on several assump-
tions. Patty began with Vitesse’s revenue-normalized 
business model, shown in Table 1.
Patty wanted to calculate the IRR on the model’s 
direct R&D spending, not total R&D spending, since 
only the direct spending was used in the BPR process. 
Unfortunately, however, that information was not 
readily available.
She asked the R&D manager to estimate the per-
centage of R&D that was direct spending. R&D per-
sonnel had been resistant to collecting information 
for the IRR calculation. They did not want to spend a 
lot of time gathering data if no one was going to use 
it. The senior vice president of R&D told Patty, “Unless 
we use the IRRs to drive behavior, it’s just a collection 
of pretty pictures.” Marty and Patty did not disagree; 
they hoped their analysis would indeed change 
behavior.
Eventually, the R&D manager provided the needed 
information. He estimated that 60% of total R&D spend-
ing was direct spending on projects. Patty was able to 
verify that these numbers tied, more or less, to the total 
R&D spending reported on financial statements.
Patty used two different models for the timing of pro-
ject investment. In Model 1 the entire investment takes 
place in Year 0, the year before the investment began gen-
erating revenue. In Model 2, the investment is incurred 
20% in Year −1, 70% in Year 0, and 10% in Year 1.
Project Investment Timing Estimate:
Year:
−1
0
1
Model 1
100%
Model 2
20%
70%
10%
To calculate IRR, Patty also had to make some 
assumptions about how project revenue was distrib-
uted over time. Patty followed current projections and 
assumed that 56% of project revenue followed the 
quicker enterprise revenue distribution pattern, and 
44% of project revenue followed the slower carrier rev-
enue distribution pattern. She weighted revenue pat-
terns accordingly, to develop a blended 10-year revenue 
distribution.
Table 1  Revenue-normalized business model
P&L Model
Model
Minimum
Mid
High
Revenue
100%
100
100
100
Cost of Goods 
Sold
38–43%
43
41
39
Gross Margin
57–62%
57
59
61
R&D
25–28%
28
27
25
SG&A
15–19%
19
17
16
Operating 
Income
15–21%
10
15
20
Year:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Enterprise
30%
75%
100%
75%
50%
30%
Carrier
0%
30%
50%
50%
100%
100%
100%
50%
50%
30%
Blended
17%
55%
78%
64%
72%
61%
44%
22%
22%
13%
Normalized to 100%
4%
12%
17%
14%
16%
14%
10%
5%
5%
3%
Project Revenue Timing Estimate:

Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation
337
Patty subtracted the investment from the revenue 
each year and calculated the IRR on the resulting 
10-year income stream. She concluded that R&D project 
investments should yield IRRs between 35% and 40% 
to achieve the profit projections in the business model. 
(See the IRR model in Exhibit 3.) Obviously if the com-
pany wanted profit growth rates, the IRRs would have 
to be even higher. Patty used the same methodology 
and estimated that target IRRs would have to increase 
to 43%–47% to achieve 20% profit growth.
Results of the analysis
Patty thought that the results of the analysis were 
enlightening. The target IRR she calculated was signifi-
cantly higher than the 20% hurdle rate that was used in 
the current BPR process, and often higher than the 
actual IRR new products were generating.
Patty went on to calculate the IRR for all new prod-
ucts and platforms currently on the market. The calcu-
lations were based on actual revenue and costs as well 
as forecasts taken from platform roadmaps. As 
expected, the IRRs of new platforms were always well 
below Patty’s target, but the IRRs increased with each 
derivative. (See Exhibit 4 for one example: Ethernet 
platform IRRs.) Patty also calculated IRRs for entire 
roadmaps, the weighted IRR for every derivative in a 
platform, and several fell below the 35% target. (See 
Exhibit 5 for IRRs of all current platform roadmaps.)
Recommendation
Marty and Patty took their results to the marketing and 
executive teams and made a strong recommendation to 
increase minimum project hurdle rates. They argued 
that a minimum 35% IRR tied to the company’s busi-
ness model was required. This higher IRR rate was nec-
essary to achieve long-term profit plans. They 
recommended that instead of approving one project 
derivative at a time, entire platform roadmaps should 
be approved, but only if the platform met the 35% IRR 
target. Marty believed that management had to learn 
to say no to bad investments.
Marty also suspected that marketing low-balled reve-
nue forecasts in the BPR because their performance was 
evaluated against the BPR revenue targets. Marty hoped 
the higher hurdle rate would compel everyone involved 
on a project to commit to higher returns and to figure out 
how to deliver them, either by reducing costs, expanding 
markets, or increasing the number of derivatives.
Response
Vitesse’s CEO and marketing team were intrigued by 
the analysis. The actual IRRs of some projects sur-
prised them. Their sense of a project’s return had been 
largely informed only by anecdotal results, so they 
were interested to learn that, among other things, one 
large and popular project was not as financially suc-
cessful as they had previously believed. But even 
though everyone understood the analysis and its impli-
cations, no one seemed in any hurry to formally adopt 
the 35% IRR target as a new project hurdle rate.
Carrier Ethernet project
The first test came when a BPR for a new Carrier Ether-
net product landed on Marty’s desk. This was a new 
product that, if approved, would be Vitesse’s first entry 
into this aspect of the Carrier Ethernet market. Marty 
and Patty were both in the BPR meeting and argued 
against its approval because the project did not have a 
positive NPV even at the 20% hurdle rate, let alone the 
more meaningful 35% hurdle rate. Even future deriva-
tives were expected to be low margin, falling below the 
35% IRR target.
Marketing pushed back, arguing that it was neces-
sary to approve the project for “strategic reasons.” If 
Vitesse did not enter this aspect of the Carrier Ethernet 
market now, they argued, Vitesse would miss an entire 
generation of products. It was necessary to take a loss in 
the short term, so they could build a customer base and 
keep the door open for more profitable derivatives in the 
future. Patty understood this argument and did not 
think it was unreasonable, but she did not want to 
approve the BPR as it had been presented. She explained:
I wasn’t completely against moving forward with 
the new Carrier Ethernet project, but I thought that 
marketing should take another look at the numbers 
and commit to higher revenues (and profits). Their 
forecasts are typically too conservative. And since 
marketing claimed that earnings from future deriv-
atives would justify the initial loss on the project, I 
thought they needed to document that. I wanted to 
see a roadmap.
As the discussion continued it became evident that 
no one was willing to kill the project. In addition to the 
strategic reasons for approving the project, marketing 
argued that engineering resources were not totally fun-
gible. Different groups had different expertise, and the 
engineers who would be assigned to this project could 

338
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
not be redeployed immediately to other projects. Marty 
and Patty eventually conceded, but they insisted that 
the marketing team at least seriously consider how to 
increase the project’s IRR. Marketing agreed to study 
the issue, but they made it very clear that they were not 
committing to a higher revenue forecast in the BPR.
Concerns
Marty and Patty were disappointed that the project was 
approved even though it did not meet the IRR bench-
mark that they had worked so hard to develop. It made 
them evaluate whether or not the IRR benchmark was 
useful as a tool to assess projects. The IRR calculations 
relied on forecasts and assumptions, so no one could be 
sure they were 100% accurate. And even assuming the 
IRR targets were accurate, Marty and Patty knew that 
there might be legitimate strategic reasons for pursu-
ing a project. If so, could those be quantified? Certainly 
a new project could not be expected to meet the same 
hurdle rate as a later iteration. That was understood by 
everyone in the organization. Marty and Patty won-
dered how they could include those considerations into 
the decision process with an objective measure.
Marty and Patty conceded that IRR target might not 
be appropriate as a hard cutoff for projects, but they 
still believed it was a useful tool that could add disci-
pline to the BPR process and could better position 
Vitesse to meet both its short- and long-term financial 
goals.
1
0%
100%
20%
40%
60%
80%
Year
Percent of Peak Revenue
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Carrier
Blended Revenue
Enterprise
Exhibit 1  Carrier and Enterprise Revenue Cycles

Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation
339
Exhibit 2  Excerpts from the BPR procedure document
VSC Procedure VQPR-1001
Intent
The BPR process is intended to ensure proper product investments, resulting in viable product choices supported with 
appropriate resources, and to weed out products that are not likely to meet business goals. A BPR meeting is intended 
to validate the business for a specific product, not a market area or broad family of devices.
BPR Presentation Template
The following information provided by the Product Marketing Manager (PMM) shall be presented using the template 
defined in VQFF-1005:
General market area of the opportunity
Market conditions and target customers
Qualitative description of the product and opportunity
Product Positioning relative to other products, roadmap, division strategy
Competition
Project Priorities List
Risks
SWOT analysis
Sources of data for Workbook numbers
Basis for average sales price numbers
BPR Presenter Workbook
The following information provided by the PMM and the Design Manager shall be presented using the template defined 
in VQFF-1006:
Top-down analysis of unit forecast with assumptions
Bottom-up analysis of unit forecast with assumptions
Product Cost structure analysis from standard online cost model and/or reviewed by manufacturing
Development Costs & Schedule with assumptions
Units, Revenue, Profit, Time to Money, NPV/ROI calculation
• Typical analysis should assume nominal development schedule, ASP and market share
• Worst case analysis should assume loss of 1 of 3 top customers, plus one additional design spin with associated 
delay, plus greater ASP erosion and lower unit shipments
Scorecards
Attendees will rate the presented product using the scorecard defined in VQFF-1007. The following 15 factors will be 
rated on a scale of 1–5:
a.	 Revenue and Profit
b.	 Quality of Forecasting Methods (sliding scale with BPR level 0–2)
c.	 Strategic Alignment
d.	 Customer Needs
e.	 Standards or Compliance Issues
f.	 Competitive Analysis
g.	 Product Positioning
h.	 Key Requirements & Priorities
i.	 Risk Management
j.	 Market Channels & Key Contacts
k.	 Management Support
l.	 Resource Availability
m.	Core Competencies
n.	 Dependency Management
o.	 SWOT analysis
Forecasting Notes
Accurate forecasting of revenue for a new product is notoriously difficult. Cumulative errors of less than 25% in the four 
factors of revenue (customers, unit volumes, ASPs and timing of ramps) can lead to results that miss or exceed predic-
tions by a factor of two or more. Optimism in forecasting tends to make most products miss rather than exceed their 
goals. The presenter of a BPR is responsible for forecasting the target revenue within reasonable limits of accuracy.

340
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
Exhibit 3  IRR model
P&L Model
Model
Minimum
Mid
Hgh
Breakeven
Revenue
100%
100.0
100.0
100.0
74.6
COGS
43.0
41.0
39.0
30.6
GM
57–62%
57.0
59.0
61.0
44.0
R&D
25–287%
28.0
27.0
25.0
27.0
SG&A
15–197%
19.0
17.0
16.0
17.0
Opinc
15–21%
10.0
15.0
20.0
0.0
60% R&D is direct project spending
Revenue Multiplier
1.0
Investment Multiplier
1.0
Discount Rate
20%
Year
IRR
ROI
NPV
21
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Minimum, 
Model 1
34%
2.04
$7.36
(17) 2.14
7.02
9.92
8.14
9.16
7.74
5.60
2.80
2.80
1.68
Minimum, 
Model 2
33%
2.04
$5.86 (3.36)
(11.76) 0.46
7.02
9.92
8.14
9.16
7.74
5.60
2.80
2.80
1.68
Mid, Model 1
37%
2.19
$8.61
(16) 2.21
7.27
10.27
8.43
9.48
8.01
5.79
2.90
2.90
1.74
Mid, Model 2
35%
2.19
$6.91 (3.24)
(11.34) 0.59
7.27
10.27
8.43
9.48
8.01
5.79
2.90
2.90
1.74
High, Model 1
41%
2.44 $10.36
(15) 2.29
7.52
10.62
8.71
9.80
8.28
5.99
3.00
3.00
1.80
High, Model 2
39%
2.44
$8.39 (3.00)
(10.50) 0.79
7.52
10.62
8.71
9.80
8.28
5.99
3.00
3.00
1.80
Breakeven
26%
1.63
$2.99
(16) 1.65
5.42
7.66
6.29
7.07
5.97
4.32
2.16
2.16
1.30
Breakeven
25%
1.63
$2.23 (3.24)
(11.34) 0.03
5.42
7.66
6.29
7.07
5.97
4.32
2.16
2.16
1.30

Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation
341
0%
0
#1
Mercury
67/36
14%
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
45,000
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
#2
Venus
40/14
17%
#3
Earth
43/38
35%
#4
Mars
118/64
52%
IRR for Solar System New Products
Investment Cost, $000
Target IRR: 35%—40%
Solar Sysem
Roadmap
$273M/$146M
25%
Exhibit 4  Sample platform IRRs
0%
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
IRR for New Product Platforms
Development Cost, $000
Polaris
$92M/$60M
40%
Alpha Centauri
$278M/$133M
38%
Solar System
$273M/$153M
26%
Procyon 
$95M/$57M
32%
Sirius
$15M/$12M
19%
Castor
$96M/$40M
15%
Pollux
$46M/$28M
3%
Platform and early
derivatives total to
18% IRR
All projects since 
2005 total to 26% IRR
Later derivatives
total to 36% iRR
Target IRR: 35%—40%
Exhibit 5  IRRs for all current roadmaps
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Marshall Vance and Research Assistant Michelle Spaulding.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Marshall Vance.

342
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
 On the evening of Friday, October 10, 2008, Linda 
Ott sat alone in her offi  ce contemplating the year to 
come. Linda was the founder of VisuSon, Inc. (VSI), a 
small manufacturer of medical ultrasound equipment, 
and the only CEO the company had ever had. Linda 
refl ected on the meeting she had had that afternoon 
with Jonathon Foley, VSI’s CFO. At the meeting, they 
reviewed the company’s results for the third quarter 
just ended and discussed projections for the rest of 
2008 and for 2009. The last item on the agenda – the 
look at 2009 – dominated their discussion and now 
occupied Linda’s thoughts. 
 Sales were at a record high in the third quarter of 
2008. Furthermore, the company’s book of confi rmed 
orders provided ample assurance that the fourth quar-
ter, and 2008 as a whole, would continue VSI’s estab-
lished pattern of double-digit growth (see  Exhibits  1 – 3 ). 
 But there were dark clouds on the horizon. The Dow 
Jones Industrial Average had just closed at 8,451, nearly 
20% below its level of a week before and down 40% 
from a year ago. Of more direct importance to VSI, the 
February collapse of the auction-rate securities market 
produced some delays in orders and collections, while 
many US hospitals, VSI’s largest group of customers, 
scrambled to replace their auction-rate debt with alter-
native sources of capital. Both Linda and Jon believed 
that this one problem had reduced sales growth for the 
year by several percentage points from what they had 
projected at the same meeting a year ago. Both Linda 
and Jon agreed that a wider credit crisis would nega-
tively impact 2009 sales, but there was no historical 
precedent on which to base a reliable forecast. 
 Linda worried about the near-term impact on earn-
ings and the long-term strategic impact of a slowdown 
while VSI prepared to release its fi rst entirely new prod-
uct platform in several years. The new platform 
accounted for nearly 30% of VSI’s research and devel-
opment budget plus more than $10 million in capital 
expenditures over the last two years. Jon, however, had 
cautioned against “fi xating on sunk costs,” as he put it. 
He believed the company should be focused on cash 
fl ow and VSI’s own access to fi nancing as much as cus-
tomer demand. As Linda pored over the numbers and 
considered various scenarios, she wondered whether 
Jon might be right. 
 Ultrasonography 
 Medical devices for ultrasound imaging (ultrasonogra-
phy) use high-frequency sound waves to generate 
graphical representations of soft tissue, organs, and 
blood fl ow. This often can be accomplished non-inva-
sively through the application of probes, called trans-
ducers, to the surface of the patient’s skin. In some 
important applications, transducers are inserted into 
body cavities or even into blood vessels to produce bet-
ter images. Modern ultrasonography equipment is 
capable of producing moving 3-D images of internal 
body structures in real time. With the use of so-called 
Doppler technology and color display, the speed and 
direction of fl uid fl ow can be accurately measured and 
displayed. Ultrasonography is generally a less expen-
sive form of radiology than magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI) and computed tomography (CT). In contrast 
to CT and X-Ray imaging, ultrasonography does not 
expose the patient to potentially harmful radiation. 
Consequently, ultrasonography has developed into the 
most common form of radiology for some areas of med-
icine. Cardiology and obstetrics/gynecology, for exam-
ple, provide important applications for ultrasonography. 
 By 2008, the global market for ultrasonography equip-
ment was dominated by four large medical device manu-
factures that were themselves divisions of global 
conglomerates. Industry analysts estimated that Philips 
Healthcare, Siemens Healthcare, GE Healthcare, and 
Toshiba together controlled approximately 80% of the 
worldwide market. But the medical ultrasound market 
remained quite dynamic and innovative with more than a 
dozen smaller competitors vying for the remaining share. 
In addition to new and niche competitors from North 
America and Europe, new entrants into the global market 
were emerging from other parts of the world, particularly 
 CASE STUDY 
 VisuSon, Inc.: Business Stress Testing 

VisuSon, Inc.: Business Stress Testing
343
China. Historically, as smaller competitors established 
themselves and grew, they were often acquired and 
absorbed by one of the four dominant players.
Rapidly developing technology and above average 
growth drove the dynamism of the ultrasonography 
equipment industry. The US domestic market for medi-
cal ultrasound had grown at 4–6% annually for the last 
decade. Certain segments, especially cardiology and so-
called hand-carried ultrasound (HCU), were projected 
to grow much faster than the overall market. By 2008, 
industry analysts believed that the US market, which 
accounted for more than 40% of the global market, had 
reached saturation. New sales were primarily replacing 
older technology. In contrast, markets in the developing 
world were expected to grow at annual rates above 5% 
for at least the next five to seven years.
Company Background
VSI manufactured its ultrasonography systems at a 
plant in Apple Valley, California, and sold them world-
wide through a network of independent distributors. 
The firm began as Visutech Partners in 1998, commer-
cializing and licensing novel signal processing and vis-
ualization algorithms pioneered by Linda Ott’s former 
academic research laboratory.
After several years of initial development efforts, the 
fledgling firm signed a licensing agreement with Bain-
bridge Manufacturing. At the time, Bainbridge was a 
contract manufacturer of components for the medical 
ultrasound market. It possessed considerable manufac-
turing expertise but lacked proprietary technology of its 
own. Bainbridge hoped to use the licensed technology to 
move up from lower-margin contract manufacturing into 
the more profitable market for integrated ultrasonogra-
phy systems. By the time Bainbridge’s new system had 
won approval from the US Food and Drug Administra-
tion, Visutech had merged with a unit of Bainbridge, 
forming VSI with Linda as the Chief Executive and the 
former head of the Bainbridge unit as the newly inde-
pendent firm’s Chief Operating Officer. Linda’s former 
principal research collaborator, Dr. Simon Lee, was 
retained as Director of Engineering (see Exhibit 4).
As a new firm entering a market dominated by much 
larger firms, VSI chose to target a mid-tier niche. It 
focused on cardiology applications where it believed its 
proprietary technology conferred the greatest advan-
tage. VSI targeted its initial offerings well. Within its 
first six years, its systems were in use in hospitals and 
medical practices across all 50 states and in most coun-
tries in Western Europe. One major competitor 
responded to VSI’s entry into their market by negotiat-
ing an agreement under which they resold VSI’s top-of-
the-line system under their own brand. Though nearly 
70% of its revenues still came from the domestic mar-
ket, with the addition of two global distributors, VSI’s 
expansion into Asia and Latin America had begun.
VisuSon, Inc. in 2008
By the start of 2008, VSI had grown to just over 200 full-
time employees. Of this number, roughly half were in 
manufacturing. The engineering department employed 
a staff of 25 scientists and engineers supported by a 
dozen technicians. As most sales were handled through 
distributors, the sales and marketing staff totaled just 25 
employees. The accounting and finance, information 
technology, human resources and payroll, and legal 
staffs, all reporting to Jon Foley, made up the remainder.
As medical diagnostic devices, VSI’s products were 
subject to extensive regulations by a number of govern-
mental authorities. Chief among these was the US Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA). In addition to its role of 
overseeing and approving pre-clinical testing of VSI’s 
products, the FDA also oversaw registration of VSI’s man-
ufacturing facility and compliance with the FDA Quality 
System Regulation. Consequently, all of VSI’s manufac-
turing employees were required to learn and maintain 
proficiency with the company’s stringent quality control 
and recording systems. Together with the skills and train-
ing required for the manufacturing process, this slowed 
the process of bringing newly hired manufacturing 
employees up to full productivity and placed a premium 
on the retention of skilled employees. VSI’s only seasonal 
or part-time employees were clerical. Accounting and 
legal temps were used to fill occasional staffing shortages.
Beyond the impact it had on the manufacturing pro-
cess, regulation drove the new product release process. 
All of VSI’s products were required to obtain pre-mar-
ket clearance as FDA 510(k) Class II devices before they 
could be sold in the domestic market. Typically, the 
process of pre-market notification and clearance for 
VSI’s products required two to three months, but for 
the most innovative products, it could take substantially 
longer. For example, the process of earning clearance 
for VSI’s first intravenous transducer catheter required 
well over a year.
VSI’s systems were modular platforms, enabling 
incremental expansion or enhancement of their func-
tionality. As transducer technology advanced, VSI 

344
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
introduced new and improved probes. These new com-
ponents could be added to existing platforms. Fre-
quently, this necessitated concurrent upgrades to the 
processing and control software. Less frequently, VSI 
upgraded the digital signal processing unit at the core 
of each system. Since the introduction of VSI’s original 
platform, the Alpha-PD, it had introduced just one new 
platform, the smaller and less costly Delta-CV. In 2007, 
both platforms were enhanced and were now marketed 
as Alpha-PDx and Delta-CVx. Customers with older 
devices were able to purchase upgrades to bring their 
existing devices up to the latest standard.
Sales to new customers typically resulted from a 
lengthy process. In general, the time from initial contact 
with a VSI distributor to the final delivery and acceptance 
was between 12 and 18 months. Existing customers peri-
odically purchased new probes or other system upgrades, 
but even these smaller sales could normally be measured 
in months from inception to delivery. Platform sales to 
new customers and often to existing customers were 
competitive. It was not uncommon for customers to 
require competing vendors to place equipment at the cus-
tomer’s location for direct comparison and evaluation. 
For especially promising or demanding accounts, VSI 
provided not only equipment but staff sonographers to 
augment the distributor representatives in demonstrat-
ing equipment and training customer personnel.
Due to the length of the sales cycle, VSI began each 
year with a strong indication of the volume of sales to 
be expected in the coming year. For more than two-
thirds of their annual platform sales, the sales cycle 
was already underway before the beginning of the 
year. Moreover, VSI kept careful track of its end cus-
tomers. The company’s knowledge of its customers and 
their applications for its systems were invaluable in 
forecasting the number who would purchase upgrades. 
This helped VSI develop quarterly and annual sales tar-
gets for its distributors.
The budgeting process
The overall market for medical ultrasound equipment 
had historically expanded at an annual growth rate of 
4–6%, and the market segments on which VSI focused 
grew at an even faster clip. Thus, from the early years 
of the firm, VSI’s management systems were designed 
to allow the firm to cope with rapid growth. The budg-
eting process was a key element of the firm’s manage-
ment system. The budget provided the foundation for 
VSI’s planning, control, and incentive systems.
VSI’s planning and budgeting cycle started 13 months 
prior to the start of the company’s fiscal year (see Exhibit 
5). It began with the annual meeting of the Radiological 
Society of North America (RSNA), which was held in 
late November of each year. This professional confer-
ence was well attended by radiologists and other physi-
cians from across North America and beyond. It also 
featured an exhibit space where virtually all of the radi-
ology equipment vendors came to show their latest 
offerings. The meeting was an opportunity for VSI to 
meet with its most important North American distribu-
tors, key customers, and prospects. Initial feedback 
gathered at RSNA allowed VSI sales and marketing to 
develop business forecasts for the coming year.
Coincident with the RSNA meeting, industry ana-
lysts would release their annual updates of market 
growth, market share, and five-year forecasts. VSI did 
not rely on these market analyses for forecasting the 
next year’s sales. The state of the sales pipeline and dis-
tributor quota commitments were far more useful for 
near-term sales forecasting. But the market analyses 
aided VSI’s marketing team in planning and position-
ing the firm and its products for the years beyond.
Engineering managers, together with product man-
agers from the marketing team, would begin finalizing 
specifics and features for any new products to be intro-
duced at the next year’s RSNA meeting shortly after 
they returned from the current year’s meeting. This 
was necessary as the FDA pre-market certification pro-
cess required months and needed to be successfully 
concluded ahead of the next meeting. A detailed under-
standing of the features of the product line was 
required in order to anticipate unit costs and relative 
market competitiveness as well as to develop pricing 
plans. Engineering personnel, together with specialists 
in the legal department, were responsible for the FDA 
510(k) pre-market notification process. Typically, VSI 
sought certification from the FDA before pursuing cer-
tification from foreign regulators.
By early February, on the basis of the plans provided 
by the engineering and marketing departments, the 
manufacturing department would begin to generate bills 
of materials, labor standards, and cost estimates. Capac-
ity projections and capital equipment requirements were 
also developed by manufacturing as part of this process. 
Manufacturing would initiate negotiations with suppli-
ers to meet their anticipated needs for components, sub-
assemblies, and any additional capital equipment 
required by the manufacturing process. Though under-
way by midyear, these agreements would not be finalized 

VisuSon, Inc.: Business Stress Testing
345
before December when the budgets were finalized and 
then approved by VSI’s board of directors.
While engineering was navigating the approval pro-
cess and manufacturing was developing cost estimates, 
it fell to sales to begin working with the distributors. 
Although most distributor agreements were renewed 
each December as part of the quota commitment pro-
cess, sales worked with the distributors throughout the 
year. In addition to monitoring current sales activity and 
achievements toward quota, the sales department 
worked through a formal review and evaluation process 
with each distributor of the partnership’s performance 
over the previous year. At the same time, the distributors 
provided feedback on developing sales leads for the com-
ing year. Together with the distributors, sales would for-
mulate plans to support these sales efforts with VSI 
demonstration and training staff as well as evaluation 
equipment. Sales would also begin providing distribu-
tors with advanced marketing information concerning 
forthcoming offerings in order to elicit feedback on 
anticipated volume and market pricing. Though most 
distribution and sales agreements included confidential-
ity clauses, the distribution network was a valuable 
source of competitive intelligence regarding expected 
features and pricing by competitors. This information 
was combined into a preliminary sales forecast provided 
to the budget committee by mid-August of each year.
On the basis of the preliminary forecast from sales 
and their own planning effort for any new products, 
manufacturing developed and submitted a draft labor 
budget to human resources (HR). The other depart-
ments also submitted staffing requests at this time, but 
the manufacturing labor budget was the most critical. 
HR was responsible for developing the staffing and 
training schedule for the coming year. As part of this 
process, HR reviewed the salary and wage surveys it 
purchased from consultants to ensure that VSI kept 
pace with the competitive labor markets. Salaries and 
wages were a significant cost category for VSI. This 
information was critical for developing department 
managers’ merit pay budgets for the coming year as well 
as for refining the direct labor budget. The most inten-
sive phase of the budget process took place each 
September. By this point in the year, the volume of sales 
and product mix for the coming year was relatively pre-
dictable. Combining the updated sales forecast distrib-
uted by the sales department at the beginning of the 
month with salary, wage, and staffing information pro-
vided by HR, department managers developed detailed 
budgets for their departments using a standardized 
spreadsheet produced by the Accounting Department. 
The design of the spreadsheet largely automated the roll-
up of department budgets to higher organizational lev-
els. But in the budgeting review processes, changes were 
inevitably suggested, forcing negotiations and revisions. 
The budgeting review effort was intensive, but the pro-
cess was not overly cumbersome because VSI’s manage-
ment consisted of fewer than 20 individuals. Finally, in 
December, VSI’s executive committee, and then the 
board of directors, approved the consolidated budget.
Management of cash and working capital was a criti-
cal issue for this small, rapidly growing company. VSI 
management and its bankers agreed that the firm should 
typically hold six weeks of operating expenditures in its 
cash accounts. In an effort to be responsive to the needs 
of its distributors and customers, VSI maintained a pol-
icy of holding 30–40 days’ forward sales in finished 
goods inventory. Finished goods accounted for just more 
than 40% of the total value of inventory, with the 
remainder split about equally between work in process 
and raw materials. At the other end of its operating 
cycle, VSI’s accounts receivable balance hovered 
between 60 and 80 days of trailing sales. In an effort to 
minimize net operating capital, VSI maintained accounts 
payable and accrued liabilities at the highest levels pos-
sible while still taking advantage of all available trade 
credits for prompt payment. Likewise, expenses were 
only prepaid when required. Nonetheless, its long oper-
ating cycle and high growth rate required VSI to finance 
this growing investment in working capital through 
short-term borrowing against the value of its accounts 
receivable and inventories. Thus, before any budget 
could be considered viable, it required review and 
approval by the finance department.
Anywhere from one-third to one-half of the manag-
ers’ cash compensation was tied to achievement of 
objectives set by the executive committee and the 
board at the start of each year. For first-level managers, 
one-third of cash compensation was considered 
“at-risk,” with the level rising to 50% for Linda. For 
most managers, achievement of budget objectives was 
weighted 50% in importance for determining the 
annual bonus. The remaining 50% was based on 
achievement of other quantified goals and/or a subjec-
tive evaluation of performance.
The new challenge
The budget that Jon Foley delivered to Linda earlier in 
the day was based on an assumption of 10% revenue 

346
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
growth for 2009 (see Exhibits 6 and 7), a level that had 
been considered quite conservative just a month ear-
lier. It included plans to bolster Asia/Pacific and Latin 
American sales support by hiring more account manag-
ers and sonographers and by devoting additional dem-
onstration equipment to these markets. While it 
included no plans for major product releases in 2009, 
engineering and marketing planned to begin the FDA 
510(k) process for approval of the new hand-carried 
ultrasound (HCU) platform targeted for release in 
2010. Recently, the HCU market had grown faster than 
the cart-based segment where VSI currently competed. 
Analysts were forecasting an acceleration of the shift 
toward greater use of HCUs. Linda and the board were 
eager to enter this new market segment.
With the assumption of 10% growth, most first-level 
management perceived that they would face tight 
resource constraints. Manufacturing headcount and 
manufacturing compensation were budgeted to grow 
by only 6.4% and 9.0%, respectively. Capital expendi-
tures were actually budgeted to fall significantly as the 
firm more fully utilized existing capacity. Additional 
investments were expected to accompany the new HCU 
platform introduction in 2010. By far the most signifi-
cant growth in operating expenses would come from 
expansion of the sales staff, with total compensation 
expense in sales and marketing budgeted to increase 
by slightly less than 40%. This was considered an 
investment required to maximize the potential growth 
from new product introductions in subsequent years. 
Growth in engineering head count of 12% and engi-
neering compensation of just over 15% was in equal 
parts justified by growth in manufacturing capacity 
and the installed base and by development of the new 
product line. Finally, the roughly 12% growth in head-
count and compensation expense within finance was 
deemed necessary to support growth in the other three 
functions.
However, while the strategic importance of growing 
into new markets and keeping ahead of the technology 
would not change, continuation of the market’s and 
VSI’s high rates of growth could not be assured. The US 
domestic market was dominated by private not-for-
profit hospitals, which rely in part on endowments like 
those of some private universities. The nearly 40% fall 
in equity market values was sure to adversely affect 
such investment portfolios. Government-owned hospi-
tals were already anticipating funding shortages 
because the slowdown was reducing tax revenues. In 
addition, the crisis was likely to reduce demand for 
elective procedures, further reducing all hospitals’ rev-
enues and spending. Consequently, analysts were 
beginning to speculate about a decrease in capital 
spending by US hospitals of as much as 14% in 2009. 
Yet, it was unclear how capital spending on radiology 
generally, and sonography in particular, might be 
affected. As the bulk of sales in the domestic market 
were replacements for older technology, many custom-
ers could defer purchases.
Customers had already shifted purchases to later in 
the year during 2008. Linda and others at VSI feared 
that this pattern could become more pronounced due 
to the developing recession. With limited workforce 
flexibility, VSI would be forced to choose between 
building inventory early in 2009 or risking stocking 
out later in the year. Fortunately, the sales mix was 
expected to remain essentially fixed, as it was driven 
by customers’ clinical requirements rather than by 
financial factors.
As Linda reviewed the spreadsheet Jon Foley had 
prepared for the 2009 budget, she considered his 
words of caution. Jon believed that in the short term 
VSI’s fate could be determined by how well they man-
aged cash and by their ability to access bank financing. 
He felt that all plans should be built upon an assump-
tion of reduced gross debt levels and improved debt 
ratios. He suggested that they “prepare for the worst 
and hope for the best,” and advocated beginning a pol-
icy of “deferring expenditures and wringing cash out 
of the working capital accounts.” Jon argued that com-
mitting to plans for growth was risky and that “modest 
cuts now [could] avert severe cuts later.” While Linda 
had come to rely on Jon’s financial expertise, her 
trusted friend and collaborator, Simon Lee, had pri-
vately criticized the CFO as overly cautious and Peter 
Beeson had on more than one occasion dismissed him 
as “just a bean counter.” In contrast, Tom Nelson, VSI’s 
COO, who had worked with Jon at Bainbridge, never 
made a significant proposal without having Jon first 
vet the numbers.
Linda knew that deferring planned investments, let 
alone cutting back, would limit the company’s capacity 
for growth in 2009 and beyond. Recognizing that any 
course of action would create some controversy within 
the management team, she wondered how exposed VSI 
was to a decrease in sales, which might be imminent. How 
great a downturn could the company endure without hav-
ing to make the sort of deep cuts that would choke off 
future growth? And might VSI’s own survival be threat-
ened if market conditions became really unfavorable?

347
Exhibit 1  Income statements
Income statement
2008 (estimated)
9 months ended 9/30/08
2007
2006
Revenues (net)
$59,766
$44,227
$52,994
$47,443
Cost of goods sold
27,269
20,224
24,806
22,930
Gross margin
32,498
24,003
28,188
24,513
Operating expenses
Selling
10,663
7,921
9,581
8,705
R&D
7,566
5,744
6,646
5,856
General and administrative
7,458
5,611
7,028
6,673
Operating income
6,811
4,728
4,933
3,279
Interest expense
1,060
773
886
653
Income before tax
5,751
3,955
4,046
2,626
Tax
2,013
1,384
1,416
919
Income before extraordinary items
3,738
2,570
2,630
1,707
Extraordinary items (net of tax)
–
–
Net income
$3,738
$2,570
$2,630
$1,707
Exhibit 2  Balance sheets
Balance sheet
2008 
(estimated)
9 months ended 9/30/08
2007
2006
2005
Current assets
Cash
$5,930
$5,448
$5,258
$4,701
$4,178
Accounts receivable (net)
12,898
12,153
11,436
10,238
9,093
Inventories
6,767
6,216
6,000
5,371
4,770
Prepaid expenses
2,030
1,835
1,800
1,611
1,431
Total current assets
27,625
25,652
24,494
21,922
19,472
Non-current assets
Property, plant, and equipment
26,531
26,945
24,108
21,583
19,167
Less accumulated depreciation
6,323
6,353
6,356
6,430
6,483
20,208
20,592
17,752
15,152
12,685
Other assets
4,282
4,209
3,522
2,988
2,466
–
–
Total assets
$52,115
$50,454
$45,767
$40,063
$34,624
Current liabilities
Accounts payable
4,496
4,348
4,423
3,960
3,516
Notes payable
14,860
14,640
12,040
9,470
6,210
Tax payable
384
253
368
239
111
Accrued liabilities
2,437
2,357
2,397
2,146
1,906
Current portion of long-term debt
339
339
339
339
339
Total current liabilities
22,516
21,938
19,568
16,154
12,083
Non-current liabilities
Long-term debt
348
433
687
1,027
1,366
Total liabilities
22,865
22,371
20,255
17,180
13,448
Owners’ equity
Common stock
189
189
189
189
189
Additional paid-in-capital
4,546
4,546
4,546
4,546
4,546
Retained earnings
24,516
23,348
20,777
18,147
16,440
Total owners’ equity
29,251
28,083
25,512
22,882
21,175
Total liabilities and equity
$52,115
$50,454
$45,767
$40,063
$34,624

348
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
Exhibit 3  Statements of cash flows
Statement of cash flows
2008 (estimated)
9 months ended 9/30/08
2007
2006
OPERATIONS:
Net income
$3,738
$2,570
$2,630
$1,707
Adjustments to reconcile:
Depreciation and amortization
5,182
3,836
4,275
3,813
Accounts receivable
(1,462)
(717)
(1,198)
(1,146)
Inventories
(767)
(216)
(628)
(601)
Prepaid expenses
(230)
(35)
(189)
(180)
Accounts payable
73
(75)
463
443
Tax payable
15
(115)
129
128
Accrued liabilities
40
(41)
251
240
Cash flow from operating activities
6,590
5,208
5,734
4,405
INVESTING:
Additions to PP&E
6,509
5,845
5,978
5,482
Acquisitions of technology licenses
1,889
1,519
1,430
1,321
Cash flow used for investing activities
8,398
7,364
7,409
6,803
FINANCING:
Borrowing of notes payable
14,860
11,510
12,040
9,470
Repayments of notes payable
(12,040)
(8,910)
(9,470)
(6,210)
Long-term borrowing
–
–
–
–
Repayment of long-term debt
(339)
(254)
(339)
(339)
Cash dividends paid
–
–
–
–
Cash flow from (used by) financing
2,481
2,346
2,231
2,921
Net increase (decrease) in cash
$673
$190
$557
$523
2,481
2,346
2,231
2,921
Cash paid for income taxes
$1,621
$1,122
$1,287
$791
Cash paid for interest
$1,054
$780
$846
$614

VisuSon, Inc.: Business Stress Testing
349
Exhibit 4  VisuSon, Inc.: Organization chart

350
Exhibit 5  Budget timeline

VisuSon, Inc.: Business Stress Testing
351
Exhibit 6  Staffing
Staffing Budget
Current 
FTE
Estimated 
attrition
Requested 
FTE
Anticipated 
need (excess)
Estimated 
wage increase
Manufacturing:
Management
4
–
4
–
3.0%
Supervisory
8
1
8
1
2.0%
Labor & Technical
92
4
98
10
2.0%
Clerical
5
1
6
2
0.0%
109
6
116
13
Engineering:
Management
4
–
4
–
3.5%
Science
5
–
5
–
3.0%
Engineering
16
1
16
1
3.6%
Technical
11
1
14
4
2.6%
Clerical
6
1
8
3
0.0%
42
3
47
8
Sales & Marketing:
Management
5
–
5
–
2.0%
Commissioned
4
1
5
2
1.5%
Professional
6
–
9
3
2.7%
Technical
10
2
15
7
3.0%
25
3
34
12
Finance Division:
Management
5
–
5
–
3.0%
Professional
9
1
9
1
3.0%
Technical
6
8
2
1.8%
Clerical
12
2
13
3
0.0%
32
3
35
6
208
15
232
39

352
Chapter 8 • Planning and Budgeting
Exhibit 7  Summary budget
2009 Budgeted income summary
Comments and analysis
Revenues (net)
$65,743
10% growth
Cost of goods
Direct materials
12,742
Direct labor
6,959
Manufacturing overhead
Salary and wages
4,078
Includes $160 for management bonuses
Depreciation and amortization
3,148
Includes $596 on 2009 investments
Miscellaneous
2,919
10,145
29,846
Includes indirect materials, utilities, and 
maintenance: 74% fixed
Gross margin
35,897
Operating expense
Selling
Salary and wages
2,807
Includes estimated commissions of $965 + $190 
management bonus
Marketing and advertising
5,036
85% discretionary / 15% variable
Shipping
1,747
95% variable, based on estimated forward rates
Sales promotion funding
1,972
11,562
Discretionary-variable
Research and development
Salary and wages
4,934
Includes $210 for management bonuses
Depreciation and amortization
1,712
Includes $430 on 2009 investments
Consulting
1,640
Discretionary
Miscellaneous
39
8,325
Discretionary
General and admin.
Salary and wages
6,567
Includes $445 for management bonuses
Travel and training
2,060
Discretionary
Depreciation and amortization
791
Miscellaneous
395
9,813
29,700
Includes $105 of contract labor: 20% variable
Operating income
6,197
Interest expense
1,250
At assumed rate of working capital growth
Before tax income
$4,947
Capital expenditure
$5,960
92% for replacements and license renewals
This case was prepared by Research Assistant David P. Huelsbeck and Professor Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

 
353
 One of the primary principles of eff ective management is that rewards should be the third thing you work 
on. Measurements should come second, and both rewards and measurements should be subordinated to 
performance defi nition; i.e., clear and unambiguous articulation of what needs to be done. 
 Steven Kerr, Chief Learning Offi  ce, Goldman Sachs 1 
 The third major element of fi nancial results control systems deals with the provision of organi-
zational rewards; that is, the design of incentive systems. As per the opening quote above, 
incentives follow performance defi nition. Performance defi nition, described by Kerr as the 
“clear and unambiguous articulation of what needs to be done,” includes both defi ning desired 
performance and assigning responsibility for achieving the desired results. Defi ning desired 
performance and setting adequately challenging performance targets in the desired perfor-
mance areas are among the main purposes of planning and budgeting systems, which we dis-
cussed in  Chapter  8 . Designing responsibility centers, which we discussed in  Chapter  7 , 
determines the accountability for the desired result areas. Incentive systems, which we discuss 
in this chapter, tie rewards (and/or punishments) to the performance evaluations. Incentive 
systems are important because they reinforce the defi nitions of the desired result areas and 
motivate employees to achieve and exceed the performance targets. Section IV of this text 
focuses exclusively on the important topic of performance measurements, which drive the per-
formance evaluations and associated incentives in most organizations. 
 Hereafter, we use the term  incentives  to refer primarily to things that employees value – 
(positive)  rewards . That said, organizations can, and do, also provide some negative rewards, 
or  punishments or  penalties . 2 In an organizational context, however, punishments commonly 
manifest themselves through an  absence of positive rewards, such as not being paid a bonus or 
being passed over for a promotion. Naming and shaming is another type of unpleasant experi-
ence (hence, punishment) that employees would rather avoid. For example, at Black & Decker’s 
semiannual meeting of division heads, managers who had met their budget targets sat on the 
left side of the room, whereas those who had failed to meet their targets were asked to sit on 
the right in order to explain to the others why they had not met their targets. Mr. Archibald, 
the executive chairman, explained proudly: “They hate being over on the right. We think this 
kind of peer competition is motivational.” In a similar fashion, China’s Haier, the large con-
sumer appliances company, uses naming and shaming by prominently displaying photographs 
of managers throughout the company with a red smiley face for good performance and a yel-
low frowning one for those doing poorly. 3  
 Table  9.1 lists some of the types of rewards that organizations use. Note that many of these 
rewards are  non-monetary . Although it is widely accepted that individuals universally value 
money, it is equally correct to suggest that monetary rewards are not the only thing that people 
 CHAPTER 9 
 Incentive Systems 

354
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
value.4 When properly chosen, non-monetary rewards will be greatly appreciated by employ-
ees, and in many cases, they place a smaller financial burden on the firm. For example,
While raises or bonuses are not unimportant, especially in [an] uncertain financial climate, 
[survey evidence suggests] that workers across a spectrum of ages – from Baby Boomers 
who have worked hard to reach the peaks of their career, to Generation X’ers struggling to 
satisfy professional ambitions and personal fulfillment, to Millennials who view work/life 
balance as their right – are looking for a remix of conventional rewards. Many of these don’t 
cost a dime but pay off in increased engagement, loyalty, and willingness to go the extra 
mile. For example, when surveyed about the possibility of working remotely, 83% of Millen-
nials and 75% of Boomers say that the freedom to choose when and where they work 
motivates them to give 110%.5
Therefore, organizations typically do not rely on just a single form of rewards. In many for-
profit firms, various monetary incentives in the form of cash or stock usually go up and down 
with performance. But a manager’s autonomy, authority, recognition, and status often do, too. 
Corporate managers can (threaten to) reduce the decision autonomy of entity managers by 
Table 9.1  Examples of positive and negative rewards
Positive rewards
Negative rewards (punishments)
Autonomy
Interference in job from superiors
Power
Loss of job
Opportunities to participate in important decision-making processes
Zero salary increase
Salary increases
Assignment to unimportant tasks
Bonuses
Chastisement (public or private)
Stock options
No promotion
Restricted stock
Demotion
Praise
Public humiliation
Recognition
Promotions
Titles
Job assignments
Office assignments
Reserved parking places
Country club memberships
Job security
Merchandise prizes
Vacation trips
Participation in executive development programs
Time off
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 427

Purposes of incentives
355
refusing to fund investments in entities where performance is poor. In entities where perfor-
mance is excellent, they can grant managers additional power and increase their recognition 
within the firm by publicizing the results. Employees who climb the corporate ladder also often 
are given various perks (discretionary rewards), such as the opportunity to travel first class, to 
pick a larger office, to be given first choice for vacation scheduling, to have a preferred parking 
spot, and so on.
This chapter first describes the purposes of incentives. It then focuses mainly on monetary 
incentives to discuss various important incentive system decisions that organizations need to 
consider, such as about the extent to which the incentives are determined formulaically, the 
shape of the incentive-performance function, and the form and size of incentive pay. The chap-
ter concludes by providing a set of criteria for evaluating incentive systems.
Purposes of incentives
Performance-dependent rewards, or incentives, provide the impetus for the alignment of 
employees’ natural self-interests with the organization’s objectives. They provide three types of 
management control benefits. The first is informational. The rewards attract employees’ atten-
tion and inform or remind them of the relative importance of often-competing results areas, 
such as cost, quality, customer service, asset management, and growth. Merely telling employ-
ees that customer service, for example, is important might have some effect on their behaviors. 
But including customer service measures in annual bonus plans is more likely to convince them 
to emphasize customer service. In other words, the rewards signal which performance areas 
are important and help employees decide how to direct their efforts. For this reason, the infor-
mational aspect of incentives is sometimes also referred to as the effort-directing purpose.
A pertinent example is the global financial services company, Barclays. Reeling from missel-
ling practices by branch personnel of insurance, loans, and bank accounts, which it believed 
their commission payments had encouraged, the company decided that “Barclays staff will no 
longer be paid any commission for selling financial policies,” but that “from now on, any bonuses 
will be dependent entirely on giving customers good quality service” because “the key to 
Barclays long-term success is the level of service we provide, not how many products we sell.”6 
Also in banks, brands have been shown to be shaped less by advertising and marketing than by 
their customers’ experiences. “In such cases, customers get the message only if employees do,” 
which is why some banks, like HSBC, link the pay of some of their employees to indicators of 
brand health.7
The informational purpose of incentives is equally pertinently illustrated by the case when 
Bob Dudley, the UK oil group’s new chief executive at BP, vowed to improve BP’s safety culture 
upon taking the helm following the company’s deep-sea oil well disaster in the Gulf of Mexico. 
To make his point, Mr. Dudley announced that the company had decided that bonuses for the 
fourth quarter of 2010 would be based solely on how employees perform in terms of safety and 
risk management. BP would honor the existing performance contracts for the first three quar-
ters of the year, but the fourth quarter’s performance would be measured “solely according to 
each business’s progress in reducing operational risks and achieving excellent safety and com-
pliance standards,” he said. In so doing, Mr. Dudley signaled in no uncertain terms that the 
company was “absolutely clear that safety, compliance and operational risk management [was 
to be] BP’s number one priority, well ahead of all other priorities.”8
The second control benefit is motivational. Some employees need incentives to exert the 
extra effort required to perform tasks well; that is, to work hard, do a good job, and succeed.9 In 
other words, this purpose of incentives is sometimes also called the effort-inducing purpose. 

356
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
Sometimes even hard-working employees need incentives to overcome their natural aversion to 
some difficult or tedious actions that are in their organization’s best interest, such as working 
cooperatively with other divisions to resolve customer complaints, making cold sales calls to get 
more business, preparing paperwork, or training employees. The crucial point here, however, is 
that the incentive systems are designed to encourage the desired behaviors, and not to crowd 
them out.10
The third control benefit is attraction and retention of personnel. Performance-dependent 
rewards are an important part of many employees’ total compensation package. Some rewards 
are promised because the organization wants to improve employee recruitment (selection) and 
retention, either by offering a package that is comparable or superior to the packages offered by 
their competitors or in the relevant labor market, or by linking payments to an employee’s con-
tinued employment. Some firms also overtly offer compensation packages with below-average 
base salaries but with performance-dependent compensation elements (variable pay) that pro-
vide the opportunity to earn above-average total compensation if excellent performance is 
forthcoming. These packages tend to appeal to employees who are entrepreneurial, rather than 
risk averse, and those who are confident about their abilities to achieve. These efforts to use 
compensation packages to attract and retain the most suitable employees often form a key ele-
ment of firms’ personnel control strategy, as discussed in Chapter 3.
Finally, incentive systems also serve several non-control purposes. Incentive systems that are 
performance-dependent make compensation more variable with firm performance. This 
decreases cash outlays when performance is poor and, thus, smooths earnings, because com-
pensation expense is lower when profits are lower. This purpose is clearly articulated in a recent 
survey of practice, and inevitably put into the context of the aforementioned attraction and 
retention purpose:
“Organizations are under immense pressure to keep costs in line to remain competitive, 
and as a result, we are seeing more than 90 percent of companies shifting more of their 
spending to variable pay because this type of strategy enables them to recognize and 
reward performance without growing their fixed cost,” said Ken Abosch [at compensation 
consultant] Aon Hewitt. “Pay is a top engagement driver for employees, and as the market 
continues to improve, organizations will need to differentiate through variable pay pro-
grams to attract and retain top talent.”11
Incentive system design choices can also affect a firm’s tax payments. Some forms of compensa-
tion are not deductible for tax purposes, and some deductions are limited. For example, 
Section 162(m) of the US Internal Revenue Code limits the deductibility of compensation in excess 
of $1 million paid to an employee unless the compensation qualifies as “performance-based.” The 
intent of this law was to discourage high guaranteed payments to executives in situations where 
shareholders were not benefiting (presumably because the fixed pay is not performance-based).12
Government regulations also affect compensation arrangements in organizations, thus driv-
ing another important concern of incentive system design – compliance. For example, concerns 
for compliance were heightened following the financial crisis of 2008, especially in banks, 
where lawmakers and regulators, although with significant variations across countries, man-
dated or tinkered with caps on bonuses and deferred bonuses as well as restrictions on how 
bonuses are paid out (such as, for example, in deferred shares instead of cash).13 Firms respond 
to these restrictions by finding ways to maintain competitive compensation packages. The fol-
lowing quote illustrates this: “Banks are now rushing to find ways to maintain overall levels of 
compensation. With bonuses limited to a small multiple of salaries and banks unwilling to 
greatly increase their fixed costs, many firms – including Goldman – are hoping to bridge the 
gap by introducing role-based allowances” (italics added).14 The idea behind these role-based 
allowances is that they would not qualify as bonuses as defined by the regulator (such as by 

Monetary incentives
357
being based on seniority or “role” instead of on performance) and thus would not count toward 
the bonus cap, while having some characteristics of bonuses such as being adjustable upward or 
downward each year. One could therefore maintain that the regulation has led to a new form of 
compensation – so-called allowances – that fall somewhere between fixed pay and bonuses,15 
and which, for this reason, will be closely scrutinized by the regulators.16
While this chapter focuses on the management control benefits of incentives, it must be rec-
ognized that the control and non-control purposes of incentive systems can, and must, some-
times be traded off against each other. Consequently, observing organizations’ incentive 
practices does not necessarily provide definitive clues as to which incentives they find to be 
most effective for control purposes.
Monetary incentives
Money is an important form of reward that is often linked to performance, particularly at 
management levels in organizations. Monetary incentives certainly are not the only form of 
reward, and they may not even always be the best one, but their use is common. There are 
three primary ways through which monetary incentives can be provided: performance-based 
salary increases, short-term incentive plans, and long-term incentive plans. Note that the 
term “performance-based” is key to distinguishing incentives from entitlements. When we 
use incentives hereafter, we presume them to be performance- or merit-based, instead of 
amounts being awarded as cost-of-living adjustments or on the basis of seniority, custom (e.g. 
a holiday “bonus” depending on salary band rather than performance), or collective bargain-
ing agreements.
That is not to say that there is agreement about the extent to which pay should be perfor-
mance-based. Indeed, views on this vary widely. For example, a survey in the United Kingdom 
revealed that, in the private sector, 54% of the responding employees believe that their salary 
should reflect their own performance, 36% think it should reflect inflation, and 32% feel it 
should reflect their experience. In the public sector, however, the percentages are 36% perfor-
mance, 55% inflation, and 33% experience. These variations support the aforementioned 
selection purpose of incentives – that is, different incentive incentives systems will attract, or can be 
designed to attract, different types of individuals to different types of organizations. Indeed, the 
survey also suggested that while “public sector workers agreed that private sector workers should 
be paid based on how well they perform, they are more reluctant to see their own pay linked to 
individual performance (36%), that of their team (11%) or that of their organization (5%).”17
Salary increases
Organizations give, or at least consider, salary increases to their employees typically each year. 
These salary increases are minimally cost-of-living adjustments. But they can also be seen as an 
incentive when at least some portion of the raise is merit-based. Salary increases are typically a 
small proportion of an employee’s salary, but they have considerable value because they are not 
just a one-time or lump-sum payment; instead, they provide a permanent increment because 
employees’ salaries are rarely reduced (although, in years of austerity, further increases may be 
put on hold).
Salary increases can be seen as an incentive when they are expected to be “earned” through 
performance or the acquisition of skills that promise improved performance in future periods. 
Even the Vatican has apparently introduced an “element of incentive” into its salary system, as 
it takes into account issues such as “dedication, professionalism, productivity and correctitude” 
when awarding pay raises.18

358
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
Short-term incentives
Many organizations in the private sector, but also increasingly those in the public sector, in a 
growing number of countries, use short-term incentives, which include bonuses, commissions, 
and piece-rate payments. Incentives have become so widespread that some have claimed that 
they are “overused” and that they “emerge as the first answer to almost every problem” in the 
sense of:
Is the medical system inefficient? Set up a managed care system that provides financial 
incentives to doctors, insurers, patients, and hospitals. Bad customer service? Provide 
financial incentives for better customer service. Airplanes not flying on time? Pay employ-
ees if the planes fly on time, and so on.19
The primary rationale for variable pay is to differentiate pay; that is, to provide rewards in 
accordance with an employee’s contributions to the organization, hence the notion of pay-for-
performance or variable pay. Such pay is meant to provide the motivation for employees to go the 
“extra” proverbial mile for the “extra” compensation. But such compensation is also risk-sharing 
because the employee (employer) receives (pays) the incentive compensation only when the 
performance on which it is based has been realized; hence, the notion of at-risk pay from the 
employee’s side. For the employer, however, this feature makes compensation expense more 
variable with performance, where compensation expense is higher (lower) when performance 
is better (worse), and thus, when the firm can best (least) afford the higher (lower) pay.
Short-term incentives typically provide cash payments (although other forms of payment 
such as in the form of equity are also possible) based on performance measured over periods of 
one year or less. The awards are often called annual incentive pay or bonuses. The awards can be 
based on the performance of a single individual, or on that of a group of which an individual is 
a member, such as a work team, a profit center, or even the firm as a whole. Probably the most 
commonly used performance metrics in annual bonus plans are financial; or to put differently, 
there are very few bonus plans that would not have at least some financial performance metric 
included.20 For example, a division manager’s bonus could be calculated as a percentage of the 
division’s profits up to a maximum (e.g. not to exceed, or capped at, half the manager’s annual 
salary). But there are innumerable ways to set bonus formulas, the key parameters of which we 
discuss in more detail in a later section.
In addition to financial measures of performance, the incentive plan can also include bonus 
payments contingent on achievements in nonfinancial performance areas. For example, 30% of 
an entity manager’s bonus could be based on meeting targets for customer satisfaction and a 
further 10% based on meeting targets for environmental performance. In some cases, nonfinan-
cial performance is the dominant portion. At Lloyd’s and Royal Bank of Scotland, for example, 
individual sales performance represents only a small fraction (less than 5%) of the bonus of 
retail banking personnel; the rest is based on customer service and satisfaction levels.21
When the bonus formula in annual incentive plans includes multiple performance dimen-
sions, bonuses can be earned, sometimes controversially, due to on-target performance in one 
or some areas despite poor performance in other areas, and while the firm is making losses or 
jobs are being cut, say. This happened, to the outrage of shareholders, when the boss of oil firm 
BP, Bob Dudley, earned a 20% increase in his 2015 compensation while overseeing the firm’s 
biggest-ever operating loss for that year. Ironically, shareholders had, in the prior year, voted in 
favor of the pay policy that resulted in Mr. Dudley’s pay packet for 2015, which was designed to 
measure his effectiveness in hitting a series of targets such as scaling back capital spending, 
reducing costs, and maintaining safety.22 Companies that are concerned about this eventuality 
can make bonus payments contingent on minimum performance thresholds in all of the bonus 
formula components and, thus, use one performance measure as condition or a modifier for the 

Monetary incentives
359
other. Again, the combinations of possibilities add up to a virtually infinite number of conceiv-
able bonus formulas.
To add further to the variety of bonus plans, some short-term incentive awards are assigned 
in two steps. First a bonus pool is funded, often based on corporate performance and often con-
ditional on meeting minimum corporate performance thresholds. In the second step, the pool is 
then assigned to individuals, usually through a rating system that provides higher awards to 
better performers.23
All of the major compensation consulting firms provide data on reward practices collected 
from a large number of firms across industries in a large number of countries around the world. 
These surveys are not always easy to compare (due to different sample composition in terms of 
type and size of companies as well as industry and country coverage, plus different survey 
instruments and incentive system categorizations and valuations taken at different times). 
Overall, however, these surveys suggest that short-term incentive pay is ubiquitous at manage-
ment levels with nontrivial payouts relative to base salary for on-target performance, and with 
a trend of variable pay spreading around the world. However, in addition to a wide variation 
across countries, industries, and firm sizes and types, the surveys exhibit a wide spread in vari-
able pay across organizational roles and levels. Although it is virtually impossible to draw a line 
through these findings, perhaps one careful generalization is that both bonus eligibility and 
magnitude tend to increase with organization level; that is, as employees move up the organiza-
tional ladder, they are more likely to be eligible for a bonus and to receive a proportionally big-
ger bonus, when earned, out of total compensation.
Despite this generalization, variation remains the norm. For example, even though bonuses 
are typically strongly geared in the financial sector – where, according to data from the Euro-
pean Banking Association, the average bonus for bankers earning more than ₠1 million can be 
well over three times fixed pay24 – some banks, perhaps rare exceptions, do not believe in 
bonuses. Par Boman, chief executive at Sweden’s Handelsbanken, argues that bonuses create a 
mismatch between short-term incentives and long-term performance:
I do not believe you can combine long-term commitment with short-term incentives or you 
will have a mismatch. That doesn’t mean I’m against bonuses in principle, but in our com-
pany, we cannot see that they will help us develop the bank in the long-term. It doesn’t 
make sense to pay bonuses in good times and then in bad times tell employees they have 
to work harder for 30 percent less money.25
Perhaps the key message is that short-term incentive (STI) and long-term incentive (LTI) 
plans, to which we turn next, should complement each other. In the words of Peter Schloth, 
Principal with Mercer, a major compensation consulting firm:
Properly designed LTI programs should motivate to develop strategies and policies to 
achieve long-term growth and increase the value of the organization. Effective STI pro-
grams should motivate to execute on strategies and policies, and make good operating 
decisions to maximize performance over the course of a year.26
Long-term incentives
Long-term incentive awards are based on performance measured over periods greater than 
one year. Their principal objective is to reward employees for their role in creating long-term 
value. In addition to motivating employees to contribute to the organization’s long-term suc-
cess, long-term incentive awards also aim to attract and retain key talent by making total 
expected compensation more attractive; by encouraging employee ownership (through 
equity-based features of the plan);27 and by tying incentive payouts to service period require-
ments (to address retention concerns). Long-term incentive awards often are restricted to 

360
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
relatively high levels of management based on the argument that executive decision-making 
at these levels most directly impacts the long-term success of the organization, although some 
would object to this argument and call instead for a distributed responsibility for long-term 
success to everyone in the organization. We will come back to this point when we discuss 
group rewards.
Long-term incentive plans (LTIPs) come in multiple forms; as with short-term incentive 
plans, one must be careful to generalize selected features of these plans. There is variation in 
the period that LTIPs cover (although three to four years is quite common); in the performance 
metric(s) the plans include; and in the targets that are expected to be achieved over the period. 
Some LTIPs measure performance in accounting terms, such as earnings per share (EPS), say. 
The target for these metrics can be cumulative over the LTIP period (such as by requiring EPS to 
be within a given range each year of the performance period in addition to meeting the target at 
the end of the period), or instead be stipulated as an end-of-period target (where the plan 
requires only that the EPS target is achieved at the conclusion of the performance period regard-
less of the actual fluctuations in EPS during the period). Some firms implement consecutive 
(end-to-end) LTIPs, meaning that a new cycle begins only at the completion of the previous one. 
Others opt for overlapping performance cycles, where a new plan begins each year; hence, mul-
tiple plans are running simultaneously, making it easier to tweak the long-term targets, or even 
the chosen metrics, each year. Overlapping LTIPs also facilitate enrolling newly eligible employ-
ees and new hires each year.28
Equity-based plans are another common way to provide long-term incentives. These plans 
provide rewards based on changes in the value of the firm’s stock. Equity-based plans, too, come 
in many forms, including the following:
Stock option plans
Stock option plans give employees the right to purchase a set number of shares of company 
stock at a set price (i.e. the exercise or strike price) during a specified period of time (i.e. after 
the options vest but before they expire). Although stock option terms vary across firms, most 
options are granted at the money (i.e. the exercise price is equal to the stock price on the day of 
grant) with a three- to five-year vesting rate (i.e. one-third, one-fourth, or one-fifth of the 
options granted, respectively, vest at the end of each of the first three, four, or five years), and a 
10-year maturity (i.e. the options expire 10 years after they are granted). When the stock price 
is above the option exercise price – that is, when the stock options are in the money – the 
employee can exercise the vested options and either hold the shares or sell them with a gain. 
However, when the strike price of vested options is higher than the stock price, the options are 
said to be underwater. Rather than having motivational effects, underwater options often are a 
source of morale and retention problems, particularly if the firm’s stock price malaise is deemed 
to persist.
While employees might desire stock options because of the size of the potential gains, stock 
options also have several attractive features for the granting firms. From an incentive perspec-
tive, employees benefit only when the stock price goes up, so stock options motivate employees 
to work effectively, one would presume, to increase their company’s stock price. This improves 
incentive alignment, as employees benefit only when shareholders benefit; that is, when the 
stock price goes up and, presumably, value has been created. Moreover, the potential for share 
ownership associated with stock options also affects alignment by tying some of the employee’s 
wealth to the company’s future. Finally, vesting schedules coupled with service-based restric-
tions that cause employees to forfeit unvested options when they leave the firm are believed to 
enhance employees’ long-term focus on the business as well as retention. Thus, stock options 
get employees to think more like owners while enhancing retention of talent. Stock options also 
allow the firm to provide incentive compensation without cash outlay, which makes stock 

Monetary incentives
361
options particularly attractive for cash-constrained firms such as those during start-up but also 
turnaround, either not yet generating profits or facing losses (and retention concerns).29 In fact, 
stock options create a positive cash flow for the firm when employees exercise options (due to 
the purchase of shares, but also due to a tax-deductible compensation expense in the amount of 
the difference between the exercise price of the options and the market price of the stock). 
Moreover, until 2005, most stock option grants did not require the firm to take a charge against 
earnings. This flaw in the accounting rules provided powerful incentives for firms to grant 
options rather than to use other forms of compensation that require expensing. As of 2006, 
however, the most commonly applied accounting rules around the world, including Interna-
tional Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 
(GAAP), require that the fair value of the stock options at the grant date be estimated using an 
option pricing model. A detailed discussion of such non-control implications of stock options, 
however, is outside the scope of this text.
Despite these features, stock options also have several disadvantages. Stock option grants 
represent a potential future issuance of shares, which creates dilution and may put a downward 
pressure on stock prices (which firms try to counter by committing to share repurchases with 
the proceeds from the exercise of stock options). Stock options also sometimes motivate manag-
ers to undertake riskier business strategies because the managers are rewarded for gains but 
not penalized for losses. Their risk-taking behavior can increase stock price volatility. Stock 
options also have been criticized for generating windfall compensation due to market-wide 
stock price improvements rather than strong firm performance. In reverse, however, stock 
options also can fall underwater due to bearish stock market conditions rather than poor firm 
performance and cause morale and retention problems. Also when the firm is performing 
poorly and the stock price is subdued, stock options are worth little and, thus, are likely to erode 
the motivation to perform – ironically, just at a time when it is important for the executives and 
employees to be motivated the most. Moreover, given the relatively high liquidity of stock 
options (due to short vesting periods) and, often, the vast amounts of stock options held, execu-
tives may be encouraged to take actions that boost stock price in the short term but harm share-
holders in the long run after the options have been cashed in. Considering these issues, the 
premise that stock options contribute to the creation of shareholder value has been actively 
debated and researched.30
Before they became so contested, however, stock options were by far the most prevalent form 
of stock-based incentives during the 1990s, particularly in the United States and especially in 
certain industries (e.g. hi-tech). Although stock options remained in play, the years 2003 and 
2004 began to show declining grant rates, rising exercise rates, and declining eligibility as 
firms were increasingly considering alternatives to standard option plans, particularly below 
the executive/management level.31 The decline in stock options’ popularity around that time, 
particularly in the United States, coincided with the change in accounting rules that required 
stock option expensing. But other reasons could help explain stock options’ decline, such as the 
bear stock market in the United States that drove many stock options underwater, as well as 
investor activism against the ostensibly excessive pay that stock options helped provide during 
the boom. Investors also scorned the dilution effects of the large amounts of stock options that 
were being granted.
Differences in stock option use have existed, and continue to persist, across countries, how-
ever. Firms in Britain and France, for example, make use of stock options, whereas firms else-
where in Europe have a preference for full-value share awards (see below). That said, use of 
stock options, never so widespread in Europe as in America, appears to be declining in most 
countries.32 With the decline in stock option usage, however, other forms of equity-based 
compensation have become more prominent, including restricted shares and, especially, 
performance awards.33

362
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
Restricted stock plans
Employees eligible for restricted stock do not have to spend cash to acquire the stock, as the 
shares of stock are given to them; but selling those shares is restricted for a specified period of 
time (five years, say) and contingent upon employment at that time. In other words, the 
employee has full ownership rights over the shares, including voting and dividend rights; but 
the shares are subject to sale restrictions and/or risk of forfeiture until the vesting event occurs, 
that is, until completion of the service period.
Restricted stock obviously provides a reward for increases in stock price, although the stock 
itself also has value when the stock price is flat or even declines (unlike stock options that only 
provide a reward when the stock price exceeds the exercise price). Because full-value stock 
awards like restricted stock have less risk than stock options, the firm can issue fewer shares as 
it would when using stock options instead, thus causing less dilution. On the other hand, 
restricted stock has been derided as a giveaway or pay-for-pulse (rather than pay-for-
performance). This is because the stock has some value (even if the stock price declines), and the 
restrictions on selling the stock disappear merely with the passage of time and continued 
employment during that time; that is, with the completion of the service period. For this reason, 
restricted stock is said to better serve retention purposes and benefits stemming from owner-
ship, rather than motivation per se.
Performance stock or option plans
To mitigate the “giveaway” feature of restricted stock and bolster the pay-for-performance 
rationale, some firms have resorted to performance awards by making their stock grants contin-
gent on the achievement of stock or non-stock goals over a specified period. In this way, perfor-
mance stock shares are restricted stock shares that vest upon the achievement of specific 
performance targets and not merely the completion of a service period. Until the specific per-
formance target has been achieved, the shares are subject to sale restrictions and/or forfeiture 
contingent on continued employment. Once vested, the performance shares usually are no 
longer subject to restriction.
Similarly, performance options are alternative stock option plans that make vesting or 
exercise of the options contingent on improvements in stock performance or the achievement 
of certain stock or non-stock targets. Performance options can come in different forms. Pre-
mium options have exercise prices greater than the stock price on the grant date. Indexed 
options have exercise prices contingent on performance relative to a peer group of firms. 
Performance-vested options link the vesting of the options to the achievement of performance 
targets, such as return on equity, earnings per share, or other financial or operating measures 
(e.g. sales growth).
Examples can be varied, such as for performance stock option plans that contain both pre-
mium pricing and performance vesting. Regardless of the variations, the key idea behind these 
alternative stock option plans is to provide stronger incentives to maximize shareholder value 
by raising the bar for stock price improvements before the options become exercisable (as is the 
case with premium and indexed options) or by raising the bar on the conditions to vest and, 
thus, earn the stock (as is the case with performance-vested options). However, as is true for all 
incentive plans that require the setting of performance targets, triggers, or thresholds, doing so 
effectively is a key challenge. When the performance conditions are set too leniently, the per-
formance stock or option plans will be seen as merely providing giveaways. But when they are 
set too tough, they can have other undesired consequences, such as excessive risk taking, dis-
couragement, and/or turnover.
There are many other possible long-term incentive instruments, but most are variants of 
stock option, restricted stock, or performance stock/option plans. For example, both restricted 

Monetary incentives
363
stock and performance stock plans involve granting stock. But sometimes firms provide awards 
in units instead of actual shares. For example, at the Coca-Cola Company:
Performance Share Units (PSUs) provide an opportunity for employees to receive common 
stock if the specified performance measure [i.e. compound annual growth in economic 
profit] is met for a predefined performance period [i.e. over three-year periods – 2012–14, 
2013–15, 2014–16, 2015–17, etc.]. PSUs generally are subject to an additional holding 
period. PSUs generally vest 100% after four years (three-year performance period followed 
by a one-year holding period).
However,
The PSUs for the 2013–2015 performance period will have zero payout because the pre-
established economic profit growth target was not met. As with the two prior PSU pro-
grams, no compensation will be realized for this portion of long-term incentive compensation.
[For the 2014–16 period, the Company’s 2016 proxy statement states that] Through 
December 31, 2015, payout is projected above the target level. Company performance over 
the remaining year of the performance period [2016] will determine the number of shares 
earned, if any. Results will be certified in February 2017.
[And, for the 2015–17 period, the Company’s 2016 proxy statement states that] Through 
December 31, 2015, payout is projected near the target level. Company performance over 
the remaining two years of the performance period [2016 and 2017] will determine the num-
ber of shares earned, if any. Results will be certified in February 2018.34
Performance share units are thus granted in units instead of actual shares, where each unit 
awarded usually represents the value of one share of stock. But PSUs only entitle the employee 
to stock upon vesting, and as the example illustrates, when the vesting is performance-based – 
and thus when these are so-called performance shares – they may not always result in an award. 
(Moreover, as recipients of PSUs, employees usually have no ownership rights until vesting, 
since no shares are actually issued until that point.)
Another variation of equity-based long-term incentives are Stock Appreciation Rights (SARs). 
SARs are similar to options in that the eligible employees benefit from appreciation in the com-
pany’s stock price. They are different in that the employees do not have to spend cash to acquire 
the stock. Instead, without acquiring the stock, employees just receive the amount of any 
increase in stock price over the specified period. But like stock options, the employee typically 
can exercise the SAR at any point after vesting but before expiry. When the SAR is exercised, 
the firm pays the employee cash (cash SARs), stock (stock SARs), or a combination of both, in an 
amount equal to the stock’s appreciation since the date of grant.
As with short-term incentive plans, the variety of long-term incentive plans is infinite, which 
should caution against making any seemingly simple generalizations or patently effective pre-
scriptions. That said, evidence suggests that equity-based incentives have grown historically to 
a recent plateau, as follows:
The percentage of pay tied to the stock market for CEOs of US companies was negligible 
in the early 1980s, rose to about one-quarter in the early 1990s, peaked at roughly one-half 
in the early 2000s, and remains near 40% today.35
Another discernable trend perhaps is the decrease in the use of stock options and the increase 
in performance-based plans. Consistent with this, the aforementioned 2016 proxy statement of 
Coca-Cola explicitly states that they “adjusted the mix if equity compensation to use fewer stock 
options and more performance share units” in line with their compensation practice or princi-
ple where “the vast majority of pay is to be performance-based and not guaranteed.” David 
Hofrichter, principal and business development leader of Hewitt’s Executive Compensation 

364
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
Consulting practice, echoes this by opining that, indeed, “Compensation Committees now want 
something for [their LTIP grants]; [which] they are expressing […] through performance plans 
that target key metrics and support the strategy of the organization.”36
Incentive system design
In the following sections, we discuss three related incentive system design choices: the extent to 
which the rewards are determined formulaically, the shape of the incentive-performance func-
tion, and the size of incentive pay.
Incentive formula
The types of rewards provided and the bases on which they are awarded are commonly com-
municated to the incentive plan participant by means of an incentive formula and described in 
an incentive contract that might be written in great detail. However, the rewards sometimes 
can also be assigned subjectively instead of completely formulaically. Subjectivity almost inevi-
tably plays some role for decisions about promotions and job assignments. But subjectivity can 
also be part of annual bonus assignments in the following ways: (1) all or part of the bonus is 
based on subjective judgments about performance; (2) the weights on some or all quantitative 
measures are determined subjectively; or (3) a subjective performance threshold or override is 
used, in which case a subjective determination as to whether or not to pay a bonus is made.
Subjectivity can be used for a number of reasons. It may be difficult to describe the bases for 
the rewards and/or their weightings from a large set of evaluation criteria prior to the perfor-
mance period. Keeping the contract flexible can mitigate motivating employees in directions that 
turn out to be no longer appropriate as conditions change. When the contract is left flexible, 
employees are encouraged to keep doing their best and not give up in the face of an impossible 
performance target or, in reverse, coast once the target is achieved. And, keeping the bases for 
rewards vague can reduce employees’ propensities to manipulate the performance measures.37
The use of subjectivity in contracting, however, can affect employee risk. It can decrease risk 
if it allows adjustments for the effects of factors that are outside the employee’s control (which 
we discuss in greater detail in Chapter 12). But the use of subjectivity can also increase employee 
risk. First, with implicit contracts, employees bear the risk that their evaluators might evaluate 
them on different bases from what they were assuming when they made their decisions; that is, 
subjective evaluations are prone to hindsight bias. Second, if employees do not trust their evalu-
ators to make informed and unbiased performance assessments, subjectivity can result in 
employee frustration, demotivation, and friction. Finally, when evaluations are subjective, 
employees may attempt to inappropriately influence their evaluators for better evaluations. 
These problems, however, are reduced if the employee and the evaluator develop a working 
relationship with greater mutual trust, which has been shown to be critical for the effective 
implementation of completely or partially subjective performance evaluations.38
Shape of the incentive function
When the reward promises are formulaic, the link between rewards and the bases on which 
they are awarded is often determined by a rewards-results or pay-performance function. This 
was illustrated in a budget setting in Chapter 8 (Figure 8.3), showing that bonuses are typically 
promised only over a restricted performance range; that is, the function has lower and upper 
reward cutoffs, and it is linear in shape (although sometimes with kinks) between the cutoffs.39
At profit center levels, most firms set a lower cutoff or threshold in their short-term incentive 
contracts. Below some significant fraction (e.g. 80%) of targeted annual performance (which is 

Criteria for evaluating incentive systems
365
typically the budget), managers do not earn incentive pay for performance. Organizations set a 
lower cutoff because they do not want to pay any bonuses for performance they consider medio-
cre or worse. The fraction of the target set as the lower limit varies, among other things, with 
the predictability of the target; that is, it tends to be a lower fraction when predictability is 
lower. An upper cutoff or cap on incentive payments also is commonly used; it means that no 
extra incentive pay is provided for any additional performance above the cutoff. The caps are 
typically set at a percentage of the annual performance target, such as 150% of budget. Upper 
cutoffs can be considered for a number of reasons, including the following:
1.	 A concern that the high incentive payments might not be deserved because of windfall gains 
(unforeseen good luck);
2.	 A concern that employees will be unduly motivated to take actions to increase current period 
performance at the expense of the long term; in other words, produce results that are unsus-
tainable (which was the stated reason for the cap on bonuses for banks in the European Union, 
a rule that limits bonuses of high-earning bankers to the same level as their salaries or twice 
the amount with shareholder approval, to “curb the high bonus multiples that European law-
makers say contributed to excessive risk taking in the run-up to the financial crisis”);40
3.	 A desire not to pay hierarchically subordinate employees more than hierarchically higher 
employees or managers, thus maintaining vertical compensation equity;
4.	 A desire to keep total compensation somewhat consistent over time so that employees are 
able to sustain their lifestyle and, thus, to mitigate “feast-or-famine” volatility in pay year 
over year; and,
5.	 A concern about a possibly faulty plan design, the risk of which is greatest when the plan is new.
Size of incentive pay
Because employees almost invariably value money, a significant proportion of variable pay 
should motivate them to achieve the performance goals. Further, compensation packages that 
offer significant performance-contingent pay (at-risk pay or pay-for-performance) are likely to 
attract employees who are confident about their abilities to produce superior results and/or are 
more willing to accept risk. In that sense, the type of compensation package offered serves an 
employee selection role.
However, the most important consideration regarding the high use of variable pay is that if 
performance is not totally controllable by the employees, then the incentive system inevitably 
imposes risk on them (hence the term at-risk pay). Employees, therefore, will want to be com-
pensated for bearing that risk; that is, their compensation in expectation must be higher than 
what it would be when offered a fixed salary. If the organization fails to provide the risk pre-
mium, which is an additional compensation expense, it will find itself unable to compete for 
talent in the labor markets.
Criteria for evaluating incentive systems
Each incentive plan – being one of many possible variations, as we have seen – should be care-
fully evaluated on all of its features individually and collectively; that is, as a package. This 
should be done regularly as circumstances change, as seems to be “best practice” in many firms, 
as suggested by Andrew MacLeod, head of pay research at Aon Hewitt:
Rather than debating the philosophical point of whether or not bonus plans work, compa-
nies seem to be more focused on assessing whether they are working in reality and 

366
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
improving their design to make them more likely to succeed. Ninety-four percent of our 
study’s respondents now have a review process in place, with a big increase in the use of 
cost/benefit analysis.41
Setting aside infinite variations in specific incentive plan designs, the following criteria can 
be used as overall principles when evaluating an incentive system.
First, the rewards should be valued. Rewards that have no value will not provide motivation. 
However, reward tastes probably vary across individuals. As compared with top executives, 
lower-level managers are likely more interested in protecting their autonomy and in improving 
their prospects for promotion in addition to the size of their short-term income (after their base 
salaries are assured). Employees later in their careers are probably more concerned about job 
security. And so on. Overall, studies suggest that the reasons people join and stay with an 
organization are broader than compensation alone, including the satisfaction that comes from 
the work they do and the role they have, the long-term opportunities for development and 
advancement, and the feelings of belonging to an admirable organization that shares their val-
ues.42 Reward tastes also vary across countries due to many factors, including culture, stage of 
economic development, and differences in tax and regulation, although evidence suggests that 
these differences are diminishing and that the world is getting flatter when it comes to incentive 
pay.43 Nonetheless, some differences at various levels will remain, and if organizations can tai-
lor their reward packages to their employees’ preferences, then they could possibly provide the 
control benefits of incentives more effectively. Such tailoring is costly, however, and firms often 
opt to administer a single organization-wide incentive system (or, at most, just a few systems).
Second, the rewards should be large enough to have impact. If rewards that are valued are 
provided in trivial amounts, the effect can be counterproductive. Employees can be insulted 
and react with such emotions as contempt and anger.44 Reward visibility may affect impact. If 
rewards are visible to others, the motivational effect is enhanced by a sense of pride and recog-
nition.
Third, rewards should be understandable. Employees should understand both the reasons for 
and the value of the rewards. Organizations can incur considerable expense in providing poten-
tially valuable rewards, but if employees do not understand them well, the expense will not 
generate the desired motivational effects.
Fourth, rewards should be timely. Delay in providing the rewards after the performance is 
said to dilute their motivational effects. Prompt rewards also increase the extent of any learning 
that takes place from receiving the reward and connecting it to the performance for which it 
was given.
Fifth, the effects of the rewards should be durable. Rewards have greater value if the good 
feelings generated by the granting of a reward are long lasting; that is, if employees remember 
them.
Sixth, rewards should be reversible. Performance evaluators often make mistakes, and some 
reward decisions are more difficult to correct than others. Promotions, for example, are difficult 
to reverse.
Finally, rewards should be cost efficient; that is, all else equal, incentives should achieve the 
desired motivation at minimal cost. As the quote earlier in this section suggests, however, many 
organizations now seem to have a review process in place, with a big increase in the use of cost-
benefit analysis.
Monetary incentives and the evaluation criteria
How well do the monetary rewards that many organizations provide satisfy the reward evalua-
tion criteria? Monetary rewards can have potent impacts on employees’ behaviors because vir-
tually everyone values money. Money can be used to purchase goods and services that can 

Criteria for evaluating incentive systems
367
satisfy each employee’s most pressing desires. A vice president in a human resources consulting 
firm expressed this advantage in colorful terms, “You can’t pay orthodonture bills with crystal 
from Waterford.”45 Put differently, “working for cookies is not an option.”46 Money also has 
important symbolic values. It reflects achievement and success, it accords people prestige, and 
it sometimes even serves as a proxy for some people’s estimation of their self-worth.
However, the observation that employees almost without exception value money does not 
necessarily imply that higher incentives will lead to higher performance. Indeed, studies sug-
gest that there may be an inverse U-shaped relationship between effort levels and incentive 
intensity, indicating that ever higher incentives may actually result in a decline in performance 
or produce unintended consequences. Those consequences stem from dysfunctional behaviors 
and “gaming” of the performance metrics to increase “measured” performance and personal 
wealth at the expense of long-term value creation or “real” performance improvements47 (vari-
ous examples of which we discussed in the earlier chapters). This is anecdotally expressed in 
the following quote from John Cryan, chief executive at UBS, a global bank:
Mr Cryan not only noted that overall levels of compensation in his industry remain too high. 
He also pondered whether bonuses really spur his banking colleagues to the elevated lev-
els of productive effort such inducements are supposed to extract. In his own case, 
Mr Cryan said the answer was no. “I will not work any harder or any less hard in any year, in 
any day because someone is going to pay me any more or less,” he observed.48
This echoes the view of Jeroen van der Veer, the former boss at Shell, an oil major:
If I had been paid 50 per cent more, I would not have done [my job] better. If I had been paid 
50 per cent less, then I would not have done it worse.49
Of course, these gentlemen were very well paid, which may affect their marginal utility for 
money and thus how “much” they value it. That said, various monetary rewards sometimes also 
fail the impact criterion. Merit raises, for example, are typically quite small for most employees, 
so total raises look small in times of low inflation. But even bonuses may suffer from impact or, 
worse, lead to demotivation when expected but not earned:
The impact of a cash bonus is often short-lived. Staff quickly start to think of it as a perma-
nent part of their compensation. The following year they quite naturally become upset if 
their bonus turns out to be lower.50
Moreover, the performance evaluations on which the merit raises are based typically are 
infrequent, kept confidential, or communicated to employees in quite vague terms, thus leaving 
them ambiguous (thereby affecting understandability) and possibly failing to provide a sense of 
recognition. Indeed, the annual performance reviews on the basis of which merit raises are 
typically determined have recently been increasingly debated in terms of their effectiveness to 
properly motivate employees.51 To quote from a Harvard Business Review article:
In a survey Deloitte conducted recently, more than half the executives questioned (58%) 
believe that their current performance management approach drives neither employee 
engagement nor high performance. [What is more, tallying] the number of hours the organi-
zations were spending on performance management – they found that completing the forms, 
holding the meetings, and creating the ratings consumed close to 2 million hours a year.52
Another common issue arises when firms that fall on hard times “flatten” pay, inadvertently 
or not. Because it is difficult to cut an employee’s pay, poor performers are merely given no 
raises or bonuses, and the penalty to these employees is low. But lowering the payments to the 
top performers is where it hurts, often leading to perceptions of inequity, demotivation, and 
increased turnover, unhelpfully, among the most valuable employees.

368
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
On the other hand, some forms of monetary incentives, such as stock options, have been said to 
have “too much” impact. Stock options have often been granted in large numbers to, particularly, 
higher-level employees or executives. Due to the large number of stock options typically granted and 
held by top executives, and exacerbated by relatively short vesting periods, the executives may be 
encouraged to take actions that affect stock price in the short term but harm shareholders in the long 
run. For example, an action that can slightly affect stock price downward at the time of a stock option 
grant, or boost stock price at the time of a stock option exercise, can make a huge difference for the 
stock options to be subsequently “in the money” or yield a greater payout at exercising, respectively, 
when applied to a very large number of stock options. In other words, pay can be significantly impacted 
by short-term movements in stock prices, thus encouraging executives to take measures to affect stock 
price rather than to maximize shareholder value in the long term (by which time they may have left 
the firm). In that sense, and due to the potential short-term impact that stock price may have on the 
potential value and payout from stock options, these instruments are, in fact, working against their 
intended purpose – that is, to have the executives focused on the long term rather than to take actions 
that affect short term. This illustrates that, indeed, impact is a powerful criterion for incentives to 
have; but equally, when impact directs behaviors in ill-aligned ways, it can be detrimental.53
Because incentive contracts sometimes are quite complex (as are many long-term incentive 
plans, such as performance stock plans) or even ambiguous (when they include the use of sub-
jectivity), and because performance-related feedback is infrequent, incomplete, and/or biased, 
employees often fail to understand the reasons why they are given the rewards (or the size of 
their rewards). When the rewards fail the understandability criterion, they are less likely to 
produce the desired effects. Stock options are often said to be ill-understood by employees, 
especially at lower organizational levels. Regarding performance rating issues, such as com-
pleteness and/or biases, particularly in annual performance reviews, a Deloitte report cites 
work in psychology that found that only one-fifth of the variance in employee performance rat-
ings reflects the employee’s actual performance; the larger part reflects other factors, particu-
larly rater perceptions (three-fifths of the variance) and other noise:
Assessing someone’s skills produces inconsistent data. Objective as I may try to be in 
evaluating you on, say, strategic thinking, it turns out that how much strategic thinking I do, 
or how valuable I think strategic thinking is, or how tough a rater I am significantly affects 
my assessment of your strategic thinking.54
Monetary rewards vary in their timeliness. Piece-rates used in some production settings are 
possibly the timeliest. Sales commissions are perhaps a close second. The most common period 
for performance reviews, however, such as for salary increases and bonuses, is annual. Long-term 
incentive awards – those based on multiyear performance – are less timely. It has been suggested 
that the mental discount rate employees apply to delayed rewards is greater than the time value of 
money. Or, as Peter Boreham, a director at Hay Group, put it: “Once you go beyond three years [as 
is commonly the case with long-term incentive plans], the mental discount that executives put on 
rewards gets very large; any longer and it becomes a lottery ticket.”55 One survey study estimates 
that incentive pay is discounted compared to fixed pay by about 10% for cash bonuses and 50% or 
more for deferred bonuses and long-term incentives.56 Hence, extending the time horizon of 
incentives, which has been increasingly called for to enhance a focus on the long term, is not cost-
less given the rather large mental discount that people attach to delayed payouts.
Following the 2008 financial crisis, a common trend in the calls for change was to defer 
bonus payments because “deferring bonus payments helps companies to control short-termism,” 
said Vicki Elliot, a worldwide partner at Mercer. “It means that a portion of the bonus is payable 
to employees in installments based on subsequent company and/or business unit performance. 
This claw-back approach sends the message that the bonus isn’t finally determined until com-
pany or business unit performance is sustained.”57 In other words, deferring some of the bonus 

Criteria for evaluating incentive systems
369
payments should prevent employees from pocketing bonuses when they misleadingly appear to 
be doing well and keeping the money when their firm subsequently suffers or even collapses. 
“There has been too much focus on payments that are very short-term focused, people who pick 
up the tab for short-term profits, without having to bear the costs of long-term impairments,” 
said Stephen Green, chairman of HSBC, a global bank.58
Another way to possibly mitigate the short-term focus of some incentive systems while cir-
cumventing the cost of the “mental discount” that comes with deferred payments is to consider 
risk-adjusted measures as the basis for bonus determination. However, the vast majority of 
banks (and likely nonfinancial firms as well) admitted that they lack “reliable methods to meas-
ure the risks they are running” and had to “work out how to phase compensation to make sure 
it reflects the risks being taken over a long period.”59 Some banks have considered paying 
bonuses in contingent bonds (rather than cash), which are “wiped out” if the bank’s capital ratio 
[a key indicator for a bank’s survival] falls below a predefined threshold, which should curb 
incentives to take excessive risk.60 But even though the employees own the bonds, they may 
value them less than cash. As we will see in the next chapter, there are indeed no easy solutions 
to overcome the ubiquitous myopia problem.61 And, this is not only a problem in banks, although 
the crisis clearly has put a spotlight on their incentive systems. For example, several Chinese 
cities and counties dropped gross domestic product (GDP) as a performance metric for govern-
ment officials in an effort to shift the focus to protecting the environment and reducing poverty:
The move, which follows a directive issued by top leaders, is among the first concrete 
signs of China switching its blind pursuit of economic growth at all costs towards meas-
ures that encourage better quality of life. Analysts say that adherence to GDP as a perfor-
mance metric – thus linking it to local officials’ promotion – has contributed to 
environmental degradation and urban sprawl as officials encouraged heavy industry and 
bulldozed agricultural land to build housing developments.62
This latter example is one of promotion-based incentives, which are durable. Most monetary 
rewards, in contrast, particularly small ones, are not. In many cases, salary increases are “lost 
in the paycheck” – they are quickly spent and forgotten (see also earlier quotes above). One 
survey found that 29% of employees who earned bonuses used them to pay bills; 18% “admitted 
they couldn’t remember where the money went.” The report concluded that, for most employ-
ees, “[cash] bonuses have no lasting value.”63 Durability can perhaps be improved if the award 
is given but restricted for a period of time, such as with an award of restricted stock (or contin-
gent bonds, as in another example above), because the employee can see the reward, and can 
value it, but cannot spend it. This benefit of durability would also apply to the deferred bonus 
schemes that firms ponder, thus involving a tradeoff against the possible cost due to mental 
discounting. In contrast, some non-monetary rewards, such as a promotion or a recognition 
that goes on one’s CV, are quite durable (although they tend to be less or not reversible).
Indeed, monetary rewards also vary in their reversibility. Bonus awards are reversible because 
they are typically contingent on performance in a single period. Salary increases, on the other 
hand, provide an almost guaranteed increment because pay cuts are rare. But some question 
whether even bonuses are truly reversible. Employees come to expect them, and if there is no 
payout, they will be frustrated, especially if it happens because the company is not doing well. 
Recall the quote here from Handelsbanken, arguing that “it doesn’t make sense to pay bonuses in 
good times and then in bad times tell [employees] they have to work harder for 30 percent less 
money.”64 Or, as Tidjane Thiam, chief executive of Credit Suisse, a global bank, muses:
Remuneration is a “battle ground.” [And although he] is not against bonuses for his invest-
ment bankers, if pay goes up and down with performance, but, “it’s the ‘and down’ that 
they don’t accept.”65

370
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
Finally, monetary rewards tend to be expensive. The value provided to the employees is a 
direct cost to the firm. Some other forms of rewards, such as titles, recognition, interesting job 
assignments, or prized parking spots are much less expensive, yet they can have value to 
employees.
Although monetary rewards do not satisfy all the evaluation criteria equally well, the crite-
ria are not all equally important, either. As such, monetary rewards possibly are quite effective 
in satisfying the most important criteria. In particular, money is highly valued, so monetary 
awards attract most employees’ attention. That is not to say that monetary rewards are not 
sometimes overused or that they could not be better designed.66 As we have shown, such design 
considerations inevitably will involve tradeoffs among the various criteria.
Group rewards
Team or group rewards certainly have advantages; they were discussed in Chapter 3 as one the 
methods by which personnel/cultural controls can be implemented. But they also have some 
significant disadvantages. Group rewards often do not provide direct and strong incentive effects. 
They provide a direct incentive only if the individuals to whom the rewards are promised per-
ceive that they can influence the performance on which the rewards are based to a considerable 
extent. Group rewards also create the potential for free riding. In larger teams, particularly, some 
team members can slack off and suffer little adverse effects on the rewards earned.
As such, stock-based plans, one prominent form of group rewards, provide direct incentives 
only for the small number of managers at the very top of publicly held firms who presumably 
can influence their firm’s stock price in a meaningful way. When lower-level employees are 
included in stock-based plans, their compensation is made more volatile and uncertain, but 
their motivation is not proportionally affected.
Group rewards can produce a beneficial form of cultural control, however. Team members 
may monitor and sanction each other’s behaviors and produce improved results. Comments 
like, “Get to work; you’re hurting my profit sharing!” are evidence that cultural control – mutual 
monitoring – is working. It is this benefit and the avoidance of some dysfunctional effects of 
individual rewards that group rewards can provide.
Some firms have used group rewards very effectively over long periods of time. For example, 
all employees (or “partners,” as the company calls them) at John Lewis, a large UK retailer, 
share in the company’s profit, which in some years amounts to several weeks up to two months’ 
worth of salary for each employee, depending on company performance. “Today’s results reflect 
the collective hard work of our partners,” said Charlie Mayfield, John Lewis chairman. “While 
not a universal panacea, [our collective performance-based bonus plan] clearly underpins the 
partnership’s performance,” he added.67 Other firms have variations of group rewards through 
share ownership. For example, Slater & Gordon, a stock-exchange-listed Australian law firm, 
commented on its employee stock ownership plan as being designed to “encourage staff reten-
tion, improve performance, and align employee and shareholder incentives.”68
Conclusion
Incentives are an important part of the results-control arrangements used to direct employees’ 
behaviors. Rewards that can be linked to measures of performance or subjective performance 
evaluations come in many forms. It is widely, but not universally, believed that monetary 

371
Notes
rewards are important for motivation. However, a wide range of other forms of rewards, such as 
praise, titles, recognition, promotions, and so on, also can be potent motivators while being cost 
efficient and having advantages in terms of satisfying the various other evaluation criteria that 
we discussed.
Incentive contract design presents problems that are far larger than just the choice of rewards, 
however. For example, tailoring rewards to employees’ individual preferences would seem to be 
effective, but that benefit has to be weighed against the potential for employees’ perceptions of 
inequities and the cost of contract administration. Similarly, it is well recognized that organiza-
tions’ total compensation package must be competitive to attract and retain talented employees. 
If a portion of the compensation package, such as base salary, is not competitive, perhaps because 
cash is in short supply during the start-up phase of a new venture, then the incentives-perfor-
mance function for the variable portion of pay may have to be adapted to compensate, or alterna-
tive forms of compensation such as stock options may have to be provided.
Perhaps the safest advice that can be proffered is that incentives should be sufficiently mean-
ingful to offset other motives employees have to act in ways that are contrary to the organiza-
tion’s best interests, but the rewards should not be greater than those necessary to provide the 
needed motivation. An incentive system will not create value for the organization unless the 
incremental value of the increased performance generated by the incentives exceeds the associ-
ated compensation and administration expense. Organizations also have to worry about imple-
menting an incentive system that encourages behaviors that do not lead to the desired outcomes. 
Many incentive systems have unintended consequences that can actually destroy value, such as by 
encouraging results that maximize incentive pay in the short term while jeopardizing the long-
run viability of the organization. If that is the case, it may be better to have no incentive system 
than to have a bad one. The literature is littered with examples of incentives having unintended 
consequences. This is, in a perverse sense, testimony that incentives work – that is, they encour-
age employees to produce results. But if poorly designed incentive systems encourage employees 
to produce the wrong results or do the wrong things in the wrong way, then strong incentives 
will only get the organization off track, and sometimes even ruin the firm, more quickly.
Notes
	 1	 S. Kerr, “Executives Ask: How and Why Should Firms and 
Their Employees Set Goals,” Academy of Management 
Executive, 18, no. 4 (November 2004), pp. 122–3.
	 2	 For recent research on incentive schemes including pen-
alties, see for example W. A. Van der Stede, A. Wu, and S. 
Y. Wu, “The Reinforcement Effect of Bonuses and Penal-
ties,” Working Paper (2016); M. H. Christ, K. L. Sedatole, 
and K. L. Towry, “Sticks and Carrots: The Effect of Con-
tract Frame on Effort in Incomplete Contracts,” The 
Accounting Review, 87, no. 6 (November 2012), pp. 1913–
38; T. Hossain and J. A. List, “The Behavioralist Visits the 
Factory: Increasing Productivity Using Simple Framing 
Manipulations,” Management Science, 58, no. 12 (2012), 
pp. 2151–67.
	 3	 “Cut-and-Build Archibald,” Forbes (September 23, 1996), 
p. 46; “Grow, Grow, Grow,” The Economist (April 17, 
2010), Special Report, p. 13.
	 4	 For examples of recent research on non-monetary incen-
tives, see S. M. Lourenço, “Monetary Incentives, Feedback, 
and Recognition – Complements or Substitutes? Evidence 
from a Field Experiment in a Retail Services Company,” The 
Accounting Review, 91, no. 1 (January 2016), pp. 279–97.
	 5	 S. A. Hewlett, “Attract and Keep A-Players with Nonfinan-
cial Rewards,” Harvard Business Review (May 24, 2012), 
online at hbr.org/2012/05/attract-and-keep-a-players-wit.
	 6	 “Barclays Abolishes Commission Bonuses for Branch 
Staff,” BBC (October 10, 2012), online at www.bbc.co.uk/
news/business-19902562.
	 7	 “What Are Brands For?,” The Economist (August 30, 2014), 
online at econ.st/VPofD5.
	 8	 “BP Links Bonuses to Safety Performance,” The Financial 
Times (October 18, 2010), online at on.ft.com/1QueezM.
	 9	 There is a large literature on this, but for a review of 
research examining the effects of monetary incentives on 
effort and performance, see S. E. Bonner and G. B. Sprinkle, 
“The Effects of Monetary Incentives on Effort and Task 
Performance: Theories, Evidence, and a Framework for 
Research,” Accounting, Organizations and Society, 27, no. 
4/5 (May–July 2002), pp. 303–45. Another good review 
or overview article with further references is T. Cham-
orro-Premuzic, “Does Money Really Affect Motivation? A 
Review of the Research,” Harvard Business Review (April 
10, 2013), online at hbr.org/2013/04/does-money-really-
affect-motiv.

372
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
	10	 An interesting article in this regard, as its title aptly sug-
gests, is U. Gneezy, S. Meier, and P. Rey-Biel, “When 
and Why Incentive (Don’t) Work to Modify Behavior,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25, no. 4 (Fall 2011), 
pp. 191–210.
	11	 “U.S. Organizations Report Highest Compensation Spend 
in 39 Years,” Aon Media Center (August 26, 2015), online 
at aon.mediaroom.com/news-releases?item=137290.
	12	 See, for example, “IRS Releases Final Regulations Under 
Section 162(m),” Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate 
Governance and Financial Regulation (April 9, 2015), 
online at corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2015/04/09/irs-
releases-final-regulations-under-section-162m.
	13	 See, for example, “Regulations and Lower Returns Put 
Pressure on Pay and Bonuses,” The Financial Times (April 
24, 2014), online at on.ft.com/QGRu8v; “SEC Proposes 
Rules on Executive Pay and Performance,” The New York 
Times (April 29, 2015), online at nyti.ms/1OEoKcQ; 
“Bonus Reforms to Come under Glare of Financial Stabil-
ity Board,” The Financial Times (November 8, 2015), 
online at on.ft.com/1WK47e6.
	14	 “Goldman Sachs Pioneers Plan to Deal with Bonus Cap,” 
The Wall Street Journal (January 30, 2014), online at on.
wsj.com/1czchTr.
	15	 “City Bankers to Evade EU Bonus Cap with ‘Role-Based’ 
Allowances,” The Financial Times (April 13, 2014), online 
at on.ft.com/Q4eMoO.
	16	 “EU Bank Watchdog Signals Crackdown on Allowances,” 
The Financial Times (June 13, 2014), online at on.ft.
com/1on9CDS.
	17	 “Majority of Public Sector Employees Have Reservations 
about Performance-Related Pay, Reveals CIPD,” HR Mag-
azine (January 16, 2013), online at www.hrmagazine.
co.uk.
	18	 “Vatican Unveils Merit-Based Pay,” BBC (November 22, 
2007), online at www.bbc.co.uk.
	19	 J. Pfeffer and R. Sutton, Hard Facts (Boston, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press, 2006), p. 129.
	20	 See, for example, “Aon Hewitt: Bonus Schemes in Europe 
Back on Track” (September 23, 2014), online at www.
consultancy.uk.
	21	 “Lloyds Says Customer Service Key to Future,” The Finan-
cial Times (December 12, 2013), online at http://on.ft.
com/1kDQavb.
	22	 “Pay Dirt,” The Economist (April 23, 2016), online at econ.
st/26gMsSS.
	23	 For an academic treatment of “bonus pools,” see M. Eder-
hof, M. V. Rajan, and S. Reichelstein, “Discretion in Mana-
gerial Bonus Pools,” Foundations and Trends in Accounting, 
5, no. 4 (2011), pp. 243–316; and W. A. Van der Stede, 
“Review of ‘Discretion in Managerial Bonus Pools,’” The 
Accounting Review, 88, no. 1 (January 2013), pp. 351–4.
	24	 “Goldman Sachs Pioneers Plan to Deal with Bonus Cap,” 
The Wall Street Journal (January 30, 2014), online at on.
wsj.com/1czchTr.
	25	 “Bank Chief Champions Case for Fixed Pay,” The Financial 
Times (February 18, 2010), online at on.ft.com/1rse0F3.
	26	 “Key Differences Exist between Long- and Short-term 
Executive Incentive Awards,” Mercer (March 10, 2015), 
online at www.mercer.com.
	27	 For an academic article on this topic, see U. Von Lilien-
feld-Toal and S. Ruenzi, “CEO Ownership, Stock Market 
Performance, and Managerial Discretion,” The Journal of 
Finance, 69, no. 3 (June 2014), pp. 1013–50.
	28	 See, for example, “Key Differences Exist between Long- 
and Short-Term Executive Incentive Awards,” Mercer 
(March 10, 2015), online at www.mercer.com.
	29	 See, for example, M. Matejka, K. A. Merchant, and W. A. 
Van der Stede, “Employment Horizon and the Choice of 
Performance Measures: Empirical Evidence from Annual 
Bonus Plans of Loss-Making Entities,” Management Sci-
ence, 55, no. 6 (June 2009), pp. 890–905.
	30	 See, for example, B. Hall and K. Murphy, “The Trouble 
with Stock Options,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17, 
no. 3 (Summer 2003), pp. 49–71; “Do Stock Options 
Improve Performance?,” CalBusiness (Spring–Summer 
2010), pp. 8–9. See also D. Aboody, N. Johnson, and R. 
Kasznik, “Employee Stock Options and Future Firm Per-
formance: Evidence from Option Repricings,” Journal of 
Accounting and Economics, 50, no. 1 (May 2010), pp. 
74–92; “US Chief Executives Hoard Good News for Stock 
Sales,” The Financial Times (September 7, 2014), online at 
on.ft.com/1oUm9Jb; A. Edmans, L. Goncalves-Pinto, Y. 
Wang. and M. Groen-Xu, “Strategic News Releases in 
Equity Vesting Months,” Working Paper (2016), online at 
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2489152.
	31	 See, for example, Watson Wyatt Worldwide, Stock Incentives: 
Moving toward a Portfolio Approach (2005) and Deloitte & 
Touche USA LLP, 2005 Stock Compensation Survey (2005).
	32	 “Pay Attention,” The Economist (June 12, 2008), pp. 77–8.
	33	 “Last Gasp for Stock Options?,” The Wall Street Journal – 
CFO Journal (August 26, 2013), online at http://blogs.
wsj.com/cfo/2013/08/26/last-gasp-for-stock-options. 
See also “Five Trends in Stock Compensation,” HR Times 
(March 20, 2014), online at hrtimesblog,com.
	34	 The Coca-Cola Company, online at www.coca-colacom-
pany.com/content/dam/journey/us/en/private/fileassets/
pdf/investors/annual-meeting/TCCC-2016-Proxy-State-
ment.pdf.
	35	 M. J. Mauboussin and D. Callahan, “A Long Look at Short-
Termism: Questioning the Premise,” Journal of Applied 
Corporate Finance, 27, no. 3 (Summer 2015), pp. 70–82.
	36	 “Hewitt Study Shows Long-Term Incentives in Executive 
Compensation Packages Are Back – but with a Catch,” Aon 
Hewitt (August 5, 2010), online at www.hewittassociates.
com.
	37	 For an overview, see J. Bol, “Subjectivity in Compensation 
Contracting,” Journal of Accounting Literature, 28 (2009), 
pp. 1–24.
	38	 For a detailed discussion and further references to this lit-
erature, see M. Gibbs, K. A. Merchant, W. A. Van der 
Stede, and M. E. Vargus, “Determinants and Effects 
of Subjectivity in Incentives,” The Accounting Review, 79, 
no. 2 (April 2004), pp. 409–36.

373
Notes
	39	 See also K. J. Murphy, “Performance Standards in Incen-
tive Contracts,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 30, 
no. 3 (December 2000), pp. 245–78; X. Zhou and P. Swan, 
“Performance Thresholds in Managerial Incentive Con-
tracts,” Journal of Business, 76, no. 4 (October 2003), 
pp. 665–96.
	40	 “Regulations and Lower Returns Put Pressure on Pay and 
Bonuses,” The Financial Times (April 24, 2014), online at 
on.ft.com/1JFJxum.
	41	 “Bonuses Are Back, but with Tighter Rules and Better Tar-
gets,” Aon Media Center (September 17, 2014), online at 
aon.mediaroom.com/news-releases?item=137052.
	42	 “Companies Using Employee Engagement to Attract, 
Retain Top Talent,” Industry Week (July 2, 2010), online at 
www.industryweek.com; D. Scott and T. McMullen, The 
Impact of Rewards Programs on Employee Engagement, 
Hay Group & World-at-Work (June 2010).
	43	 K. Abosch, J. Schermerhorn, and L. Wisper, “Broad-Based 
Variable Pay Goes Global,” Workspan (May 2008), 
pp. 56–62.
	44	 “Forty-One Percent of Employees Say They Would Be 
Insulted by a Low Bonus,” World-at-Work (November 3, 
2010), online at www.worldatwork.org.
	45	 “Bonus Question: Cash Rewards or Gifts? Experts Are 
Divided,” The Los Angeles Times (May 30, 1999), p. C5.
	46	 “Bonuses Are Bad for Bankers and Even Worse for Banks,” 
The Financial Times (January 25, 2016), online at on.
ft.com/1WJF8Ju.
	47	 See, for example, K. Pokorny, “Pay – But Do Not Pay Too 
Much: An Experimental Study on the Impact of Incen-
tives,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organizations, 
66, no. 2 (May 2008), pp. 251–64; D. Ariely, U. Gneezy, G. 
Loewenstein, and N. Mazar, “Large Stakes and Big Mis-
takes,” Review of Economic Studies, 76, no. 2 (April 2009), 
pp. 451–69; see also W. A. Van der Stede, “The Pitfalls of 
Pay-for-Performance,” Finance & Management (December 
2007), pp. 10–13.
	48	 “Bonuses and the Illusion of Banking Performance,” The 
Financial Times (November 25, 2015), online at on.ft.
com/1LAeYRs.
	49	 “Bonuses Are Bad for Bankers and Even Worse for Banks,” 
op. cit.
	50	 Ibid.
	51	 See, for example, “Meritocracy without the Numbers,” 
Strategy + Business (September 22, 2015), online at strat.
bz/SbPkwJU; “Why GE Had to Kill Its Annual Perfor-
mance Reviews after More than Three Decades,” Quartz, 
online at qz.com/428813; “The Measure of a Man: 
Reports of the Death of Performance Reviews Are Exag-
gerated,” The Economist (February 20, 2016), online at 
econ.st/1U9VifD.
	52	 M. Buckingham and A. Goodall, “Reinventing Perfor-
mance Management,” Harvard Business Review (April 
2015), online at hbr.org/2015/04/reinventing-perfor-
mance-management.
	53	 See, for example, J. Efendi, A. Srivastava, and E. Swan-
son, “Why Do Corporate Managers Misstate Financial 
Statements? The Role of Option Compensation and Other 
Factors,” Journal of Financial Economics, 85, no. 3 
(September 2007), pp. 667–708; “CEOs Strategically 
Time News Releases for Their Own Benefit,” LSE Business 
Review (March 22, 2016), online at blogs.lse.ac.uk/busi-
nessreview/2016/03/22/ceos-strategically-time-news-
releases-for-their-own-benefit.
	54	 M. Buckingham and A. Goodall, “Reinventing Perfor-
mance Management,” Harvard Business Review 
(April 2015), online at hbr.org/2015/04/reinventing-
performance-management.
	55	 “Hard to Get,” CFO Europe (April 2009), pp. 38–41.
	56	 “Making Executive Pay Work: The Psychology of Incen-
tives,” PwC Report (2012), online at www.pwc.co.uk.
	57	 “Financial Organizations Shuffling Compensation Pro-
grams,” World-at-Work (January 14, 2010), online at 
www.worldatwork.org. See also “UBS Extends Deferred 
Bonus Plan,” Bloomberg (January 23, 2015), online at 
bloom.bg/1Bjucbk; “Moody’s Urges Slower Bank Bonus 
Payouts,” The Financial Times (December 9, 2014), online 
at on.ft.com/131jzOy.
	58	 “HSBC Chief Backs Bank Pay Reform,” BBC (September 
13, 2008), online at www.bbc.co.uk.
	59	 “Banks, Aware of Discord on Pay, Work to Adjust, a Survey 
Finds,” The Wall Street Journal Europe (March 30, 2009), 
p. 3.
	60	 “UBS Extends Deferred Bonus Plan,” op. cit.
	61	 R. Gopalan, T. Milbourn, F. Song, and A. V. Thakor, “Dura-
tion of Executive Compensation,” The Journal of Finance, 
69, no. 6 (December 2014), pp. 2777–2817.
	62	 “Small Chinese Cities Steer Away from GDP as Measure of 
Success,” The Financial Times (August 13, 2014), online at 
on.ft.com/1rpzRqj.
	63	 “Bonus Question: Cash Rewards or Gifts? Experts Are 
Divided,” op. cit.
	64	 “Bank Chief Champions Case for Fixed Pay,” Financial 
Times (February 18, 2010), online at on.ft.com/1rse0F3.
	65	 “Bonuses Are Bad for Bankers and Even Worse for Banks,” 
op. cit.
	66	 See also W. A. Van der Stede, “Designing Effective Reward 
Systems,” Finance & Management (October 2009), 
pp. 6–9.
	67	 “John Lewis Staff Get £151m Bonus,” BBC (March 11, 
2010), online (www.bbc.co.uk); see also “TSB Freezes 
CEO Pay, Pledges Free Employee Shares in IPO,” Bloomb-
erg (June 5, 2014), online at bloom.bg/1GCxXK0.
	68	 “Slater & Gordon Offers One Million Shares to Employ-
ees,” The Law Society Gazette (July 11, 2014), online 
(www.lawgazette.co.uk).

374
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
 Harwood Medical Instruments PLC (HMI), based just 
outside of Birmingham, England, manufactured spe-
cialty medical instruments and sold them in market 
niches that were becoming increasingly competitive and 
price sensitive because of pressures to reduce healthcare 
costs. HMI was organized into nine divisions each run by 
a general manager. Over the years, HMI had grown both 
organically and by acquisition. Six of the divisions had 
been acquired by HMI within the past decade. 
 All of HMI’s divisions sold medical products to hos-
pitals, laboratories, and/or doctors, so the need for 
product quality and reliability was high. The divisions 
varied signifi cantly, however, in terms of the degree to 
which their success depended on, for example, devel-
opment of new products, effi  ciency of production, and/
or customer service. 
 Bonuses for division general managers were paid 
semi-annually. Up to the year 2009, these bonuses were 
calculated as 1% of division operating profi ts. 
 HMI’s managing director, Andy Guthrie, had con-
cerns, though, that the operating profi t measure was too 
narrowly focused. He had been reading articles about 
performance measurement and decided to implement a 
“more balanced” scorecard. In November 2009, just 
before introducing a new bonus plan, Mr. Guthrie 
explained to his chief fi nancial offi  cer that he was will-
ing to pay out higher bonuses than had been paid histori-
cally if improved performance warranted doing so. 
 The new plan provided a base bonus for division 
general managers of 1% of division operating profi ts 
for the half-year period. This base bonus was adjusted 
as follows: 
 ●  Increased by £5,000 if over 99% of deliveries were on 
time; by £2,000 if 95–99% of deliveries were on time; 
or by zero if less than 95% of deliveries were on time. 
 ●  Increased by £5,000 if sales returns were less than 
or equal to 1% of sales, or decreased by 50% of the 
excess of sales returns over 1% of sales. 
 ●  Increased by £1,000 for every patent application 
fi led with the UK Intellectual Property Offi  ce. 
 ●  Reduced by the excess of scrap and rework costs 
over 1% of operating profi t. 
 ●   Reduced by £5,000 if average customer satisfaction 
ratings were below 90%. 
 Exhibit 1  Harwood Medical Instruments PLC 
 Operating results for the Surgical Instruments and Ultrasound Diagnostic Equipment Divisions, 2010 (£ in 000s) 
 
 Surgical Instruments Division 
 Ultrasound Diagnostic Equipment Division 
 
 1st half of 2010 
 2nd half of 2010 
 1st half of 2010 
 2nd half of 2010 
 Sales 
 £42,000 
 £44,000 
 £28,600 
 £29,000 
 Operating profi t 
 £4,620 
 £4,400 
 £3,420 
 £4,060 
 On-time deliveries 
 95.4% 
 97.3% 
 98.2% 
 94.6% 
 Sales returns 
 £450 
 £420 
 £291 
 £289 
 Patent applications fi led 
 0 
 1 
 4 
 8 
 Scrap and rework costs 
 £51.1 
 £45.0 
 £39.7 
 £28.2 
 Customer satisfaction (average) 
 78% 
 89% 
 81% 
 91% 
 CASE STUDY 
 Harwood Medical Instruments PLC 

Superconductor Technologies, Inc.
375
 If the bonus calculation resulted in a negative 
amount for a particular period, the manager received 
no bonus. Negative amounts were not carried forward 
to the next period. 
 Exhibit  1 shows results for two representative HMI 
divisions for the year 2010, the fi rst year under the new 
bonus plan. The Surgical Instruments Division (SID), one 
of HMI’s original businesses, sold a variety of surgical 
instruments, including scissors, scalpels, retractors, and 
clamps. The markets for these products were mature, so 
growth was relatively slow. Not much innovation was 
needed, but controlling costs was critical. The Ultrasound 
Diagnostic Equipment Division (Ultrasound), which was 
acquired in 2007, sold and serviced ultrasound probes, 
transducers, and diagnostic imaging systems. The ultra-
sound market promised excellent growth and profi ts if 
the division could keep its sophisticated products on the 
cutting edge technologically and control both product 
development and production costs eff ectively. 
 In 2009, the total annual bonuses for the year earned 
by the managers of SID and Ultrasound were approxi-
mately £85,000 and £74,000, respectively. 
 This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 In October 2003, Martin (Marty) McDermut, Senior 
VP, CFO, and Secretary of Superconductor Technolo-
gies, Inc. (STI), was reflecting on some issues related 
to his company’s compensation and incentive sys-
tems. He had multiple concerns. Marty knew that 
STI’s most important asset was its people, and he 
was worried about employee retention. STI’s stock 
price was stuck far below its historical highs, so most 
of the options that had been granted to employees 
were “underwater.” Without the prospects of sig-
nificant rewards, some of the company’s key people 
might be “ready to bolt.” He wondered, “What can 
we do so that these things that we have put in place 
don’t vanish?” 
 Marty also worried that some of the incentive sys-
tem elements might motivate some behaviors that were 
not in the shareholders’ best interest. One specifi c con-
cern of this type was that top management would be 
too motivated to try to sell the company to cash in the 
large numbers of options that they had been granted. 
He sighed: 
  These things have tremendous motivational eff ects, 
but they can really get you in trouble if you don’t 
think the issues all the way through. 
 Company history and strategy 
 Superconductor Technologies, Inc. was founded in 
Santa Barbara, California, in 1987 by Nobel Prize 
winner Dr. J. Robert Schrieff er, who teamed up with 
three venture capitalists to form a company to capi-
talize on a scientifi c breakthrough known as high-
temperature superconductivity (HTS) technology. In 
the mid-1990s, STI managers decided to focus their 
application of HTS technology on the wireless com-
munications industry. In 1997, STI began the trans-
formation to an operating company with the launch 
 CASE STUDY 
 Superconductor Technologies, Inc. 

376
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
of its first commercial product, the SuperFilter®. M. 
Peter Thomas, a wireless-industry veteran, was hired 
as CEO.
By 2003, STI was the global leader in developing, 
manufacturing, and marketing HTS products for wire-
less communication networks. STI’s products incorpo-
rated patented technologies that extended network 
coverage, increased capacity utilization, and improved 
both the uplink and downlink radio frequency signals, 
thus lowering the incidence of dropped and blocked 
calls. They also enabled higher wireless transmission 
data rates while reducing operators’ capital and 
operating costs. Over 3,000 STI systems had been 
installed worldwide, making STI the clear leader in the 
HTS wireless network optimization technology mar-
ketplace. STI’s successes stemmed largely from its tech-
nological developments, including patented thin-film 
technologies and unique software design and simula-
tion tools. It planned to exploit its management, engi-
neering, and manufacturing expertise to maintain and 
expand its market leadership in radio frequency 
enhancement solutions.
In 2003, STI, which had nearly 300 employees, 
was organized into two main operating entities. One 
was located in Sunnyvale, California, at the former 
site of Conductus, a company acquired in December 
2002. People at the Sunnyvale location were primar-
ily involved in research, some of which was funded 
by the federal government on a cost-plus basis. The 
other operating entity was located in Santa Barbara, 
California. Personnel at the Santa Barbara location 
were responsible for the company’s commercial 
applications.
STI management looked at the year 2002 as a 
“watershed year,” even though STI reported a net loss 
of $19.5 million that year (see financial statements in 
Exhibits 1 and2). The reason was the increased market 
acceptance of STI’s products, which was expected to 
fuel further revenue growth and bring the company 
closer to profitability. In its entire 17-year history, STI 
had never made a profit. In 2002, STI also completed a 
multimillion-dollar expansion of its production facili-
ties in Santa Barbara to ramp up production and fur-
ther improve product quality.
Since 2001, STI revenues had grown quite rapidly. 
In 2003, revenues were expected to be nearly $50 mil-
lion, up from $22 million in 2002. In both 2002 and 
2003, STI was named one of the “Technology Fast 50” 
companies in the Los Angeles area.
STI was considered to be a consensus-driven com-
pany. As Marty McDermut phrased it, “People buy into 
our major decisions before we go ahead.” Plans were 
developed on a bottom-up basis. Performance was 
reviewed monthly, and the forecasts for the remainder 
of the year were updated quarterly.
STI went public in March 1993 (NASDAQ: SCON), 
with 1.5 million shares offered at $10 per share. In an 
eight-week period in early 2000, STI’s stock price shot 
up above $100, but it came down as quickly as it had 
risen. Most of the time since then, the stock had been 
trading below $5 per share (see Exhibit 3).
Still, STI’s future looked bright. In 2003, approxi-
mately 150,000 wireless communications base stations 
were deployed in the United States alone, providing 
service to nearly 140 million people.1 The number of 
US subscribers to mobile services had been growing at 
14% per year, and the average monthly minutes of use 
per person was growing at an annual rate of 26%. The 
combined effect of more subscribers and more minutes 
of use resulted in an exponential increase in total wire-
less communications traffic. That growth was expected 
to continue, and the greater wireless traffic had also led 
to a rise in radio frequency interference, resulting in 
more dropped and blocked calls and origination fail-
ures, outcomes that negatively affect customer satisfac-
tion. Consequently, the wireless operators had 
continuing needs to find new, cost-effective ways to 
increase network traffic while improving network per-
formance. STI’s products, which could be employed at a 
fraction of the cost of building more base stations, were 
designed to be part of the solution to the industry’s 
delivery problems.
Elements of management 
compensation
The compensation package for STI’s top 30 people, 
those down to the director level (one level below vice 
president), was comprised of three elements:
1.	 Base salary. STI set its salaries at competitive lev-
els. For most employees, including top executives, 
annual salary increases were in the range of 0–5%.
2.	 Cash bonuses. All top STI executives were included 
in a bonus plan that provided cash awards based on 
1	 The global numbers were nearly one million base stations serving 
more than one billion customers.

Superconductor Technologies, Inc.
377
the achievement of a weighted combination of cor-
porate and individual objectives. The targeted bonus 
awards varied by organization level, from 25% to 
40% of base salary.
	
Up through 2002, all bonuses were based exclu-
sively on corporate performance. The compensation 
committee of the board of directors reached a judg-
ment about corporate performance by comparing 
results measured in terms of the elements of a “per-
formance scorecard” (see Table 1) with expectations.
	
The performance evaluation judgments did not 
automatically weight all the measurement elements 
equally in importance. Ken Barry, VP-Human 
Resources and Environmental Health & Safety, sus-
pected that sales (revenue growth) was by far the 
most important criterion considered by the compen-
sation committee. He postulated that the judgments 
about bonuses might come about as follows:
Let’s see … they met the revenue target; … they 
didn’t earn as much profit as we’d expected; … but, 
they didn’t have any major operational problems 
internally or externally, … and they signed a big 
deal … so, taken together, that probably warrants a 
bonus equal to potential for the year …
	
Ken concluded that what it really came down to in 
normal years was for the compensation committee 
to decide whether to award a bonus at 80%, 100%, 
or 120% of the target bonus. Because the Board met 
with the key executives about four times a year, Ken 
believed that they had sufficient knowledge to make 
these bonus decisions, although the evaluations 
were undeniably subjective.
	
Before 2002, everyone received the same, undiffer-
entiated bonus potential percentage. In 2002, how-
ever, the compensation committee concluded that 
some executives had performed better than others. 
They decided that these differences should be recog-
nized by basing some of the bonus awards on indi-
vidual performance. They decided to base the 
bonuses 75% on corporate performance and 25% on 
individual performance.
	
Each executive’s individual performance was eval-
uated in terms of achievements in 4–9 perfor-
mance areas tailored to the individual’s areas of 
responsibility. Examples of achievements that 
were considered in the evaluations of specific indi-
viduals included:
● Successfully accomplish a project milestone;
● Reduce costs of products manufactured;
● Establish a needed line of credit;
● Maintain receivables at a level equal to or less than 
28 days outstanding;
● Make significant new hires/retain valued em-
ployees;
● Maintain safe workplace (no lost-time accidents).
	
The evaluations of individual performance were 
linked to bonus awards as follows:
Evaluation
% of target 
bonus earned
Exceeded objectives
37.5
Met objectives
25
Partially missed objectives
12.5
Substantively missed objectives
0
	
When the compensation committee was not sure of 
its evaluations, they generally asked for more infor-
mation or for an explanation from the “team leader,” 
CEO Peter Thomas, before making the final call.
3.	 Stock options. Annually, almost all STI employees 
were given stock options. The purpose of the options 
was to promote the success, and enhance the value, 
of the company by linking the personal interests of 
participating employees to those of the company’s 
stockholders and by providing such employees with 
an incentive for outstanding performance. The 
details of the stock option plan had been modified 
somewhat over the years, but all the options granted 
were 10-year options, and they vested over either 
four or five years.
Table 1  Key elements of corporate “Performance 
Scorecard”
Cash
Number of employees
Sales
Warranty expenses
Profits
Inventory
Timing of sales
Yield
Receivables (days outstanding)
Gross margins
On-time delivery performance
Product reliability

378
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
The number of options granted varied depending on 
organization level, tenure, and individual perfor-
mance. Lower-level employees were given only a few, 
perhaps only 200, options per year. Top management 
received thousands of options annually. Exhibits 3 and 
4 provide detail on the option grants given to STI’s top 
five executives. 
Ken Barry estimated that in a normal year, about 
10% of the workforce (30 employees, say) did not 
receive stock options, for one of three reasons, each of 
which explained the treatment of about 10 of the 
excluded employees. The first reason was because some 
employees did not meet performance expectations. 
Ken added, “By not meeting performance expectations 
I mean that we usually let these employees go within 
the next year.” Second, some employees were not given 
the annual allotment of options for equity reasons. 
Some of them, for example, had recently received extra 
options because they had been promoted. And third, 
extra options were not provided to employees hired 
during the last quarter of the year.2
Implementation of the 
compensation plans
In 2001, STI failed to achieve its revenue plan by a nar-
row margin. All STI executives were given 80% of their 
target bonus.
The year 2002 was not a good one. STI did not come 
close to achieving its aggressive revenue plan. The STI 
plan was set at $32 million, and the actual revenues for 
2002 were $22 million. In July 2002, management 
implemented a salary cut of 10% for the top 10 execu-
tives. At the end of the year, no bonuses were paid, and 
virtually all the options that had been granted previ-
ously were underwater.
In March 2003, STI’s board approved a 2003 Equity 
Incentive Plan that reserved six million shares for issu-
ance to key employees, directors, and consultants of 
the company. Two million of these shares were 
reserved for the top 20 executives. This plan replaced 
other stock option plans created in 1992, 1998, and 
1999. It was designed both to help ensure that STI did 
not lose its key employees and to drive employees to 
focus on having the company become profitable. 
Becoming profitable was important because manage-
ment wanted to raise more money, but they were told 
that would be difficult until and if the company started 
earning profits.
The 2003 Equity Incentive Plan provided 10-year 
options to be awarded on January 1, 2004, with “cliff vest-
ing” after five years.3 However, this plan also included a 
unique feature, a promise of accelerated vesting – 50% on 
January 1, 2004, and 50% on January 1, 2005 – if the 
company was profitable in the fourth quarter of 2003 and 
if the profits were judged to be sustainable.4
In January 2003, the executives whose salaries had 
been cut had their salaries reinstated to prior levels. 
They were not given back pay, however.
Issues for the future
Both Marty McDermut and Ken Barry raised issues 
about the incentive packages that STI should use in the 
future. If accounting rules regarding stock options 
were changed to require the immediate recording of 
the value of the options as an expense, as seemed likely 
to happen, should that cause the company either to dis-
continue the granting of options or to restrict their use, 
perhaps only for top executives? Should the company 
instead substitute restricted stock, or some combina-
tion of restricted stock and options? Marty did not 
think that the solution would be just to provide higher 
bonus payments because those payments would cause 
“a big hit to the P&L.”
Particularly if the use of options was to be restricted, 
Ken Barry thought that the company would need more 
deferred compensation options, mechanisms that 
2	 All employees were given stock options when they were first hired.
3	 That is, all the options would vest on January 1, 2009.
4	 Without the cliff vesting feature, the accelerated vesting in this plan 
would have had a significant accounting implication. The original 
fixed price options did not require the recording of any compensa-
tion expense because the options were granted at the market price 
at the time of grant (Accounting Principles Board Statement 25, 
Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees, October 1972). However, 
without the cliff vesting provision, a change in terms, in this case 
the acceleration of vesting, if it happened, would require STI to 
record compensation expense in accordance with the “variable 
method” (FASB Interpretation 44, Accounting for Certain Transac-
tions Involving Stock Compensation: An Interpretation of APB Opinion 
No. 25, March 31, 2000). Under variable accounting, compensation 
expense is recognized based on the excess of the underlying stock’s 
market price over the exercise price on the exercise date. Then, prior 
to the exercise date, compensation expense is estimated each period. 
It varies with the movement in the price of the company’s stock in 
comparison to the exercise price. Therefore, if a company changes 
the terms of its stock option grants, it is subject to the uncertainty 
of how much compensation expense it will have to record, not only 
during the vesting period of the option, but until the option is actu-
ally exercised by the employee. If the company’s stock performs well, 
the company will probably have to take a hit to earnings.

Superconductor Technologies, Inc.
379
would allow the company to spread the employees’ 
compensation over 5, 10, or even 15 years. Deferred 
compensation approaches had tax benefits for the 
employees, and they allowed the company to save cash 
during its most rapid growth period.
Related was a concern about the appropriate short-
term/long-term balance of the incentive package. 
Should STI link the much desired annual profit objec-
tive more strongly with incentives, or should the com-
pany continue to be patient in its positioning of the firm 
for long-term success? Ken also was not sure whether 
the assignments of the rewards should be less subjec-
tive after the firm became profitable.
Ken had also started thinking about issues that the 
company would face when it expanded internationally. 
STI had no foreign employees as yet, but Ken knew that 
incentive approaches varied markedly around the world. 
He wanted to be prepared to give recommendations to 
management when and if the international expansion 
took place.
Exhibit 1  Superconductor Technologies, Inc.: Income statement data for years ending December 31 ($ millions)
2002
2001
2000
1999
1998
Net sales or revenues
22.40
12.39
9.96
7.12
7.98
Cost of goods sold
17.36
8.49
13.92
5.54
10.79
Depreciation, depletion, and amortization
1.93
2.14
1.79
1.31
0.94
Gross income
3.11
1.77
–5.75
0.27
–3.74
Selling, general, & admin expenses
18.90
18.90
15.09
10.88
5.44
Other operating expenses
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Other expenses – total
38.18
29.52
30.80
17.72
17.16
Operating income
–15.79
–17.13
–20.85
–10.60
–9.18
Extraordinary charge – pretax
3.80
0.98
0.13
0.00
0.00
Nonoperating interest income
0.22
1.05
0.81
0.02
0.08
Earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT)
–19.37
–17.06
–20.17
–10.58
–9.10
Interest expense on debt
0.15
0.15
0.48
0.30
0.06
Pretax income
–19.51
–17.20
–20.66
–10.88
–9.16
Income taxes
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Net income before extra items/preferred div
–19.51
–17.20
–20.66
–10.88
–9.16
Extra items & gain(loss) sale of assets
0.00
0.00
–10.61
0.00
0.00
Net income before preferred dividends
–19.51
–17.20
–31.27
–10.88
–9.16
Preferred dividend requirements
1.76
2.60
2.20
1.36
0.27
Net income available to common
–21.27
–19.80
–22.86
–12.24
–9.43

380
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
Exhibit 2  Superconductor Technologies, Inc.: Balance sheet data for years ending December 31 ($ millions)
Assets
2002
2001
2000
1999
1998
Cash and ST investments
18.19
15.21
31.82
0.07
0.31
Receivables (net)
3.41
1.45
3.69
1.59
1.94
Total inventories
6.35
5.73
3.78
2.75
2.72
Raw materials
1.84
1.39
1.09
0.43
0.82
Work in progress
3.14
2.95
1.96
1.69
1.67
Finished goods
2.01
1.40
0.72
0.63
0.24
Progress payments & other
−0.65
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Prepaid expenses
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Other current assets
0.56
0.60
0.50
0.45
0.17
Current assets – total
28.50
22.98
39.79
4.85
5.14
Long-term receivables
0.82
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Property, plant & equipment – net
11.09
5.22
4.99
4.10
5.11
Property, plant & equipment – gross
23.74
16.24
14.34
12.15
12.10
Accumulated depreciation
12.65
11.03
9.35
8.05
6.99
Other assets
25.74
1.96
1.98
2.14
2.25
Deferred charges
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Tangible other assets
0.49
0.28
0.11
0.21
0.18
Intangible other assets
25.25
1.68
1.88
1.93
2.07
Total assets
66.15
30.16
46.76
11.09
12.51
Liabilities & shareholders equity
Accounts payable
5.89
2.70
2.00
1.80
2.40
ST debt & current portion of LT debt
1.55
0.28
0.24
2.16
0.81
Accrued payroll
1.05
0.84
0.90
0.67
0.58
Income taxes payable
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Dividends payable
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Other current liabilities
3.50
0.41
0.46
0.24
0.00
Current liabilities – total
12.00
4.23
3.60
4.87
3.79
Long-term debt
0.57
0.27
0.51
0.75
0.93
Other liabilities
3.23
2.00
4.24
0.00
0.00
Total liabilities
15.80
6.50
8.35
5.62
4.72
Preferred stock
0.00
37.53
0.00
20.34
8.98
Common equity
50.34
−13.87
38.41
−14.87
−1.20
Common stock
0.06
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
Capital surplus
154.74
73.34
110.65
32.21
35.01
Other appropriated reserves
0.00
−2.28
−4.52
0.00
0.00
Retained earnings
−104.46
−84.95
−67.75
−47.09
−36.22
Total liabilities & shareholders equity
66.15
30.16
46.76
11.09
12.51
Common shares outstanding (thousands)
59,823.55
18,579.16
17,823.16
7,739.22
7,722.59

Superconductor Technologies, Inc.
381
Exhibit 3  Superconductor Technologies, Inc.: Stock performance Copyright 2003 Yahoo! Inc. 
http://finance.yahoo.com/

382
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
Exhibit 4  Superconductor Technologies, Inc.: Executive officer compensation
The following table sets forth all compensation received for services rendered to the Company in all capacities during the 
fiscal years ended December 31, 2002, 2001, and 2000 by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and the four executive 
officers other than the Chief Executive Officer whose total salary and bonus for fiscal year 2002 exceeded $100,000.
Annual compensation
Long-term compensation
Name and principal position
Year
Salary ($)
Bonus 
($)
Other 
($)1
Securities 
underlying 
options (#)
All other 
compensation 
($)2
M. Peter Thomas
2002
303,854
–
–
125,000
1,980
President and Chief
2001
300,014
72,000
–
75,000
2,323
Executive Officer
2000
285,394
70,000
–
250,000
1,290
E. Ray Cotten
2002
194,997
–
–
57,750
6,180
Senior Vice President,
2001
209,467
30,172
–
7,300
7,250
Business Development
2000
195,582
28,080
–
20,000
3,810
Robert B. Hammond
2002
208,394
–
–
57,750
690
Senior Vice President and
2001
205,945
29,628
–
3,650
809
Chief Technical Officer
2000
194,613
27,675
–
40,000
690
Robert L. Johnson4
2002
186,267
–
–
66,000
690
President, STI Wireless
2001
182,163
26,244
–
38,350
809
Systems, North America
2000
116,4624
20,048
–
100,000
504
Martin S. McDermut5
2002
194,961
–
–
43,750
690
Senior Vice President,
2001
193,895
23,310
–
43,750
809
Chief Financial Officer and Secretary
2000
167,2125
24,975
43,3743
100,000
398
Charles E. Shalvoy6
2002
277,052
–
–
–
–
President and CEO
2001
264,992
56,644
–
153,000
–7
of Conductus
2000
250,185
66,250
–
200,000
–
1Excludes certain perquisites and other amounts that, for any executive officer, in the aggregate did not exceed the lesser of $50,000 or 10% of the total 
annual salary and bonus for such executive officer.
2Term life insurance premiums.
3One-time relocation expenses.
4Mr. Johnson joined the Company in April 2000.
5Mr. McDermut joined the Company in February 2000.
6Mr. Shalvoy joined the Company in December 2002. All compensation paid by Conductus prior to acquisition of Conductus by the Company. Mr. Shalvoy 
is the President of the Conductus subsidiary and an Executive Vice President of Superconductor Technologies, Inc.
7Because Conductus provided group term life insurance for its employees and named executive officers on an aggregate basis, Conductus is unable to 
determine the amount of term life insurance premiums paid by Conductus for Mr. Shalvoy during the 2002, 2001, and 2000 fiscal years.
Source: STI Proxy Statement, May 23, 2003

Superconductor Technologies, Inc.
383
Exhibit 5  Superconductor Technologies, Inc.: Option grants to executives in 2002
The following table sets forth certain information regarding stock options granted during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2002, 
to each of the executive officers named in the table under “Executive Officer Compensation – Summary Compensation Table.”
Individual grants
Potential realizable value at 
assumed annual rates of stock 
price appreciation for option term3
Name
Number of 
securities 
underlying 
options 
granted1
% of Total 
Options 
granted to 
employees 
in fiscal year2
Exercise 
price 
($/share)
Expiration 
date
5% ($)
10% ($)
M. Peter Thomas
125,000
15%
5.60
2/4/2012
385,930
950,563
E. Ray Cotten
57,750
7%
5.60
2/4/2012
178,300
439,160
Robert B. Hammond
57,750
7%
5.23
1/23/2012
178,300
439,160
Robert L. Johnson
66,000
8%
5.23
1/23/2012
190,307
468,736
Martin S. McDermut
43,750
5%
5.23
1/23/2012
126,151
310,715
Charles E. Shalvoy4
–
–
–
–
–
–
1Except as set forth herein, each option vests over a four-year period at the rate of 1/4th of the shares subject to the option at the end of the first 12 
months and 1/36 the of the remaining shares subject to the option at the end of each monthly period thereafter so long as such optionee’s employment 
with the Company has not terminated.
2Total number of shares subject to options granted to employees in fiscal 2002 was 851,975, which number includes options granted to employee 
directors, but excludes options granted to nonemployee directors and consultants.
3The Potential Realizable Value is calculated based on the fair market value on the date of grant, which is equal to the exercise price of options granted in 
fiscal 2002, assuming that the stock appreciates in value from the date of grant until the end of the option term at the compounded annual rate specified 
(5% and 10%). Potential Realizable Value is net of the option exercise price. The assumed rates of appreciation are specified in rules of the SEC and do 
not represent the Company’s estimate or projection of future stock price. Actual gains, if any, resulting from stock option exercises and common stock 
holdings are dependent on the future performance of the common stock and overall stock market conditions, as well as the option holders’ continued 
employment through the exercise/vesting period. There can be no assurance that the amounts reflected in this table will be achieved.
4Mr. Shalvoy joined the Company in December 2002 and did not receive any options from the Company in 2002, although he did receive options from 
Conductus in 2002 prior to the acquisition.
Source: STI Proxy Statement, May 23, 2003.
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.

384
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
 In late December 2009, portfolio managers at hedge 
fund Raven Capital, LLC had just fi nished delivering 
annual performance reviews and year-end bonuses to 
their staff s. They spent considerable time and eff ort 
trying both to allocate bonuses fairly and to keep 
employees happy. But those two goals were sometimes 
in confl ict. Every year some employees were surprised 
by the amount of their bonuses. Some of the surprises 
were positive, but inevitably some were negative. 
 CFO Julie Behrens refl ected on Raven’s performance 
evaluation and incentive compensation plan: 
 Hedge funds like ours have access to lots of data. 
We have many performance measures and indices 
that we can use for benchmarking purposes. But 
interestingly, our incentive plan is not purely quan-
titative. We consider the performance metrics, but 
none of them gives us a complete picture of an 
employee’s contribution to the company. The man-
agement team makes our evaluation system work 
with painstaking qualitative adjustments. Still, I 
wonder if we should make at least a portion of our 
incentive plan more formulaic.  
 Industry background 
 Hedge fund managers pursue absolute returns on their 
underlying investments. The investments can be any 
combination of financial vehicles, including stocks, 
bonds, commodities, currencies, and derivatives. 
Sometimes hedge fund managers hold cash, sell short, 
and/or buy or sell options or futures. 
 The word “hedge” means to manage risk. Risks come 
in many forms, such as infl ation risk, market risk, inter-
est rate risk, currency risk, sector risk, and regional risk. 
Hedge fund managers are experts in designing hedging 
positions for most perceivable risks, making a true 
hedge fund less risky than a traditional long-only invest-
ment fund, at least in theory. But each hedge fund is 
unique. Diff erent hedge funds use diff erent mixes of 
investment vehicles, and their strategies vary signifi -
cantly from conservative to highly speculative. 
 Hedge funds diff er from other managed funds in a 
few key areas. Hedge fund investors are typically 
required to have high income, high net worth, and 
demonstrated investment knowledge. Because hedge 
funds manage money for a limited range of sophisti-
cated, accredited investors, they operate with fewer 
regulations than other funds. They are less restricted in 
their use of leverage and are distinguished from mutual 
funds by a greater fl exibility in investment strategies. 
Hedge fund management companies are typically 
organized as limited partnerships. The manager acts as 
the general partner, and the investors act as the limited 
partners. 
 Most hedge fund companies use the same business 
model. They derive revenue from two sources: man-
agement fees and incentive fees. Management fees, 
typically 1–2% of assets under management (AUM), 
are earned regardless of performance. Incentive fees, 
collected annually, are performance-based, typically 
totaling 20% of a fund’s return above a “high water 
mark,” the highest level of value the fund ever had for 
each investor. If a fund loses money, its managers are 
not penalized, but they cannot collect further incentive 
fees until the fund surpasses its high water mark; i.e. 
until the losses are recovered. The high water marks 
are diff erent for each investor, depending on the point 
at which they invested their monies. (See  Exhibit  1 for a 
simple high water mark example.) Hedge funds typi-
cally use the management fees to cover their operating 
expenses. Incentive fees are normally distributed to 
staff  as bonuses. 
 The year 2008 was an extremely challenging year for 
the hedge fund industry. The S&P 500 index dropped 
37%, the credit markets tightened, and investors around 
the world fl ed to safe investments. AUM at hedge funds 
fell sharply due to trading losses and redemptions, as 
investors rushed to liquidate their assets. A record num-
ber of hedge funds closed in 2008. By 2009, the S&P 
500 rose 24%, regaining some of the prior year’s losses. 
According to several indexes that track hedge fund per-
formance, hedge funds that survived 2008 were up 18% 
 CASE STUDY 
 Raven Capital, LLC 

Raven Capital, LLC
385
or more in 2009, making it the best year for hedge fund 
performance since 2003. However, almost half of all 
hedge funds were still below their high water marks at 
the end of 2009.
Raven Capital, LLC
Investment strategy
Raven Capital, LLC was founded in 1999 by Maxwell 
(Max) Stoneman. Total AUM in 2009 were slightly less 
than $1 billion. Raven’s funds bought and sold long and 
short positions in domestic equities. Raven managers 
focused their investments in industries – financial, 
energy, technology, consumer products, and health-
care – in which they had years of expertise and many 
management contacts. Their heaviest investment 
weights were in the financial and energy industries.
Almost half of Raven’s AUM came from “funds of 
funds” – funds that invested in portfolios of different 
hedge funds. Another 33% came from pension and 
retirement funds, and 18% came from high net worth 
individuals. Only 1.5% came from foundations and 
endowments. (See Exhibit 2 for a chart of capital 
sources by investor type.)
As a traditional hedge fund, Raven made investment 
decisions based on fundamentals, not short-term 
momentum, arbitrage opportunities, or expectations of 
superior predictions of macroeconomic trends. Analyt-
ical horse power was considered key to Raven’s success. 
Raven managers sought superior returns based on a 
thorough understanding of strategic, financial, and 
competitive dynamics of companies and industries, as 
well as selective entry and exit points. Specifically for 
long positions, Raven targeted both growth companies 
and solid companies that were currently out of favor. 
Raven also took short positions in companies that they 
perceived had fundamental problems, aggressive 
accounting and overstated earnings, and/or stock 
prices that reflected unrealistic earnings expectations.
Raven’s approach was disciplined. Managers were 
cognizant of macroeconomic trends, but macro trends 
did not materially alter the overall strategies, long/
short exposures, or industry focus. As portfolio man-
ager Jeffrey Lomintz put it, “We do what we say we’re 
going to do within the bands that are prescribed 
because we want to have product integrity.” Raven 
funds had tight net exposure targets (long exposure 
plus the absolute value of short exposure). Net expo-
sure for their long/short funds was typically 40%–55%.
Organization
Raven’s 17 employees were organized into two groups, 
Investment Management and Business Operations. Max 
Stoneman was the general manager and CIO of Raven. 
Together with Jeffrey Lomnitz, Max also managed the 
Investment Management Group. Max and Jeffrey acted 
as Raven’s portfolio managers (PMs), managing 100% 
of the firm’s assets. They supervised the analysts and 
traders who comprised the balance of Investment Man-
agement. Julie Behrens managed Business Operations. 
(See Exhibit 3 for an organization chart.)
The analysts were industry specialists who closely 
studied and monitored the publicly traded companies in 
their industry. They studied financial statements, inter-
viewed management, and ran models, working to iden-
tify inflection points in companies’ business models. 
Analysts frequently championed stocks for inclusion in 
Raven funds, and made entry and exit price recommen-
dations. They were also responsible for monitoring 
stocks once investments had been made in them.
As PMs, Jeffrey and Max were responsible for “pull-
ing the trigger” on stock picks. They considered ana-
lysts’ inputs, and decided which stocks to buy at what 
price, and how to size the positions. The analysts per-
ceived the PM’s investment styles as being somewhat 
different. One was described as wanting to be a “home 
run hitter.” The other was said to take “smaller cuts at 
the ball because he did not like volatility.”
The traders were responsible for executing buy and 
sell orders at the portfolio managers’ target prices. Hit-
ting target prices could be difficult, especially for illiq-
uid stocks or to buy and sell orders large enough to 
move the stock price. Traders made use of relationships 
and negotiations with executing brokers to obtain 
favorable pricing.
Raven was a relatively small firm. Most of its employ-
ees lived in the same neighborhood, and knew each 
other socially as well as professionally. Employee ten-
ure at Raven was higher than the hedge fund industry 
average.
Performance
For over a decade, the Raven Capital team had deliv-
ered superior risk adjusted returns for the investors 
who entrusted their monies to the company. For exam-
ple, Raven’s Flagship Fund (the Fund), the firm’s oldest, 
had an annualized return since inception of 14.8%, as 
compared to a 7.3% annualized return for the S&P 500 
firms in that period. In approximately 70% of the 

386
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
months when the market was down, the Fund’s values 
either increased or were down less than the market 
declined. (See Exhibit 4 for the Fund’s monthly fund 
risk report.)
But 2008 was a year for the record books on the 
downside. Though Raven funds beat the overall mar-
ket, they lost significant absolute value. The Fund 
dropped 27% (the S&P dropped 37%). While techni-
cally the job of a hedge fund was to participate when 
the market went up, and lose less when the market 
went down, many clients had an expectation that the 
fund would never lose money, let alone a significant 
amount of money.
Raven’s liquidity terms were much more liberal than 
those of many hedge funds. Raven funds did not have 
lock-ups or gates.1 For example, if a fund had a gate of 
15%, and investors requested withdrawals totaling 
25% of the fund’s assets, fund managers could legally 
refuse all withdrawals exceeding 15%. Investors des-
perate for cash sold their assets that were liquid regard-
less of performance, and the funds entrusted with 
Raven were liquid. That liquidity policy contributed 
significantly to the decline of Raven’s AUM in 2008 as 
investors needed to get cash fast.
By the end of 2009, both the markets and Raven 
funds turned a corner. The Fund was up 36% and had 
exceeded its high water mark. But despite the invest-
ment gains, the firm’s AUM had not returned to any-
thing near their historical levels. By the end of 2009, 
Raven’s AUM were only 41% of what they had been at 
the beginning of 2008.
Analyst compensation
Raven analysts earned a minimum base salary of 
$180,000 plus an annual bonus granted at the discre-
tion of management. Bonuses fluctuated significantly 
but generally ranged from approximately $150,000 
upward to several million dollars.
Raven’s incentive fees earned became the annual 
bonus pool. The bonus pool was split two-thirds to 
Investment Management and one-third to Business 
Operations, as was traditional in the industry. Within 
Investment Management, the PMs typically took a 
standard percentage of the pool, and the balance was 
allocated to the other employees.
The bonus allocation decisions were made subjec-
tively by the management team, Max and Jeffrey (the 
two PMs) and Julie (CFO). They considered many 
quantitative measures but applied considerable judg-
ment in deciding what quantitative factors to consider 
and how to weight the multiple indicators in impor-
tance. Jeffrey explained, “Most importantly we need a 
process that is fair and repeatable.”
The bonuses were awarded based on a combination 
of company, team, and individual performance. For 
evaluating analysts, the primary quantitative evalua-
tion measure was an analyst performance report (see 
Exhibit 5) that was updated monthly and closely 
tracked by all members of the Raven team. The perfor-
mance of every stock that an analyst “touched” was 
coded, and the monthly profits or losses from those 
stocks were tracked in the report.
Though the management team knew that at least 
some analysts would prefer to be awarded bonuses 
based entirely on quantitative measures, they recog-
nized several difficulties with a strictly formulaic 
approach. First, analysts could only choose stocks within 
their industry of expertise, so their performance could 
be helped or hindered by industry performance. Though 
theoretically their performance could be measured 
against an industry benchmark, managers believed that 
in practice it was very difficult to find a robust index.
Second, exposure to short or long positions could 
have a significant effect on performance as well. It may 
well have been in an analyst’s best interest to take only 
long positions in a rising market, but Raven strategy 
often required somebody to “take shorts for the team.”
Finally, analysts could “touch” stocks in several 
ways that were not reflected in the stock performance 
report. For example, if an analyst made a stock recom-
mendation, but the PM chose not to buy a position, the 
stock was not tracked on the report. Several analysts 
kept track of those stocks on their own, to receive credit 
for good picks even if they did not become part of a 
fund. Equally, if an analyst made a “save” by recom-
mending getting out of a position, it was not directly 
reflected in the report, either. Analysts could clearly 
also make bad calls that the PM chose not to imple-
ment. Jeffrey explained, “I could follow an analyst’s 
recommendation to buy a stock at $10 and ignore his 
recommendation to sell at $15. If I ultimately sell at 
$18, who gets the credit? The analyst had a good idea 
but he told me to sell the stock earlier, and I didn’t, so 
we made even more money. That’s one area where the 
performance evaluations get murky.”
1	 Lock-ups restricted withdrawals of the original investment in a hedge 
fund for a period of time. Gates limited the percentage of a fund’s 
assets that could be withdrawn during any redemption period.

Raven Capital, LLC
387
Ultimately, company performance drove bonuses, 
since the company couldn’t pay out more than it earned 
in incentive fees. Max explained,
There are years where everyone is overpaid. If the 
firm has a great year and you have horrible perfor-
mance, you’ll be overpaid. But in years like this year, 
everyone is underpaid. You may have done well, but 
fees were lower because we had to get up to our high 
water marks again. There were not as many dollars 
to go around. But my memory is not that short.
Management used a “mental carry forward” to com-
pensate people they felt had been overpaid or under-
paid in prior years. Managers also adjusted bonuses 
based on qualitative factors. For example, they consid-
ered whether analysts wasted time with poor recom-
mendations. Jeffrey explained, “Some analysts use a 
dart board approach. If you throw enough darts, you’ll 
eventually hit the board, but it puts the burden on the 
PMs to sort through all those ideas.”
From the analysts’ perspective, Raven’s evaluation 
method, while not perfectly visible, was generally seen 
as fair. The analysts were not oblivious to the economics 
of the business. They were aware of how much the com-
pany earned each year, and had a general idea of what 
they deserved as a bonus. While they sometimes believed 
their bonus award was not completely fair compared 
with other analysts, the differences were generally not 
huge. As analyst Winston Hill put it, “we’re not under-
paid by 50%.” Winston explained further:
I don’t know the mad science behind how Max 
comes up with some of his performance metrics. 
I’m sure he runs the numbers a number of different 
ways. There is an art to this as well as a science … 
Everyone thinks that Max and Jeffrey are fair peo-
ple. This model would not work if there wasn’t a 
trust factor.
Having such a subjective process was not the indus-
try norm. Many other hedge funds did use a formulaic 
approach, most typically awarding a pre-negotiated 
percentage of fund returns as an annual bonus. Win-
ston reflected, “The great thing about that is you know 
exactly what you make.”
Concerns
Each year seemed to present unique evaluation chal-
lenges. Julie listed some of the questions that had to be 
addressed:
What is the firm making? How are the funds doing? 
How should we evaluate employee contribution? 
Should we pay for tenure? How much of the bonus 
pool should go to those working in administration?
Reflecting on the 2009 year-end performance 
reviews, the Raven management team had some con-
cerns. They feared that bonus expectations had 
become unmanageable. They valued their analysts 
and wanted to keep them happy. High water marks 
had made this year unusually difficult for Raven and 
for hedge funds in general. But because fund returns 
were high, some analysts felt entitled to bonuses simi-
lar to the record amounts earned in 2007. And, as Max 
and Jeffrey both noted, “Most employees overrate 
their performances and overvalue their worth.” In the 
past, it was not uncommon for analysts who were 
unhappy with their compensation to jump to compa-
nies with more assets or to start hedge funds of their 
own, but that possibility had become far less likely 
given the state of the industry.
Max and Jeffrey were also concerned that they were 
not accomplishing much in the way of evaluating and 
improving performance through the review process. 
During their reviews, analysts paid careful attention to 
the bonus award, but were unable to focus on anything 
else. One possibility that Julie had suggested was to 
move performance reviews to September, to separate 
performance discussions from the awarding of 
bonuses, which would still be done in December.

388
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
Exhibit 1  Hypothetical high water mark example
Pool at beginning 
of period
% return
$ return
Pool at end 
of period
Incentive fee earned at 
rate of 20% of fund returns
Year 1
$800,000
125%
1$200,000
$1,000,000
$40,000*
Year 2
$1,000,000
220%
2$200,000
$800,000
$0
Year 3
$800,000
110%
2$80,000
$880,000
$0
Year 4
$880,000
125%
1$220,000
$1,100,000
$20,000**
*($1,000,000 − $800,000) × 0.2 = $40,000
**($1,100,000 – $1,000,000) × 0.2 = $20,000
 
Exhibit 2  Raven assets under management by investor type (as of 7/1/2009)

Raven Capital, LLC
389
Exhibit 3  Organizational chart

390
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
Exhibit 4  The fund risk report
Statistical Highlights
Firm AUM
$732M
Fund AUM
$128M
Returns Since Inception
Fund
S&P 500
Cumulative
687.50%
182.70%
Annualized
15.11%
7.34%
General Summary
MV
Delta Adj.
Equity ($)
$131,557,936
–
LMV ($)
$119,262,214
$131,035,077
SMV ($)
($61,414,565)
($73,739,807)
Gross Exposure
$180,676,779
$204,774,884
Net Exposure
$57,847,649
$57,295,270
LMV (% Equity)
90.65%
99.60%
SMV (% Equity)
(46.68%)
(56.05%)
Gross Exposure (% Equity)
137.34%
155.65%
Net Exposure (% Equity)
43.97%
43.55%
1 day VaR 95%
$1,392,438
–
1 day VaR 99%
$2,111,171
–
Position Info.
Long
Short
Top 25 positions
74.88%
(30.21%)
# of Positions
53
63
Days Liquidity (Fund)
0.70
0.12
Turnover
15.58%
35.68%
Risk Metrics
Fund
S&P 500
Standard Dev.
3.87%
4.60%
Standard Dev. Ann.
13.42%
15.94%
Sharpe Ratio
0.85
0.55
Downside Dev.
2.53%
3.49%
Sortino Ratio
1.30
0.30
Benchmark Comps
Fund
S&P 500
R2
54.44
1.00
Beta
0.62
1.00
Alpha (Since Inception)
574.63%
–
Correlation
0.74
1.00
(Continued)

Raven Capital, LLC
391
Definition of risk metrics
Alpha
The Y-intercept of the security characteristics line. The specific benchmark used in 
the Monthly Fund Risk Reports is the S&P 500 with dividends reinvested.
Annualized standard deviation
(Monthly standard deviation) × (square root of 12).
Beta
With ra denoting the rate of return of asset A and rp denoting the rate of return of 
referencing benchmark, beta can be expressed as beta(a) = covariance (ra,rp)/
variance (rp).
Correlation coefficient
Correlation coefficient pX,Y between two random variables X and Y, with standard 
deviations sigma (X) and sigma (Y) is defined as pX,Y = covariance (X,Y)/(sigmaX 
sigmaY).
Downside deviation
The standard deviation of the returns that are less than the minimum acceptable 
return (MAR).
Hard to borrow
This is defined by our broker as MV of short equities for which we receive less than 
our cold rate.
Liquidity
The day’s liquidity for each position is calculated by dividing the shares held by 30% 
of the average 20-day trading volume. The day’s liquidity for the firm or fund is based 
on the weighted average of firm or fund holdings.
R2
R-squared, coefficient of determination, in linear regression, which is employed here, 
R-squared is simply the square of the correlation coefficient.
Sortino Ratio
Investment return-risk free (ROR)/downside deviation. The downside deviation is 
relative to a user-specified minimum acceptable return (MAR), which in the case of 
the fund risk report is 0.
Standard deviation
The square root of variance.
Exhibit 4  Continued

392
Chapter 9 • Incentive Systems
Analyst
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
2009
MS
13.8
6.9
29.9
4.5
5.8
−9.7
19.8
13.8
36.2
50.2
4.8
9.8
185.8
BS
0.9
−0.8
−0.3
−5.9
4.9
−0.9
7.8
9.6
6.9
15.3
11.1
0.1
48.8
JL
2.6
9.6
16.9
4
11.4
14.5
−15.2
27.4
13.9
4.7
−14
12.8
88.7
NS
3.3
1.5
−2.4
−0.4
−1.7
3.1
−8.6
0.7
3.2
6.4
8.8
−5.6
8.3
WH
3.8
5
−2
−2.4
2.1
−11.9
1.7
−0.3
−1.1
−0.6
−1.6
−1.4
−8.7
CF
0.2
−0.1
−0.1
0.1
−0.01
−0.2
−0.1
−0.1
0.1
−0.03
0.1
−0.3
CIM
−1.3
−0.3
2
2.1
2.9
0.9
0.8
−0.8
−0.2
1.2
−0.1
−0.2
7.1
IPOS
0.3
0.2
0.4
0.5
0.3
−0.01
0.1
0.1
1.7
GOLD/SPYS
−4.7
4.4
−4.5
−7.5
−7
1.6
7.7
−3.7
−3.6
−0.01
5.6
0.7
−11.3
TOTAL
18.3
26.6
39.5
−5.2
18.5
−1.6
14.2
47.4
56.8
80
17.8
16.9
329
Short portfolio
Month to month profit/loss in $ millions (profit and loss defined as realized plus changes in unrealized)
Exhibit 5  Analyst performance report
Long portfolio
Month to month profit/loss in $ millions (profit and loss defined as realized plus changes in unrealized)
Analyst
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
2009
MS
22.6
−1.3
29.3
21.7
8.1
−13.4
−11
7.7
32.6
30.5
−31.4
−8
87.4
BS
5.4
0.5
7.1
1.8
13.3
−5.6
−6.2
7.3
5.3
10.7
2.5
−1.2
40.8
JL
9.8
−1.5
13.8
11.7
16.1
7.8
−17
24
22.1
16.6
−30.4
1.6
74.6
NK
3.7
−0.5
−4.3
2.8
0.7
4.2
−9.8
3.1
4.6
9.7
−0.2
−3.0
11.07
WH
8
2.1
−1
8.3
12.1
−10.7
−2
−1.2
−1.1
−0.6
−1.6
−1.4
11.02
CF
0.2
−0.1
−0.1
0.1
−0.01
−0.2
−0.1
−0.1
0.1
−0.03
0.1
−0.31
CIM
−1.4
−0.4
2.3
2.5
3.4
0.5
0.7
−0.8
0.02
1.2
−0.6
−0.01
7.4
IPOS
0.27
0.2
0.4
0.5
0.3
−0.01
0.05
0.09
1.73
GOLD
−1.2
−0.8
−0.1
−0.4
−0.3
0.5
−0.5
−2.8
TOTAL
46.8
−0.7
46.4
49.1
53.2
−17.3
−44.7
40.7
64.1
71.4
−61.2
−12.3
235.4
(Continued)

Raven Capital, LLC
393
Analyst
2009 profit
% of 2009 profit
Allocated capital 
($ millions)
% of allocated 
capital
% return on 
allocated capital
MS
234.59
71.3%
800
33%
29.3%
JL
88.71
27.0%
800
33%
11.1%
NS
8.31
2.5%
300
12%
2.8%
WH
−8.66
−2.6%
300
12%
−2.9%
CF
−0.31
−0.1%
2
0%
−15.3%
CIM
7.09
2.2%
30
1%
23.6%
IPOS
1.73
0.5%
0%
GOLD/SPYS
−11.26
−3.4%
190
8%
−5.9%
TOTAL
329.03
100%
2422
100%
13.6%
Total portfolio
Month to month profit/loss in $ millions (profit and loss defined as realized plus changes in unrealized)
Analyst
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
2009
MS
−8.8
8.3
0.6
−17.2
−2.3
3.8
30.8
6.1
3.5
19.7
36.2
17.8
98.5
BS
−4.4
−1.3
−7.3
−7.7
−8.4
4.7
14
2.3
1.5
4.7
8.6
1.3
8.0
JL
−7.2
11.1
3
−7.7
−4.7
6.8
1.8
3.4
−8.2
−11.9
16.5
11.2
14.1
NK
−0.3
2
1.9
−3.2
−2.4
−1.1
1.2
−2.5
−1.4
−3.4
9
−2.6
−2.8
WH
−4.2
2.9
−1
−10.6
−10
−1.3
3.6
0.8
−19.7
CF
CIM
0.03
0.1
−0.3
−0.4
−0.5
0.4
0.2
0.03
−0.2
0
0.5
−0.2
−0.3
NC
SPYS
−3.5
4.4
−3.8
−7.5
−6.6
1.9
7.2
−3.2
−3.6
−0.01
5.6
0.7
−8.5
TOTAL
−28.4
27.3
−6.9
−54.3
−34.7
15.6
58.9
6.7
−7.3
8.6
79
29
93.6
Exhibit 5  Continued
This case was Prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant and research assistant Michelle Spaulding.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

This page intentionally left blank

 
395
 SECTION IV 
 Performance Measurement 
Issues and Their Eff ects 

This page intentionally left blank

 
397
 CHAPTER 10 
 Financial Performance Measures 
and Their Eff ects 
 The primary objective of for-profi t organizations is to maximize shareholder (or owner) value, 
or  fi rm value for short. Thus, the results-control ideal would be to reward employees for their 
contributions to fi rm value. However, because direct measurements of the contributions by 
employees to value creation are rarely possible, fi rms have to look for measures that proxy for 
this ultimate objective and resort to results-control alternatives to either reinforce desired 
behaviors where the proxies leave gaps or mitigate undesired consequences that may arise from 
relying on the proxies. 
 A commonly cited management “truism” is that  what you measure is what you get . As dis-
cussed in  Chapter  9 , this truism is particularly pertinent when the performance measures are 
linked to incentives that reinforce the attainment of the measured performance. But which per-
formance measure(s) should be used? At managerial levels in organizations, job responsibilities 
are both broad and varied. In common jargon, managerial jobs are said to be  multitasking in 
nature. Refl ecting this task variety, the list of measures used in practice to motivate and evalu-
ate managerial performance is long. That said, the list of measures can be classifi ed into three 
broad categories. Two of these categories include summary fi nancial measures of performance, 
expressed either in market (stock price) or accounting terms, and the third category includes 
combinations of measures. 
 The  summary measures refl ect the aggregate or  bottom-line  impacts of multiple perfor-
mance areas (e.g. accounting profi ts refl ect the aggregate eff ects of both revenue- and cost-
related decisions). The fi rst category of summary measures contains  market measures ; that 
is, those that refl ect changes in stock prices or shareholder returns. The second category 
contains  accounting measures , which can be defi ned in either residual terms (such as net 
income after taxes, operating profi t, residual income, or economic value added) or ratio 
terms (such as return on investment, return on equity, or return on net assets). These two 
categories of summary fi nancial (market-based or accounting-based) measures of perfor-
mance are the focus of this chapter. These measurement categories represent  financial 
measures of performance because they are either denominated in currency (e.g. quarterly 
profi ts of $19.2 million); as a ratio of fi nancial numbers, such as $0.12 earnings per share 
(EPS) or 12% return on equity (ROE); or as a change in fi nancial numbers, such as 11% 
earnings growth. 
 The third measurement category consists of  combinations of measures. These combinations 
can involve the use of either type of summary measures, or both, plus some  dis aggregated 
fi nancial measures (e.g. revenues, expenses) and/or  nonfi nancial  measures (e.g. market share, 
customer satisfaction, employee turnover). We discuss the use of combinations of measures in 
 Chapter  11 . In both chapters, we use the evaluation criteria introduced in  Chapter  2 , notably 

398
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
congruence, controllability, precision, objectivity, timeliness, understandability, and cost effi-
ciency to evaluate and to compare and contrast each measurement category.
Most organizations base their higher managerial-level results controls to a great extent on 
summary accounting measures of performance. Earlier chapters (particularly Chapters 2 and 7) 
elaborated the reasons why accounting measures of performance are in such common use. They 
have some significant advantages over other measurement alternatives. In particular, at mini-
mal incremental cost, they provide a useful summary of the results of the many actions and 
decisions that managers take. It must be recognized, however, that even the best accounting 
measures are not perfect; they are only surrogate or proxy indicators of changes in firm value.
The use of accounting performance measures as a proxy for changes in firm value creates 
various control problems. This chapter describes one of the most significant problems account-
ing measures cause: a tendency to make managers excessively short-term-oriented, or myopic. 
This chapter also discusses the issue of suboptimization, a form of behavioral displacement 
caused particularly by the use of accounting-based ROI-type (ratio or return) measures. 
Chapter 11 focuses on how the myopia problem can be alleviated, at least to some extent. 
A whole chapter is devoted to this subject because of its importance and complexity. The final 
chapter in this section, Chapter 12, discusses how to handle problems caused when employees 
are held accountable for results they cannot completely control.
Value creation
It is generally understood that the primary objective of for-profit organizations is to maximize 
the value of the firm, subject to some constraints, such as compliance with laws and adequate 
concern for employees, customers, and other stakeholders.1 As Michael Jensen, a financial 
economist, phrases it, “200 years’ worth of work in economics and finance indicate that social 
welfare is maximized when all firms in an economy attempt to maximize their own total firm 
value.”2 Ideally, then, to reflect success properly, performance measures should go up when 
value is created and go down when it is destroyed.
We hasten to add, however, that while the arguments presented in this chapter are based on 
the assumption of value maximization as the ultimate organizational objective in the context of 
for-profit corporations, we realize that corporations have responsibilities to a broader set of 
stakeholders, including employees, customers, suppliers, and society, and that fulfilling these 
stakeholder responsibilities is both important and requires tradeoffs. Although it is beyond the 
scope of this chapter to debate the question about the ultimate (balance of) objective(s) of cor-
porations, the evaluation framework presented in this and earlier chapters, and the congruence 
criterion in particular, can be used to evaluate performance measures no matter which 
objective(s) an organization pursues. The framework can be conceptually applied even to non-
profit settings (as we discuss in Chapter 16), where the organizational purposes (e.g. to provide 
healthcare, education, or affordable housing) are not directed toward maximizing shareholder 
value. But even where value maximization is the key objective, concerns related to sustainabil-
ity and corporate social responsibility, for example, also need to be addressed; we also discuss 
this in Chapter 16.3
Returning to the strict context of “firm value” as alluded to by Jensen, the value of any eco-
nomic asset can be calculated at any specific time by discounting the future cash flows that the 
firm is expected to generate, where the discount rate reflects the time value of money and risk. 
Thus, employees can, all else equal, increase value by increasing the size of future cash flows, 
by accelerating the timing of those cash flows (due to the time value of money), or by making 
them more certain or less risky (thus allowing a lower discount rate). The change in firm value 

Market measures of performance
399
over any given period is called economic income. Therefore, maximization of economic income is 
an alternative way of phrasing the basic corporate financial objective of value maximization. As 
we will see, economic income is different from accounting income, and the difference has impor-
tant management control implications.4
Market measures of performance
One way of assessing value changes is by using market measures of performance, which are 
based on changes in the market value of the firm or, if dividends are also considered, return to 
shareholders. The value created (return to shareholders) can be measured directly for any 
period (yearly, quarterly, monthly) as the sum of the dividends paid to shareholders in the 
measurement period plus (or minus) the change in the market value of the stock. For publicly 
traded, exchange-listed firms whose stock is traded in actively traded and properly regulated 
capital markets, the market value of the firm is generally viewed as the closest, although imper-
fect, measure of (hence, proxy for) the firm’s true intrinsic value. As we have seen in Chapter 9, 
firms often employ a variety of stock-based compensation plans, such as stock option and 
restricted stock plans, which link incentive payments to stock price. In this way, employees who 
are eligible for equity-based compensation plans are rewarded for generating shareholder 
returns as defined above, or at least its most significant component – changes in the value of 
common stock.
In that sense, market measures have broad appeal in part because they provide relatively 
direct indications of changes in firm value. Such measurement congruence allays political pres-
sure that outsiders otherwise might bring on the company. Who is to complain if managers 
share rewards in synch with those enjoyed by the firm’s owners? If the market value changes 
are measured in terms of recent transaction prices in an actively traded, efficient market, the 
market measures also have other advantages. For publicly traded, exchange-listed firms, mar-
ket values are available on a timely (daily) basis. They are precise (no or little random error) and 
relatively accurate (no or little systematic biases, assuming an efficient information environ-
ment), and the values are usually objective (not manipulable by the managers whose perfor-
mances are being evaluated; or, at least, not nearly as manipulable as some other measures).5 
They are understandable, at least in terms of what the measures represent. And, they are cost 
effective because they do not require any company measurement expense.
Market measures do have limitations, however. First, market measures suffer from control-
lability problems. They can generally be affected to a significant extent only by the top few 
managers in the organization, who have the power to make decisions of major importance. 
They say little about the performances of individuals lower in the organization, even those with 
significant management responsibilities, except in a collective sense. Individually, the efforts of 
virtually all employees below the very top level of management usually have an infinitesimally 
small impact on stock prices, which is captured pertinently by the following quote: “So many 
things can affect stock-price performance that have nothing to do with the individual employee 
– employees may actually be demotivated upon realizing that it can be like a lottery; we should 
only ask employees to control things they can influence, like earnings.”6 Or in the view of War-
ren Buffett, the legendary investor:
Buffett doesn’t like what he calls lottery ticket arrangements, such as stock options, in 
which the ultimate value could range from zero to huge and is totally out of the control of 
the person whose behavior we would like to affect. Instead, goals should be tailored to the 
economics of the business, simple and measurable, and directly related to the daily 
activities of plan participants.7

400
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
But even for the top management team, market measures may be far from being totally control-
lable. Stock market valuations are affected by many factors that the managers cannot control, 
such as changes in macroeconomic activity (economic growth), political climate (e.g. election 
results), monetary policy (e.g. interest rate policy), industry events, and actions of competitors 
(e.g. a major oil spill), as well as the general stock market mood (bearish or bullish). When this 
is the case, stock prices are less informative about even top-level managers’ performances. 
Therefore, one reason why accounting information is important in incentive contracting is that 
earnings can shield executives against the noise inherent in firms’ stock prices.8
It is possible, however, to “improve” the market measures to make them more informative 
of the controllable elements of performance, such as by using relative performance evalua-
tions (RPE). For example, managers can be held accountable for generating market returns 
greater than those of the overall market or greater than those of a chosen peer group of com-
panies. When done well, and consistent with efficient contracting, RPE firms select peers that 
allow effective removal of common risk and improve fairness in compensation.9 (We discuss 
methods of making adjustments for the effects of uncontrollable factors in more depth in 
Chapter 12.)
Second, market values do also not always reflect realized performance; instead, the values 
merely represent expectations, and it can be risky to base incentives on expectations because 
those expectations might not be realized. Indeed, markets can overreact to news (in either 
direction, positive or negative), such as to the appointment of a new chief executive or to news 
about a merger or a major project, or even to regular earnings announcements.
For example, Microsoft chief executive Steve Ballmer said that he was “surprised” by the 
market reaction to the software giant’s web search deal with Yahoo. Microsoft’s share price was 
hammered on Wall Street. “Watching the market reaction, nobody gets it,” Mr. Ballmer said, 
even though he argued that the deal was a win-win strategic partnership that would create eco-
nomic value for the shareholders of Yahoo and Microsoft.10 Similarly, when Molycorp, owner of 
the largest rare-earths deposit outside China, said it needed more time to file its annual report 
so the company would be able to determine the size of a “substantial” goodwill write-down, 
Jonathan Hykawy, an analyst for Byron Capital Markets Ltd., said that he was “surprised by the 
ferocity of the market reaction to the news – this charge is non-cash, so would not of itself 
impact the company’s production ramp or prospects in any way.”11
Who is right – Mr. Ballmer and Mr. Hykawy, or the markets – is hard to tell in advance, but it 
shows that managers’ and market expectations are not always aligned, and that expectations 
are not to be equated with realizations. Market valuations do not always fully reflect the under-
lying value of the firm; hence, decisions or transactions on any given day, such as stock option 
grants or exercises, can be affected by the difference. Worse, as we have discussed in Chapter 9, 
the possibility for such differences may even trigger opportunistic motivations by the executives 
to try to affect stock prices coincident with certain decisions or transactions, such as by selec-
tively disclosing information to which the markets are expected to (over)react either with a 
downward or upward effect on stock prices, to bring about more favorable conditions for the 
granting or exercising of stock options, respectively.12
A third and related problem with market measures of performance is actually a potential 
congruence failure. Markets are not always well informed about a company’s plans and pros-
pects and, hence, its future cash flows and risks. This hampers the use of market valuations 
as a proxy for firm value. For competitive reasons, companies may treat information about 
R&D productivity, pricing and sourcing strategies, product and process quality, and layoff 
intentions, say, as confidential. Market valuations cannot reflect information that is not avail-
able to the market. If sizable rewards are linked to market valuations, managers might be 
tempted to disclose this information to affect valuations, even if such disclosures could harm 
their company.

Accounting measures of performance
401
But even market valuations with well-informed participants might not always be correct. 
Over the years, a number of valuation anomalies – such as the “Monday effect” and the “January 
effect,” just to name two – have been documented, although these tend to be relatively small 
and temporary in duration. More significant for incentive purposes are some other, larger mar-
ket imperfections and lags; these are particularly likely, and more likely to be significant, in 
markets where stocks are not as actively traded. For example, in developing countries, sugges-
tions to reward managers based on stock market valuation changes are met with skepticism. 
Because regulations in certain countries are not as well established and not as well enforced as 
those in developed countries, managers can time or slant their disclosures to affect market val-
uations, and large investors can manipulate the markets.
This, therefore, raises a fourth problem with market measures – that is, their feasibility in 
certain circumstances. Market measures are also only readily available for publicly traded 
firms; they are not available for either privately held firms or wholly owned subsidiaries or divi-
sions,13 and they do not apply to non-profit organizations.
To summarize the limitations, market measures are only available, and hence reasonably 
feasible, for publicly traded firms. They are largely uncontrollable by any employees except the 
top few individuals in the management hierarchy. Even for those few individuals, the measures 
are buffeted by many uncontrollable influences, making the market measures noisy indicators 
of performance. And, changes in stock price on any given day can be misleading for several of 
the reasons discussed above. All told, then, a company’s stock price at any point in time can be a 
poor guide to long-term value, and thus, although an emphasis on shareholder value seems 
highly congruent conceptually, the use of short-term changes in stock price as a proxy for it can 
cause problems. One of these problems is that, even though relying on market measures should 
align managers’ incentives with the long-term value of the firm, they not always will. Worse, 
they can even create adverse incentives.
But several studies have documented positive effects of market-based measures and associ-
ated incentives, such as of stock options (also discussed in Chapter 9) on, say, innovation which 
is an inherently long-term endeavor requiring appropriate risk taking, even when used at lower, 
non-executive levels in the organization.14 Thus, there is no one-size-fits-all approach, and 
there are tradeoffs. But an exclusive reliance on market measures is likely ineffective, even 
where the benefits are believed to exceed the drawbacks because, inevitably, market measures 
do have limitations.
These limitations of market measures cause organizations to look for surrogate measures of per-
formance. Accounting measures, specifically accounting profits and returns, are the most important 
surrogates used, particularly at management levels below the very top management team.
Accounting measures of performance
Traditionally, most organizations have based their managers’ evaluations and rewards heavily 
on standard accounting-based, summary financial measures. Accounting-based, summary or 
bottom-line performance measures come in two basic forms: (1) residual measures (or accounting 
profit measures), such as net income, operating profit, earnings before interest, tax, depreciation 
and amortization (EBITDA), or residual income; and (2) ratio measures (or accounting return 
measures), such as return on investment (ROI), return on equity (ROE), return on net assets 
(RONA), or risk-adjusted return on capital (RAROC). These measures are typically derived from 
the rules defined by standard setters for financial reporting purposes.
Summary accounting-based measures have some appealing advantages. They satisfy many 
of the measurement criteria. First, accounting profits and returns can be measured on a timely 

402
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
basis (in short time periods) relatively precisely and objectively. Accounting rules for assigning 
cash inflows and outflows even to very short measurement periods have been set and described 
in great detail by accounting rule makers, such as the International Accounting Standards 
Board (IASB) or the US Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). It is possible to measure 
accounting profits in short time periods, such as a month, with considerable precision. Precision 
stems from the existence of accounting rules, and hence, different people assigned to measure 
the profit of an entity for any given period will arrive at approximately the same number. We say 
approximately because the accounting rules require some judgment, such as about certain lia-
bilities or the depreciable lives of certain types of assets, just to name two. Further, for large 
firms or publicly traded firms, but also for privately held firms that require bond or equity capi-
tal, independent auditors provide, mandatorily or voluntary, an objectivity check of the account-
ing calculations. Objectivity is important when incentives are linked to measures because it 
eliminates, or at least sharply reduces, the potential for arguments about measurement meth-
ods where judgments need to be made about the accounting treatment.
Second, as compared with other quantities that can be measured precisely and objectively on 
a timely basis, such as cash flows, shipments, or sales, accounting measures are at least concep-
tually congruent with the organizational goal of profit maximization, where profit is an arche-
typal accounting construct. In this respect, accounting profits provide an advantage over cash 
flows because accounting accruals are designed to provide a better matching of cash inflows 
and outflows over time.
Third, accounting measures usually can be largely controlled by the managers whose perfor-
mances are being evaluated. The measures can be tailored to match the authority limits of any 
level of manager, from the CEO down to lower management levels. As such, entity managers 
are typically held accountable for fewer of the income statement and balance sheet line items 
that they can control, compared to managers with more authority higher in the organizational 
hierarchy (as we discussed in the context of responsibility centers in Chapter 7). Because of this, 
the profit performance of an entity within the organization is almost certainly more controlla-
ble by the entity manager than the change in the company’s overall stock price. Accounting 
profits also are not, or not as severely, affected by some of the uncontrollable factors discussed 
above that affect stock prices.
Fourth, accounting measures are understandable. Accounting is a standard course in every 
business school, and managers have used the measures for so long that they are well familiar 
with what the measures represent and how they can be influenced, at least at a conceptual if not 
fully accounting-technical level.
Finally, accounting measures of performance are inexpensive because most firms have to 
measure and report financial results to outside users already, certainly when they are publicly 
traded, but also in many countries when they exceed a certain size and require auditing (see 
above). Even when these conditions do not apply, to obtain funding of any kind (debt or equity) 
requires the reporting of at least some financial information to the fund providers, who will do 
a due diligence or an audit of the numbers and the overall viability of the organization.
For all these reasons, pioneer business baron Alfred P. Sloan may have had a point when he 
proclaimed that “no other financial principle with which I am acquainted serves better than 
[accounting] rate of return as an objective aid to business management.”15 Nonetheless, 
accounting measures of performance are far from perfect indicators of firm value and value 
changes. While research has shown that the correlations between annual accounting profits 
and stock price changes are positive,16 they are not a perfect surrogate and, thus, only imperfect 
proxies for economic income.17
In some types of firms, accounting profit measures are essentially meaningless. A good 
example is start-up firms. These firms almost inevitably report significant accounting losses 
early in their life cycle. The losses are just an artifact of conservative accounting rules that 

Accounting measures of performance
403
require the immediate or rapid expensing of long-term-focused business-building investments 
(such as investments in R&D and product and market development). In these cases, which 
include virtually all start-up firms, managers are not, or should not be, greatly concerned with 
short-term accounting profits (or rather losses) because the need for a long-term focus reduces 
the degree of congruence between earnings and firm value.
More generally, measurement congruence, or the correlation between accounting profits and 
firm value, increases with the length of the measurement period, which suggests a tradeoff 
between the congruence and timeliness measurement evaluation criteria. The increasingly 
higher correlations with increasingly longer measurement windows occur primarily because 
accounting profits provide a lagged indicator of economic income. Changes in economic income 
are often reflected only some time later in the profit measures. How much later depends on 
what caused the economic income change and what type of accounting measurement rules is 
being used.
There are thus various reasons why accounting profit measures fail to reflect economic 
income perfectly. Many things affect accounting profits but not economic income, and vice 
versa. First, accounting systems are transactions-oriented. Accounting profit is primarily a 
summation of the effects of the transactions that took place during a given period. Most 
changes in value that do not result in a transaction are not recognized in accounting profit. 
When a firm receives a patent or regulatory approval for a new drug, the expectation of eco-
nomic income is affected; but there is no transaction, no accounting entry, and, thus, no effect 
on accounting income.
Second, accounting profit is highly dependent on the choice of measurement methods. Multi-
ple measurement methods are often available to account for identical economic events. Depre-
ciation accounting choices (straight-line vs. accelerated methods) are but one example. These 
methods also often require making judgments, such as in this example, about the depreciable 
lives of the assets. Longer lives spread the costs over more years and thus affect the accounting 
profits recorded over those years.
Third, accounting profit is derived from measurement rules that are often conservatively 
biased.18 Accounting rules require slow recognition of gains and revenues but quick recognition 
of expenses and losses. For example, accounting rules define strict criteria that must be satisfied 
before revenue (and the associated profit) can be recognized, and expenditures on intangible 
assets are generally expensed immediately. Thus, accounting measures do not always match 
revenues and expenses well, and this problem is particularly acute where measurement periods 
are shorter than the firms’ investment payoff horizons.
Fourth, profit calculations ignore some economic values and value changes that accountants 
feel cannot be measured accurately and objectively. Investments in major categories of compa-
nies’ intangible assets, such as research in progress, human resources, information systems, 
and customer goodwill, are expensed immediately. Consequently, these types of assets do not 
appear on the balance sheet. The omission of intangible assets occurs even though, for many 
companies, these types of assets are much more important than the old industrial-era-type 
assets of property, plant, and equipment.19 The physical assets of companies like Apple, Google, 
and Facebook, for example, are only a relatively small portion of each company’s total market 
value. Profit also ignores the costs of investments in working capital. Managers sometimes 
increase their sales and profits by making poor investments in extra inventory, the costs of 
which do not appear on the income statement.
Fifth, profit reflects the cost of borrowed capital (through interest deductibility) but ignores the 
cost of equity capital. Firms earn real income only when the returns on capital are greater than the 
cost of that capital, and ignoring the cost of equity capital overstates the difference between 
returns and costs (that is, profit). This omission is serious because equity capital is typically more 
expensive than borrowed capital, and the cost of equity capital is even higher for companies with 

404
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
risky (volatile) stocks. Failure to reflect the cost of equity capital also hinders comparisons of the 
results of companies with different proportions of debt and equity in their capital structures.
Sixth, accounting profit ignores risk and changes in risk. Firms, or entities within firms, that 
have not changed the pattern or timing of their expected future cash flows but have made the 
cash flows more certain (less risky) have increased their economic value, and vice versa. This 
value change is not reflected in accounting profits.
Finally, profit figures also focus on the past. Economic value is derived from future cash 
flows, and there is no guarantee that past performance is a reliable indicator of future  
performance.
The multiple reasons why accounting income and economic income diverge have caused 
some critics to make strong statements against the use of accounting performance measures. 
Most managers, however, have found that the advantages of accounting measures outweigh 
their limitations, and they continue to use them. But they must be aware that motivating 
managers to maximize, or at least produce, accounting profits or returns, rather than eco-
nomic income, can create a number of behavioral displacement problems. Myopia is probably 
the most potentially damaging. Managers who focus on accounting profits or returns meas-
ured in short periods tend to be highly concerned with increasing (or maintaining) monthly, 
quarterly, or annual profits. When managers’ orientations to the short term become exces-
sive – that is, when they are more concerned with short-term profits or returns rather than 
with long-term value creation – the managers are said to be myopic, which we discuss in the 
next section.
In summary, then, the major failure of accounting measures of performance is in terms of 
the congruence criterion for evaluation. Accounting measures do not reflect changes in eco-
nomic values well, particularly in shorter measurement windows. They also suffer some con-
trollability problems, although less than market measures; but these problems can be 
addressed using the same methods that can be used to adjust the market measures, which 
we discuss in more detail in Chapter 12. Accounting measures, however, rate highly in terms 
of the other evaluation criteria – timeliness, accuracy, understandability, cost effectiveness, 
and feasibility.
Investment and operating myopia
Accounting performance measures can cause managers to act myopically in making either 
investing or operating decisions. Holding managers accountable for short-term profits or 
returns may induce managers to reduce or postpone investments that promise payoffs in future 
measurement periods, even when those investments have a positive net present value and meet 
other criteria to make them worthwhile. This is investment myopia.
Investment myopia stems directly from two of the problems with accounting measures 
described above: their conservative bias and their ignoring of intangible assets with predomi-
nantly future payoffs. Accounting rules do not allow firms to recognize gains until they are real-
ized; that is, until the critical income-producing activities (such as a sale) have taken place and 
the earnings can be measured in an objective, verifiable way. On the other hand, the rules 
require firms to begin recognizing costs when the investments are made. The understatement 
of profits in early measurement periods is magnified because accounting rules are purposely 
conservative. Projects with uncertain returns and little liquidation value, such as R&D projects 
and employee development and customer acquisition initiatives, must be expensed as the costs 
are incurred, and capital investments must be expensed over periods that are typically shorter 
than those in which returns will be realized.

Investment and operating myopia
405
The motivational effect of these measurement rules is perverse because managers who are 
motivated to produce accounting profits or returns can (in the short term) do so by not making 
worthwhile investments. By not making the investments, the managers reduce expenses in the 
current period and do not suffer the lost revenue until future periods. Even worse, the quest for 
short-term profits and returns sometimes induces managers to engage in manipulative earnings 
management practices, such as not booking operating expenses immediately, but instead push-
ing them into the future as capital investments. We discuss such manipulative behaviors in 
more detail in Chapter 15, but the following indicative excerpt highlights this:
“A large fraction of CEO pay appears unrelated to periodic value creation,” said Lars Helge 
Hass, Jiancheng Liu, Steven Young and Zhifang Zhang, the authors of a report on pay at 
FTSE 100 companies by CFA UK, a society of investment professionals, and Lancaster 
Business School. Relatively simplistic performance measures such as Earnings per Share 
(EPS) and Total Shareholder Return (TSR) continued to dominate the measures against 
which executives’ performance was benchmarked over the period [10 years from 2003 to 
2013]. Value-based metrics that related performance to the cost of capital were rarely 
used. […] The report said the dangers of over-reliance on such measures of executives’ 
performance were well documented and included: investment myopia, earnings manipu-
lation, excessive risk-taking, and threats to organizational culture.20
Managers can also boost current period profits and returns by destroying goodwill that has 
been built up with customers, suppliers, employees, and so on. They can force employees to 
work overtime at the end of a measurement period to finish production so that the product can 
be shipped and the revenues and profits booked. But if the product is of lower quality, customer 
satisfaction (and future sales) may diminish; the costs of service repairs or customer returns 
may increase; and some employees may be demotivated and tempted to leave. As the excerpt 
above suggests, such actions and decisions may ruin the organizational culture.
Another common “trick” is known as channel stuffing, which involves boosting near-term 
sales by extending lower prices to distributors, encouraging them to load up while potentially 
hurting later sales. These are examples of operating myopia, sometimes also colloquially 
referred to as “shipping bricks and other tricks.” These are examples of employees and organi-
zations (through their culture) becoming “too aggressive, too focused on the short term, and 
too disconnected from the needs of customers.”21
In many cases, determining whether managers are acting myopically is difficult. For example, 
in 2014 when IBM, the information technology giant, announced a $1 billion global restructur-
ing with major job cuts in its US home market to maintain the company’s earnings growth in the 
face of flagging revenues, some analysts started to question whether IBM’s pursuit of five-year 
earnings targets, which were long seen as a mark of financial discipline, may have led to an 
excessively short-term focus on profits. To quote one analyst, “many investors expect IBM to hit 
its $20 EPS target [for 2015], but remain concerned about the long-term health of the business.” 
This was in part because the cuts followed disappointing sales, which added to concerns on Wall 
Street that IBM was missing out on some of the fastest-growing markets in cloud computing. The 
firm’s view – unsurprisingly, perhaps – was that this was not the case, stating that “IBM continues 
to rebalance its workforce to meet the changing requirements of its clients, and to pioneer new, 
high-value segments of the IT industry.” Was the company acting myopically for the sake of hit-
ting its earnings targets, by slashing costs but eroding its capacity to move effectively into new 
high-growth markets? Or, was it instead competitively positioning itself to achieve exactly that? 
It is hard to tell, and judgments as to whether the cuts were myopic clearly varied.22
The IBM example illustrates the difficulty of making judgments that involve short-term ver-
sus long-term tradeoffs. We discuss several ways to address the myopia problem in Chapter 11. 
But first we turn to another set of problems created by relying on return-on-investment (ROI) 

406
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
measures of performance, a specific form of accounting performance measure that is commonly 
used in large, divisionalized firms.
Return-on-investment measures of performance
Divisionalized organizations are comprised of multiple responsibility centers, the managers of 
which are held primarily accountable for profit or some form of accounting ROI, as discussed in 
Chapter 7. The divisionalized form of organization dates back to the 1920s, when it was intro-
duced in the DuPont Company, but its use spread particularly quickly after World War II as one 
response to increased organizational size and complexity. To this day, the divisionalized form 
of organization is used by many firms above minimal size requiring delegation of decision 
authority.
Referring to Chapter 7, divisionalization and decentralization are related concepts, but the 
two words are not synonymous. An organization is said to be decentralized when authority for 
making decisions is pushed down to lower levels in the organization. All divisionalized organi-
zations decentralize authority, at least to some extent, in specified areas of operations, notably 
a line of business or a geographical area. But the converse is not true – not all decentralized 
organizations are divisionalized. When decentralization is effected along functional lines of 
authority (such as production and marketing), the responsibility centers are usually cost and 
revenue centers, not profit or investment centers (divisions).
Divisionalization provides several advantages. Large, complex organizations are not able to 
control behaviors effectively with action-dominated control systems involving, for example, the 
direct guidance of a central manager or the enforcement of standard operating procedures by a 
central administration. No central management can know everything about a complex organi-
zation’s many product-market combinations and operational capabilities and constraints. Even 
if it could, it would take time for central management to direct its attention to each issue that 
arises, become informed about the details, and reach a decision. Decision-making would be 
unnecessarily delayed, even if it were informed.
When an organization is divisionalized, local managers become experts in their products 
and markets, and they are able to make informed decisions more quickly. Because they control 
their own success to a significant extent, the local managers are likely to be more motivated and 
entrepreneurial. Their involvement in decision-making helps them acquire experience that will 
benefit them as they move to higher organization levels through promotion. Top management’s 
time becomes available to focus on strategic decisions.
Divisionalization is not without its problems and challenges, however. Many of the issues, 
particularly, relate to the problems created by the measurement of performance in terms of ROI.
Return-on-what?
ROI is a ratio of the accounting profits earned by the division divided by the investment tied up 
in the division. Divisionalized corporations typically use some form of various types of ROI 
measures to evaluate division performance.
Variances from plans can be analyzed using formula charts (ROI trees) such as the one shown 
in Figure 10.1. Such analyses might show that a division’s actual ROI of 15% was below the 
planned level of 20%, even though sales profitability (profit as a percent of sales) was on plan 
but asset turnover (sales divided by total investment) was below target:
Planned ROI (20%) = profit as percent of sales (20%) x asset turnover (1.0)
Actual ROI (15%) = profit as percent of sales (20%) x asset turnover (0.75)

Return-on-investment measures of performance
407
The measures can then be further decomposed to understand whether, in this example, the 
variance was due primarily to a decline in sales or more capital tied up in a specific kind of 
assets.
ROI formula charts are also useful for linking performance at various organizational levels. 
The chart can be expanded out to the right to show specific measures that can be used for con-
trol purposes down to the lowest levels in the organization. Sales performance can be disaggre-
gated into sales volume and price factors. These factors can be further disaggregated by product, 
geographical region, customer segment, or sales team.
The actual forms of ROI-type ratios that companies employ vary widely, as do the labels 
companies put on their bottom-line investment center measures. Among the most common 
are return on investment (ROI), return on equity (ROE), return on capital employed (ROCE), 
and return on net assets (RONA). For a specific entity or division, firms might use return on 
controllable assets (ROCA) to take account of the assets or capital that the entity or divi-
sion managers can control commensurate with the investments that they are authorized to 
make. In these ratios, both the numerator and denominator can include all or just a subset 
of the line items reflected on the corporate financial statements. The profit measure in the 
numerator of the ROI calculation can be a fully allocated, after-tax profit measure, or it 
can be a before-tax operating income measure. Similarly, the denominator can include all 
the line items of assets and liabilities, including allocations of assets and liabilities not 
directly controlled by the division managers; or it can include only controllable assets, 
which generally include, at a minimum, receivables and inventories. The variations are 
innumerable.
ROI-type measures are in widespread use because they provide several advantages. First, 
they provide a single, comprehensive measure that reflects the tradeoffs managers must make 
between revenues, costs (the balance of which translates into profit), and investments. Second, 
they provide a common denominator that can be used for comparing returns on dissimilar 
Figure 10.1  Formula chart showing relationship of factors affecting ROI
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 543.

408
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
businesses, such as divisions and outside competitors, or types of investments. Third, because 
they are expressed in percentage terms, they suggest that ROI figures are comparable to other 
financial returns, such as those calculated for stocks and bonds, although such a direct com-
parison should be qualified (as we explain later). Finally, because ROI measures have been in 
use for so long in so many places, virtually all managers understand both what the measures 
reflect and how they can be influenced, by changes in both the numerator and denominator.
Problems caused by ROI-type of measures
Relying heavily on ROI measures in a results-control system can cause some problems, how-
ever. One problem is that the numerator in the ROI measure is accounting profit. Thus, ROI has 
all the limitations of profit measures, such as the tendency to produce management myopia, the 
common form of behavioral displacement, which we address further in Chapter 11. A second 
limitation is a tendency for the measures to induce suboptimization. A narrow focus on ROI can 
lead division managers to make decisions that improve division ROI even though the decisions 
are not in the corporation’s global best interest; that is, decisions that appear locally optimal (in 
the division) may not be globally optimal (for the firm). Finally, ROI measures sometimes pro-
vide misleading signals about the performance of the investment centers (divisions) because of 
difficulties in measuring the fixed asset portion of the denominator. These misleading signals 
can cause poor investment and performance evaluation decisions, as we explain below.
Suboptimization
ROI measures can create a suboptimization problem by encouraging managers to make invest-
ments that make their divisions look good even though those investments are not in the best inter-
est of the corporation. Put simply, this problem arises because division managers are unlikely to 
propose capital investments that are expected to yield returns below their divisional return tar-
gets, even if those investments are good from the company’s perspective. Table 10.1 shows a sim-
plified suboptimization example of this type. Assume the corporate cost of capital is 15%. If an 
investment opportunity arises promising a 20% return, the investment should be made (assum-
ing the opportunity is consistent with the firm’s strategy and other considerations). The manager 
of Division A, whose performance targets reflect historical performance of 10%, would be willing 
to make this investment, but the manager of Division B, operating at 40%, would not.
Conversely, ROI measures can cause managers of unsuccessful divisions to invest in capital 
investment projects that promise returns below the corporate cost of capital. This problem is illus-
trated in Table 10.2, which changes the Table 10.1 example only slightly by assuming the corporate 
cost of capital is 25%. In this situation, Division A would be willing to make this investment promis-
ing a 20% return, even though this investment does not cover the corporation’s cost of capital.
Unless managers guard against these problems, the effect of situations like the examples 
shown in Tables 10.1 and 10.2 is that the firm’s capital will gradually be allocated away from its 
most successful or, at least, highest-earning divisions and toward its least successful divisions, 
which is incongruent with the objective to maximize firm value, all else equal.
Where division managers have the authority to make financing decisions (to finance their 
investment decisions), ROI-type measures can also lead to suboptimization at that level. For 
example, return-on-equity (ROE) measures may induce managers to use debt financing (i.e. to 
reduce the equity put into the denominator of the ratio). This may push their entity’s leverage to 
levels in excess of the desired corporate leverage.23
Misleading performance signals
Difficulties in measuring the denominator of the ROI measure, particularly pertaining to fixed 
assets, can provide misleading signals about the performance of an investment center (division). 

Return-on-investment measures of performance
409
The asset values reflected on the balance sheet do not always represent the economic value of the 
assets available to managers for earning current returns. The assets were added to the business 
at various times in the past, under varying market conditions and varying purchasing power of 
the monetary unit. As such, the book values of the various assets accumulated over time on the 
balance sheet may say little about the economic value of the assets; that is, their ability to gener-
ate future cash flows. Nonetheless, many firms use net book values (NBV) to compute divisional 
ROI. When NBV is used, ROI is usually overstated. The overstatement is larger if the entity 
includes a relatively large number of older assets. Assuming inflation, the NBV of older assets are 
below their replacement values because they were bought in a period of lower prices, but even 
without taking inflation into account, also because they have been depreciated longer.
This ROI-overstatement problem is illustrated in Table 10.3. Assume that Divisions C and D 
are identical operating units except that Division C purchased most of its fixed assets many 
years ago and Division D has mostly new assets. For the sake of simplicity, assume there have 
been no technological advancements; that is, the old assets perform the same tasks as efficiently 
as the new assets (because if not, there could be productivity gains that need taking into 
account). Profit before depreciation is identical, but Division D’s depreciation is twice that of 
Table 10.1  Example of suboptimization: failure to invest in a worthwhile project
Assume: corporate cost of capital = 15%
Base situation
Division A
Division B
Profit before tax
$100,000
$400,000
Investment
$1,000,000
$1,000,000
Return on investment
10%
40%
Assume an investment opportunity that is good for the company: invest $100,000 to earn $20,000/year.
New situation
Profit before tax
$120,000
$420,000
Investment
$1,100,000
$1,100,000
Return on investment
10.9%
38.2%
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 545.
Table 10.2  Example of suboptimization: investment in a project that is not worthwhile
Assume: corporate cost of capital = 25%
Base situation
Division A
Division B
Profit before tax
$100,000
$400,000
Investment
$1,000,000
$1,000,000
Return on investment
10%
40%
Assume an investment opportunity that is not good for the company: invest $100,000 to earn 
$20,000/year.
New situation
Profit before tax
$120,000
$420,000
Investment
$1,100,000
$1,100,000
Return on investment
10.9%
38.2%
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 546.

410
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
Division C, so C’s profit after depreciation is slightly higher. But C’s ROI is dramatically higher 
than D’s, mostly because its assets have a lower NBV. The difference between 20% and 3% ROI 
is not real; it is an artifact of the measurement system.
Another quirk of ROI measures is that ROI calculated using NBV automatically increases 
over time if no further investments are made. This is illustrated in Table 10.4. Assume that Divi-
sion E is operating in a steady state, earning an ROI of 12% in year 1. Because the assets are 
being depreciated, the ROI increases to 13.3% in year 2, and 15% in year 3. This ROI increase is 
not real, either.
These measurement quirks can cause managers who are using ROI-type measures to make 
poor decisions:
● They encourage division managers to retain assets beyond their optimal life and not to invest 
in new assets that would increase the denominator of the ROI calculation. (This dysfunc-
tional motivational effect is exacerbated when the managers expect their job tenures to be 
short, illustrating another channel through which the myopia problem operates.)
● They can contribute to the problem illustrated in Tables 10.1 and 10.2; that is, the tendency 
for capital allocations to be distorted.
● If corporate managers are unaware of these measurement effects or do not adjust for them, 
they can cause distortions in evaluating division managers’ performances.
Measuring fixed assets at gross book value (GBV) – that is, gross of depreciation conventions 
that are used for financial reporting purposes – minimizes some of these problems because GBV 
Table 10.3  Example showing ROI overstatement when denominator is measured in terms of 
net book value
Division C
Division D
Profit before depreciation
$110,000
$110,000
Depreciation
$10,000
$20,000
Profit after depreciation
$100,000
$90,000
Assets (net book value)
$500,000
$3,000,000
ROI
20%
3%
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 547.
Table 10.4  Example showing increase in ROI due merely to passage of time
Division E
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Profit before depreciation
$110,000
$110,000
$110,000
Depreciation
$50,000
$50,000
$50,000
Profit after depreciation
$60,000
$60,000
$60,000
Assets (net book value)
$500,000
$450,000
$400,000
ROI
12%
13.3%
15%
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 547.

Residual income measures as a possible solution to the ROI measurement problems
411
is closer to replacement value than is NBV. In periods of inflation, as is almost always the case 
(although, in recent years, only moderately so in most advanced economies), old assets valued 
at gross book value are still expressed at lower values than new assets, so ROI will still be over-
stated. Another possibility is to use “adjusted NBVs” by depreciating the assets commensurate 
with their economic lives, where the rate of depreciation can be different (slower or faster and/
or nonlinear) from the depreciation rates used or allowed for financial accounting or taxation 
purposes. This takes the productivity of the assets into account, which may be more crucial in 
times of rapid technological change but low inflation.
A final potential problem is that ROI measures create incentives for managers to lease 
assets rather than buy them. Under some accounting rules,24 leased assets accounted for on 
an operating-lease basis are not recognized on the balance sheet, so they are not included in 
the ROI denominator. Managers can increase their divisional ROI by gaming the system in 
this way. Of course, corporations can easily include the capitalized value of assets employed 
in division ROI calculations even when those leases are not required to be capitalized for 
financial reporting purposes. This adjustment avoids this potential problem, but adjustments 
are costly and may complicate the administration of different books for different purposes. 
The idea of “adjusting” accounting measures of performance, however, leads us to the next 
section.
Residual income measures as a possible solution to the ROI 
measurement problems
A number of researchers and consultants have argued that the use of a residual income measure 
can help overcome the suboptimization limitation of ROI. Residual income is calculated by sub-
tracting from profit a capital charge for the net assets tied up in the entity or division (invest-
ment center). The capital is charged at a rate equal to the weighted average corporate cost of 
capital. Conceptually, one could adjust the capital charge rate for each investment center’s risk, 
thus making the performance measurement system consistent with the capital budgeting sys-
tem. (In the interest of focus, we do not carry this suggestion through in our discussion below 
because it does not change the basic residual income calculations; it just causes them to be 
matched to the risk profile of each of the divisions.)
If the residual income charge is made equal to the required corporate investment rate of 
return, then the residual income measures give all division managers an equal incentive to 
invest, thereby addressing the suboptimization problem inherent in ROI measures. Regardless 
of the prevailing levels of return in each of the divisions, the division managers are motivated to 
invest in all projects that promise internal rates of return higher than, or at least equal to, the 
corporate cost of capital (again, all else equal, thus ignoring any strategic or other considera-
tions and options).25 This is illustrated in Table 10.5, showing a modified version of Table 10.1 
with a row added for residual income. In both divisions, residual income is increased if the 
worthwhile investment is made.
Residual income also addresses the financing-type suboptimization problem. By considering 
the cost of both debt and equity financing (by using a weighted average corporate cost of capi-
tal), residual income removes the managers’ temptations to increase their entity’s leverage 
through debt financing.
Residual income does not address the distortions often caused when managers make new 
investments in fixed assets, however. Many desirable investments initially reduce residual 
income, but then the residual income increases over time as the fixed assets get older and are 
depreciated.

412
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
One consulting firm, Stern Stewart & Company, recommends a measure called Economic 
Value Added (EVA™) that combines several of the modifications to the standard accounting 
model in a residual income-type measure.26 The generic EVA formula is:
EVA = Modified Net Operating Profit After Tax − (Modified Total Capital × Weighted 
Average Cost of Capital)
The word “modified” refers to many adjustments to standard accounting treatments, such as 
the capitalization and subsequent amortization of intangible investments such as for R&D, 
employee training and advertising and the expensing of goodwill. Just which modifications 
should be implemented in any given situation is subject to judgment. The weighted average cost 
of capital reflects the weighted average cost of debt and equity financing.
Because it addresses some of the known weaknesses of accounting profit or return measures, 
EVA should better reflect economic income than accounting profit does in many settings. It 
should mitigate the investment myopia problem discussed above because it involves capitaliza-
tion of the most important types of discretionary expenditures managers might try to cut if they 
were pressured for profits (such as on R&D, employee training and customer acquisition). EVA 
also has all the advantages of a residual income-type measure.
It must be recognized, however, that despite its name, EVA is still only is a proxy at best for eco-
nomic income. It does not address all of the problems that differentiate accounting income from 
economic income, although the proposed adjustments to the accounting numbers should attenuate 
the gap. In particular, EVA still reflects primarily the results of a summation of transactions com-
pleted during the period, and thus, the past, while economic income reflects changes in future cash 
flow potentials. This is an especially pertinent issue for firms that derive a significant proportion of 
their value from future growth. Joel Stern, now chairman of Stern Value Management in New York, 
would argue though that this is a matter of using an appropriate rate of return for risk, suggesting 
that value management essentially “involves both selecting an appropriate measure of corporate 
performance and also a required rate of return for risk in achieving that corporate performance, 
[thereby] providing a way of measuring performance year-by-year contemporaneously.”27
EVA also has some other measurement limitations. It suffers from objectivity problems as the 
EVA adjustments require considerable judgment. Managers therefore can bias EVA just as they 
can accounting numbers. EVA also is probably not differentially affected by any of the usual 
Table 10.5  Example of suboptimization with residual income: failure to invest in a 
worthwhile project
Assume: corporate cost of capital = 15%
Base situation
Division A
Division B
Profit before tax
$100,000
$400,000
Investment
$1,000,000
$1,000,000
Return on investment
10%
40%
Residual income
$(50,000)
$250,000
Assume an investment opportunity that is good for the company: invest $100,000 to earn $20,000/year.
New situation
Profit before tax
$120,000
$420,000
Investment
$1,100,000
$1,100,000
Return on investment
10.9%
38.2%
Residual income
$(45,000)
$255,000
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 548.

Conclusion
413
controllability problems. EVA, however, is more likely to create some additional understandability 
problems, as the measures can be complex and are not as widely familiar. Many of the firms that 
have decided not to use EVA or similar types of measures developed mainly by consulting firms, 
such as Cash Flow Return on Investment (Holt Value Associates), Total Business Return (Boston 
Consulting Group), Economic Profit (McKinsey & Co.) or Shareholder Value Added (LEK/Alcar), or 
which have tried such a measure and then abandoned it, seem to have done so mainly because of 
understandability failures.28 The survey of FTSE 100 companies by CFA UK and Lancaster Busi-
ness School that we quoted from above also states that “value-based metrics that relate perfor-
mance to the cost of capital are rarely used.”29 Maybe this is because, despite some key features, 
implementing these measurement systems can be quite expensive, requiring considerable assis-
tance from consultants and systems and management development and training time.
In summary, EVA may have better congruence characteristics in some industry settings 
when a carefully chosen (and not too complex) set of adjustments are made to the traditional 
accounting profit measures. EVA also exhibits the features of any generic residual income meas-
ure. That said, and perhaps not surprisingly, EVA is hardly a measurement panacea, an ideal 
that, as we discussed, is hard for any measure to meet.
Conclusion
The primary goal of managers of for-profit firms should be to maximize shareholder or firm value, 
which is a long-term, future-oriented concept. Short-term accounting profit and return measures 
provide imperfect, surrogate indicators of changes in firm value. Management myopia, an exces-
sive focus on short-term performance, is an almost inevitable side-effect of the use of financial 
results control systems built on accounting measures of performance. In the next chapter, we dis-
cuss six alternatives that can be used individually or in combination to eliminate or reduce myopia.
In this chapter, we also discussed the issue of suboptimization, another form of behavioral 
displacement caused particularly by the use of accounting-based ROI-type measures. Managers 
who still rely on ROI-type measures do so probably because the conceptual weaknesses of ROI 
are well understood and the potential suboptimization problems can be monitored through the 
company’s capital budgeting and strategic planning processes. Managers of highly profitable 
divisions can be encouraged to make more investments, and proposed investments from less 
profitable divisions can be scrutinized carefully. And even the managers evaluated by these 
measures should understand that when they “run down” their business by not investing in it or 
by not replacing their old assets will eventually hamper their ability to generate revenues from 
these assets, thereby hurting the numerator of their ROI measure, assuming of course that they 
plan to be around long enough in the company for that to be a worry of them. In that sense, ROI 
measures have, only over time though, a self-disciplining mechanism built into them.
It is true that the suboptimization problems can be avoided or mitigated to some extent 
through the investment review processes, as well as through their inherent self-disciplining 
mechanism. By using these processes, companies can use ROI-focused results control systems 
with some degree of effectiveness. One might ask: Why use a measurement system that works 
effectively only in conjunction with bureaucratic oversight and processes (or other balancing 
control mechanisms) that are needed to prevent managers from taking undesirable actions? 
The answer to that question in many settings is that the net benefits of such a system are greater 
than those of several other feasible alternatives. There is no panacea, and better control is likely 
to arise from a set of mutually reinforcing and balancing mechanisms. An all-purpose perfor-
mance measure (or performance measurement system) that meets all control objectives 
effectively without triggering any potentially harmful side effects simply does not exist.

414
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
Notes
	 1	 See, for example, “Shareholders vs. Stakeholders: A New 
Idolatry,” The Economist (April 26, 2010), online at econ.
st/KA1p7h.
	 2	 M. Jensen, “Value Maximization, Stakeholder Theory, 
and the Corporate Objective Function,” Journal of Applied 
Corporate Finance, 14, no. 3 (Fall 2001), p. 11.
	 3	 For an interesting example and perspective on the “corpo-
rate social responsibility” of firms in light of “shareholder 
value maximization,” see “Maximizing Shareholder Value: 
The Goal That Changed Corporate America,” The Wash-
ington Post (August 26, 2013), online at wpo.st/8EXX1.
	 4	 See, for example, “Analyse This,” The Economist (April 2, 
2016), online at econ.st/1V9hSFB.
	 5	 See, for example, “CEOs Strategically Time News Releases 
for Their Own Benefit,” LSE Business Review (March 22, 
2016), online at blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2016/ 
03/22/ceos-strategically-time-news-releases-for-their-
own-benefit; see also G. Gong, L. Y. Li and J. Y. Shin, “Rel-
ative Performance Evaluation and Related Peer Groups in 
Executive Compensation Contracts,” The Accounting 
Review, 86, no. 3 (May 2011), pp. 1007-1043.
	 6	 “Options for Everyone,” Business Week (July 22, 1996), p. 84.
	 7	 “Warren Buffett’s 9 Rules for Running a Business,” CNBC 
(November 11, 2014), online at cnb.cx/1Hk7L9q.
	 8	 For a seminal article on this issue of the choice of perfor-
mance measures in incentive contracts, see R. A. Lambert 
and D. F. Larcker, “An Analysis of the Use of Accounting 
and Market Measures of Performance in Executive Com-
pensation Contracts,” Journal of Accounting Research, 25 
(Supplement, 1987), pp. 85–125.
	 9	 See, for example, “Peer Benchmarking and Trends in 
Executive Compensation,” Audit Analytics (November 19, 
2015), online at www.auditanalytics.com/blog/peer-
benchmarking-and-trends-in-executive-compensation.
	10	 “Microsoft CEO Surprised at Yahoo Deal Reception,” 
Reuters (July 31, 2009), online at www.reuters.com.
	11	 “Molycorp Delays Report to Determine ‘Substantial’ 
Writedown,” Bloomberg (February 28, 2013), online at 
www.bloomberg.com.
	12	 See, for example, D. Aboody and R. Kasznik, “CEO Stock 
Option Awards and the Timing of Corporate Voluntary Dis-
closures,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 29, no. 1 
(February 2000), pp. 73–100; A. Edmans, L. Goncalves-
Pinto, Y. Wang, and M Groen-Xu, “Strategic News Releases 
in Equity Vesting Months,” Working Paper (2016), available 
at papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id= 
2489152.
	13	 See, for example, B. Schindler, “Understanding Private 
Company Incentive Pay Practices,” Workspan (March 
2008), pp. 44–8; The Rise and Fall of the Unicorns: Some 
Private Technology Firms Are Having Trouble Justifying 
Their Lofty Valuations,” The Economist (November 28, 
2015), online at econ.st/1Ne7TLM.
	14	 See, for example, X. Chang, K. Fu, A. Low, and W. Zhang, 
“Non-executive Employee Stock Options and Corporate 
Innovation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 115, no. 1 
(January 2015), pp. 168–88.
	15	 A. P. Sloan Jr., My Years with General Motors (Garden City, 
NY: Doubleday, 1964), p. 140.
	16	 See, for example, B. Lev, “On the Usefulness of Earnings: 
Lessons and Directions from Two Decades of Empirical 
Research,” Journal of Accounting Research, 27 (Supple-
ment 1989), pp. 153–92; and “Are Earnings Reports Obso-
lete?” Stanford Business (October 6, 2015), online at 
stanford.io/1LhJ6kv.
	17	 See, for example, R. M. Bushman, A. Lerman, and X. F. 
Zhang, “The Changing Landscape of Accrual Account-
ing,” Journal of Accounting Research, 54, no. 1 (March 
2016), pp. 41–78.
	18	 For an academic review paper on the issue of accounting 
conservatism, see A. Mora and M. Walker, “The Implica-
tions of Research on Accounting Conservatism for 
Accounting Standard Setting,” Accounting and Business 
Research, 45, no. 5 (Special Issue, 2015), pp. 620–50.
	19	 B. Lev, Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and 
Reporting (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press, 
2001); C. D. Ittner, “Does Measuring Intangibles for Man-
agement Purposes Improve Performance? A Review of the 
Evidence,” Accounting and Business Research, 38, no. 3 
(May 2008), pp. 261–72. See also R. M. Bushman, A. 
Lerman, and X. F. Zhang, “The Changing Landscape of 
Accrual Accounting,” Journal of Accounting Research, 54, 
no. 1 (March 2016), pp. 41–78.
	20	 “Top Managers’ Pay Reveals Weak Link to Value,” 
Financial Times (December 28, 2014), online at on.ft.
com/1CODoYe.
	21	 “Barclays Cuts 3,700 Jobs in Restructuring,” Financial 
Times (February 12, 2013), online at on.ft.com/12I9AKS.
	22	 “IBM Braced for Fresh Job Cuts,” The Financial Times 
(February 28, 2014), online at on.ft.com/1kyGFyN.
	23	 See, for example, “The Best Way to Measure Company Per-
formance,” Business Week (March 5, 2010), online at www.
businessweek.com. See also W. A. Van der Stede, “Discus-
sion of ‘The Role of Performance Measures in the Intertem-
poral Decisions of Business Unit Managers,’” Contemporary 
Accounting Research, 30, no. 3 (Fall 2013), pp. 962–9.
	24	 Accounting rules for leases can vary by jurisdiction and 
change over time. For a recent change in the accounting 
rules for leases under IFRS, see “IFRS 16 Leases: Project 
Summary and Feedback Statement,” IFRS (January 
2016), online at ifrs.org.
	25	 See, for example, J. J. Gong, W. A. Van der Stede, and S. 
M. Young, “Real Options in the Motion Picture Industry: 
Evidence from Film Marketing and Sequels,” Contempo-
rary Accounting Research, 28, no. 5 (Winter 2011), 
pp. 1438–66.
	26	 G. B. Stewart, III, The Quest for Value (New York: Harper-
Collins, 1999); J. M. Stern, J. S. Shiely, and I. Ross, The 
EVA Challenge: Implementing Value-Added Change in an 
Organization (New York: Wiley, 2003).

Behavioral Implications of Airline Depreciation Accounting Policy Choices
415
 27  “Joel Stern on SVM,”  The Economist (April 30, 2016), 
online at  econ.st/1NAKhTR . 
 28  See, for example, B. Birchard and A. Nyberg, “On Further 
Refl ection,”  CFO Magazine (March 1, 2001). 
 29  “Top Managers’ Pay Reveals Weak Link to Value,”  Finan-
cial Times  (December 28, 2014), online at  on.ft.
com/1CODoYe . 
 Most managers have signifi cant discretion in choosing 
their accounting policies. The managers of some com-
panies choose sets of policies that are relatively “con-
servative”; others choose sets that are relatively 
“liberal.” Conservatism results in delay of the recogni-
tion of some revenues or gains and/or acceleration of 
the recognition of some expenses or losses. Liberal 
accounting policies do the opposite. The eff ect of con-
servatism is that profi ts are reported later than they 
would have been had more liberal accounting policies 
been adopted. 
 If one wants to determine whether an airline 
company is being conservative or liberal in its choice 
of accounting policies, one obvious place to look is 
in the area of accounting for property, plant, and 
equipment (PP&E). PP&E usually constitutes more 
than 50% of the total assets of an airline. Interest-
ingly, airlines’ accounting policies for PP&E vary 
significantly. 
 Consider, for example, the aircraft depreciation 
practices used at four major airlines: 
 Delta Air Lines : 1 
 ●  Straight-line over estimated useful lives 
 ●  20- to 32-year life (from the date the equipment was 
placed in service) 
 ●  Residual value = 5% to 10% of cost 
 American Airlines : 2 
 ●  Straight-line 
 ●  16- to 30-year life 
 ●  Residual value = 5% to 10% of cost 
 Singapore Airlines : 3 
 ●  Straight-line 
 ●  15- to 20-year life 
 ●  Residual value = 5% to 10% of cost 
 Lufthansa : 4  
 ●  Straight-line 
 ●  20-year life 
 ●  Residual value = 5% of cost 
 Other facts: 
 1.  An aircraft can fl y indefi nitely, assuming the aircraft 
is maintained properly.  
 2.  The cost of maintaining an aircraft tends to increase 
over time.  Exhibit  1 shows a typical function relating 
 1  Source: Delta Air Lines, Inc. Form 10-K for the year ended December 
31, 2015. From July 1, 1986, to April 1, 1993, Delta’s policy had 
been to depreciate equipment to residual values (10% of cost) over 
a 15-year period. Prior to July 1, 1986, the company’s policy was to 
depreciate equipment to a 10% residual value over a 10-year period. 
 2  Source : American Airlines Group, Inc. Form 10-K for the year ended 
December 31, 2015. Prior to January 1, 1999, AMR used an esti-
mated useful life of 20 years and a residual value of 5%. For the year 
ended December 31, 1999, the eff ect of this change was to reduce 
depreciation expense by approximately $158 million. 
 3  Source : Singapore Airlines Annual Report for the year ended 
December 31, 2015. From April 1, 1989 to April 1, 2001, Singapore’s 
policy had been to depreciate over a 10-year period to a residual 
value of 20% of original cost. Prior to April 1, 1989 at Singapore 
Airlines, the operational lives of the aircraft were estimated to be 8 
years with 10% residual values. 
 4  Source : Lufthansa Group Annual Report for the year ended 
December 31, 2015. Prior to March 2014, Lufthansa depreciated its 
aircraft over 12 years to a residual value of 15% of cost. See R. Weiss, 
“Lufthansa Changes Dividend Formula on Plane-Depreciation 
Switch,”  Bloomberg (December 10, 2014). 
 CASE STUDY 
 Behavioral Implications of Airline Depreciation Accounting 
Policy Choices 

416
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
the cost required to maintain the airframes of com-
mercial jetliners, commonly referred to as the “matu-
rity factor,” as the jetliners’ cumulative flight hours 
increase.
3.	 The useful economic life of an aircraft is finite, but it 
is often difficult to estimate. Some DC-3 aircraft are 
still flying cargo routes commercially, even though 
this aircraft made its debut in 1935. But these air-
craft, and some that followed them, such as the 
Boeing 707, which had its maiden flight in 1957, are 
no longer competitive for use in passenger markets.
4.	 New aircraft prices tend to rise over time. Fair mar-
ket values for used aircraft decrease over time, but 
unless the aircraft are made obsolete by a techno-
logical breakthrough in new aircraft, which is rare, 
the values tend to decrease slowly. Some aircraft 
maintain 90% or more of their original value 
even after decades of use. Used aircraft values do 
fluctuate sometimes significantly depending on, for 
example, market demand and supply conditions in 
the air travel and aircraft production industries, 
technological innovations, and changes in laws (e.g. 
governing noise pollution or allowable tax deduc-
tions). However, rarely do used aircraft market val-
ues drop below 50% of their original purchase price.
5.	 In many countries, including the United States, the 
rules governing the depreciation allowable for tax 
purposes are quite different from those that deter-
mine the depreciation that can be taken for financial 
reporting purposes. The tax rules allow ultra-
conservative accounting to ensure that companies 
do not have to pay the tax before they have collected 
cash from their customers. Corporations should and 
do take advantage of these rules and depreciate the 
aircraft as quickly as possible to defer the taxes that 
need to be paid (assuming positive income).
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.
Exhibit 1  Airframe labor and material maturity factors

Las Ferreterías de México, S.A. de C.V.
417
 We had been operating our company like a family, but 
maybe we’re too big to operate that way. I think some of 
our people have gotten lazy, and our performance has suf-
fered. That is why I asked for the design of a new incen-
tive compensation plan. We need to be more competitive 
to survive. I want our people to focus on what they can do 
to improve company performance, and if we’re successful, 
I am quite willing to share a good proportion of the pro-
ceeds of our success. 
 — Fernando Gonzalez Chairman and CEO, 
Las Ferreterías de México, S.A. de C.V. 
 The company 
 Las Ferreterías de México, S.A. de C.V. (Ferreterías) 
was the second-largest retailer of lumber, building 
materials, and home improvement products and equip-
ment in Mexico. Ferreterías operated 82 stores in 
Mexico City and throughout most of the northern 
regions of Mexico. Each of Ferreterías’ stores off ered 
between 10,000 and 20,000 stock keeping units (SKUs) 
in a retail sales area, an outside lumberyard area, and a 
garden center. The total store areas ranged from 10,000 
to 35,000 square feet. 
 Ferreterías was founded in 1902 in a suburb of 
Mexico City by Fernando Gonzalez’ grandfather. Over 
the years, the company added more locations. It was 
listed on the Mexican Stock Exchange in 1983. In 2012, 
Ferreterías had sales of 2,210 million pesos and profi ts 
of almost 120 million pesos (see summary fi nancial 
statements in  Exhibits  1 and  2 ). 1 
 Starting in the late 1980s, Fernando Gonzales 
launched a major company expansion to take advan-
tage of the growth in the Mexican economy. He 
thought that his company needed to emulate the 
methods of the large American homebuilding retail-
ers, such as Home Depot and Lowe’s, in order to sur-
vive. Thus, improving market share and improving 
operating efficiencies became Ferreterías’ strategic 
priorities. 
 The store managers enjoyed considerable auton-
omy. They were responsible for hiring, firing, and 
supervising their store’s personnel. While the stores 
had the same architectural designs and some basic 
stock keeping requirements, the individual store man-
agers were allowed to adapt their merchandise off er-
ings, their inventory levels, and their advertising and 
promotional activities to their local markets, which 
were quite diverse. The store managers were given 
considerable latitude to reduce prices to move excess 
inventory or to meet competition. They were responsi-
ble for making credit-granting decisions, although for 
large accounts they were expected to ask fi nance per-
sonnel at headquarters to perform a credit check. And 
some aggressive store managers tried to generate 
new business by calling on prospective customers 
themselves. 
 The 82 stores were organized into nine geographi-
cal regions. The regional managers, each of whom 
was a former store manager, provided oversight and 
advice. Their role was seen as an important part of 
the management structure because most of the store 
managers had little formal education. Only a few 
were college educated, and few of those had formal 
business education. Each region also contained a 
regional sales offi  ce with specialists who worked with 
larger customers, primarily larger contractors, in 
selecting materials and estimating costs. Sales to 
these customers, however, were made through the 
store nearest to the job. 
 The corporate staff  of Ferreterías provided a range 
of centralized functions, including purchasing, human 
resources, marketing, real estate, and investor rela-
tions. Inventory was shipped to the stores from one of 
three regional warehouses. 
 1  At the time of the case, one Mexican peso was worth approximately 
US$0.08. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Las Ferreterías de México, S.A. de C.V. 

418
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
All Ferreterías’ employees were paid a base salary or 
hourly wage plus a bonus based on a share of the com-
pany’s overall profits. These bonuses were small, usu-
ally in the range of 2% to 5% of base salary, depending 
on organization level. In addition, Fernando Gonzalez 
typically provided some discretionary bonus awards 
to employees whose performance in a given year 
was exemplary. Generally, however, these types of 
bonuses were not considered to be effective at moti­
vating behavior, as was indicated in the comment by 
Mr. Gonzalez presented at the beginning of the case.
A new incentive plan
In July 2012, Mr. Gonzalez hired a consulting firm to 
design a new performance-based compensation plan. 
He asked his chief financial officer and head of human 
resources to assist the firm with its work.
Mr. Gonzalez’s original intent was to include all 
company salesmen, buyers, and managers in the new 
incentive plan. After a series of interviews, however, 
the consulting firm reported that it would not be easy 
to measure the performances of either salesmen or buy-
ers. While most customers were assigned to one par-
ticular salesperson, it was difficult to assess whether a 
sale came from the assigned salesperson’s efforts. Many 
customers had dealt with Ferreterías for years, and 
they placed their orders regardless of whether or not 
they received a call from a Ferreterías salesperson. 
Some of the large contractors had also established per-
sonal relationships with one or more corporate or 
regional staff, and oftentimes they called their friends 
for advice, rather than relying on the salesperson for-
mally assigned to them. Measuring the performances 
of the buyers was similarly problematic. The primary 
aspect of buyer performance that could be measured – 
the prices paid for items purchased – was affected by 
many factors over which the buyer had little control. 
These included the order size and market conditions. 
Because of these measurement problems, the consult-
ants concluded that the measures that could be tracked 
would not provide meaningful bases on which to assign 
bonus awards. They recommended that they work first 
on designing an incentive plan for managers, which 
included the individual store managers (82), regional 
managers (9), and corporate staff managers (5). (Nei-
ther Fernando Gonzalez nor his chief operating officer 
was to be included in this plan; the compensation com-
mittee of the company’s board of directors determined 
their bonuses.)
All other employees would continue to earn the 
same profit sharing awards that they had been earning. 
Those included in the new management incentive plan 
would no longer earn the profit sharing awards.
The consultants’ suggestion for the management 
incentive plan included the following features:
1.	 Bonus pool. A total bonus pool would be created 
according to the following formula: 4 million pesos 
plus 8% of the corporate income before bonuses and 
taxes in excess of 120 million pesos. The total bonus 
pool would be divided into three classes as follows:
Store managers	
70%
Regional managers	
15%
Corporate staff managers	
15%
2.	 ROI measure of performance. The bonus pools 
would be assigned to managers based on their enti-
ty’s return on investment (ROI), defined as bonus-
eligible revenues minus expenses divided by total 
store investments. The following guidelines were 
provided to facilitate the calculation of the ROI for 
bonus purposes:
● The revenues eligible for bonuses included all 
shipments from the store except those stemming 
from sales orders written by regional or headquar-
ters personnel.
● The expenses include all direct store costs and all 
regional and headquarters costs. The costs of sig-
nificant regional and headquarters activities trace-
able directly to a given store (e.g. cost of preparing a 
customer credit report, cost of a building upgrade) 
would be charged directly to that store. All other 
costs would be allocated to the stores. Activity-based 
allocations would be used where possible, such as in 
using the stores’ relative proportions of receipts into 
inventory to allocate purchasing expenses. All other 
expenses would be allocated based on a proportion 
of bonus-eligible store revenues.
● The investment at each store would include the 
annual average of the month-end balances of cash, 
inventory in stock, accounts receivable associated 
with the bonus-eligible revenues, equipment, furni-
ture, fixtures, buildings, and land. (If the property is 
rented, the rent would be recognized as an expense.)
3.	 Allocation of the bonus pool. The store managers’ 
bonus pool would be divided among the store 
managers based on their relative proportion of 

Las Ferreterías de México, S.A. de C.V.
419
bonus units earned. All managers whose stores 
earned at least 5% ROI would earn one bonus unit. 
For each full percentage point above five, the man-
agers would earn an additional bonus unit, up to a 
maximum of six bonus units.
	
In 2012, the distribution of the stores’ ROI was as 
follows:
ROI	
N
< 5%	
6
5–6%	
6
6–7%	
9
7–8%	
11
8–9%	
20
9–10%	
15
10–11%	
8
11–12%	
4
> 12%	
3
	
82
	
For store managers who had been in that position for 
less than the full year and managers who trans-
ferred between stores during a year, bonus units 
would be assigned by the relevant regional 
manager(s) by applying the basic bonus unit award 
philosophy as closely as possible.
	
The regional managers’ bonus pool would be divided 
among the regional managers based on a proportion 
of the bonus units earned by the stores in their 
region divided by the total bonus units earned by all 
stores.
	
The allocation of the corporate staff bonus pool 
would be decided by Fernando Gonzales based on 
the corporation’s annual ROI performance.
4.	 Form of the awards. Bonuses were to be paid in cash 
as soon as the financial statements were prepared 
and audited and the amounts could be calculated.
Concerns before implementation
As Mr. Gonzalez looked over the consulting firm’s 
design, he had some concerns. First, it was obvious to 
him that the new plan would increase the company’s 
compensation expense. How much would that expense 
increase, and would the benefits of the plan be worth 
that expenditure? Second, he knew that he would have 
to be the one to announce the implementation of the 
plan. He had to anticipate what his managers’ reactions 
would be. What were they mostly likely to complain 
about? Is this plan fair to all of the managers? And, 
finally, he still lamented the fact that personnel in the 
regional sales and corporate purchasing organizations 
were not included in this plan. If their individual per-
formances could not be measured objectively, was 
there some other way he could motivate them and 
reward them for performing their roles, which were 
critical to the company’s success?
Exhibit 1  Las Ferreterías de México, S.A. de C.V. income 
statement as of 12/31/2012 (Ps 000)
Net Sales
2,216,540
Costs of Sales
1,582,670
Gross Margin
633,870
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
377,580
Depreciation Expense
65,740
Interest Expense
14,320
Total Expenses
457,640
Earnings before Taxes
176,230
Income Tax Provision
58,240
Net Earnings after Taxes
117,990

420
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
Exhibit 2  Las Ferreterías de México, S.A. de C.V. balance sheet as of 12/31/2012 (Ps 000)
Assets
Current Assets
Cash and Cash Equivalents
79,880
Short-Term Investments
5,430
Accounts Receivable
16,550
Merchandise Inventory
387,550
489,410
Property, Less Accumulated Depreciation
857,650
Long-Term Investments
8,720
Other Assets
14,060
Total Assets
1,369,840
Liabilities
Accounts Payable
211,260
Other Current Liabilities
57,860
Long-term Debt
384,350
Other long-term liabilities
67,140
720,610
Shareholder’ Equity
Preferred Stock ($10 par; 300,000 shares issued)
30,000
Common Stock ($20 par; 1,000,000 share issued)
200,000
Retained Earnings
419,230
649,230
Total Liabilities and Shareholder Equity
1,369,840
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede, with the research assistance of 
Sung-Han (Sam) Lee.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.

Industrial Electronics, Inc.
421
 My division had another great year last year. We all 
worked hard, and the results were there. But again we got 
no reward for our hard work. It’s very frustrating 
 – Division manager, General Products Division, 
Industrial Electronics, Inc. 
 Industrial Electronics, Inc. (IE) produced a wide range 
of electronic equipment, including signal sources, test 
equipment, communications systems, and various piece 
parts and subassemblies such as motors, generators, and 
probes. Total annual sales were in excess of $8 billion. 
IE’s stock was listed on the New York Stock Exchange. 
 The company’s objective was to maximize share-
holder value. In most of its business areas, IE had to be 
innovative to stay ahead of the competition. However, 
price competition was also signifi cant, so the company 
also had to maintain tight control over costs. 
 The company was organized by product line. Its 16 
relatively autonomous divisions were managed as 
profi t centers. The division managers reported to one of 
four Business Group managers who, in turn, reported 
to the company’s CEO. 
 Thirty managers, including all line managers at the 
level of division manager and above plus key corporate 
staff  managers, were eligible for an annual manage-
ment bonus award. (Many lower-level employees were 
included in a separate “management-by-objectives” 
incentive plan.) The management bonuses were based 
on company-wide performance. Each year, a bonus 
pool equal to 10% of the corporation’s profi t after taxes 
in excess of 12% of the company’s book net worth was 
set aside for assignment as bonuses to managers. This 
amount was divided by the total salary of all the execu-
tives eligible for a bonus. This yielded an “award per 
dollar of salary.” The maximum bonus paid was 150% 
of salary. 
 Historically IE’s managers had been earning bonuses 
that ranged from of 30% to 120% of salary, with the 
average approximately 50%. But because of the reces-
sion in the prior two years, the bonus pool was zero. 
 Complaints about the management bonus system 
had been growing. Most of them stemmed largely from 
division managers whose divisions were performing 
well, even while the corporation as a whole was not 
performing well. These managers believed that the 
current bonus system was unfair because it failed to 
properly recognize their contributions. The quote cited 
at the beginning of the case was representative of these 
complaints. 
 In response, top management, with the assistance of 
personnel in the corporate Human Resources and 
Finance departments, proposed a new management 
bonus plan with the following features: 
 1.  Bonuses would be determined by the performance 
of the entity for which each manager was responsi-
ble. That is, division manager bonuses would be 
based 100% on division performance; group man-
ager bonuses would be based 100% on group perfor-
mance; and corporate manager bonuses would be 
based 100% on corporate performance. 
 2.  For bonus award purposes, actual performance 
would be compared with targets negotiated dur-
ing IE’s annual budgeting process. IE’s philosophy 
was to try to set budget targets at “threshold” lev-
els that were likely to be achieved if the manage-
ment teams performed effectively. Corporate 
managers knew that IE was a “high tech” com-
pany that operated in many business areas in 
which there was significant operating uncer-
tainty. It was often difficult to forecast the future 
accurately. They thought that the relatively 
highly achievable budget targets provided the 
operating managers with some insurance against 
an operating environment that might turn out to 
be more harsh than that seen at the time of budget 
preparation.  
 3.  Each division would be given an “economic profit” 
objective equal to budgeted operating profit minus 
budgeted operating assets multiplied by 12%, which 
 CASE STUDY 
 Industrial Electronics, Inc. 

422
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Eff ects
was assumed to be approximately IE’s weighted aver-
age cost of capital. For example, a division with an 
operating profit budget of $100,000 and budgeted 
operating assets of $500,000 would be given an eco-
nomic profi t objective of $100,000 – 60,000 = $40,000. 
 4.   The actual investment base was calculated as follows: 
 Cash 
 Assumed to be 10% of cost 
of sales 
 Receivables 
 Average actual month-end
and inventories 
balances 
 Fixed assets 
 Average actual end-of-month 
net book values 
 5.  If an entity’s actual economic profi ts were exactly 
equal to its objective, the manager would earn a 
bonus equal to 50% of salary. The bonus would 
increase linearly at a rate of fi ve percentage points 
for each $100,000 above the objective and be 
reduced linearly at a rate of fi ve percentage points 
for each $100,000 below the objective. The maxi-
mum bonus would be 150% of salary. The minimum 
bonus would be zero. 
 Tis case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 In 2009, Haengbok Bancorp, one of Korea’s smaller 
nationwide banks, opened its fi rst foreign branch in 
New York. It opened the branch for multiple reasons. 
This would be an important step in fulfilling 
Haengbok’s objective of being an international bank. 
Having a US presence would allow the bank both to 
provide better support to its Korean partners and to 
generate additional business from primarily US-
based Korean-owned, but also related, businesses. 
Most of Haengbok’s customers were small and 
medium-sized businesses, but many of those busi-
nesses had some international operations. In addi-
tion, having some employees based overseas would 
allow the bank to be better informed about worldwide 
banking trends. 
 Haengbok managers knew that the competition for 
US-based Korean customers was fi erce. Many Korean 
banks, some of them much larger than Haengbok, 
had well-established operations in the United States. 
Nevertheless, they thought the time was right to open 
the US branch because many smaller businesses were 
having difficulty raising capital as a result of the 
fi nancial crisis. The branch was located in New York 
both because it was the largest US money center and 
because the New York–New Jersey metropolitan area 
contained a relatively high concentration of Korean-
owned and oriented businesses. 
 Haengbok’s New York branch was a wholesale 
operation. The primary goal was to make US dollar 
loans to Korean or US companies. To limit foreign 
exchange risk, the branch had to raise all of its money, 
except for a small capital contribution from Haengbok 
Bancorp, in the US money markets. Only a few retail 
accounts were maintained for the convenience of 
Haengbok’s multinational clients. No special services 
were off ered to build the retail side of the business. 
Check-clearing services were outsourced to a major 
US, New York-based bank. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Haengbok Bancorp 

Haengbok Bancorp
423
Management of the branch
Hyun Ki Kim, an experienced Haengbok account man-
ager previously based in Seoul, was appointed as senior 
manager of the New York branch. Mr. Kim quickly hired 
five experienced account managers with track records 
of success at other banks in the United States. The 
account managers began identifying clients in need of 
loans. For the most part, the account managers were 
assigned defined geographical territories to develop. 
Two were based on the East Coast, two on the West 
Coast, and one in the Midwest. However, two of the 
account managers had had significant, specific prior 
industry experiences, and they were given responsibil-
ity for developing opportunities with a few specifically 
identified prospective clients in those industries that 
were located outside their assigned territory.
Mr. Kim knew that the account managers he hired 
had varied corporate experiences and operating styles, 
but that did not concern him at all. He put few con-
straints on their activities. He told the account manag-
ers that he did not care how they identified and 
cultivated their clients as long as they eventually 
“booked good deals.”
For monitoring and incentive purposes, Mr. Kim set 
each account manager up as a “mini profit center.” 
Their profit centers were credited with the interest 
earned on the loans initiated, and they were charged 
for the expenses incurred, including the cost of funding 
the loans. This was not the system used by Haengbok 
Bancorp in Korea, but Mr. Kim thought that such a sys-
tem was needed to encourage the account managers’ 
entrepreneurialism, which would be needed to be able 
to grow the branch rapidly.
In addition to their base salaries, which branch stud-
ies showed to be slightly below comparable bank aver-
ages, the account managers were paid a bonus of 10% 
of the aggregate profits generated in their mini profit 
centers each year. They were not penalized for aggre-
gate losses that might be incurred in any given year, but 
it was understood that losses would not be tolerated for 
extended periods of time. The bonuses were paid out in 
full in cash shortly after the fiscal year end. Mr. Kim 
thought that after the account managers had built their 
loan portfolios to their envisioned levels, their total 
compensation would be more than competitive with 
those of the established banks.
Mr. Kim thought that as the branch matured, he 
might begin to set goals for each account manager and 
to provide bonuses based on achievement of those 
goals, but in the start-up phase, he did not have enough 
knowledge of either the market potentials or the 
account manager capabilities to set meaningful goals. 
He worried that short-term profits provided only an 
imperfect measure of success in the wholesale banking 
industry. For one thing, the loans were typically granted 
for terms of 5 to 10 years, and no loan ever granted had 
a zero chance of default. But he thought that the rather 
rudimentary system put in place would suffice during 
the branch’s start-up period. A more sophisticated 
reward system would probably emerge over time.
Managing time productively was a critical skill for 
the account managers. In all the geographical territo-
ries, the number of potential clients was huge. But com-
petition was also stiff. Many Korean banks, including 
Hanmi, Nara, Wilshire, Center, Saehan, Pacific City, 
Shinhan, Woori, and Mirae, were already well estab-
lished in the United States, and some Korean-oriented 
businesses also raised money from non-Korean banks. 
The Haengbok account managers had to identify and 
solicit business from their best prospects. The best cli-
ents were businesses who wanted larger loans with 
higher spreads and, importantly, also had the ability to 
pay the loans back. The account managers also had to 
consider both the costs of finding the prospects, analyz-
ing their situations, and preparing the loan applications 
and the probabilities of getting the loans approved.
After the account managers identified loan prospects, 
they prepared a credit application. The loan application 
package needed to include a description of the client and 
its business, the proposed use of the loan funds, the pro-
posed loan terms (e.g., size, payments, fees, security, 
covenants), and an analysis of the loan’s risk. Risk was 
addressed in many ways, but market prospects and the 
client’s financial statements were always considered.
Applications for loans less than $1 million could be 
approved by Mr. Kim. If the proposed loan exceeded 
$1 million, the application had to be approved by the 
branch’s Credit Committee, which was comprised of 
Mr. Kim, the branch CFO/treasurer, and two of the most 
experienced account managers. If the proposed loan 
exceeded $5 million, then the Haengbok Bancorp Cor-
porate Credit Committee, based in Seoul, would also 
have to give approval before the loan could be made.
After loans were made, they were reviewed on a reg-
ular basis by management, national bank examiners, 
and external auditors. Management also regularly 
monitored clients for signs of possible problems, which 
might be indicated by declining business conditions, 
violations of covenants, and missed payments.

424
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Eff ects
  A rejected loan application 
 In early 2010, Jae Lee, an account manager assigned to 
the southwestern US territory, submitted a credit appli-
cation for an $11 million, seven-year term loan for Far 
East Trading Corporation (FETC), a company that had 
significant business activities in Korea. The pricing 
included a 1% fee at closing and a variable rate of 5% 
above the prime lending rate. The loan was fully col-
lateralized with inventory. Because of the size of the 
loan, Jae spent considerable care in preparing the 
application. He was pleased with it: 
 I thought this was a good deal for Haengbok. I 
priced it with a relatively large spread, so we were 
going to make good money over the life of the loan. 
FETC is a good company that has been in business 
for many years, and it has an experienced manage-
ment team. They have found good business oppor-
tunities even in the current recessionary period. So 
I concluded that the loan was relatively low risk. 
 The branch’s Credit Committee, of which Jae was 
not a part, quickly approved the loan. At the time, com-
mittee members noted that Jae’s application was well 
prepared and that they trusted Jae’s judgments about 
the merits of the deal. Jae happened to be one of the 
more experienced account managers. He had worked 
for several years for two major US banks before joining 
Haengbok’s New York branch. 
 Since the proposed size of the loan exceeded $5 mil-
lion, the application also had to be approved by the cor-
porate Credit Committee in Seoul. When the corporate 
committee met, Jae joined part of the meeting by tele-
phone. The committee members asked Jae a number of 
questions asking for both clarifications and more 
detail. Jae thought that he was able to answer all the 
questions satisfactorily. 
 A couple of days later, however, Jae and Mr. Kim 
were informed that corporate had decided that the loan 
should not be made. The committee spokesman 
explained that the problem was not with either Jae’s 
analysis or the loan terms. A concern arose because 
some members of the Credit Committee had heard alle-
gations that FETC was involved in some transfer pric-
ing disputes with the tax authorities. These disputes 
could lead to protracted legal costs, possibly hefty fi nes, 
or an expensive settlement. While they could not con-
fi rm the allegations and did not know if the legal settle-
ments, if any, might hinder FETC’s ability to meet its 
cash fl ow obligations, when it came time to vote on this 
application, a majority of the committee members 
decided to err on the side of caution. 
 This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 In 2016, Corbridge Industries, Inc. (Corbridge) was 
starting a process that could lead to major changes in 
its planning and measurement systems. Chantal 
Coombs, vice president of planning, explained: 
  The basic thrust of what we are starting to do is 
very simple, although it has potentially major 
ramifi cations. We are changing the basic decision 
rules by which we evaluate our plans and our 
accomplishments. We have become convinced 
that for Corbridge, at least, the traditional 
accounting measures such as net earnings or 
return on net assets, are neither good criteria on 
 CASE STUDY 
 Corbridge Industries, Inc. 

Corbridge Industries, Inc.
425
which to base decisions, nor reliable indicators of 
performance.
The primary objective of our company is to 
create value for our shareholders. We believe that 
stock values, like the values of all economic 
resources, depend on investors’ expectations of 
future cash flows, discounted for time and risk. 
Consequently, we think that in evaluating possi-
ble actions, it is more important to focus on the 
possible impacts of our decisions on future cash 
flows and risk, rather than estimating the impact 
on the accounting indicators. In addition, we think 
that it makes sense to judge our performance 
based on what we accomplish for our sharehold-
ers—meaning the amount of value we generate 
for them.
The company
Corbridge was a midsize but diversified company with 
$2.2 billion in annual sales of specialized, business-to-
business supplies to some large manufacturers mainly 
in the midwestern United States. The company had 
experienced robust growth in both revenues and earn-
ings over the years (see Exhibit 1).
Corbridge was organized into four business 
groups: Semiconductor, Electrical Products, Indus-
trial Products, and Custom Products. The Semicon-
ductor Group (SG) (2015 sales of $561 million, four 
divisions) designed, manufactured, and marketed a 
broad line of semiconductor components, including 
electronic sensors (e.g. photodiodes), memory 
devices, microprocessors, and transmission devices 
(e.g. fiber optics, speech synthesis chips). The Electri-
cal Products Group (EPG) ($507 million, five divi-
sions) produced assorted components or various 
subcomponents for generators and motors, circuit 
breakers and electrical connectors. The Industrial 
Products Group (IPG) ($774 million, six divisions) 
sold a wide range of components including custom 
engineered ball, roller, and slider bearings, precision 
engine parts, mechanical seals, industrial laminates, 
and some other nonwoven materials. The Custom 
Products Group (CPG) ($310 million, four divisions) 
designed, manufactured, and distributed products 
that used in-house technologies for small-order, 
sometimes one-off specialized components for the 
military and space technology sectors among others. 
A financial comparison of these groups is presented in 
Exhibit 2. The groups’ 19 divisions were, in turn, 
divided into 70 product departments, each with 
profit-center responsibility.
In 2016, the compensation of a typical manager was 
expected to be approximately 60% salary and 40% 
performance incentives. The performance incentives 
were based 75% on operating income less a capital 
change (i.e. residual income), and 25% on the accom-
plishment of specific KPI (key performance indicator) 
targets.
Corbridge was a growth-oriented company with rel-
atively young management. Most general managers 
had an engineering education and either technical or 
marketing experience, or both. The average age of the 
division managers was approximately 41. Tom 
McDowell, the chair of the board, was only 51. Top 
management was interested in maintaining at least 
moderate levels of overall internal growth and in 
acquiring companies with operations that comple-
mented Corbri­dge’s portfolio.
Planning processes
Planning at Corbridge was intended to be a bottom-
up process. The strategic planning process started in 
March with headquarters sending general planning 
guidelines to the business units. These guidelines 
included an economic forecast and some preliminary 
estimates of the resources the company would make 
available to each business unit. The department 
managers (and lower-level managers where appro-
priate) were expected to propose their own goals and 
strategies. They were asked to prepare three-year 
plans with the emphasis on market analysis and 
identification of strategic alternatives. Quantitative 
data (including financial) were required in only 
summary form.
These plans were then reviewed at successively 
higher organizational levels. The Corporate Manage-
ment Committee (CMC) reviewed the plans and evalu-
ated the total portfolio of businesses early in September. 
The CMC rarely made material changes to the strategic 
plans at this time: changes were usually made only if 
the resource position changed or if an acquisition or 
divestment was imminent.
After CMC approval of the strategic plan, the depart-
ment managers prepared detailed operating plans 
(budgets) for the next year. The operating plans 
included targets for sales growth, profit margins, and 
operating earnings and were intended to be consistent 
with the strategic plans. The operating plans were also 

426
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
reviewed at successively increasing organizational lev-
els, usually with only minor modifications being made.
The shareholder value model
In the early 2010s, corporate staff began experiment-
ing with a model called V-Plan as an aid in evaluating 
strategic plans. V-Plan was developed by a manage-
ment consulting firm, with the help of some leading 
academics in the fields of finance, accounting, and 
business planning.
At the heart of V-Plan was a discounted cash flow 
(DCF) model, which, with the input of estimates of 
future cash flows and factors for discounting time and 
risk, could be used to place a value on any business 
entity at any point in time. For strategic planning pur-
poses, V-Plan could be used to value an entity given the 
assumptions behind any of a number of different strate-
gic alternatives. A particular strategy was considered 
to generate a positive value for shareholders only if it 
increased the business entity’s cash flows in a manner 
sufficient to more than offset new investments that 
might be required. Cash flows (and value) might be 
generated by, for example, increasing the volume of 
sales, increasing the contribution generated by each 
incremental sale, or reducing the amount of invest-
ment tied up in working capital as compared to the lev-
els in the base period. In concept, V-Plan was identical 
to capital-investment-analysis models based on the net 
present value (NPV) method. But with V-Plan, all cash 
outlays that were required to implement a strategy 
were considered, not just capital investments, which 
typically composed only a small fraction of the total.
History of use of the shareholder 
value model
Prasad Vepa, director of corporate planning, described 
how Corbridge came to incorporate V-Plan in its plan-
ning processes:
By all the traditional accounting measures, our per-
formance over the last two decades was excellent. 
Take any measure you want – sales growth, earn-
ings growth, return on equity, return on assets, and 
earnings per employee – they all indicate we had 
done very well. Our shareholders, however, hadn’t 
really derived any benefit from this success. In 
2013, our market value was essentially where it was 
in 2004, even though stocks in the S&P 500 had 
averaged about 8% returns in this time period. And 
although we increased our dividends as earnings 
increased, this never provided shareholders with a 
return greater than 4%.
In 2013, the merger and acquisition people in our 
corporate planning department were involved in a 
lot of value analyses. We were using pretty sophis-
ticated models which helped us analyze the deter-
minants of value – cash flow potentials and risk –  
under various business and economic assump-
tions, so that we could put a value on business seg-
ments we were considering buying or selling. In our 
planning meetings, my group saw the need for the 
same types of analyses. One choice our manage-
ment was often faced with was whether to acquire 
an existing business or to build one by allocating 
resources to one of our existing business units. 
Thus, it was natural that we began to use cash 
flow-based value models in our planning analyses.
Corbridge first applied the shareholder value models 
to the plans submitted during the 2014 planning pro-
cess. The operating managers were not involved in the 
actual use of the models; corporate staff just took the 
numbers in the plans and plugged them into the mod-
els. The purpose of this exercise was not to use the out-
put in decision-making, but just to get some familiarity 
with the problems that might arise when the models 
were used to compare internal business units.
In the first year, the corporate planning staff used 
the model’s cash flow-based estimates of changes in 
intrinsic shareholder value at the corporate level and 
compared them with Corbridge’s actual changes in 
market value over the period 2009–13 and the year 
2014. The model’s estimates were quite accurate. They 
showed that the corporation’s net cash returns during 
the 2009–13 period were actually not sufficient to 
increase shareholder value, but that the plans for 2014, 
if they were achieved, would do so. And, indeed, at the 
end of 2014, when the plans had been achieved, the 
total Corbridge market value had risen to over 
$750 million, up from the $550 million level where it 
had been for virtually the entire prior decade.
At this time, top-level Corbridge managers indicated 
that they were very comfortable with these findings. 
Tom McDowell (chairman) stated that the value con-
cept supported intuitive feelings he had had.
Later in the year, V-Plan was given a real credibility 
boost. At year-end 2014, Corbridge stock was selling at 
about $32 per share, and at midyear 2015 it was around 

Corbridge Industries, Inc.
427
$40. In June 2015, Rick Aubrey, an analyst in the Cor-
porate Planning Department, used V-Plan to analyze 
Corbridge’s financial performance and concluded that 
despite continuing improvement in the accounting 
numbers, company performance did not justify the 
higher stock price. Rick estimated that by year-end the 
stock price would be around $31 per share if the com-
pany maintained its current strategy and performance 
came in as projected. This estimate was shown to the 
high-level corporate managers, but they did not choose 
to alter company strategies at that time.
At year-end, with everything going according to 
plan, Corbridge stock was selling at $30. Rick observed:
You can’t depend on the model showing that kind 
of accuracy consistently. We have to make a num-
ber of assumptions and approximations; nobody 
really knows how the stock market will respond at 
any given time; and the market does not have 
access to the confidential information I used in my 
analysis. But the theory behind the model is cor-
rect; the intrinsic value of our company should 
depend on the size, pattern, and uncertainty sur-
rounding the cash flows we expect to be able to 
generate in the future.
The success of this forecast was very important. 
It gave the model credibility. Everybody is used to 
thinking in terms of sales and earnings growth, and 
we have always used those numbers to plan with, 
even though they are not very good numbers on 
which to base our decisions or to judge our success.
V-Plan and strategic planning
Rick went on to describe how the model could be used 
to support Corbridge’s planning efforts:
Let me show you some examples of why I think we 
should use V-Plan in our planning processes. Here 
is a situation where operating managers might be 
discouraged from investing in, or even proposing, 
good strategies because of their adverse impact 
on accounting earnings [Exhibit 3]. Schedule 1 
shows pro-forma income statements for a three-
year period in which I’ve assumed no real growth 
but 10 percent inflation, which I know is unrealistic 
in the current day and age, but bear with me—this 
is just to make my point and for ease of computa-
tion and dramatic effect. I’ve called this Strategy 1; 
it can be considered a base case or a maintenance 
strategy.
Now, suppose a manager identifies a strategy 
which requires an investment of $5 million in mar-
keting expenses in each of the next three years 
(2016–18) but which promises five percent real 
growth in 2017 and 2018. The projected income 
statements for this alternative (Strategy 2) are 
shown in Schedule 2.
The implication should be clear. With a projected 
decline in earnings in 2016, this strategy will prob-
ably suffer an early death. The division manager will 
be reluctant to propose it because top manage-
ment is not likely to look at it enthusiastically and, 
furthermore, if the strategy were implemented it 
would adversely affect his bonus.
From the shareholder’s standpoint, however, this 
is a good plan. The cash flow and shareholder value 
numbers are shown in Schedule 3. As per our stand-
ard conservative procedure, I’ve assumed the oper-
ating cash flows will remain constant at the 2018 
level in perpetuity. But even so, the value numbers 
make it obvious that our shareholders would want 
us to invest in this plan. An analysis would show 
that the internal rate of return is over 30 percent.
The accounting biases can also operate in the 
opposite direction—that is, a decision that prom-
ises excellent profits can be bad for the sharehold-
ers. Here is such an example [shown as Strategy 3 
in Exhibit 4].
I’ve taken the same base case (Schedule 1) and 
this time assumed that a manager has identified an 
investment of $25 million in capital equipment and 
working capital that would increase the operating 
margin from 20 to 22 percent. This provides an 
improved profit picture (Schedule 2), but this is actu-
ally a bad investment that yields less than the 
18 percent cost of capital that I’ve assumed. The net 
effect is to reduce the value of the earning assets in 
this business unit by almost $5 million (Schedule 3).
These are very simple examples, of course, but I 
can assure you that these patterns occur in some 
of the plans submitted by our operating units. Let 
me show you one example. During the 2015 plan-
ning process, one of our divisions proposed a 
strategy which showed sharp increases in both 
sales and earnings [Exhibit 5]. From these num-
bers, it is easy to conclude that this is a pretty 
decent plan. In truth, however, it is not.
Using V-Plan, I calculated that the pre-strategy 
value of this division (net of liabilities) is approxi-
mately $500,000. But if this strategy is implemented, 

428
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
I figure that the value of this division would actually 
be a negative $1.2 million [Exhibit 6]. This is true 
because the strategy requires a considerable up-
front investment for items which do not show up in 
the income statement for some time. I conclude that 
implementing this strategy would cause a decrease 
of $1.7 million in the intrinsic value of this division 
and the value of Corbridge stock. And if anything, 
my calculation may be optimistic because for this 
business segment it would be easy to justify using a 
risk-adjusted discount rate greater than the 18 per-
cent that I used in making these calculations. The 
18 percent is the overall corporate weighted-aver-
age cost of capital, and this particular business unit 
is probably one of the riskiest businesses in our 
portfolio.
I think we should seriously consider selling this 
business, assuming someone would be willing to 
pay something close to the $500,000 that it is worth 
right now. We certainly should not be investing the 
money proposed in this plan. The increased sales 
and earnings picture is misleading; this plan will 
actually be very costly to our shareholders.
Let me make one qualification, however. I am not 
suggesting that impact on shareholder value should 
be the only criterion we should look at when we make 
our strategic resource allocation decision. What I am 
suggesting is that impact on shareholder value 
should be an important financially-oriented criterion 
and that it is far superior to looking at projections 
expressed in traditional accounting terms.
Change in statement of objectives
At the end of 2015, the wording of Corbridge’s pri-
mary statement of objectives was changed to read as 
follows:
The primary objective of Corbridge Industries is to 
increase shareholder value. This will be accom-
plished by focusing on markets where the Com-
pany has or can capture a major share, by 
developing a higher-than-average flow of success-
ful new products, and by continuing to emphasize 
productivity of Company personnel and assets.
Formerly, the primary objective had been “to grow 
and to improve profitability.” This change in the word-
ing of the statement of company objectives was not 
brought about by the V-Plan directly, but it was moti-
vated by the same logic that the model used.
The future of the shareholder 
value model
Corbridge planned to work with and to refine the share-
holder value model and eventually to spread its use 
throughout the organization. Tom McDowell (chair-
man) promised to use V-Plan and related models “more 
intensively and extensively.”
A number of important issues remained to be solved, 
however. One issue was the planning horizon. In mak-
ing the value calculations, all cash flows, no matter 
how far into the future, had to be considered, but the 
Corbridge operating plans only included three years of 
data. To work around this limitation, the planning staff 
had been making the assumption that the operating 
cash flows in the last year of the plan would remain 
constant in perpetuity, in the absence of information to 
the contrary. While the most immediate cash flows had 
the largest value impact because of discounting, this 
assumption was subject to obvious criticisms, particu-
larly for those divisions with products with relatively 
short product life cycles. Thus, to improve the accuracy 
of V-Plan’s calculations, one possibility that had to be 
considered was an extension of the planning horizon, 
from three years to five, or perhaps even longer.
A second issue was whether the plans should reflect a 
single point estimate of future results or whether they 
should reflect a range of possible outcomes and an 
assessment of the likelihood of each. V-Plan’s value cal-
culations were intended to reflect the expected value of 
the future cash flows, and the model could easily accom-
modate probabilistic cash flow estimates. However, sev-
eral senior managers thought that single-point estimates 
were necessary for control purposes, so that managers 
could be held responsible for achieving a specific plan.
Risk presented another problem. Corbridge’s early 
uses of the model used the same discount factor – the 
corporate average cost of capital – in all analyses. If 
Corbridge had been highly vertically integrated and in 
a single market, this might have been acceptable, but 
the corporate planning staff felt that the various busi-
ness units faced quite different levels of risk. Quantify-
ing the amounts of risk faced in order to reflect them in 
the discount rates used in the value calculations was 
not straightforward, however, and more thought would 
have to be given to this issue before use of the model 
was made more widespread.
A fourth issue was the speed of implementation, mean-
ing how fast to involve managers at each organization 
level in the use of the model. Because they were convinced 

Corbridge Industries, Inc.
429
of its worth, top management was inclined to use the 
impact-on-shareholder-value criterion for evaluating 
plans immediately. This might, however, cause frustra-
tion and conflict if the lower-level managers did not 
understand the bases on which the decisions were being 
made. All managers were familiar with the NPV concept 
because they were required to use it in preparing their 
capital investment proposals, but it was not clear whether 
they could easily transfer their knowledge of this basic 
concept to the preparation of entire operating plans.
Finally, if impact on shareholder value became an 
important criterion in strategic decision-making, 
another issue would arise; that is, whether or not to 
link a value-related performance criterion – impact on 
shareholder value – to the management reward system. 
To reinforce the shareholder value concept, some por-
tion of management compensation could be made con-
tingent on value increases – either of the corporation as 
a whole or of specific business units. The question was: 
should this be done, and if so, how soon?
Exhibit 1  Corbridge financial results 2004–2015 ($ million)
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
Net sales
2,152
1,841
1,577
1,334
1,139
1,025
883
762
647
533
Net earnings
110
96
84
71
61
50
44
38
33
28
Capital expenditures
98
86
57
59
59
35
40
45
36
19
Market value (ave.)
755
769
544
526
551
619
581
563
625
662
Ratios (%)
Increase in sales
16.9
16.7
18.2
17.1
11.1
16.1
15.8
17.8
213
16.5
Increase in net earn.
14.6
14.2
18.3
16.4
21.9
13.6
15.8
15.2
17.8
21.7
Net earn. as % of sales
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.3
5.3
4.9
5.0
4.9
5.1
5.3
Dividends as % of net earn.
29.7
27.4
25.7
26.2
24.1
20.7
19.2
21.8
22.5
24.9
Ret. on ave. shareholder 
equity
15%
14.6%
14.6%
13.5%
12.9%
12.0%
12.2%
11.9%
11.6%
11.1%
Exhibit 2  Financial comparison of major business groups
2015
2014
% Change
Semiconductor
Net sales
$561
$428
31.1
Net earnings
6
5
20.0
Electrical Products
Net sales
$507
$469
8.1
Net earnings
28
27
3.7
Industrial Products
Net sales
$774
$701
10.4
Net earnings
63
56
12.5
Custom Products
Net sales
$310
$243
27.6
Net earnings
13
8
62.5
Corbridge Total
Net sales
$2,152
$1,841
16.9
Net earnings
110
96
14.6

430
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
Exhibit 3  Example showing discouragement of a good investment ($ million)
Schedule 1: Projected Income Statements, Division A, Strategy 1 (Base Case)
Actual 2015
Forecast
2016
2017
2018
Sales
$200
$220
$242
$266
Variable operating expenses
160
176
194
213
Depreciation
10
11
11
12
Discretionary expenses
20
22
24
27
Total expenses
190
209
229
252
Profit before tax
10
11
13
15
Income tax (40%)
4
4
5
6
Profit after tax
$6
$7
$8
$9
Schedule 2: Projected Income Statements, Division A, Strategy 2 (Real Growth)
Actual 2015
Forecast
2016
2017
2018
Sales
$200
$220
$253
$291
Variable operating expenses
160
176
202
233
Depreciation
10
11
11
12
Discretionary expenses
20
27
29
32
Total expenses
190
214
243
276
Profit before tax
10
6
10
15
Income tax (40%)
4
2
4
6
Profit after tax
$6
$4
$6
$9
Schedule 3: Value Calculations
Annual Cash Flows
2016
2017
2018
2019 and beyond
Strategy 1
$18
$19
$21
$21
Strategy 2
15
17
21
24
Value of Division A on December 31, 2015 at 18% (ignoring liabilities)
Strategy 1 $102.3 million
Strategy 2 $108.1 million

Corbridge Industries, Inc.
431
Exhibit 4  Example showing encouragement of a bad investment ($ million)
Schedule 1: Projected Income Statements, Division A, Strategy 1 (Base Case)
Actual 2015
Forecast
2016
2017
2018
Sales
$200
$220
$242
$266
Variable operating expenses
160
176
194
213
Depreciation
10
11
11
12
Discretionary expenses
20
22
24
27
Total expenses
190
209
229
252
Profit before tax
10
11
13
15
Income tax (40%)
4
4
5
6
Profit after tax
$6
$7
$8
$9
Schedule 2: Projected Income Statements, Division A, Strategy 3 (Improve Operating Margins)
Actual 2015
Forecast
2016
2017
2018
Sales
$200
$220
$242
$266
Variable operating expenses
160
172
189
208
Depreciation
10
12
13
14
Discretionary expenses
20
22
24
27
Total expenses
190
206
226
248
Profit before tax
10
14
16
18
Income tax (40%)
4
6
6
7
Profit after tax
$6
$9
$10
$11
Schedule 3: Value Calculations
Annual Cash Flows Investment
2016
2017
2018
2019 and beyond
Strategy 1
$18
$19
$21
$21
Strategy 3 $(25)
21
23
25
25
Value of Division A on December 31, 2015 at 18% (ignoring liabilities)
Strategy 1 $102.3 million
Strategy 3 $ 97.4 million

432
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
Exhibit 5  Division A, Strategy X: Projected income statements ($ million)
2016
2017
2018
Sales
$74
$89
$106
Expenses
70
84
99
Profit before taxes
4
5
7
Income taxes
2
2
3
Profit after taxes
$2
$3
$4
Exhibit 6  Division A, Strategy X: Shareholder value calculations ($ million)
Present value of earning assets at end of implementation of strategy
$16.8
Less: Present value of investment required
(7.9)
Less: Market value of debt (net of monetary assets)
(10.1)
Present value of division if strategy is implemented
(1.2)
Less: Pre-strategy value of division
.5
Shareholder value contribution of strategy
$(1.7)
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

King Engineering Group, Inc.
433
 In early 2016, managers at King Engineering Group, 
Inc. (King), a large engineering and construction com-
pany, were striving to strengthen the links between 
corporate and business unit goal setting. Their task was 
somewhat unique because King was privately owned 
by an employee stock ownership plan (ESOP). In May 
2016, Jim Anderson, King’s chief financial officer 
(CFO), described the challenge: 
 Our goal, like that of all corporations, is to maxi-
mize value for our investors. But King is essentially 
an investment maintained by a pension plan; the 
funds just happen to be invested in engineering 
and construction assets. What performance should 
our owners reasonably expect? Should we com-
pare our performance against that of our publicly 
traded competitors or other pension plans? And 
how can we best get all of our business units work-
ing toward the achievement of our corporate goals? 
 The company 
 George E. King founded King Engineering in 1946. By 
the year 2016, King was a large full-service engineer-
ing and construction fi rm, with over 11,000 employees 
and nearly $1.5 billion in annual sales. 
 King was headquartered in Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma, but its operations were global. King had 
three main business units (see organization chart in 
 Exhibit  1 ). The Transportation Group (approximately 
20% of total company sales) built highways, bridges, 
and rail and transit systems. The Energy & Chemicals 
(E&C) Group (40%) off ered design and construction 
services for oil and gas fi eld refi neries, power genera-
tion facilities, and chemical plants. The Infrastructure 
& Technology (I&T) Group (40%) built projects in 16 
diff erent market sectors, including shopping centers, 
dams, resorts, airports, and telecommunication 
infrastructures. The I&T Group also provided environ-
mental services, such as the monitoring of air and 
water quality and construction of municipal waste 
treatment plants. In a typical year, King’s operations 
encompassed approximately 3,000 projects, the budget 
for some of which exceeded $1 billion. The signifi cant 
projects totaled about 200 in the Transportation Group, 
60–70 in E&C, and 200 in I&T. 
 King’s organization structure also included three 
regional organizations beyond its North American 
market (Europe, Middle East, Africa & South Asia 
(EMEASA); Latin America; and Asia Pacifi c). King’s 
regional management worked closely with the global 
business units to support international customers, to 
coordinate King’s in-country resources with local 
partners, and to mobilize King’s global workforce to 
provide the technical capabilities required on the 
projects. 
 In the late 2000s as a result of the great recession, 
the engineering and construction industry underwent 
some signifi cant changes. These included fi rm consoli-
dations (mainly because many fi rms were performing 
poorly) and an acceleration of the shift (particularly in 
energy and chemicals markets) from cost-plus con-
tracts toward fi xed-price business. King, which tradi-
tionally had been among the more conservative 
players in the industry, responded successfully by cut-
ting costs, outsourcing non-critical engineering skills, 
and developing greater marketing eff orts. Over time, 
King had also restructured its corporate business port-
folio through both internal development and acquisi-
tions. In October 2015, the company announced an 
intention to sell the E&C Group, which generated 
about 25% of total company sales, but a buyer had not 
yet been identifi ed. 
 In light of these changes, King developed a strategy of 
delivering more than traditional (“blue-collar”) engi-
neering, construction, and program management. The 
company instead moved to try to deliver more “turnkey 
solutions,” which involved fi nancing, engineering, pro-
curement, construction, operation, and maintenance 
capabilities on a global scale. These changes required 
King to bear more risk. Since more of these projects were 
based on fixed-price rather than cost-plus contracts, 
 CASE STUDY 
 King Engineering Group, Inc. 

434
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
King bore the cost-control and schedule risks. In some 
projects, King was even providing customers with “back-
end guarantees.” For example, the customers would buy 
kilowatts from King at a fixed price, rather than just pay-
ing for construction of a power plant, so King was bear-
ing the performance risks. In some of the projects, the 
risks were shared with a joint-venture partner.
Ownership by an Employee Stock 
Ownership Plan (ESOP)
King had always been privately owned. But in 1984, to 
create liquidity for the original owners and to take 
advantage of some newly created tax changes, King’s 
managers created an Employee Stock Ownership Plan 
(ESOP) and had the ESOP buy all of the company stock. 
After 1984, King Engineering had only one share-
holder: the ESOP trust.
ESOPs are employee benefit plans that make employ-
ees of a company the owners of the stock in that com-
pany.1 ESOPs are required by law to invest primarily in 
the securities of the sponsoring employer. All employ-
ees are automatically members of the ESOP, and they 
build up a “beneficial interest” over time. King employ-
ees’ ESOP interests are fully vested after seven years, 
and they receive a lump sum payout at retirement.
ESOPs provided two tax-related advantages. First, 
since ESOP contributions are tax deductible, a corpora-
tion that repays an ESOP loan in effect gets to deduct 
principal as well as interest from taxes. Second, divi-
dends on ESOP stock that are paid to employees are also 
tax deductible. Moreover, when King’s ESOP was 
formed, US federal tax law allowed lenders to exclude 
50% of the interest earned on loans to ESOPs from its 
taxable income. This gave rise to so-called “leveraged 
ESOPs,” such as that in place at King, and used as an 
important element of corporate finance. In a leveraged 
ESOP, the company borrows money from a bank or 
other qualified lender and then, in turn, lends it to the 
ESOP. The ESOP can use the funds to buy either existing 
stock or new stock from the company. Competitive mar-
kets forced the lenders to pass some of these savings on, 
so ESOPs were able to borrow money at favorable rates.2
ESOPs also provide advantages in that they give 
employees a significant ownership stake in their com-
pany. This ownership stake can improve the company’s 
culture and lead to performance gains.
Despite the advantages of the ESOP, not all of the 
employees were happy with the change in ownership. 
When the King ESOP was formed, several employee 
groups filed a class action lawsuit against King and its 
officers and directors. They maintained that they had 
little say in the decision, that the plan disproportion-
ately benefited higher-level executives, and that the 
buyout left the ESOP with all of the debt but none of the 
decision-making power. The final appeal was heard in 
1991, and the settlement favored King’s position.
Accounting performance measures
The generic income statement used in the construction 
industry is in the following format:
Revenues
minus:	 Direct contract costs (materials, labor, and overhead)
=	 Gross profit
minus:	 General and administrative expenses (G&A)
=	 Net operating income
In its early years, King’s managers’ main focus 
was on the revenue line. The problem with this 
approach was that the varying mix of the contracts 
in which King was involved often produced mislead-
ing revenue trends and revenue-based ratios. Some 
of King’s contracts, such as some oil exploration pro-
jects, were set up to run all the revenues generated 
by the project through King’s accounting records, 
but King’s profit as a percentage of those revenues 
was very small. In others, all project revenues 
flowed to the client’s records, and King’s records 
reflected only the smaller amount of revenues 
earned directly from King’s efforts, which yielded 
proportionally good margins. For yet others, King 
earned significant royalty payments but had no 
costs associated with them.
In the early 2000s, when a new management team 
assumed control, King’s managers changed their 
focus. They made greater use of the following four 
measures:
Gross Profit Sold (GPS): the excess of anticipated 
revenue from contracts booked during a period over 
anticipated direct contract costs.
1	 ESOPs are quite common. In 2015, the National Center for Employee 
Ownership estimated that there were approximately 7,000 ESOPs in 
existence in the United States covering about 13.5 million employee 
owners (or about 8.5% of the US workforce). For more information 
on ESOPs, see www.esop.org.
2	 This provision in the tax law no longer exists.

King Engineering Group, Inc.
435
Gross Profit Produced (GPP): the excess of revenue 
over direct contract costs for a given accounting 
period.3
Overhead (OH): included the indirect non-contract 
expenses incurred in the various administrative 
units (e.g. corporate, division).
Net Operating Income (NOI): gross profit minus 
overhead.
King’s managers started closely monitoring two key 
performance ratios: the GPP/GPS conversion ratio and the 
GPP/OH divergence ratio. The GPP/GPS conversion ratio 
emphasized the fact that sales (GPS) do not mean much 
unless they actually get consummated (GPP). The GPP/OH 
divergence ratio was meant to keep overhead spending in 
check. In combination, the two performance ratios were in 
place to encourage managers to get “productive” sales 
(GPP) that generate bottom-line profitability (NOI) with 
an efficient use of resources (OH). The mechanics underly-
ing the use of these ratios are discussed further below.
Planning and budgeting processes
King’s planning and budgeting processes focused on the 
development of an annual plan. King did little long-
term operational planning because of the difficulty of 
accurately seeing very far into the future. Jim Anderson 
(CFO) said, “Twelve to eighteen months’ visibility is the 
most you really get.” One major planning limitation was 
that the economy-wide changes (such as growth in GDP 
or changes in population demographics and consumer 
demand) that could be forecast reasonably accurately, 
and that were useful for planning purposes in many 
firms, were not the drivers of King’s business opportuni-
ties. Those were largely driven by discrete political, leg-
islative, and economic events that were difficult to 
predict, and they were affected by changes in commod-
ity prices (particularly oil). As Jim Anderson explained, 
“Could anybody predict the fall of the Iron Curtain? 
Could anyone foresee the Iraq War and its aftermath? 
Did anybody know in 2000 where the 2016 Olympics 
would be held?” While King’s managers made some 
longer-term projections, Jim Anderson described only 
the company’s targets for the next year as “good.” He 
called targets for the second year out “guesswork,” and 
targets for the third year out as outright “fiction.”
Up until 2014, King’s financial planning process was 
like that used in many corporations. Corporate execu-
tives did not communicate any overall corporate perfor-
mance benchmarks to the business units. They provided 
only a few planning parameters (e.g. expected average 
salary increases). The business units then developed 
largely bottom-up financial plans. Corporate manage-
ment reviewed the bottom-up plans and typically 
“squeezed some more profit out.” Bill Houchin, president 
of the I&T Group, reflected on the old planning process:
The outcomes were really corporate-imposed busi-
ness unit targets. Where did these numbers come 
from? I really don’t know. My best guess is that 
they were trend-based. Corporate managers would 
ask line managers to do better than they had done 
the prior year. But not all of these plans were realis-
tic. Some business units really had to stretch to 
make their numbers, and sometimes they compro-
mised their future in doing so.
In 2014, the new management team made signifi-
cant changes to the planning and budgeting process. 
The major changes were:
● A more scientific corporate goal-setting process 
backed by a “sales-to-share price model” that trans-
lated share price growth goals into corporate finan-
cial targets.
● An interactive process designed to produce greater 
convergence between the corporate and business-
unit targets.
● A focus on allocation of discretionary investment 
monies, which were called “free money” because the 
business units did not bear the cost of the investment.
Each of these elements is described in the following 
explanations of the corporate and business unit plan-
ning processes.
The corporate goal-setting process
King’s goal was to “maximize share price” for its ESOP 
trust. Since no market-determined share price existed, 
King had a stock valuation done annually by an outside 
consulting firm, which compared King’s financial per-
formance with that of the company’s major publicly 
held competitors: Fluor, Amec Foster Wheeler, Parsons, 
ICF International, Jacobs, Morrison Knudsen, Stone & 
Webster, Stantec, and URS Corp. This analysis yielded 
3	 King’s managers also monitored a measure of Gross Profit Backlog 
(GPB), which was cumulative Gross Profit Sold less the Gross Profit 
Produced in the current period plus/minus backlog adjustments 
(e.g. stemming from projects falling out of backlog or contract term 
renegotiations). As such, GPB was a measure of the profit potential 
of the projects in backlog.

436
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
revenue, EBIT, and EBITDA multiples that were used, 
along with judgment, to compute an “equivalent share 
price” for King stock.
As part of the annual planning process, King’s cor-
porate managers set an annual share price growth goal 
that, in recent years, had been 15%. Jim Anderson 
(CFO) explained:
Like all corporations, we want to grow. But we have 
trouble funding and staffing growth. Our expenses 
tend to be front-loaded, but our revenue is slow to 
be collected, and the pool of qualified profession-
als is limited. We think that 25% growth is probably 
too much. That would also reveal a number of 
organizational constraints involving people, par-
ticularly managers and professionals. So we have 
been happy with 10–15%.
The share-price-growth goal was translated into 
financial performance targets that could be used to guide 
corporate and operating managers in their decision mak-
ing and performance monitoring activities. Jim Ander-
son was in the process of developing a sales-to-share 
price model that would serve this purpose. The model, 
which is illustrated in Exhibit 2, assumes a desired 15% 
increase in share price end-of-year 2015 to end-of-year 
2016 (from $19.46 to $22.38). The model then calculates 
the NOI needed to produce that target share price.
The calculations shown in Exhibit 2 needed to be 
extended to create OH and GPS targets for the year 
2016. NOI is GPP minus OH. Jim Anderson believed 
that GPP and OH had to diverge by 20%, that is, the 
GPP/OH divergence ratio must be about 1.20. Then GPP 
is the sum of NOI and OH. To calculate GPS, another 
calculation was necessary to account for the fact that 
not all anticipated contracts would actually be fulfilled: 
the GPP/GPS conversion ratio. For 2016, Jim Anderson 
set the GPP conversion target at 97%, roughly the his-
torical average. Thus, the GPS target was the GPP tar-
get divided by .97. Here is a numerical example that 
illustrates the logic linking OH, GPP, and GPS targets 
with the targeted share price:
Target Share Price for 2016  
    (assuming 15% growth)	
$22.38
(from Exhibit 2)
Corresponding Target NOI	 [1] $21,980 (from Exhibit 2)
OH-target for 2016	
109,900
(=[1]÷ .20)
GPP-target for 2016	
[2] 131,880
GPS-target for 2016	
$135,959
(=[2]÷ .97)
While Jim Anderson was convinced that he was on 
the right track in developing this model, he also 
acknowledged the current model parameters were not 
reliable. King’s business had changed so dramatically 
in recent years, for example, by the shift toward more 
fixed-price rather than cost-plus contracts. Jim con-
cluded that he really had only two good data points – 
the annual results since 2014 – that he could use for 
model estimation purposes.
The business unit planning process
At the same time the corporate target-setting process 
was taking place, the business unit managers prepared 
their bottom-up plans. In June, the Group managers 
asked their subordinates (profit and cost center manag-
ers) to put together “baseline” projections for the next 
year. The baseline projections assumed a continuation 
of current operations and some inflation, but no new 
investments.
The base-line projections contained “factored” esti-
mates of forthcoming GPP. Projects that were currently 
“in hand” or in the process of being consummated were 
included in the plan at a 100% certainty level. Expected 
additional tasks stemming from existing contracts 
were included at a 90% certainty level. All other “pro-
spective contracts on the sales horizon” were weighted 
by a specific “probability of capture,” which might be as 
low as 5%. Then, based mostly on historical trends, a 
layer of unidentified work – project development 
opportunities that arise on a day-to-day basis and could 
not yet be foreseen – was added.
Profit center managers were also asked to propose 
up to two levels of incremental investment, generally 
2% and 5% higher than current levels. These incre-
mental investments had to either contribute to King’s 
existing strategy or lead the business units to move in 
new and useful directions. For example, one incre-
mental investment that was funded led to King’s 
recent move into running the vehicle emissions 
inspection program for the state of Oklahoma. This 
program was an offshoot of King’s air quality business 
in its environmental profit center. The investment 
proposals had to include a solid investment analysis, 
including estimates of future cash inflows and an esti-
mated return.
Some managers took this opportunity to propose 
new investments. Others decided they had no pros-
pects that would pass corporate scrutiny, so they did 
not propose anything.

King Engineering Group, Inc.
437
Corporate review processes
In early September, after internal group reviews, the 
budget and investment proposals were submitted to 
corporate. Corporate managers first reviewed them for 
“reasonableness.” Then the plans were discussed in a 
weeklong meeting held toward the end of September. 
One focus of this planning meeting was on the forecasts 
and probability estimates of newly identified projects.
If the consolidation of the business unit plans fell 
short of achieving the corporate targets, the manage-
ment team would collectively have to figure out who 
would have to “step up” to, possibly, reduce overhead. If 
the consolidation showed a surplus, the managers 
would have to decide whether to accept the surplus. 
About this process, Jim Anderson said, “setting busi-
ness targets here is no different from what happens 
elsewhere. There is a lot of sandbagging and horse-
trading.”
At the end of this process, corporate managers cre-
ated planning reserves to protect against the chance of 
business units not achieving their targets. The sum of 
the business unit plans was designed to exceed the cor-
porate target.
Another focus of the planning review meeting was 
the investment proposals. To support the investment 
initiatives that they considered worthy, corporate man-
agers gave out what they called “free money.” The 
money was considered “free” because the investment 
was not charged to the business units. However, after 
investments were approved, the returns forecast in the 
investment proposals were added to business units’ 
plans for the subsequent years.
Some operating managers thought the forecast aug-
mentation catch to the “free money” was a high cost. 
Bill Houchin (president of the I&T Group) explained:
Although the money is “free” for one year, it is allo-
cated with the clear understanding that we turn it 
into GPP in the following years. We are held fully 
accountable for the cash flows and returns in our 
investment proposals, which means that what we 
said we “could achieve” suddenly becomes what 
we “must achieve.” The challenge is even greater 
because there is a vote on the investments to 
approve. The investments that are at the top of the 
list seem to be those that return the money fast, so 
that forces you to accelerate your forecasts of the 
returns. And then these returns don’t count toward 
your GPP growth goals; they’re incremental to that. 
I understand that there must be accountability, but 
you can’t get someone to the edge of the envelope 
if there is a significant downside to taking risk.
The final business unit plans were due in November. 
Corporate managers typically made a few final adjust-
ments before seeking board approval. The business 
plans became final by mid-December.
Management incentives
In addition to the typical subjective performance 
reviews that were used for salary adjustment purposes, 
King used two formal performance-dependent incen-
tive plans – a Management Incentive Plan and a Long 
Term Incentive Plan.
Management Incentive Plan (MIP)
Several hundred employees were included in the MIP, 
from corporate officers down to project managers, 
functional managers, and key employees in overhead 
departments. Employees’ MIP target bonuses ranged 
from 75% of base salary at the executive level (corpo-
rate officers) to 10% of salary at lower organizational 
levels (e.g. functional managers).
The criteria for which bonuses were given had 
changed significantly over the years. Prior to 2013, the 
MIP placed a high weighting of importance on control of 
overhead. In 2013, the new CEO responded to divisions’ 
requests to “let us manage our costs.” He placed more 
weighting on GPS and deemphasized the rewards that 
could be earned directly by controlling overhead 
expenses. However, the divisions “went crazy on spend-
ing” without generating sufficient additional NOI.
In 2014, the MIP was changed to include two perfor-
mance factors – GPS and NOI. But corporate managers 
learned quickly that some operating managers were 
not good at managing NOI. Since then corporate man-
agers sought to improve operating managers’ financial 
management skills. Jim Anderson explained that, “the 
sales-to-share-price models on which I have been work-
ing, as well as the use of the GPP/GPS and GPP/OH 
ratios, have actually been quite helpful in explaining to 
our managers the relationship between GPS, GPP, NOI 
and, ultimately, share price.”
In 2016, the MIP rewards for the highest level man-
agers (down to group presidents) were based on 
achievement of corporate (or group) GPS and NOI tar-
gets. Lower-level general managers (regional presi-
dents and lower-level profit center managers) were 
given GPS and OH targets.

438
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
The 2016 MIP plan also allowed more subjectivity 
in performance evaluations, up to 30% in some situa-
tions, rather than less than 10% in the older plans. 
The importance weighting of the subjective element 
of the performance evaluation was increased to 
encourage greater cross-organizational synergy and 
cooperation. Corporate managers believed that some 
managers had not aggressively sought business oppor-
tunities that required cross-organizational coopera-
tion. They also knew that the heavy bonus emphasis 
on measured division performance had led to some 
“non-value-added” activities, such as the charging of 
unfair transfer prices on borrowed or shared 
resources.
Bill Houchin (president of I&T) explained that the 
overall corporate targets provided limited guidance to 
him in setting targets for his eight profit centers:
Goals given to you at an aggregate level don’t nec-
essarily make much sense lower in the organiza-
tion. Our standards have to be much more 
pragmatic. They have to be based on controllability 
and achievability.
Take the 15% growth goal. That’s the CEO’s 
vision for the company. But Transportation is and 
should be growing at a 25% rate. Similarly, if you 
look at our businesses you will see great variation 
in GPP/OH ratios. In aviation we get a ratio of about 
five – and infrastructure is even higher than that – 
whereas it is only about one, or less, in most of the 
environmental business. These are all successful 
operations; it’s just the nature of their businesses. 
For example, we don’t have a lot of overhead in avi-
ation because we don’t have to invest in local sales 
and support offices to get jobs: its clients contract 
with us from anywhere in the world.
Bill went on to explain that in the subjective evalua-
tion of his people he considers a variety of “soft” objec-
tives. These included the extent to which managers 
worry about management development (succession 
planning) and training; the extent to which they “lead” 
(as opposed to merely “manage”) their unit; and the 
extent to which they cooperate with other units within 
I&T as well as King in total.
While the subjective component of the performance 
evaluations could be weighted up to 30%, Jim Anderson 
wondered if this feature of the plan was having the 
desired effect. He thought that the subjective evalua-
tions tended to be significantly influenced by objective 
measures:
Are you likely to get a good discretionary bonus if 
you seriously missed your financial targets? I don’t 
think so. People are people, and evaluators may 
not always be able to make this disconnect. In my 
view, the subjective component should be used to 
evaluate orientation to corporate-wide goals. Our 
company has grown largely through acquisition. 
We have generally kept the businesses separate, 
and they have not worked well together.
Although the aforementioned MIP criteria were to 
be used as general guidelines for the provision of 
annual incentive payments, corporate allowed the 
business units to design their own MIP-programs, sub-
ject to a sanity check at corporate. For example, the 
MIP reward function within the I&T Group looked 
approximately as shown in Exhibit 3. In I&T, MIP par-
ticipants would earn some bonus money if the perfor-
mance for which they were being held responsible 
exceeded a threshold, defined as 90% of the target.
The bonuses earned for exceeding targets were not 
great. About this aspect of the plan, Jim Anderson said, 
“We are pretty conservative. We are willing to pay for 
good performance, but today’s GPS may not be profita-
ble for years down the road, and in some cases it might 
not be profitable at all. We can’t just open-end the 
bonus payments.”
There was one catch. If the corporation did not 
achieve 100% of its NOI target, then the use of all for-
mulas was suspended. Any bonuses given in such cir-
cumstances were discretionary.
The performance targets were set to be achievable 
with good performance. Jim Anderson noted that “A 
few people meet all of their targets; most meet most of 
their targets.” Bill Houchin concurred with this judg-
ment. He explained:
I don’t mind a stretch, but I don’t want it to be too 
severe. If we plan for 2–4% growth, I can roll with 
some fluctuations in the business and still make 
it. If my goals ask for 12–15%, we’ll have to crank 
down on investment. You end up just hurting 
yourself.
I think that my people are about 90% confident 
that they can meet the 90% threshold. In my view, 
achieving the threshold should be “certain with 
effort.” That is, if you work hard and make good 
decisions, you will make it. Hunting dogs make 
their targets; lap dogs don’t.
The probability of achieving full target, on the 
other hand, should be perceived as “slight.” If my 

King Engineering Group, Inc.
439
people get to 120% or more of their target, then 
there is clearly something wrong with my target 
setting. Although rewards are capped, exceptional 
performance can always be taken care of through 
discretionary bonuses.
Long Term Incentive Plan (LTIP)
The LTIP was designed to encourage key employees of 
the corporation to remain in King’s employ and to moti-
vate them to exert maximum effort to achieve the cor-
poration’s long-term goals. LTIP awards, which were 
paid in cash, were based on three-year performance. In 
2014, when the LTIP was first adopted, about 70–80 peo­
ple were included, roughly down to one level below the 
managers of the major profit-and-loss units.
The primary performance criterion in the LTIP was 
King’s share price growth. In each new performance 
cycle, each individual included in the plan was 
awarded a substantial number of performance units 
(depending on organizational level). A performance 
unit was a contingent right to receive a cash amount in 
the event certain performance criteria were achieved. 
For each cycle, the board of directors decided the list 
of employees who would participate in the plan, the 
value of a performance unit, the number of units to be 
granted to each participant, and the performance 
criteria/targets.
The payments vested over the three years following 
the completion of a performance cycle at the rate of 
one-third per year. Payments were made in January 
after they vested. A new performance cycle started 
each year, so three cycles were in progress simultane-
ously. A participant in any cycle, however, might or 
might not be granted performance units for a different 
cycle or cycles. No LTIP payments had yet been made 
because the first performance cycle, which started in 
2014, was not yet complete.
Bill Houchin believed that the LTIP was less of an 
incentive plan and more of an attempt to replicate the 
stock option plans used in publicly traded companies:
This is truly “blue smoke and mirrors.” We don’t 
think about it as much as we do about the MIP. I 
understand the payouts from the LTIP can be very 
significant, and people who are in the plan are 
grateful. But I look at the potential awards as a 
windfall. After all, our individual impacts on King’s 
share price are relatively small. If the market is up 
and we happen to be in a window that allows us to 
take advantage of it, then that’s great.
If we shed our E&C business, we will have more 
control over the LTIP rewards because what will be 
left in the corporation will be more predictable. It 
won’t be as affected by the swings in oil prices. So 
there will be a lot more accountability on our part. I 
would also say that the LTIP is a powerful tool to 
change attitudes towards more of a King mentality, 
so it’s good from that standpoint.
Concerns for the future
Jim Anderson thought that King had made progress in 
its attempts to translate the share price concerns of its 
retirees or near-retirees into measures that would drive 
the business unit managers to find ways to drive share 
price. But he knew more work had to be done, and he 
had some significant questions and concerns:
First, is there some way to take the subjectivity out 
of our share price targets? We have tended to com-
pare our performance with those of our closest 
industry competitors, but 50% of the firms in this 
industry, particularly those whose business is 
somehow connected to oil production, are doing 
relatively poorly at the current time. Should we be 
thinking instead about what return our investors 
need? Or should we consider what other pension 
plans or investment funds are providing?
Second, to what extent should we consider our 
shareholder groups’ retirement needs or concerns? 
We are a relatively old company; the average age of 
our employees is 47. But we’re really comprised of 
two significant age groups. We didn’t hire much in 
the early 2000s when our business was not doing 
well, so the 36–45 age group is largely missing. Age 
makes a big difference in thinking about pension 
plans. A 59-year-old engineer wants low risk. A 
25-year-old, on the other hand, if he or she thinks 
about the pension plan at all, is willing to tolerate 
high risk in exchange for a high expected long-term 
return. How should we blend these concerns? 
Should these concerns affect where we invest our 
money? We also have 6,000 ESOP participants who 
are no longer employed at King. How highly should 
we weight their concerns?
Third, is there a flaw in this whole system? The 
parameters in the sales-to-share price model are 
based on very few data points. If we could retrofit 
the sales-to-share-price model using real, histori-
cal data, but taking out the effects of the structural 

440
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
changes in our business over the years, would we 
generate meaningful results? Would this model 
work in another industry? I want to be able to go to 
the board and explain that we have not just 
dreamed this up.
Some other King employees, particularly those with 
some financial sophistication, were also concerned 
about the exclusive reliance on financial volume meas-
ures like GPS, GPP and OH, instead of return measures 
like Return on Assets (ROA), or even a broader set of 
financial and non-financial measures. The manager of 
E&C’s Global Business Development area elaborated:
I think our biggest problem is that we don’t have a 
good return measure for our profit centers. We 
need to work on an ROA measure. Right now there 
is no way to assess an investment or exit strategy. 
For example, I used to think we were investing too 
much in Chemicals which, I thought, had changed 
to a commodity business. Now I am happy that it is 
seen as a commodity business. But financial assets 
are not the key. Intellectual assets – people – are 
more important. So I don’t know if it’s a financial 
calculation we need.
Jim Anderson agreed:
Some critics have pointed out that the current 
“size” measures, for example, do not reflect the use 
of assets and their ability to generate cash flows 
and that GPS lags sales effort (although it is a good 
leading indicator of future GPP and NOI). Okay, but 
if we use return-type measures, what should be in 
the denominator? We need to look broader than 
financial assets. Our value is in people and intel-
lectual capital, not just receivables. Some others 
have pointed out that our overhead numbers are 
not fully activity-based, and at times in the past 
they believe this has caused some of our cost-
based prices to be non-competitive. And some 
have argued that we should be looking at some 
non-financial performance measures, such as 
measures of political involvement, public relations 
exposure, joint efforts, and win rates. There are lots 
of things we might be working on.
ℓ CFO – James T. Anderson
ℓ GENERAL COUNCIL
ℓ HUMAN RESOURCES
ℓ CONSTRUCTION
KING
ENERGY & CHEMICALS
GROUP 
KING
TRANSPORTATION 
GROUP 
KING
LATIN AMERICA
CHAIRMAN and
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
KING
EUROPE, MIDDLE EAST,
AFRICA, SOUTH ASIA
KING
ASIA PACIFIC
KING
INFRASTRUCTURE &
TECHNOLOGY GROUP
William C. Houchin
Exhibit 1  King Engineering organization chart

King Engineering Group, Inc.
441
Exhibit 2  King Engineering illustration of sales-to-share price model calculation assuming a desired 15% 
growth in share price
2015 (actual)
2016 (plan)
Price/share
$19.46
$22.38
x #shares outstanding
41,699
41,699
= capitalization value
$811,523
$933,224
÷ P/E multiple
17.6
17.6
= earnings
46,109
53,024
+ tax
10,849
12,476
+ interest expense
15,000
13,000
= EBIT
71,959
78,500
− other income
5,000
5,000
− excess ESOP contribution4
49,066
51,520
= NOI
17,893
21,980
4King’s contribution rate to the ESOP was approximately 15–20% of eligible compensation, which was significantly higher than the typical 6–8% range in 
other ESOP companies. Excess ESOP was an adjustment made by the valuation consultancy to compare King with its major competitors that, regardless 
of whether they are ESOPs or not, typically returned a lower proportion of earnings to shareholders.
Target bonus
(% of salary)
90%
110% of target bonus
(27.5% of salary)
Target achievement
110%
100%
100% of target bonus
(25% of salary)
Exhibit 3  King Engineering illustration of the MIP reward function used in the I&T Group
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede. 

442
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Eff ects
 We had to do something diff erent. The company was doing 
great according to all the performance indicators we moni-
tored, and our managers were earning nice bonuses, but 
the shareowners weren’t benefi ting. 
 William Embleton 
 William Embleton, managing director of Berkshire 
Industries PLC, explained why his company had imple-
mented a new incentive system based on an “economic 
profit” measure of performance starting in the year 
2000. In 2002, however, Berkshire managers were ques-
tioning whether their new system had had its desired 
eff ects. The new economic profi t measure did not seem 
to be any better in refl ecting shareowner returns than 
did the old measure – accounting earnings – on which 
Berkshire managers had previously focused. And the 
new system was causing some management confusion 
and a perceived unfairness issue. Mr. Embleton had 
to decide whether to modify the new system, and if so 
how, or to replace it with something else. 
 The company 
 Berkshire Industries PLC (Berkshire) was founded in 
1852 as a brewery serving local pubs. Over the years it 
had grown, both internally and by acquisition. In 2002, 
Berkshire was a medium-sized, publicly held corpora-
tion focused on the beverages and snack foods industry. 
It had annual turnover of about £500 million and it 
employed nearly 3,500 people in six countries. Berkshire 
was listed on the London Stock Exchange. The company 
headquarters was still located in Manchester, England, 
where the company was founded. 
 Berkshire had four operating divisions: beer, spirits, 
soft drinks, and snack foods. The managing directors 
of each of these divisions had considerable autonomy 
because Berkshire operated in a decentralized fashion. 
The small headquarters staff  was primarily responsible 
for coordinating the fi nance, human resources, and 
various administrative functions (e.g. legal, informa-
tion systems). 
 Measurement and incentive systems 
 Since the company had gone public, the primary per-
formance emphasis at Berkshire had been on corporate 
earnings per share (EPS). The company’s long-term 
EPS growth target was 8%, but the target was modifi ed 
each year based on anticipated market conditions and 
pending acquisitions, if any. 
 The company’s annual planning process was a bot-
tom-up process, which fi rst involved the operating divi-
sions proposing their earnings targets for the year and 
their means of achieving them. The division’s draft 
plans were consolidated and compared with Berk-
shire’s corporate EPS growth target. Typically, the dif-
ference between the divisions’ plans and the corporate 
target was material. This “planning gap” was elimi-
nated in a series of discussions among corporate and 
division managers, typically by increases in some or all 
divisions’ targets. 
 Because top management considered it so important 
to meet analysts’ EPS expectations, they also estab-
lished a corporate “profi t reserve” of approximately 
10% of planned earnings. This reserve was established 
to ensure that the corporation would achieve its targets 
even if one, or perhaps even two, of its divisions failed 
to achieve their targets. If, later in the year, manage-
ment determined that the company would achieve its 
targets, they would release this reserve to the Invest-
ments Committee for spending on discretionary pro-
jects, most of which had relatively long-term payoff s. 
But in 2000 and 2001, none of this reserve was released 
to the Investments Committee. All of it was turned in to 
meet the corporate EPS targets. 
 Senior managers at Berkshire, a group of about 
40 people, participated in an annual incentive compensa-
tion plan. Performance was evaluated based on achieve-
ment of earnings targets in the entity to which the 
manager was assigned: a division in the case of division-
level personnel or the entire corporation in the case 
of corporate-level personnel. The target bonuses ranged 
from 20% to 90% of base salary, depending on the 
 CASE STUDY 
 Berkshire Industries PLC 

Berkshire Industries PLC
443
manager’s level of seniority. The plan allowed for subjec-
tive overrides of bonus awards if superiors, or the com-
pensation committee of the board of directors in the case 
of top management, felt that performance shortfalls 
were caused by factors beyond the manager’s control.
The motivation for a new incentive plan
In 1999, Berkshire’s board of directors asked William 
Embleton to explore the desirability of a new perfor-
mance measurement and incentive system based on an 
“economic profit” measure of performance, a concept 
that had received many popular reviews in the man-
agement press.
The board’s motivation for a new plan stemmed 
from two concerns. First, they were concerned that 
managers’ interests were not aligned with those of 
shareowners. They were particularly concerned that 
EPS was not a good measure of performance in the new 
era where the management mantra had become “maxi-
mization of shareowner value.” They noted that while 
Berkshire’s EPS had been improving steadily, at an 
average annual growth rate of 9% in the last decade, 
the company’s shareowners had not benefited. The 
company’s share price had increased only slightly over 
that period of time.
Second, the board wanted to force more objectivity 
into the performance evaluation and reward system. 
Some board members believed that too many subjec-
tive bonus awards were being made, giving managers 
bonuses even in years where their entity did not per-
form well. One effect of allowing subjective judgments 
was that bonus awards were only loosely correlated 
with the realized operating performances. Another 
effect was a lot of misspent time, as managers engaged 
in “politicking.” They tried to convince their evaluators 
that they had performed well, even though the results 
were disappointing. The board members in favor of 
change thought that a new incentive system should 
place sharp limits on the use of subjectivity in granting 
bonus awards, if not eliminate it entirely.
The new system
In response to the board’s request, William Embleton 
asked three consulting firms to submit proposals for 
an engagement to design a new measurement and 
incentive system. After a series of meetings, the Berk-
shire management team and board selected the large 
New York-headquartered firm of Corey, Langfeldt and 
Associates (CLA). The consulting engagement was 
staffed by CLA associates based in London.
The CLA approach was based on the firm’s proprie-
tary “economic profit” measure of performance. The 
CLA formula for economic profit was:
Economic profit 5 Adjusted Net Operating Profit after 
Taxes 2 Capital 3 Cost of Capital]
Net operating profit after taxes (NOPAT) excluded all 
nonoperating noncash charges, such as depreciation, 
amortization, asset write-offs and write-downs, and 
reserves. Cost of capital was determined annually for 
each business unit based on the yield on long-term gov-
ernment obligations plus a risk premium calculated 
based on an assumed capital structure and risk factor 
(b value) for comparable peer firms. Since Berkshire’s 
business units were all seen as being in relatively stable 
industries, all were given the same cost-of-capital 
rate of 10%.
In each of their engagements, CLA would propose a 
specific combination of adjustments to NOPAT to make 
the economic profit measure “better,” to better match 
costs and benefits and, hence, to improve the relation-
ship between economic profits and share prices. The 
CLA system designers had identified well over 100 
adjustments that might be used in certain situations. 
But in Berkshire’s case, the consultants proposed only 
two adjustments because they wanted “to keep the 
model simple.” First, they suggested that the company’s 
consumer advertising expenses should be capitalized 
and amortized on a straight-line basis over three years. 
The current year’s expense was added back to operat-
ing profits, and the capitalized amount was added to 
net operating assets. Exhibit 1 shows an example.
Second, the CLA consultants suggested that the 
goodwill that had arisen from the company’s acquisi-
tions should not be amortized.1 Hence, they suggested 
that cumulative goodwill which had been amortized to 
date should be added back to net operating assets, and 
all goodwill amortization expense should be added 
back to operating earnings.
In their presentations, the CLA consultants explained 
that their economic profit measure was superior to all 
other measures, particularly accounting earnings, that 
Berkshire could use. The consultants presented charts 
showing that their measure of economic profits was highly 
1	 In the United Kingdom, companies can disclose goodwill amorti-
zation charges on the income statement, and they can also present 
goodwill-adjusted earnings per share figures.

444
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
correlated with returns to shareowners in a broad range of 
corporations. Thus, they claimed, it is the one measure 
that provides “the right signals to management all the 
time.” Motivating managers to maximize their entity’s 
economic profit would induce them to invest in their enti-
ties’ futures. They would make all investments promising 
returns greater than the corporation’s cost of capital. It 
would also motivate them to recognize the full cost of 
tying up the company’s capital and, hence, to reduce their 
employed assets where the returns are inadequate.
Knowing their competition, the CLA consultants also 
directed some of their critique at systems that tried to link 
management incentives to elaborate combinations of 
measures. The multiple-measurement systems, they 
explained, were usually hopelessly complex. The systems 
typically incorporated measures that were not directly 
linked with shareowner value. They included perfor-
mance concepts that were vague (for example, personnel 
development) and supported by weak measures. And they 
rarely made the trade-offs among the multiple measures 
clear. The overall effects were diffusion of management 
attention and loss of understandability and accountability.
The CLA consultants also recommended against the 
implementation of a stock-based incentive program. 
They pointed out that stock prices are affected by many 
external factors and are highly volatile in the short 
term. They further explained that stock-based incen-
tives are not an effective tool for motivating division- 
and lower-level managers who can have, at best, a 
modest impact on share prices.
The measurement focus of the CLA presentation was 
highly convincing to some of the board members. One 
remarked:
This is what we need, one simple measure that goes 
up when shareowner value is created and that goes 
down when value is destroyed. If we get our manag-
ers focused on this measure, they will be working in 
the best interest of our shareowners. With earnings, 
we just don’t know what we’re getting.
A second element of the CLA system involved the 
automatic ratcheting of performance targets. In the CLA 
system managers were compensated directly for improv-
ing their entity’s economic profits. In the first year, the 
performance targets were set based on a projection of 
the unit’s historical economic profit growth rate, if that 
growth rate was deemed to be good performance, multi-
plied by 75%. Thereafter performance targets were set 
automatically based on improvements from the actual 
performance of the prior year. Each business unit’s 
performance target was ratcheted up (down) by 75% of 
the amount by which actual performance exceeded (fell 
short of) the unit’s prior year’s performance. The CLA 
consultants explained that this method of setting targets 
avoided the need to renegotiate performance targets 
each year and, hence, the politics and gameplaying that 
was almost inevitably associated with these negotia-
tions. It also incorporated the desired management phi-
losophy of continuous improvement.
A third element of the system was the explicit elimi-
nation of payout thresholds and caps. Managers were 
assigned a target bonus, a fixed percentage of base pay, 
that would be earned if their units just achieved their 
performance targets. These targets were increased 
slightly from the bonus levels that were earned under 
Berkshire’s old system to encourage managers’ accept-
ance of change. The target bonuses ranged from 20% of 
base salary for functional managers within a division to 
100% for Berkshire’s managing director. If the units 
exceeded their performance targets, managers would 
earn larger bonuses. The slope of the line determining 
the payoffs for each level of economic profit was based 
on each unit’s historical growth rate. This slope was 
intended to remain the same from year to year, although 
it was subject to board review. The maximum bonus 
that could be earned was unlimited (see Exhibit 2).
The fourth element of the system was a “bonus 
bank” that was intended to reduce manager risk by 
smoothing out the bonus awards, to reduce managers’ 
short-term gaming behaviors, and to improve manager 
retention. If a unit’s economic profit performance 
exceeded the performance target, the “excess” bonus 
earned (calculated as the slope of the payoff function 
times the amount by which the actual economic profit 
exceeds the target) was credited to the bonus bank. 
Managers were then paid their target bonus plus one-
fourth of the amount in the bonus bank. If economic 
profit fell below the target amount, a negative entry 
(obtained as the slope of the payoff function times the 
amount by which the actual economic profit fell short 
of the target) was made to the bonus bank. If managers 
changed divisions, their bonus bank amounts would 
follow them. Managers who left Berkshire voluntarily 
forfeited the amounts in their bonus bank accounts.
Problems and concerns
While Berkshire’s board members’ and managers’ 
hopes were high after the company’s introduction of the 
new economic profit system in 2000, early experiences 

Berkshire Industries PLC
445
with the system were disappointing. The new system 
had caused several problems and concerns. The board 
and the top management team were considering 
whether the system needed fixing. Some even ques-
tioned whether the new system should be continued.
One problem was that the new system had created 
considerable management confusion, which persisted 
even after all the operating managers had attended a 
series of training sessions. Corporate managers thought 
that the operating managers would quickly learn how 
the economic profit measure worked, since their 
bonuses now depended on it. But a number of the man-
agers seemed not to understand how the economic 
profit measure was computed, and some of them con-
tinued to manage their entities based on their old earn-
ings-based management reports.
A second problem was discouragement and demoti-
vation in the Spirits Division (Spirits). In both 2000 and 
2001, economic profits in Spirits were poor. In the 
recessionary times, consumers were drinking less spir-
its. With consumer demand down, some of the Spirits 
Division’s competitors cut prices significantly and Spir-
its had to match their reductions. This had a disastrous 
effect on margins. Spirits failed to achieve both its 
2000 performance target and its ratcheted-down 2001 
target, by wide margins. As a consequence, bonus 
awards for Spirits managers were significantly below 
target levels, and all Spirits managers had sizable 
negative balances in their bonus bank accounts.
Ian Dent, Spirits’ managing director, asked William 
Embleton for some special adjustments. He requested 
that the Spirits Division performance targets be 
adjusted retroactively to reflect the economic condi-
tions that were actually faced. He did not think it was 
fair for his managers to suffer the negative effects of 
factors over which they had no control. He explained 
that his team had worked very hard in the trying condi-
tions they had faced, and they had made the hard deci-
sions that were called for, including cutbacks in 
discretionary expenses and layoffs. He also requested 
that the economic profit system not be applied to his 
division because it was not responsive to changing mar-
ket conditions. Ian was worried that his division would 
suffer some significant management losses because of 
his managers’ negative bonus bank balances.
A third problem was a widely shared perception 
of a basic failure of the economic profit measure 
itself. Overall, Berkshire’s performance, as measured 
in terms of economic profit, seemed excellent. 
Economic profit had improved since 2000, but the 
company’s stock price had actually declined over this 
period (see Exhibit 3). The CLA consultants had sold 
the new system based on a promise of a high correla-
tion between the company’s economic profit num-
bers and returns to shareowners, but to date, at least, 
the economic profits did not seem to be moving in 
parallel with the stock price. The shareowners had 
not benefited.
Exhibit 1  Example showing effect of capitalization and amortization of consumer advertising expenditure (£000s)
First year of use of new system
1998
1999
2000
2001
Advertising expense as reported on income statement
900
1,200
1,800
2,400
Amortization for economic profit report
1998
300
300
300
1999
400
400
400
2000
600
600
2001
800
Advertising expense on economic profit report
1,300
1,800
Cumulative advertising expense (on income statement)
900
2,100
3,900
6,300
Less: cumulative amortization (economic profit report)
300
1,000
2,300
4,100
Capitalized advertising for economic profit calculation 
of capital for economic profit report
1,600
2,200

446
Chapter 10 • Financial Performance Measures and Their Effects
Exhibit 2  Link between economic profit performance and bonus awards

Berkshire Industries PLC
447
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede, with the research assistance of Xiaoling 
(Clara) Chen.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Exhibit 3  Berkshire Industries’ earnings, economic profit, and stock price, 1997–2002

Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
448
 In  Chapter  10 , we explained how the use of fi nancial results controls that emphasize current-
period accounting profi ts can cause managers to become excessively short-term-oriented, or 
 myopic , in their decision-making. Myopia is a well-known dysfunctional side eff ect of fi nancial 
results control systems. In this chapter, we fi rst discuss the pressures that cause managers to act 
myopically. We then discuss six fi nancial results control remedies that can be used to alleviate 
the myopia problem. These remedies include: (1) reducing the pressure for short-term profi ts; 
(2) using preaction reviews (action controls) to control developmental, long-term investments; 
(3) lengthening the horizon over which performance is measured and rewarded (using long-
term incentives); (4) changing what is measured (other proxies for shareholder value creation 
instead of accounting income); (5) adjusting or improving accounting measures to better refl ect 
economic income; and (6) replacing (or complementing) accounting measures with (nonfi nan-
cial) value drivers of performance (that is, using  combination-of-measures systems ). 
 Pressures to act myopically 
 Managers, particularly top-level managers, must understand the ever-present tension between 
short-term and long-term results and continually guard against unwise tradeoff s between 
them. What promotes one often hinders the other, or so it may seem. Every manager must con-
tinually strive for both, performing well today while, at the same time, developing the business 
for a sustainable future. As Peter Drucker is credited to have said, a manager “must keep his 
nose to the grindstone while lifting his eyes to the hills, which is quite an acrobatic feat.”  1 “Lift-
ing the eyes to the hills” is particularly hard when managers believe that the stock market will 
react vigorously to short-term earnings reports. Managers, then, may be inclined to take steps 
to maintain a smooth, steady earnings growth pattern and to meet or beat market earnings 
expectations at almost any cost. 2 
 To suggest that stock markets react only to earnings, however, is an overstatement at best 
and misguided at worst. Research indicates that stock markets also react to announcements 
of strategic signifi cance, such as investments in capital or research and development (R&D) 
projects, new management hires, and mergers and divestments. In other words, if manage-
ment is deemed to be taking sound long-term decisions, the market seems to be able to com-
pound into its valuations what the long-term impacts on earnings will be, even though the 
results may not be refl ected fully – or even adequately – in short-run profi ts with immediate 
eff ect. Indeed, as we discussed in  Chapter   10   , stock valuations should refl ect estimates of 
 CHAPTER 11 
 Remedies to the Myopia Problem 

Pressures to act myopically
449
businesses’ long-term cash generation potentials even though they are imperfect estimates, 
as we also discussed.3
Nonetheless, pressures for short-term results remain present. Acting myopically is one com-
mon response to the pressures arising from the belief in the need to prop up short-term profits. 
Another common response is to engage in gamesmanship, such as by altering judgments about 
reserves, which we discuss in more detail in Chapter 15. But here is an example to illustrate 
this point, as well as whether or not the market properly responds to the reported accounting 
profits:
Many banks have been “releasing” reserves against bad loans since the worst of the crisis 
passed and the economy began recovering. That money flows to the bottom line, helping 
some banks boost earnings at a time when lending and trading profits have been soggy. 
[…] The releases are “masking some horrible operating performance,” said Mike Mayo, a 
banking analyst at Crédit Agricole. “The bottom line is your earnings power is decreasing.” 
As banks write off bad loans as uncollectable, they are releasing reserves they no longer 
need to cover those loans. When those charge-offs exceed new funds being added to 
reserves, there is a net release of reserves. That money is booked as income. […] Banks 
say the reserve releases are justified by declines in bad loans and the economy’s improve-
ment. The releases are permissible under accounting rules. […] But analysts note the 
releases aren’t high-quality contributors to earnings, because they aren’t generated by the 
banks’ core businesses and can’t be repeated indefinitely. “It’s cotton candy,” said Matt 
McCormick, a portfolio manager and banking analyst with Bahl & Gaynor Investment 
Counsel in Cincinnati. “It looks good, but it’s not going to be substantial for you.” […] 
Reserve releases don’t drop directly to the bottom line, because they become income that 
must be taxed. But the earnings contribution at some banks is substantial.4
“At some point you run out of reserves to release, and you can’t cut more costs without 
cutting loans,” says Josh Rosner, an industry analyst with Graham Fisher in New York. 
Among the four largest U.S. banks, Bank of America has received the biggest boost from 
releasing reserves: the move helped it turn $11.8 billion in losses since 2010 into $11.4 bil-
lion in profit. Citigroup, which reported $40.4 billion in net income over that time, would 
have booked about half that amount without the accounting benefit. […] Analysts say ram-
pant use of the reserves has made profit reports virtually meaningless. [But] not all inves-
tors may feel the same way. JPMorgan rose 25 percent in the last 12 months. Citigroup is 
up 27.5 percent over that time, while Wells Fargo gained 31.3 percent and Bank of America 
surged 44.6 percent. “Bank earnings are a joke,” says Paul Miller, a bank analyst at FBR 
Capital Markets in Arlington, Virginia. “They are very poor quality, but investors are just 
embracing them.”5
Myopia and gamesmanship are the two most common forms of what is generally referred to 
as earnings management. Some companies are known for earnings management. For example, 
an article in Fortune explained that,
[…] though earnings management is a no-no among good-governance types, [General 
Electric] has never denied doing it, and GE Capital [GE’s large capital division that has 
helped finance GE’s vast array of businesses] is the perfect mechanism. Since financial 
assets are, under normal conditions, far more liquid than tangible assets, the company can 
buy or sell them in the final days of a quarter so that reported earnings rise with comforting 
smoothness, right in line with Wall Street expectations.” As such, GE Capital “has become 
such a necessary part of GE’s legendary earnings results that General Electric could not 
perform as well or consistently if anything happened to it,” according to Michael Lewitt, 
President of Harch Capital Management, a hedge fund.6,7

Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
450
Some chief executives, however, appear to steadfastly object to such pressures and simply refuse 
to smooth or manage earnings, and over the long term, their companies’ stock performance does 
not seem to have been hurt by it. For example, Progressive, an Ohio-based insurance company, 
seems to have maintained strong stock performance even though its chairman, Peter Lewis, 
refused to try to smooth earnings zigzags: “It is not honest,” he said. “Besides, when companies 
manage their earnings they mar their own business intelligence: the accounting stuff that is 
required to smooth things out causes management to mislead itself.”8 Another example is Ama-
zon, the giant electronic commerce company, whose boss Jeff Bezos has defied the critics of 
short-termism by resolutely taking a long-term view and proclaiming the following:
“Amazon will continue to make investment decisions in light of long-term market leader-
ship considerations rather than short-term profitability considerations or short-term Wall 
Street reactions.” The company continues to invest heavily today, consistent with this prin-
ciple, and investors have accorded the business an astonishingly high market capitaliza-
tion while reporting remarkably little current profits.9
Another excerpt presumably gives the lie to critics of short-termism:
Amazon went public in 1997, then worth $438m. It now has a market cap of $315bn. A bru-
tally short-termist market would require that such exponential growth be underpinned by a 
steady stream of cash return. Amazon has […] never paid a cent in dividends. But surely it 
has a history of strong profits, at least? General Electric, whose market cap Amazon 
recently overtook for the first time, earned $15bn last year. Amazon has earned a cumula-
tive $2bn in the last 20 years. […]. Then it must have consistently met analysts’ expecta-
tions? It has fallen short in 13 of the last 20 quarters, and yet over that period the stock has 
risen 300 per cent. […] Twenty years later, it is still that promise of future cash flows that 
keeps investors bidding up the stock. [Contrast this with] IBM that has adhered to the sup-
posed Wall Street orthodoxy of cutting costs, leveraging up and paying big buybacks and 
for a while the stock outperformed. But recently the outperformance ended. The complaint 
of Stanley Druckenmiller, a hedge fund investor, was not that there was insufficient financial 
engineering but that the company had not invested for growth.10
Nonetheless, it seems to take resolve, and even perhaps some stubbornness, to resist pres-
sures to act myopically. Therefore, it is important to have an effective management control sys-
tem (MCS) in place to help mitigate myopia whether it stems from real or presumed capital 
market pressures. In addition to the approaches discussed in Chapter 10 to try to offset the ten-
dencies of accounting measures of performance that may inflict myopia, we discuss a further 
six lines of defense here.
Reduce pressures for short-term profit
Sometimes the best myopia-avoidance solution might be merely to relax the pressure for gener-
ating short-term profits. The reductions in pressure can be affected in either of two basic ways. 
The weighting placed on the annual (or quarterly) profit targets can be reduced, perhaps even 
to zero; while other, longer-term performance indicators, such as market share or technical 
breakthroughs, are emphasized. At Johnson & Johnson, for example, the large and successful 
healthcare and pharmaceuticals company, profits are not directly linked with rewards:
Our company philosophy is to manage for the long term. We do not use short-term bonus 
plans. Salary and bonus reviews are entirely subjective and qualitative and are intended to 
reward effort and give special recognition to those who have performed uniquely.11

Control investments with preaction reviews
451
Alternatively, the short-term profit targets can be made easier to achieve. Profit targets that 
are more highly achievable create some room for managers to be preoccupied by longer-term 
initiatives. The risk of doing so, however, is that relaxing short-term profit pressure may trigger 
slackness – a loss of concentration on short-term results – without necessarily a sharper long-
term focus. Therefore, when relaxing the pressures for the short term, the managers whose 
pressures are being relaxed must be trusted; otherwise (or in addition), the needed pressure 
must be imparted in other ways, such as through timely nonfinancial performance evaluations 
(which we discuss further in this chapter).
A curious example of this, and the importance of an appropriately balanced focus on targets 
and other criteria, can also be found in sports. For example, in China,
[…] an investigation into the country’s sports administrator condemned the “blind pursuit” 
of athletic success. [Specifically,] China’s State General Administration of Sports will abol-
ish the practice of rewarding provincial teams and coaches for their medal hauls. Instead, 
it will put more weight on “multiple criteria including public participation in sports and cost 
efficiency of public sports investments” [after] the country’s sports administrator con-
cluded that “the unscrupulous, illegal and fraudulent pursuit of gold medals not only dis-
torts the spirit of sport but hurts career development and national interests.” [However,] 
athletics experts said gold medals were not the problem so much as the lengths coaches 
and athletes were willing to go for them. “It is not wrong to focus on gold medals in com-
petitive sports, the essence of which is to jump higher, run faster and be stronger,” said 
Tan Jianxiang, a sports professor at South China Normal University. “But they shouldn’t be 
connected to sports officials’ promotions or make them richer. The value of gold medals 
has been twisted.”12
A more conventional example is found in banking. Stuart Gulliver, chief executive of HSBC, a 
global bank, said that:
[…] the bank had changed the incentive schemes for staff in its retail and wealth management 
business to switch them from earning a commission on each product sold to a “balanced 
scorecard” of performance targets, adding that [among other factors] this had reduced reve-
nue but “the quality of revenue that remains is significantly higher as the risk of customer 
redress is greatly reduced [presumably as a result of less aggressive sales tactics].”13
Control investments with preaction reviews
To control investment myopia, some companies find it useful to use financial results controls to 
reward improvements in short-term operating performance only. The costs of longer-term 
investments are “taken out of the equation” and considered below the income statement line for 
which the managers are held accountable. Therefore, managers feel no pressure, or less tempta-
tion, to cut these investments to boost short-term profits. The key to implementing this approach 
is to distinguish between operating expenses, which are necessary to produce current-period 
revenues, and developmental expenses, which are incurred in order to generate revenues in 
future periods. If this distinction can be made, the profit center managers are asked to maxi-
mize operating income – that is, they are asked to focus on current period sales and costs – 
which are good indicators of short-term performance. The managers are asked to propose ideas 
for developmental investments that will produce revenues and profits in future operating peri-
ods. The quality of those investment ideas and the payoffs from the expenditures is then 
monitored with other forms of control, such as preaction reviews of expenditure or investment 

Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
452
proposals through so-called capital budgeting rounds, and by monitoring of progress and 
accomplishments against predefined milestones (as discussed in Chapter 3).
Some companies use variations of this approach, such as by not charging operating units for 
some developmental expenses that benefit them. Instead, they fund certain types of business 
development at higher organization levels (such as corporate or business group levels) until the 
investments begin to generate revenues in order to cushion lower-level entities’ earnings from 
the impact of these expenses.
Other firms have split themselves into what could be called today businesses and tomorrow 
businesses. In the today businesses, managers are charged with making their businesses lean, 
efficient, and profitable in their competitive environment. Managers of tomorrow businesses 
are charged with developing new business opportunities (such as products and markets) that 
might someday augment or replace the existing today businesses. Today businesses are con-
trolled through tight financial results controls. Tomorrow businesses are controlled with a com-
bination of nonfinancial performance indicators and action controls. A good example is Google. 
In late 2015, Google was restructured into a company called Alphabet, where the “old” Google 
is Alphabet’s today business that generates dollops of cash, and where the “other companies that 
are pretty far afield” are its tomorrow business, requiring huge cash injections. In the words of 
Larry Page and Sergey Brin, co-founders of Google, the rationale for setting up Alphabet was 
explained as follows:
Google is not a conventional company. We do not intend to become one. As part of that, 
[we make] bets in areas that might seem very speculative or even strange when compared 
to our current businesses. […] We did a lot of things that seemed crazy at the time. Many of 
those crazy things now have over a billion users, like Google Maps, YouTube, Chrome, and 
Android. […] We are creating a new company, called Alphabet. […] Alphabet is mostly a 
collection of companies. The largest of which, of course, is Google. This newer Google is a 
bit slimmed down, with the companies that are pretty far afield of our main internet prod-
ucts contained in Alphabet instead. What do we mean by far afield? Good examples are 
our health efforts: Life Sciences (that works on the glucose-sensing contact lens), and 
Calico (focused on longevity). Fundamentally, we believe this allows us more management 
scale, as we can run things independently that aren’t very related. […] We will rigorously 
handle capital allocation and work to make sure each business is executing well. […] Ser-
gey and I are seriously in the business of starting new things. Alphabet will also include our 
X lab, which incubates new efforts like Wing, our drone delivery effort. We are also stoked 
about growing our investment arms, Ventures and Capital, as part of this new structure. 
[…] We are excited about getting more ambitious things done, taking the long-term view, 
empowering great entrepreneurs and companies to flourish, [and] investing at the scale of 
the opportunities and resources we see.14
In less invasive variations than the complete restructuring of Google, however, the approach 
of separating and protecting developmental expenditures has two major limitations. One is that 
a clear distinction between operating expenditures and developmental expenditures may not 
exist, or that the distinction can be blurred. For example, manufacturing process improvements 
and market development programs will probably provide benefits (cost reductions or additional 
revenues) in current and future periods. Consequently, managers have some latitude to incur 
expenses either above or below the operating margin line, and they can use this latitude to game 
the system. In particular, when their entity is performing well in comparison with budget tar-
gets, they can choose to fund development expenditures within their current operating budget.
Another limitation of this approach is that it passes final decisions about which developmen-
tal expenditures to fund to corporate management. Relative to entity managers, corporate 
managers in large, diversified corporations, particularly, are almost inevitably less well 

Extend the measurement horizon (use long-term incentives)
453
informed about the prospects of each specific business and the desired type and level of fund-
ing. This may harm the quality of resource allocation decisions to key investments in the future. 
On the other hand, corporate managers may squander, or be seen to squander, resources on “pet 
peeve” or “moonshot” projects that never materialize and are relegated as mere distractions.15
Extend the measurement horizon (use long-term incentives)
Lengthening the period of measurement is a third alternative for improving the congruence of 
the accounting measures of performance. As discussed in Chapter 10, the longer the period of 
measurement, the more congruent the accounting measures of performance are likely to be 
with economic income (changes in shareholder returns). One way to enhance congruence is by 
providing incentives tied to performance measured over longer periods; that is, by providing 
long-term incentives.
Even Christine Lagarde, managing director at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
weighed in on this issue, as The Financial Times outlined:
[…] banks need to shake up bonus-heavy pay structures and attack corporate cultures that 
encourage excessive short-term risk-taking, opining that pay practices needed to encour-
age the long-term performance of banks and other companies rather than short-term 
gains, and that shareholders needed to be given a bigger say on pay while banks should 
have the power to claw back pay and bonuses in the event of misconduct or changes in 
performance. “Regulation alone cannot solve the problem,” Ms. Lagarde said, adding that 
“whether something is right or wrong cannot simply be reduced to whether or not it is per-
missible under the law; what is needed is a culture that induces bankers to do the right 
thing, even if nobody is watching.”16
On the point of shareholder “say” on the issue, one of the world’s biggest fund managers, Fidel-
ity, a top 10 shareholder in a third of the FTSE 100 groups as well as several European compa-
nies, added its voice and took aim at the long-term incentives of chief executives in an effort to 
tie executive pay more closely to the performance of the company. In particular,
[…] Fidelity wants companies to increase the time executives must hold shares from three 
years to five before they are allowed to sell. That is intended to encourage long-term plan-
ning rather than “quick fix” policies with only short-term benefits. Dominic Rossi, invest-
ment chief for equities at Fidelity, said: “Extending holding periods for a minimum of five 
years is easy to operate. It will result in a far better alignment between executive compen-
sation and the longer-term performance of the company.”17
As discussed in Chapter 9, long-term incentive plans come in a variety of forms, but they usu-
ally provide rewards either for stock appreciation or for the attainment of performance targets, 
such as earnings per share (EPS) or accounting returns such as return on investment (ROI) or 
return on equity (ROE) measured over a three- to five-year period. One study suggests that 
long-term incentive (LTI) plans are in common use and exhibit the following features:
● Not only are LTI plans in common use, companies also have been re-examining the mix of 
components and appear to have increased performance-based awards while de-emphasizing 
stock options and time-based restricted stock (see Chapter 9 for a discussion of the difference 
between the two).
● Moreover, the survey suggests that the most prevalent metrics used in performance-based 
LTI plans are return measures, such as ROI, TSR (Total Shareholder Return) and EPS.

Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
454
● Most companies use at least two metrics, where TSR is used most frequently.
● Companies also use LTI metrics that reflect key measures of success in their industry. For 
example, the automotive industry frequently uses cash flow as a metric, focusing executives 
on liquidity to manage the significant cash requirements associated with the industry. In the 
pharmaceutical and technology industries, where the success of a company’s pipeline and 
current product offerings is reflected in their stock price, TSR is more frequently used.
● Furthermore, many companies use a two-pronged approach of measuring performance 
against both internal goals and relative to an external benchmark such as by using a peer 
group (see also Chapter 9).
● The study concludes that “this continued shift towards performance-based LTI compensa-
tion reflects an effort by companies to respond to shareholder feedback and align executives’ 
pay with performance.”18
Long-term incentive plans are adopted to lengthen managerial horizons and, thus, to 
attenuate management myopia. To have these effects, however, the expected payoffs from 
long-term incentives must reflect the additional discounting that employees apply to deferred 
compensation. As discussed in Chapter 9, one survey study estimated that incentive pay is 
discounted compared to fixed pay by about 10 percent for cash bonuses and 50 percent or 
more for deferred bonuses and long-term incentives.19 Hence, extending the time horizon of 
incentives has a cost in terms of providing higher payoffs in expectation. If the firm fails to 
compensate for this, it will provide motivational effects that are still skewed toward the short 
term. But giving the long-term incentives too much weight, or making them potentially too 
lucrative, also causes problems, as examples in Chapter 9 suggested and as the following 
quote reinforces:
Linking compensation to share price has been viewed as a way to make sure the interests 
of the CEO and other top managers are aligned with those of shareholders. In recent years, 
however, the system has encouraged executives to take actions that boost share price in 
the short term but hurt shareholders and other stakeholders later, after the executive has 
cashed out.20
This is why other features of long-term incentive plans have been increasingly adopted (or 
been mandated as is the case, among others, for bankers in Europe). One such feature comes in 
the form of so-called claw backs, which allow bonuses or other incentive payouts to be rescinded 
if long-term performance is poor (or when it turns out that pay stemmed from managed, manip-
ulated performance, misconduct or material errors, or if performance suffers from a severe 
downturn from a risk management failure). Even short-term incentives, like bonuses, can be 
given a long-term feature by paying them not in cash but in some greater or lesser fraction in 
deferred shares to allow for these to be recouped or clawed back in future years if performance 
suffers.21 Or some incentives could be paid out in so-called performance bonds, where when 
future performance tanks, the bonds would be forfeited; in the case of banks, the debt could be 
used to help recapitalize a bank that fell into difficulties (where the bonds would then auto-
matically convert into equity).22 These are all relatively new features of incentive plans or 
incentive instruments whose principal purpose is to ensure that employees and managers act in 
the longer-term interest of the company.
Another issue to be addressed in designing accounting-based long-term incentive plans is the 
performance standard. Firms commonly use the numbers included in the long-term strategic 
plan as the standard. But this practice can cause problems. It can drive much of the creative 
thinking out of strategic planning, and it may make managers conservative in their aspirations 
(out of fear to be held against meeting those aspirations), exactly what most firms would not 
wish their strategic planning processes to suffer from.

Improve the accounting measures
455
Measure changes in value directly
A fourth possible remedy to the myopia problem is to try to measure economic income or 
shareholder value creation directly by estimating future cash flows and discounting them 
to the present value. This direct measurement of the value of an entity can be made both at 
the beginning and the end of a measurement period. The difference between the beginning 
and ending values is a direct estimate of the value created during the period, and thus of 
economic income.
The idea of measuring economic income directly and then using it in a financial results con-
trol system to motivate managers’ behaviors is fraught with difficulties, however. Hence, this 
remedy to myopia suffers from feasibility. Will the cash flow forecasts prove to be accurate? 
Who should prepare the forecasts? Certainly some measurement difficulties need to be faced, 
but some believe that measuring changes in economic income directly might be workable 
within usable levels of accuracy in some situations (although likely rather infrequently).
Estimating future cash flows is not a new management concept. Most companies have con-
siderable experience in preparing estimates of future cash flows and in reviewing the estimates 
for reasonableness. Analyses of future cash flows are a standard part of investment and acquisi-
tion proposals, and some companies are also accustomed to using discounted cash flow meth-
ods for strategic planning purposes. Discounting cash flow estimates is also an important part 
of several accounting rules (such as those related to long-term receivables, leases, asset impair-
ments, and pension liabilities), despite the importance accountants place on measurement pre-
cision. One of the significant trends in accounting actually seems to be a greater tolerance for 
this so-called softer, forward-looking, but potentially more relevant, data.
That said, measurement precision and objectivity are significant stumbling blocks to the use 
of direct measures of economic income. If rewards are linked to the cash flow estimates, manag-
ers may be tempted to bias their estimates. These biases could perhaps be controlled by having 
the estimates prepared, or at least reviewed, by an independent third party, such as a consulting 
firm or auditor. To do their work, however, these outsiders would have to be given access to 
considerable amounts of information, and the process would undoubtedly be expensive. None-
theless, if these problems can be overcome, direct estimates of economic income (changes in 
cash flow potentials) could be given some practical use in results-control systems, at least on a 
less frequent basis (e.g. every three years rather than annually).
Improve the accounting measures
A fifth approach to mitigate investment myopia involves changing the measurement rules to 
make the accounting income measures better; that is, more congruent with economic income. 
These improvements address one or more of the deviations between accounting income and 
economic income.
Some measurement improvements provide a better matching of revenues and expenses. 
Companies can choose depreciable lives for fixed assets that are close to the useful economic 
lives of the assets, not conservatively short, as is typical. Similarly, companies can capitalize all, 
or at least more, categories of expenditures made for the express purpose of generating cash 
flows (revenues or cost savings) in future periods (developmental expenditures). Capitalization 
of investments, such as for R&D, customer acquisition, and employee development, will provide 
a better matching of revenues and expenses if the future cash flows (revenues) are forthcoming 
from these investments, as they should if the investments are good ones.

Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
456
Some measurement improvements recognize profits (and losses) more quickly, which makes 
the performance indicators timelier. The value changes are recognized as soon as they can be 
measured or estimated, rather than waiting for the completion of a transaction. Variations of 
this concept already exist, such as in mark-to-market accounting in certain industries (e.g. 
banks), where certain assets on the balance sheet are held at their market value rather than 
their historical cost. This causes profits and losses to be recorded when the changes in value are 
observed and not just when the assets are sold.23 Oil companies are another example, where the 
timing of the value changes could anchor on when oil or gas is discovered, which is commonly 
several years in advance of the production of the reserves and, hence, the cash flows to the firm 
and the accounting recognition of the gains.
Another possible adjustment involves charging depreciation for older assets that for finan-
cial reporting purposes are considered fully depreciated, suggesting they no longer have a cost. 
Charging depreciation recognizes the economic value of these assets that are still in use and 
provides proper signals, and incentives, that managers should replace the assets when the 
decline in the assets’ service potentials warrants the replacement.
Some accounting measure improvements are designed to reflect the company’s entire cost of 
capital, not just the cost of debt through its interest deductibility. Companies concerned about 
this problem include an imputed cost of equity capital on their income statements. Other 
accounting measure improvements are designed primarily to improve the denominator of 
return-on-investment measures (as discussed in Chapter 10). For example, some companies put 
all of their entities’ leases on the balance sheet regardless of whether they qualify under the 
prevailing accounting rules as capital leases.24 Note that such adjustments to accounting meas-
ures of performance, and many more, are akin to those originally proposed by Stern Stewart & 
Company (now Stern Value Management), the consulting firm that recommends the Economic 
Value Added (EVA) measure (also discussed in Chapter 10).
However, most of these measurement improvements deviate from the applicable accounting 
rules and, hence, their implementation will cause the performance reports used for manage-
ment control purposes to differ from those prepared for financial reporting purposes. The 
accounting measure improvements, then, necessitate the use of a third set of financial records, 
a management set, to supplement the books designed for financial reporting and tax purposes. 
Managers must be aware that these improvements, then, are not without costs. There are added 
processing, reporting, and reconciliation costs, and possibly costs of confusion that might not 
be inconsequential.
Measure a set of value drivers
The short-term, backward-looking, transactions-based orientation of accounting measures 
(discussed in Chapter 10) can be balanced by focusing also on other performance measures that 
are more future-oriented. For example, well-chosen nonfinancial measures can provide signals 
about what is likely in the future. Accomplishments in areas such as R&D, new product develop-
ment, product quality, and customer satisfaction are often value drivers and hence, leading indi-
cators of future financial performance. Thus, supplementing the accounting measures with 
some combination of these value drivers can be used to mitigate managers’ tendencies to prop 
up short-term financial measures at the expense of future performance. Indeed, many firms 
have found it useful to focus on a set of value drivers in their measurement systems. Because 
carefully selected value drivers are leading indicators of forthcoming cash flows and profits, 
value drivers focus managers’ attention on actions and decisions they should worry about today 
in order to create (or not destroy) value in the reasonably distant future.

Measure a set of value drivers
457
One commonly used measurement combination is of market and accounting measures, each 
of which we discussed separately in Chapter 10. This particular combination of measures is 
often a key element of performance stock or performance options that we discussed in Chapter 9, 
and which also create long-term incentives, a myopia-problem remedy that we discussed above.
A second commonly used measurement combination involves the use of either summary 
accounting measures or specific, disaggregated financial elements (e.g. revenues, expenses, 
margins, assets, and liabilities), or both, with any of a number of nonfinancial measures (e.g. 
product quality, yields, customer satisfaction, and days since last lost-time accident). These 
combinations can be as simple as including a second parameter in an incentive contract. A divi-
sion manager’s bonus, for example, might be based 50% on return on assets and 50% on sales 
growth in units. But measurement combinations can also be quite complex.
Numerous stylized combination systems with a variety of trade names have been developed 
and publicized in recent years, such as Performance Prisms25 and Balanced Scorecards,26 just to 
name two. Kaplan and Norton’s Balanced Scorecard is undeniably the most widely adopted of 
these. Specifically, it proposes a combination of short-term measures and leading indicators 
framed into the following four perspectives:27
● Financial perspective: How do we look to shareholders? Examples of measures in this category 
include operating income and ROE.
● Customer perspective: How do our customers see us? Examples of measures in this category 
include on-time delivery and percent of sales from new products.
● Internal perspective: What must we excel at? Examples of measures in this category include 
cycle time, yield, and efficiency.
● Innovation and learning perspective: Can we continue to improve and create value? Examples 
of measures in this category include time to develop next generation, new product introduc-
tions versus competition.
The first perspective is primarily short-term-oriented and financial in nature, whereas the 
other three entail prominent categories of nonfinancial, leading indicators of future financial 
performance.
The generic concept of combination-of-measures systems is not new, however. Many compa-
nies have used a variety of measures of value drivers. In the 1950s, when General Electric was 
decentralizing its organization into over a hundred profit centers, its managers developed a 
measurement system comprised of eight key measures: short-term profitability, market share, 
productivity, product leadership, employee attitudes, personnel development, public responsi-
bility, and balance between short-range and long-range objectives. The eighth item was not a 
measure, but a reminder that the short/long-term balance was indispensable. GE’s managers 
ran their complex organization using this set of key performance indicators for much of the 
1950s and 1960s.28
Similarly, given the importance of new product development at 3M Corporation (now 3M 
Company or just 3M), all 3M divisions were required to have new products account for at least 
30% of their sales. At Emerson Electric (now Emerson), 10% of division (profit center) manag-
ers’ bonuses was tied to keeping their plants union-free, which they believed was critical to 
maintain the needed flexibility to implement product and process innovations.29 In the airline 
industry, important value drivers have traditionally included measures of on-time performance, 
mishandled baggage, ticket over-sales, and in-flight service, all of which are believed to affect 
customer satisfaction.30 Empirical evidence, much focused on customer satisfaction, appears to 
support the premise that some nonfinancial measures are significantly associated with future 
financial performance and contain additional information not reflected in past financial 
measures.31

Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
458
The core idea behind combination-of-measures systems is that if the organization tracks the 
right set of leading indicators and gives them proper importance weightings, then profits will 
inevitably follow. Some studies document that both nonfinancial and financial performance 
improve following the implementation of performance measurement and incentive systems 
that include nonfinancial performance measures.32 But to make the value-driver sets effective, 
managers must carefully consider which leading indicators to use and how the chosen indica-
tors should be weighted, individually and in total.
In essence, then, a measurement combination approach including leading indicators of future 
performance, or value drivers, should reflect the economic effects on shareholder value of specific 
management accomplishments and failures more quickly than do accounting measures. Hence, 
holding managers accountable for some combination of leading indicators shifts the balance of incen-
tives toward longer-term concerns because it forces the managers today to make tradeoffs between 
short-term profits and the drivers of future profits. As such, this balancing of short-term and long-
term concerns can be seen as an attempt to make the performance indicators more timely. This is 
desirable because financial performance measures are generally thought to be lagging indicators of 
performance. The goal is to provide the information needed in a feed-forward control system, which 
strives to alert managers of potential problems before they unravel in poor financial performance.
Besides the forward-looking feature, another key argument supporting the use of measure-
ment combination approaches is that no single measure, no matter how good it is, can reflect 
organizational performance sufficiently well to motivate proper management decision-making. 
As such, the multiple measures might provide a more complete, and hence more congruent, 
reflection of performance by capturing aspects of performance that are not reflected, or are not 
weighted highly enough in importance, in a summary performance measure. Measurement 
combinations are also more flexible. With summary financial measures, every dollar of inflows 
(revenues) and outflows (expenses) is weighted the same in importance. As a consequence, val-
uable information can be lost in the aggregation. If, however, the summary measures are 
decomposed, different financial elements can be given different weightings of importance. For 
example, revenues from new products can be weighted more highly than those from mature 
products, and, if it is appropriate, controlling general and administrative expenses (overheads) 
can be given greater importance than controlling raw material costs.
Another version of the completeness argument reflects a stakeholder view of the firm. That is, 
market and accounting measures reflect mainly the interests of the organization’s financial 
claimants; the shareholders or owners. Hence, other measures can help reflect the interests of 
other stakeholders, which might include employees, customers, suppliers, conservationists, 
governments, and society at large (which we discuss further in Chapter 16).
Finally, combination-of-measures systems can address an understandability problem that 
exists in some settings. Some managers do not understand fully or near-completely what they 
should do to increase their entity’s value. Combination-of-measures systems give managers 
greater direction than do the systems based on summary performance measures, either market 
or accounting in nature. If the combination systems are well designed, they impart a better 
understanding as to what should be done to create value. The (presumed or tested) causal link-
ages in a balanced scorecard,33 for example, provide managers with some guidance as to what 
they must do to influence the financial performance measures, which are at the end of the 
causal chain. In the words of Kaplan and Norton:
[A] properly constructed balanced scorecard should make explicit the sequence of hypoth-
eses about the cause-and-effect relationships between outcome measures and perfor-
mance drivers of those outcomes. Every measure selected for a balanced scorecard 
should be an element in a chain of cause-and-effect relationships that communicates the 
meaning of the business unit’s strategy to the organization.34

Measure a set of value drivers
459
But while balanced scorecard systems provide guidance to managers as to how to produce the 
desired ends, they can also erode their sense of decision authority.
Do these combination-of-measures systems work? Conceptually, it is difficult to argue 
against the combination-of-measures idea. They are flexible. If a summary performance meas-
ure has a weakness (e.g. too short-term oriented), managers can add another measure that min-
imizes that weakness (e.g. one that emphasizes returns in the future, such as new product 
development successes or building market share).35 If the combination of those two measures 
leaves out a concern for the environment, a measure can be added that induces managers to 
have that concern. And so on. Combination-of-measures systems are in widespread use, which 
suggests strongly that many companies have found them useful. However, because combina-
tion-of-measures systems exist in so much variety, with a large number of possible measures 
that can be included, they may be difficult to validate in terms of their effectiveness. That said, 
the following quote indicates their prevalence across sectors, including financial services:
Vishal Khosla, executive director at EY, said some companies were developing more 
sophisticated ways to measure executive performance. “We are increasingly seeing finan-
cial services firms, particularly those within the banking industry using approaches like the 
balanced scorecard to measure performance,” he said. “This approach uses a mix of both 
financial and non-financial metrics that are linked to the strategic goals of the firm, and 
also take account of a range of risk measures.”36
Inevitably, some companies’ combinations-of-measures systems are not effective. Some com-
panies uncritically implement boilerplate frameworks of measures without much consideration 
as to whether those frameworks fit the specific situation in which they are used. Other compa-
nies focus on the wrong measures. For example, managers of a fast food company thought that 
employee turnover was a key performance indicator, but subsequent analyses revealed that 
what explained the differing profitability of restaurants was, specifically, the turnover of super-
visors, not that of front-line employees.37 Even when the correct measurement concept is identi-
fied, decisions must still be made as to how to measure that concept. For example, in a retail 
environment, should customer satisfaction be measured by a survey of customers, by ratings 
from mystery shoppers, or in terms of a measure of customer retention?
Another difficult question to address is how many measures are needed to define perfor-
mance completely, or at least completely enough. For example, balanced scorecard systems are 
said ideally to contain 23 to 25 measures.38 For motivational purposes, however, 20 or more 
measures are probably too many. When so many measures are used, each of the individual 
measure’s importance is likely to become diluted, thereby causing employees to not pay suffi-
cient attention to the measures with low(er) weights as a consequence.
Perhaps not surprisingly because of the ease of working with summary financial perfor-
mance measures, one study by a compensation consulting firm found that where companies use 
a balanced scorecard, the financial dimension of performance – one of the four performance 
dimensions – is weighted heavily, 55% of the total in their sample of balanced scorecard firms.39 
Should this seemingly heavy weighting of financial measures be considered balanced? Will the 
lesser emphasis on the nonfinancial measures be sufficient to mitigate myopic behaviors 
induced by the financial measures?
There is also some evidence that managers may apply their own implicit weights to the vari-
ous measures. For example, one study documented that even after a large financial services 
firm implemented a balanced scorecard system, most of the company’s managers continued to 
base performance evaluations on factors other than those included in the balanced scorecard.40 
Other studies found that cognitive biases or information overload may cause evaluators to over-
emphasize the common measures, those used throughout an organization or based on a com-
mon methodology, as compared to the unique measures included in a balanced scorecard.41

Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
460
The importance weightings would be difficult to set even if the performance factors were 
independent, but they are not. Many, if not most, of the performance factors interact. For exam-
ple, consider just two factors – labor productivity and production throughput. Throughput can 
be increased by working employees harder, but at some point fatigue sets in, causing productiv-
ity to decrease. Similar tradeoffs occur with many of the combinations of measures that might 
be considered.
Many of the payoff relationships are also nonlinear. For example, customer satisfaction may 
be particularly important if a company has not been paying attention to it. At some point, how-
ever, after the firm has spent enough on customer satisfaction, or maybe even overspent, further 
improvements in customer satisfaction are not good investments. Greater satisfaction beyond 
that point might not generate any additional sales. The inflection point is hard to determine.
Generally, the weights placed on the various performance indicators must vary across organ-
izational settings and must be aligned with the strategy. The weights also must be adjusted over 
time as conditions change, and they must vary depending on the quality of the measures and 
the cost of measuring. If the weights are ill-calibrated, the combination-of-measures system 
will have the same effect as if the wrong measures were chosen, meaning that the weighted 
combination of measures does not reflect, or is incongruent with, the organization’s objectives.
Finally, costs should be considered. The cost of designing and implementing a simple combi-
nation-of-measures system involving the use of just a few measures that are already in existence 
might be minimal. In many organizations, however, the development of a balanced scorecard 
often involves consultants to help with both the development and implementation processes and 
possibly the development of new measures. Some individual measures can also be quite expen-
sive to use. It is expensive to administer customer satisfaction surveys, to employ mystery shop-
pers to evaluate operations from a customer perspective, or to conduct safety audits. But some of 
these costs are already incurred (e.g. safety audits) for other purposes (e.g. health and safety 
compliance), and increasingly more structured and unstructured data are available – for exam-
ple, about customers – harvested from social media and other “big data” channels.
Conclusion
As discussed in Chapter 10, the primary goal of managers of for-profit organizations should be 
to maximize shareholder value. Value is a long-term concept. Short-term accounting profits and 
returns provide imperfect, surrogate indicators of shareholder value changes (economic 
income). Management myopia, an excessive focus on short-term performance, is an almost 
inevitable side effect of the use of financial results control systems built on accounting measures 
of performance.
Myopia can be mitigated at top management levels by holding these managers accountable 
for increasing market valuations. Shares of stock are priced, although surely also imperfectly, 
based on a corporation’s expected future cash flows, not just on current-period results. But the 
task of reducing myopia is more difficult at middle and lower management levels. This chapter 
described six alternatives that can be considered to mitigate myopia. None of the alternatives is 
a panacea. Still, it is important to understand where each of the alternatives falls short of per-
fection and how those shortfalls can be addressed. Choosing the “right” amount of pressure for 
short-term results to apply, the “right” control mix to use, and/or the “right” measurement 
alternative to adopt requires detailed analyses and complex judgments. Each approach has 
advantages and disadvantages, but when applied effectively, it will enhance the understanding 
of the role everyone plays in creating value, motivate and reward accordingly to create it, and 
mitigate behavioral displacements.

461
Notes
Notes
	 1	 P. F. Drucker, The Practice of Management (New York: 
Routledge, 2011), revised Classic Drucker Collection edi-
tion, p. 296.
	 2	 “Corner Office Thinks Short Term: Managers’ Focus Is to 
Hit Targets, Smooth Earnings, Sacrificing Future 
Growth,” The Wall Street Journal (April 14, 2004), p. C3. 
See also J. Graham, C. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, “The Eco-
nomic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting,” 
Journal of Accounting and Economics, 40, no. 1–3 (December 
2005), pp. 3–73; I. D. Dichev, J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, 
and S. Rajgopal, “Earnings Quality: Evidence from the 
Field,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 56, Nos. 2–3 
(Supplement, December 2013), pp. 1–33.
	 3	 For a more extensive treatment of the question of 
whether capital markets inculcate short-termism, see M. 
J. Mauboussin and D. Callahan, “A Long Look at Short-
Termism: Questioning the Premise,” Journal of Applied 
Corporate Finance, 27, no. 3 (Summer 2015), pp. 70–82.
	 4	 “Banks Depleting Earnings Backstop,” The Wall Street 
Journal (February 3, 2012), online at on.wsj.com/
ypN061.
	 5	 “The Accounting Wizardry behind Banks’ Strong Earn-
ings,” Bloomberg (January 14, 2014), online at bloom.
bg/1mc0IcA.
	 6	 “GE under Siege,” Fortune (October 15, 2008), online at 
money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune.
	 7	 Under the leadership of Jeff Immelt, GE’s chief executive, 
the company has in recent years been divesting most its non-
industrial portfolio, including its media and finance entities, 
to re-focus on its core industrial roots, where most of its GE 
Capital divestiture had been completed by late 2015 when it 
sold its commercial lending and leasing businesses with 
roughly $32 billion in assets to Wells Fargo, a large bank. 
See “Last Big Chunk of GE Capital Sold to Wells Fargo,” For-
tune (October 13, 2015), online at for.tn/1VPTIlQ.
	 8	 “Executive Critical of ‘Managed’ Earnings Doesn’t Mind if 
the Street Criticizes Him,” The Wall Street Journal (April 16, 
1999).
	 9	 Quoted from Mauboussin and Callahan, “A Long Look at 
Short-Termism,” op. cit., p. 77.
	10	 “Unicorns Beware: Markets Get It Wrong on Tech Valua-
tions,” The Financial Times (November 13, 2015), online 
at on.ft.com/1iYJIoa.
	11	 R. Simons, “Codman & Shurtleff, Inc.: Planning and Control 
System,” Harvard Business School Case No. 9-187-081, p. 8.
	12	 “China Seeks End to Gold Medal Fixation,” The Financial 
Times (January 27, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1CuiPiv.
	13	 “HSBC Suffers 20% Fall in Profits,” The Financial Times 
(May 7, 2014), online at on.ft.com/1s29h5M.
	14	 “G is for Google,” Larry’s Alphabet Letter (August 10, 
2015), online at abc.xyz/investor/founders-letters/2015 
or at abc.xyz.
	15	 See, for example, “Crazy Diamonds: Billionaires Are 
Funding Lots of Grandiose Plans,” The Economist (April 
30, 2016), online at econ.st/1NWiDf0.
	16	 “Christine Lagarde Calls for Shake-up of Bankers’ Pay,” 
The Financial Times (May 6, 2015), online at on.ft.
com/1hgJZCY.
	17	 “Fidelity Challenges Companies on Long-Term Incen-
tives,” The Financial Times (September 22, 2013), online 
at on.ft.com/1J3jvM7.
	18	 Changing Practices in Executive Compensation: Long-Term 
Incentive Plan Design (Compensation Advisory Partners, 
2015), online at www.capartners.com/uploads/news/
id209/capartners.com-capflash-issue66.pdf.
	19	 Making Executive Pay Work: The Psychology of Incentives 
(PwC, 2012), online at www.pwc.co.uk.
	20	 “Incentives for the Long Run: An Executive Compensation 
Plan That Looks Beyond the Next Quarter,” Knowledge@
Wharton (May 27, 2009), online at knowledge.wharton.
upenn.edu. See also A. Edmans, L. Goncalves-Pinto, Y. 
Wang, and M Groen-Xu, “Strategic News Releases in 
Equity Vesting Months,” Working Paper (2016), online at 
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2489152.
	21	 See, for example, “Five Trends in Stock Compensation,” 
HR Times (March 20, 2014), online at hrtimesblog.com; 
“UK Bankers Face Tough Bonus Clawbacks,” The Financial 
Times (July 29, 2014), online at on.ft.com/1k5Te8U; “SEC 
Proposes Rules on Executive Pay and Performance,” The 
New York Times (April 29, 2015), online at nyti.
ms/1OeoKcQ.
	22	 “BoE’s Mark Carney Urges Banker Bonus Overhaul,” The 
Financial Times (November 17, 2014), online at on.ft.
com/1oXyG5d.
	23	 For a broader and recent discussion, see C. Laux and C. 
Leuz, “The Crisis of Fair-Value Accounting: Making Sense 
of the Recent Debate,” Accounting, Organizations and 
Society, 34, Nos. 6–7 (August–October 2009), pp. 826–34.
	24	 As mentioned in Chapter 10, accounting rules for leases 
can vary by jurisdiction and change over time. For a 
recent change in the accounting rules for leases under 
IFRS, see “IFRS 16 Leases: Project Summary and Feed-
back Statement,” IFRS (January 2016), online at ifrs.org.
	25	 A. Neely, C. Adams, and M. Kennerley, The Performance 
Prism (London: Financial Times/Prentice Hall, 2003).
	26	 See, for example, the core text R. S. Kaplan and D. P. 
Norton, The Balanced Scorecard (Boston, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press, 1996). But also see R. S. Kaplan 
and D. P. Norton, “The Balanced Scorecard: Measures 
that Drive Performance,” Harvard Business Review 
(July–August 2005), pp. 172–80; and several other arti-
cles by these authors on the balanced scorecard during 
the last two decades, such as R. S. Kaplan and D. P. Norton, 
“Having Trouble with Your Strategy? Then Map It,” 
Harvard Business Review (September–October 2000), 
pp. 3–11. For a historical account by one of the co-devel-
opers of the balanced scorecard, see R. S. Kaplan, 
“Conceptual Foundations of the Balanced Scorecard,” 
Harvard Business School (Working Paper 10-074, 2010).
	27	 Kaplan and Norton, The Balanced Scorecard, op. cit.

Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
462
  28  See, for example, R. Greenwood,  Managerial Decentraliza-
tion: A Study of the General Electric Philosophy  (Lexington, 
MA: D.C. Heath, 1974). 
 29  “A Knight with Thick Armor for IBM,”  Business Week 
(August 23, 1993). 
 30   B. Behn and R. Riley, “Using Nonfi nancial Information to 
Predict Financial Performance: The Case of the U.S. Air-
line Industry,”  Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance , 
14, no. 1 (Winter 1999), pp. 29–56; A. Davila and M. 
Venkatachalam, “The Relevance of Nonfi nancial Perfor-
mance Measures for CEO Compensation: Evidence from 
the Airline Industry,”  Review of Accounting Studies , 9, 
no. 4 (December 2004), pp. 443–64. 
 31  For a classic academic article on this topic, as the title sug-
gests, see C. D. Ittner and D. F. Larcker, “Are Nonfi nancial 
Measures Leading Indicators of Financial Performance? 
An Analysis of Customer Satisfaction,”  Journal of Account-
ing Research , 36 (Supplement, 1998), pp. 1–35. For a 
recent, related article, see C. X. Chen, E. M. Matsumura, J. 
Y. Shin, and S. Y. Wu, “The Eff ect of Competition Intensity 
and Competition Type on the Use of Customer Satisfac-
tion Measures in Executive Annual Bonus Contracts,”  The 
Accounting Review , 90, no. 1 (January 2015), pp. 229–63. 
 32  See, for example, R. Banker, G. Potter, and D. Srinivasan, 
“An Empirical Investigation of an Incentive Plan that 
Includes Non-Financial Performance Measures,”  The 
Accounting Review , 75, no. 1 (January 2000), pp. 65–92. 
   33  See, for example, D. P. Huelsbeck, K. A. Merchant, and T. 
Sandino, “On Testing Business Models,”  The Accounting 
Review , 86, no. 5 (September 2011), pp. 1631–54. 
 34  Kaplan and Norton,  The Balanced Scorecard , p. 31. For 
Kaplan and Norton’s point in this quote on “communicat-
ing the meaning of the strategy to the organization,” see, 
for example, D. Campbell, S. M. Datar, S. L. Kulp, and V. 
G. Narayanan, “Testing Strategy with Multiple Perfor-
mance Measures: Evidence from a Balanced Scorecard at 
Store 24,”  Journal of Management Accounting Research , 
27, no. 2 (Fall 2015), pp. 39–65. 
   35   See, for example, M. J. Gibbs, K. A. Merchant, W. A. Van 
der Stede, and M. E. Vargus, “Performance Measure Prop-
erties and Incentive System Design,”  Industrial Relations: 
A Journal of Economy and Society , 48, no. 2 (2009), 
pp. 237–64. 
 36  “Top Managers’ Pay Reveals Weak Link to Value,”  The 
Financial Times  (December 28, 2014), online at  on.ft.
com/1CODoYe . 
 37  C. D. Ittner and D. F. Larcker, “Coming Up Short on Non-
fi nancial Performance Measurement,”  Harvard Business 
Review , 81, no. 11 (November 2003), pp. 88–95; See also 
G. Cokins, “The Promise and Peril of the Balanced Score-
card,”  Journal of Corporate Accounting and Finance , 21, 
no. 3 (March–April 2010), pp. 19–28. 
 38  D. P. Norton, “BEWARE: The Unbalanced Scorecard,” 
 Balanced Scorecard Report (March 15, 2000). 
 39  Towers Perrin, “Inside the ‘Balanced’ Scorecard,”  Compuscan 
Report (January 1996), pp. 1–5.  
 40  C. D. Ittner, D. F. Larcker, and M. W. Meyer, “Subjectivity 
and the Weighting of Performance Measures: Evidence 
from a Balanced Scorecard,”  The Accounting Review , 78, 
no. 3 (July 2003), pp. 725–58. 
   41   M. Lipe and S. Salterio, “The Balanced Scorecard: Judg-
mental Effects of Common and Unique Performance 
Measures,”  The Accounting Review , 75, no. 3 (July 2000), 
pp. 283–98; R. D. Banker, H. Chang, and M. Pizzini, “The 
Judgmental Eff ects of Strategy Maps in Balanced Score-
card Performance Evaluation,”  International Journal of 
Accounting Information Systems , 12 (2011), pp. 259–79; Y. 
Chen, J. Jeremias, and T Panggabean, “The Role of Visual 
Attention in the Managerial Judgment of Balanced-Score-
card Performance Evaluation: Insights from Using an 
Eye-Tracking Device,”  Journal of Accounting Research , 
54, no. 1 (March 2016), pp. 113–46. 
 We’re a young company, and this is an exciting 
place to work. But the work is intense. People are 
here at work 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
Our employees would probably be motivated even 
without our bonus plan. But the plan is still impor-
tant. It is a tool to focus people’s attention on the 
right things … Being a young company, we’re still in 
a “preprofi t” stage of operation. Thus our perfor-
mance measures are primarily nonfi nancial. The 
nonfi nancials are what we need to pay attention to. 
 Michael Redard, Vice President of Finance and Admin-
istration for Catalytic Solutions, Inc., was comment-
ing on his company’s performance measurement and 
 CASE STUDY 
 Catalytic Solutions, Inc. 

Catalytic Solutions, Inc.
463
incentive systems. Mike was confident that his compa-
ny’s systems were working effectively, but he also knew 
that the systems would have to evolve significantly over 
time as the company grew and matured.
Company history and strategy
Catalytic Solutions, Inc. (CSI) was founded in Santa 
Barbara, California, in 1996 by Steve Golden and Bill 
Anderson. Steve, who had a PhD in material sciences, 
developed a new coating formulation and proprietary 
manufacturing processes that produced catalytic con-
verters with better performance and substantially lower 
prices than competing products. Catalytic converters 
are used to reduce the pollution caused by combustion 
engines. Bill, formerly the CEO of a publicly held com-
pany, had over 30 years of experience as a senior execu-
tive. He became the CEO of CSI shortly after raising 
seed money to finance the first few years of operation.
Exhibit 1 presents a timeline of the company’s early 
history. CSI’s first patents were issued in 1999 and its 
first sales were recorded as CSI started producing con-
verters for stationary engines. These early sales proved 
that the technology was viable. But CSI’s managers’ 
immediate goal was to supply converters to the huge 
automotive sector that spent over $7 billion (estimate 
for 2001) on catalytic converters, primarily because of 
tightening worldwide emissions regulations.
CSI’s technological advantage was mainly due to the 
fact that its converters used 50–80% less Platinum 
Group Metals (PGMs) than did competitors’ converters. 
Standard converters typically contained large amounts 
of PGMs platinum, palladium, and rhodium. As pollu-
tion standards became increasingly stringent (Exhibit 2), 
the demand for, and the price of, PGMs had risen dra-
matically (Exhibit 3). In 2001, about 60% of the world 
supply of PGMs was used to produce converters. Further, 
there was uncertainty about the supply of palladium, 
most of which came from Russia. The average converter 
cost per vehicle tripled between 1990 and 2001, becom-
ing the third-largest automobile component cost after 
the engine and transmission. The savings resulting from 
CSI’s lower usage of PGMs could range from $40 for a 
small-vehicle converter to as much as $200 for those 
used in large sports utility vehicles (SUVs). In an indus-
try where manufacturers “kill for pennies,” this pre-
sented an enormous cost saving potential. At the same 
time, CSI’s proprietary technology was shown to have 
superior performance characteristics. CSI converters 
were able to withstand extremely high temperatures in 
exhaust systems and meet increasingly stringent emis-
sions standards worldwide.
For years, three companies had dominated the sup-
ply of catalytic converters to the automobile market. 
However, CSI managers thought that the risk of one of 
these companies being able to appropriate CSI’s tech-
nology was relatively low, for several reasons. First, CSI 
had patent protection. CSI had been issued two pat-
ents, and three others were pending. (Each patent 
establishes a protection period of 17 years.) Second, 
CSI had developed some innovations, such as the coat-
ing composition and a proprietary manufacturing pro-
cess, that CSI managers thought would be hard to 
imitate, even based on a finished product analysis 
(reverse engineering). Third, CSI continued to expend 
significant resources to improve its technology and to 
maintain its lead. And finally, suppliers to the automo-
bile industry faced substantial barriers to entry. It had 
taken CSI several years to get established in the auto 
industry. New entrants copying CSI’s technology would 
face similar challenges and would not be able to dem-
onstrate a substantial cost advantage over CSI.
Suppliers for new platforms had to cooperate with car 
manufacturers several years before new models were 
launched. Winning a new original equipment (OE) com-
mitment translated into sales, but with a one- to five-year 
lag, depending on the customer and the platform. In the 
meantime, CSI had to work closely with the engine 
development teams of major car companies. Strict sched-
ules had to be met during several rounds of preparing, 
testing, and shipping samples. Consistency and perfect 
quality were crucial. Further, it was a prerequisite for 
auto industry suppliers to obtain the QS-9000 quality 
certificate, which was a more demanding equivalent of 
the ISO-9000 certification. It was hard to obtain business 
without demonstrating technical skills, a commitment to 
flawless production, and reliable on-time deliveries.
CSI managers were also in the process of developing 
applications for other markets. One was the growing 
light duty diesel market, which, management esti-
mated, would total $2.2 billion by 2008. Outside the 
transportation industry, the power-generating sector 
was likely to become the next major opportunity. More 
stringent emission regulations required pollution 
reductions of more than 50% of the existing standards 
by as early as 2003. The market for natural gas turbine 
converters was estimated to grow to nearly $1.3 billion 
by 2008. Other markets could include alternative fuel 
vehicles and fuel cells that may someday revolutionize 
the transportation industry.

464
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
Early successes
CSI’s early revenue stemmed largely from sales in the 
auto industry after-market, a $50 million market for con-
verter replacements. OE commitments were to follow.
Honda Motor Company became the early OE adop-
ter. It started evaluating CSI’s technology in 1999, and 
in October 2000 it took an initial 10% stake in CSI. Pro-
duction for the Honda Stepwagon model began in 
December 2000. Two additional vehicle programs were 
added in 2001. In late 2001, CSI was assigned to a high-
volume platform for General Motors scheduled to begin 
in 2004. In early 2002, the company signed a strategic 
agreement with Ford to evaluate several high-volume 
platforms. By this time, CSI was cooperating at some 
level with most of the major automakers of the world.
In June 2002, CSI received the Gratitude Award for 
Excellency in Research and Development by Honda 
Motor Company. During a special award ceremony at 
CSI, Mr. Tsuneo Tanai, senior vice president/general 
manager of Honda R&D Americas, Inc., stated:1
In early testing, everyone at Honda was very 
impressed by the great performance of the CSI prod-
uct. Honda realized the huge potential that this tech-
nology promised. On behalf of Honda, I would like to 
express my deepest gratitude to everyone at CSI.
This award attested to CSI’s success in the early 
years of the company’s existence. CSI’s converter prod-
uct had won acceptance in one of the toughest markets 
in the world. Mike Redard explained: “It is extremely 
hard to penetrate the automotive market, change is 
slow in this industry.”
CSI’s product design had clearly won acceptance 
from the industry. The next step was to get ready to 
produce several million perfect quality converters each 
year. Production quality was important because the 
auto market was unforgiving.
The company in 2002
Most of CSI’s senior management team had been with 
the company for several years (see Exhibit 4). The new-
est member was CFO Kevin McDonnell, who joined in 
2002. CSI’s board consisted of three of the executive 
officers and four outside directors.
In 2000, CSI employed 38 people. That number grew 
quickly to 110 in 2001, and 125 in 2002. In 2002, about 
half of the employees worked in manufacturing and 
quality control; one-third were engineers assigned to 
R&D, and the rest were in sales and administration. 
Given that the main part of the research had been car-
ried out earlier, recent efforts concentrated largely on 
the development of applications in close cooperation 
with the customers. Many of the engineers were new, 
young PhDs with little industry experience. The com-
pany policy was to attract open-minded people who 
were not burdened with taken-for-granted approaches 
established in the converter industry. Mike Redard 
explained: “This is an exciting place to work with lots of 
opportunity, but there is also an element of risk due to 
the early stage of the company. We tend to attract ambi-
tious people who are comfortable taking some risks.”
People came to CSI because they believed in its 
future success. They were highly committed and hard 
working. Further, there was a strong spirit of team 
membership and cooperation, and personnel turnover 
was relatively low. CSI’s human resource practices were 
designed to encourage this cooperation and to attract 
long-term employees. Managers were closely involved 
with operations and knew their employees well, which 
contributed to the collective spirit and informal culture.
As CSI was preparing for mass production, however, 
it became clear that some more formal managerial 
structures and policies were necessary. The company 
needed measurement devices to keep track of progress 
on a number of dimensions. The emphasis was mainly 
on nonfinancial performance indicators. Critical drivers 
of long-term success were quality, on-time delivery, and 
production efficiency. It was also crucial to win new 
sales commitments from OE car manufacturers. CSI 
managers believed that the initial focus on nonfinancial 
targets would later translate into financial success.
Getting new OE commitments was the responsibil-
ity of top executives. Suppliers’ reputations and prices 
were the key determinants of success in the bidding 
process. Reputation was important because each OE 
commitment required several years of development 
work that had to meet the high standards of the auto 
industry. CSI also had to demonstrate significant cost 
savings over its more established competitors in order 
to have a good chance of winning new contracts. CSI’s 
bids were based on estimates of unit costs derived from 
product specifications provided by the customer.
CSI’s sales had climbed steadily through 2001, but 
the company was still perhaps a year or two from becom-
ing profitable. The managers hoped to issue a public 
stock offering within a few years, but there was no 
1	 Source: http://www.pressreleasenetwork.com/pr-2002/june/mainpr1280.
htm.

Catalytic Solutions, Inc.
465
pressure to rush the IPO. The company had adequate 
capital to fund its immediate product and process devel-
opment and operating needs. In January 2002, it raised 
$29.6 million from private sources.2 And with the public 
stock market valuations quite low in 2002, the cost of 
raising capital from private sources was not significantly 
higher than could be expected in a public stock offering.
Compensation systems
Every employee’s compensation package consisted of 
three components: base salary, stock options, and a 
bonus (since 2001). Base salaries were set to be at or 
slightly below the industry median. Mike Redard noted 
that “In many instances people who joined CSI from 
larger, established companies took a pay cut to do so.” 
The spread between the top and bottom salaries in the 
company was not large, and salary raises were modest, 
typically in the 4 –5% range.
The first year they joined CSI, each employee was given 
stock options. These options vested over the first four 
years at 25% per year and expired 10 years after granting 
(or within 30 days of leaving the company). While a for-
mal plan for annual stock option grants had not yet been 
implemented, follow-on grants were awarded on an ad 
hoc basis to ensure that employees’ stock holdings were in 
line with their current position and contribution to the 
company. The value of the stock option component varied 
substantially depending on tenure, position in the com-
pany and value to the organization.3 By 2002, employees 
(most of them were hired during the 2000 –2002 period) 
had on average accumulated value in stock options worth 
50% of their annual salary. The employees, in total, 
owned on a fully diluted basis about 24% of CSI shares.
One problem that Mike Redard had observed regard-
ing the options was that “many people don’t understand 
them and don’t know how to value them.” The options 
were, indeed, difficult to value. They could become quite 
valuable if the company went public and was successful. 
But they could also become near worthless if the com-
pany did not go public or if its performance languished.
The annual bonus plan was put in place in 2001 to 
communicate the importance of some short-term goals 
to employees and to align their interests with firms’ 
objectives. Some employees also appreciated the cash 
bonuses, which were more immediate and “tangible” 
than the stock options. The target bonus could be from 
5% to 15% of an employee’s base salary depending on 
level within the company. All bonuses were awarded 
based on corporate, not individual, performance 
because, as Mike explained, “We want a team effort. 
We all win or all lose together.”
Each year the senior managers discussed what ele-
ments they should be focusing on, why focus on those 
elements was important, and what weight each ele-
ment should carry. These discussions established the 
list of performance areas on which the bonus assign-
ments would be based. Because reliable, objective 
measures were important, managers recognized that 
the company needed to make rapid progress in improv-
ing some of its systems of measurement.
Exhibit 5 shows the performance areas linked to 
bonuses in 2001. The measures reflected company-
wide achievements in three areas: receipt of new OE 
commitments, execution of existing business, and 
building of infrastructure.
1.	 In the area of OE commitments, managers identified 
a number of specific programs that CSI felt they had 
the opportunity to bid for in 2001. If the manufacturer 
made the order commitment to CSI, CSI employees 
would earn a designated portion of their target bonus. 
The two largest of these programs were given an 
importance weight of 20% each. This meant that if cus-
tomers committed to both of these programs, employ-
ees would earn 40% of their target bonus amount just 
from this result. Also identified were three other large 
programs, each of which would add 10% of the target 
bonus and two smaller programs each with a weight of 
5%. Each additional, significant, unidentified OE com-
mitment would add 5%, up to a maximum of 15%, of 
the target bonus. If all of these OE commitments were 
made in 2001, CSI employees would earn 95% of their 
target bonuses. These programs were given a high 
weighting of importance because, as Mike Redard 
explained, “absent some problem, an assignment 
means you are designed into the vehicle platform, thus 
providing a high degree of visibility to future revenue.”
2.	 Execution of existing business was assessed in 
terms of two elements: shipment volumes to two 
major customers and shipment quality. Maximum 
shipments to each major customer could produce 
40% of the target bonus. The measures of quality 
were scrap, shipment errors, and on-time delivery. 
For each of these measures, performance ranges 
were set to result in bonuses of minus 5% to plus 5% 
2	 This and other financial and operational figures in the case are 
disguised.
3	 The exercise price of stock options was based on independent valua-
tions obtained during recent financing rounds.

466
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
for scrap, minus 10% to plus 5% for shipment errors, 
and zero to 10% for on-time delivery performance.
3.	 Finally, in 2001, the building of infrastructure 
referred to the attainment of QS-9000 certification. 
If this certification was attained, employees would 
earn 20% of their target bonuses.
Overall, the performance targets were set so that 
employees would have “a decent shot” at earning 100% 
of the target bonus. Performance ranges were set to 
allow bonus assignments to range from 0 % to 215% of 
the target amounts, but Mike Redard explained that if 
the actual bonus earned was extreme, say either 20% or 
200% of the target bonus, then “you’d have to question 
whether the performance targets were set correctly.”
In 2001, after what Mike Redard described as “a lot of 
hard work,” actual performance resulted in employees 
earning 117.9% of their target bonus. New OE commit-
ments accounted for 50% of the total, execution for 32.9%, 
quality for 15%, and QS-9000 certification for 20% (see 
Exhibit 5). The QS-9000 quality certificate was actually 
awarded to CSI in January 2002, but since the timing was 
so close to the end of the year, management counted it as a 
successful accomplishment of the goal for 2001.
Mike Redard explained that management reserved 
the right to make subjective adjustments to the bonus 
plan, and this QS-9000 timing issue was one example 
where they exercised that right. But he quickly 
explained that: “We don’t want to make subjective 
changes to provide rewards when the company has 
clearly not achieved its targets. Our employees under-
stand that there can be some variance in the bonus 
awards. There will be good years and bad years.”
In 2002, the performance areas linked to bonus 
awards were changed, as is shown in Exhibit 6. Finan-
cial targets, with a weight of 0 – 60% of the target 
bonus, were added. The focus was on increasing reve-
nues and reducing operating losses. As in 2001, CSI 
continued emphasizing new OE commitments 
(0 –105% of the target bonus) and quality as reflected 
in scrap, shipment errors, and on-time delivery (total 
weight of minus 15% to plus 20% of the target bonus). 
Building infrastructure was defined in 2002 as the 
upgrading of production to full automation, increasing 
safety standards, and obtaining QS-14001 certification 
(total weight 0 –20%). Having the automated produc-
tion line operational by the end of 2002 was a major 
challenge. Nevertheless, management had little doubts 
that the target would be met because it had to be – mass 
production was crucial for future growth.
CSI executives knew even this new list of measures 
omitted some important performance indicators. For 
example, it did not include a measure of new patents. 
While patents were unquestionably important, this 
particular measure was not included in the bonus plan 
because patents occurred infrequently and were the 
focus of only a few people in the company. But more 
importantly, CSI managers believed strongly that too 
many indicators would leave employees uncertain as to 
where the priorities should be. Mike Redard thought 
that the optimum number of measures was 4–6.
The performance targets for 2002 were again set so 
that 100% of the target bonus was realistically achiev-
able. Entering the last quarter of 2002, the projected 
outcome for the year was for payments of 75–100% of 
the target bonus.
In addition to these three compensation elements, 
Mike Redard explained that management had addi-
tional ways of rewarding top performers, including 
special raises and promotions.
The future
Overall, Mike Redard and the rest of the CSI manage-
ment team was confident that the company’s compen-
sation system, and in particular its bonus plan, was 
fulfilling its objectives:
We have benefited from the variety of backgrounds 
of our management team. We all worked for differ-
ent companies with different compensation poli-
cies, and we all have experience with both good and 
bad bonus systems. The nice thing about working 
for CSI is that here we have the chance to do it right 
from the start. Sure, we are still wrestling with how 
many performance measures to include and which 
ones are most relevant, but I think the overall struc-
ture is working. The bonus plan communicates in 
simple terms to our employees what is important …
We met most of our targets last year and I think 
in general people are quite happy with the bonus 
they received.
Mike expected that the financial measures would prob-
ably account for about 30% of the target bonus in 2002. 
He thought that the importance of financial measures 
would probably increase in the future as CSI became 
closer to becoming a public company. However, he also 
said he “would be shocked if their importance ever 
exceeded 50%.”

Catalytic Solutions, Inc.
467
Exhibit 1  Company history
Exhibit 2  Tightening NOx emissions* standards in the United States
*NOx (nitrogen oxide5) emissions are a major cause of smog problems in large cities.

468
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
Exhibit 3  Volatile cost of metals
Exhibit 4  Management team
Stephen Golden, PhD
CTO, Chairman, Cofounder
William Anderson
CEO, Cofounder
Daniel McGuire
President, COO
Kevin McDonnell
CFO
Michael Redard
VP, Finance and Administration
Timothy Truex, PhD
VP, Technical Marketing
Steven Shotwell
VP, Operations and Manufacturing

Catalytic Solutions, Inc.
469
Exhibit 5  2001 bonus objectives and actual results
Target bonus %
Actual result %
OE program commitments1
0–95
50
Execute existing business
Unit shipments2
0–80
32.9
Quality3
(15)–20
15
Build infrastructure
0–20
20
Total
215%
117.9%
Objective
Target bonus %
1OE program commitments
New program A
5
New program B
5
New program C
10
New program D
10
New program E
10
New program F
20
New program G
20
Other OE commitments
each 5%
(max. 15%)
2Shipments
Customer A
0–40
Customer B
0–40
3Quality
Scrap
(5)–5
Shipment errors
(10)– 5
On-time delivery
0–10
Exhibit 6  2002 bonus objectives
Target bonus %
Financial
0–60
Revenue
Operating income
OE program commitments
0–105
Quality
(15)–20
Scrap
Shipment errors
On-time delivery
Build/improve infrastructure
0–20
Mass production
QS-14001 certification
Safety
Total possible
205%
This case was prepared by Professors Michal Mateˇjka, Kenneth A. Merchant, and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Copyright © by Michal Mateˇjka, Kenneth A. Merchant, and Wim A. Van der Stede.

470
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
 In February 2014, Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH 
(DKG), a large privately held German conglomerate, 
instituted a new long-term incentive plan in its US sub-
sidiary. This incentive plan provided cash awards for 
key managers whose business units were able to meet 
the targets set in their long-term strategic plans, Alfred 
(Al) Harris (Senior VP-US Finance & Administration) 
explained why the plan was established and what he 
saw as the major risk: 
 The new long-term incentive plan is designed as an 
integral part of our compensation package, and we 
also expect it to have some positive motivational 
eff ects. In particular, we are hoping that it will rein-
force the message that we are interested in mana-
gerial thinking that extends beyond just concerns 
for quarterly or annual earnings. 
 I have some worries, though, that the new plan 
might not accomplish what we want, and might 
even be counter-productive. We are a highly 
decentralized fi rm, and the instructions we send 
to our division presidents about how they are to 
do strategic planning emphasize that we want it to 
be a creative process. We say: “We want you to do 
some ‘blue-sky’ thinking. You tell us, as an entre-
preneur, where you want to take the business. Be 
creative. Be ambitious. Assume the money is 
there.” But we haven’t always been consistent. 
When the divisions come in with their plans, we 
are prone to say: “This is ridiculous. There’s no 
way your business will quadruple in four years. Go 
back and be more realistic.” And now we are say-
ing that the managers’ long-term compensation is 
based on the strategic planning numbers. We may 
be eliminating any chance of getting the blue-sky 
thinking the company wants and really does need. 
 The company 
 DKG, headquartered in Dortmund, Germany, con-
sisted of a portfolio of manufacturing and service 
businesses in eight industry groups. The groups 
were quite varied, including, for example, packag-
ing products (e.g. glass containers), pumps, farm 
machinery, metal products, shipping, and informa-
tion services. (Summary financial figures are shown 
in  Figure  1 .)  
 DKG was managed by a three-member Executive 
Committee, consisting of the controlling stockholder 
and his representatives, and a five-member Board of 
Management ( Exhibit  1 ). Each Board of Manage-
ment member had both line and staff responsibility, 
with responsibility for one or more of the eight indus-
try groups and one or more staff functions (see 
 Exhibit  2 ). The industry groups were each run by a 
group president who was responsible for from five to 
seven product divisions. DKG’s 44 divisions were 
largely self-contained businesses that were organ-
ized on a functional basis, with manufacturing, mar-
keting, R&D, and finance managers reporting to the 
division president. 
 Although DKG had operating facilities in 14 coun-
tries, a signifi cant proportion of the company’s busi-
ness was in the United States. In 2014, fi ve of the eight 
industry groups and 19 of the 44 divisions were head-
quartered in the United States. The US legal entity 
accounted for approximately 50% of DKG’s sales and 
70% of net income. Most of the US operations had 
been part of a publicly held company that was acquired 
in 2003. 
 DKG’s divisions were quite diverse. Some of their 
markets were rapidly growing. Others operated in 
 Figure 1  Summary fi nancial information (US$ millions) 
 
 2013 
 2012 
 Consolidated Sales 
 4,701 
 4,791 
 Net Income 
 165 
 321 
 Cash Flow 
 285 
 435 
 CASE STUDY 
 Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH 

Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH
471
more mature markets. Most of the divisions were pur-
suing “build” strategies, seeking growth while trading 
off short-run profitability and long-run competitive-
ness. Two divisions were having to slash prices to main-
tain market share in competitive markets. A few other 
divisions were pursuing “harvest” strategies, maintain-
ing margins but losing market share. However, if they 
were generating satisfactory financial returns, they 
were not currently being considered for divestment.
Planning processes
The company’s annually recurring planning processes 
were divided into two distinct cycles: strategic plan-
ning and operating planning.
Most of the strategic planning was done at the divi-
sion level, with very few guidelines provided to the 
divisions by corporate. The division presidents were 
expected to analyze their strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, and threats and to present proposals to 
top management as to what they wanted to do over the 
next five-year period. The plans might involve invest-
ments, acquisitions, and/or divestments.
The strategic plan was not required to be submitted 
in any particular format, but it was expected that it 
would be in narrative form, backed up by a small set of 
supporting numerical schedules. (Exhibit 3 provides an 
outline summary of the planning package submitted by 
one of the Metals divisions as part of the most recent 
2014–2018 planning process that took place in 2013; 
the 2014 strategy planning exercise for the 2015–2019 
planning horizon was still ongoing.) Presentations of 
the strategic plans were made to the group presidents 
and the Board of Management in the spring and early 
summer.
After the strategic plans had been approved, the 
divisions began working on their operating plans. The 
operating plans were expressed in terms of income 
statements and balance sheets for the coming year by 
month. The operating plans were reviewed by the 
group president, the Board of Management, and head-
quarters staff in late September or early October.
The operating plans were intended to be detailed 
expressions of the first year of the strategic plans, but 
that mapping was not always exact. Al Harris 
explained:
A casual observer might conclude that the operat-
ing plans bear no relation to the first year of the 
strategic plans. But anywhere from 3–6 months 
have passed between the time the strategic plan is 
put together and the time when the operating plan 
is prepared, and a lot can change over that period. 
The operating plans reflect the new information. I 
would also say that it is generally true that the 
operating plans are more conservative – or “realis-
tic” if you prefer – than the strategic plans, some-
times significantly so.
The compensation package
The compensation package that DKG offered its man-
agement personnel varied significantly by location. For 
personnel in the industry groups based in Europe, com-
pensation consisted almost entirely of salary. In its US-
based groups, however, DKG offered its management 
personnel base salaries that were competitive, but not 
on the high side. It relied on incentive pay to make its 
total compensation packages competitive. The com-
pany offered two incentive plans – a short-term plan 
and a long-term plan – that paid cash awards based on 
“business unit” (a term with a specific meaning, 
explained further below) performances as compared to 
plans.
Short-term incentive plan
The short-term incentive plan (STIP) provided annual 
cash awards based on the level of return on investment 
(ROI) achieved by the business unit to which the indi-
vidual was assigned (again, explained further below). 
ROI was defined as pretax, pre-interest operating 
income divided by the net book values of assets less 
current liabilities. About 150 managers were included 
in the STIP, including most managers down to one or 
two levels below division presidents.
As part of the operating planning process, the Board 
of Management member responsible for each division 
or group established a range of ROI performance that 
would qualify for the short-term incentive awards. Per-
formance below the lower (threshold) level would 
qualify for no awards; in company terminology, the 
payout factor would be 0.0. Performance at the upper 
(maximum) level, would qualify for twice the normal 
award (payout factor of 2.0). No extra awards would be 
paid for ROI above this level. The payout factor 
increased linearly with ROI between the threshold and 
maximum levels. The ROI target in the operating plan 
was generally near the middle of the threshold-maxi-
mum range.

472
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
At normal performance levels (payout factor of 1.0), 
the STIP was designed to pay the following percentages 
of salary:
Expected Payout
Organizational Level
(% of salary)
Group President
65%
Division President
50
Functional Manager
35
Long-term incentive plan
The long-term incentive plan (LTIP) provided cash 
awards to approximately 60 high-level general and 
staff managers. Payouts were based on sales growth 
and ROI performance over a longer period, generally 
four years, again as compared to the targets established 
during the planning processes. Further details on the 
LTIP are provided later in the case.
The weighting of the elements 
of compensation
The payouts were set to provide compensation in approxi-
mately the following proportions for a division president:
Salary	
50%
STIP	
25%
LTIP	
25%
For higher management (e.g. group presidents), salary 
was a lower proportion of total compensation; for lower 
management, it was a higher proportion.
History of long-term incentives
DKG’s US businesses had had an LTIP since the 1980s 
(before being acquired by DKG). Up until 2009, the LTIP 
was a performance share plan. Under this plan, partici-
pants, who included personnel down to division presi-
dents and key staff personnel, were assigned a number 
of hypothetical shares of phantom stock and were paid 
biannually (i.e. every two years) for growth in the value 
of the stock over the prior four-year period. Typical two-
year awards were 100–150% of annual salary.
After DKG acquired the US-based public company, 
the performance share plan was continued, except that 
the payoffs were based on total corporate earnings 
instead of stock price because the shares were no longer 
publicly traded. The payouts were calculated with the 
assumption that the DKG price-earnings ratio would be 
equal to, and remain equal to, that of the public com-
pany at the point in time when the shares ceased to be 
traded.
In the Great Recession of 2008–2009 and beyond, 
however, the performance share plan fell on hard 
times. Business was so bad that the entire share issues 
were wiped out for long periods of time. This led DKG 
management eventually to replace the performance 
share plan with another type of LTIP plan.
The new LTIP
The new long-term incentive plan, announced in 
2014, was designed (1) to link motivation and 
rewards to the achievement of long-term strategic 
goals at the group and division levels, and (2) to pro-
vide payouts that, when combined with base salary, 
annual incentives, benefits, and perquisites, would 
provide the competitive total compensation 
opportunities required to attract and retain talented 
executives.
A. Participants and payout levels
Participants included the group and division presi-
dents and key headquarters staff personnel. In addi-
tion, group presidents could nominate other 
individuals for inclusion in the plan. These would be 
people who had made important contributions, who 
had significant responsibilities, and/or who had high 
potential. These nominations were subject to the 
approval of the Compensation Committee of the Board 
of Directors. In 2014, the total number of participants 
in the plan was 60 (2% of the exempt workforce in the 
United States.).
The payouts varied by level in the organization. The 
expected payouts were as follows:
Organizational Level of 
Participant
Expected Payout 
(% of salary)
Group president
65%
Division president/senior 
headquarters staff
50%
Functional manager
35% or 25% 
(depending on role)

Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH
473
B. Performance measures
Payouts were based on: (1) growth in sales, and (2) 
return on investment (ROI) in the business unit to which 
the individual was assigned over the performance cycle 
(normally four years). Sales growth was measured on a 
cumulative, compound basis over the length of the per-
formance cycle. ROI was averaged over the years in the 
performance cycle.
C. Definitions of business units
Each division was not defined as a unique business unit 
for purposes of assigning LTIP awards. Some divisions 
were grouped together into what were called “natural 
complementary work units.” For example, one work 
unit called “Glass Containers” included four glass con-
tainer-related divisions. Jerry Chapin (President – 
Packaging Products Group) explained why this was 
done:
Our glass container divisions are essentially in the 
same business; they just operate in different 
regions of the country. One of our objectives in 
combining them in the long-term incentive plan 
was to get the managers to think in terms of a 
national glass business, rather than as a regional 
business. More of that kind of thinking would help 
us improve our facility and equipment utilization 
and our service to national accounts.
At the time the plan was started (February 2014), 13 
business units were identified. These included 12 oper-
ating units plus New York staff, as follows:
1.	 Packaging Products Group
2.	 Glass Containers (4 Divisions)
3.	 Corrugated Containers (1 Division)
4.	 Electrical and Construction Products Group
5.	 Plastic and Foam Products (2 Divisions)
6.	 Electrical Products (2 Divisions)
7.	 Fluids Systems Group
8.	 Metal and Automotive Products Group
9.	 Automotive Products (2 Divisions)
10.	 Metal Products (2 Divisions)
11.	 Commercial Vehicles (1 Division)
12.	 Information Technology Group
13.	 New York Staff
D. Performance cycle
Despite the fact that the strategic plans were prepared 
with a five-year horizon, the long-term incentives were 
generally based on a four-year performance cycle. Lisa 
Kozlowski (Director – US Personnel) explained the 
rationale for this choice:
There are two reasons for the four-year perfor-
mance cycle. First, a four-year performance cycle 
keeps us in line with industry practice. The sur-
veys we have gathered show that most companies 
with long-term incentive plans have used either a 
three- or four-year cycle. Second, the perfor-
mance share plan we were replacing had a four-
year performance cycle, and we didn’t see any 
need to change.
In addition to the first normal four-year performance 
cycle (2014–2017), there were two shorter, “special” 
cycles, one covering 2014–2015 and the other 2014–
2016. This was done to help retain key personnel who 
had not received payments from the discontinued per-
formance plan. Al Harris noted:
We were really able to add the special cycles to 
replace the awards we had lost only because we’re 
privately held. If we were a public company, we’d 
have had to issue a proxy statement, and it would 
have been a difficult thing to explain.
E. Payout factors
The method of determining the long-term incentive 
payout factors was similar to that used for determining 
the factor for the short-term awards. During the plan-
ning process, a payout range was established for each 
performance measure, and the extreme points on this 
range determined the line from which the payout fac-
tors would be calculated.
Payout factors were set at 1.0 if the sales growth and 
ROI targets in the strategic plan were achieved. Gener-
ally the targets were set in the middle of the range from 
minimum to maximum. However, the responsible 
Board of Management member could decide that the 
plan’s target was either tough or easy and recommend 
to the corporate Compensation Committee that the 
performance range be skewed in one direction or 
another. Lisa Kozlowski explained:
Assume a business unit planned an ROI of 20%. A 
normal payout range might be 14–26% because the 
threshold is generally set about 30% below plan 

474
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
and the maximum is set about 30% above. But it is 
rare that ROI targets are set below 15%, which is 
what we assume as our cost of capital,1 so the 
range would probably be set at 15–26%.2
Further assume, however, that the responsible 
Board-of-Management member judged this plan to 
be optimistic or particularly challenging. He might 
then choose to skew the payout range downward, 
perhaps to 15–22%. He would be saying: “This is 
really a tough plan. If they make 20% ROI, I would be 
very pleased.” Then if this unit actually achieved the 
20% ROI, the payout factor would be approximately 
1.4, or 70% of maximum. [This example is shown in 
graphical form in Exhibit 4.] The opposite would also 
be true, as if the plan was conservative, the range 
might be set from 17–29%.
There are different ways to skin a cat. We could 
keep rejecting a plan because it’s too loose or too 
tough, or we can make this type of adjustment to 
the incentive plan to take care of the problem. We 
have been making the same kind of adjustments to 
the targets for the STIP for years.
F. The Award Calculation
The actual cash award was determined by multiplying 
the individual’s award potential (i.e. assigned percent-
age of salary) by a weighted average of the payout fac-
tors achieved in sales growth and ROI. Exhibit 5 shows 
a sample calculation.
The weighting between sales growth and ROI was set 
differently in different business units to reflect the relative 
importance of each, given the unit’s strategy. Growth-ori-
ented units had a higher weighting on sales growth, while 
mature units had a higher weighting on ROI. For example, 
the following chart shows how the weightings were set for 
the rapidly growing Information Technology Group and 
the more stable Fluids Systems Group:
Group
Sales Weighting
ROI Weighting
Information 
Technology
60%
40%
Fluids Systems
30%
70%
One final feature was included in the award calcula-
tion. In the event that a unit’s actual ROI was below the 
cost of capital, penalties were assessed according to the 
following schedule:
Amount ROI Below 
Cost of Capital
Reduction in Award
1 percentage point
25%
2 percentage points
50
3 percentage points
75
4 percentage points
100
It was expected that the assessment of penalties 
would be a rare occurrence.
As an incentive to encourage a manager to transfer 
from a healthy business unit to one in a turnaround situ-
ation, DKG provided a guarantee that for the first two 
years the payouts from the LTIP would be no less than 
what they would have been in the business unit they left.
Long-term incentives for US 
headquarters personnel
For headquarters personnel (e.g. staff), the LTIP awards 
were based on a payout factor calculated as follows:
● Ninety percent was based on a simple average of the 
payout factors of the five US-based groups, with no 
upper limit to the performance range considered.
● Ten percent was based on control of headquarters 
expense. Performance was rated at 1.0 at the budg-
eted level, 0.0 at 110% of budget, and 2.0 at 90% of 
budget.
Managerial judgment allowed
Provision was made for applying managerial judgment 
if it was felt that the actual performance as indicated by 
either measure was distorted by extraordinary circum-
stances. Recommendations for judgments were to be 
made by the group president of the affected business 
unit to the Board of Management and the Compensa-
tion Committee of the Board of Directors.
Al Harris explained why these after-the-fact judg-
ments were allowed:
We always have to keep in mind what we are trying 
to do: We are trying to motivate operating managers 
to make good business decisions. Uncontrollable 
1	 The cost of capital assumed for purposes of calibrating the expected 
returns in the long-term incentive plan could be changed annually. 
In 2014, it was set conservatively high. Indeed, Al Harris estimated 
that in the most recent period, 2013, the company’s marginal cost of 
capital was approximately 9.5%.
2	 For the sales growth measure, it was rare that the threshold was set 
below zero.

Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH
475
factors can distort the measures so much that they 
become motivationally useless.
For example, one of our groups does a significant 
amount of business in China. We are forecasting 
continuing weakness in the Chinese yuan, and if that 
happens, it will have a tremendous negative effect on 
that business. If we didn’t adjust the numbers, per-
sonnel in that group could lose the awards of several 
of four-year cycles in addition to their annual incen-
tive. We’re trying to be fair. There are always going to 
be judgments that will have to be made.
Concerns
DKG management felt obligated to make changes to 
their old compensation package because, as Al Harris 
explained, “A high proportion of our compensation is 
based on incentives, and our package was not really 
competitive when the old performance share plan 
zeroed out.”
But Al went on to describe two of his major concerns:
As I mentioned before, are we going to cause 
managers to become more conservative? Are we 
going to discourage really creative long-range 
thinking?
As a senior financial executive, I also worry 
about whether we have good control over our per-
formance measures. We don’t have an internal 
audit function, and the compensation of the most 
senior people who should be performing this con-
trol function is based on the same measures used 
to reward the managers. Is this a case of putting 
the “fox in the chicken house?” Do we have a sig-
nificant risk of bias without the necessary controls?
However, Al concluded, “This plan has only just 
been put in place. It would be unreasonable to think we 
could get everything perfectly right from the start. I 
expect that we will be in the process of evaluating what 
we’re doing for many years to come.”
Executive committee
Board of directors
Board of
management
Industry groups
• Agricultural and Farm Machinery (6, $636)
• Shipping and Transport Services (5, $726)
• Equipment Leasing and Services (5, $291)
• Metal and Automotive Products* (5, $543)
• Packaging Products* (5, $345)
• Electrical and Construction Products* (6, $573)
• Fluids Systems* (5, $690)
• Information Technology* (7, $204)
* Headquartered in New York
Note: Numbers in parentheses show the number of division in each operating group, and 2013 sales in US$ millions.
• Finance
• Control and Administration
• Legal
• Tax
• Planning and Corporate Development
• Personnel and Labor Relations
Staﬀ functions
Exhibit 1  Organization structure

476
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
Exhibit 2  Responsibilities of Board of Management members
Responsible for:
Board of Management Member
Industry Groups
Staff Functions
Eckhard Klein
Agricultural and Farm Machinery
Finance
Control
Karl Schusster
Shipping and Transport Services
Legal
Tax
Gerhard Haussmann
Equipment Leasing and Services
Planning and Corporate Development
Harold (Hal) Johnson*
Metal and Automotive Products
Packaging Products
Electrical and Construction Products
US Personnel and Labor Relations
James Pernecky*
Fluids Systems
Information Technology
US Headquarters Staff
*Based in New York
Exhibit 3  Outline of strategic plan submitted by a metals division in 2013
1.	 Mission and Strategic Thrust for the 2014–2018 planning horizon (3 pages).
2.	 Market and Competitive Analysis (9 pages of narrative, 3 tables of figures). This section discussed market sizes and 
trends for each of the two major product lines, key customers, industry capacity and a competitor analysis, including 
strengths weaknesses and plans. The charts showed:
1.	 DKG market share (1990–2018).
2.	 Industry capacity by manufacturer (2009, 2012, 2015, 2018).
3.	 Key customer analysis--volume and DKG market share (2011, 2012, 2018).
3.	 Internal Analysis (4 pages). Discussion of capabilities in areas of marketing, product development, production, and 
human resources. Also one section on degrees of integration with other areas of DKG.
4.	 Strategy (5 pages). Started with discussion of specific objectives, including 8% average growth rate, 15% market 
share, 8% return on sales, and 50% return on investment before tax. Then discussion of strategic alternatives (e.g. 
maintain, broaden product offerings, forward integration) and the selection of strategy made. Concluded with list of 
specific actions that would have to be accomplished in order to implement the chosen strategy.
5.	 Financial Summary (5 schedules with 3 page-up pages).
1.	 Sales, Profit, Return on Investment, Cash Sources and Uses, and Employee Count (2008–2018)
2.	 Summary Balance Sheet (2012–2018)
3.	 Sales and Profit Comparison (2011 vs. 2012)
4.	 Capital Expenditure Summary (2012–2018)
5.	 Market and Sales Forecast (2012–2018) – market size, market share, competitor assumptions.
6.	 Organization (1 page organization chart)

Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH
477
Exhibit 5  Long-term incentive award – calculation example
Assume: (1) Individual assigned 100% to a business unit with performance weighted 30% sales growth and 70% ROI (2) 
Expected payout for this individual: 50% of salary = $120,000
Performance 
factor
Target award
Target
Maximum
Actual achieved 
(over 4 years)
Rating achieved
LTIP
amount payable
Sales growth
$36,000
2%
6%
4%
1.5
$54,000
ROI
$84,000
18%
23%
18%
1.0
$84,000
$138,000
2.0
1.43
0
(min.)
15%
(threshold)
ROI Payout
Factor
ROI
payout
factor
Assume: A performance range of 15–22%
    Actual performance = 20%
At 20% ROI, the Performance Factor = 1.43 (interpolated)
22%
(maximum)
20%
(strategic plan
target)
Exhibit 4  Determining long-term payout factors – example
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

478
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
 Jill Landon’s palms were starting to sweat. It was the 
morning of Johansen’s annual performance summit, 
and she was still unsure about what overall perfor-
mance rating to give Jared Clark. It was clear from 
the data that he deserved the highest rating on the 
financial, strategy, and leadership initiatives on the 
new scorecard. But his performance this year in cus-
tomer service fell far short of the level required by 
the guidelines in the new scorecard system. Based on 
the data, she did not think she could justify more 
than a “meets expectations” rating of 3 for Clark’s 
customer service rating. As a result, she knew that 
Clark would be ineligible for the best overall perfor-
mance rating of 5 and, subsequently, would not 
receive the maximum bonus possible. In fact, based 
on the new system, he would receive a lower bonus 
than he did last year if given a 4 overall this year 
( Exhibit  1 ). 
 Landon knew the importance of the company’s 
new scorecard system. Although Clark’s scorecard 
suggested that he should receive an overall rating of 
4, the thought of giving Clark anything less than a 5 
overall was difficult to stomach. Landon was Johans-
en’s Southwest regional manager; and Clark had 
been her best store manager for a number of years. 
She had never seen another store manager who 
could deliver the financial performance that he 
could year after year. Landon’s own annual perfor-
mance evaluation was based primarily on the sales 
and financial performance of the Southwest region, 
performance that was affected greatly by what hap-
pened in Store 51; she was grateful for a manager 
like Clark, since her own future promotion and com-
pensation prospects depended on continuing to turn 
in top results. 
 Landon recalled a conversation she had with 
Clark the previous November. When Clark informed 
her that one of Johansen’s largest national competi-
tors was planning on opening a store in the same 
mall as Store 51, her immediate thought was, “This 
is our highest-performing store in the region. How 
will this affect sales?” Clark then proceeded to tell 
her that he had been approached by the competitor 
to be the store manager for this new store. Clark also 
detailed the generous increase in salary he had been 
offered, as well as the opportunity for larger annual 
bonuses. Despite the appealing offer, he shared that 
he loved Store 51 and Johansen’s because of the cor-
porate culture and the positive encouragement and 
interest in his success as a store manager that he had 
received over the years. The potential for higher pay 
was understandably attractive, however. He also 
remarked that he hoped Landon would bear this in 
mind when evaluating his performance and when 
the company considered which store managers to 
promote within the company. Landon was con-
cerned about the competitive threat, but relieved 
that Clark was forthcoming about it and seemed 
open to working things out so that he could remain 
at Johansen’s. 
 Background 
 Johansen’s, a large high-end department store, fi rst 
opened its doors in New York City in 1950. Founded on 
the principle of superior customer service, Johansen’s 
quickly found success and expanded its stores across 
the country. Johansen’s built its reputation and brand 
on putting the customer fi rst and off ering an unparal-
leled level of customer service. This core value was 
integral to maintaining its position as the premier high-
end retailer for decades. 
 As of 2014, Johansen’s had 121 stores across 
32 states. Due to its growth over the years, Johansen’s 
was divided into fi ve regions: Northeast, Southeast, 
Midwest, Southwest, and Northwest ( Exhibit  2 ). Each 
region had a regional manager who oversaw all the 
store managers in that region. Generally, Johansen’s 
promoted from within, and it was not uncommon for 
an associate at one store to be promoted to manager of 
 CASE STUDY 
 Johansen’s: The New Scorecard System 

Johansen’s: The New Scorecard System
479
another. At the store manager level, it was more typical 
for a promotion to regional manager to occur within 
the same region, but there were instances in which a 
store manager from one region was promoted to 
regional manager of another region.
In 2006, Johansen’s was facing financial difficulties. 
As a result, most of the senior executives were replaced. 
The new leadership team was eager to drive across-the-
board improvements in financial performance. To this 
end, a financially based incentive system was imple-
mented. Johansen’s store managers were the “boots-
on-the-ground” employees, and were critical to driving 
sales; Johansen’s believed in empowering its employ-
ees, and store managers had a great deal of autonomy 
and control over their stores. They had little to no influ-
ence over store location – and consequently customer 
demographics – and other major store investments. But 
they had the ability to influence sales levels, and they 
affected the in-store customer experience, determined 
individual store marketing and sales promotions, han-
dled individual store merchandising, and were respon-
sible for training and developing employees. As a 
result, the leadership team considered the stores to be 
profit centers and decided that store managers would 
be rated and compensated based on three key financial 
metrics for their stores: same-store sales growth, gross 
margin, and net income.
Although Johansen’s saw a modest improvement in 
its financial performance early on, by 2012, the com-
pany’s financial performance had stagnated again 
(Exhibit 3). Management commissioned a study to fig-
ure out why Johansen’s was facing financial difficulties 
once more. The study provided three key insights. First, 
it became clear that Johansen’s industry-leading posi-
tion was far from assured. It used to be that Johansen’s 
main competition was from other retail stores. Now, 
however, Johansen’s faced additional competition as 
more and more Internet retailers emerged. E-com-
merce had been growing faster than any other retail 
sector since 2008 and, as a result, was consuming an 
ever-greater share of retail spending. Exhibit 4 shows 
the growth trends for e-commerce and total retail 
sales, as well as for department stores and apparel. Like 
most retailers, Johansen’s did have an online presence, 
but only a marginal percentage of its revenue came 
from online sales. Nearly all Johansen’s sales came 
from in-store purchases due to the robust customer 
experience that appealed to shoppers. Moreover, given 
the e-commerce retailers’ cost structures, Johansen’s 
knew it was unlikely to be able to successfully engage 
in a price war, placing an even greater emphasis on its 
in-store experience going forward. Second – and to 
make matters worse – recently published market 
research that was reviewed as part of the study indi-
cated that a rival company’s customer service was 
superior to that of Johansen’s. This news seriously 
jolted upper management. Certainly, improving finan-
cial performance had been essential to this new leader-
ship team, and to varying degrees the team had 
succeeded in this regard. Delighting customers had 
always been Johansen’s key value proposition, how-
ever, and the prospect of losing this important differen-
tiator caused great angst among senior managers. 
Finally, an analysis of detailed financial and employee 
data suggested that cost-cutting efforts that led to 
greater profitability may also have fueled customer 
service–related compromises. When the leadership 
team implemented the incentive program focused on 
financial metrics in 2006, it had assumed managers 
knew that customer service was at the heart of the com-
pany’s identity. Now, the leadership team was con-
vinced that an overemphasis and focus on financial 
performance had eroded performance around its key 
success factor, customer service.
The leadership team was determined to make any 
necessary changes to restore Johansen’s position as the 
premier customer service provider in the industry, 
while also continuing its trend of improved financial 
performance. Superior customer service had always 
been associated with the company’s name, and it was 
an even more important success factor considering the 
growth in e-commerce. To ensure a customer experi-
ence that pulled patrons away from the Internet and 
into Johansen’s retail locations, it was imperative that 
the company refocus its efforts along this dimension. 
The leadership team agreed that incentives drive 
behavior, and it became clear that the financially 
driven incentive system needed to be overhauled.
The new performance measurement 
and incentive compensation system
After much discussion and analysis, the leadership team 
agreed that a new performance measurement and incen-
tive system was needed. The leadership team reflected 
on the role of the company’s store managers and decided 
to implement a new assessment tool that it called the 
“scorecard system.” Under the new system, store manag-
ers would be assessed across four categories: financial, 
customer service, leadership, and strategy. The store 

480
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
managers would receive a rating for each of these indi-
vidual categories on a 1-to-5 numerical scale: 1 con-
ferred a “below expectations” rating, 3 a “meets 
expectations” rating, and 5 an “exceeds expectations” 
rating.
1.	 Financial: The regional manager worked with the 
corporate finance department to establish year-over-
year (YoY) sales-growth and profitability targets for 
the individual stores.1 These targets included a 
baseline target that stores had to hit in order to 
achieve the “meets expectations” rating. These 
baseline targets appropriately accounted for each 
store’s unique demographics; as such, stores that 
had more favorable demographics could be expected 
to have more aggressive baseline goals. In addition, 
a stretch target was issued by the corporate finance 
department that, although achievable, would 
require an impressive performance to meet. If met, 
however, it would qualify stores and managers for 
the maximum rating of “exceeds expectations” in 
this category.
2.	 Customer Service: The company had always meas-
ured customer service through customer surveys. 
The surveys were developed, administered, and 
analyzed by a third party to preserve the integrity of 
the questions and the results. Every customer had 
the opportunity to take the survey – instructions 
were featured on the bottom of the receipts printed 
at checkout. Sales associates often circled the 
instructions with a highlighter to draw the custom-
er’s attention to them. Customers who took the sur-
vey would be eligible for a monthly drawing to win a 
$500 gift card redeemable at any Johansen’s store. 
Until 2005, customers who wished to take the sur-
vey called a toll-free number and provided numeri-
cal answers to a sequence of questions using the 
telephone keypad. In 2005, this changed, and the 
receipts instead directed customers to a website so 
that they could take the survey online. The survey 
had 10 questions about the customer’s in-store expe-
rience. Each of the questions allowed the customer 
to answer on a scale from 1 to 5, with 5 being the 
best score. The scores for the 10 questions were 
averaged to get an overall survey score. All the over-
all survey scores for an individual store were then 
averaged to get a customer satisfaction score at the 
store level. In addition, customers had an opportu-
nity to provide qualitative feedback at the end of 
each survey. Company-wide, the response rate of the 
survey in 2012 was 18.5%, and the average cus-
tomer satisfaction score was 3.6.
In this category of the scorecard, store managers 
were evaluated quantitatively and qualitatively. First, 
the regional manager considered the store’s survey 
response rate. Managers whose stores achieved less 
than a 12% response rate could earn a maximum of a 
“meets expectations” rating in the customer service 
category, even if the feedback was positive. This  
constraint was part of the system because in cases of 
particularly low response rates, the sample size was 
considered too small for the data to be meaningful. 
Second, the regional manager considered the aver-
age customer satisfaction score for the store. To get a 
5 rating in customer service, store managers needed 
to get an average customer satisfaction score of 4.4 
or higher. Third, the regional manager made a sub-
jective assessment of the qualitative customer feed-
back that the store received.
3.	 Leadership: Johansen’s believed in 360-degree feed-
back, which the human resources (HR) department 
administered annually. HR forwarded the results of 
the exercise to regional managers so they could fac-
tor those results into a store manager’s leadership 
rating. HR also communicated turnover and 
employee complaint information to the regional 
managers so that this too could be factored into the 
leadership rating. The regional manager weighed all 
the information received from HR to determine what 
rating to give the store manager in this category.
4.	 Strategy: The purpose of this element of the score-
card was to achieve cohesiveness and alignment 
throughout the company. Store managers were sub-
jectively evaluated by the regional manager on pro-
motion of the Johansen’s brand and branded 
merchandise, and also the implementation of corpo-
rate initiatives such as inventory management, 
training, merchandising mix, and initiatives from 
corporate (e.g. inventory management and 
employee training).
After assigning a rating for each of the four dimen-
sions, the regional manager gave the store manager an 
overall rating, also on a 1-to-5 scale. Ultimately, the 
1	 Johansen’s had company-wide sales, profitability, and same-store 
sales-growth targets. Company sales goals could be met in one of 
two ways: same-store sales growth or adding new stores. At the 
individual store level, however, sales growth and same-store sales 
growth would be redundant metrics.

Johansen’s: The New Scorecard System
481
overall rating determined a store manager’s bonus 
(Exhibit 5). Additionally, when regional manager posi-
tions became available, store managers who had the 
highest performance ratings were the first ones consid-
ered for promotion.
But the overall rating was not a simple average of 
the ratings in the four categories of the scorecard. 
Rather, it was a subjective rating by the regional man-
ager that was supported by the underlying individual 
ratings in each category and the following corporate 
guidelines. In order for a store manager to receive an 
overall rating of a 5, he or she needed to be rated at 
least a 3 in all four categories, achieve a 5 in three of 
the four categories, and achieve a 4 or higher in the 
customer service category. Requiring a store manager 
to get at least a 4 in the area of customer service 
emphasized Johansen’s renewed focus on this key 
success factor.
The new system was rolled out company-wide and 
implemented beginning January 1, 2013. It initially 
received mixed responses from the regional manag-
ers. Those who had been with the company for several 
years were relieved to see that corporate management 
was working to restore Johansen’s original culture 
and character. But some regional managers resisted 
the new system and were quite reluctant to buy in. 
The skeptics, having always exceeded their financial 
goals, were concerned that their performance evalua-
tion under this new system would be adversely 
affected by nonfinancial, “soft” metrics. Moreover, 
many of these managers had been promoted or hired 
during the period when improving financial perfor-
mance was the company’s number-one goal, and they 
now felt vulnerable to a system that didn’t fully appre-
ciate their unique skill sets, which were more geared 
toward running highly efficient, financially savvy 
stores.
The new scorecard system: 
Early success
The time had come for Johansen’s first annual perfor-
mance review under the new scorecard system. Despite 
the lack of buy-in from some of the regional managers, 
the leadership team believed that the new system had 
proved successful so far. During the first three quar-
ters, most regions showed both increased profitability –  
as a result of growth in revenue – and increased cus-
tomer satisfaction scores. It appeared that Johansen’s 
was on its way back to the top!
The Store 51 dilemma
Store 51, located in the Southwest region, generated 
annual revenue of $150 million in 2013, the highest in 
the region and the sixth highest in the United States 
(see Exhibit 6 for a financial summary of Store 51 com-
pared with the average Johansen’s store). Store 51 typi-
cally led the region in sales due to its advantageous 
location in Orange County, California. The store was 
located in a shopping center that had numerous upscale 
shops and restaurants but no direct competitors to 
Johansen’s. Store 51 was also a flagship store, resulting 
in a number of advantages for it. First, given its status 
and history in the area, it had a very loyal customer 
base. This helped drive the second advantage: exten-
sive, detailed historical customer data. This data pro-
vided Store 51 with a heightened understanding of and 
insight into its customers and, consequently, provided 
great merchandising advantages. Additionally, the sur-
rounding neighborhoods were very affluent; this 
resulted in people who entered Store 51 generating 
higher-than-average revenue per transaction than 
those in most other Johansen’s stores.
Despite its continued success, Store 51 was in an 
interesting predicament. The store manager, Jared 
Clark, was known as one of the best store managers in 
the country. Under the old performance system, he 
exceeded every financial metric and received the high-
est store manager bonus possible every year; his record 
was pristine. Under the new scorecard system, Clark 
still exceeded the financial targets. The new system, 
however, revealed several issues regarding Clark’s per-
formance as a manager that had previously gone unde-
tected by Landon as the Southwest regional manager. 
In the first and second quarters under the scorecard 
system, Landon noted particularly high employee turn-
over (45%) and relatively low customer satisfaction 
scores of 3.2 and 3.4, respectively, at Store 51. She 
approached Clark to discuss these shortcomings, and 
was relieved to find that he was receptive to the 
feedback.
Clark was able to modestly improve his customer sat-
isfaction score in the third quarter, and the latest results 
for the fourth quarter indicated further improvement. 
Per usual, Store 51’s financial performance was well 
above that of the other stores in the region. But Clark’s 
performance in customer service remained below the 
company average, even with his improvement through-
out the year. Another complicating element that needed 
to be considered was the relatively low customer survey 

482
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
response rate (the highest it had been in 2013 for Store 
51 was 7% in the fourth quarter). It was not particularly 
surprising that Store 51’s response rate was less than the 
average, since the older, wealthier demographic of 
Orange County was less likely to go online and fill out a 
survey (Exhibit 7). Landon could not help but wonder, 
however, whether the low survey participation rate for 
Store 51 was the root of Clark’s low customer service 
scores. Perhaps if the sample size was larger, Clark 
would be able to achieve a higher rating in the customer 
service category, making him eligible for the overall rat-
ing of 5. Or was the fundamental customer base inher-
ently disadvantageous to Store 51’s customer service 
score? Based on the feedback through the survey, the 
majority of survey participants only took the survey 
when upset.
Landon was faced with a dilemma: How should Clark 
be rated this year? (See Exhibit 8 for Clark’s scorecard.) 
At Johansen’s annual performance summit, regional 
managers and the managers of several corporate func-
tions (finance, customer service, and HR) discussed over-
all regional performance and store manager ratings (see 
Exhibit 9 for information about these managers). Landon 
knew that regardless of the rating she gave Clark, she 
would have to justify it to all these managers at the per-
formance summit, as well as to Clark afterward.
Exhibit 1  Johansen’s: The new scoreboard system, Southwest regional manager
Jared Clark’s historical and projected annual compensation
2012
2013
Jared Clark’s salary:
$85,000
$91,000
+bonus
Overall rating = 3
10%
$8,500
10%
$9,180
Overall rating = 4
25%
$21,250
25%
$22,950
Overall rating = 5
40%
$34,000
40%
$36,720
Northeast
Midwest
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Exhibit 2  Johansen’s: The new scoreboard system, Johansen’s regional breakdown
Source: Author adaptation of “Blank USA, w territories,” posted to public domain under Creative Commons (CC BY-SA 3.0) by 
“Lokal_Profil,” February 12, 2007, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Blank_USA,_w_territories.svg (accessed May 13, 2014).

Johansen’s: The New Scorecard System
483
Exhibit 3  Johansen’s: The new scoreboard system, Johansen’s financial overview
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
2005
Net sales
$8,300
$7,790
$7,800
$7,600
$6,610
$6,600
$7,000
$6,725
$6,612
Cost of goods sold(COGS)
$5,400
$5,140
$5,130
$4,950
$4,350
$4,390
$4,500
$4,350
$4,166
COGSas % of net sales
65.1%
66.0%
65.8%
65.1%
65.8%
66.5%
64.3%
64.7%
63.0%
Gross profit
$2,900
$2,650
$2,670
$2,650
$2,260
$2,210
$2,500
$2,375
$2,446
Gross profit as % of net sales
34.9%
34.0%
34.2%
34.9%
34.2%
33.5%
35.7%
35.3%
37.0%
SG&A expenses
$1,950
$1,830
$1,830
$1,750
$1,650
$1,650
$1,675
$1,650
$1,621
SG&A expenses as % of net sales
23.5%
23.5%
23.5%
23.0%
25.0%
25.0%
23.9%
24.5%
24.5%
EBT
$950
$820
$840
$900
$610
$560
$825
$725
$825
Taxes (40%)
$380
$328
$336
$360
$244
$224
$330
$290
$330
Net income
$570
$492
$504
$540
$366
$336
$495
$435
$495
Net income as % of net sales
6.9%
6.3%
6.5%
7.1%
5.5%
5.1%
7.1%
6.5%
7.5%
Source: Created by author.
15%
Quarter/Quarter Sales Growth by Retail Sector
10%
5%
–10%
–5%
0%
Total retail (excluding 
food and e-commerce)
E-commerce
Department stores
Total apparel
Apr-00
Oct-00
Apr-01
Oct-01
Apr-02
Oct-02
Apr-03
Oct-03
Apr-04
Oct-04
Apr-05
Oct-05
Apr-06
Oct-06
Apr-07
Oct-07
Apr-08
Oct-08
Apr-09
Oct-09
Apr-10
Oct-10
Apr-11
Oct-11
Apr-12
Oct-12
Apr-13
Exhibit 4  Johansen’s: The new scoreboard system, historical retail industry trends
Source: Federal Reserve(FRED)

484
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
Exhibit 5  Johansen’s: The new scoreboard system, store manager compensation and 
bonus structure
2012
2013
Average store manager salary:
$73,000
$76,650
Bonus as a % of salary
Overall rating = 3
10%
10%
Overall rating = 4
25%
25%
Overall rating = 5
40%
40%
Source: Created by author.
Exhibit 6  Johansen’s: The new scoreboard system, Johansen’s store financials ($ in millions)
2013
Johansen’s
Average Store
Store 51
Sales
$8,300
$68.60
$150.00
Gross profit
$2,900
$23.97
$60.00
Gross profit %
34.94%
34.94%
40.00%
YoY sales growth (a)
6.41%
4.49%
5.50%
(a) YoY Sales Growth for the company as a whole came from two sources: same-store growth and new stores.
Source: Created by author.
Exhibit 7  Johansen’s: The new scoreboard system, Johansen’s customer demographic
Johansen’s
Store 51
Average customer age range
24–55
32–64
Average customer annual household income
$100,000
$135,000
Average sales/square foot
$408
$772
Average store size
160,000 sq. ft.
195,000 sq. ft.
Source: Created by author.

Johansen’s: The New Scorecard System
485
Exhibit 8  Johansen’s: The new scoreboard system, Johansen’s scorecard for Store 51’s manager
Store Manager:	
Jared Clark
Evaluation Period: January 1–December 31, 2013
Store Number:	
51
Region:	
Southwest
Regional Manager:	
Southwest regional manager
Rating Summary
Rating Explanation and Justification:
Category 1: Financial (quantitative)
Store managers must meet the “baseline target” to achieve a rating of 3.
Store managers must exceed “stretch target” to achieve a rating of 5.
Additional note: This year, aggressive financial stretch targets were set for Clark’sstore. Clark exceeded the stretch 
targets and achieved figures well beyond expectations.
Financial Rating: 5
Category 2: Customer Service (quantitative and qualitative)
Store manager must achieve a survey response rate of 12% to receive a rating of 4 or 5.
Store manager must achieve a store customer satisfaction score of 4.4 to receive a rating of 5.
Qualitative assessment: Although Clark did not achieve the 12% minimum customer service survey response 
rate, his customer service performance improved throughout the year. In the first quarter, the feedback was 
generally negative; customers were able to find the merchandise they demanded, but were very unsatisfied 
with the customer service. In Q2, I spoke to Clark about the importance of customer service. He was receptive 
to the feedback, and saw an increase in survey response rate (from 3.7% in Q2 to 5.5% in Q3). Additionally, 
the feedback from customers was not overwhelmingly positive, but certainly was not as negative as it had 
been in the first half of the year. In Q4, Clark’s performance increased again. The survey response increased 
to 7%, and customers had positive things to say about Store 51.
Customer Service Rating: 3
Financial
Customer Service
Leadership
Strategy
Overall
Rating
5
3
5
5
5
Q1’13
Q2’13
Q3’13
Q4’13
Profit:
-Baseline target met?
Y
Y
Y
Y
-Stretch target exceeded?
Y
Y
Y
Y
YoY sales growth:
-Baseline target met?
Y
Y
Y
Y
-Stretch target exceeded?
Y
Y
Y
Y
Q1’13
Q2’13
Q3’13
Q4’13
Response rate
3.5%
3.7%
5.5%
7.0%
Q1’13
Q2’13
Q3’13
Q4’13
Customer satisfaction score
3.2
3.4
3.7
4.1
(continued)

486
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
Category 3: Leadership (qualitative)
Questions to consider when rating store manager: Were there many employee complaints? What was the nature of the 
complaints? Isolated incidents or ongoing issues? Was there an increase in turnover throughout the time period being 
assessed? What was the nature of the 360-degree feedback? Was store manager interested in developing leadership 
skills?
Qualitative assessment: Clark’s turnover was notably high at 45% during the first half of the year. In Q3 and Q4, 
however, turnover was reduced to 33%, a turnover figure better than the corporate average of 35%. There were 23 
employee complaints throughout the year. 17 of them were from the same two employees, however. This does not 
necessarily imply that Clark’s leadership was poor; the high volume of complaints from two individuals could sim-
ply indicate a mismatch in personalities. Those two employees voluntarily left Johansen’s in November. Clark’s 
360-degree review was highly positive for the most part.
Leadership Rating: 5
Category 4: Strategy (qualitative)
Questions to consider when rating store manager: Did store manager actively promote the Johansen’s brand? Was 
branded merchandise in high-visibility areas throughout the store? Were corporate initiatives implemented? Was store 
manager proactive in seeking corporate guidance and initiatives?
Qualitative assessment: Clark exceeded my expectations in this area. He regularly asked me about new corporate 
initiatives and how he could best implement them in Store 51. Clark also worked hard to enhance the Johansen’s 
brand. He engaged members of his team and store managers across the Southwest region to brainstorm ways to 
promote Johansen’s as a whole and also Johansen’s branded merchandise. Clark is the strongest Johansen’s corporate 
ambassador in the Southwest region.
Strategy Rating: 5
OVERALL RATING: ____________
Exhibit 8  (continued)

Johansen’s: The New Scorecard System
487
This fictional case was prepared by Professor Luann Lynch, Jennifer Forman (MBA ‘14); and Graham Gillam (MBA ‘14).
Copyright © 2016 by the University of Virginia Darden School Foundation, Charlottesville, VA. To order copies, send an e-mail to sales@dardenbusi-
nesspublishing.com.
Corporate Human Resources Manager Don Harold
Last year, Harold was ready to leave Johansen’s. After six years, his job had become monotonous, the company was 
struggling, and morale was low. He was just starting to look at opportunities elsewhere when senior management 
announced an overhaul of the existing performance measurement system. The company had been too focused on finan-
cial performance, and had lost sight of its strong customer service value proposition. The new scorecard system was an 
effort to bring the company back to its core values. Harold was offered a promotion within human resources to develop 
and implement the scorecard system. This was exactly the type of opportunity that he was looking for, so he eagerly 
accepted the promotion and stopped looking for other positions.
As much as the change in responsibilities was refreshing, it was challenging to develop the new system. While craft-
ing it, Harold had his own performance assessment in mind. He would be evaluated and compensated based on the 
successful implementation of the new system, buy-in from employees, and changes made after system implementation. 
He wasn’t sure exactly how those factors would be measured, but he did know that his boss would do the evaluation 
after seeking input from other constituents to get their assessment about the implementation process and general sup-
port of the system design, as well as reflecting on the extent of changes needed after the first year under the system. 
Harold was eligible for a one-time bonus of up to 30% of his salary based on the outcome of that review. He worked hard 
to come up with the best system possible, and he thought it was truly a stellar system.
Corporate Customer Experience Manager Mitch Dougan
After several years at Johansen’s, Dougan was given the opportunity to become the company’s first customer experi-
ence manager. This position was created alongside the development of the new scorecard system, and was considered 
instrumental to Johansen’s return to its core value of premier customer service.
In this role, Dougan’s main objective was to improve customer service across the company. He would be evaluated 
and would be eligible for a bonus based on the increase in customer service survey response rates, and also the cus-
tomer satisfaction scores and qualitative feedback received through the surveys. He hoped that the new scorecard 
system would help boost the scores. He was very enthusiastic about the company’s renewed focus on customer ser-
vice, as well as his new opportunity to shine in this role.
Corporate Finance Manager Marjorie Thompson
This year, Thompson was celebrating her 15th anniversary with Johansen’s. She started as a finance intern when she 
was in college and had moved up the finance ranks over the years. During her tenure with the company, she saw several 
years of stellar financial performance. In 2005, however, she watched the company’s financials, as well as her bonus, 
start to stagnate. Johansen’s began to recover after implementing a financially based incentive system, but that recovery 
was short-lived. Then the company implemented the new scorecard system, and Thompson was worried about what 
would happen as a result. She just wanted to see the company return to an exceptional financial standing.
Although Thompson was in finance, she was quite in tune with the stores in the different regions, and she had strong 
relationships with the regional and store managers. She recently caught wind of a rumor that a Johansen’s competitor 
tried to recruit Store 51’s manager, Jared Clark. Given that Clark’s financial performance exceeded that of any other 
store manager’s performance in the region, she was deeply concerned about the possibility that Johansen’s could lose 
Clark to a competitor. Thompson saw Clark as a real star, and few store managers had been able to turn in the stellar 
financial performance that he had over time. Thompson believed that the company needed managers like him, particu-
larly since her performance evaluation depended on the company’s financial performance.
Other regional managers (Northeast, Midwest, Southeast, Northwest)
The annual performance evaluation of the regional managers was based in large part on the sales and financial performance 
of each region, and these regional managers considered themselves fortunate to have these top performers managing 
stores in their regions. They knew that these star performers were counting on the new scorecard system to rate them fairly.
The top-performing store manager in each of these regions excelled in all areas of the scorecard, including customer 
service. Depending on the region, the top store manager achieved a customer service survey response rate from 18% to 
19%, had an average customer satisfaction score from 4.4 to 4.6, and received positive qualitative feedback from those 
responses. Each of them truly deserved an overall rating of 5.
Exhibit 9  Johansen’s: The new scoreboard system, managers attending the performance summit

488
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
 Mainfreight, a large international logistics company 
with headquarters in Auckland, New Zealand, man-
aged its performance without preparing annual budg-
ets as most other companies did. At Mainfreight, 
budgets were believed to distract managers’ attention 
away from their day-to-day business. 
 Company background 
and organization structure 
 Mainfreight was founded in 1978. Its stock was listed 
on the New Zealand stock exchange in 1996. In 2012, 
the company had 214 autonomous branches operating 
in 14 countries, including New Zealand, Australia, the 
United States, Asia, Europe, and Mexico. The company 
had been profi table since its founding. In 2012 it gener-
ated NZ$1.8 billion in revenues; it employed over 5,000 
team members 1 (see  Exhibit  1 for key performance 
data); and it was named New Zealand Company of the 
Year. 
 Mainfreight offered a full supply chain solution, 
from managed warehousing to international and 
domestic freight forwarding. The company was organ-
ized into three main divisions: Domestic Freight, Air 
and Ocean (international freight) and Logistics. It did 
not own any trucks, ships, or airplanes. Instead it relied 
on a network of owner-drivers and air, rail, and ship-
ping freight handlers to deliver its consignments. 
 The company’s organization structure was fl at, with 
just four hierarchical levels between front line team 
members and the Group Managing Director (GMD). 
Team members reported to branch managers; branch 
managers to general managers; 2 and general managers 
to the GMD, who reported to the Board. 
 The organization was highly decentralized, but all 
organization units had clearly defi ned responsibilities 
and reporting lines. Managers’ decision-making 
authority was also constrained by certain policies, such 
as limits on the levels of expenditures that could be 
authorized at each management level. As one manager 
explained – “there is a rule that no one commits them-
selves to a lease over a $100,000 per annum without 
Director approval” – which is no small threshold by 
most companies’ standards. 
 The small central support team included the Human 
Resources (HR), Information Technology (IT), and 
Finance functions. No centralized marketing function 
existed because the executive team believed that deliv-
ering freight on time provided suffi  cient marketing for 
the company. All support service costs were fully allo-
cated to branches. 
 At Mainfreight the “branches are king.” Branch 
teams were accountable for providing quality service to 
customers. The branches had relatively stable fixed 
costs and focused on managing the direct or variable 
costs of shipments. 
 The branch managers treated their branches as their 
own businesses. The branch managers were acknowl-
edged to be the most knowledgeable about local mar-
kets and conditions and were authorized to make 
decisions about issues such as pricing, service off er-
ings, delivery modes, and hiring. Overall, the branch 
managers were expected to have their “fi ngers on the 
pulse” and to make decisions that would have a positive 
impact on margins and profi tability. 
 Decisions to open and close branches were made by 
the general managers. They decided, for example, 
when and where to open and close branches based on 
the prevailing conditions and knowledge of their 
markets. 
 Company culture 
 Mainfreight described itself as “a special company with 
special people.” It viewed its philosophy of business, 
stated in its Three Pillars (see  Exhibit   2   ), as a key con-
tributor to its success. Selected principles derived from 
 1  The company use the term team member instead of employee. 
 2  Country managers had been introduced in some parts of the world, 
but not yet in New Zealand. General managers of each division 
reported to their respective country managers who reported to the 
Group Managing Director. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Mainfreight 

Mainfreight
489
this philosophy that underpinned Mainfreight’s 
approach to business include:
● Capitalism creates the profits needed to improve liv-
ing standards for owners, employees, and communi-
ties. To generate profits, keep managers’ attention 
focused on the drivers of performance.
● Every branch of the business needs to generate prof-
its. Provide managers with autonomy and trust them 
to make decisions that are in the best interest of the 
company.
● Centralized control processes, budgets, and bureau-
cracy are ineffective and time consuming, and divert 
management’s attention away from the business. 
Avoid hierarchy and bureaucracy at all costs.
● Team members have valuable contributions to make 
and may be the future managers and directors of the 
company. Provide opportunities for team members 
to grow and promote from within.
● Success is the result of teamwork. Share the rewards 
of success with the whole team.
The Mainfreight culture was intendedly egalitar-
ian and supportive. The company provided a famil-
ial, nurturing environment in which everyone won 
or lost together. Few distinctions were made 
between managers and team members, and every-
one shared open plan offices, parking spaces, lunch 
facilities, and the annual bonus. This culture estab-
lished the foundation for the company’s perfor-
mance management system. The company tolerated 
honest mistakes but expected team members to 
learn from their mistakes and to avoid repeating 
them.
The executive team recognized that they were 
charged with maintaining the organizational culture 
through coaching, mentoring and encouragement. 
Here is a representative quote from an executive:
When you have got that devolution going on, it is 
not about a head office control environment. It is 
about a cultural environment. The one job I think I 
have got to do is to maintain that culture, to main-
tain that enthusiasm and that passion that the peo-
ple have to grow this business into something more 
than what it is now.
Mainfreight’s top executives saw themselves as pro-
viding team members with an opportunity to help build 
a 100-year-old company and to share in the excitement 
of creating an organization that was trying to make a 
difference, to its customers, employees, and communi-
ties. As one executive described it:
We want these young people to understand the 
Mainfreight culture which is so exciting. It’s excit-
ing to be in a business that is going for the moon all 
the time.
All the executive managers had worked their way up 
through the business and were very knowledgeable 
about operations. They regularly visited branch offices 
and “walked the talk.”
The performance management system
Budgets were not part of Mainfreight’s performance 
management system (PMS) because they were believed 
to distract managers’ attention away from day-to-day 
business, as was mentioned in the introduction to this 
case. One manager explained:
Business moves quickly today, things change on a 
weekly basis. To distract a branch manager, to ask 
him to pore over a set of [budget] numbers, while 
real business is happening on his doorstep, means 
the manager is ignoring or cannot get to real busi-
ness.
The company believed that by providing quality ser-
vice to customers and maintaining team morale, profits 
would look after themselves. Mainfreight’s PMS 
focused on enabling managers to perform their roles, 
as one manager surmised:
Basically, you are left to it. They are monitoring how 
you are performing based on your financials. It is 
like any business right? But there is also … the cul-
ture of the business, the audit score, the morale, all 
those things that impact intangibly on the bottom 
line profit. We talk about quality, culture, and profit 
in that order.
Goals and strategies
Mainfreight’s aspirational, medium-term goal was to 
become New Zealand’s largest company by size and 
market capitalization by the year 2028. The specific 
milestones and targets to be achieved along the way 
were specified in its 2012 Annual Report (see Exhibit 3).
Mainfreight did not have formal strategic plans but 
it was clear about its strategic direction. Managers did 
not create detailed strategic plans because they 

490
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
believed sufficient guidance was provided by the com-
pany’s overall objective – to grow by continually 
increasing profits. The GMD described the company’s 
views on strategy in this way:
[Why have] a strategic plan that was written in 
March and not applicable in October? … Does 
Mainfreight have a strategic plan? No it does not. 
Does Mainfreight understand its strategic direc-
tion? Definitely it does.
Strategic directions evolved through regular discus-
sions between executive managers, which were 
informed by their discussions with branch managers. 
Strategic considerations were integrated into wider dis-
cussions, as explained in the following quote:
We have two Country Manager meetings a year. 
These are normally in March and October, and 
these just precede a Board meeting. So we have 
one or two days of Exec or Country Manager meet-
ings, and then that’s followed by a two-day Board 
meeting … that’s when the strategy for the year, or 
the next six months is promulgated … then the 
Board would spend time in general business dis-
cussing what we believe to be right or wrong in a 
particular business direction.
The outcome of these discussions was shared under-
standings of the company’s strategic intentions, rather 
than formal plans. According to one member of the 
executive team:
The overall strategy is to continue to grow, to be in 
many of the right places, to determine what those 
right places are in the world, and generally to open 
international Air and Ocean-type operations.
The strategic intent that emerged from these regular 
conversations was not fixed. It remained fluid and 
could be adjusted quickly if required. For example, 
Mainfreight’s intended strategy for entering the Euro-
pean market was via Air and Ocean services. What 
actually happened was that the executives learned that 
a European freight operation was for sale, albeit one 
with minimal Air and Ocean business, and they decided 
to acquire it.
Mainfreight’s “emergent” approach to strategy meant 
that there was little separation between planning and 
action. Both activities occurred in rapid succession. 
Planning was simply a continuous consideration and 
response to current opportunities. Hope et al. (2011, 
p. 211) described this approach to planning as typical of 
the processes found in what they called “Beyond Budget-
ing organizations,” in this way:
Strategy making via this process is less reliant on 
sophisticated tools than on fast, relevant (actiona-
ble) information and responsible people who know 
what is expected of them and what to do in any 
given situation.
Performance standards
Mainfreight’s executive team used heuristics to set per-
formance expectations. The overall company goal was 
to grow profit by 15% per year, and branches are 
expected to set targets in line with this standard. This 
influence of profit expectations on branch target set-
ting was explained by one executive in this way:
We do not do budgets but the branch managers 
create targets … they know we think anything less 
than 15 percent is failure. They do not set targets in 
sales or gross profit or expenses, they do it in pre-
tax profit. They just produce one number.
The executive team also established standards for 
key performance indicators (KPIs), such as profit 
growth, percent of accounts receivable to sales, percent 
of aged debtors, number of claims for damage, number 
of consignment notes raised, percentage of on-time 
deliveries and number of credits raised. For example, 
the following quote identifies the targets set for the 
number of claims expected for a given consignment 
volume:
We measure the number of consignments before 
you have one claim. On an outwards [consignment] 
if you get greater than fifteen hundred consign-
ments … before there is a claim then you are con-
sidered to have met the target. And it is about three 
thousand on an inward [consignment].
The branches set annual profit targets within the 
overall guidelines provided by the executive team. The 
target-setting process was relatively brief, generally 
completed within one day. Branch managers, in consul-
tation with their teams, identified a realistic net profit 
target for the upcoming year. Last year’s performance 
and current business conditions were considered when 
setting the target. Branch managers informed their 
respective general managers of the proposed target, 
and those that were reasonably challenging and achiev-
able are approved. Once approved, the targets become 

Mainfreight
491
notional contracts. They were signed by every team 
member in the branch – from the kitchen lady to the 
branch manager – and then framed and hung on the 
office wall. The company performance target was sim-
ply the aggregation of the branch targets.
Reporting
Mainfreight’s PMS was supported by information sys-
tems that provided consistent and transparent infor-
mation. All levels of the company reported the same 
information, in the same format, using the same classi-
fications for revenues and costs.
Weeklies were the key mechanism for keeping per-
formance on track. They resembled abbreviated profit-
and-loss statements (see Exhibit 4), showing actual 
performance for the previous week, including reve-
nues, direct costs, gross margin, an aggregated figure 
for routine overheads, and non-standard overheads. 
Preparation of the weeklies took no more than 
two hours.
Every Monday, branch managers phoned their 
weekly results through to their respective general man-
agers3 and posted the results on the Quality Board in 
the shared lunch facilities for the entire team to see. 
The weekly conversation took place directly between 
managers; it did not involve the accountants or any 
other intermediaries. General managers consolidated 
the branch information and in turn phoned the divi-
sional results through to the Group managing director 
(GMD). The format was the same as that used at the 
branch level (see Exhibit 4). The results reported at this 
level reflected the overall performance by division and 
country. The GMD made the overall results available to 
members of the executive team and the Board by Tues-
day afternoon.4 At the start of each week, every person 
in the company was aware of corporate performance 
for the preceding week.
Everyone, from the front line to the Board level, 
scrutinized the weekly information to identify emerg-
ing trends and to develop appropriate responses. The 
company defined a trend as any change in margin that 
persisted for three consecutive weeks. The aim was to 
resolve margin issues within four weeks. This process 
was explained in the following quote:
We are concerned if we start to see a trend. For us, 
three weeks is a trend. So the first week might indicate 
that there’s a hiccup. Managers start asking some 
questions during the second week to identify why this 
is happening. If it continues the third week we know 
there’s a trend here, and we’ve got to act on that.
Branch managers gauged their current performance 
(weekly, monthly, or quarterly) in comparison to the 
results achieved in the corresponding period of the pre-
vious year. The aim was to always improve on prior peri-
ods’ performance. This approach eliminated the need 
for rolling forecasts or periodic budgets; the prior period 
figures provided a natural baseline from which to 
improve performance. In the words of team members:
People say we have got to measure to make 
changes. And we do measure. Instead of comparing 
against the budget, we compare against last year.
• • •
The weekly forecast just becomes your budget – 
it is just that it is dynamic, it is live and in real time. 
You are comparing to real time things.
The importance of the weeklies for managing the 
business was described by one executive as follows:
We do not do quarterly forecasts; the weeklies suf-
fice. We are more focused on the day-to-day busi-
ness and the annual profit looks after itself. We do 
not need to know what the next quarter will look 
like because we have last year’s. So the branch 
managers know when they have big weeks coming 
up and that they have to meet them.
Mainfreight managed its operations with its week-
lies, so it was critical that those figures were accurate. 
As one team member explained:
We monitor those tolerances and see how good 
they are. We treat additional profit from weeklies 
with the same disrespect as we do under profit 
when compared to it … the accuracy of the week-
lies is paramount. It is our barometer of our busi-
ness and unless you get it right, you can’t act on it 
to make the changes.
Monthlies
Monthly accounts were produced by the accountants 
towards the latter half of the month following the one 
3	 As the company expanded, the process for weeklies was slightly 
modified. Country managers were introduced, and general managers 
reported to country managers. They, in turn, accumulated the branch 
results and reported them to the group managing director.
4	 Traditionally, results were known by Monday evening but with oper-
ations now spread throughout the world results are not available 
until early Tuesday afternoon.

492
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
being reported. A separate profit-and-loss report was 
produced for every branch. Accountants used the 
monthlies to verify the accuracy of the branch week-
lies. The weekly figures provided by branch managers 
were expected to be accurate to within plus or minus 
1% of the monthly results. All discrepancies, either 
favorable or unfavorable, were queried.
Branch managers reviewed the monthlies and veri-
fied whether transactions coded to their branch’s gen-
eral ledger belonged there. Through this process they 
maintain detailed control over all their costs. One 
branch manager explained the process in this way:
As a manager you get to know your business, down 
to [the] financials. You can say to me, “Hey, why is 
this [account] up? … Why has that [account] come 
down?” I can tell you. I go through those numbers. 
We live these numbers; we own these numbers.
Apportionment of shared revenues
The nature of the company’s operations meant that 
interactions between branches, both within and 
between countries, was required in order to deliver 
customer consignments. Given that branch perfor-
mance was assessed on its margins, it was imperative 
to have a “fair” apportionment of revenues earned on 
each consignment between branches. For Domestic 
operations, a centrally-determined allocation schedule 
was used to determine inter-branch allocations. Send-
ing branches were required to allocate prescribed 
amounts to receiving branches for the services they 
provided, such as handling and delivery, to complete 
the delivery. This procedure ensured that receiving 
branches were able to cover their actual costs and gen-
erate a profit. This approach avoided cross-subsidiza-
tion and ensured that at all times branch managers sold 
at the real cost to make margins.
Resource allocation
Mainfreight allocated resources dynamically, meaning 
that it committed resources as, and when, required. 
Managers at different levels could commit to varying 
levels of expenditure up to the limit authorized by the 
executive team. Before committing additional 
resources, branch managers spoke to their general 
manager. During these typically brief conversations, 
branch managers justified how additional funds would 
be used. General managers considered the broader 
implications of the resourcing requests and gave imme-
diate approval to any that seemed justified. There were 
no formal approval processes to follow or paperwork to 
complete. The contrast between this approach and tra-
ditional budgeting is highlighted in the following 
quote:
With budgets, people get so focused on saying we 
cannot do this because there is nothing left in the 
budget. We just do not have that. We just get on 
and do it. It works.
Performance evaluation
Mainfreight used performance comparisons of finan-
cial and nonfinancial KPIs to assess how well branches, 
divisions and countries were performing. Inter-branch 
comparisons matched branches on type of operations, 
revenue and size before assessing profit performances. 
This meant that branch performance was compared to 
the performance of its peers. It was called a “buddy 
branch comparison.”
League tables (branch rankings) were used to com-
pare the relative performance of branches with respect 
to KPIs. For example, a league table on claims perfor-
mance is shown in Exhibit 5. These results were circu-
lated to all branches. These tables showed a 
company-average figure, and branches knew that if 
their performance fell below the average their bonus 
would be negatively affected. The use of ranges was 
explained as follows:
We use ranges to assess performance with respect 
to key indicators. This is what you said you were 
going to achieve, and this is what the norm is. Then 
there’s a spread below and above. … It is not that 
you have to achieve a specific target … you can 
actually achieve more.
Inter-country comparisons were also made. A mem-
ber of the executive team explained how country com-
parisons are handled:
We can look at the margins in each business, in 
each country and know who is performing and who 
is not. In fact in some categories we will compare 
country by country, compare them side by side on 
the P&L sheet. We can do a comparison of costs, 
margins and revenues, and categories of revenue.
The comparative measures of performance enabled 
Mainfreight to benchmark its branches and divisions. It 
did not, however, benchmark itself against competitors. 

Mainfreight
493
The preference for internal benchmarking was 
explained in the following quote:
At the end of the day, we do not do too much com-
parison with competitors. We are thinking about our 
business, not what theirs might be. The important 
thing is the expectation of our own performance.
The key measure used to assess how well the company 
was doing overall was return on revenue (ROR). The GMD 
explained the importance of this measure to the company:
I see … things like return on investment, return on 
equity, debt-to-equity ratios … What is [our] return 
on equity? … it is not a measure that I refer to … we 
measure this business in return on revenue, and we 
have some guidelines on what we want for return 
on revenue, and our return on revenue measure is 
… at the profit before tax line. We have a set of 
guidelines that we apply, the 5 to 7 percent return 
for Air and Ocean, 10 to 12 percent for Domestic, 
and 15 to 20 percent for Logistics. Those are the 
key financial measures, which we manage this 
business on, on both a weekly and monthly basis.
Financial rewards
Mainfreight’s bonus system applied to all team members. 
The two separate-but-interrelated components of the 
bonus scheme were the base bonus and the discretionary 
bonus. Profitable branches earned a base bonus equal to 
10% of branch net profit. This bonus was shared evenly 
among all team members who were employed for at least 
twelve months, regardless of their role in the branch.
The base bonus was adjusted by the discretionary 
bonus calculation. The discretionary bonus considered a 
range of performance indicators, including profit 
growth, debtors, claims and damages. Profit growth was 
assessed in relation to what the branch could reasonably 
have been expected to earn given the prevailing condi-
tions. Branch performance on the remaining indicators 
was assessed in relation to peers and average levels of 
performance. A branch could increase (or decrease) the 
discretionary bonus by one or two percent of branch net 
profit depending on its relative performance on the 
selected indicator. Branches’ performances on claims 
per consignment (see Exhibit 5) were also considered.5 
Branches whose performance was above the average 
increased the discretionary bonus amount; those 
below the average had their discretionary bonus 
reduced.
Nonfinancial rewards
The company acknowledged the efforts of the team in a 
variety of ways. Plaques were given to branches that 
achieved their profit pledges or that won the branch-of-
the-year award. Similar awards were given to individu-
als who were long serving members of the team and 
those who were acknowledged as top achievers. The 
plaques are publicly displayed on the walls of branch 
offices. Team members also received tokens of appreci-
ation such as hams at Christmas or a bucket of apples 
during the year.6
The company continually acknowledged the contri-
bution of the team members to its success. The names 
of all team members were listed every year in the com-
pany’s Annual Reports. In 2009, they were even printed 
on the cover. Similarly, the names of all team members, 
with their length of service, were listed in the published 
corporate histories.
Cash management
Cash management was a key focus for the performance 
management system. A key reason for running weekly 
profit reports was to make sure that the billing was 
done each week. Billings had a direct and positive 
impact on cash flow. The history behind sending billing 
statements each week is explained as follows:
We had all the invoices on the statement every 
Friday night . . . Every cent that we could possibly 
charge out was charged out then. The freight 
industry has a history, may it never change, of 
charging weekly and trying to get paid weekly. We 
do [still] get paid on some weekly cycles . . . the 
railways always charged weekly, the ships always 
charged weekly. It was just one of those global tra-
ditions, and there was absolutely no point in trying 
to break it.
The KPI for accounts receivable ensured that once 
customers were billed, managers made sure that the 
5	 Number of consignments completed before a claim is made, for both 
inward and outward consignments.
6	 The company has had to adapt these New Zealand-grown practices 
to other locales. The company had to find ways of giving appropriate 
to specific countries.

494
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
accounts were paid on time. The pressure to collect 
accounts on time was tied to Mainfreight’s policy of 
paying owner-drivers and creditors on time. 
The impact of on-time payments was explained as 
follows:
At Mainfreight we have a philosophy of paying our 
creditors on the 20th of the month, every month. 
We pay our drivers on the 15th of the month, every 
month. That forces us to collect our money . . . If you 
pay on time, you have to collect your money on 
time, and you cannot allow your credit terms to be 
extended.
Mainfreight managers also believed that strong 
companies earn profits based on good customers. 
They wanted customers who valued quality service 
and were willing to pay for it, on time (Davies, 2003, 
pp. 60, 102). The company was not interested in, 
and actively avoided acquiring customers who 
wanted only the cheapest service. In their words, 
“Silly rates lead to silly margins and should be 
avoided.” One executive explained this philosophy 
as follows:
Some customers like [one large retailer] live in the 
swamp . . . so we will not quote for them. We tend not 
to quote for the breweries unless it is strategic . . . 
Until recent times we have not shown any interest in 
supermarkets . . . They want cheap and ever cheaper 
service.
These disciplines – bill weekly, pay on time, and 
manage the margins earned from individual custom-
ers – contributed to the company’s cash management 
discipline.
Issues
Mainfreight had not prepared a traditional annual 
budget since its founding. The founder, a qualified 
accountant, set out to create a non-bureaucratic, non-
hierarchical, decentralized organization. He had 
always viewed budgets as a waste of time, and he 
wanted to avoid them at all costs.
The Mainfreight performance management system 
was not perfect. Company managers were facing a few 
issues. There was some tension in the organization because 
the divisions’ bonus potentials were not equal. In particu-
lar, team members in the Domestic Freight division could 
earn bonuses in the thousands, if not tens of thousands. 
The potentials in the Logistics division were much lower 
because of the high capital investments costs charged to 
the profit-and-loss statements. And there was a perception 
on the part of some managers that some branches found it 
easier to achieve their performance targets than others.
However, no team member had ever suggested that 
Mainfreight should introduce a traditional annual 
budgeting system.
Further Readings
Davies, K. 2003. With Passion Anything is Possible. Mainfreight – 
An Insight (Auckland: David Ling Publishing Limited).
Davies, K. 2013. Ready Fire Aim: The Mainfreight Story: How a 
Kiwi Freight Company Went Global (Auckland, New Zealand: 
Random House New Zealand).
Hope, J., Bunce, P., & Roosli, F. 2011. The Leader’s Dilemma: How 
to Build an Empowered and Adaptive Organization without 
Losing Control (San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.)
O’Grady, W., & Akroyd C. 2016. The MCS Package in a Non-
budgeting Organisation: A Case Study of Mainfreight. Qualita-
tive Research in Accounting & Management, 13, no. 1, pp. 2–30.

495
92
90
88
88
86
73
72
69
68
67
66
62
61
59
58
56
54
53
57
37
34
26
25
22
23
24
29
32
41
20
19
13
10
1
8
5
3
1980
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
Zoom
Share price
1m
3m
6m
YTD
1y
All
1982
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
2014
1984
2
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
6
7
9
11
14
12
21
4
9
11
Week from Monday. Jun 10. 1996
MFT Share Price : 0.98
911,719
1,265,578
1,132,158
GROUP OPERATING REVENUE
$ MILLION
GROUP EBITDA
$ MILLION
1,341,500
11
10
09
08
12
1,813,568
74,334
81,256
75,849
91,584
11
10
09
08
12
138,190
Exhibit 1  Mainfreight performance
An interactive chart showing key milestones and share price for Mainfreight can be found at http://www.mainfreight.com/global/en/global-home/investor-centre.aspx

496
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
Exhibit 2  Mainfreight culture and values
Culture
Under-promise, over-deliver
Keep reinventing with time and growth
Education is optional, learning is compulsory
Let the individuals decide
Keep it simple
Tear down the walls of bureaucracy, hierarchy and superiority
Avoid mediocrity – maintain standards and beat them
Look after our assets
Immaculate image and presentation
Promote from within
No job descriptions
Integrity – how it affects other people
Family
Eat together – use mealtimes as a discussion time
Listen to each other
Share the profits and the successes
Openly discuss problems and openly solve them
Don’t beat up your brothers and sisters
Have respect – seek it from others and show it by actions
Philosophy
One-hundred-year company
Profit comes from hard work, not talk
We are driven by margin, not revenue
Train successors, so that you may advance
An enduring company is built by many good people, not a few
We are here to make a positive difference, as well as a dollar
We “care” for our customers, environment and community base
Total quality management
Ready, fire, aim

Mainfreight
497
Exhibit 3  Mainfreight targets and target status
TARGET
STATUS
2013
• Revenue of US$400 million in Mainfreight USA and 
number of owned branches doubled from 12 to 24
• Revenue in the 2012 financial year US$208 million. 
Owned branches now number 33
• CaroTrans located on five continents
• On target, currently Asia, North America, South 
America, and Australia. European branch to open 
mid-2012
• Mainfreights is KiwiRail’s largest customer in New Zealand
• Developing; currently 4th on their customer list
• Mainfreight Austraia operations have doubled revenue 
to AU$600 million
• On target, currently Australian revenue is AU$391 
million
• 12 branches in our Asian network
• Currently 10
• Asian interests produce profit before tax of $l0 million
• Likely by 2018
• Another five branches opened in our Australian 
Domestic business
• Two new branches opened in past year: Albury and 
Sunshine Coast
• European Air and sea operations profitable
• On target
• Mexican and Canadian branches profitable
• On target - both to open in 2012
• Further European network expansion
• Finland and Moscow branches opened 2012; additional 
Eastern Europe branches expected
2014
• Mainfreight USA has revenue of US$500 million earning 
a rate of return of 7%
• Likely by 2018
• We have a branch network established throughout 
Southeast Asia
• Likely to located in three Southeast Asia countries in 
2012
• Asian interests produce sales revenues in excess of 
$100 million earning a return on revenue of 7%
• Likely by 2015; Current revenue including related party 
sales NZ$56 milion (or US$45 million)
• European Air & Sea operations developed in Eastern 
Europe
• On target
2015
• Sales revenue exceeds $2 billion
• Likely to be achieved in 2013.
• Our American and European interests earn more profit 
than our Austral and New Zealand operations
• Expect this to be achieved in 2018 to allow our 
American interests the opportunity to develop further
• Over 300 branch localions around the world
• On target
• Located six European countries
• Completed through the acquisition of the Wim Bosman 
Group in April 2011
• Located in three South American countries
• Established in Chile through CaroTrans; ongoing focus 
to extend development
• Branch network extends throughout Asia including a 
presence in India
• Asian development continues including a Southeast 
Asian presence; India opportunities continue to be 
explored
2016
• sales revenues exceed $3.0 billion
• European revenues exceed £500 million
• Likely by 2018
• More branches opened in Eastern Europe
• Allready in Polland, Romania, Russia - new branches 
opened in Finland
• Asia/Europe and USA/Europe trade lanes are our 
largest by volume and revenue
• Located in all European countries
• A little ambitious, howenver we will try hard!
(continued)

498
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
TARGET
STATUS
2017
• Mainfreght has a will-established Intrenational network 
trading between Europe, USA, South America, and 
Asia/Pacific
• 85% of revenue is earned outside of New Zealand
2028
OUR 50TH YEAR OF BUSINESS
MAINFREIGHT BECOMES NEW ZEALAND’S LARGEST COMPANY BY SIZE AND MARKET CAPITALISATI0N.
JUST IMAGINE!
Source: Mainfreight’s 2012 Annual Report. See http://www.mainfreight.com/global/en/global-home/investor-centre/report-library.aspx.
Exhibit 3  Mainfreight targets and target status (Continued)

Mainfreight
499
Exhibit 4  Format of weekly performance reports
Branch A Weekly results
%
$
$
This 
year
Last 
year
1
Sales
Allowances from 
Sending branches
2
Less: Direct Costs
Allowances to Receiving 
branches
%
%
Pick Up & delivery
%
%
Linehaul Total
%
%
3
Gross Margin
%
%
4
Standard Overheads
Extra overheads
Salaries
5
Weekly Profit
%
%
6
No. of consignments
Total cubic metres
Total tonnage
7
Branch Manager’s 
comments
Insights on mix, events, 
weather, etc
Notes on Sales & 
Margin performance
Division Weekly 
Results
This 
year
Last 
year
Gross 
Margin
L/Haul 
Margin
Week Ending
Branch A
Branch B
Branch C
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Branch XYZ

500
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
This case was prepared by Professor Winnie O’Grady.
Copyright © Winnie O’Grady.
Exhibit 5  Branch league table on claims performance
Claims Performance
Outward Consignments Per Claim
Inwards Consignments Per Claim
To March
To Sept
To March
To March
To Sept
To March
Branch
2012
2011
2011
Branch
2012
2011
2011
Chem Auckland
1756
1892
1667
Chem Auckland
5680
6755
4670
Rotorua
1158
1068
1166
Chem Christchurch
3470
2255
1746
Whangarei
1081
1318
571
Blenheim
2264
3147
1800
Chem Christchurch
1032
930
584
Palmerston North
1589
1832
1267
New Plymouth
936
799
759
Owens Auckland
1502
1810
1401
Napier
750
799
697
DF Auckland
1399
1529
1337
Mt Maunganui
744
892
551
Mt Maunganui
1345
1385
964
Dunedin
695
855
1009
MF Auckland
1266
1196
1060
Palmerston North
676
704
897
Taupo
1179
1178
1362
MF Hamilton
655
753
655
Napier
1168
914
1327
Blenheim
649
617
505
New Plymouth
1160
1170
1083
MF Auckland
627
662
639
Total Company
1084
1155
1106
Owens Auckland
617
676
607
MF Hamilton
1063
1568
1110
Total Company
582
612
576
Owens Christchurch
1022
1339
877
MF Wellington
581
592
515
DF Christchurch
969
1098
1320
MF Christchurch
532
574
444
Whangarei
969
1164
598
DF Auckland
473
486
652
MF Wellington
898
826
1026
Invercargill
396
409
366
MF Christchurch
887
844
1102
Owens Christchurch
379
431
348
Nelson
814
802
713
DF Christchurch
349
348
445
Rotorua
762
1136
1183
Nelson
319
384
343
Invercargill
635
677
1108
Taupo
221
386
244
Dunedin
616
668
846

Statoil
501
 We have a management model that is very well-suited to 
dealing with turbulence and rapid change. It enables us to 
act and reprioritize quickly so that we can fend off  threats 
or seize opportunities. This is much more diffi  cult in a “tra-
ditional budget” world. 
 Helge Lund, CEO, Statoil 
 Statoil, the large Norwegian energy company, used an 
innovative performance management process called 
“Ambition-to-Action” to translate the company’s over-
all strategies into strategic objectives, key performance 
indicators, needed actions, and individual goals. It 
combined two management concepts – the “balanced 
scorecard” and “beyond budgeting” – in a unique way. 
 The implementation of the Ambition-to-Action pro-
cess had taken a long time, but by 2010 it had been fully 
implemented across Statoil. In August 2010, Bjarte 
Bogsnes (Vice President, Performance Management 
Development), reported that: 
  One of our core values is to challenge accepted 
truths. We threw out our annual budgeting process 
back in 2005. In 2010, we decided to throw out the 
calendar. We are for instance implementing event-
driven dynamic forecasting. No longer do we 
require any forecasts to be prepared at any fi xed 
time, and the planning horizons vary depending on 
the business or operation. We are striving to make 
our entire process – strategic planning, target set-
ting, action planning, forecasting – totally dynamic, 
done as needed. We want our management pro-
cess to be business-driven, not calendar-driven. 
This is not accounting. Our aim is to create the con-
ditions required for teams in Statoil to perform to 
their full potential. 
 The new Ambition-to-Action process had already 
provided many benefi ts. But Bjarte acknowledged that 
some Statoil managers were still uncomfortable with 
the Ambition-to-Action process. “It’s a long journey, 
and it should be. Changing mind-sets is not a quick fi x,” 
he said. 
 Company background 
 Statoil, headquartered in Stavanger, Norway, was a 
large, multinational energy company. 1 The company 
was formed in 1972 by the Norwegian government and 
was wholly state owned until 2001 when its shares were 
listed on both the Oslo and New York stock exchanges. 
After the 2007 merger with the oil and gas division of 
Hydro, a Norwegian competitor, Statoil became the 
world’s largest offshore energy producer, the world’s 
third-largest seller of crude oil, and Europe’s second-
largest gas supplier. Statoil was also the largest company 
based in Scandinavia measured by market capitalization 
(nearly US$70 billion) and annual sales (US$70 billion). 
The company employed 20,000 people in 34 countries.  
 Statoil’s original focus was on the exploration, pro-
duction, and development of oil and gas on the Norwe-
gian continental shelf. The company’s distinctive 
competency was deep water off shore drilling in harsh 
environments. Over the years, it diversifi ed into refi n-
ing and retailing of petroleum products and produc-
tion of alternative forms of energy, such as wind 
power. In October 2010, Statoil spun off  its retail busi-
ness to create a separate public corporation, Statoil 
Fuel & Retail. 
 Statoil’s strategy was to grow its long-term oil and 
gas production profi tably while gradually building a 
position in renewable energy production. The oil 
reserves on the Norwegian continental shelf, on which 
the company had relied for many years, were being 
depleted. International growth was a key strategy. Sta-
toil managers knew that the company was entering a 
new, more competitive, and more unpredictable era, so 
faster responsiveness to change was deemed critical. 
 The Statoil organization structure was relatively fl at. 
It consisted of six main business units: (1) Exploration & 
Production – Norway; (2) Exploration & Production – 
International; (3) Natural Gas; (4) Manufacturing & 
 1   More information on the company can be found at  www.statoil.com . 
 CASE STUDY 
 Statoil 

502
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
Marketing; (5) Projects & Procurement; and (6) Tech-
nology & New Energy (see Exhibit 1).2
Ambition-to-Action
Statoil’s Ambition-to-Action was a process that was 
designed to provide integration from organizational 
strategy to employees’ actions, while providing suffi-
cient freedom and flexibility. It was designed around 
five basic principles:
1.	 Performance is ultimately about outperforming 
peers.
2.	 Do the right thing in the actual situation, guided by the 
Statoil Book,3 the Ambition-to-Action, decision crite-
ria and authorities, and sound business judgment.
3.	 Within this framework, resources are made available 
or allocated case-by-case.
4.	 Business follow up is forward looking and action 
oriented.
5.	 Performance evaluation is a holistic assessment of 
delivery and behavior.
Strategic objectives, performance 
indicators, and actions
The Ambition-to-Action process was built around a key 
performance indicator (KPI) scorecard system that was 
originally introduced at the company in 1997. In 2002, 
additional information was added to the KPI-dominated 
scorecard – a mission, strategic objectives, and needed 
actions – to provide a broader and richer language for 
describing and evaluating performance than could 
be provided by focusing just on KPI measures. Bjarte 
Bogsnes explained:
Ambition-to-Action is the cornerstone of how we 
manage our business. It is how we exercise leader-
ship, and it is the core of our business review meet-
ings. It is a much better tool than a budget for 
integrating the strategic processes with financial and 
operational measurement activities and people pro-
cesses. A budget cannot provide a holistic approach 
to management as it has a narrow financial focus, 
and accounting numbers are getting more distant 
from our business. Because oil prices are so volatile, 
accounting reports tell us very little about perfor-
mance unless we benchmark. You can’t read strat-
egy out of a budget, but you can read strategy out of 
a good scorecard.
All the Ambition-to-Action information was displayed 
together on a single page. Exhibit 2 shows an Ambition-
to-Action example, that for the entire corporation. The 
overall mission is shown at the top: “Globally competitive 
– an exceptional place to perform and develop.” The left 
column shows the strategic objectives, which answered 
the question: “Where are we going?” The center column 
showed the performance indicators, which answered the 
question: “How do we measure progress?” The right col-
umn described the key actions to be taken, which 
answered the question: “How do we get there?”
The corporation’s two key financial performance 
indicators were relative total shareholder return and 
relative return on average capital employed (RoACE). 
Exhibit 3 shows backup detail for these two KPIs, which 
compare Statoil performance with that of the other 
major energy companies.
Exhibits 4, 5, and 6 show other examples of Ambi-
tion-to-Action documents. These examples are for 
organizations at Levels 2 and 4 in the Projects & Pro-
curement organization and at Level 3 in the Explora-
tion & Production – Norway organization. The 
examples show the wide variety in the chosen strategic 
objectives and KPIs.
In 2010, over 1,100 Ambition-to-Action documents 
were in use within Statoil. Managers were encouraged 
to try the Ambition-to-Action process, but there was no 
corporate mandate imposing its use. Most, but not all, 
organizational entities above a certain size used it. The 
number of Ambition-to-Action documents had grown 
significantly over the years, more than doubling in just 
the last two years, simply because most Statoil manag-
ers wanted to use the process.
The strategic objectives were designed to describe 
“what success looks like on a medium term time hori-
zon.” To test the objectives they had developed, manag-
ers were asked to consider the following questions:
● Do they provide clear guidance and direction?
● Are they written in a language that makes you tick, 
without too many buzzwords?
● Do they support each other (cause and effect, from 
people and organization to finance)?
2	 Statoil announced a new organization effective January 1, 2011, 
that carved out North America as a seventh major business unit.
3	 The Statoil Book explained the company’s most important oper-
ating principles, policies, and requirements. It set standards for “our 
behavior, our delivery and our leadership.”

Statoil
503
● Is the time horizon right, within an appropriate 
delivery period?
The lists of performance indicators (KPIs) were 
organized using five perspectives, the four traditional 
balanced scorecard perspectives – finance, market, 
operations, and people and organization – plus a fifth 
perspective of particular importance to Statoil: health, 
safety and environment (HSE). Statoil’s conventional 
order for display of the perspectives was different from 
that of the standard balanced scorecard. Instead of 
starting with the financial perspective at the top, Statoil 
placed the people and organization perspective on top, 
followed by HSE, operations, and market, ending with 
finance. This was done to secure sufficient focus on the 
performance drivers found in the first four perspec-
tives, as Finance was seen as the ultimate consequence 
of performing well in the other perspectives.
The managers of each entity selected the set of KPIs 
that they believed would work best for their organiza-
tion. There were relatively few attempts to use the 
same KPIs at multiple levels of the organization if it did 
not make sense to do so, although some corporate enti-
ties from time to time tried to “push” their own 
favorites. Managers were aware of the strategic objec-
tives, performance indicators, and actions of the enti-
ties above them in the corporate hierarchy, as all of this 
information was made available on the common man-
agement information system (MIS) that maintains all 
Ambition-to-Actions. But Statoil did not want a 
mechanical “cascading” of the objectives, performance 
indicators, and actions throughout the organization. 
What they wanted was for each entity to run its own 
strategy process and to “translate” higher-level strate-
gies into strategy themes that were actionable at each 
organization level. The goal was to secure ownership 
and have local teams manage themselves effectively in 
their local environment while moving in the right 
direction as defined by the strategies of entities higher 
in the organizational hierarchy. The measures were 
changed to fit the circumstances being faced, as Baard 
Venge (Controller, Drilling & Well) explained: “We 
change measures when strategy changes or when we 
find better ones. If a measure is easy to manipulate, it is 
useless. We take it out.”
Statoil wanted managers to define KPIs that were 
relative, rather than absolute. Relative KPIs linked 
inputs with outputs (e.g. cost per barrel) and, where 
possible, they compared the organization’s performance 
with some benchmarks – performance relative to other 
entities. Statoil managers thought that relative KPI tar-
gets were more robust and “evergreen,” meaning that 
they did not need to be updated as often. They also 
drove performance by stimulating a competitive mind-
set and peer pressure to perform and encourage learn-
ing from the best performers and the sharing of best 
practices. Regarding the question as to how challenging 
to set to targets, Geir Slora (senior vice president, 
Drilling & Well) clarified, “We want achievement of the 
targets to be possible. In most cases we are not aiming at 
world records. We are aiming at being in the top 25%.”
Bjarte Bogsnes noted:
Absolute KPIs, such as a cost figure, is just meas-
uring one side of the equation and is not in relation 
to what you want to get out of those costs. Is meet-
ing an absolute cost target good or bad? Well, it 
depends on what you get back from those costs. 
Perhaps you should have spent more, as you lost 
value by missing business opportunities by not 
doing so. Or maybe you should have spent less 
because some expected opportunities did not 
come true. In any case, you will only know after-
wards and not beforehand what the “right” cost 
level is. It is however not possible to find good rela-
tive KPIs in all areas, so we also use absolute cost 
targets. These should however be set at an overall 
level, not a detailed level, to secure flexibility for 
teams to take the right decisions.
Finally, the actions listed on the Ambition-to-Action 
documents were those considered to be the most 
important for achievement in the areas of performance 
reflected by the KPIs.
Regarding the advice he tended to give managers 
who were working on their Ambition-to-Action docu-
ments, Bjarte Bogsnes proffered:
Teams must spend quality time defining strategic 
objectives before moving on to the KPIs. The stra-
tegic objectives translate strategy into success 
using language that people understand. When 
scorecards only show KPIs, what strategies do 
they communicate? Making strategy more con-
crete through strategic objectives can also reveal 
lack of clarity in the strategy …
Don’t search for the perfect KPI; it doesn’t exist. 
I’ve spent 10 years looking for it. There are good 
KPIs and good combinations of KPIs, but there’s no 
perfect KPI. The problem is that we often forget 
what the “I” in KPI stands for – indicator. It’s only an 

504
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
indication of whether we are moving towards our 
strategic objectives. It’s not a goal by itself. There-
fore, de-emphasize KPI targets and heighten 
objectives and actions.
The Ambition-to-Action documents were intended 
to be updated only as required, not on a periodic (e.g. 
annual) basis.
Performance targets, forecasts, and 
capital allocations
Statoil previously used a traditional annual budgeting 
process but, inspired by the beyond budgeting princi-
ples,4 the company’s Executive Committee approved its 
discontinuance on May 9, 2005.5 Statoil managers had 
many reasons for believing that budgeting was harmful 
to the corporation; for example:
● The budget forced three different purposes into one 
set of numbers – target setting, forecasting, and 
resource allocation – hurting the quality of each 
purpose as these are different things. The budget as 
a forecast became biased because the same number 
also served as a target, or as an application for 
resources. An ambitious sales target cannot be the 
same number as a 50/50 sales forecast.
● The budget became obsolete shortly after it was pre-
pared because the assumptions on which it was pre-
pared were no longer accurate. Nonetheless, some 
operating managers tended to view the budgeted 
costs as entitlements that should be spent anyway: 
“Nobody ever gives anything back.” Other operating 
managers were limited by the cost budget ceiling 
that prevented them from doing additional things 
that would be value-creating.
● Detailed budgets became centralized micro-man-
agement of highly competent and educated knowl-
edge workers, which the company claimed were its 
most important asset.
● Managers spent a lot of budget review time looking 
backwards, explaining variance, rather than focus-
ing on the future. Even though the budget reference 
points became more irrelevant as the months in the 
year went by, they were still compared with actual 
costs monthly with “accounting accuracy.”
● Budgeting was done on an annual cycle, but an 
annual cycle is not optimal for all parts of Statoil’s 
business. For some that is too often, but others 
should be evaluating performance and reforecasting 
more frequently.
● The budget preparations were predicated on the 
assumption that financial capital is the main con-
straint. In many areas of Statoil, other constraints, 
particularly expertise (human resources), were 
more salient.
Bjarte Bogsnes explained that all these problems 
with budgeting undermined the power of their score-
cards:
A key reason why many scorecard implementa-
tions fail is because they compete with the budget 
as a management tool, which confuse the organi-
zation over what’s the most important. As long as 
we had both, the budget normally won because it 
had the longest tradition, and managers were most 
familiar with it. When we removed the budget, no 
one was in doubt about the role of the scorecard. 
We got an amazing turbo-charging of the process.
The Ambition-to-Action process is shown in diagram 
form in Exhibit 8. The process started with strategic 
planning. Strategic themes and issues out to a 10-year 
horizon were discussed when needed as well as at the 
4	 Beyond budgeting is a management model aimed at overcoming the 
problems caused by traditional budgeting. The model, first devel-
oped at the Swedish bank Handelsbanken, has been developed and 
refined as its use has spread to several other organizations around 
the world, including Toyota, Southwest Airlines, Whole Foods 
Markets, and Nokia.
	 The aim of the beyond-budgeting management model is to increase 
the adaptability of enterprises. Exhibit 7 shows the 12 core beyond-
budgeting principles. The first six principles are focused on taking the 
right leadership actions to address the drivers of change. The second 
six principles align management processes with leadership actions. 
Companies that follow the beyond-budgeting principles have simple 
organizational structures, flat hierarchies, and flexible peer-to-peer 
networks. They operate with an assumption that organizations, like 
natural systems, are capable of self-organization and self-regulation. 
Their managers do not require negotiation of fixed performance 
targets, as is done in a traditional budgeting system. Allocations of 
resources are event-driven, not calendar-driven. Allocated resources 
are not treated as entitlements that must be spent. Unconstrained by 
a fixed and outdated plan, employees strive to improve their perfor-
mance relative to their peers or some other benchmark. Creativity 
and rapid response to customer needs and unpredicted events are 
encouraged. The 12 principles are closely inter-related. Beyond-
budgeting proponents caution that adopting a few principles while 
ignoring the others could lead to unsatisfactory outcomes.
5 Bjarte Bogsnes noted that “When you work with external partners 
[companies on large projects, say], you are often required to provide 
traditional budgets. When you aren’t preparing budgets to operate inter-
nally, this can be confusing for those managers who have this external 
interface. So, we haven’t completely eradicated budgets for those 
purposes.” Baard Venge agreed: “It is hard to be dynamic if our partners 
are not also dynamic. Most of them want to see an annual budget.”

Statoil
505
two Executive Committee meetings held each year. The 
ambition statements and strategic objectives developed 
out of the strategy discussions. They remained rela-
tively stable over time.
Statoil managers separated the functions typically 
served by traditional budgeting processes – target set-
ting, forecasting, and resource allocation – from each 
other in order to help improve the quality of each of 
these activities. Statoil used three distinct processes 
separated in time, or by KPIs used, to accomplish these 
very different purposes.
Performance target setting was done first. Perfor-
mance targets were set to be both ambitious and, if pos-
sible, relative. Ideally, relative targets both connected 
inputs with outputs (e.g. cost per unit of production) 
and allowed performance comparisons with that of 
other like organizations (e.g. “above average in the 
industry”). For example, targets for the health, safety 
and environment measure of “serious incidence fre-
quency” (SIF) commonly used in the exploration areas 
of the company were set relative to other like-entities 
within Statoil. Relative performance targets provided 
several advantages: there was no need to negotiate tar-
gets each year; managers set more ambitious targets 
for themselves because no one likes to be a laggard; 
and they motivated managers to be interested in learn-
ing from those who performed better on a relative 
basis.
Forecasts were designed to reflect expected out-
comes, to provide early warnings of problems that 
might be occurring so that corrective actions could be 
taken if necessary. Statoil managers knew that there 
would always be noise in the forecasts, but they wanted 
the forecasts to be honest and unbiased. The forecasts 
were intended to reflect expected outcomes realisti-
cally, whether favorable or unfavorable. When visibil-
ity into the future was poor, the forecasts could include 
scenarios and ranges of outcomes.
The frequency, lead time, and time horizon of the 
forecasts were intended to be driven by the business – 
not the calendar. In the first years of use of Ambition-to-
Action, however, the process was more calendar-driven. 
Entities did strategic planning, KPI selection and target 
setting in the spring; action planning and forecasting 
in the fall, and performance evaluations at the end of 
the year.
Thus, starting in 2010 and 2011 respectively, Statoil 
changed the process to require use of dynamic (or 
event-based ) forecasting and target setting. Bjarte 
Bogsnes explained that, “An event is either something 
that happens around us or an action we take ourselves 
that has an effect that should be reflected in our targets 
and forecasts.” Deciding when to update was a local 
manager decision. Forecasts were updated when an 
“event” happened or when important new information 
became available, but the time horizon was whatever 
local managers believed was relevant for their entity. 
Forecast updates were noted in a forecast log that was 
available for everyone to see in the MIS system. Strate-
gic objectives, KPI selection, and target setting could be 
changed when necessary. However, major changes 
required approval one level up; minor changes were 
only reported as information. If changes affected other 
entities, the entity initiating the change was responsi-
ble for informing those entities. Changing targets did 
not happen frequently, but they were intended to hap-
pen at natural points in time instead of directed by the 
calendar. Performance evaluation still took place once 
a year as before, but against Ambition-to-Actions that 
varied from very stable to very dynamic.
As a result, Statoil’s forecasts were approximately 
correct at all times, rather than being correct only at 
one fleeting point in time as is true in companies with a 
traditional annual planning and budgeting process. 
But since the targets were set to be ambitious and the 
forecasts were made to be realistic, it was common to 
have a gap between the two sets of numbers. This was 
seen as natural, as managers aimed high but had a real-
istic view of where they were.
Forecasts were not intended to be performance com-
mitments, because targets had been set earlier. Cost 
forecasts were also not applications for resources for 
funds, as discussed next.
Allocations of resources at Statoil were not a mechan-
ical function of either targets or forecasts. Managers 
had the freedom to commit resources up to limits 
defined by their scope of responsibility. The definition 
of a limit was however significantly redefined.
The problem with the conventional annual budget 
process was that it forced entities to decide on funding 
once a year, not only the total level but also the funding 
composition, which was not always the right time. 
Statoil did still allocate funds to projects or major deci-
sions involving costs, but only when the project was 
ready for a decision. Additional allocations were made 
dynamically, when the resources were needed, rather 
than far in advance as was typically done in a periodic 
budgeting process. Resources were “in principle” avail-
able whenever they were needed, if the project was 
good enough and if fresh forecasting information 

506
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
indicated sufficient capacity. “The bank is open year 
round,” Bjarte Bogsnes exclaimed, “but you can still get 
a no on your request for money.”
The intention with dynamic resource allocation was 
to cause a different managerial mind-set. Instead of 
asking “Do I have the budget for this?” managers should 
ask whether spending the money was the right thing to 
do. Was it within their decision authority, could they 
justify the expenditure, was the spending necessary, 
and, last but not least, was the spending within the 
framework defined by Ambition-to-Action? This frame-
work might include KPI targets like profit targets, unit 
cost targets or an overall absolute cost target. Some 
entities had no cost KPIs at all, instead addressing cost 
through strategic objectives or actions, combined with 
a continuous monitoring of their own actual spending 
development.
Business reviews
Performance reviews provided a structured assessment 
of actual performance. The reviews focused on the 
Ambition-to-Action documents, which were produced 
monthly. Each document (examples are shown in 
Exhibits 2, 4, 5, and 6) provided a quick summary of 
recent performance. The circles to the right of each 
performance indicator and each action showed whether 
forecasted (not actual) performance was meeting tar-
gets or schedules. A circle with a plus sign (coded 
green) indicated yes; one with an exclamation point 
(colored yellow) was questionable; one with a minus 
sign (coded red) indicated no. The arrows to the right 
of the circles indicated if the last forecast update 
reflected a positive or negative trend since the last 
reporting period. This format created much more for-
ward-looking business reviews.
The reviews typically started with an evaluation of 
KPIs and necessary action performance vs. targets. 
This was not as straightforward as it might first appear, 
as Geir Slora (senior vice president, Drilling & Well) 
explained:
We can live with some red circles, as we look at the 
reasons for misses. Were there unforeseen prob-
lems? If the KPIs are all green, we get suspicious 
that the manager was too conservative in target 
setting. For example, one manager in the drilling 
business was able to show “all green” on his 
Ambition-to-Action because his cost targets were 
set in absolute terms. His entity was able to come 
in below the cost targets because they failed to do 
all the drilling that was expected for the period 
which, of course, was not good. At the end of the 
day, all we really want to see is whether the organi-
zation is headed in the right direction.
As a matter of fact, comparing the performances vs. 
targets was only a starting point. More important were 
the answers to the following five questions to “pressure 
test” the KPI results:
● Did the KPI results contribute to the strategic objec-
tives? What were they unable to pick up? If we look 
beyond the KPI results, how would we evaluate per-
formance?
● How ambitious were the targets? With hindsight, 
would we say that they were stretched?
● Were there changes in assumptions that should be 
taken into account? Were the results affected by a 
tail-wind or head-wind that had nothing to do with 
performance?
● Were agreed-upon or necessary actions taken?
● Were the results sustainable? Or had the managers 
made themselves look better in the short run at the 
expense of the long run?
Eldar Saetre, the CFO, said:
Some uninformed observers might fear the pros-
pect of cost anarchy. I disagree. Many businesses 
within Statoil have KPI targets on profitability and/
or unit costs, benchmarked against peers where 
possible. Here, costs are managed by setting unit 
(rather than absolute) cost targets. Entity manag-
ers cannot spend wildly without a return or a good 
business case. In other areas we give overall guid-
ing on acceptable cost levels. Across all busi-
nesses, we monitor cost trends carefully, at least 
monthly, and intervene at any time if a negative 
trend has no good explanation.
Individual performance evaluations
Individual performances evaluations were done holisti-
cally and with the advantage of hindsight. All Statoil 
employees had individual goals for both delivery 
(what) and behavior (how). Performance was judged 
50% on delivery, as defined by Ambition-to-Action, and 
50% on behavior and living up to Statoil values. Deliv-
ery performance was evaluated subjectively, taking 

Statoil
507
into consideration relevant hindsight information. Sta-
toil used 360-, 180-, and 90-degree behavior evalua-
tions plus a people survey and day-to-day observations 
to learn how managers and employees were living up to 
the company’s values. Delivery and behavior evalua-
tions were each scored on a 1–5 scale and weighted 
equally in determining salary increases and bonuses on 
top of the common bonus for everybody, which 
was linked to Statoil’s financial performance vs. 
competitors.
Elder Saetre explained:
We have broken the automatic link between fixed 
KPI targets, performance evaluation and bonuses, 
not just by introducing behavior as a key element, 
but also by broadening our definition of delivery. 
Delivery used to be solely defined by KPIs, but they 
seldom provide the whole picture. That is why you 
need a more holistic assessment. We now look at 
Ambition-to-Action as a whole and make qualified 
judgments with hindsight. It takes a few years for 
employees to understand how it works, but then it 
can be very credible.
Implementation
KPI-dominated scorecards were first introduced as a 
local initiative on one of the offshore platforms in the 
late nineties. Their popularity grew rapidly, both side-
ways and upwards in the organization, and by 2003 all 
of Statoil used them. Then the broader Ambition-to-
Action process was introduced, emphasizing also stra-
tegic objectives and actions. In 2005, the company 
abolished traditional budgets, starting out with some 
pilots. The 2007 merger with Hydro, which added 
10,000 people in new roles in a new organization, 
meant starting all over again in many entities. In 2010 
the decision was taken to kick out the calendar.
Statoil managers did not wait until they had nailed 
down every detail. They designed the major features of 
the system and implemented it. They knew they were 
entering unfamiliar territory and did not believe that 
everything could be designed up front.
Some Statoil employees were worried about the 
change, as Bjarte Bogsnes recalled:
The skeptical ones fall in two categories. Some are 
skeptical because they are confused. These just 
need time to learn and understand. But there will 
always be a group of hard-core skeptics that you 
cannot convince up front. Instead of arguing 
against them, tell them you accept that there is a 
risk that it will not work. But what is actually the risk 
if throwing out budgets fails? Most companies can 
go back to budgeting overnight. Nobody will have 
forgotten how to do it. So ask them to compare that 
minimal downside risk with the upside if it works as 
intended. That tends to calm people down.
By 2010, the Ambition-to-Action process was fully 
operational throughout Statoil. All of the major busi-
ness units had implemented the process, and virtually 
all senior managers thought that it was a success. 
Exhibit 9 summarizes the major changes from the old 
command-and-control management style to the new 
more dynamic and flexible style.
Corporate managers did not impose the Ambition-
to-Action process on any entity. They concluded that 
local managers needed to have the freedom to adapt 
the principles and practices of the process to fit their 
entity’s needs, and they needed to find it useful them-
selves. If they did not, they would not use it anyway. 
Corporate managers needed to impose only enough 
structure to maintain a coherent vision and direction 
from the top to the bottom of the organization. They 
asked only that if the process was being used, all the 
documents be kept fully up-to-date at all times. They 
did try to communicate the purposes of the process and 
stood ready to train the managers to use it more effec-
tively. They expected that as the managers became 
more comfortable with the system, its use was likely to 
increase and improve.
Even though all the major entities had chosen to 
implement Ambition-to-Action, not all implementa-
tions were equally effective. The quality of implemen-
tation at lower organization levels, particularly, was 
uneven because the levels of understanding, quality, 
and commitment varied considerably. Some managers 
used the process as it was designed, as a “leadership 
tool.” But others used it merely as a “reporting tool,” as 
a budget in disguise. Numerous problems were appar-
ent. For example, some of the strategic objectives and 
KPIs were poorly chosen or defined or not changed 
often enough. Some performance standards were 
absolute when they could have been relative. Some 
KPIs and performance targets were dictated to subor-
dinates by higher-level managers through cascading 
processes. Some important performance qualities, 
such as “capabilities and competencies” in an internal 
consulting entity, could not be measured effectively. 

508
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
Too many forecasts were only updated with a year-end 
horizon. Too many targets had end-of-December deliv-
ery dates.
The future
It was inevitable that refinements to the process would 
be made over the years. The company was just begin-
ning to incorporate risk heat maps into Ambition-to-
Action. Bjarte Bogsnes thought that the system could 
become even more dynamic. In 2010, action planning, 
resource allocations, and forecasting were all done 
dynamically, and from 2011 setting the strategic 
objectives, determining the KPIs and KPI targets would 
also be event- and business-driven. Looking forward 
Bjarte thought that, for example, performance evalua-
tions might also be more closely linked to the comple-
tion of projects or activities.
He added:
I still have my dark days when I observe practices or 
behaviors reflecting what we wanted to leave behind. 
My medicine is, however, both simple and effective. I 
think back to how things were when we started out 
some years ago. If we can make similar progress in 
the coming years, we will have moved mountains.

509
Exhibit 1  Statoil: Organization chart

510
Exhibit 2  Ambition-to-Action example – Statoil Corporation

Statoil
511
Exhibit 3  Relative Statoil performance

512
Exhibit 4  Ambition-to-Action example – Exploration & Production-Norway, Drilling & Well Organization (Level 3)

513
Exhibit 5  Ambition-to-Action example – Projects & Procurement (Level 2)

514
Sheringham Shoal: Creating sustainable energy and shaping the future
Strategic objectives
People and organisation
A project organisation known for open, friendly and
truthful communication
Develop wind farm competence through project
execution
Performance indicators
Work environment survey
+
Actions (top 5)
Execute self assessment of working environment within project
team (31.12.2010)
Two teambuildings yearly (31.12.2011)
Health, safety and environment
Zero harm to people and environment
SIF
Harmful discharge to sea
TRIF
-
HSE Program and HSE Activity list (31.12.2011)
Establish and follow up Authority plan (31.12.2011)
HSE reviews and monitoring plan (31.12.2011)
Dropped objects campaign (31.12.2011)
HSE training (VC) (01.03.2011)
+
-
-
Operation
Pursuing opportunities, ensuring predictable results
Combine Statoil’s oﬀshore experience with best
practise from the wind industry
Estimate Development
Main milestones
Progress
!
Top 10 risk register (31.03.2012)
Target cost actions (31.03.2012)
!
!
Market
Develop stakeholder relations
Pursue cost reduction and optimisation opportunities
Claims from contractors
Timely consent approval
+
+
Monitor interface register and avoid delay to agreed dates (31.12.2011)
Timely closing of Variation orders (31.12.2011)
Finance
Build cost awareness throughout the entire value chain
SOX Compliance
+
Execute SOX self assessment yearly (31.03.2012)
+
+
+
+
+
!
+
-
+
+
+
+
Exhibit 6  Ambition-to-Action example – Projects & Procurement, Sheringham Shoal (Level 4) (Offshore Wind)

Statoil
515
Exhibit 7  The 12 principles of beyond budgeting
Change in leadership
Change in processes
1.	Values – Govern through a few clear values, goals, and 
boundaries, not detailed rules and budgets.
2.	Performance – Create a high performance climate 
based on relative success, not on meeting fixed 
targets.
3.	Transparency – Promote open information for 
self-management, don’t restrict it hierarchically.
4.	Organization – Organize as a network of lean, 
accountable teams, not around centralized functions.
5.	Autonomy – Give teams the freedom and capability to 
act; don’t micro-manage them.
6.	Customers – Focus everyone on improving customer 
outcomes, not on hierarchical relationships.
7.	 Goals – Set relative goals for continuous 
improvement, don’t negotiate fixed performance 
contracts.
8.	Rewards – Reward shared success based on relative 
performance, not on meeting fixed targets.
9.	Planning – Make planning a continuous and inclusive 
process, not a top-down annual event.
10.	Coordination – Coordinate interactions dynamically, 
not through annual planning cycles.
11.	 Resources – Make resources available as needed, 
not through annual budget allocations.
12.	Controls – Base controls on relative indicators and 
trends, not on variances against plan.
Exhibit 8  A pictorial representation of the Ambition-to-Action process

516
Chapter 11 • Remedies to the Myopia Problem
Exhibit 9  Summary – “a systematic change of the whole process”
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.

 
517
 CHAPTER 12 
 Using Financial Results Controls 
in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors 
 The eff ects of unpredictable, uncontrollable events have been ubiquitous following the 2008–
2009 fi nancial crisis that caused widespread volatility and wreaked havoc on strategies, deci-
sions, and business plans far beyond the bankers’ wood-paneled offi  ces on Wall Street or 
London’s City. But there are many other examples, just to mention some: 
 ●  The closure of most of the airspace over Europe for several days in mid-April 2010 on con-
cerns that ash from the Eyjafjallajokull volcano in Iceland could damage aircraft engines 
also spread far and wide, like the ash, to aff ect a variety of economies, sectors, and busi-
nesses. Airplanes were grounded, which severely disrupted businesses not just in the airline 
industry, but also in tourism, deliveries, supplies, and so forth. 
 ●  Then, a few days later, came the Macondo oil well blowout in the Gulf of Mexico, also known 
as the BP or Deepwater Horizon oil spill, and the temporary off shore drilling moratorium 
that was imposed because of it. This severely impacted not only BP, but also the entire oil 
industry and related sectors as knock-on eff ects became apparent. 
 ●  In March 2011, the Fukushima nuclear disaster in Japan caused Germany to shutter its 
nuclear reactors, casting a dark cloud over the future of Japan’s nuclear fuel industry and, 
indeed, many other countries’ nuclear fuel ambitions and plans. 1 
 ●  In October 2012, Hurricane Sandy, the deadliest and most destructive hurricane of the then 
Atlantic hurricane season, and the second-costliest hurricane in US history, signifi cantly dis-
rupted business, leaving insurers and re-insurers with a bill of over $25 billion. 2 
 ●  In July 2014, still reeling from the disappearance of fl ight MH370 in March, Malaysia Airlines 
received news of another fl ight, MH17, crashing in Ukraine. An unprecedented two crashes of 
the same airline in the span of four months – a tragedy without comparison. Malaysia Airlines is 
still fl ying but struggling to survive because, regardless of fault, customers deserted the airline.  3 
 ●  The Ebola outbreak in West Africa in the summer of 2014, which was not contained until late 
2015, hit many African economies where they were most vulnerable – the tourism industry – 
as travelers reconsidered trips to popular destinations as far away from the Ebola-struck 
countries as Kenya and South Africa. 4 
 ●  And then there was the tumbling of the oil price by more than a third in 2015 extending a 
drop by half in 2014, which changed just about any plan of any economy and business that 
depended on oil in some nontrivial way. 
 And the list goes on. Business is rife with uncontrollables; events that could not have been pre-
dicted with reasonable confi dence or accuracy in terms of either their likelihood, timing, 
impact, or magnitude. 

Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
518
Against this backdrop, consider the following, rather less significant, situation. The manager 
of a hi-tech subsidiary of a medium-sized, publicly traded firm was asked to grow annual sales 
and profit by 20% during the upcoming fiscal year. After the budget was prepared, however, a 
large client-company that was projected to buy more than 15% of total output from the subsidi-
ary faced financial difficulty and, later in the year, went out of business. As a consequence, the 
subsidiary’s actual performance was flat, and the subsidiary missed its budget target by a sub-
stantial margin. Almost everyone familiar with the situation agreed that, although bankruptcy 
is a common occurrence in fast-growing, hi-tech industries, it was virtually impossible to fore-
cast at budget time that this customer would have gone out of business as quickly as it did. 
(Actually, several of the events mentioned above cause firms, and not just those in the indus-
tries directly affected, to go out of business in a short period of time, which are the ripple effects 
through which the turmoil spreads. For example, “one Thai insurance company that had booked 
a trip to Cape Town to reward its biggest earners canceled the trip for 1,500 people,” said Barry 
Hurter, the chief executive of South Africa’s ERM Tours, which runs excursions that include 
safaris and corporate retreats.)5 Should you expect the subsidiary manager to have had a con-
tingency plan for such occurrences? Should the subsidiary manager be held accountable for not 
meeting the budget target? Would you forgive this subsidiary manager for the poor perfor-
mance? Would that forgiveness include allowing the subsidiary manager to keep this job? Earn 
a salary increase? Collect a bonus?
If one adheres to the controllability principle in a strict sense, one would give the subsidiary 
manager in this situation all, or most, of the eligible rewards. The results shortfall was not the 
subsidiary manager’s fault. The controllability principle, which was introduced in Chapter 2, 
states that employees should be held accountable only for what they control. A measure is 
totally controllable by an employee if it is affected only by the employee’s actions or decisions. 
The logic behind the controllability principle is obvious: Employees should not be penalized for 
bad luck. Nor should they be given rewards for mere good luck.
To implement the controllability principle, performance evaluators can reduce, and some-
times even eliminate, some of the distorting effects of uncontrollable factors on measured per-
formance. This chapter discusses several ways in which this can be done. Use of such 
distortion-reducing procedures is rarely unproblematic, however. Many important results 
measures, particularly at managerial levels in an organization, are only partially uncontrolla-
ble. Even though the measures are affected by occurrences outside the managers’ control, such 
as supply shortages, changing cost factors, competitors’ actions, or even business calamities, 
managers can take actions to react to these factors to try to mitigate their impact on the results 
measures. If managers are protected against the uncontrollables, they might not be motivated 
to wield the influence they have or could have. Moreover, even when it is clear that a given fac-
tor is largely uncontrollable, the extent of the distortion in the results measures because of it is 
often difficult to estimate. Combined, then, organizations must determine both whether and to 
which extent they should adjust the results measures for the influence of uncontrollable factors.
Dealing with the effects of uncontrollable factors is also prone to misjudgments. Organiza-
tions sometimes fail to protect managers from the effects of uncontrollable factors when they 
should be protected; and sometimes they do protect them when they should not. Sometimes the 
protections that are provided are ill-conceived. If judgments about how to deal with uncontrol-
lables are not made correctly, the advantages of results controls will be diminished, and poten-
tially serious morale problems can arise from poor results-based performance evaluations.
In the following sections, we discuss the problem of evaluating performance when measures 
are affected by uncontrollable factors. It presents the basic rationale for the controllability prin-
ciple and describes the types of uncontrollable factors that can be faced. It then discusses the 
various methods organizations can use to implement the controllability principle and the appli-
cability, advantages, and disadvantages of each of the methods.

The controllability principle
519
The controllability principle
Several related arguments explain why employees should not be asked to bear uncontrollable 
business risks. Organizations that hold employees accountable for uncontrollable factors bear 
the costs of doing so because the vast majority of employees are risk averse; that is, employees 
prefer that their performance-contingent rewards stem directly from their efforts and not be 
affected by the vagaries of uncontrollables.
To illustrate risk aversion, assume the following two compensation contracts. The first pro-
vides a fixed salary of €100,000 per year. The second provides an opportunity to earn €200,000 
if a performance target is met, and all involved agree that the likelihood of meeting the target is 
50%. If the target is not achieved, however, there will be no compensation. The expected value 
of both contracts is €100,000, but most people will choose the fixed salary, the guarantee of 
€100,000 because they do not want to bear the risk of earning nothing.
People’s degrees of risk aversion vary with personal and various other characteristics such as 
career type and stage. Although it is hard to generalize, sales and marketing personnel perhaps are, 
or are said to be, relatively more risk tolerant than are accounting and finance personnel, who are 
said or believed to be more prudent and who may have self-selected into accounting, auditing, and 
control-related jobs because of that trait. For salespeople, on the other hand, accepting to work on 
commission rather than salary may be some indicator of their relative risk tolerance. Compared to 
mid-career colleagues, say, employees at the start of their career – who still can recover from a job 
mishap if it were to happen, and who may have no dependents to provide for, no mortgage payments, 
or other major financial commitments yet – are more likely to tolerate more risk or even seek risk, 
depending on their personality and ambitions. So, too, are people at the other end of their career, 
who may have become independently wealthy through years of hard work and strong earnings 
power, although for them reputation concerns are still likely to affect their attitudes toward risk.
The extent of a person’s risk aversion can be assessed by varying the parameters in the ear-
lier example. For example, if the amount of the salary guarantee was lowered to €90,000, some 
relatively risk-tolerant (less risk-averse) people would be tempted enough by the higher 
expected value of compensation of the performance-contingent alternative (€100,000) that 
they would be willing to take the 50% risk of earning nothing. If the salary guarantee was low-
ered to €80,000, another group of people would be willing to take the risk. But the key point is 
that employees, on average, cannot be taken to be risk neutral.
Risk aversion is the basis for the primary argument supporting the controllability principle. 
Firms that hold risk-averse employees accountable for the effects of factors they cannot com-
pletely control will bear some costs of doing so. First, to compensate for the risk, firms will have 
to provide risk-bearing employees with a higher expected value of compensation. If they fail to 
do so, the firms will bear some costs in alternate forms, such as an inability to hire talented 
employees, a loss of motivation from their employees, and, probably eventually, turnover.
Second, firms holding employees accountable for uncontrollables will bear the costs of some 
employee behaviors that seek to lower their exposure to uncontrollable factors, possibly at the 
expense of firm value. Employees may fail to develop or implement ideas for investments that 
are in the firm’s best interest but that involve some risk. They may also engage in gameplaying 
behaviors, such as managing earnings or creating budgetary slack, to protect themselves 
against the effects of the uncontrollable factors.
Third, firms may bear the cost of lost time, as employees whose performances are evaluated 
in terms of measures that are distorted by uncontrollable influences are prone to develop 
excuses. They will spend time arguing about the extent of the distortions, at the expense of 
doing their jobs. The scheming, discussions, and “politicking” are not only unwelcome, but they 
may trigger needless job-related stress and tension.

Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
520
To a feasible extent, then, business risks should essentially be left with the business owners. 
Owners are better able to bear the risk as investors or because they have chosen to do so by vir-
tue of being entrepreneurs. Unlike employees, owner-investors can diversify risk in their invest-
ment portfolios. Owner-entrepreneurs’ rewards stem directly from the risk-bearing function 
they perform, and choose to perform, as their fortunes go up and down with the success or 
failure of the business.
Types of uncontrollable factors
Before describing the methods managers can use to control for the distorting effects of uncon-
trollable factors, it is useful to categorize the types of factors that can be, to a greater or lesser 
extent, uncontrollable by management. They include (1) economic and competitive factors, 
(2) force majeure, and (3) interdependencies.
The first uncontrollable factor includes a broad range of economic and competitive factors that 
affect one or more results measures. One important results measure – profit – is affected by 
many factors that change: consumer demand, product/service prices, and/or the costs of doing 
business (factor costs). Among the factors that affect consumer demand and prices are business 
cycles, competitor actions, changing customer tastes, customer boycotts, changing laws and 
regulations, and foreign exchange rates. Among the factors that affect costs are the supply and 
demand of raw materials, labor and capital, foreign exchange rates, regulations, and taxes. 
Virtually every other results measure also can be affected by multiple, uncontrollable economic 
and competitive factors. For example, company stock prices are affected by market cycles, 
rumors and investor tastes, or even moods. On-time delivery measures can be adversely affected 
by supply shortages and changing customer demands. Customer satisfaction measures can be 
affected by, among other things, the quality of the products and services provided by competi-
tors or the arrival of an online competitor with quite a different business model to essentially 
meet the same customer need.6
Changes in economic and competitive factors are difficult for performance evaluators to deal 
with because, although most of these factors appear to be uncontrollable, managers can and 
should usually make responses to these changes to positively influence the results measures. 
When raw material prices increase, managers can consider substituting alternate materials. 
When the cost of capital increases, they can consider delaying capital investments and reducing 
inventories. When exchange rates change, they can consider sourcing or selling in different 
countries. When customer tastes change, they can alter their product design or change their 
marketing strategy. Indeed, responses such as these are a key part of being a manager. As a con-
sequence, most evaluators do not buffer managers from changes in economic and competitive 
factors, although they might take steps to have the organization share some of the risk with the 
managers, such as by corporate hedging to try to mitigate fluctuations in raw material prices.
A second type of uncontrollable factors includes unpredictable and abnormally severe events 
caused by natural or other forces, commonly referred to as force majeure (or act of nature and 
act of God, although with varying meanings and interpretations under different systems of law). 
Such “major forces” are large, unexpected, one-off uncontrollable events such as hurricanes, 
earthquakes, floods, riots, terrorist attacks, key executive deaths, and, if they are not caused by 
negligence, fires, accidents, major installation breakdowns, thefts, and so on. Most acts of 
nature involve negative surprises, but positive surprises sometimes also occur. For example, 
while hurricanes and other natural calamities can destroy many businesses (and business 
plans) in their path, they create opportunities for others, such as construction firms, manufac-
turers of power generators and drywall, and self-storage companies7 as well as insurance 

Types of uncontrollable factors
521
companies.8 And while severe weather can keep airplanes grounded at a huge cost in lost busi-
ness and subsequent damages, they boost hotel bookings in the airport’s vicinity. Similarly, 
while the above-mentioned volcanic ash cloud grounded airlines, P&O cross-Channel ferries 
and Eurostar trains were fully booked, and a group of businesspeople paid a taxi driver £700 to 
take them from Belfast to London after they became stranded.9
Many organizations are inclined to protect employees from the downside risks caused by 
force majeure, but only if the events are deemed to be clearly uncontrollable and if steps are 
taken by the managers to recover from the adversity as expeditiously as possible. Moreover, in 
some cases, controllability itself is at question, as controversy can develop over the cause of, say, 
fires, accidents, breakdowns, or thefts. Also potentially contentious is the extent to which a 
manager could have reduced exposure to these effects by purchasing insurance protection or 
other risk-transfer solutions.
Even some of the most unprecedented, uncontrollable events, such as the 9/11 terrorist 
attacks on the United States, needed an immediate response from management. Within days of 
the attacks, Boeing Company, the aerospace giant, scaled back production in its commercial 
airplanes unit while planning for faster growth in defense-related units. Similarly, Bill Marriott, 
chairman and chief executive of Marriott International, a global hotel group, made his first 
cost-cutting decision on the afternoon of September 11 by canceling the firm’s advertising 
based on the expectation that panicked customers were going to have fear of flying and would 
stay away from hotels in droves for at least several weeks.10 Similarly, many companies are 
investing heavily to protect themselves from the effects of weather. Better forecasts and better 
scenario planning helped insurer Swiss Re to spread its risk better and FedEx to route its planes 
more robustly to deliver packages with minimal delays.11 These examples illustrate clearly that 
managers must respond even when mostly uncontrollable events happen. While the events 
themselves are uncontrollable, managers have influence over the effects that will be felt, and 
good managers should be expected to respond to the best of their abilities.
A third and quite different type of uncontrollable factor is caused by interdependence. Inter-
dependence signifies that an entity is not completely self-contained, causing the measured 
results of the entity to be affected by other entities within the organization. Interdependencies 
can be pooled, sequential, or reciprocal.
Pooled interdependencies exist where an organization’s entities use common resources or 
resource pools, such as shared staff or facilities (e.g. shared human resources support, shared 
research, and development). Pooled interdependencies raise the question whether managers 
should be put at risk for the poor performance of shared resource pools, such as corporate staff 
activities on which they must rely. In many large firms, managers in the resource-dependent 
entities are protected from cost increases by the terms of an annual contract, negotiated during 
the annual planning process, which stipulates the services to be provided and their costs. The 
expected costs are impounded in a fixed allocation rate, and unexpected rate increases cannot 
be passed on to internal customers until the next contract negotiation. But they are not neces-
sarily protected from the poor performance of the shared activity.
Sequential interdependencies exist when the outputs of one entity are the inputs of another 
entity. Organizations that are high in sequential interdependence are vertically integrated 
firms, such as paper and steel companies. Reciprocal interdependencies are bidirectional sequen-
tial interdependencies. That is, organizational entities both produce outputs used by other enti-
ties and use inputs from them. Reciprocal interdependencies are high in some related-diversified 
firms. Most corporations deal with both sequential and reciprocal interdependencies by setting 
up internal transfer pricing systems that try to approximate the conditions found in external 
markets. These systems, which we discussed in Chapter 7, make these interdependencies act 
much like the economic and competitive uncontrollables described above, and evaluators then 
can deal with them in much the same way.

Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
522
Another type of interdependency stems from interventions from higher-level management. 
Higher-level managers can force a decision on an entity manager and, in so doing, significantly 
affect a results measure linked to one or more forms of rewards. For example, corporate manag-
ers might order a division to sell to a particular customer at a money-losing price in return for 
other benefits that will accrue to other entities in the firm. Corporate managers can also affect 
results measures simply by not approving decisions initiated by an entity manager. They might 
not approve a proposed expenditure or a production schedule change. If these decisions are 
imposed on the entity managers, some organizations will make an adjustment for such argua-
bly uncontrollable interventions. Others, however, argue that these interventions are not 
always totally uncontrollable. The entity managers might be involved in the discussions leading 
up to the decision and should, therefore, be held responsible for the effects of the negotiations 
and deliberations with their corporate superiors over which they could be expected to have had 
some influence.
Controlling for the distorting effects of uncontrollables
Managers can reduce (and sometimes even eliminate) some of the distorting effects of some 
of these uncontrollable factors by using either or both of two complementary approaches. 
Before the measurement period begins, they can define the results measures to include only 
those items that employees can control or at least only those items over which they have sig-
nificant influence. After the measurement period has ended, they can calculate (or estimate) 
and adjust for the effects of any remaining uncontrollable factors using techniques such as 
variance analysis, flexible budgeting, relative performance evaluations, or subjective perfor-
mance assessments. Both of these methods of controlling for the effects of uncontrollable 
factors have costs. These costs must be balanced against the benefits of reducing the risks 
employees must bear.
Controlling for uncontrollables before the measurement period
Two primary methods can be employed to control for uncontrollables before the measurement 
period: purchasing insurance and design of responsibility structures.
Insurance
Many uncontrollable events, such as physical damage to company assets, employee-caused 
damage, product liability suits, employee errors and misappropriations, riots, and vandalism, 
are insurable. A detailed discussion of insurance generally, and insurable events and insurance 
policies specifically, is outside the scope of this text. However, the key concept underlying insur-
ance is that the company (the insured party) accepts a known relatively small “loss” (cost) in the 
form of a regular payment in exchange for being covered by the insurer for possibly large 
(although relatively unlikely) losses. Insurance might, therefore, be especially pertinent for 
what are sometimes called “low frequency – high impact” events. As such, the key benefit from 
purchasing insurance derives from a transfer of risk from the insured to the insurer.
Responsibility structures
The controllability principle underlies most of the logic guiding the design of responsibility 
structures. In Chapter 7 on financial responsibility structures, we presented a key concept in 
the design of responsibility centers, which is but a slight modification of the controllability prin-
ciple: Hold employees accountable for the performance areas that management wants them to pay 
attention to.

Controlling for the distorting effects of uncontrollables
523
This general concept is widely applied. Organizations do not hold salespeople or production 
managers accountable for the results of corporate financing or major asset acquisition deci-
sions. There is no need for these managers to pay attention to these decisions that clearly fall 
outside of their purview, and thus outside of their control.
Performance reports often separate controllable from uncontrollable items. As an illus-
tration, Table 12.1 shows such an itemized performance report with four profit measures. A 
control system built on this report would hold the profit center manager responsible for 
controllable profit. Everything below the controllable profit line is deemed to be uncontrol-
lable by that manager. In other words, companies thus aim to “match” an entity manager’s 
scope of decision authority with the line item for which they hold the entity manager 
accountable.
But are the items below the controllable profit line really uncontrollable? Maybe not entirely, 
thus raising the issue: When should managers be expected to pay attention to things over which 
they have less than complete control? In other words, can there be grounds for charging entity 
managers with the effects of corporate financing decisions or corporate research and develop-
ment (R&D)? Assigning them the costs as a line item on their entity’s budget or profit-and-loss 
statement would, in effect, hold them accountable for that line item. If these managers are not 
involved in the corporate decisions regarding financing and R&D, say, and if there is no need for 
them to be aware of how much the corporation is spending on interest expense or R&D, then 
there is no need to assign them a share of those costs.
As an alternative example, should entity managers be assigned a share of corporate adminis-
trative (overhead) costs, such as those incurred in the corporate personnel and information 
systems departments? Here, the answer may be yes. Charging these costs is likely to empower 
the entity managers to challenge the size of the costs and the quantity or quality of the services 
rendered in exchange for the costs. In other words, allocating these overhead costs to the enti-
ties will stimulate the entity managers to put pressure on the corporate overhead departments 
to control service costs and to provide “competitive” services. These charges, however, violate 
the strict controllability principle, but they are consistent with the rule presented above; that is, 
to hold managers accountable for the performance areas you want them to pay attention to. You 
want them to exercise some influence even though they have less than direct control over these 
areas.
When employees are held accountable for many performance areas over which they have 
little influence, the organization will bear the increased costs of making employees bear the 
risk. At some point, these costs outweigh the benefits. As such, this approach is bounded by the 
limits of holding employees accountable for too many things over which they have too little 
influence.
Table 12.1  Entity income statement broken down by controllable and non-controllable items
$
Sales
xxx
Less: variable costs
(xxx)
Sales margin
xxx
Less: controllable division expenses
(xxx)
Controllable profit
xxx
Less: non-controllable division expenses
(xxx)
Less: allocations of central expenses
(xxx)
NET PROFIT
xxx

Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
524
Controlling for uncontrollables after the measurement period
Removing the distorting effects of uncontrollable factors from the results measures can also be 
attempted after the measurement period (but before the assignment of rewards). This can 
sometimes be done objectively (through numerical calculation) using variance analysis, flexible 
performance standards, or relative performance evaluations. Alternatively, it can be done sub-
jectively through exercising evaluator judgment. There are benefits and costs to each approach.
Variance analysis
In MCS applications, variance analysis is a systematic approach or method designed to explain 
why actual results differ from predetermined standards, budgets, or expectations. They can 
help segregate controllable from uncontrollable variances and help explain who should be held 
accountable for the controllable variances, which are either positive (favorable) or negative 
(unfavorable) variances.
Variance analysis techniques as applied to manufacturing operations are described in great 
detail in every cost accounting textbook. To explain why actual manufacturing costs are differ-
ent from standards, variance analysis distinguishes material, labor, and overhead cost vari-
ances and then breaks each down into price, mix, yield, volume, and potentially other variance 
components. (Most cost accounting textbooks explain these variances, and the formulas for 
calculating them, in great detail.)12 The variance analysis technique can be usefully applied to 
many settings other than production, however, as it essentially involves varying one perfor-
mance factor at a time from expected to actual levels within a computational model to see what 
caused overall actual performance to differ from expected performance.
As an illustration, Table 12.2 shows how variance analysis can be applied to a sales territory 
in a foreign country. Assume that managers have determined that sales are largely dependent 
on four factors (industry volume, market share, price in local currency, and the currency 
exchange rate), and so they prepare a sales plan (a model) based on estimates of each of these 
factors. At the end of the measurement period, almost inevitably, actual sales will be different 
from the plan. An analysis such as that shown in Table 12.2 can then be developed to under-
stand the bases of the sales variances.
The original sales plan is reflected in the left-hand column of Figure 12.2, which shows the 
planned or budgeted value for each of the key factors. The first analysis involves changing one of 
Table 12.2  Application of variance analysis to a sales entity
Sales plan
Actual Ind. Vol.
Actual MS
Actual Price
Actual Ex. Rate
Expected industry 
volume (IVB)
IVA
IVA
IVA
IVA
Planned market share 
(MSB)
MSB
MSA
MSA
MSA
Planned price (local 
currency) (PLCB)
PLCB
PLCB
PLCA
PLCA
Planned foreign 
exchange rate (FXB)
FXB
FXB
FXB
FXA
Ind. Vol.	
Market Share	
Sales Price	
Exchange Rate
Variance	
Variance	
Variance	
Variance
A = actual
B = expected, planned, or budgeted

Controlling for the distorting effects of uncontrollables
525
the factors from the planned to the actual value. Figure 12.2 separates the effect of industry vol-
ume first.13 The difference between the sales plan and the amount shown using actual industry 
volume is the industry volume variance. The second analysis changes a second factor, here market 
share, from the planned to the actual value, while holding the previously changed value (industry 
volume) at actual. This identifies a market share variance. This process continues for each of the 
remaining two factors, identifying a sales price variance and an exchange rate variance, respec-
tively. The sum of the four variances will equal the total sales variance (the amount by which 
actual sales are different from the sales plan). This is illustrated with numbers in Table 12.3.
Variance analyses such as these separate uncontrollable from controllable factors in explain-
ing the difference between actual and planned results. In this example, the industry volume and 
currency exchange variances would probably be considered uncontrollable, whereas the market 
share and price variances should be controllable by a sales entity manager. If that is the case, 
specific individuals (or groups of individuals) can be held accountable for the controllable vari-
ances; that is, in the above example, it is likely that the market share and price variances are 
deemed to fall within the responsibility of the sales entity. However, further analyses might 
show that the accountability for these variances should be shared with other departments or 
entities, such as engineering (product design) or production (production quality, schedule 
attainment) because there may have been scheduling or customization issues, say, which caused 
sales volumes to be lower than expected. The exchange rate variance might be the responsibility 
of the corporate finance function if this department is in charge of currency hedging. If not, this 
variance might be considered uncontrollable on the whole.
Table 12.3  Illustrating the Table 12.2 example with a set of numbers
Assume:
IVb = 2 million
IVa = 2.4 million
MSb = 10%
MSa = 8%
PLCb = 0.90
PLCa = 1.10
FXb = 1 home currency: 1 foreign currency
FXa = 1.2 home currency: 1 foreign currency
Sales (in home currency)
Planned = 180,000 (2m × 10% × 0.9 × 1)
Actual = 253,440 (2.4m × 8% × 1.1 × 1.2)
Total Sales Variance = 73,440 favorable
Variances (in home currency)
Industry volume variance = 36,000 favorable (the plan called for 10% of 2m industry volume which 
turned out to be bigger at 2.4m, hence 200,000 vs. 240,000, or 40,000 units higher at the expected 
price of 0.9 = 36,000)
Market share variance = 43,200 unfavorable (the budget assumed a 10% share of 2.4m, but the 
entity only achieved to obtain 8%, hence 240,000 vs. 192,000, or 48,000 units less at the expected 
price of 0.9 = 43,200)
Price variance = 38,400 favorable (the budget expected to sell 192,000 units at a price of 0.9, 
but the entity managed to sell at a price of 1.1, hence the difference between 172,800 and 211,200, 
or 38,400)
Foreign exchange variance = 42,240 favorable (the budget expected a 1:1 currency exchange of 
the entity’s sales of 211,200 in foreign currency, but the home currency weakened to 1.2:1, hence a 
favorable currency translation of 42,240)

Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
526
Flexible performance standards
Flexible performance standards, which we introduced in Chapter 8, can also be used to protect 
managers from the effects of uncontrollable factors. Flexible standards define the performance 
that employees are expected to achieve given the actual conditions faced during the measurement 
period. To refer to the example above, flexible performance standards might be made to vary with 
some of the pertinent uncontrollable factors – for example, the sales entity’s budget would be “re-
calculated” at the prevailing exchange rates rather than the initially expected exchange rates.
In this way, flexible (or “re-calculated”) budgets can be particularly useful when there is a 
dominant input factor whose cost has changed beyond normal variations, such as due to, say, oil 
price fluctuations that materially affect factor costs. This situation is not descriptive of many 
industries, however. That is, even though production costs in many firms vary with, say, direct 
material cost, few production processes are dominantly dependent on any given material or 
input. Therefore, firms conventionally expect that managers will be able to manage or compen-
sate unfavorable price movements for some materials against favorable price movements for 
some other materials. Or, if that is not the case, they expect that managers will be able to some-
how mitigate the adverse effects of unfavorable price movements. That said, in periods where oil 
prices unexpectedly drop by more than half in a year, such as in 2014–2015, flexible budgets that 
re-calculate the plan at prices that better reflect the new reality can be useful and avoid frustra-
tion of managers held accountable against targets materially impacted by these factors, assum-
ing that indeed they are largely uncontrollable and have fluctuated beyond normal ranges.
When environments are less predictable and managers wish to embed various assumptions 
about the future into their planning, they sometimes engage in what is called contingency, sce-
nario, or what-if planning exercises. For example, some banks have set up contingency plans to 
account for the possibility of any nation exiting the European Union’s common currency, the euro:
“We’ve been doing some contingency work to ensure that we have a robust system and 
ability to absorb shocks if on a Sunday night a sovereign decides to leave the euro,” Carl 
Norrey from JPMorgan in London said – “the probability of a country exiting the euro is no 
longer zero.”14
General Electric also does extensive contingency planning around scenarios including the 
spread of the financial woes to more markets and the possibility of a breakup of the euro:
“We’re putting in contingencies for everything we can think of,” GE Capital Chief Executive 
Mike Neal said. “You’d be nutty today to have a large European business and not be gam-
ing for something like that.”15
Similarly, Coca-Cola had contingency plans ready to adapt its World Cup sponsorship in Brazil if 
unrest and protests about the high level of spending on the World Cup compared with public 
services were to return to the streets:
“We hope there [will be] no unrest,” Coke’s Executive Vice President Joe Tripodi said from 
Atlanta. “But we recognize these things happen. You always have to be smart to have all 
kind of Plan Bs, Plan Cs and Ds to prepare for any contingency. And if certain things hap-
pen you might have to change […] your marketing. […] The world we live in now is full of 
disruption, frequent chaos and change all the time,” he added. “So, as a company and as a 
brand if you are not prepared to respond, then you aren’t going to survive.”16
Proponents of contingency planning maintain that it improves a company’s ability to cope 
with (possibly radical) variations in key aspects that impact on the business, allows dealing 
with complex risk and control issues, and prepares to take pre-emptive action. In other words, it 
prepares organizations to respond to “known unknowns”—possible events that they are aware 

Controlling for the distorting effects of uncontrollables
527
can happen or have a non-zero chance of occurring but whose impacts are hard to estimate with 
precision. As such, scenario planning provides another way to apply flexible performance 
standards. At the beginning of the measurement period, managers prepare plans for several 
reasonable scenarios. At the end of the period, managers are then held accountable for achiev-
ing the plan associated with the scenario that actually unfolds.17
However, drawing up plans for a range of scenarios is not costless, particularly when done 
frequently, such as for annual budgeting purposes. That said, and perhaps due to recent events 
that had become nearly unthinkable in living memory, such as the bankruptcy of major banks, 
“people are trying to move beyond historic notions that tail risk events are so infrequent on the 
one hand, and so extreme on the other hand, that there is nothing you can do about them,” said 
Eugene Ludwig, founder of the Washington-based risk management firm Promontory Financial 
Group.18
Another way to make performance standards more flexible is simply to update them more 
frequently. Any time a performance standard is set, there is a chance that the assumptions 
underlying the preparation will prove to be inaccurate, rendering the standard obsolete. Obso-
lete standards subject managers to uncontrollable risks. Potential obsolescence is easy to see in 
a budgeting context. Budgets are prepared under the assumption of a given set of planning 
parameters, such as economic forecasts. The budget targets then remain fixed for the duration 
of the planning horizon (typically one year). The managers are at risk for all the forecasting 
errors; that is, they are asked to achieve their budget targets regardless of the conditions actu-
ally faced.19 To mitigate this, firms might evaluate managers’ performances monthly or quar-
terly (rather than annually) and then prepare an updated, hopefully more realistic, budget for 
the next month or quarter. Rolling budgets are an application of this approach, where there is a 
“constant” 12-month budget window even though it is updated each month or quarter by add-
ing a month or quarter as each month or quarter passes. As such, the 12-month budget is “roll-
ing forward” on a monthly or quarterly basis.
But updating standards more frequently is not a panacea, either. One problem is cost. Updat-
ing standards can be time-consuming depending on how elaborate the budget preparation pro-
cess is. Measuring results in short time periods also creates some other potential problems. It is 
not always possible to determine in a short time period whether the results generated by some 
individuals, such as managers or research scientists, are good or bad. As such, the short time 
horizon may exacerbate the myopia problem by introducing even shorter “windows” or time 
horizons, as we discussed in Chapter 11.
Relative performance evaluations
Another method of protecting employees from the distorting effects of uncontrollable factors is 
by way of relative performance evaluations (RPE). RPE means that employees’ performances are 
evaluated not in terms of the absolute levels of the results they generate, but in terms of their 
results relative to each other or relative to those of their closest outside competitors. For RPE to 
be effective, all parties in the comparison or peer group must be performing roughly the same 
tasks and/or face roughly the same sets of opportunities and constraints. These conditions are 
sometimes met in companies with numerous comparable entities, such as in banks with many 
like-branches and fast food chains with many like-restaurants.
Consider a pizza parlor example. When at one time the price of mozzarella cheese rose 
sharply, the increase caused a profit squeeze at virtually all pizza parlors because cheese 
accounts for nearly half of a pizza’s cost, and pizza prices are roughly fixed. As a spokesman for 
Domino’s Pizza put it, “customers are accustomed to ‘three-digit pricing’ – people buy lots more 
pizza at $9.99 than at $10.99.”20 Consequently, profits at virtually all pizza parlors fell sharply 
over this period. If the evaluations of the managers of pizza outlets were based on their achieve-
ments vis-à-vis pre-established targets, such as budget targets not flexed with the change in 

Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
528
cheese prices (as discussed above), then all the managers would be evaluated as poor perform-
ers. If those evaluations were linked to rewards, then presumably, these managers’ bonuses 
would be quite low, if not zero. But in this case, since all pizza outlets suffered the same uncon-
trollable shock, their performances can be compared relative to each other. As such, RPE would 
be an easy way for large pizza chains to adjust for the effects of this uncontrollable economic 
factor.
In most settings, however, good comparison groups do not exist, which may explain why 
RPE is not in widespread use, at least in a formal, objective sense. That said, the RPE concept 
often does influence subjective performance evaluations or justifications for target adjustments 
after the fact. Changes in targets with hindsight are often made with reference to industry 
effects. In a loose sense, this is RPE where the comparison group is the company’s relevant 
industry. It is not formal RPE, however, in the sense that targets were not RPE-based in the 
original plan but rather adjusted after the fact in an arguably discretionary way to reflect unfore-
seen industry changes, which takes us to the next section.21
Subjective performance evaluations
Many subjective performance evaluations take into consideration all the logic embodied in the 
objective methods of adjusting for uncontrollables. However, instead of making a formal, 
numerical calculation, the evaluator makes a judgment as to whether the results generated 
reflect strong or poor performance. Proper subjective performance evaluations have undenia-
ble advantages.22 Most importantly, they can correct for flaws in the results measures. As we 
have seen in earlier chapters, particularly Chapters 2 and 7, results measures rarely reflect con-
trollable performance completely and accurately. Therefore, a rigid linking of evaluations to 
results measures inevitably implies penalizing employees for bad luck and rewarding them for 
good luck. When adding judgment, evaluators can use both the results measures and their 
knowledge of the situations faced by the employees to evaluate whether they performed well in 
any given period.
Subjectivity in evaluations creates its own problems, however. First, in applying judgment, 
subjective evaluations vest a source of power in superiors over their subordinates, which may 
create tension and resentment.
Second, subjective evaluations are prone to biases.23 One such bias is known as the outcome 
effect, where the evaluator’s knowledge of other results influences the performance evaluations 
even though the results may not be informative of the evaluatee’s performance.24 Another pos-
sible bias is known as the hindsight effect, where evaluators with knowledge of results tend to 
assume information about the pre-result circumstances that was not available to those being 
evaluated when they faced the circumstances. In other words, hindsight effects arise when an 
evaluator sees events that have occurred as being more controllable then they were when they 
took place; that is, the bias arises from inaccurate assessments of reality ex post facto.25 Thus, 
while subjectivity is intended to lower employees’ reward-related risks, it can sometimes raise 
the risk of performance evaluations that are unfair, inconsistent, or biased.
Third, subjectivity often leads to inadequate, or perhaps even no, feedback about how per-
formance was evaluated. This lack of feedback inhibits learning and mitigates the motivation of 
the evaluatee to improve performance in subsequent periods.
Fourth, even when the evaluations are fair, employees often do not understand or trust 
them. A mere perception of bias, whether accurate or not, can create morale and motivational 
problems. This is particularly salient when the evaluators renege on reward promises that were 
(presumably) made but not documented in writing.
Fifth, subjectivity often leads to creation of an excuse culture. Humans seem to have an inher-
ent trait that causes them to make excuses for poor performance. This trait has been studied in 
psychology under the rubric of attribution theory, which maintains that individuals tend to 

Conclusion
529
attribute their success to their own efforts, abilities, skills, knowledge, or competence, while 
they attribute their failures to bad luck, task difficulty, or a variety of other external or situa-
tional factors at least partially out of their control. In other words, they tend to make excuses 
when things are not going well. In an excuse culture, instead of focusing on generating good 
results and being committed to achieving targets, employees spend considerable amounts of 
time making excuses and lobbying their evaluators for forgiveness of poor or mediocre results. 
They aim to beat the evaluation system rather than to work within it. These negotiation pro-
cesses, as well as the appeal processes through which the employees often contest their perfor-
mance evaluations, distract employees from the real tasks at hand.26
Finally, and as a consequence of many of the issues raised above, if they are done well, sub-
jective performance evaluations can be expensive, especially in terms of the time committed by 
both the evaluators and evaluatees. Evaluators must often spend considerable time informing 
themselves about the circumstances their subordinates faced during the performance period. If 
performance targets were not reached, the evaluators must sift through considerable informa-
tion that will enable them to separate legitimate reasons from excuses. If performance exceeds 
targets, they must assess whether good luck rather than effort explains the high performance, 
an exercise for which they are unlikely to receive much sympathy from the employees being 
evaluated. And, if the performance evaluations are rather negative, evaluators must be pre-
pared for dealing with a fair dose of disgruntlement.
Other uncontrollable factor issues
Organizations face other issues when considering adjustments for uncontrollables. One is the 
purpose for which the adjustments are made. Uncontrollables should not be treated identically 
for all reward purposes. Evaluators are likely to be more forgiving or willing to give the benefit 
of the doubt for longer when considering job retention decisions. However, evaluators are likely 
much less forgiving and more resolute when considering annual incentive pay, such as when 
determining bonus amounts. If performance is down, organizations are less likely to have the 
financial resources to pay the bonus, so employees are asked to share the pain.
A second issue regards the direction of the adjustments. Most evaluators seem to adjust for 
uncontrollables after the measurement period asymmetrically; that is, they make their adjust-
ments in one direction only: to protect the employees from suffering from bad luck, but not to 
protect the owners (shareholders) from paying out undeserved rewards for good luck. The eval-
uators find it difficult to deny rewards, particularly bonuses, to employees when the organiza-
tion has done well. Moreover, the managers face no pressure to make downward adjustments in 
rewards for good luck because the employees do not raise the issue, while the owners (share-
holders) probably are not aware of the issue. Even if they are aware, they are already benefiting 
from the good performance. So who is to complain?
Conclusion
The controllability principle, holding employees accountable only for what they can control, 
seems so simple, yet implementing it is far from unproblematic. There are many complications. 
Most results measures are only partially uncontrollable, and estimating the extent of uncontrol-
lability is often less than an exact science. Moreover, organizations want employees to respond 
properly to many factors that influence the measures even if these factors are partially uncon-
trollable. As such, the controllability principle or, perhaps more accurately, the influenceability 

Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
530
principle – hold employees accountable for what they can sufficiently influence – provides good 
general guidance.
When decisions are made to protect employees from the effects of uncontrollables, each of 
the methods for doing so involves tradeoffs. If the adjustments are made after the performance 
period has ended, some of the advantages of having fixed, preset performance standards will be 
lost. Adjustments that involve subjective judgments can create bias, inconsistency, and chal-
lenge. If complex procedures are implemented to deal with the many types of possible uncon-
trollable factors, simplicity is lost, raising the possibility that some employees will fail to 
understand what they are being asked to achieve. Regardless of the complexity, the stakes are 
high, as significant problems can arise if uncontrollables are not dealt with properly.
Notes
	 1	 See, for example, “Fukushima Accident Has Ripple Effect 
in Worldwide Nuclear Industry,” The Asahi Shimbun 
(November 26, 2013), online at fukushimaontheglobe.
com/the_earthquake_and_the_nuclear_accident/3146.
html.
	 2	 See, for example, “Sandy’s Insurance Bill Estimated at 
$25 Billion for Industry,” The Wall Street Journal (January 
3, 2013), online at on.wsj.com/ZYm7tq.
	 3	 See, for example, “Can Malaysia Airlines Survive MH17 
Disaster?” The Guardian (July 18, 2014), online at gu.
com/p/4v3n2/stw; “Recovery Phase: Two Years after 
Flight MH370 Vanished Malaysia’s Flag Carrier Is Still in 
Trouble,” The Economist (April 2, 2016), online at econ.
st/1ZNtdvB.
	 4	 See, for example, “Ebola Virus Outbreak Threatens Afri-
ca’s Tourist Industry,” The Wall Street Journal (August 19, 
2014), online at on.wsj.com/XxTp3e.
	 5	 Ibid.
	 6	 Depending on the nature of the new competition, this is 
sometimes called “disruptive innovation,” a term coined 
by Harvard professor Clayton Christensen – see www.
claytonchristensen.com/key-concepts (accessed January 
2016).
	 7	 “Sandy to Boost Construction Jobs as Rebuilding 
Spurred,” Bloomberg (October 31, 2012), online at www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-10-31/sandy-to-
boost-construction-jobs-as-rebuilding-spurred.
	 8	 “Natural Disasters Help Insurance Industry Grow in 
Asia,” South China Morning Post (November 6, 2014), 
online at www.scmp.com/business/banking-finance/
article/1349000/natural-disasters-help-insurance-
industry-grow-asia.
	 9	 “Volcanic Ash Keeps Flights across Europe Grounded,” 
The Guardian (April 17, 2010), online at www.guardian.
co.uk.
	10	 “Uncertainty, Inc.: CEOs Find There Is No Playbook for 
War and Ailing Economy,” The Wall Street Journal 
(October 16, 2001), p. A1.
	11	 “Getting Ahead of the Weather,” Fortune (February 7, 
2005), pp. 87–94.
	12	 Variance analysis is covered in great detail in C. T. Horn-
gren, S. M. Datar, and M. V. Rajan, Cost Accounting: A 
Managerial Emphasis, 15th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 2014).
	13	 The order in which the factors are analyzed is not impor-
tant. The actual variance amounts may be slightly differ-
ent because of the placement of what is referred to in 
some textbooks as the “joint variance.” Regardless of the 
ordering, the total variance will be explained, and the 
magnitude of each of the variances will be indicative of 
the effect of that factor on the total.
	14	 “Euro Exit Risk Prompts JPMorgan to Set Up Contingency 
Plans,” Bloomberg (July 25, 2012), online at www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-07-25/euro-exit-
risk-prompts-jpmorgan-to-set-up-contingency-plans-1-.
	15	 “GE: Best Approach for Continent Is to Pull Back,” The 
Wall Street Journal (May 31, 2012), online at on.wsj.
com/1AreQjz.
	16	 “Coca-Cola to Soften Marketing if Unrest Hits World 
Cup,” USA Today (April 2, 2014), online at usat.ly/1igfOGf.
	17	 W. Van der Stede and T. Palermo, “Scenario Budgeting: 
Integrating Risk and Performance,” Finance & Manage-
ment, no. 184 (January 2011), pp. 10–13.
	18	 “Pimco Sells Black Swan Protection as Wall Street 
Markets Fear,” Bloomberg (July 20, 2010), online at 
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2010-07-20/pimco-
sells-black-swan-protection-as-wall-street-profits-from-
selling-fear.
	19	 See, for example, “Companies Get Budgets All Wrong,” 
The Wall Street Journal (July 22, 2013), online at on.wsj.
com/1OfjJaR.
	20	 “Pizza Chains in Cheese Squeeze,” The Los Angeles Times 
(September 3, 2001), p. C4.
	21	 See, for example, “Long-Term Incentive Plans with Rela-
tive Performance Measurements,” Compensation Advisory 
Partners (January 9, 2012), online at www.capartners.

Olympic Car Wash
531
com/news/78/61/Long-term-Incentive-Plans-with-
Relative-Performance-Measurements . 
 22  For an overview, see J. Bol, “Subjectivity in Compensation 
Contracting,”  Journal of Accounting Literature , 28 (2009), 
pp. 1–24. See also M. Gibbs, K. Merchant, W. Van der 
Stede, and M. Vargus, “Determinants and Eff ects of Sub-
jectivity in Incentives,”  The Accounting Review , 79, no. 2 
(April 2004), pp. 409–36. 
 23  See, for example, F. Moers, “Discretion and Bias in Perfor-
mance Evaluation: The Impact of Diversity and Subjectiv-
ity,”  Accounting, Organizations and Society , 30, no. 1 (Jan-
uary 2005), pp. 67–80. 
   24   See, for example, D. Ghosh, “Alternative Measures of 
Managers’ Performance, Controllability, and the Out-
come Effect,”  Behavioral Research in Accounting , 17 
(2005), pp. 55–70. 
   25   See, for example, S. A. Butler and D. Ghosh, “Individual 
Differences in Managerial Accounting Judgments and 
Decision Making,”  British Accounting Review , 47, no. 1 
(March 2015), pp. 33–45. 
   26   This statement was the subject of a research article focused 
on examining  excuse cultures : F. Larmande and J. P. Ponssard, 
“Fishing for Excuses and Performance Evaluation,”  Review of 
Accounting Studies , 19, no. 2 (June 2014), pp. 988–1008.  
 The Olympic Car Wash Company owned and operated 
30 car washes in Belgium. The general managers of 
each of the 30 locations reported to Jacques Van Raem-
donck, Olympic’s chief operating offi  cer. 
 At the end of each quarter, Jacques had to evaluate 
the performances of each of the car wash locations. 
His evaluations determined the size of a bonus pool 
that was allocated to personnel at the location. If the 
location achieved its budgeted profi t target, €3,000 
was put into the bonus pool. The pool was also aug-
mented by €1 for every €10 the location exceeded its 
profi t target. 
 However, the bonus contract gave Jacques the right 
to make subjective adjustments for the eff ects of factors 
he deemed outside the control of personnel at the loca-
tion. In the past few years, Jacques had made such 
adjustments for the adverse eff ects on revenue of con-
struction taking place on the street just in front of one 
car wash location and to cover the costs of vandalism at 
another location. 
 By far the largest uncontrollable factor that 
Jacques had to consider was, however, the weather. 
In particular, sales volume dropped sharply when it 
rained, and it rained frequently in Belgium. The 
budget, which was updated quarterly, was prepared 
based on an assumption of hours of good weather. 
Inevitably, though, those assumptions were not 
accurate. 
 During the recent spring quarter, it rained many 
more hours than were assumed in the company’s 
budget, and actual profi ts for all of the locations were 
far below the budgeted profi t level. The results for the 
Aalst location are shown in  Figure   1  .  Figure   2  shows 
 Figure 1  Profi t vs. budget for Aalst location for spring 
quarter  
 
 Budget 
 Actual 
 Variance 
 Revenue 
 €184,000 
 €124,080 
 €(59,920) 
 Variable expenses 
(50% of revenue) 
 92,000 
 62,040 
 29,960 
 Fixed expenses 
 53,820 
 55,000 
 (1,180) 
 Total expenses 
 145,820 
 117,040 
 28,780 
 Profi t 
 38,180 
 7,040 
 (31,140) 
 CASE STUDY 
 Olympic Car Wash 

532
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
some operating assumptions and statistics for the 
quarter. The Aalst location is open every day, 10 hours 
per day, when it is not raining. The car wash employees 
are paid the legally required minimum wage plus a 
fi xed amount for each car wash completed, so labor 
costs are largely variable with revenues. 
 How large should the bonus pool be for the Aalst 
location? 
 This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
 Figure 2  Operating statistics for Aalst location for 
spring quarter 
 
 Budget 
Assumption 
 Actual 
 Average number of vehicles 
washed in a good weather hour 
 23 
 24 
 Average revenue per vehicle 
 €10.00 
 €11.00 
 Total hours in quarter 
 920 
 920 
 Hours of bad weather 
 120 
 450 
 Hours of good weather 
 800 
 470 
 On January 1, 1999, the municipal government of 
Beijing (People’s Republic of China) mandated a new 
vehicle emission control standard. The new law, in 
essence, required all passenger vehicles sold within the 
Beijing city limits to be equipped with a fuel injection 
system, rather than an older carburetor system. 1 
 This new law did not come as a surprise to the man-
agers of Beifang Chuang Ye Vehicle Group, a large 
group of companies that included four automobile 
dealership locations in Beijing. They had become 
aware of the impending new law about a year earlier. 
However, like most other Beijing dealers and the man-
ufacturers who supplied the vehicles, they did not 
believe that the Beijing government would actually 
enforce the new law. But it did! The government would 
not register any vehicles that did not meet the new, 
tighter emission standards. As a consequence, in early 
1999 the Beifang dealers had no cars meeting the legal 
requirements to sell. In January 1999, their new car 
sales fell to zero. 
 Now, in early February 1999, Ming Zhou (vice direc-
tor and general manager) had to decide, among other 
things, whether he should compensate his dealership 
managers and sales personnel as if this unfortunate 
external circumstance had not happened or whether 
they should be made to share the company’s losses, and 
if so, to what extent. 
 The company 
 Beifang Chuang Ye Vehicle Group (Beifang) was a hold-
ing company comprised of 14 companies, most of which 
operated in segments of the transportation market in 
northern China. Among the Beifang companies were 
three taxi companies (operating 3,600 vehicles), a car 
rental company, an automobile association (with 160,000 
members in northern China), an advertising company, a 
 1  A similar law was made eff ective across the entire People’s Republic 
of China on September 1, 2001. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Beifang Chuang Ye Vehicle Group 

Beifang Chuang Ye Vehicle Group
533
vehicle importer, three automobile dealerships, and an 
automobile repair company.
Beifang was formerly 100% owned by the Chinese 
central government, but the company was privatized. By 
the year 2000, the government owned only 10%. The 
other 90% was owned by private investors, the most 
prominent of which were members of Ming Zhou’s family.
The three automobile dealerships were all 100% pri-
vately owned. The largest dealership company, Beijing 
Munitions Vehicle Trade Head Company (Beijing 
Munitions), sold and serviced four brands of vehicles, 
all of which were manufactured in China: Volkswagen, 
Citroën, Jeep, and Jin Bei. It maintained four locations 
in the greater Beijing area. Beijing Munitions had 
90 employees. It also had indirect responsibility for the 
personnel servicing its customers’ Citroën vehicles. 
However, the Citroën service personnel were formally 
considered employees of one of the car rental compa-
nies, which maintained a fleet of 2,000 Citroën vehicles.
The other two automobile dealership companies 
sold new cars only.2 North Zhi Xing Car Trade Head 
Company, with 20 employees, sold imported cars (par-
ticularly Volkswagens and Audis) at one Beijing 
location. Qun Xing Car Lian Suo Dian, with 70 employ-
ees, sold domestic vehicle brands from locations in the 
Changan area in the northeast of China.
All of the dealership companies were organized by 
function. Beijing Munitions had a general manager and 
managers of sales, accessories, service, parts, marketing, 
and administration. The other two companies had fewer 
departments because they were just sales companies.
Net profit was the primary performance measure 
tracked within Beifang. Until 1999 all of the dealership 
companies were profitable. The dealerships were also 
all growing at healthy rates, 20% or more annually. 
Beifang managers predicted that the growth rate would 
increase significantly, particularly for imported brands 
of vehicles, if and when China was granted admission 
to the World Trade Organization.
Employee compensation
In each of the car dealership companies, an incentive 
compensation pool was created based on the company’s 
net profit performance, as shown in Table 1.
Taking money from this pool, the general manager 
of each company was expected to earn about 2% of the 
company’s total net profit (8% of the total bonus pool) 
if the company just achieved its net profit target. He3 
would earn 1.5% of the profit if profit was positive but 
below target. And he would earn 4% of the profit if 
profits exceeded the target. The general managers 
decided how to allocate the remainder of the bonus 
pool to their subordinates.
The bonus potentials were a significant proportion 
of total compensation. The general managers’ monthly 
base salaries ranged from 7,000 to 10,000 yuan.4 In 
typical years their total monetary compensation 
ranged from 160,000 to 200,000 yuan. In the best year 
the highest-paid general manager earned 360,000 
yuan. The managers were also given some fringe ben-
efits, including an apartment and a car.
The sales manager in Beijing Munitions earned a 
monthly base salary of 8,000 yuan, plus a car, which is 
all he earned if net profit targets were not met. If the tar-
gets were met, he would earn approximately 10,000 yuan 
per month.
The entire bonus pool would not necessarily be 
paid out immediately each month, however. Beifang 
and dealership company managers could, and typi-
cally did, reserve up to 3% of the pool both to provide 
lunar new year “bonuses,” which were typically one 
month’s base salary, and to smooth out the month-to-
month and year-to-year fluctuations in incentive 
payments.
The net profit targets were set based on history and 
expected market changes. The target-setting processes 
started in early November with the submission of 
bottom-up budgets. The negotiation process culmi-
nated in an annual planning meeting held near the end 
of December. The targets could be, and typically were, 
2	 Separation of the functions of new car sales, used car sales, and car 
servicing was still the norm in China, although some large dealer-
ships, such as Beijing Munitions, were beginning to combine the 
activities. Still, even Beijing Munitions was not involved in used car 
sales or financing and insurance.
3	 In all cases, the general managers were male.
4	 One yuan equals approximately US$0.12.
Table 1  Calculation of bonus pool
Monthly net profit
Bonus pool share 
of total net profit
< 0
0
> 0 but < target
25%
> target
27%

534
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
revised each half-year. The monthly bonuses in the sec-
ond half of the year were based on the revised targets. 
  Decisions to be made 
 In February 1999, Ming Zhou had to make a number of 
immediate decisions. He did not expect any cars to be 
available for sale until March at the earliest. The deal-
ership companies were all losing money, and it was 
already obvious that they would not achieve their 
annual net profi t plans. These losses were coming right 
out of Mr. Zhou’s personal wealth, and that of his part-
ners. Because Beifang was somewhat diversifi ed, the 
company could stand to bear the losses in the dealer-
ships for a short period of time. But should it? 
 Mr. Zhou had empathy for his employees. This prob-
lem was not their fault. They did not have great per-
sonal wealth, and most of them had families to support. 
Should he keep his employees on the payroll, prepare a 
revised plan, and then reward them if the revised plan 
was achieved? Should he keep them on the payroll but 
at a lower salary rate, perhaps even down to the gov-
ernment-mandated salary of approximately 500 yuan 
per month? Or should he lay off  all or some off  the 
employees until cars were available to be sold? If he did 
the latter he would still have to pay them the govern-
ment-mandated unemployment rate of approximately 
300 yuan per month, and he would risk the possibility 
that many of them would fi nd alternative employment, 
as the Beijing economy was quite healthy. 
 This case was prepared by Professors Thomas W. Lin, Kenneth A. Merchant, and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
 Copyright © by Thomas W. Lin, Kenneth A. Merchant, and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
 In January 2016, a small fire broke out in the back-
room of a pharmacy in Downey, California, owned 
and operated by Hoffman Discount Drugs, Inc. The 
fire department concluded that the fire was started 
by a fault in the store’s electrical system. Luckily, the 
sprinkler system worked and fire damage was held to 
a minimum. However, the water from the sprinklers 
damaged some of the inventory. Jane Firstenberg, 
the store’s general manager, completed a Damage 
Report, which described the situation and calculated 
the resulting losses. The losses were calculated as 
follows: 
 Total losses incurred
= value of inventory lost + cleaning expenses 
+ payroll used in clean-up process 
 The losses incurred were not charged to their ordinary 
line item (for example, payroll). Instead, they were 
charged to an account called “Non-insured Losses.” In 
this case, the loss totaled $17,440. 
 Jane was discouraged when she saw the amount of 
the loss. If the loss had been greater than $20,000, a 
corporate adjustment would have been made to off set 
the effects of this “uncontrollable event” for net 
income bonus purposes. But since the loss was less 
than $20,000, no adjustment would be made. Jane 
commented: 
 This really hurts. My store is having a great year in 
sales, but our margins have been down. Now this. 
This loss might cause us not to achieve our net 
 CASE STUDY 
 Hoff man Discount Drugs, Inc. 

Hoffman Discount Drugs, Inc.
535
income objective for the year. We were right on the 
edge as it was. It takes a lot of sales to make up for 
a nearly $20,000 loss. I was looking forward to a 
nice bonus check. Even worse, if our bonuses are 
cut, I’m worried I may lose part of my management 
team. A couple of them have already been consid-
ering offers from competitors.
The company
Hoffman Discount Drugs, Inc. (HDDI) was a large retail 
drug store chain, which operated over 400 stores 
located throughout the Western United States. It oper-
ated over 200 stores in the Southwest region, which 
included Southern California, Arizona, and Nevada. 
HDDI stores were typically located in large shopping 
centers that also included a large supermarket chain 
store.
HDDI’s recent performance had been mixed. For the 
last few years, sales levels had been increasing and 
were currently the highest in the company’s history. 
However, because of intense competition in the com-
pany’s major markets, operating earnings were barely 
above break-even. In late 2015, HDDI’s president was 
fired, after only two years on the job, and Matt LeGeyt 
was appointed president.
Matt immediately started negotiating with several 
major insurance carriers to have HDDI be the sole dis-
tributor of prescriptions to individuals who hold poli-
cies with those carriers. By obtaining those prescription 
distribution rights, Matt believed HDDI stores would 
benefit from increased customer traffic. But Matt 
believed HDDI’s real key to success was to improve 
operations at the store level. He thought the company 
needed more effective local marketing, better cus-
tomer service, and more efficient operations. He did 
not want to change the company’s decentralized mode 
of operation, however. He believed it was potentially 
one of HDDI’s advantages over its more centralized 
competitors.
Store operations
A typical large HDDI store carried $2 million of inven-
tory, served nearly 900,000 customers per year, and 
generated annual sales of approximately $20 million 
and net income of $1 million. In computing net income, 
all corporate expenses except interest and income 
taxes were traced or allocated to the stores. In addition, 
the stores were charged a carrying cost on their inven-
tory based on an annual approximation of the corpora-
tion’s marginal cost of capital.
HDDI stores offered a wide range of products. 
The average percentage of total store sales was as 
follows:
Category
% of Sales
General merchandise
64%
Pharmacy
29
Liquor
7
Total
100%
General merchandise items included health and 
beauty aids, detergent and soap products, baby sup-
plies, greeting cards, toys, and seasonal items.
Many functions, such as purchasing, human 
resources, investor relations, and real estate, were cen-
tralized within HDDI, and inventory was shipped to the 
stores from one of three regional warehouses. Each 
store had the same basic look, and each store was 
required to carry a basic set of pharmacy-related 
inventory.
Other than these constraints, however, the stores 
were relatively autonomous. Store managers were 
allowed to adapt their merchandise offerings to their 
local market. Therefore, stores located near the beach 
stocked many sun- and water-related items, such as 
sunscreen, beach towels, and boogie boards. Those 
located near retirement communities carried large 
stocks of age-related items, such as pain killers, laxa-
tives, and blood pressure monitors. And those in neigh-
borhoods dominated by upper-income professionals 
with young families carried large stocks of baby- and 
child-related products, as well as videocassette record-
ers, stereos, and cameras.
The store managers were also allowed to make deci-
sions about local advertising. That is, they selected the 
amount and type of local advertising (newspaper, 
radio, and television), although newer managers typi-
cally asked for and received considerable guidance in 
this area from corporate specialists and their district 
managers. A typical large store spent nearly $800,000 
per year on local advertising.

536
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
Store management bonus plan
HDDI’s policy was to pay store-level managers salaries 
that were slightly below market levels but to provide 
bonus opportunities that made the total compensation 
package competitive. The bonuses were intended to 
motivate the managers to work hard and to act in the 
company’s best interest.
The HDDI Store Management Bonus Plan was based 
on achievement of pre-determined objectives for sales 
and net income for each store.1 These objectives were set 
in a “top-down” fashion. In a series of discussions which 
considered historical performance, demographic and 
competitive trends, and corporate initiatives, corporate 
and regional managers established sales and profit 
objectives for the corporation. They then broke these 
objectives down into objectives for the three regions. 
The regional managers, in consultation with the district 
managers, disaggregated the objectives into districts. 
And the district managers then had the responsibility to 
set objectives for the individual stores in their districts.
Because the company was constantly adding some 
new stores and improving some store locations, the cor-
porate, regional, and district objectives were usually 
increased, typically by an average of 4% to 7% annu-
ally. But the growth objectives for individual stores 
were generally more modest. Sometimes store objec-
tives would even be lowered as would be the case, for 
example, if the major supermarket store in the HDDI 
store’s shopping center was closed.
The objectives for each store were disaggregated 
into monthly periods using historical seasonality pat-
terns and, if necessary, some management judgment. 
Each month during the year, store managers received 
reports comparing their store’s sales, net income, and 
inventory performance with their objectives for the 
month and the year-to-date. Line-item detail was also 
provided for analysis purposes.
HDDI’s fiscal year ended March 31. In early March, at 
the end of the company’s annual planning process, each 
member of each store management team was presented 
with a Store Management Compensation Letter (see 
example in Exhibit 1). Managers had to signify receipt 
and understanding of this letter by signing a copy of the 
letter and returning it to the corporate Human Resources 
Department.
The Management Compensation Letters listed the 
individual’s base salary, bonus objective, and total com-
pensation objective. The bonus objectives were set as 
follows:
Role
Bonus objective
(% base salary)
General manager
15–20%
Assistant general 
manager
7–10%
Assistant manager
3–5%
The managers would earn their bonus objective if 
they exactly achieved their predetermined sales and 
net income objectives.
The bonus objective was broken down into a net 
income (before bonus) objective and a sales objective. 
Reflecting HDDI’s belief in the importance of high 
profits, the net income objective was given three times 
the weight of the sales objective. That is, 75 percent of 
the bonus was based on achievement of net income 
objectives. The other 25 percent was based on achieve-
ment of sales objectives.
Exhibit 2 shows the description of the bonus plan as 
provided annually to participants. The bonus earned 
based on net income performance was calculated by 
adding/subtracting a percentage of the variance to/
from the net income bonus objective according to the 
following formula:
BN = ON + A = ON + (V × S)
where:
BN	= bonus earned based on net income performance
ON	= net income bonus objective
A	 = adjustment to net income bonus objective
V	 = net income variance = actual net income minus net 
income objective
S	 = sharing percentage (see below)
The sharing percentage depended on the manager’s 
level in the store, as follows: general manager (10%), 
assistant general manager (3%), assistant manager 
(1.5%). These percentages were set to reflect the differ-
ent levels of responsibility associated with each job.
The effect of this net income bonus formula was that 
for every dollar of income the store earned above its 
predetermined objective, the general manager earned 
in bonus 10 cents more than his/her bonus objective. 
1	 The only other compensation plan offered to store- and lower-level 
employees was a stock purchase plan. Employees could have a 
portion of their check withheld for the purpose of purchasing stock. 
The stock was sold to the employees at the current market price, but 
the employees would not have to pay any commission fees on their 
purchases.

Hoffman Discount Drugs, Inc.
537
Conversely, for every dollar actual income fell below 
the objective, the general manager earned 10 cents less 
than his/her bonus objective.
The sales portion of the bonus was based on the per-
cent of annual sales objective achieved. The effect on 
the bonus objective was determined by using one of the 
charts shown at the bottom of Exhibit 2. The chart on 
the left was used if net income before bonus was above 
budget; the chart on the right was used if net income 
before bonus was below budget. These two charts dif-
fer only when sales exceed budget. If sales exceeded 
the objective but net income was below budget, then 
the managers’ sales bonuses were set at lower limits.
Exhibit 3 shows a bonus calculation example.
Shortly after the midpoint of the appraisal period 
(that is, at the end of the 26th week of the year), HDDI 
gave each manager a bonus check equal to one-half of 
the expected year-end bonus. This was done to pro-
vide the managers more timely reinforcement in 
hopes that they would stay focused throughout the 
entire year. This aspect of the plan seemed to work. 
Managers who received a large interim check were 
excited and were motivated to earn another large 
check at year end. Those who received a small check 
were motivated to make up the difference in the sec-
ond half of the year.
Adjustments for uncontrollable events
HDDI corporate managers reserved the right to make 
subjective adjustments to bonuses earned in case actual 
performance was distorted by uncontrollable events. 
They considered only three types of uncontrollable 
events: natural disasters (for example, fires, floods, 
earthquakes), robberies, and rioting and looting. In 
larger (AAA classification) stores, adjustments were 
considered only if the damage resulting from the 
uncontrollable event exceeded $20,000. Events caus-
ing less than $20,000 damage were considered to be 
immaterial. Losses were considered only individually, 
not cumulatively, but in any case it was quite rare that 
an individual store would experience more than one or 
two uncontrollable events in a single year.
One example of an uncontrollable event was 
described in the introduction to this case. Here are 
three others:
1.	 In November 2015, heavy rains and a stopped-up 
sewer drain caused flooding around the HDDI store 
in Van Nuys, California. The store suffered approxi-
mately $16,000 in inventory damage as water came 
into the stockroom, and cleanup expenses totaled 
$4,000 more. A more serious problem, however, 
was that a sinkhole developed in the major street 
artery in front of the store, and the street was 
closed for three days for repairs. The store manager 
argued that customers’ difficulties in getting to the 
store caused sales for the month to be down more 
than $200,000, costing the store approximately 
$12,000 in net income. Corporate managers read-
ily agreed to an adjustment for the inventory dam-
age, but their opinions were mixed as to whether to 
make the adjustment for the “lost profits” because 
they thought the estimates were soft. However, 
they eventually did agree to an income adjustment 
totaling $6,000.
2.	 In December 2015, an armed robbery occurred in an 
HDDI store in Glendale, Arizona. Since only $380 
was stolen, no adjustment was made for bonus 
purposes.2
3.	 In April 2013, a neighborhood Cinco de Mayo party 
got out of hand. Looters stole nearly $400,000 
worth of merchandise from a store in East Los Ange-
les and caused another $100,000 in structural dam-
age to the building. Corporate managers awarded 
the managers of this store their full bonus objec-
tives as was their policy when stores suffered 
“heavy” damage.
Management concerns
Matt LeGeyt, the new president, who believed the com-
pany’s key to success was in improving store opera-
tions, had already expressed interest in conducting a 
thorough evaluation of the Store Management Com-
pensation Plan. When Jane Firstenberg complained to 
her superiors about unfairness of the situation 
described in the introduction to this case, HDDI man-
agers agreed to move this task up on the agenda. The 
corporate Human Resources Department was asked to 
conduct a thorough analysis of the plan and to present 
their recommendations at the July management 
meeting.
2	 The losses associated with robberies averaged less than $500. Store 
managers were generally able to limit the amount of robbery losses 
by following the company policy of collecting money from the cash 
registers at regular intervals.

538
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
Ralph Williams
PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL
General Manager
Store #142
Store Classification: AAA
The following pertains to your assignment for fiscal year 2016 as of 03/31/16
BASE PAY:
$88,800
BONUS OBJECTIVE:
$15,800
TOTAL COMPENSATION OBJECTIVE:
$104,600
THE PERFORMANCE RATING USED FOR PAY REVIEW PURPOSES WAS:
08
25% OF YOUR BONUS OBJECTIVE IS BASED ON STORE SALES AND 75% IS BASED ON BUDGETED 
NET INCOME BEFORE BONUS.
YOUR STORE IS CURRENTLY ON THE REGULAR PLAN (Refer to your 2016 Store Management Compensation 
Booklet for Plan details)
MINIMUM % OF BONUS OBJECTIVE PAYABLE:
0%
MAXIMUM % OF BONUS OBJECTIVE PAYABLE:
500%
The following information pertains to your Store Management assignments for fiscal 2016 to date and your most recent 
salary history:
ANNUAL
COMPENSATION OBJECTIVE
EFFECTIVE	
BONUS	
STORE	
NIBB3 BUDGET
DATE	
STORE	
DIST	
POSI.	
BASE	
OBJECTIVE	
TOTAL	
CLASSIFICATION	
SALES BUDGET	
PLAN
03/31/16	 142	
LO2	
GM	
88,800	
15,800	
104,600	
AAA	
1,745,554	
REG.
21,400,286
02/03/15	 142	
LO2	
GM	
85,200	
15,800	
101,000	
AAA	
1,745,554	
REG.
21,400,286
These are the facts according to our records as of this date. Changes after this date will be sent to you in a separate 
carrier. No other considerations or adjustments will be made at any time unless stated and authorized in writing by the 
Regional Vice President of Operations.
If any of this information varies from what you understand your compensation plan to be, please contact your District 
Manager immediately for an explanation. Otherwise, please confirm your understanding of this information (including 
Appendix A, which is attached to your Store Management compensation letter, and the bonus payment table) by 
promptly signing one page of this letter and returning it to the Corporate Human Resources Department within two 
weeks.
I understand the compensation program explained above and have received a copy of Appendix A and understand the 
contents.
Signed:________________________________________	
Date:_____________________________
3NIBB = net income before bonus
PRIOR COMPENSATION HISTORY:
02/04/15
142
GM
85,200
13,600
98,800
04/23/14
89
AGM
62,200
4,800
67,000
03/26/14
111
AGM
62,200
4,800
67,000
01/29/14
111
AGM
56,400
4,800
61,200
03/27/14
111
AGM
56,400
4,000
60,800
01/31/14
111
AGM
54,800
4,000
58,800
12/06/13
111
AGM
54,800
3,000
57,700
03/29/13
89
AM
52,000
2,000
54,000
Exhibit 1  Store management compensation letter

Hoffman Discount Drugs, Inc.
539
Exhibit 2  Net income/bonus function for regular plan
This plan is broken down into two pieces - NET INCOME BEFORE BONUS and SALES. The minimum payout is 0 and 
the maximum is 500% of your bonus objective for the combined pieces.
NET INCOME BEFORE BONUS (NIBB) PORTION OF BONUS OBJECTIVE:
Bonus calculations are based on variance from budget. Your NIBB bonus objective will be adjusted by the amount of 
the variance multiplied by the sharing rates as follows:
GENERAL MANAGERS	
+or− 10.0% OF VARIANCE
ASSISTANT GENERAL MANAGERS &	
+or− 3.0% OF VARIANCE
SENIOR MERCHANDISE ASSISTANTS
ASSISTANT MANAGERS, MERCHANDISE	
+or− 1.5% OF VARIANCE
ASSISTANTS & SERVICE MANAGERS
SALES PORTION OF BONUS OBJECTIVE
Bonus calculations are based on the percent of Sales budget achieved using the following charts:
If Net Income before Bonus is Above Budget:
If Net Income before Bonus is Below Budget:
% of Sales	
% of Sales	
% of Sales	
% of Sales
Budget Achieved	
Objective Earned	
Budget Achieved	
Objective Earned
90.0%	
0.0%	
90.0%	
0.0%
91.0	
10.0	
91.0	
10.0
92.0	
20.0	
92.0	
20.0
93.0	
30.0	
93.0	
30.0
94.0	
40.0	
94.0	
40.0
95.0	
50.0	
95.0	
50.0
96.0	
60.0	
96.0	
60.0
97.0	
70.0	
97.0	
70.0
98.0	
80.0	
98.0	
80.0
99.0	
90.0	
99.0	
90.0
100.0	
100.0	
100.0	
100.0
101.0	
120.0	
101.0	
110.0
102.0	
140.0	
102.0	
120.0
103.0	
160.0	
103.0	
130.0
104.0	
180.0	
104.0	
140.0
105.0	
200.0	
105.0	
150.0
106.0	
220.0	
106.0	
160.0
107.0	
240.0	
107.0	
170.0
108.0	
260.0	
108.0	
180.0
109.0	
280.0	
109.0	
190.0
Max. 110.0	
300.0	
Max. 110.0	
200.0
In the event a person transfers into a store, earnings are referred as the higher of the person’s adjusted earnings after a 
transfer of the store’s adjusted earnings.
DEDUCT 5% FROM THE PAYOUT ON SALES FOR EACH 1% STORE EARNINGS ARE BELOW 97%; DEDUCT 5% 
FROM THE PAYOUT ON STORE EARNINGS FOR EACH 1% ACTUAL SALES ARE BELOW 100%.

540
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.
Exhibit 3  Bonus calculation example
Assume:
General manager
Base salary	
$90,000	
Bonus objective break-down:
Bonus objective	
16,400	
Net income	
$12,300
Total compensation objective	
$106,400	
Sales	
4,100
Net Income portion of bonus:
actual 2015 net income	
$1,990,082
minus 2015 net income objective	
1,517,872
variance	
472,210
sharing percentage	
10%
adjustment to NI bonus objective 	
$ 47,221
net income bonus objective + adjustment = net income bonus earned
$12,300 + 47,221 = $59,521
Sales portion of bonus:
actual 2015 sales	
$19,285,820
2015 sales objective	
18,608,946
actual % objective	
103.6%
Since the store achieved its net income objective, use the left-side chart in Exhibit 2. Interpolating on the chart, 
the percent objective earned is 172%.
sales bonus objective × percent objective earned = sales bonus earned
$4,100 × 172% = $7,052
Total compensation earned:
Base salary	
$ 90,000.00
Net income bonus earned	
59,521.00
Sales bonus earned	
7,052.00
Total compensation	
$156,573.00

Howard Building Corporation, Inc.
541
Paul McGunnigle, CEO of Howard Building Corporation, 
a large general contracting company, described the dif-
fi cult balance his company faced between generating 
profi ts on its projects and maintaining good relationships 
with its customers and subcontractors:
We have to make profi ts on our projects. Profi ts are 
the lifeblood of every company. If costs on a pro-
ject increase, the money can only come from three 
sources: the client, the subcontractors, or us. 
But I don’t want our project managers to be 
solely focused on profi ts at the expense of relation-
ships. We have always prided ourselves on the idea 
that we make key decisions based upon success 
and not profi t, with the belief that success ulti-
mately leads to profi t in the long run. Decisions 
based primarily on profi t quite often diminish suc-
cess, which in turn diminishes opportunity. Ours is 
a long-term strategy. If at the end of a project, cli-
ents, architects, and subcontractors won’t give us 
a positive recommendation, then the project was 
not a success, even if it was profi table.
If we make mistakes, such as underbidding, we 
live with those mistakes and learn from them. On 
the other hand, I also don’t want to make it too easy 
for the project managers to let Howard Building 
Corp. absorb every cost increase. Sometimes they 
need to push back.
The Company
Howard Building Corporation (HBC) was a privately-
owned, commercial general contracting company, 
founded in 1983 by Gary Conrad, Paul McGunnigle and 
Michael Howard, with offi  ces in Los Angeles and Costa 
Mesa. In the 30+ years since HBC opened its doors, the 
company grew from a small business with 15 employ-
ees and annual revenue of $3 million, into an industry 
leader with 160 employees and annual revenue of 
approximately $300 million. Employee turnover at 
HBC was extremely low.
HBC specialized in tenant improvement (TI) pro-
jects. TI projects altered the interior of an existing 
structure to meet the needs of a tenant. TI projects 
could be more complicated than building from the 
ground up because the existing structure imposed 
constraints. On the other hand, TI projects did not 
require lengthy entitlement procedures and were 
therefore much quicker and usually more profi table 
than ground-up projects. HBC was a TI industry leader, 
particularly in the entertainment and technology 
industries, and had a recent emphasis in the growing 
healthcare industry. HBC was the winner of multiple 
IIDA (International Interior Design Association) 
Awards including, most recently, Best Leisure and 
Entertainment Project (2014) and Best Large Project 
(2015).
HBC employees’ actions were guided by fi ve core 
values: 
1. Every transaction must be fair for all.
2. We look forward to every challenge with confi dence.
3. We build what no one has built before.
4. We embrace our role as leaders in the industry.
5. We are good citizens in our community.
The core values permeated the attitudes and deci-
sions of HBC’s loyal, long-term employees. HBC was 
particularly known for treating sub-contractors well 
and paying them quickly, as Mike Howard explained:
We have a very good rapport with subcontractors. 
They know they will be paid and even forwarded 
money if needed. Our relationship with subcontrac-
tors allows us to request and receive their very best 
foreman.
CASE STUDY
Howard Building Corporation, Inc.

542
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
Project Management Teams
HBC derived revenue from a relatively small number of 
large projects, about 100 projects per year. Managing 
each project well, from the initial bid to completion, 
was critical to success. The construction industry was 
highly competitive. Typical gross profit margins were 
8-10%. Anything beyond that was available only on 
very small projects. The low margins left little room for 
error without significant financial impact.
Each project was managed by a team composed of a 
Project Executive, a Project Manager (PM), an Assis-
tant Project Manager or Project Engineer, and a Super-
intendent (SI). The Project Executive was a high 
ranking executive, the President, CEO, or one of three 
SVPs, who was assigned to the project. The Project 
Executive attended monthly project meetings and was 
kept informed throughout the building process. A Pro-
ject Executive was typically assigned to 10 to 20 pro-
jects per year. 
The Project Manager (PM) was ultimately account-
able for the success and profitability of an assigned pro-
ject, and was responsible for the project from design to 
completion. Specific responsibilities included main-
taining positive relationships with all parties, develop-
ing the project budget and preparing bids, preparing 
and maintaining project schedules, executing contracts 
with subcontractors, managing inspections by govern-
ment agencies, managing change orders, and monitor-
ing the superintendent on the project. A PM typically 
managed three projects per year.
PMs at HBC earned a generous base salary. They 
were also eligible for an annual bonus of 10% of any 
profit earned above a base profit requirement. So, for 
example, if a PM’s base profit expectation was $500,000 
per year, and s/he had an exceptionally good year, 
bringing in $800,000 in profit, then he/she would earn 
10% of $300,000, or a $30,000 bonus. Bonuses were 
almost always awarded strictly according to the for-
mula. If they were adjusted due to unique circum-
stances, the adjustment was always in the PM’s favor. 
The bonus was usually a relatively small part of the 
total compensation by design, according to PM Craig 
Roalf:
The owners don’t want us to be mercenaries. They 
want us to do the right thing for our customers. I’ve 
been with this company for 30 years. It’s not some-
thing that’s a question in my mind or anyone else’s 
mind what you want to do. You want to do a good 
job, you want a successful project, and you want to 
show profitability at the end of it.
The Assistant Project Managers or Project 
Engineers assisted the PMs with their duties, primar-
ily the dissemination of information. They also pro-
vided technical support to the superintendents. 
The Superintendent (SI) reported both to the PM 
and his/her functional manager, the General Superin-
tendent. The SI worked onsite, overseeing work, and 
making sure everything was done correctly, according 
to scope documents and codes. The SI was responsible 
for maintaining schedules and communicating with 
all parties if the schedule changed. The SI was not 
responsible for the project budget and was not com-
pensated based on project profitability. The SI’s pri-
mary responsibility was ensuring that work was done 
correctly. 
LA Prep Project
To illustrate the functioning of HBC’s project manage-
ment systems, the history of one project will be 
described. The customer for this project was LA Prep, 
which was to be a new food-business incubator in Los 
Angeles. The project would convert an existing build-
ing located in the Lincoln Heights area of Los Angeles 
into 50,000 square feet of commercial kitchen spaces 
for lease to wholesale food producers. Lincoln Heights 
was a low income, mostly Hispanic, geographical area 
located just east of downtown Los Angeles. The new 
facility would be equipped with everything a new food 
producer might need: areas for food storage, a demon-
stration kitchen, and a staffed warehouse for receiving 
and logistics. L.A. Prep would also provide its tenants 
group buying opportunities, health department 
approvals, and expedited wholesale licenses.
By the time LA Prep contacted HBC, it had already 
signed its anchor tenant—LA Kitchen, a philanthropic 
organization that had signed a contract to lease 20,000 
of the 50,000 square foot facility. LA Kitchen had an 
innovative business model of its own: It reclaimed food 
that would otherwise be wasted, and trained youths 
just exiting foster care and older adults just released 
from prison in culinary trades. The reclaimed, pre-
pared food was distributed to local social service 
organizations.
In early 2014, on the recommendation of their archi-
tect, managers of LA Prep asked HBC to bid on a TI pro-
ject. HBC managers viewed the LA Prep project as an 

Howard Building Corporation, Inc.
543
exciting, high profile opportunity. LA Prep’s ground-
breaking business model had been featured in local 
news stories as well as in a story in The Wall Street 
Journal 1 as a catalyst for job growth in Los Angeles. Los 
Angeles city officials were similarly enthusiastic about 
LA Prep, both for its prospects for stimulating job 
growth in the Lincoln Heights area of the city and for 
the positive publicity the LA Prep venture was creating. 
They happily cooperated with LA Prep, partnering with 
the company to create new health and building codes 
for the project.
But HBC managers also viewed the LA Prep project 
as very complex. Paul McGunnigle (CEO) described it as 
“a logistical nightmare.” There were unique electrical 
requirements, health requirements, and many 
unknowns. An unusually high number of subcontrac-
tors, over 25, would be required to complete the project.
The project was further complicated by financial 
constraints. LA Prep had a fixed budget that was not 
large enough to do everything they needed to do, and 
they had loan covenants that prevented them from 
securing additional financing. 
Craig Roalf, one of HBC’s most experienced and strong-
est technical PMs, was assigned to the L.A. Prep project. 
Also appointed were Deanna Rott as Project Engineer, 
and Gary Scharrer as Superintendent. Both Deanna and 
Gary were also highly experienced in their respective 
roles. Mike Howard was assigned as the Project Executive.
Bid/Contract
HBC responded to LA Prep’s request on March 7, 2014. 
The bid, called a Letter of Intent, was given to LA Prep in 
the form of a “Guaranteed Maximum Price (GMax),” sub-
ject to additions and deductions that might be enacted by 
Change Orders. If the costs exceeded the GMax for rea-
sons not due to an agreed upon change order, then HBC 
would be contractually obligated to absorb the costs 
without reimbursement by LA Prep. The GMax was, as 
the name stated, the guaranteed maximum price HBC 
would charge LA Prep for the completion of the project.
HBC was proud of its pricing process, as was 
explained on the HBC website:
We deliver preliminary pricing that is the most thor-
ough in the industry. Every component needed to 
build a project is priced through our extensive 
­network of pre-qualified subcontractors, offering 
­clients a construction budget that reflects current 
market costs, not just estimates. This avoids sur-
prises later and ultimately results in project savings.
HBC personnel built the GMax starting with an 
estimate of the Cost of Work. The goal was to make  
this estimate as accurate as possible. The estimate was 
based on an extremely detailed bottom-up budget that 
included material costs and proposals from subcontrac-
tors for every component of the project. However,  
as was typical in the industry, the project drawings 
were only about 70% complete when the bid and GMax 
were developed. Where the details were missing, costs 
were estimated using square foot-based rules-of-
thumb. (See Exhibit 1 Budget Cost Summary for the 
summarized Cost of Work estimate.) 
Added to the Cost of Work to arrive at the GMax 
were General Condition Costs, a Profit/Fee, Insurance 
Costs, and a Contingency. Here are explanations of the 
terms whose meanings are not self-evident:
● General condition costs were recurring costs nec-
essary to operate a construction site that were billed 
to the customer at an agreed upon rate per week for 
the agreed upon duration of the project. General 
condition costs typically included on-site project 
supervision, equipment rentals, safety programs, 
and other general recurring costs. (See Exhibit 2 
General Conditions Breakdown.) The General 
Condition Cost Breakdown also identified general 
costs that were not included in the General Condi-
tion Cost rate, but instead would be directly reim-
bursed by the customer. Typical “reimbursables,” as 
these costs were called, were utilities, permits, and 
printing costs.
	
Project duration was an important variable in esti-
mating the GMax. If the project duration expecta-
tion was exceeded, general condition costs would go 
over budget. If a project delay was caused by the cli-
ent, HBC had a contractual right to place a “delay 
claim” on the project, thus increasing the General 
Condition costs of the project. The duration of the 
LA Prep project was contracted at 20 weeks. 
● A Contingency was added as a protection against 
uncertainties, to shield the company in case costs 
came in higher than originally budgeted. Typically 
5-25% of the value of the project was set aside as a 
contingency. If more information was available at the 
time of setting budgets, the contingency was set at the 
low end of the range. Contingencies were necessary 
1	 http://www.wsj.com/articles/food-accelerators-and-the-10-bag-of-
pasta-1420590268

544
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
for every project, but they were especially important 
for the LA Prep project because costs on this project 
were more uncertain than they would be for a more 
standard building concept. If the contingency budget 
was not used, per the contract, 75% would be 
returned to LA Prep and 25% to HBC.
For the LA Prep project, the GMax was calculated as 
shown in Figure 1. Historically, HBC achieved its pro-
ject budget targets about 90% of the time.
HBC managers knew that customers also typically 
budgeted their own construction contingencies for 
scope changes that might arise as the project progressed.
Change Orders and Budget 
Adjustments
Inevitably, projects did not go exactly as planned. Cus-
tomers often changed their specifications as the pro-
ject unfolded, necessitating Change Orders. And, of 
course, unforeseen problems were discovered. These 
uncertainties did not phase Paul McGunnigle, as he 
explained:
There are always issues and problems on large 
building projects. This business is all about manag-
ing problems. If the projects ran themselves no one 
would need us. A good PM will communicate 
change orders early, and give reasons ahead of 
time, not excuses afterwards.
For the LA Prep project, over 100 change orders 
were documented on a change order log. This was a not 
an atypical number of change orders for a project of 
this size. HBC and LA Prep were able reach payment 
agreements for about 70 to 80 of the change orders. 
However, as the project neared completion and L.A. 
Prep funds and HBC contingencies were depleted, the 
negotiations became more difficult. Relationships 
became more strained.
The five change orders detailed below represent 
typical situations that required change orders. These 
examples are illustrative of the dynamics of the project, 
constraints provided by the contractual agreements, 
and relationships between HBC and LA Prep personnel. 
1. Change Order (CO)#2
CO#2 was a customer-directed scope change. Since the 
drawings were only 70% complete when the project 
was bid, it was not a surprise that a CO was required 
once the final drawings were issued for construction. 
Once the drawings were finalized, the city issued plan 
check and corrections, and the changes were priced. 
Pricing COs could be a time-consuming exercise, as 
project Superintendent, Gary Scharrer explained:
We study the final drawings for any changes in scope. 
Once we identify changes, we could apply square-
foot-based unit cost rules-of-thumb and price the 
changes very quickly. However, since the mid-1980s 
we have involved outside construction management 
companies in the process to minimize project costs. 
But sometimes they are inexperienced, and this pric-
ing exercise takes much longer. Schedules have also 
been significantly condensed in the 30 years I’ve 
worked in the industry. Projects that used to take six 
months, are now expected to be completed in four 
months. So it is easy to get behind schedule.
The changes on CO#2 touched 15 trades. They 
resulted in significant increases in the cost of MEP 
(mechanical, electrical, and plumbing), particularly, 
but also some other project elements. The architect, 
engineers, and HBC project manager worked together 
to design the changes as cost effectively as possible, but 
the final result was a cost increase of $224,572. LA Prep 
agreed to pay a majority of the cost: $217,593. HBC vol-
unteered $6,979 from its contingency budget to subsi-
dize the cost of this CO. This change process delayed 
the entire project by two weeks.
Craig Roalf chose not to make a “delay claim.” While 
it would have been within HBC’s contractual rights to 
place the claim, it would not have been the cultural norm 
to enforce rights so rigidly, especially at the beginning of 
a project, with a large contingency budget still available. 
2. CO#4
CO#4 began with an RFI (request for information) 
from a subcontractor. The subcontractor had received 
Figure 1  Calculation of GMax
Cost of Work (Exhibit 1)
$6,393,178
General Condition Costs (Exhibit 2)
119,537
Fee/profit (2.5% of costs incl. General 
Conditions)
162,818
Insurance
66,755
  Subtotal
$6,742,288
Contingency (approx. 5% of Subtotal)
347,475
  Total Budget (GMax)
$7,089,763

Howard Building Corporation, Inc.
545
drawings that showed an 8” high platform for an 
exhaust fan on a flat roof, but the actual roof of the 
building was sloped, not flat. Structural upgrades were 
deemed necessary, resulting in a redesign and scope 
change. The engineers, architect, and PM worked 
together to value-engineer the redesign down from an 
initial cost of $63,000 to only $12,000. LA Prep 
approved and paid for this change. But this change also 
caused more delays, as Gary explained,
RFIs often slow projects down. The outside engineer-
ing company is contractually obligated to respond to 
RFIs in a timely manner, but it doesn’t always happen. 
Some engineering companies are better than others. 
3. CO#10
CO#10 was necessary because the cost of building an 
elevator came in much higher than HBC had originally 
estimated. HBC received only one proposal from a sub-
contractor in time to be included in the Cost of Work 
calculations and GMax bid. Unfortunately the subcon-
tractor’s proposal was for a 3,000 pound freight eleva-
tor. They were unable to deliver the 5,000 pound 
freight elevator that was necessary for the LA Prep pro-
ject. HBC was forced to use a much more expensive 
vendor, resulting in a $39,164 increase. HBC paid for 
this increase from its contingency budget. 
4. CO#78 
CO#78 was caused by vandalism. HBC had just 
installed the service entrance for water, and the copper 
piping was exposed in preparation for the final plumb-
ing inspections. This was in a period when copper 
prices were at an all-time high. Two days before the 
scheduled inspection, vandals cut the copper pipes that 
had just been installed. HBC immediately replaced the 
pipes and built a security cage to protect the copper 
from vandalism, at a cost of $3,655. HBC issued CO 
#78 after the work had been completed, but LA Prep 
“declined” the work, and refused to pay for it. 
At this point in the project, HBC had already contrib-
uted the entire contingency to prior COs, as Mike How-
ard explained:
We knew that LA Prep’s budget was tight from the 
beginning and they did not have a large contingency 
of their own for scope changes. So at some point in 
the project, we offered the contingency fund to 
them to use as they saw fit. In retrospect that was a 
mistake. They took advantage of our generosity.
The $3,655 for CO #78 came out of HBC’s profit. 
5. CO#94 
CO#94 was caused by a timing issue. The LA Prep pro-
ject required temporary power from July 2014 to March 
2015, until permanent power became available. Power 
was clearly stipulated in the contract as LA Prep’s finan-
cial responsibility. Craig Roalf explained: “We assume 
that the power, parking, and water necessary for con-
struction are to be provided by the owner at no cost to 
the General Contractor.” Power was not included in the 
general condition rate. It was to be billed to and reim-
bursed by LA Prep on a monthly basis as the actual 
expense was realized. A CO was necessary because HBC 
did not receive the bill from the power company until 
April 2015. Temporary power had not been included in 
the monthly billings to LA Prep. The total cost of the tem-
porary power for the nine-month period was $11,099. 
LA Prep refused to approve this CO, arguing that 
because they had not been informed of the expense in a 
timely manner, they had made other decisions with the 
money that had been available. Craig acknowledged that 
although ethically LA Prep should have paid for the utility 
charges, they were within their legal rights to refuse pay-
ment, because they were not informed of the costs as stip-
ulated in the contract. And LA Prep insisted that they 
were out of money. The $11,099 came out of HBC’s profits. 
About this CO and others like it, Mike Howard  
commented:
[L.A. Prep] starting taking our contract literally. For 
example, if the CO was not in in 10 days, they would 
automatically reject it. They were desperate for 
every piece of change they could get. When these 
kinds of things happen, the relationship suffers.
Billing
HBC billed LA Prep every month by applying a percent-
age of work complete to each line item in the contract, as 
revised by agreed upon change orders. The percentage of 
work complete was determined by the Project Manager 
for each line item of the budget, and certified by the pro-
ject architect. The total amount due was calculated for 
each line item by multiplying the revised contract amount 
for the line item by the percentage of work complete. Pre-
vious payments and retainers were subtracted from the 
total amount due to determine the amount due for the 
current month. (See Exhibit 3 Application and Certifi-
cate for Payment for an example of a monthly billing.)
LA Prep was not informed about, nor was it concerned 
with, subcontractor costs and the actual cost of work. 
They were billed strictly according to the cost of work 

546
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
­contracted, revised only by change orders. HBC bore the 
risk and reward of the actual cost of work coming in higher 
or lower than contracted. For example, if the revised con-
tracted amount for asphalt paving was $26,000 and the 
actual subcontractor’s costs for asphalt came in at $28,000, 
HBC could only charge LA Prep $26,000. HBC would lose 
money on that particular line-item. On the flip side, if for 
example the cost of insulation was contracted at $75,000 
and the actual subcontractor costs came in at $71,000, 
HBC could still charge LA Prep the full contracted amount 
of $75,000 for completed insulation work.
Project Control
Perhaps the most important control tool was the Vari-
ance Report, used internally by HBC to track project 
profit (see Exhibit 4). The Variance Report was updated 
every month. It summarized the financial impact of the 
COs for the period. The COs were reflected in the report 
as changes to the contract price for a line item, deple-
tion of the contingency fund, or depletion of the con-
tracted profit, depending on the agreement made in the 
COs. Column (A) in Exhibit 4 shows the original con-
tract amount for each line item. Column (B) shows the 
contract price revised by change orders, i.e. the revised 
amount LA Prep agreed to pay HBC by line item. This 
report also tracked changes to the subcontractor costs 
(commitments) for each line item during the same 
period. Column (C) shows the subcontractor cost origi-
nally budgeted by HBC for each line item. Column (D) 
shows the revised subcontractor cost after all subcon-
tractor change orders, i.e. the revised amount Howard 
agreed to pay its subcontractors by line item. 
HBC’s profit was the difference between the revised 
contracted price and the revised subcontractor com-
mitment for each line item (B-D), plus 25% of whatever 
remained of the contingency fund and 100% of what-
ever remained of the contracted profit. In the case of 
this project, the difference between the agreed upon 
price to LA Prep and cost of subcontractor work was 
$(217,060). The remaining contingency fund was $0, 
and the remaining contracted profit was $176,294, 
resulting in a net profit (loss) of $(40,766). 
Changes that reduced the projected profit required 
approval and signature of the Project Executive. These 
changes were referred to as a “X” costs. The most com-
mon “X” costs were subcontractor changes that 
increased the cost of work above what was contracted. 
For example, Exhibit 4 shows an “X” cost for steel. The 
contract with LA Prep was revised up by $41,416, but 
the subcontractor cost increased by $45,359, $4,421 
more than what was charged to the client, requiring 
executive approval. Executive approval was also 
required before any unused line items could be returned 
to the customer, if overall project profitability was 
already in jeopardy. For example, per Exhibit 4, land-
scaping was removed from the contract and the entire 
line-item was returned to the customer. This reim-
bursement required executive approval. Paul explained,
Once a contract is signed, any change that dimin-
ishes profit must be signed by the Project Execu-
tive. PMs cannot just move money from another 
line item that came in under budget. This provides 
some incentive to charge clients appropriately if 
they have made a scope change.
Meetings were held weekly to discuss project issues. In 
attendance were the PM, Project Engineer, and SI, as well 
as the outside architect and engineer hired by LA Prep 
and LA Prep management. Mike Howard, the HBC Pro-
ject Executive, also attended meetings occasionally, 
about once a month. RFIs and the response (or lack 
thereof) were documented in meeting minutes. Exhibit 5 
shows excerpts from the minutes of a weekly meeting. 
Craig Roalf explained the benefit of involving the 
Project Executive for the duration of the project:
The Project Executive knows what is going on. 
They understand the tenor of meetings and the 
impetus and rationale for decisions that are made. 
There are no big surprises at the end of the project.
Mike Howard explained one of his roles in the pro-
ject meetings:
Sometimes managers do not push hard enough or 
clearly state the drop dead date for decisions by 
clients that are necessary to keep the project on 
track. In that case, I pull the PM aside outside of the 
meeting to discuss my concern.
HBC posted several other key project management 
documents on the Project Exchange, a web page cre-
ated for each project and accessible to the customer as 
well as to HBC employees. The Project Exchange was 
updated weekly with images of the construction-in-pro-
gress, an updated project schedule, the RFI and Change 
Order logs, as well as monthly meeting minutes.
Final Accounting
In the end, the duration of the project was 45 weeks, as 
compared to an initial estimate of 20 weeks. And, as is 
shown in Exhibit 4, HBC lost $40,766 on the project.

Howard Building Corporation, Inc.
547
BUDGET COST SUMMARY
Trade #
Description
Trade Cost
Per SF
01400
Surveying
$ 12,500 
$ 0.27 
01800
Finish Clean up
$ 21,932 
$ 0.63 
02001
General Sitework
$ 32,850 
$ 0.70 
02500
Site Demolition
$ 120,390 
$ 2.15 
02510
Grading & Earthwork
$ 10,000 
$ 0.27 
02201
Asphalt Paving
$ 20,210 
$ 0.42 
02410
Underground Utilities
$ 80,379 
$ 3.76 
02480
Landscaping
$ 20,000 
$ 0.45 
02300
On-Site Concrete
$ 180,060 
$ 3.49 
03200
Reinforcing Steel & Rebar
$ 13,560 
$ 0.24 
04100
Masonry
$ 61,700 
$ 1.18 
04400
Stone
$ 10,500 
$ 0.27 
05100
Steel
$ 258,700 
$ 6.14 
05580
Sheet Metal
$ 26,114 
$ 0.14 
05700
Ornamental Metal
$ 68,450 
$ 1.32 
06132
Rough Carpentry
$ 101,800 
$ 1.37 
06400
Arch. Woodworking
$ 20,800 
$ 0.07 
07200
Insulation
$ 54,420 
$ 1.21 
07500
Roofing
$ 28,250 
$ 1.24 
08200
Doors/Frames/Hardware
$ 152,080 
$ 2.87 
08800
Glazing
$ 55,700 
$ 1.13 
09250
Drywall
$ 470,713 
$ 9.15 
09300
Ceramic Tile
$ 68,580 
$ 1.49 
09500
Acoustical Ceiling
$ 111,832 
$ 3.92 
09680
Flooring
$ 230,568 
$ 5.46 
09900
Painting
$ 196,776 
$ 5.45 
10426
Signage
$ 4,574 
$ 0.12 
Exhibit 1  Budget Cost Summary
LA Prep	
Budget #:	
14-020
210 and 230 W. Ave. 26	
Date:	
3/7/2014
Los Angeles, CA 90031	
RSF:	
55,846 
WEEKS PROJECTED ON SITE: 20
(Continued)

548
10800
Toilet Partitions	
$ 32,683 
$ 0.57 
11131
Projection Screens
$ 630 
$ 0.01 
11160
Dock Equipment
$ 2,100 
$ 0.04 
11450
Kitchen Equipment
$ 378,519 
$ 16.46 
14200
Elevators
$ 100,102 
$ 1.79 
15300
Fire Sprinklers
$ 63,461 
$ 1.81 
15350
Fire Extinguishers
$ 4,060 
$ 0.05 
15400
Plumbing
$ 1,099,983 
$ 25.81 
15500
HVAC
$ 1,246,810 
$ 25.05 
16001
Electrical
$ 1,002,213 
$ 22.40 
16600
Fire/Life Safety
$ 29,179 
$ 0.81 
Total
$ 6,393,178 
BUDGET COST SUMMARY
Trade #
Description
Trade Cost
Per SF

Howard Building Corporation, Inc.
549
Exhibit 2  General Conditions 
PRECONSTRUCTION PERIOD (12) WEEKS
Cost Category
Weekly Rate
# Of Weeks
Totals
Project Executive
No Charge
12
No Charge
Project Manager
No Charge
12
No Charge
Project Engineer
No Charge
12
No Charge
Project Administrator
No Charge
12
No Charge
Subtotal
No Charge
12
No Charge
CONSTRUCTION PERIOD (20) WEEKS
Cost Category
Weekly Rate
# Of Weeks
Totals
Project Executive
Inc. in Fee
20
Inc. in Fee
Project Manager
Inc. in Fee
20
Inc. in Fee
Assistant Project Manager
Inc. in Fee
20
Inc. in Fee
Project Engineer
$420
20
$8,400
Superintendent (Exterior)
$2,200
20
$44,000
Superintendent (Interior)
$1,800
20
$36,000
Laborers
$500
20
$10,000
Project Administration
Inc. in Fee
20
Inc. in Fee
Direct Expenses
•  Field Office & Supplies
Included
20
Included
•  Communication & Electronic Equipment
$65
20
$1,300
•  Temporary Protections/Barricades
$80
20
$1,600
•  Rubbish Removal
$320
20
$6,400
•  Safety Program/Equipment
$120
20
$2,400
•  Small Tools/ Misc. Equipment
$192
20
$3,837
•  Fencing
$280
20
$5,600
•  Field Inspections
Included
20
Included
Reimbursables
•  Reprographics for Bid Set and Construction Set
•  Permits, Plan Check, Agency, Impact and/or Utility Fees
•  Distribution, Postage & Mailing
Subtotal
$5,977
20
$119,537
Should the schedule be extended during the construction period for reasons beyond the responsibility of HBC, the 
weekly General Conditions cost shall be $5,977.00 
TOTAL GENERAL CONDITIONS
$119,537

550
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
Exhibit 3  Application and Certificate for Payment
APPLICATION AND CERTIFICATE FOR PAYMENT	
	
AIA Document G702
TO: 	
	
LA PREP PROPERTIES, LLC	 	
	
APPLICATION NO:	 8
	
	
400 MT. WASHINGTON DRIVE	
	
	
LOS ANGELES, CA 90065	
	
	
PERIOD TO:	
	
1/31/15
	
	
	
FROM:	
	
HOWARD BUILDING CORPORATION	 	
INVOICE NO:	
	
8307
	
	
707 WILSHIRE BLVD., STE 3750	
	
LOS ANGELES, CA 90017-3506	
	
CONTRACT DATE:	 	
3/10/14
Application is made for Payment, as shown below, in connection with the Contract. Continuation sheet, AIA Document 
G703, is attached.
ORIGINAL CONTRACT SUM …….…………………………………….
$
7,089,763.00
Net Change by Change Orders ………………………………………..
$
48,012.00
CONTRACT SUM TO DATE ……………………………………………….
$
7,137,775.00
TOTAL COMPLETED & STORED TO DATE …………………………
$
5,856,648.74
RETAINAGE
$
551,171.94
TOTAL EARNED LESS RETAINAGE
(Line 4 Less Line 5 Total)	
$
5,305,476.80
LESS PREVIOUS CERTIFICATE FOR PAYMENT
(Line 6 From Prior Certificate)
$
4,356,137.75
CURRENT PAYMENT DUE
$
949,339.05
BALANCE TO FINISH, PLUS RETAINAGE
(Line 3 less line 6)
$
1,832,298.20
CONTRACTOR: HOWARD BUILDING CORPORATION
BY:
 
CRAIG ROALF PROJECT MANAGER
DATE 1/30/15
ARCHITECT’S CERTIFICATE FOR PAYMENT
In accordance with the Contract Documents, Based on 
on-site observations and the data comprising the above 
application, the Architect certifies to the Owner that to the 
best of the Architect’s knowledge, information and belief 
the Work has progressed as indicated, the quality of the 
work is in accordance with the Contract Documents, and 
the Contractor is entitled to payment of the AMOUNT 
CERTIFIED.
AMOUNT CERTIFIED …………………………….
ARCHITECT:
By:_______________________Date___________
This certificate is not negotiable. The AMOUNT 
CERTIFIED is payable only to the Contractor named 
herein. Issuance, payment and acceptance of payment 
are without prejudice to any rights of the Owner or 
Contractor under this contract.

551
Exhibit 3  Application and Certificate for Payment (Continued)
LA PREP
APPLICATION NO.          8
INVOICE DATE	
1/30/2015
PERIOD TO	
1/31/2015
DESCRIPTION OF 
WORK
REVISED CONTRACT 
AMOUNT
WORK COMPLETED
TOTAL 
COMPLETED TO 
DATE
% COMPLETE
BALANCE TO 
FINISH
RETAINAGE
PREVIOUS 
APPLICATION
THIS PERIOD
Contingency
61,282.00
61,282.00
Insurance
70,003.00
46,887.36
10,550.10
57,437.46
82.05
12,565.54
Bond
1,253.00
419.00
834.00
1,253.00
100.00
Surveying
12,500.00
12,500.00
Finish Clean-Up
21,932.00
21,932.00
General Sitework
32,850.00
16,788.00
16,788.00
51.11
16,062.00
1,678.80
Site Demolition
144,441.00
132,025.00
2,850.00
134,875.00
93.38
9,566.00
13,487.50
Grading & Earthwork
10,000.00
9,414.00
9,414.00
94.14
586.00
941.40
Asphalt Paving
25,865.00
1,100.00
13,270.00
14,370.00
55.56
11,495.00
1,437.00
Underground Utilities
153,519.00
5,900.00
5,900.00
3.84
147,619.00
590.00
Landscaping
20,000.00
20,000.00
On-Site Concrete
226,033.00
225,458.00
225,458.00
99.75
575.00
22,545.80
Reinforcing Steel & 
Rebar
13,560.00
13,560.00
13,560.00
100.00
1,356.00
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
HVAC
1,281,835.00
989,173.45
236,833.71
1,226,007.16
95.64
55,827.84
12,600.72
Electrical
1,070,416.00
860,422.10
160,769.80
1,021,191.90
95.40
49,224.10
102,119.19
Fire/Life Safety
29,179.00
14,589.50
8,753.70
23,343.20
80.00
5,835.80
2,334.32
General Conditions
119,537.00
81,666.65
16,416.46
98,080.11
82.05
21,456.89
Fee
170,809.00
114,407.65
25,741.13
140,148.78
82.05
30,660.22
Totals
7,137,775.00
4,807,776.32
1,048,872.42
5,856,648.74
82.05
1,281,126.26
551,171.94

552
Exhibit 4  Final Variance Report
OWNER CONTRACT
SUBCONTRACTOR COMMITMENT
Owner  
Contract (A)
Total Changes
Revised Owner 
Contract (B)
Original 
Subcontractor 
Cost (C)
Subcontractor 
Change Order
Revised 
Subcontractor 
Cost (D)
Variance/
Profit 
(B-D)
General Conditions
 $ 119,537
$2,662
$122,199
$315,439
$15,742
$331,181
$ (208,982)
Insurance
$ 66,755
$5,496
$ 72,251
$ 53,421
$53,421
$ 18,830
Surveying
 $ 12,500 
$ (8,086)
$4,432
$2,200
$2,,233
$4,433
$ (1)
Finish Clean Up
 $ 21,932 
-
$ 21,932
$ 21,932
-
$ 21,932
-
General Sitework
 $ 32,850 
$ (85)
$ 32,765
$32,365
$3,143
$ 35,508
$ (2,743)
Site Demolition
 $ 120,390 
$25,551
$145,941
$123,713
$23,101
$146,814
$ (873)
Asphalt Paving
 $ 20,210 
$5,655
$25,865
$20,210
$7,805
$28,015
$ (2,150)
Underground Utilities
 $ 80,379 
$ 90,656
$ 171,035
$ 143,929
$27,106
$171,035
-
On-Site Concrete
 $ 180,060 
$ 57,186
$ 237,246
$ 180,060
$ 58359
$ 238,419
$ (1,173)
Landscaping
 $ 20,000 
$ (20,000)
_
-
Steel
 $ 258,700 
$41,416
$ 300,116
$259,178
$45,359
$304,537
$ (4,421)
Rough Carpentry
$ 101,800
$ 20,458
$122,258
$100,869
$ (1,919)
$98,950
$23,308
Insulation
$ 54,420
$ 21,034$ 
$75,454
$50,197
$21,118
$71,315
$4,139
Doors/Frames/Hardware
 $ 152,080 
$85,902
$ 237,982
$152,080
$85,326
$237,406
$ 576
Drywall
$ 470,713 
$ 124,420
$ 595,133
$ 470,713
$127,331
$598,044
$ (2,911)
Acoustical Ceiling
$ 111,832
$ (6,681)
$ 104,971
$ 111,832
$ (6,571)
$ 105,261
$ (290)
Flooring
 $ 230,568 
$ (4,070)
$ 226,498
$229,686
$ (1,612)
$ 228,074
$ (1,576)
Painting
 $ 196,776 
$ (13,601)
$183,175
$196,776
$ (10,141)
$ 186,635
$ (3,460)
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Elevators
 $ 100,102 
$46,948
$147,050
$137,932
$11,051
$148,983
$ (1,933)
Fire Sprinklers/Extinguishers
 $ 63,461 
$13,442
$76,903
$63,461
$13,442
$76,903
-
Plumbing
 $ 1,099,983 
$186,212
$1,286,195
$1,099,983
$197,877
$1,297,860
$ (11,665)
HVAC
 $ 1,246,810 
$93,747
$1,340,557
$1,246,810
$93,827
$1,340,637
$ (80)
Electrical
 $ 1,002,213 
$137,733
$1,139,946
$ 1,002,213
$154,761
$1,156,974
$ (17,028)
Fire/Life Safety
$ 29,179
_
$ 29,179
$ 29,179
_
$ 29,179
_
Subtotal 
$ 6,579,470
$ 549,191
$7,128,661
$6,438,068
$907,653
$7,345,721
$ (217,060)
Contingency
$ 347,475
$ (347,475)
_
_
Contracted Profit/OH
$ 162, 818
$13,476
$176,294
$176,294
Total Original Contract
$ 7,089,763
$215,192
$7,304,955
$ (40,766)

Howard Building Corporation, Inc.
553
Exhibit 5  Excerpt from Weekly Meeting Minutes
LA PREP	
Meeting Date:	
2/17/15
Project Meeting Minutes #38	
Next Meeting	
Tuesday, Feb 24, 2015 @1PM
ITEM
RESP
DISCUSSION
1.4
INFO
Drawings Status & Plan Check Changes
2-3-15 – There may need to be a revision to civil drawings due to changes in the basement
2-10-15 Delta #10 was received last week from Civil Engineer. Delta #11 expected shortly
2-17-15 Delta 11 has not been issued
1.6
HBC
Submittal Process
2-10-15 HBC to submit quarry tile along with floor sealant
2-17-15 HBC submitted Via by hand and is waiting SAA’s approval. HBC has already 
received owner approvals on tile and sealant submittals.
1.7
SAA
RFI Process
2-3-15 RFI’s 152 and 153 are still pending
2-10-15 RFI’s 152 and 153 have been answered. RFI’s 154, 155, and 159 are outstanding.
2-17-15 RFI 154 has been answered. RFI’s 155 and 159 are still outstanding.
1.9
HBC
Schedule/Long Lead Items/3 Weeks Look Ahead
2-3-15 March 6th is current move in date. However there are electrical requirements that are 
holding up projects from receiving electrical.
2-10-15 All corrections have been made with Electrical with the exception of the newer rated 
3R battery closet that is still being reviewed. DWP pushed on schedule to Friday
2-17-15 Waiting on doors to be keyed. Keying is scheduled on Thursday by LAP. 
Schedule is being delayed daily by not having electrical.
1.12
LAP
Pay Application
2-3-15 Pay Application was sent back to HBC with comments. HBC is waiting on December 
payment. LAP said it was approved today and will be sent out.
2-10-15 Dec payment received. Jan pay application has been revised and approved.
2-17-15 LSP is looking for Pay App # 6 releases.
27.0
HBC
Veggie Washer
1-27-15 LA Prep has stated that a 2 ½” is good enough and this is what should be used
2-3-15 LAK has asked for stub outs only as an option
2-10-15 All items were carried in alternatives. HBC has suggested running waste and 
underground at a minimum.
2-17-15 LAK does not want to proceed with Veggie washer. Item Closed.
33.0
HBC
Color Choice for the Building
2-3-15 A color has been selected as CL 1466 Flat. LAP still waiting on changes.
2-10-15 HBC to submit.
2-17-15 LAP had not received a price change per its request.
Research Assistant Michelle Spaulding and Professor Kenneth A. Merchant prepared this case.
Copyright © Kenneth A. Merchant. 
The above constitutes our understanding of the content and conclusions of the meeting. All attendees are requested to 
review this report and direct any errors or omissions in writing with 7 calendar days or these minutes will be presumed 
correct as written. Items deleted from the minutes are those determined by attendees as to be that they are resolved or 
required no additional action.
Prepared by: 
 Date 2/11/15
	
	
Deanna Rott, Project Engineer

554
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
 In late 2001, Annette Lo, president of Branch Network 
of the retail banking division of Bank of the Desert 
(BoD), a large regional bank, was pondering the ade-
quacy of the bank’s branch performance measurement 
and evaluation system. Having the right performance 
indicators was important because BoD had an aggres-
sive sales culture. Annette and her management team 
focused much of their attention on improving the per-
formances of branches that were not achieving their 
growth targets. The performance evaluations were 
also important because they aff ected the assignments 
of annual bonuses for branch personnel. 
 Annette’s discomfort with the bank’s current system 
stemmed from several sources. She had heard grum-
bling from some of the branch managers, particularly 
about their performance targets. At least some of the 
branch managers did not understand how their targets 
were set, and those who thought that their targets were 
unfair were prone to complain about them. Annette had 
also heard claims that the bank’s performance measures 
and evaluations, which were more sensitive to customer 
acquisition than to customer retention, had led to rela-
tively high “customer churn” rates. 
 Annette discussed her concerns informally with 
Dave Phillips, a consultant friend. Dave said that it 
sounded to him like the system did have some signifi -
cant weaknesses. BoD’s performance measures both 
seemed to be incomplete and not to direct management 
attention to the areas with the greatest payoff  poten-
tial. Annette decided that she should conduct a thor-
ough review of the system. 
 The company 
 Bank of the Desert, headquartered in Phoenix, Arizona, 
was a diversifi ed fi nancial services company that pro-
vided banking, insurance, investments, mortgage, and 
consumer finance services to customers located 
throughout the southwestern region of the United 
States. BoD competed in virtually every segment of the 
fi nancial services industry and, in its regional market, 
it was among the market leaders in many. In 2001, 
BoD’s size ranked it among the largest US banks. It had 
assets of approximately $30 billion and more than 
10,000 employees. 
 BoD managers had observed the wave of consolida-
tions in the banking industry, which were motivated to 
increase profi ts through greater economies of scale, but 
they were highly motivated to keep BoD independent. 
They believed that BoD could serve its customers best 
by remaining a smaller bank focused on the needs of 
the fast-growing Southwest region. To discourage 
potential acquirers so that they could remain inde-
pendent, BoD’s managers knew that they needed to 
keep the company’s stock price high. Thus, they set an 
aggressive 10% annual earnings-per-share growth rate 
target. BoD had not managed to meet this target each 
and every year, but it had reached the target over the 
long term: the bank’s annualized growth rate since 
1990 was 11.1%. 
 BoD’s Retail Banking Division off ered a full range of 
deposit, investment, loan and insurance products to 
consumers and small businesses in metropolitan and 
community markets. It served nearly 2 million house-
holds through the third-largest retail banking network 
in the region, with approximately 250 branches and 
2,700 automated teller machines (ATMs). Net income 
from retail banking exceeded $800 million in the year 
2001. The division’s mission was to satisfy all of its cus-
tomers’ fi nancial needs and to help the customers suc-
ceed fi nancially. The major components necessary to 
turn this vision into reality were all in place. 
 While some important decisions, such as regarding 
branch locations, product off erings, pricing, and pro-
motions, were made at division headquarters, the day-
to-day operations of the division were highly 
decentralized (see organization chart in  Exhibit  1 ). 
Each of the regional presidents was responsible for 
approximately 50 branches, so the time they had avail-
able to help any one branch was limited. Thus, person-
nel in the branches were responsible for identifying 
their own customers and satisfying those customers’ 
 CASE STUDY 
 Bank of the Desert (A) 

Bank of the Desert (A)
555
needs for financial services. Division-level staff pro-
vided some product training, marketing, and financial 
analysis support.
Performance measures and incentives
For managers at the top of the retail division’s man-
agement hierarchy, from the division president down 
to the regional presidents, the performance measure-
ment and incentive system focused on financial per-
formance, in particular growth in profits. As 
mentioned above, BoD’s profit growth target was 10% 
per year. During BoD’s annual planning and budget-
ing process this overall target was disaggregated into 
targets for the branch network and each region. 
Given the importance of the branch network to BoD’s 
total profits, the division and branch network annual 
profit goals were typically very close to 10%. In recent 
years the profit growth goals for the regions had var-
ied, however, from 7% to 13% depending, particu-
larly, on each region’s economic prospects and the 
number of new branches that would be opened in 
that region.
Although BoD produced an extensive set of profit 
reports down to the level of individual branches, prod-
uct types (e.g. demand deposits), and customers, prof-
its were seen to be largely uncontrollable at the branch 
and lower organization levels. Branch profits were 
highly affected by interest rates. The branch managers 
also had little or no control over many of the revenue 
and expense items on the branch income statements. 
For example, the branch managers had no control over 
decisions regarding product offerings, prices, or facility 
leasing costs. Division-level managers even set branch 
staffing levels, which they did based on volumes of 
transaction activity.
What the branch managers could control, however, 
was the management of their employees for the pur-
pose of generating bank revenues. Thus BoD’s branch 
incentive compensation system focused on what were 
perceived to be the two most important, controllable 
profit drivers at the branch level. Both were revenue-
focused. The first measure included in the incentive 
system was the number of product sales, scaled by the 
number of full-time-equivalent employees (FTE) in 
the branch to make the measure comparable across 
branches of different size. Product sales included both 
sales to new customers and new accounts opened by 
current customers. The measure was number of sales, 
rather than the profitability of the sale, because the 
profits of any given sale to the bank could vary signifi-
cantly, for example depending on how much custom-
ers eventually deposited in an account or how long 
they kept the account open. But new sales were very 
important to the branch because they could provide a 
stream of profits to the bank that could last many 
years.
The second measure included in the incentive plan 
was the cross sell/total retail accounts ratio. “Cross sell” 
was defined as the proportion of customers who pur-
chased products in more than one product category 
(e.g. loans, deposit accounts, mortgages, credit cards) 
per customer. The cross sell ratio was seen as a useful 
indicator of the effectiveness of the branches’ market-
ing and sales efforts.
All performances within the division were evalu-
ated by comparing actual results relative to targets set 
during the annual planning process. The goal-setting 
process was primarily top-down. In September of 
each year, BoD’s corporate-level managers sent pre-
liminary global profit targets to division managers. 
These preliminary targets were designed to ensure 
that the bank achieved its minimum 10% annual 
profit growth rate. Division-level staff then set prelim-
inary goals for each region and branch, primarily by 
extrapolating trends in the branches’ past perfor-
mances. These preliminary goals were consolidated, 
reconciled with the bank’s target for the division, and 
presented to the top management team. Top manage-
ment made adjustments based on their knowledge of 
market trends and promotion and investment plans 
for the year. Then the goals were presented to the 
branch managers, whose inputs led to a final round of 
negotiations.
At the end of the year, bonuses were paid to branch 
personnel based on their percent achievement of tar-
gets for the number of product sales per FTE (weighted 
75%) and cross sell/total retail accounts ratio 
(weighted 25%). The number of product sales meas-
ure was given a higher weight because it was seen to 
be a more important driver of total profits. No bonuses 
were paid on performance dimensions where perfor-
mance was below target. Personnel whose branches 
exactly achieved their targets would earn bonuses 
ranging from 10% to 50% of base salary. If perfor-
mances exceeded targets by 50% or more, personnel 
could be paid bonuses of up to twice the target bonus 
levels.

556
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
 Exhibit 1  Bank of the Desert organization chart – Retail Banking Division 
  This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant, Wim A. Van der Stede, and research assistant Xiaoling (Clara) Chen. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
 In October 2001, Annette decided to hire a manage-
ment consulting firm to evaluate BoD’s system of 
branch performance measures and evaluations. Dave 
Phillips, an experienced partner, was the lead consult-
ant on the job. At the end of a four-month examination 
period Dave’s consulting team presented its prelimi-
nary fi ndings. 
 The consultants’ fi ndings startled Annette and her 
management team. Among other things, the consult-
ants presented a list of the “10 branches with the larg-
est improvement opportunities.” Surprisingly, that list 
included several branches that the BoD management 
team thought were among its best performers. The 
manager of one of these branches had even been 
recently singled out for promotion. 
 Annette knew that the consultants’ findings would 
have to be studied very carefully. If they were correct, 
major changes would probably have to be made to the 
bank’s performance measurement and evaluation system. 
 Performance standards 
 One of the consulting team’s recommendations was that 
each branch’s performance should be compared with 
what they called its  market opportunity potentials , rather 
than with budget targets that were primarily extrapola-
tions from the past. The consultants argued that large 
performance increases relative to past performance 
might only indicate low starting points. Market opportu-
nity potentials, instead, would refl ect the level of perfor-
mance that each branch should reasonably be able to 
reach given its size, location, and operating conditions. 
 But how should those potentials be measured? BoD’s 
branches were quite diverse. They operated in many 
 CASE STUDY 
 Bank of the Desert (B) 

Bank of the Desert (B)
557
different locales, some urban, some suburban, and some 
in small towns. Some of the branches were located in 
affluent communities, and some were located in poor 
communities. Some were old, established branches, and 
some were newly opened. And some had served custom-
ers for many years, while others served more transient 
communities. After considerable discussion the consult-
ing team concluded that the branch performance poten-
tials varied most significantly with the number and mix 
of customers in the regions they served and that market 
potentials could be measured reasonably accurately on 
that basis.
BoD staff had previously analyzed a broad range of 
customer demographics and behavior patterns and 
classified the bank’s retail customers into 30 customer 
types, which they summarized into 10 broad segments, 
which included categories such as “Well Off,” “Newly 
Secure,” and “Future Potential.” The customers in these 
categories varied in terms of their mix of purchases of 
various products and services and in current and future 
profit potentials.
The consulting team took these data on the mixes of 
customer types served by each of the 253 branches 
and, using a sophisticated statistical clustering pro-
gram, grouped the branches into 10 clusters. The clus-
ters were labeled:
1.
Young Professionals
6. Old Wealth
2.
Experienced Investors
7. New Investors
3.
Middle-Class Workers
8. Small Branches
4.
Transaction Customers
9. Small Business 
Banking
5.
New Wealth
10. Priority Banking
Branch clusters 1 through 7 were based solely on the 
mix of consumer segments. For example, the average 
branch in the “Old Wealth” cluster (6) was comprised of 
17.4% of “Well Off ” customers, 11.5% of “Newly 
Secure” customers, 42.5% of “Future Potential” cus-
tomers, 1.8% of “Core Bankers,” 0.7% of “Traditional 
Bankers,” 8.1% of “New Investors,” 7.3% of “Getting 
There” customers, 6.7% of “Checks and Mortgages” 
customers, 0.7% of “Middle Stable” customers, and 
3.3% of “Anomalies and Unclassified” customers.
Information on consumer characteristics was una-
vailable for some specialized branches. These branches 
were clustered based on balance sheet and transaction 
characteristics. Clusters 8 through 10 fell into this cat-
egory. Among them, cluster 8 included branches with 
less than 3,500 customers, and clusters 9 and 10 were 
highly focused branches.
The branch clustering was important because it 
could be used to set more reasonable performance 
standards. Branch performances could be compared 
only with the performances of other BoD branches in 
the same cluster, i.e. those facing roughly the same 
business environment.
The consultants decided to set the branch perfor-
mance standards based on the current performance of 
the average branch in each cluster. Dave Phillips 
explained:
We did not want to pick some theoretical perfor-
mance standard. It’s too easy to argue with those. 
We chose to set standards based simply on how 
the average branch in each cluster was currently 
performing. The opportunity for improvement, 
then, was simply calculated based on bringing the 
poor-performing branches up to average. Every-
body can understand that. Once they pick that “low 
hanging fruit,” then maybe the bank managers can 
get more sophisticated and figure out how to move 
the higher-performing branches up.
Performance opportunity metrics
Another key element of the consultants’ engagement 
involved the development of a metric that could be 
used to distinguish the high and low performing 
branches in each cluster. They decided to take a cus-
tomer focus. They based their performance model on 
the simple logic that the bank, and indeed any busi-
ness, can improve its profits by: (1) acquiring new cus-
tomers; (2) improving the profit potential of each of its 
customers (e.g. by selling them multiple products and, 
particularly, the most profitable products); and 
(3) retaining each customer as long as possible. They 
called the combination of the first two factors the mar-
ket opportunity. They called the third factor the cus-
tomer retention opportunity.
The team also sought to develop metrics that would 
quantify both opportunities on a common measure-
ment dimension – profits. They thought that the com-
mon metric would help division managers bridge the 
gap between the financial performance focus at upper 
management levels and the operational focus at the 
branch level.

558
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
A. Market opportunity metric
Each branch’s market opportunity was the product of 
two factors: a customer value mix opportunity and a 
market penetration opportunity. Underlying the calcu-
lation of the customer value mix opportunity were some 
cost accounting analyses that had recently been con-
ducted by BoD staff. These analyses estimated profita-
bility by product and by customer. The product 
profitability analyses estimated the average profits the 
bank earned from the sale of each of a broad range of 
products. These included, for example, loans of various 
types, current accounts, savings accounts, credit cards, 
and certificates of deposit with various maturity 
lengths. Only averages could be estimated because the 
profitability of bank products can be dramatically dif-
ferent depending on how the customers use the prod-
ucts. For example, some current account customers 
maintain large balances; others do not. Some make 
considerable use of tellers for their transactions, while 
others use only the relatively inexpensive automated 
teller machines (ATMs). And some manage their 
accounts carelessly (e.g. bouncing checks), making it 
possible for the bank to charge them fees, while others 
do not.
Customer profitability was based on the profitability 
of the mix of products purchased by customers of dif-
ferent types. The customer profitability analysis first 
involved ranking the 10 customer types described 
above in terms of desirability (i.e. both current profita-
bility and growth potential). These categories were 
then reclassified into one of four more aggregate cate-
gories. Category 4 included all unprofitable customers. 
This category included, surprisingly, 18% of all the 
bank’s customers. Category 3 included customers who 
generated some profits but who, because they offered 
limited growth potential, were not the type that bank 
managers wanted their line officers searching for. Cat-
egories 1 and 2 included the “outstanding” and “excel-
lent” customer types. BoD managers only sought 
customers in Categories 1 and 2. The consultants calcu-
lated that the Category 1 and 2 customers, which com-
prised only 25% of the BoD’s customers, provided 84% 
of the Retail Banking Division’s total profits.
Based on these analyses and data on the mix of 
products purchased by customers in Categories 1 and 
2, the consultants calculated a “standard profit per 
household,” that is, what a branch could be expected 
to earn by attracting one more customer in either 
Category 1 or 2.
For example, Branch 188 served a total of 6,075 
households, but only 19% were in the top two tiers 
(outstanding or excellent) in terms of profitability, as 
compared to the average percentage of top-tier custom-
ers in its cluster of 21%. Thus, Branch 188 can be said to 
have a customer value mix opportunity of 2%. The dif-
ference in profitability between the top two tier cus-
tomers (outstanding and excellent profitability) and 
bottom two tier customers (moderate and potential 
profitability) is $543 for Branch 188. Therefore, the 
customer value mix opportunity of 2% translates into a 
profit potential of about $66,000 (i.e. 0.02 × 6,075 × 
$543, rounded).
The other element of the market opportunity metric, 
the market penetration opportunity, was more difficult 
to calculate. BoD had never measured market penetra-
tion or share at the branch level. The branch and ATM 
network was designed so that the individual service 
locations would work in a complementary manner to 
serve customers and to capture market share. Thus 
bank managers did not believe that the market share of 
any particular individual location was particularly 
meaningful. However, BoD staff had previously defined 
48 distinguishable “market areas” served by the bank’s 
branches. The consulting team used these data and cal-
culated BoD’s penetration rate in each market area by 
dividing the BoD retail households in the market area 
by the total potential households in that particular 
market. They then assumed that the penetration rate 
was the same for all BoD branches located in this mar-
ket area.
For example, there were 135,176 households in the 
South Tucson area of Arizona (market area 1), in which 
Branch 188 was located. Within this market area BoD 
served a total of 32,442 households, so BoD’s penetra-
tion rate was 24%. This figure was compared to BoD’s 
overall average penetration rate of 29%. This led to the 
conclusion that the BoD branches in the South Tucson 
market area had a penetration opportunity rate of 5%.
Branch 188 currently served 6,075 households. 
Assuming that the branch’s customer mix stayed the 
same at an average profit per household of $132, if the 
branch could increase its market penetration by 5%, 
thus bringing in an additional 304 households as cus-
tomers, it could expect to earn an additional profit of 
about $40,000 (i.e. 0.05 × 6,075 × $132, rounded).
The total market opportunity was the sum of the 
customer value mix opportunity and the market pene-
tration opportunity. For Branch 188, this was approxi-
mately $106,000.

Bank of the Desert (B)
559
B. Customer Retention Opportunity 
Metric
The consultants knew that good customer service was 
one of the primary profit drivers in a bank branch and, 
indeed, most types of businesses. But BoD did not have 
good measures of customer satisfaction or customer 
feedback. It did, however, track a primary outcome of 
good customer service – customer retention. From the 
bank’s customer retention statistics, the consulting 
team calculated the profit opportunity that would be 
derived from improving each branch’s customer reten-
tion rate to the average of its cluster. The formula was:
Customer retention	 = number of households currently
profit opportunity	
served × retention improvement 
opportunity (%) × number of 
years of improved retention1 
× cluster average customer 
profit opportunity
For example, Branch 188 has a customer retention rate 
of 81.2%, as compared to the average retention rate in its 
cluster of 82.8%. Branch 188’s customer retention oppor-
tunity, then, is 1.6%. Branch 188 serves 6,075 households 
in total and the profit per household is $132. Therefore, in 
dollar terms Branch 188’s customer retention opportu-
nity is $38,000 (i.e. 0.016 × 6,075 × $132 × 3, rounded).
The case of Branch 992
To illustrate how the new proposed evaluation systems 
yielded results that contrasted with those of the evalua-
tion system BoD was currently using, consider the con-
sultants’ conclusions regarding the performance of 
Branch 992. Branch 992 had been in operation for 
36 years, and it served a total of 9,128 households.
Based on the operational metrics used for incentive 
purposes, Branch 992 had a cross sell/total retail 
accounts ratio of 95.3% and 5.6 sales per FTE per day, 
as compared to a target cross sell ratio of 93% and 
5.4 sales per FTE per day. Since it exceeded both of its 
targets, Branch 992 was considered a superior per-
former under BoD’s current evaluation system; it was 
ranked 44th best of the 253 branches.
Under the consultants’ proposed evaluation system, 
however, Branch 992 was not ranked nearly as highly. 
In fact, in terms of the opportunity metrics, it was 
ranked 218th out of the 253 branches.
Under the proposed segmentation Branch 992 belonged 
to cluster 5 (“New Wealth”). As shown in Table 1, Branch 
992’s performance was below the cluster average for both 
the customer mix and customer retention metrics. The 
penetration rate in Branch 992’s market area was 28%, as 
compared to the overall bank average of 29%, so Branch 
992 also failed to achieve that performance standard.
The consultants translated these performance 
opportunities into dollars and concluded that if Branch 
992 could be brought up to average performance its 
profits would increase by $411,068 (27.5%) from a 
stronger customer value mix; $14,932 (1%) from better 
market penetration; and $26,317 (1.8%) from 
increased customer retention. With a total profit oppor-
tunity of $452,318, Branch 992 had the largest oppor-
tunity for improvement in the “New Wealth” branch 
cluster. It was far from being a top performer!
The consultants’ presentation
Dave Phillips presented his report to BoD’s retail division 
management on February 4, 2002. He described his 
team’s approach and the rationale behind it. He showed 
that the new approach would lead to some significant 
differences in branch evaluations. Branch 992 was one 
of the examples that he presented. And he concluded his 
presentation with some overall statistics about how 
much money BoD had been “leaving on the table.” Dave 
claimed that bringing the weaker performing branches 
in each cluster up to average would yield an additional 
bank profit of about $8.8 million from the customer 
value mix opportunity, $5.9 million from the market 
penetration opportunity, and $4.2 million from the cus-
tomer retention profit opportunity. Taken as a whole, the 
division’s profit would increase by approximately $18.9 
million (7%), just from bringing all the poor-performing 
branches up to the current average within each cluster.
The division managers were stunned by the consult-
ants’ overall conclusions and, especially, by some of the 
specific branch examples. They wondered why the 
consultants’ findings suggested that maybe they should be 
thinking about firing a branch manager, the one of Branch 
1	 Assumed to be 3. This is to recognize that retention improvements 
generate streams of profits over more than a single year.
Table 1  Branch 992 performance vs. cluster 5 averages
Cluster 5 
average
Branch 992
Customers in top 2 tiers (%)
31.5%
24.1%
Customer retention (%)
88.2%
87.6%

560
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
992, whom they were preparing to promote because his 
branch had consistently met its performance targets.
In the days following the meeting Dave noted that the 
bank managers quickly started asking useful questions 
that they had not been asking, such as: Why do some 
branches do so well on the metrics we have been using 
but so poorly on the opportunity metrics? How should 
we be setting goals? If we implement this system, will 
the improvement automatically happen, or would we 
have to do something else to bring the poor performing 
branches up to at least average performance levels?
Dave knew that his team’s analysis was not the final 
answer. They had completed only the first phase in 
what would have to be a lengthy analysis and change 
process. Nonetheless, Dave thought that they had 
achieved their primary purpose, which was to stimu-
late the BoD managers to ask some of the right ques-
tions. He considered the opportunity metrics primarily 
as a diagnostic tool that was particularly valuable for 
internal learning and improvement. However, he also 
thought that the opportunity metrics would encourage 
the branch managers to take a broader view of the busi-
ness and focus their attention on the dimensions of per-
formance that were critical to the long-term success of 
the company. In Dave’s words:
They are in the earliest stages of figuring out the 
implications of seeing their business from this new 
perspective. Over time they will refine the perspec-
tive, and will begin to relate my findings to their 
day-to-day behavior. But the most important thing 
to note is that they were stunned. That was the pri-
mary value. I showed them that their perceptions of 
performance and their decision-making processes 
were less effective than they had thought because 
they didn’t have a complete context for either.
However, Dave pointed out to the bank managers 
that while his system was relatively simple it might not 
be the ultimate answer to all their evaluation problems. 
The analyses were based on a number of marketing and 
cost accounting analyses. Even if these analyses were 
correct today – which Dave’s team assumed they were 
at face value – the studies would have to be updated on 
a regular basis. He also pointed out that the three sug-
gested metrics (customer mix, market penetration, cus-
tomer retention) did not define branch performance 
completely. For example, those metrics did not reflect 
how well branch managers controlled the expenses 
that they could control or how well they developed 
their employees’ skill sets. Bank managers would have 
to decide whether focusing only on the three suggested 
metrics would cause branch managers to ignore other 
important but unmeasured aspects of their jobs.
Decisions to be made
Annette and BoD’s other retail bank managers knew 
they had to make some important decisions. Was the 
consultants’ approach superior to the system they had 
been using? If it was superior, how fast should they try 
to implement it? They had already communicated the 
terms of the 2002 bonus plan, using the old evaluation 
criteria, to branch personnel. Could they change now? 
If so, how would they explain the new system to the 
branch personnel? What should they do next?
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant, Wim A. Van der Stede, and research assistant Xiaoling (Clara) Chen.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.

Fine Harvest Restaurant Group (A)
561
 In March 2013, Ralph Martin called Karen Williams 
for an appointment. Ralph was the manager of Restau-
rant #036, a Fine Harvest restaurant located in Grand-
view, Missouri. Karen was the president and CEO of 
the Fine Harvest Restaurant Group (hereafter “Fine 
Harvest”), a chain of 246 companyowned restaurants. 
Ralph was livid. He had just received his performance 
evaluation from Joe Simmons, his immediate supe-
rior, the Kansas City area manager. The evaluation 
was not good, and Ralph learned that he would not be 
earning a bonus for the year 2012. Ralph had already 
expressed his anger to Joe, but on further refl ection, 
Ralph decided that he would not just passively accept 
the evaluation. He felt able to express his anger and 
frustration directly to Karen because he had known 
her for a long time. He was one of the fi rst employees 
Karen and her husband, Robert, hired when they 
founded the Fine Harvest Restaurant Group in 1994. 
Despite the gap in the management hierarchy, Karen 
agreed to meet with Ralph. The meeting was sched-
uled for April 2, 2013. 
 At the April meeting, Ralph bluntly laid out his com-
plaint. He explained that performance evaluation was 
not fair. 
 My employees and I worked our butts off  all year. 
We did the best we could. In fact, I think we did 
the best that could be done. You know I’m a good 
manager. I’ve proven it over many years. And 
now for me to get this slap in the face … well, it’s 
just not fair. And this is a particularly bad year to 
not get a bonus. My wife’s been out of work 
because she has been ill, and I’ve got two kids in 
college. 
 Ralph also explained that he had been talking 
with some other restaurant managers, and they too 
did not trust the company’s performance evaluation 
system. Many of them did not want to complain, 
because they perceived they had earned part of their 
bonuses out of luck. 
 The company 
 Fine Harvest Restaurant Group, headquartered in 
St. Louis, was one of the largest family-owned busi-
nesses in the United States. Over the last 18 years, Fine 
Harvest had grown from a single location to a national 
company with 246 outlets in 27 states, predominantly 
in the Midwestern and Western regions of the United 
States. It had about 4,250 employees and approxi-
mately $289 million in annual sales. 
 Since its founding, the privately held Fine Harvest 
dramatically outperformed its competitors. Same-store 
sales, a common industry measure of growth, had 
increased almost every year since 2001, with a 7.3% 
jump in 2007. The only year in the last decade when 
same-store sales did not increase was during the reces-
sion of 2008, when same-store sales remained steady. 
Fine Harvest also continued to add to its growth by 
opening new restaurants. In 2012, Fine Harvest 
recorded annual revenues approaching $290 million, 
capping five consecutive years of growth at a com-
pound annual rate of 14.2%. 
 Fine Harvest’s core menu offerings focused on 
sandwiches and salads. At Fine Harvest, the customer 
could choose from a wide selection of attractively dis-
played sandwich and salad choices a-lacarte or order 
one of four meal types (chef salad, soup and sand-
wich, salad unlimited, and vegetable burger), also 
known as “combination platters.” For larger parties, 
customers could order party platters that served 
10–12 people. 
 The founders also believed that Fine Harvest’s suc-
cess was due in part to the fl exibility the restaurants 
provided by adapting to a variety of operating environ-
ments. Since its founding in 1994, Fine Harvest had 
broadened its operations from the St. Louis area to 
27 states, and management had aggressive plans for 
continued expansion. 
 Fine Harvest was one of the fi rst quick-service chains 
to open restaurant locations inside of a supermarket 
and was also testing drive-through locations in several 
 CASE STUDY 
 Fine Harvest Restaurant Group (A) 

562
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
markets. Fine Harvest strategically positioned its res-
taurants in four sites:
1.	 Shopping center cafeterias;
2.	 Key intersections and downtown areas;
3.	 University campuses, airports, casinos, resorts, and 
stadiums;
4.	 Major supermarkets and retailers.
Fine Harvest made a significant investment in each 
location. Its in-house architectural and construction 
team oversaw each step of development to ensure a high 
quality of design and construction. In addition, it made 
sure that its restaurants accommodated the specific cri-
teria of each location while still maintaining the opera-
tional and visual elements characteristic of Fine Harvest.
Both owners, Robert and Karen Williams, remained 
actively involved with their company on a daily basis as 
chairman and president/CEO, respectively. They 
believed that much of their success was due to their 
active involvement in the daily operations of each res-
taurant. There were no plans to offer franchises in the 
near future.
Organization structure
As shown in Exhibit 1, the executive committee of the 
Fine Harvest organization consisted of seven people: 
founder and chairman of the board (Robert Williams); 
president and CEO (Karen Williams); chief financial 
officer; vice president of human resources, vice presi-
dent of marketing, senior vice president of operations; 
and senior vice president of restaurant development. 
Three vice presidents reported directly to the chief 
financial officer in the functional areas of business 
planning, accounting and finance, and information 
systems. The senior vice president of operations super-
vised the work of the vice president of purchasing, the 
executive chef, and the director of food and beverages.
Thirty four geographical area managers, each 
supervising between 4 and 11 restaurants, also 
reported on a regular basis to the vice president of 
operations, and reported summary results to the mem-
bers of the executive committee on a quarterly basis. 
The area managers were responsible for administering 
the management and staff training programs, setting 
performance targets for the restaurants, and oversee-
ing the performance of the restaurants. The area man-
agers were primarily held accountable for the 
achievement of the financial goals.
The staff of a typical Fine Harvest restaurant con-
sisted of a general manager, one or two assistant man-
agers, and approximately 12 to 15 hourly employees. 
The general manager of each restaurant was responsi-
ble for the day-to-day operations of that restaurant, 
including sales, costs, hiring, training, ordering, inven-
tory, and marketing. The general manager ensured 
that the restaurant provided excellent customer ser-
vice, maintained high-quality food, and met financial 
and operational goals. The assistant managers were 
responsible for purchasing, maintaining product qual-
ity, and controlling food and kitchen labor costs.
Budgeting and performance 
measurement systems
Fine Harvest’s goal-setting process was primarily top-
down. In October of each year, Fine Harvest’s top exec-
utive committee set preliminary profit margin targets 
for each of the area managers. These targets were 
based on historical projections, plans for new restau-
rants in each area and the committee members’ knowl-
edge of market trends and the competitive environment. 
They were also designed to ensure that the company 
achieved its desired minimum of 12% annual growth 
in profits.
The area managers then set tentative financial tar-
gets for each restaurant. At the restaurant level, restau-
rant margin was the fundamental indicator of 
performance. Restaurant margin was calculated as the 
difference between a given restaurant’s revenues and 
its expenses. Interest expense, taxes, and rent or leas-
ing expense were excluded from the margin calcula-
tion. This was done because the restaurant managers 
had little or no input into decisions about financings 
and restaurant locations.
In setting restaurant margin targets, the area man-
agers generally extrapolated from the restaurants’ his-
torical performances. However, they also took into 
consideration new information that they were aware 
of, such as local population growth rates, highway con-
struction plans, and competition. These preliminary 
restaurant targets were consolidated, reconciled with 
the executive committee’s target for the area, and pre-
sented to the executive committee.
At the end of the year, bonuses were paid to area 
managers and restaurant managers based on their per-
cent achievement of targets for the restaurant margins. 
No bonuses were paid where performances were below 
targets. If performances exceeded targets by 50% or 

Fine Harvest Restaurant Group (A)
563
more, the managers could be paid bonuses of up to 
twice the target bonus levels. Salary increases and pro-
motions also depended primarily on the achievement 
of the financial targets.
Fine Harvest managers believed that the most 
important factor affecting growth prospects for a res-
taurant was the population growth rate in the sur-
rounding area. Restaurants located in communities 
that were growing rapidly grew faster than those in 
declining communities. For analysis purposes, Fine 
Harvest grouped their restaurants by area in which 
they operated and estimated the growth rate for each 
area. They then compared each restaurant to its peers 
as well as the performance of the entire system.
The performance evaluation 
of Restaurant 036
Ralph had worked on the Grandview downtown restau-
rant for five years. Before he took over, the profit mar-
gins of this restaurant had never exceeded 3.5% since 
its opening in October of 2000 and were often in the 
red. During his tenure, Ralph brought the profit mar-
gins up from 3.4% in 2007 to 8.8% in 2012. He had 
achieved most of this improvement in the first two 
years, during which profit margins increased at an 
average 30.5% annual growth rate. But according to 
Ralph, the restaurant could not sustain this rate indefi-
nitely, since all the main improvements had been 
already implemented. The profit margins had increased 
only 8.4% in the last year (from 8.12% in 2011 to 8.8% 
in 2012).
Ralph complained to Karen that the targets set by 
Joe Simmons assumed that the restaurant could 
increase its profit margins indefinitely and at an unre-
alistic rate. “Instead of rewarding us for turning around 
this restaurant, Joe has frustrated our efforts by impos-
ing ever increasing targets. I feel like a donkey follow-
ing a carrot on a stick.” Ralph also complained that 
Simmons did not understand how downtown restau-
rants operated. “Downtown restaurants are less profit-
able than restaurants operating in malls or 
supermarkets.”
Karen’s indecision
Karen was not sure what to make of Ralph’s complaint. 
On one hand she worried that Ralph would lose motiva-
tion or would even leave the company if she did not 
revise his performance evaluation. Ralph was one of 
the most loyal, capable, and hard-working employees 
that Karen had encountered, and she could not afford 
to lose a manager like him. On the other hand, Fine 
Harvest had a no-exceptions policy when it came to 
performance evaluations. Karen understood well that 
bending the rules for one employee would threaten the 
credibility of the company’s performance evaluation 
system, which had produced exceptional results since it 
was implemented in 2005.
Karen also worried that the frustration expressed by 
Ralph was a symptom of a wider-spread problem. She 
had already heard that some managers were unhappy 
with their bonuses because they asserted their targets 
were too challenging and she was concerned that some 
of the managers who were not complaining might have 
too easy targets. As the restaurant group grew larger 
and operated in increasingly diversified markets, Karen 
was suspicious that she was losing touch. She won-
dered whether the performance evaluation system, 
which had served the company well for almost two dec-
ades, needed to be modified. How could she know 
when the targets set were too easy or too challenging? 
What changes, if any, could she implement to improve 
the current system?

564
This case was prepared by Professors Xiaoling (Clara) Chen, Kenneth A. Merchant, Tatiana Sandino and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Copyright © by Clara Chen, Kenneth A. Merchant, Tatiana Sandino, and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Chief Financial
Oﬃcer
Vice President,
Marketing 
Senior Vice President,
Restaurant Development 
Business
Planning 
Accounting
& Finance 
Information
Systems  
President & CEO
Karen Williams 
Founder & Chairman of the Board
Robert Williams 
Purchasing 
Executive
Chef  
Director of Food
& Beverages 
Geographical
Area Managers
(34) 
Restaurant
Managers
(246) 
Senior Vice President,
Operations 
Vice President,
Human Resources 
Exhibit 1  Fine Harvest Restaurant Group organization chart

Fine Harvest Restaurant Group (B)
565
 In May 2013, Karen Williams, president and CEO of the 
Fine Harvest Restaurant Group, (hereafter “Fine Har-
vest”), had a discussion with Mike Henderson, a con-
sultant friend, about her concern that her company’s 
performance measurement and evaluation system may 
have become obsolete. Karen recounted to Mike her 
interaction with a trusted restaurant manager (Ralph 
Martin) who had recently claimed that the perfor-
mance evaluation system was unfair. The restaurant 
manager complained that all of the restaurants were 
expected to be similarly profi table, despite signifi cant 
diff erences in their operating environments, and that 
the system penalized profi t margin growth, since per-
formance improvements were followed by increases in 
future profit margin targets (a problem commonly 
known as ratcheting). Karen recognized that it was dif-
ficult to set accurate profit margin targets for the 
increasing number of restaurants operated by Fine 
Harvest (246 outlets as of 2013). 
 Mike agreed with Karen’s view that the target set-
ting processes were not keeping up with the evolution 
of the company. Mike suggested that Karen adopt a “rel-
ative performance evaluation” (RPE) procedure to set 
the right targets. Karen vaguely remembered from her 
executive MBA classes at the Olin Business School in 
Washington University that in an RPE system, manag-
ers’ performances were evaluated not in terms of the 
absolute levels of their organizations’ results, but rather 
in terms of their results relative to the results of peer 
organizations facing the same sets of opportunities and 
constraints. Karen thought this might be a good idea 
and decided to use Mike’s help in performing a thor-
ough analysis of the system before she took any actions. 
 Consulting engagement 
 Cluster analysis and performance 
standards 
 Mike and his consulting team claimed that by com-
paring each restaurant’s performance with its peers’ 
performances, rather than with budget targets that 
were primarily extrapolations from the past (with 
limited adjustments for expected population growth 
and market trends), Fine Harvest would be able to 
set performance goals that reflected the level of per-
formance that each restaurant should reasonably be 
able to reach given its location and operating condi-
tions. The consultants argued that the company’s 
tradition of setting similar profit and profit growth 
targets across the board was deeply flawed because 
the restaurants operated in areas with different 
profit potential and performance increases relative 
to past performance might only indicate low start-
ing points. 
 The consultants found that the Fine Harvest res-
taurants were actually quite diverse, despite the fact 
that they operated in areas where the average demo-
graphics of the population were similar to each other. 
Some operated in mature markets while others oper-
ated in developing markets. They also operated in 
different venues. Some of the restaurants were 
located in shopping malls, some on university cam-
puses, and some were drive-through restaurants. 
Some were old, established restaurants, and some 
were newly opened. 
 The consulting team set out to identify clusters of 
restaurants operating in approximately the same 
business environment. They proposed that restau-
rant performances be compared only with the per-
formances of other Fine Harvest restaurants 
operating in the same cluster. Karen already told 
Mike that area growth rate was just one of a few fac-
tors shaping the operating environments of the res-
taurants. To gain more insight into the best 
segmenting scheme for the 246 Fine Harvest restau-
rants, Mike asked Karen her intuition about the 
dimensions on which restaurant performance poten-
tials varied most significantly. 
 Drawing on her own extensive experience with the 
restaurants and some inputs from other members of 
 CASE STUDY 
 Fine Harvest Restaurant Group (B) 

566
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
the top executive committee, Karen came up with 
three criteria: the type of venue, the stage of develop-
ment of the market, and the dining style mix. The 
type of venue refers to the operating environment of 
the restaurant. For example, a restaurant could be 
operating in a shopping mall, a strip mall, or in a 
downtown area. It could also be a drive-through oper-
ation. The stage of development of the market cap-
tures the degree to which the market is mature. A 
restaurant could be located in a new, developing, or 
mature market. The dining style mix refers to the rela-
tive proportion of eat-in vs. take-out orders among all 
meal orders.
Venue type was chosen as a criterion because it was 
one of the primary drivers of customer behavior. For 
example, people ordered different things, and often 
had a different propensity to buy drinks in mall loca-
tions vs. at stand-alone street locations. The stage of 
development of the market was selected as an addi-
tional criterion since it had an impact on volume and 
growth. Karen also chose eat-in vs. take-out mix as a 
criterion, since this had an impact on labor productiv-
ity and drink sales.
Karen had thought of other criteria such as infra-
structure investment and square footage of restau-
rants, but these two criteria were largely subsumed by 
the “venue type” criterion. She also considered the 
average daily traffic generated by the mall/supermarket 
as a potential clustering criterion, but she decided to 
take account of traffic directly, due to the existence of 
fairly accurate “hard” data.
Karen was not very confident that her intuitive 
criteria could best characterize the market potentials 
for the different restaurants. The consulting team 
offered to conduct a cluster analysis based on the cri-
teria suggested by Karen and her management team. 
If their data analysis showed that the resulting clus-
ters differed significantly on key performance 
dimensions, then the criteria would receive some 
empirical support.
The consulting team identified five different types 
of venues: shopping mall, strip malldowntown, drive-
through, and nontraditional. The data revealed that 
the market took a relatively short period of time to 
develop for all restaurants except for drive-through 
restaurants. For this reason, the consultants decided 
to segment only drive-through restaurants based on 
their stage of market development. Dining style mix 
could be either primarily eat-in dining or a mix of 
eat-in and take-out dining. The combinations of 
restaurant characteristics along these dimensions 
yielded 10 clusters:
1.	 Drive-through, new
2.	 Drive-through, developing
3.	 Drive-through, mature
4.	 Shopping mall, eat-in dining
5.	 Shopping mall, mixed dining
6.	 Strip mall, eat-in dining
7.	 Strip mall, mixed dining
8.	 Downtown, eat-in dining
9.	 Downtown, mixed dining
10.	 Nontraditional (e.g. campuses, airports, casinos, 
stadiums)
The consultants decided to calculate the average 
performance outcomes of the restaurants in each clus-
ter and then compare the averages across the 10 clus-
ters. If the average performance on different metrics 
proved to be significantly different across clusters, 
Karen’s intuition would prove to be sound.
Performance metrics
The consultants’ next task was to develop metrics that 
could be used to measure the performance outcomes of 
Fine Harvest restaurants. After interviewing the top 
executives at Fine Harvest, the consultants identified 
“sales composition” and “labor productivity” as the 
main controllable components that could affect each 
restaurant’s profit margin according to the following 
formula:
Profit Margin 5 Revenue 2 Labor Cost
2 COGS (Cost of Goods Sold)
Most of the executives agreed that the employees 
had little control over the volume of meals they sold, 
given that customer demand was largely determined 
by the restaurant’s location. A lengthy analysis led the 
consultants to propose three metrics that they thought 
reasonably captured the key performance dimensions 
over which the restaurant managers and employees 
had control.
The first two metrics captured the sales composition 
component. These metrics were related to cross-selling 
and super-sizing, which represented two of the limited 
means available to the restaurants for increasing reve-
nue profitability, given that they could not control the 
menu items or pricing. The first metric, product 

Fine Harvest Restaurant Group (B)
567
profitability, estimated the average profits the restau-
rant earned from the sale of each meal (that is the price 
per meal minus the cost of goods sold per meal).1 The 
second metric, drink incidence, tracked the amount of 
cross-selling by calculating the average number of 
drinks sold with each meal. Because drinks generally 
brought in higher profits than the food items, the con-
sultants believed that all else equal, restaurants selling 
more drinks would have a higher profit margin.
The third metric, labor productivity, was an expense 
measure that Fine Harvest was currently using in 
accounting calculations. It was measured as the num-
ber of labor hours per meal. Having examined a large 
variety of costs Fine Harvest was tracking, the consult-
ants believed that labor costs represented the primary 
cost pool for the restaurants. As a result, restaurants 
that were better able to manage labor costs would bring 
in more profits. Indeed, the consultants’ analysis 
showed that labor costs accounted for about 50% of the 
variability in the profitability of each restaurant.
Initial results from the consultants’ analysis were 
summarized in Table 1. Using a statistical package, the 
consultants showed that the 10 clusters differed signifi-
cantly on at least one of the key performance dimen-
sions, which led them to conclude that Karen’s 
intuitions were valid. These results had important 
implications. As restaurants operating in different 
environments had substantially different performance 
potentials, restaurant managers should get differential 
performance targets.
Performance opportunities
Since the initial analysis confirmed Karen’s intuitions, 
the consultants suggested that the next step would be 
to set the current performance of the average 
restaurant in each cluster as the performance stand-
ard for all the restaurants in that cluster. Mike’s expe-
rience had taught him that average benchmarks were 
straightforward. In his words, “Employees find it dif-
ficult to argue with their superiors, when their superi-
ors request that they do not perform ‘below the 
average.’”
The consulting team also sought to develop metrics 
that would quantify the opportunities on a common 
measurement dimension – profits. They thought that 
the common metric would help restaurant managers 
bridge the gap between the financial performance 
focus at upper management levels and the operational 
focus at the restaurant level.
1	 The costs of goods sold per meal were calculated as the total costs of 
the prepared foods divided by the total number of meals. The total 
costs of the prepared foods were equal to:
• Beginning inventory, plus purchases, minus ending inventory 
(where inventory included food ingredients, utensils, and other 
kitchen supplies used to prepare and serve the food)
• Plus depreciation of kitchen equipment,
• Plus a charge for utilities and kitchen space.
	 Labor costs and drink costs (which included the costs of drinks and 
cups) were NOT included in this calculation. Likewise, drink prices 
were not included in the price per meal.
Table 1  Cluster averages on key performance dimensions
Cluster name
Product Profitability 
Metric (profit/meal)
Drink Incidence Metric 
(#drinks/meal)
Labor Productivity Metric 
(labor-hrs/meal)
Drive-through, new
4.193
0.5124
0.1758
Drive-through, developing
4.182
0.4823
0.1334
Drive-through, mature
4.194
0.4891
0.1252
Shopping mall, eat-in dining
4.267
0.7052
0.1121
Shopping mall, mixed dining
4.248
0.6414
0.1081
Strip mall, eat-in dining
4.269
0.6573
0.1181
Strip mall, mixed dining
4.223
0.6575
0.1027
Downtown, eat-in dining
4.229
0.6610
0.1267
Downtown, mixed dining
4.278
0.5554
0.1266
Nontraditional
4.108
0.6131
0.1299

568
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
A. Product profitability opportunity
The product profitability analyses estimated the aver-
age profits the restaurant earned from the sale of each 
meal. The consultants used the average meal profit for 
each cluster as the benchmark for that cluster. The dif-
ference between the actual average meal profit and the 
benchmark represented the product profitability 
opportunity. This opportunity was then multiplied by 
the number of meals sold for each restaurant to obtain 
the dollar amount of profit opportunities.
For example, Restaurant 001, opened in December 
2009, sold an average of 32,129 meals per quarter. Res-
taurant 001 belonged to the Drive-through/Developing 
cluster and had an average meal profit of $4.264 as 
compared to the average meal profit of $4.182 in that 
cluster. Thus, according to the consultants’ analysis, 
Restaurant 001 outperformed the other restaurants in 
the same cluster and therefore did not face a meal prof-
itability opportunity.
Restaurant 011, opened in April 2012, also belonged 
to the Drive-through/Developing cluster. In contrast 
with Restaurant 001, Restaurant 011 faced a product 
profitability opportunity since it had an average meal 
profit of $4.121, which was lower than the average 
meal profit of $4.182 in that cluster. Thus, Restaurant 
011 could be said to have a meal profit opportunity of 
$0.061. The number of meals per quarter for Restau-
rant 011 was 44,457. Therefore, meal profitability 
opportunity of $0.061 translated into a profit potential 
of about $2,700 (i.e. 44,457 × $0.061, rounded to the 
nearest hundredth). In other words, assuming that the 
number of meals sold per quarter by Restaurant 011 
stayed the same, if the restaurant could increase its 
average meal profit by $0.061, it could expect to earn 
an additional profit of about $2,700.
B. Drink incidence opportunity
As with the product profitability opportunity metric, the 
consultants set the average number of drinks per meal 
for each cluster as the benchmark for all the restaurants 
in the cluster. The difference between the actual average 
number of drinks per meal and the benchmark was the 
drink incidence opportunity. This opportunity was then 
multiplied by the profit per drink and the number of 
meals sold for each restaurant to obtain the dollar 
amount of drink-related profit opportunities.
Take Restaurant 001 as an example again. Restaurant 
001 sold an average of 0.5211 drinks per meal as com-
pared to the average 0.4823 drinks per meal for the 
Drivethrough/Developing cluster. Restaurant 001 again 
outperformed the other restaurants in the same cluster, 
and thus, did not face a drink incidence opportunity.
Restaurant 011, however, faced a big drink incidence 
opportunity. This restaurant sold an average of 0.3341 
drinks per meal, falling below the Drive-through/
Developing cluster average of was 0.4823 drinks per 
meal. Thus, Restaurant 011 had a drink incidence 
opportunity of 0.1482. Considering that the number of 
meals per quarter for Restaurant 011 was 44,457 and 
that the profit per drink was $1.10, the drink incidence 
opportunity of 0.1482 translates into a profit potential 
of about $7,200 (i.e. 0.1482 × 44,457 × $1.10, rounded 
to the nearest hundredth). In other words, assuming 
that the number of meals sold per quarter and the profit 
per drink for Restaurant 011 stayed the same, selling an 
additional 0.1482 drinks per meal, would bring in an 
additional profit of about $7,200.
C. Labor productivity opportunity
Labor productivity was measured as the number of 
labor hours per meal. The difference between the 
actual average number of labor hours per meal and the 
benchmark was the labor productivity opportunity. 
This opportunity was then multiplied by the cost per 
labor hour and the number of meals sold for each res-
taurant to obtain the dollar amount of labor-related 
profit opportunities.
For example, Restaurant 001 used an average of 
0.1320 labor hours for each meal sold, as compared to 
the benchmark of 0.1334 labor hours for the Drive-
through/Developing cluster. Thus, Restaurant 001 did 
not face a labor productivity opportunity. Instead, Res-
taurant 011 used 0.1349 labor hours for each meal sold, 
which exceeded the benchmark of 0.1334 for the cluster, 
resulting in a labor productivity opportunity of 0.0015 
per meal. The labor cost per hour was $7.765. Therefore, 
the labor productivity opportunity of 0.0015 translated 
into a profit potential of about $500 (i.e. 0.0015 × 
44,457 × $7.765, rounded to the nearest hundredth). In 
other words, assuming that the number of meals sold per 
quarter and labor cost per hour stayed the same, if Res-
taurant 011 could decrease its labor hours per meal by 
0.0015 hours (or about 5.4 seconds), it could expect to 
make an additional profit of about $500.
The total profit opportunity was the sum of the prod-
uct profitability opportunity, the drink incidence 
opportunity, and the labor productivity opportunity. 
For Restaurant 001, this was $0, but for Restaurant 

Fine Harvest Restaurant Group (B)
569
011, this was approximately $10,400 (i.e. $2,700 + 
$7,200 + $500). The dollar amount of profit opportu-
nity was divided by the total number of meals per quar-
ter to obtain the profit opportunity per meal. Thus, 
Restaurant 001 had a profit opportunity per meal of $0, 
while Restaurant 011 had a profit opportunity per meal 
of 23.4 cents (that is, $10,400/44,457 = $0.234/meal).
The cases of Restaurants 011 and 036
To illustrate how the proposed target-setting and per-
formance evaluation systems yielded results that con-
trasted with those of the current system, the consultants 
presented the cases of Restaurant 011 and Ralph 
Martin’s Restaurant 036 to the executive committee.
Based on the current budgeting and performance 
evaluation system, Restaurant 011 achieved a profit 
margin of 26.7%, exceeding the 23.5% target for the 
current year. Thus, restaurant 011 had a 114% achieve-
ment of the store margin target. Compared with the 
other restaurants, Restaurant 011 was considered a 
good performer under Fine Harvest’s current evaluation 
system; it was ranked 77th best of the 246 restaurants.
Ralph’s Restaurant (#036) was opened in October of 
2000 and served 33,932 meals per quarter. Its quar-
terly revenue was about $229,034. The restaurant 
reported a profit margin of 8.8% which was way below 
its 18.5% target, resulting in a 48% achievement of the 
store margin target. Under the current system, Ralph’s 
Restaurant performance was ranked on the lowest 
quartile; falling in the 189th position relative to the 
other 246 restaurants.
Under the consultants’ proposed budgeting and per-
formance evaluation system, however, the perfor-
mances of Restaurants 011 and 036 were ranked 
significantly differently. In fact, in terms of the dollar 
amount of profit opportunities, Restaurant 011 was 
ranked 229th, while Restaurant 036 was ranked 59th 
out of the 246 restaurants. In terms of the profit 
opportunities per meal, Restaurant 011 was ranked 
184th, while Restaurant 036 was ranked 60th.
Under the proposed segmentation, Restaurant 011 
belonged to the Drivethrough/Developing cluster and 
Restaurant 036 belonged to the Downtown Mixed Din-
ing cluster. As shown in Table 2, Restaurant 011’s per-
formance fell below the Drive-through/Developing 
cluster averages in every dimension, while Restaurant 
036 reported a number of drinks and labor hours per 
meal that were better than the “Downtown Mixed Din-
ing” cluster averages.
With a total profit opportunity of $10,400, Restau-
rant 011 had the second-largest opportunity for 
improvement among the 33 restaurants in the Drive-
through/Developing cluster. In contrast, Restaurant 
036 was the best performer among the 6 restaurants in 
its cluster, and had limited opportunities for improve-
ment. Increasing the restaurant’s profit per meal up to 
the cluster’s value would allow the restaurant to 
increase its profits by $879. Once the targets were set 
right, Restaurant 011 turned from a good performer to 
a poor performer, while Restaurant 036 turned from a 
poor performer to a good performer dramatically.
Decision time
The consultants’ analysis suggested that Fine Harvest had 
not been setting the right targets. The existing system did 
not seem to set targets according to the performance 
potential of restaurants operating in vastly different envi-
ronments. At the scale in which Fine Harvest was operat-
ing, Karen could no longer rely on her intuitions and 
personal observations to adjust the historically based tar-
gets to the realities of each of the restaurants.
As for the new performance measurement system, 
Mike argued that the valuable outcomes from this new 
system were twofold: first, it forced the area managers 
to consider how to use the measures. It offered an organ-
izing principle about what to show to the restaurant 
Table 2  Performance of Restaurants 011 and 036 and corresponding cluster averages
Profit per meal
Number of drinks 
per meal
Number of labor 
hours per meal
Restaurant 011 (Drive Thru, Developing)
$4.121
0.3341
0.1349
Drive Thru, Developing Cluster Averages
$4.182
0.4823
0.1334
Restaurant 036 (Downtown Mixed Dining)
$4.252
0.6200
0.1175
Downtown Mixed Dining Cluster Averages
$4.278
0.5554
0.1266

570
Chapter 12 • Using Financial Results Controls in the Presence of Uncontrollable Factors
managers and how to focus the restaurant managers’ 
attention on the key aspects that needed improvement. 
Second, the relative performance measures highlighted 
the opportunities for improvement, whereas the tradi-
tional performance measurement system did not focus 
managers’ attention on opportunities.
Mike and his consulting team claimed that bringing 
the weaker-performing restaurants in each cluster up to 
average would yield an additional quarterly profit of 
about $286,600 from the product profitability opportu-
nity, $415,000 from the drink incidence opportunity, 
and $387,100 from the labor productivity opportunity. 
Taken as a whole, Fine Harvest’s profit would increase by 
approximately $1,088,700 (roughly 8% of the company’s 
profit), just from bringing all the poor-performing res-
taurants up to the current average within each cluster.
It was time for Karen and her management team to 
make some important decisions. They had three 
options. First, they could change the history-based 
target-setting process to one based on RPE. Second, 
they could keep the current budgeting and perfor-
mance evaluation system and merely employ the data 
analysis as an attention-directing tool to help restau-
rant managers focus on the right aspects of the busi-
ness. Third, they could keep the current budgeting and 
performance evaluation system but find ways to 
improve the accuracy of the target setting. Which 
alternative would be the best for Karen and her man-
agement team? If they decided to adopt the system 
proposed by the consultants, how fast should they try 
to implement it and what problems would arise in the 
implementation process?
This case was prepared by Professors Xiaoling (Clara) Chen, Kenneth A. Merchant, Tatiana Sandino and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Copyright © by Clara Chen, Kenneth A. Merchant, Tatiana Sandino, and Wim A. Van der Stede.

 
571
 SECTION V 
 Corporate Governance, Important 
Control-Related Roles, and Ethics 

This page intentionally left blank

 
573
 CHAPTER 13 
 Corporate Governance 
and Boards of Directors 
 The term  corporate governance refers to the sets of mechanisms and processes that help ensure 
that companies are directed and managed to create value for their owners while concurrently 
fulfi lling responsibilities to other stakeholders (e.g. employees, suppliers, and society at large). 
Many institutional and organizational arrangements (including regulations, laws, and norms) 
and processes have corporate governance eff ects, and their eff ects vary considerably across 
countries. In Anglo-American economies, the primary governance mechanisms are provided by 
equity markets and the structures that support them or result from them. These include laws 
and regulations, boards of directors, external auditors, governance ratings, and takeover 
threats. In some Western European and Asian economies, relatively more governance infl uence 
is provided by concentrated ownership patterns, such as the  Keiretsu in Japan, the  Chaebols in 
Korea, institutional investors in India, and state ownership in China. Governance in German 
companies is heavily infl uenced by national banks, insurance companies, and labor unions. 
Scandinavian countries rely more on social norms and expectations. Islamic countries rely on 
 Sharia law. 1 
 Beyond the institutional setting, including legal and social infl uences, corporate governance 
practices in all countries are infl uenced by what is thought to be “best practice.” Some of the 
broad pronouncements about best practice are based on the recommendations of expert panels, 
such as the Cadbury Committee in the United Kingdom and the Treadway Commission in the 
United States. 2 Lists of best practices are published by the many corporate governance ratings 
organizations, such as ISS, the Corporate Library, and Governance Metrics International; by 
professional organizations such as the National Association of Corporate Directors in the United 
States; and in publications by many recognized or self-appointed experts. 
 The knowledge about best practices comes almost exclusively from developed economies 
in the West. Corporate governance in emerging markets is generally seen to be less well 
developed, and accompanying legal enforcement tends to be weak.  3   However, even in devel-
oped economies, knowledge of what constitutes best practice, either in general or in any spe-
cific setting, is incomplete. In the meantime, regulations are frequently changing. 
Corporations and boards of directors must do the best they can in environments that are 
often dynamic. 
 Corporate governance systems and management control systems (MCSs) are inextricably 
linked. A corporate governance focus is slightly broader than a MCSs focus. A MCSs focus takes 
the perspective of top management and asks what can be done to ensure the proper behaviors 
of employees in the organization. The corporate governance focus is on controlling the behav-
iors of top management (the so-called C-suite executives) and also, although less directly, those 
of all the fi rm’s other employees. The links between corporate governance and MCSs are 

Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
574
obvious. Changes in corporate governance mechanisms and practices will usually have direct 
and immediate effects on MCS practices and their effectiveness.
Primarily because of the major business scandals that were uncovered in the early 2000s – 
including Enron, WorldCom, Tyco, Parmalat, and Royal Ahold, just to name a few; the misman-
agement, misreporting, and fraud that contributed significantly to the 2008 financial crisis; 
and other more recent abuses, such as late trading, market timing, manipulations in trading of 
financial instruments and commodities, and option backdating – interest in corporate govern-
ance has skyrocketed.4 This chapter provides a brief introduction to this complex and broad 
subject.
The chapter begins by providing an overview of the legal and regulatory environment within 
which corporate governance practices must operate. The regulations are difficult to summarize 
because they vary considerably across legal jurisdictions; and even within a single jurisdiction, 
they are fragmented. For example, many of the regulations are specific to an industry (such as 
banks) or to a goal (such as accurate financial reporting). The US Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 is 
described in some detail in this chapter because it is the most significant piece of legislation 
affecting corporate governance practices to be passed in the United States since the Securities 
Act of 1934. Its importance also extends beyond US borders because it has inspired, and is simi-
lar to, other corporate governance reforms that have taken place around the world in recent 
years. The chapter then discusses the roles of boards of directors and, particularly, boards’ audit 
and compensation committees. Chapter 14 discusses two other important organizational roles 
with both corporate governance and MCS significance, those of controllers and auditors.
Laws and regulations
Corporations are legal entities. As such, they are subject to the laws and regulations of the gov-
ernment jurisdictions in which they operate and those of the stock markets on which their 
shares are traded. Corporate governance approaches and mechanisms vary widely across coun-
tries. Generally, however, the world is said to be divided into two corporate governance orienta-
tions: the Anglo-American system that focuses on the primacy of shareholders as the 
beneficiaries of fiduciary duties, and the Continental European/Japanese system that has a 
broader concern also for the rights of other stakeholders. But even within these two broad types 
of systems, considerable variation exists in the governance mechanisms used (e.g. board com-
position and structure) and the contexts in which the mechanisms must work (e.g. laws, extent 
of merger-and-acquisition activity).5
The legal system in the United States creates a fiduciary obligation for managers and direc-
tors to act in the best interest of shareholders. The directors, the elected representatives of the 
shareholders, are charged with overseeing the actions of management. Since the shareholders 
are viewed as the residual claimants of the cash flows generated, the primary goal is to maxi-
mize the value of the corporation. As we discussed in Chapter 10, value creation is a long-run, 
future-oriented concept, so it can easily be seen that treating all stakeholders well is also in the 
long-term interest of the shareholders. In the United States, corporations are incorporated in a 
given state and are bound by the laws and court decisions of that state. The Chancery Court in 
Delaware is particularly influential because many large corporations are incorporated in that 
state.
The US federal government began regulating financial markets and their participants (e.g. 
corporations, securities exchanges, brokers, dealers, and advisors) after the stock market crash 
of 1929. The US Congress passed the Securities Acts of 1933 and 1934 that, among other things, 
created the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the agency primarily responsible for 

The Sarbanes-Oxley Act
575
enforcement of US federal securities laws. These acts require that publicly traded corporations 
disclose certain types of information on a regular basis to the SEC, to the company’s sharehold-
ers, and to prospective investors. The disclosures are intended to promote efficiency and trans-
parency in the financial markets and to provide the additional benefit of discouraging bad 
behavior.
The Continental European/Japanese system of governance is aimed at ensuring that the cor-
poration is managed for the good of the enterprise, its multiple stakeholders, and society at 
large. The shareholders are only one of many affected stakeholder groups. One important effect 
of this legal difference is in the composition of the boards of directors. Large German corpora-
tions, for example, are required to have a two-tier board structure, one that provides strategic 
oversight and another that provides operational management oversight. In German corpora-
tions with more than 2,000 employees, the strategic oversight board must be comprised of 
equal numbers of employees and shareholders’ representatives.6 In Japan, banks are often rep-
resented on the boards of directors of companies with which they do business.
Regardless of their home country, all corporations are bound also by the rules and regula-
tions of the stock exchange on which their shares are traded. Large exchanges, such as the New 
Stock Exchange (NYSE) and NASDAQ in the United States, the London Stock Exchange (LSE) in 
the United Kingdom, or Deutsche Börse in Germany, maintain extensive sets of rules to regulate 
their listed companies, to prevent manipulative practices, and to promote fair principles 
of trade.
Overall, then, corporations are subject to a complex array of laws and regulations designed 
to direct and constrain their activities. Many parties independent of management and the board 
of directors monitor corporate governance practices. These include auditors, regulators, ana-
lysts, credit-rating agencies, self-appointed watchdogs, and whistle-blowers, among others.
An important example of legislation specifically aimed at strengthening corporate govern-
ance generally, as practiced in the United States, is the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to which we 
now turn.
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act
In July 2002, in response to some major corporate failures, most notably Enron and WorldCom, 
the US Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX). SOX imposed new requirements on cor-
porations listed in the United States and their auditors. The explicit goal of SOX was to improve 
the transparency, timeliness, and quality of financial reporting. But since improved controls 
over financial reporting also have management control implications, understanding the ele-
ments of SOX, and also those of other financial reporting regulations, is crucial for those inter-
ested in MCSs.
SOX has had effects beyond US borders. All companies registered with the SEC must comply 
with SOX whether their headquarters are based in the United States or abroad. In addition, 
some countries, such as Canada and Japan, have adopted regulations similar to SOX.7
Figure 13.1 provides a summary of some of the key provisions of SOX. Among other things:
● The external auditing industry, which was formerly self-regulated, became highly regulated 
by the federal government. SOX created the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
(PCAOB) and gave it the authority, with oversight from the SEC, to set auditing standards and 
to monitor auditors’ actions. (We discuss the role of auditors in more detail in Chapter 14.)
● The members of audit committees of companies’ boards of directors are required to be 
independent and financially literate.

Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
576
Figure 13.1  Key provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
Section(s) 
of the Act
Key Provision(s)
101
102
104
Creates the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) to oversee the audit of public 
companies.
• The PCAOB will register accounting firms that audit public companies.
• It has the authority to establish standards for auditing, quality control, ethics, and independence 
relating to the preparation of audit reports.
• It will conduct a continuing program of inspections to assess the degree of compliance of each 
registered public accounting firm with professional standards.
• It will hold disciplinary proceedings and impose sanctions against firms whose acts, practices, or 
omissions violate the Act, the Board’s rules, professional accounting standards, or the federal 
securities laws.
105
Increases penalties for accountants who fail to testify, produce documents, or cooperate with an 
investigation.
201
Prohibits auditors from providing certain non-audit services (including bookkeeping, financial information 
systems design and implementation, appraisal or valuation services, actuarial services, internal audit, 
management, human resources, investment advice, legal services) to the companies they audit.
202
Requires audit committee pre-approval of all services provided by audit firm.
203
Requires lead and second (review) audit partner rotation every five years.
204
Increases required communications between auditors and audit committee on critical accounting 
policies and practices, alternative accounting treatments, and other material written communications 
with management.
206
Requires a one year “cooling-off” period if audit firm employees who worked on the account are hired by 
the client into certain key financial oversight positions. Their former firm is prohibited from performing 
any audit services for the new employer for one year.
301
•	Gives audit committee sole authority for the appointment, compensation, and oversight of auditors and 
approval of any significant non-audit work.
•	Limits audit committee membership to independent directors.
•	Requires development of channels of communication for complaints from whistleblowers and others to 
the audit committee.
302
Requires management (CEO and CFO) certifications that:
•	They reviewed financial reports (quarterly and annual).
•	Financial statements do not contain any untrue statements or omission of material facts and that they 
fairly present the financial condition and results of the operations of the company as of, and for, the 
periods presented in the report.
•	They are responsible for the company’s internal controls, have designed the controls to that material 
information is made known to them, have evaluated the effectiveness of the internal controls, and have 
presented their conclusions about the effectiveness of the internal controls in the report. They 
evaluated the disclosure controls and procedures as of period end and disclosed any material changes 
in internal control during the period.
•	They disclosed to auditors/audit committee if control deficiencies and/or fraud exist.
304
Includes a “claw-back” provision requiring CEOs and CFOs to forfeit certain bonuses received and 
profits realized on the sale of securities following a financial report that is later restated due to material 
non-compliance with securities laws as a result of misconduct.
402
New company loans to directors or executive officers are prohibited.
404
•	Requires that annual report include management’s assessment of the effectiveness of the company’s 
internal control over financial reporting.
•	Auditors must attest to and report on management’s internal control assessment.

The Sarbanes-Oxley Act
577
● Senior company managers, usually the CEO and CFO, are required to certify that they had 
reviewed their company’s quarterly and annual financial statements; that the financial state-
ments are fairly presented, with no untrue statements or omissions of material facts; that 
they acknowledge responsibility for disclosure controls and procedures and internal con-
trols over financial reporting; and that they have evaluated those controls and procedures 
and disclosed any material changes or deficiencies to the auditors and audit committee. Pen-
alties for fraud and for obstructing an investigation were broadened and made more severe.
One of the most significant provisions, and clearly the most expensive one, was contained in 
the internal control-related section of the act, Section 404. Even prior to SOX, good internal 
controls were said to be good business practice. Not only did good controls help ensure fair and 
accurate financial reporting, but they helped ensure that managers would have good informa-
tion with which to make their business decisions, and they helped reduce the incidence of fraud 
and loss of assets. Sarbanes-Oxley made good internal controls a legal requirement, at least for 
companies publicly traded in the United States.
Section 404 mandated a formal evaluation of the effectiveness of a company’s internal controls 
by both management and the company’s external auditor and formal written opinions about the 
effectiveness of those controls. In doing this evaluation, managers and auditors are required to 
examine a broad range of internal controls over financial reporting, including policies and proce-
dures, audit committee effectiveness, integrity and ethical behavior programs (which we discuss 
in Chapter 15), whistle-blower programs, and tone at the top (see also Chapter 3).
The existence of a single material weakness – a deficiency in internal control so major that it 
could result in a material misstatement of a company’s actual financial situation (see definitions 
in Figure 13.2) – requires managers and auditors to conclude that the company’s internal con-
trols are not effective. Companies have no obligation to disclose the existence of any deficiency 
less severe than a material weakness, although they and their auditors are required to evaluate 
them to determine whether they could result in a material weakness.
Figure 13.3 shows the 2015 conclusion by Microsoft Corporation’s CEO and CFO about the 
effectiveness of their company’s internal control system.
Section(s) 
of the Act
Key Provision(s)
406
Requires annual disclosure as to whether the company has adopted a code of ethics for its CEO and 
senior financial officers (e.g., CFO, controller). If it has a code, it must make it publicly available. If it does 
not have a code, it must explain why it does not.
407
Requires company to disclose whether it has a financial expert on the audit committee and if not, to 
explain the reasons why it does not.
409
Requires “rapid and current” disclosure of material changes in financial condition or operations.
802
806
807
902
906
1102
1007
Increases penalties. Imposes fines of up to $5 million and/or up to 25 years imprisonment for such 
actions as:
•	The knowing alteration, destruction, or concealment of documents with the intent to impeding an 
official investigation;
•	For retaliation against whistleblowers;
•	For knowingly or willfully filing a false certification;
•	For willful violations of various white collar criminal laws.
Source: The full text of the act can be accessed on the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board website: pcaobus.org/About/History/Documents/
PDFs/Sarbanes_Oxley_Act_of_2002.pdf.
Figure 13.1  (Continued)

Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
578
Figure 13.2  Definitions of control deficiencies
A control deficiency exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow management or 
employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent or detect mis-
statements on a timely basis. A deficiency in design exists when (a) a control necessary to meet the 
control objective is missing or (b) an existing control is not properly designed so that, even if the 
control operates as designed, the control objective is not always met. A deficiency in operation 
exists when a properly designed control does not operate as designed, or when the person perform-
ing the control does not possess the necessary authority or qualifications to perform the control 
effectively.
A significant deficiency is a control deficiency, or combination of control deficiencies, that 
adversely affects the company’s ability to initiate, authorize, record, process, or report external 
financial data reliably in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles such that there is 
more than a remote likelihood that a misstatement of the company’s annual or interim financial state-
ments that is more than inconsequential will not be prevented or detected.
A material weakness is a significant deficiency, or combination of significant deficiencies, that 
results in more than a remote likelihood that a material misstatement of the annual or interim finan-
cial statements will not be prevented or detected.
Source: PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 2, An Audit of Internal Control over Financial Reporting Performed in Conjunction with an 
Audit of Financial Statements, online at pcaobus.org/Standards/Auditing/Pages/Auditing_Standard_2.aspx.
Figure 13.3  CEO and CFO certification of effectiveness of the internal control system of 
Microsoft Corporation
Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including the Chief Executive 
Officer and Chief Financial Officer, we have evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls 
and procedures as required by Exchange Act Rule 13a-15(b) as of the end of the period covered by 
this report. Based on that evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have 
concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are effective.
REPORT OF MANAGEMENT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over 
financial reporting for the company. Internal control over financial reporting is a process to provide 
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of our financial reporting for external purposes in 
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Internal 
control over financial reporting includes maintaining records that in reasonable detail accurately and 
fairly reflect our transactions; providing reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as nec-
essary for preparation of our financial statements; providing reasonable assurance that receipts and 
expenditures of company assets are made in accordance with management authorization; and pro-
viding reasonable assurance that unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of company assets 
that could have a material effect on our financial statements would be prevented or detected on a 
timely basis. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting is not 
intended to provide absolute assurance that a misstatement of our financial statements would be 
prevented or detected.
Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over finan-
cial reporting based on the framework in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued 
by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Based on this 
evaluation, management concluded that the company’s internal control over financial reporting 
was effective as of June 30, 2015. There were no changes in our internal control over financial 
reporting during the quarter ended June 30, 2015 that have materially affected, or are reasona-
bly likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. Deloitte & Touche LLP 
has audited our internal control over financial reporting as of June 30, 2015; their report is 
included in [Figure 13.4].
Source: 10-K Report, Microsoft Corporation, 2015, Item 9A: Controls and Procedures.

The Sarbanes-Oxley Act
579
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Microsoft Corporation
Redmond, Washington
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of Microsoft Corporation and subsidiaries (the “Company”) 
as of June 30, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Com-
mittee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. The Company’s management is responsible for main-
taining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control 
over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Report of Management on Internal Control over Financial Report-
ing. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our 
audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
(United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit included 
obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, 
testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and per-
forming such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a 
reasonable basis for our opinion.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the com-
pany’s principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by the 
company’s board of directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliabil-
ity of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and proce-
dures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transac-
tions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as 
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, 
and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of manage-
ment and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of 
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial 
statements.
Because of the inherent limitations of internal control over financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or 
improper management override of controls, material misstatements due to error or fraud may not be prevented or 
detected on a timely basis. Also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial 
reporting to future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in con-
ditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as 
of June 30, 2015, based on the criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Com-
mittee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United 
States), the consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended June 30, 2015, of the Company and our 
report dated July 31, 2015, expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements.
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
Seattle, Washington
July 31, 2015
Figure 13.4  External auditor’s opinion on Microsoft Corporation’s financial statements and internal control 
over financial reporting, for fiscal year 2015 (ended June 30, 2015)
Source: 10-K Report, Microsoft Corporation, 2015.
Figure 13.4 shows the 2015 opinion of Deloitte regarding Microsoft’s financial statements and 
internal control over financial reporting. The two internal control opinions are consistent: both 
express the opinion that Microsoft’s internal controls were effective, meaning that no material 
weaknesses were found and no combination of the significant weaknesses that might have been 
found could have caused a material misstatement of the company’s financial statements.

Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
580
The documentation and testing of internal controls as required by Section 404 is expensive. 
Estimates of the total cost of compliance in the first year were as high as $35 billion.8 General 
Electric alone spent $30 million in the first year of 404 compliance.9 But the costs of compliance 
declined significantly in year two – an average reduction of 44% for larger companies (those 
with a market capitalization over $700 million).10 Those declines resulted because most of the 
documentation of existing controls was completed in year one, and all involved parties became 
more familiar with the new requirements. In addition, the PCAOB and SEC provided additional 
guidance both to auditors and companies regarding best ways to comply with Section 404.
While the costs of compliance are significant, SOX affected companies’ MCSs in positive 
ways. It improved companies’ internal control structures, audit committees’ confidence in the 
company’s internal controls, and companies’ ability to prevent and detect fraud. However, even 
following all the tenets of SOX will not guarantee an infallible control system. In fact, most 
experts have concluded that the extreme examples of fraud and corporate failure that moti-
vated legislators to pass SOX would have occurred even if SOX had existed at the time. For 
example:
The existence of SOX would not have, and does not now, prevent fraudulent acts from 
being perpetrated, does not prevent pervasive internal and external collusion to cover up 
the fraud, and does not prevent decisions being made at the highest levels inside a com-
pany in contravention of stated corporate practices and policies.11
But while it is not perfect, SOX has had significant effects on the activities and responsibili-
ties of all those in financial reporting- and control-related roles. In the remainder of this chap-
ter, we discuss one of the most important roles, that of members of boards of directors and, in 
particular, the boards’ audit and compensation committees.
Boards of directors
In publicly traded companies, shareholders typically diversify their risks and own a portfolio of 
shares in numerous firms. Individually, they rarely have an incentive large enough to devote the 
time and resources necessary to ensure that management is acting in the best interest of the 
shareholders. The solution is for shareholders collectively to delegate their authority to monitor 
management’s actions to a board of directors.
Boards of directors (and also corporate officers) have a fiduciary duty to foster the long-term 
success of the corporation for the benefit of shareholders and also, particularly when insolvency 
is threatened, debt holders. In the United States, this basic fiduciary duty is deemed to have 
multiple elements:
1.	 Duty of care – duty to make/delegate decisions in an informed way;
2.	 Duty of loyalty – duty to advance corporate over personal interests;
3.	 Duty of good faith – duty to be faithful and devoted to the interests of the corporation and its 
shareholders;
4.	 Duty not to “waste” – duty to avoid deliberate destruction of shareholder value.
All of these duties are defined by, and enforced through, the US legal system. In court cases 
involving all but the duty of loyalty, directors are somewhat protected by the business judgment 
rule. This rule is a legal presumption that a corporate fiduciary has endeavored in good faith to 
exercise care in the corporation’s interest. It places the burden on the party complaining of 
breached duty to prove gross negligence.

Boards of directors
581
To carry out their responsibilities, boards must ensure that they are independent and 
accountable to shareholders, and they must exert their authority for the continuity of executive 
leadership with proper vision and values. Boards are given ultimate control over management. 
They are singularly responsible for the selection and evaluation of the corporation’s chief execu-
tive officer (CEO), and they also must ensure the quality of senior management (the corporate 
executives). Boards also should review and approve the corporation’s long-term strategy and 
important management decisions, such as the design of compensation plans that motivate man-
agement to achieve and sustain superior long-term performance.
Boards of directors have two main control responsibilities. First, they safeguard the 
equity investors’ interests, particularly by ensuring that management seeks to maximize the 
value of the shareholders’ stakes in the corporation. Second, they protect the interests of 
other stakeholders (such as employees, suppliers, customers, competitors, and society at 
large) by ensuring that the employees in the corporation act in a legally and socially respon-
sible manner. Among other things, they help ensure fair financial reporting, fair compensa-
tion, fair competition, protection of the environment, and proper conduct of business by the 
corporation overall.
Many characteristics of boards and their members can affect their effectiveness. It is widely 
believed, and hence legally required, that a majority of board members should be independent 
of management. Interlocking directorates, situations where board members serve on each oth-
er’s boards, is one particular problem many have lamented. Charles Elson, director of the Center 
for Corporate Governance at the University of Delaware, commented as follows on the “clubby 
nature” of boards, where companies’ boards are populated with business partners and individu-
als with direct financial ties:
Directors shouldn’t be consultants. Their only financial ties to the companies they oversee 
should be through stock ownership, and they should own enough company stock that if 
they lost it, it would really hurt.12
Lack of independence from management is one red flag for the lucrative CEO pay packages that 
many have criticized.13 However, there is likely an inflection point because “full” independence 
also may not be desired for “optimal” board functioning, for two reasons among others:
First, full independence deprives the board of spontaneous and regular access to the firm-
specific information of other senior executives. Second, full independence eliminates the 
first-hand exposure of future CEOs to board-level discussions of strategy, which steepens 
the learning curve for eventually promoted candidates.14
Board members should also be competent and must be able to devote the needed time to the 
role. One consultant described an extreme situation:
[The] worst board [I’ve ever seen] was five people strong, and two of them had to be 
brought in on stretchers. One was 87 [years old] and one was 83. They just laid them on a 
table in the back of the room, and that’s how they got their quorum.15
In another example, the alleged state of the board was described as follows:
[This] entrenched, incompetent Board has become a refuge for failed CEOs and we believe 
these Directors will say and do anything as they attempt to cling to their thrones. The 
Directors are focused on their own interests at the expense of shareholders, cannot be 
entrusted to lead [the company] and do not deserve a single vote after having destroyed 
$9 billion of value.16
But some board members are ineffective because they are serving on too many boards for the 
time they have available. Sometimes, boards also suffer from significant rotation of board 

Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
582
members, leaving a board with a relative lack of experience and/or tacit knowledge. This was 
alleged to be the case at Tesco, the giant UK supermarket group:
According to two people familiar with the company’s leadership, part of Tesco’s current 
problem is the structure of the board and executive committee. Many top executives and 
board members have left in the past three years and have been replaced by people lacking 
the experience to stand up to [the CEO], they said.17
That said, length of service inevitably has an inflection point somewhere between serving “too 
long” and “not long enough.” As an example of where that inflection point may lie, the UK regu-
lator has put it at nine years, “since at that point the U.K. code says non-executive board mem-
bers can no longer be assumed to be independent of the company.”18
The many examples of board failures illustrate that firms should be concerned about the 
functioning of their boards.19 There is a burgeoning literature on the functioning of corporate 
governance systems and boards of directors. However, corporate governance systems are com-
plex, and how the various governance mechanisms interact with one another and with charac-
teristics of the situations in which they operate to produce good (or bad) outcomes is not well 
understood. Many research findings conflict. These conflicts reflect the incomplete state of 
knowledge in this complex area.20
In the meantime, board members have to do the best job they can.21 But in deciding how to 
structure their activities and how to act, boards of directors should follow some basic principles. 
First, they must comply with the relevant laws and regulations. To ensure this compliance, they 
often have to rely heavily on their company’s lawyers both to inform them of the relevant laws 
and to educate them about the implications of those laws. If they are accused of wrongdoing, 
they will be judged in light of the extent they upheld their duties of care, loyalty, and so on.
Second, board members should try to follow what they believe to be best practice. Consult-
ants often play an important role in spreading and advocating such (various) practices. That 
said, board members should keep in mind that so-called experts often provide conflicting 
advice. Equally, evidence in many basic board-related areas, including the desirability of split-
ting the chairman and CEO roles,22 the optimum amount of equity involvement by board mem-
bers, the right set and mix of board member skills, and the right board size, is still equivocal.
For possible guidance, board members could also examine the criteria used in any of the 
many corporate governance ratings. Among the most commonly cited ratings are those pub-
lished by Institutional Shareholder Services (ISS), Standard & Poor’s (S&P), and GMI (formerly 
Governance Metrics International). A company’s ISS Corporate Governance QuickScore is 
based on an analysis of nearly 200 factors in four key governance “pillar” areas: board struc-
ture, compensation/remuneration, shareholder rights, and audit. The S&P Corporate Govern-
ance Score is based on scoring committee consideration of over 100 indicators of corporate 
governance arrangements. GMI’s ESG (environmental, social, governance) score is based on an 
analysis of 150 key metrics. The relative weights of these key metrics vary depending on mar-
ket, regional, ownership and sector differences. The details of all of the rating methods are pro-
prietary, but it is possible to discern or infer what these organizations consider important for 
good corporate governance.
However, there is surprisingly little correlation among the indexes the rating firms compile, 
and their validity has been called into question.23 Some prominent examples suggest that the 
relationship between the ratings and performance is tenuous at best. For example, just before 
major governance failures were uncovered at Fannie Mae, S&P gave Fannie Mae a 9 out of 10 
rating and a “gold star” for its corporate governance practices, and just before major fraud prob-
lems surfaced at HealthSouth, S&P indicated that the company outperformed 92.3% of its 
industry peers. These ratings, and the guidelines on which they are based, are not totally relia-
ble, although that does not imply that good corporate governance is not important.24

Audit committees
583
The final guide to director behavior must involve judgment. Oftentimes, there is no specific 
law that must be followed, and the best-practice advice is conflicting, vague, or unreliable. Still, 
directors must endeavor to make the right choices. Many of these examples involve situations 
where directors are not quite comfortable with something in the company, but they also do not 
want to overstep their bounds to interfere in the day-to-day management of the company. 
Where should the line be drawn between the management and oversight roles in the organiza-
tion? For example, if the board asks the CEO for a management succession plan, but some board 
members are not comfortable with some of the choices of successors, how forcefully should they 
voice their objections?
Boards put in place a number of structures and processes that enable them to carry out their 
responsibilities effectively. Some issues are delegated to board committees both because many 
issues are too complex and too time-consuming for the entire board to address, and because 
delegation allows directors to make maximum use of their expertise. The board can delegate 
certain decisions to the relevant committee, or it can ask the committee to study the issue and 
develop recommendations to bring to the full board.
Most corporations have at least the following standing committees: audit committee, com-
pensation committee, and nominating and governance committee. Some also have other com-
mittees that fit the needs of the company’s industry or operating situation. These might include 
some combination of finance, investment, technology, public policy, environment, innovation, 
corporate social responsibility, digital/social media, and/or risk management committees.
The following sections discuss two virtually universal board committees with significant 
management control-related responsibilities: audit committees and compensation committees.
Audit committees
Audit committees provide independent oversight over companies’ financial reporting pro-
cesses, internal controls, and independent auditors. They enhance a board’s ability to focus 
intensively and relatively inexpensively (without involving the full board) on the corporation’s 
financial reporting-related functions, and also sometimes risk management activities. 
Although detailed regulations vary across countries, in most developed capital markets, audit 
committees are required to be comprised of outside (non-executive) or independent directors 
with a further requirement that they be financially literate.25
An audit committee’s charter typically specifies the scope of the committee’s responsibilities 
and how it carries out those responsibilities, including structure, processes, and membership 
requirements. Audit committees establish procedures for handling complaints regarding 
accounting, auditing, and internal control matters, including procedures for the confidential, 
anonymous submission by employees of concerns regarding questionable accounting practices. 
Audit committees also are typically responsible for the appointment, compensation, retention, 
and oversight of the work of the external auditors. SOX mandates these responsibilities in pub-
licly traded corporations. The external auditors, in turn, discuss and address the quality, not 
just the acceptability, of the company’s accounting principles with the audit committee.
Audit committees are intended to be informed, vigilant, and effective overseers of their com-
panies’ financial reporting processes and internal control systems. As such, audit committees 
generally assume the board’s responsibilities relating to the organization’s financial reporting, 
corporate governance, and control practices. In the financial reporting area, audit committees 
provide assurance that the company’s financial disclosures are reasonable and accurate. In the 
corporate governance area, audit committees provide assurance that the corporation is in com-
pliance with pertinent laws and regulations, is conducting its affairs ethically, and is maintaining 

Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
584
effective controls against fraud and employee conflicts of interest. In the corporate control area, 
audit committees monitor the company’s management and internal control systems that are 
designed both to safeguard assets and to employ them to achieve established goals and objec-
tives. In fulfilling these responsibilities, audit committees hire the company’s external auditors 
and monitor their performance. They maintain lines of communication between the board and 
the company’s external auditors, internal auditors, financial management, and inside and out-
side counsel. Since they have limited resources directly available to them, audit committees 
must rely on the resources and support of other groups within the organization, particularly the 
internal auditing function.26
Independence from management, in both fact and appearance, is one essential – and, in many 
countries, legally required – characteristic of an audit committee. Before SOX was passed in the 
United States, company CEOs were known to select the audit committee members, determine 
their rotation policies, define their duties, routinely attend their meetings, and review and 
approve reports given to the audit committee. Such direct influence by the CEO or other key 
executives, such as the CFO, poses an obvious threat to the independence of the audit commit-
tee in their oversight role. Indeed, many corporate fraud cases involve the CEO or CFO, or both. 
When independence is lacking, employees and auditors will be reluctant to bring serious prob-
lems to the committee’s attention, and the committee’s effectiveness will be severely under-
mined. But other factors, such as directors’ financial expertise and tenure, also affect the 
strength of the safeguards that audit committees provide.
The foci of audit committee oversight have changed significantly over the years. SOX 
placed a premium on documentation and testing of internal controls. The 2008 financial cri-
sis caused many audit committees to broaden their charters to include a focus on oversight of 
management’s risk management practices, broadly defined. The focus is often no longer just 
on financial statement risk. Many audit committees now also provide oversight of their com-
panies’ scenario planning, enterprise risk management, and investment risk decisions. Cyber-
security, in particular, is a growing concern for audit committees, risk committees, and entire 
boards.27
While more research on audit committee effectiveness is needed, it is clear that audit com-
mittees and their processes must be adapted to the requirements and resources of their com-
pany and board. That said, some common practices suggest that audit committees ascertain to 
do the following:
● Gain support and direction from the entire board of directors.
● Use agendas and follow formal work programs; keep minutes of meetings and distribute 
them to the full board of directors; schedule meetings in advance so participants have time 
to prepare.
● Have at least three members, but not too many more so that all members can be active par-
ticipants.
● Ensure that the committee is comprised of the “right” individuals. Define the members’ 
responsibilities and expect members who no longer contribute appropriately to step down. 
Ensure that all members are independent of management, financially literate, and engaged.
● Meet at least four times per year, including a pre-audit meeting and a post-audit meeting. 
(Some experts consider the frequency and duration of meetings to be highly reliable indica-
tors of audit committee effectiveness.)
● Send a clear instruction to the independent auditor that the board of directors, as the share-
holder’s representative, is the auditor’s client and that management is not. (This is a legal 
requirement of Sarbanes-Oxley.)
● Review all financial information; review interim, as well as annual, financial reports.

Compensation committees
585
● Discuss with the independent auditor their qualitative judgments about the appropriateness, 
not just the acceptability, of the organization’s accounting principles and financial disclosure 
practices.
● Go beyond a “check-the-box” orientation to compliance with legal requirements. Deal with 
the real issues of developing effective oversight and risk management practices.
● Be proactive. Participate in setting policies. Monitor the corporate code of conduct and com-
pliance with it. Ensure that the internal auditing involvement in the entire financial report-
ing process is appropriate and properly coordinated with the independent auditor.
● Secure access to resources as needed, such as for responding to crises or conducting special 
investigations.
Compensation committees
Most publicly traded companies delegate the important issues related to compensation to a 
board compensation committee (sometimes called a remuneration committee) comprised solely 
of independent directors. New York Stock Exchange rules, for example, require the formation of 
such a compensation committee.
Compensation committees deal with issues related to the compensation and benefits pro-
vided to employees, particularly top executives. In some companies, the compensation commit-
tee also provides oversight regarding the design and operation of retirement plans, although in 
other companies this function is delegated to an investment committee of the board.
Compensation committees have fiduciary responsibilities for ensuring that the company’s 
executive compensation programs are fair and appropriate to attract, retain, and motivate 
managers and reasonable in view of company economics and the relevant practices of compara-
ble companies.
Compensation committees typically rely on the company’s human resource function for staff 
support. In addition, because the design of compensation plans can raise many complex issues, 
many of which we discussed in Chapter 9 – such as relating to performance measures, types of 
compensation (e.g. cash and stock options) and compensation structures (e.g. performance 
thresholds and vesting provisions), external and internal compensation equity, and legal and 
tax considerations – compensation committees often employ outside consultants to provide 
data or expertise that the company does not have internally. Consultants often conduct indus-
try compensation benchmarking studies and provide advice regarding the design of compensa-
tion plans. Compensation committees should retain full responsibility for overseeing the work 
of any compensation consultants they hire.28
Much criticism is currently being directed at compensation committees.29 Some of this criti-
cism stems from the large compensation, severance, and/or retirement packages that have been 
offered to top executives. Examples of companies that have been scorned for “excessive pay” 
have been in the business press almost daily, especially since the financial crisis of 2008, when 
public outcry turned to the pay packages of “greedy bankers.” Further criticism is leveled at 
boards who seem either unwilling or powerless to rein in the pay of their executives. A 2015 sur-
vey of directors by the accounting firm BDO suggested that US company boards still had trouble 
controlling the size of CEO compensation.30 Other critics are more concerned with the weak 
links in many companies between rewards and performance. Criticism is likely when the execu-
tives are well compensated not only when their performance is seen as poor in an absolute sense, 
but also when economic conditions are good even though their companies’ performance lagged 
behind those of their closest competitors.31 Beginning in 2018, public companies are required to 

Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
586
report the ratio of CEO companies to median employee pay, although the BDO survey showed 
that 74% of the directors responding thought that this ratio is neither meaningful nor helpful. 
Senior management compensation and the functioning of compensation committees will 
undoubtedly continue to be a focus for additional regulation in the corporate governance arena.
Conclusion
This chapter has provided a brief introduction to the complex topic of corporate governance. It 
discussed the laws and regulations that govern its practice and the important control-related 
roles played by members of boards of directors and, particularly, its audit and compensation 
committees. Boards of directors are important parts of companies’ corporate governance sys-
tems and, hence, MCSs. Laws and regulations require some practices deemed desirable, such as 
the independence of board members who serve on audit and compensation committees. But 
laws and regulations cannot define everything. In the best-run corporations, what is not defined 
by laws and regulations is shaped by a desire to emulate what is commonly called “best prac-
tice.” The problem is that there is far from universal agreement as to what constitutes best prac-
tice. Multiple governance rating agencies define sets of practices that they deem to be best 
practice, but their suggested best practices do not always agree. Many books and articles pro-
vide advice about aspects of corporate governance, but those ideas, too, do not always converge.
Although boards are important, there are limits to what they can do. It is common to blame 
boards of directors when companies suffer improprieties and ethical lapses. But independent 
directors serve their organizations only part time. They provide only oversight, although they 
should do so effectively. Good corporate governance must depend on managers’ building a cul-
ture of integrity that involves an open and candid relationship with their engaged and support-
ive-but-challenging boards.
Also, one must remember that boards of directors and their committees consist of groups of 
individuals. Each individual has unique perceptions and understandings of roles and responsi-
bilities. Thus, the functioning of these bodies depends heavily on group dynamics, which 
includes concerns such as how the agendas are set, how issues are presented, how people get 
along, and whether members tolerate confrontation and/or compromise.32 These are complex 
issues, and much is yet to be learned about what makes boards and board committees effective.
Notes
	 1	 See, for example, R. I. Tricker, Corporate Governance: 
Principles, Policies and Practices (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2015); Global Trends in Corporate Governance 
(New Delhi: Deloitte, 2015), online at bit.ly/1X3ddWH; 
C. de Kluyver, A Primer on Corporate Governance (New 
York: Business Expert Press, 2013); W. Judge, “Corporate 
Governance Mechanisms Throughout the World,” Corpo-
rate Governance: An International Review, 18, no. 3 (2010), 
pp. 159–60; K. Balachandran, A. Dossi, and W. Van der 
Stede, “Corporate Governance Research in ‘The Rest of 
the World,’” Journal of Accounting Auditing & Finance, 25, 
no. 3 (Fall 2010), pp. 523–9.
	 2	 See, for example, The U.K. Corporate Governance Code 
(Financial Reporting Council, September 2014), online at 
frc.org.uk/Our-Work/Publications/Corporate-Governance/ 
UK-Corporate-Governance-Code-2014.pdf; Committee of 
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(COSO), online at www.coso.org, and, specifically, The 
COSO Financial Controls Framework (2004 version) and the 
original 1992 COSO Report: Internal Control – An Integrated 
Framework.
	 3	 J. J. Chen. A Primer on Corporate Governance: China (New 
York: Business Expert Press, 2015).
	 4	 See, for example, N. Rajagoplan and Y. Zhang. “Recurring 
Failures in Corporate Governance: A Global Disease?,” Busi-
ness Horizons, 52 (2009), pp. 545–52; R. B. Lamm, “The 
Shape of Things to Come in Corporate Governance,” The 
Securities Edge (August 27, 2014), online at goo.gl/v98BFG; 
“String of Scandals Puts Japanese Investors on Edge,” The 
Financial Times (May 29, 2016), online at on.ft.com/1U4zG0t.

587
Notes
	 5	 See, for example, J. Coffee, Gatekeepers: The Professions 
and Corporate Governance (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2006), particularly Chapter 4.
	 6	 De Kluyver, Primer on Corporate Governance, op. cit.
	 7	 See, for example, P. Ali and G. Gregoriou, International 
Corporate Governance after Sarbanes-Oxley (New York: 
Wiley Finance, 2006).
	 8	 “How Much Is It Really Costing to Comply with Sarbanes-
Oxley?” The Wall Street Journal (June 16, 2005), online at 
on.wsj.com/1sjGwrq.
	 9	 L. Rittenberg and P. Miller, Sarbanes-Oxley 404 Work: 
Looking at the Benefits (Altamonte Springs, FL: The Insti-
tute of Internal Auditors Research Foundation, January 
2005).
	10	 CRA International, Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404 Costs and 
Implementation Issues: Spring 2006 Survey Update (Wash-
ington, DC: CRA International, April 17, 2006).
	11	 S. Ernst, “CPA Corner: Sarbanes-Oxley and Corporation 
Fraud – Does One Size Fit All?” AICPA CPA Insider (May 8, 
2006).
	12	 “Safeguards Failed to Detect Warnings in Enron Debacle,” 
The Los Angeles Times (December 14, 2001), online at arti-
cles.latimes.com/2001/dec/14/news/mn-14906.
	13	 For this alleged problem with corporate governance and 
boards as well as many other issues, see, for example, L. 
Bebchuk and J. Fried, “Pay without Performance: Over-
view of the Issues,” Journal of Corporation Law, 30 (2005), 
pp. 647–73; L. Bebchuk and J. Fried, Pay without Perfor-
mance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004).
	14	 O. Faleye, “The Cost of a (Nearly) Fully Independent 
Board,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 31 (June 2015), 
pp. 49–62.
	15	 “Now Hear This,” Fortune (May 2, 1994), p. 16.
	16	 “Casablanca Capital Blasts Cliffs Board for Fabrications, 
Material Omissions and Mischaracterization of Facts,” 
Business Wire (June 23, 2014), online at goo.gl/doIHtG.
	17	 “Slow to Respond, Tesco Now Pays the Price,” The Wall 
Street Journal (June 22, 2014), online at on.wsj.
com/1srX142.
	18	 “Long-Serving Non-Executives Are on the Wane in the 
UK,” The Financial Times (December 28, 2014), online at 
on.ft.com/1AXzPwO.
	19	 See, for example, D. Barton and M. Wiseman, “Where 
Boards Fall Short,” Harvard Business Review (January–
February 2015).
	20	 See, for example, D. Larcker, S. Richardson, and I. Tuna, 
“Corporate Governance, Accounting Outcomes, and 
Organizational Performance,” The Accounting Review, 
82, no. 4 (July 2007), pp. 963–1008. See also “Corpo-
rate Constitutions,” The Economist (October 28, 2010), 
p. 74.
	21	 See, for example, “From Cuckolds to Captains: Corporate 
Boards Are Playing a More Prominent Role in Steering 
Companies,” The Economist (December 7, 2013), online at 
goo.gl/UehfY3.
	22	 See, for example, “Schroders Criticized for Elevating 
Michael Dobson to Chairman,” The Financial Times 
(March 3, 2016), online at on.ft.com/1UAKKGT.
	23	 See, for example, R. M. Daines, I. D Gow, and D. F. 
Larcker. “Ratings the Ratings: How Good Are Commer-
cial Governance Ratings?,” Journal of Financial Eco-
nomics, 98, no. 3 (2010), pp. 439–61; and M. Ertugul 
and S. Hegde, “Corporate Governance Ratings and 
Firm Performance,” Financial Management (2009), 
pp. 139–60.
	24	 “How Good Are Commercial Corporate Governance Rat-
ings,” Stanford Business (September 1, 2009), online at 
stanford.io/1pjDBXJ.
	25	 See, for example, US Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion, Final Rule: Standards Relating to Listed Company 
Audit Committees: Rel. No. 33-8220 (December 18, 2007), 
online at www.sec.gov.
	26	 For a more detailed discussion of the audit committee 
charter, see publications by the major accounting firms, 
such as Deloitte & Touche, Audit Committee Resource 
Guide (Deloitte, 2010), online at www.deloitte.com.
	27	 Corporate Board Survey Results: 2015 Trends and Insights 
(Chicago: JWC Partners, January 2015); and Governing 
for the Long-Term: Looking Down the Road with an Eye on 
the Rear-View Mirror (New York, PwC, 2015).
	28	 See, for example, C. S. Armstrong, C. D. Ittner, and D. F. 
Larcker, “Corporate Governance, Compensation Consult-
ants, and CEO Pay Levels,” Review of Accounting Studies, 
17, no. 2 (June 2012), pp. 322–51.
	29	 “Executive Pay Committee Chair in the Hot Seat,” 
The Financial Times (May 2, 2016), online at on.ft.com/ 
1TGhrRq.
	30	 The BDO Board Survey (BDO USA, September 2015).
	31	 “What Directors Think,” Corporate Board Member (Spe-
cial Supplement, 2009), p. 16. See also “Is a Pay Revolu-
tion Nigh? And If Not, Should It Be?,” The Financial Times 
(May 8, 2016), online at on.ft.com/1TxUI7l.
	32	 See, for example, K. Merchant and K. Pick. Blind Spots, 
Biases and Other Pathologies in the Boardroom (New York: 
Business Expert Press, 2010).

588
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
 Harry Standell, a member of the board of directors of 
Arrow Motorcar Corporation (Arrow), had a lot on 
his mind as he drove to the offi  ce. It was March 22, 
2016, the day Arrow’s board had agreed to ask for-
mally for the resignation of the company’s president/
CEO and founder, Billy Ray Repko. Billy Ray had 
already been informed that if he did not resign, he 
would be fi red. Harry hoped that Billy Ray would 
step down gracefully and not provoke a confronta-
tion. Billy Ray had been the mastermind of the com-
pany for many years. But now Harry believed the 
board had little choice but to remove him because 
Arrow was in a crisis. Arrow was not able to pay 
either its employees or its payroll taxes; checks were 
bouncing; and outstanding accounts payable were 
being ignored. Harry and the other board members 
were convinced that the crisis was the result of Billy 
Ray’s management style and excessive spending and 
that it was the board’s moral and legal obligation to 
the company’s shareholders to remove him as presi-
dent and CEO. 
 When Harry arrived at the Arrow offi  ces, however, 
he was greeted by security staff  barring entry to the 
building. His eff orts to enter the building through a 
rear entrance were futile because the locks had been 
changed. Billy Ray had barricaded himself inside the 
building. Clearly this was not going to be an amicable 
management succession process. Billy Ray had 
declared war. 
  Arrow and the exotic sports 
car industry 
 Arrow Motorcar Corporation designed, manufactured, 
and sold exotic sports cars. Cars are defi ned as exotic 
by their price range (in the $200,000–$400,000 range 
and over); their speed (in excess of 160 mph); their 
driving performance; their technologically superior, 
high-performance components; their extensive use of 
hand manufacturing; and their appearance. Exotic 
sports cars are off ered to a select, wealthy clientele. 
Arrow management estimated that the total world wide 
market for exotic sports cars was approximately 
6,000 vehicles per year. The company’s major competi-
tors were Ferrari and Lamborghini, who together dom-
inated the market. Arrow, located in Montgomery, 
Alabama, was the only US-based manufacturer of 
exotic sports cars. 
 Formerly a stock car racer, Billy Ray Repko subse-
quently earned a college degree in aeronautical 
engineering. Billy Ray’s vision was to marry his two 
interests by designing an automobile using the fin-
est aerospace technology. For Billy Ray, perfor-
mance was paramount; cost was no object. He 
believed that he could find buyers who appreciated, 
and could pay for, automobiles constructed with his 
avant-garde, uncompromising approach to automo-
bile design. 
 Arrow’s standard model, powered by a 6.0 liter, all-
aluminum engine with twin turbochargers that gener-
ated over 600 horsepower at 5,700 rpm, was priced 
at $448,000. It could accelerate from 0 to 60 mph in 
3.9 seconds and reach speeds of 260 mph. The car 
made considerable use of aerospace technology, 
including advanced composite materials for body pan-
els, military specification electrical systems, and 
advanced tactical fi ghter instrumentation and head-
up displays. It also contained numerous safety and 
luxury features, such as an integrated roll cage, 
energy-absorbing crush zones, a spacious, hi-tech, jet-
aircraft-like leather cockpit, and a state-of-the-art 
sound system. 
 From 2000 to 2010, the company operated as Arrow 
Car, a privately funded limited partnership founded by 
Billy Ray Repko. Arrow Motorcar Corporation was 
formed in September 2010. Billy Ray sold approxi-
mately 35% of the company’s stock for $12 million to a 
collection of his family members and friends. 
 Arrow delivered its fi rst car to a paying customer in 
September 2013, and as of March 2016 it had sold a 
total of 13 cars, to an international clientele. In its peak 
 CASE STUDY 
 Arrow Motorcar Corporation 

Arrow Motorcar Corporation
589
month, the company employed 45 people. Because of 
its low sales volumes, however, Arrow had reported 
substantial financial losses since its inception (see 
statements of operations in Exhibit 1). In an attempt to 
build volume, Arrow was developing two other models, 
a roadster and coupe. Billy Ray Repko wanted to price 
these models in the $700,000–$800,000 range, but 
some of the members of the board of directors thought 
the new models should be more modestly priced, at 
perhaps around $200,000.
The board of directors
At its incorporation in 2010, Arrow had three members 
on its board of directors. Billy Ray was the chairman. 
Harry Standell was a financial consultant who had 
been a consultant to Arrow Car at the time of its forma-
tion. Barry Rosenfeld worked for the bank from which 
Arrow had obtained some loans.
The Board’s primary role was to act as a fiduciary 
body, to oversee management decisions and protect 
shareholders’ interests. The board helped Billy Ray 
develop the company’s strategy, and it ratified major 
financial and policy decisions, such as advertising and 
promotion budgets. When actual expenses were 
greater than budgeted expenses (as they often were), 
Billy Ray Repko, in his role as president, had to explain 
the variances to the other board members. Although 
the outside board members recognized that Billy Ray’s 
effectiveness as president would probably decline as 
the company grew in size, they had not concerned 
themselves with a succession plan, partly because the 
company was so small and partly because Billy Ray 
would be strongly opposed to such an action.
The board of directors met quarterly on a regular 
basis. Additional special meetings were called occa-
sionally to deal with specific issues, such as the signing 
of corporate documents. Arrow management rarely 
provided information to board members prior to the 
meetings, but they shared considerable data and pro-
gress reports during the meetings. The atmosphere of 
the board meetings was generally congenial.
In 2014, Phil Jacobs was added to the board of direc-
tors. Phil was an attorney and a longtime associate of 
Billy Ray. According to Harry:
Billy Ray wanted to shift the balance of power on 
the board. By 2014 Barry and I were not agreeing 
with him on some of the things that he wanted to 
do. He was getting voted down in some situations, 
and he wasn’t particularly happy about that. I think 
he felt bringing Phil in would help shift the balance 
in his favor a little bit.
Early signs of trouble
In June 2013, Robert Smith was hired as vice-presi-
dent, finance. Robert quickly began to feel uncomfort-
able with Billy Ray’s management style. Robert said:
Billy Ray hires good people who think they will be 
able to make a difference. But it didn’t take me long 
to realize that he doesn’t give anyone the freedom 
to be effective.
Robert thought Billy Ray was excessively focused on 
raising money and promoting the company while 
neglecting attention to engineering and production. He 
also believed that Billy Ray’s management style, which 
was shaped by “a compulsive, obsessive personality 
and a foul mouth,” imposed undue stress on employees. 
Robert confronted Billy Ray about his concerns, but 
was not able to change either Billy Ray’s priorities or his 
management style. Robert informed the board mem-
bers of his concerns, but he received no support. For 
many months, Robert felt he was the sole voice of dis-
sent, noting that “obviously Billy Ray hand-picked most 
of the board.”
Until 2015, the outside board members were not 
seriously concerned about Billy Ray’s management 
style, although they considered him eccentric. Harry 
explained that:
At some point in his schooling, Billy Ray must have 
stayed up all night preparing for an exam or a pres-
entation and received an “A” for his effort. Since 
then he has decided that’s the way life works, that if 
you let everything wait until the last minute and 
cram all your preparation into two days, you get 
better performance than if you spread it out over 
the month beforehand. That’s how he functioned.
In retrospect, Harry attributed much of the outside 
board members’ support of Billy Ray to the fact that 
most of the information they received was designed to 
elicit agreement. He said:
Billy Ray was literally a master of giving everybody, 
including the board, just enough information to 
support the conclusion he wanted them to reach. 
The boardroom presenters were well coached, and 
we never received all of the relevant information.

590
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
The board finally took serious issue with some of 
Billy Ray’s management actions early in 2015. Within 
three months of joining the board, Phil Jacobs became 
a strong adversary of Billy Ray because of some issues 
brought to his attention by Arrow employees. In an 
executive session of a board meeting, he charged that 
Billy Ray was misusing expense reports, using com-
pany funds for personal home improvements, and par-
ticipating in other forms of self-dealing at the 
company’s expense. The board asked Robert Smith to 
look into these issues. Three weeks later, a board meet-
ing was called to formally discuss the charges and to 
decide on a course of action. Phil Jacobs called for Billy 
Ray’s immediate removal.
But Phil did not get the board’s support. The outside 
board members did not think the charges of illegal 
activity could be substantiated. Robert Smith did a 
study but found no evidence that Billy Ray had diverted 
any company assets to personal use. He did question 
approximately $15,000 of items charged on Billy Ray’s 
American Express card because he had provided inad-
equate documentation. But Billy Ray explained that all 
the expenses were legitimate because, as the president 
of an exotic car company, he “had an image to 
maintain.”
The board did conclude that Billy Ray had partici-
pated in some questionable business deals. For exam-
ple, Billy Ray lent an associate $25,000 of company 
money, which was secured by a personal note made 
payable to himself. He also negotiated a lease at a 
below-market price and attempted to re-lease the prop-
erty to Arrow at the market price. The board insisted 
that Billy Ray charge Arrow the lower price for the 
lease, arguing that he should not realize personal gain 
at the expense of the company. Billy Ray reluctantly 
succumbed to the board’s wishes on the lease issue. 
And since the loan was repaid and neither of these 
deals ended up hurting Arrow, the directors felt these 
items did not warrant Billy Ray’s termination. Harry 
said:
By this time I think the Board was actually con-
cerned about Billy Ray’s management style, how 
he ran things, and about his excessive spending, 
but he hadn’t done anything illegal. He also had an 
employment contract (see excerpts in Exhibit 2) 
which says he’s allowed to be a bad manager. He 
just isn’t allowed to do anything illegal.
The outside directors also believed it was not in the 
company’s best interest for them to agree with Phil 
Jacobs’s call for firing Billy Ray because there was no 
obvious successor. In Harry’s words:
One of the concerns at that time was that Phil had 
no Act II. Act I was “get rid of Billy Ray!” Act II was, 
“What do we do now?” There had to be something 
in place as far as I was concerned. You don’t just 
throw the guy out. You have to have a plan to move 
forward.
One outcome of this board meeting, however, was 
an agreement to change the process for reimbursing 
Billy Ray for personal expenses. Previously, Arrow had 
paid Billy Ray’s entire credit card bill. After the meet-
ing, Billy Ray was required to submit formal expense 
reports to the accounting department.
Later that year, Phil Jacobs resigned from the board 
and later died. He was replaced on the board by Aiden 
West, a self-employed consultant and businessman, 
and another long-time associate of Billy Ray Repko.
A Malaysian investor
In June 2015, Arrow obtained $2.1 million in financing 
from Zafran Megat, a Malaysian investor. Mr. Megat 
bought 4 million shares at $.40 and also paid $118,000 
for an option to buy an additional 6 million shares at 
$.50. Mr. Megat advanced the money to Arrow before 
completing a due diligence review. The board members 
perceived this quick advance quite unusual and not 
business-like, but they later discovered that Mr. Megat 
customarily did business on the basis of trust.
Included in Mr. Megat’s purchase agreement was 
the right to appoint a director to the board. Thus a fifth 
director, Dan Zuraidi, was added to protect Mr. Megat’s 
interests in the company. Billy Ray had said that Mr. 
Megat insisted that the board not be increased in size, 
thus leaving him only a 20% vote, so Barry Rosenfeld 
resigned to make room for Mr. Megat’s director, leaving 
the board still comprised of four members. But the 
remaining board members later found out that Billy 
Ray had lied to them. Billy Ray and Mr. Megat had 
never discussed the board-size issue.
In the summer of 2015, Billy Ray negotiated a new 
employment contract. It included an option to buy 1 
million shares of stock at $.265, which was the value an 
outside appraisal firm put on the company’s stock on 
the date the option was issued.
By December 2015, Arrow was out of money again, 
and some employees had to be laid off. Mr. Megat was 
unwilling to exercise his stock purchase option, but he 

Arrow Motorcar Corporation
591
agreed to exercise Billy Ray’s stock option if Billy Ray 
would transfer that option to him. Mr. Megat sent 
$265,000 to Arrow in accordance with this agreement. 
But then, despite an agreement signed to the contrary, 
Billy Ray tried to renege on this deal, claiming that he 
had not intended that his option be transferred but just 
used as collateral for a loan. This disagreement 
breached the Malaysians’ trust in Billy Ray. After this 
point, they had no interest in making additional invest-
ments in Arrow, but they did keep Mr. Zuraidi on as a 
director to protect the money they had already invested.
Events leading to Billy Ray Repko’s 
termination
As Arrow’s financial position worsened, tension 
between Billy Ray and the board of directors increased. 
The company’s payroll taxes for the period September 
through December 2015 were not paid on time. This 
caused a discussion over disclosures in the company’s 
financial reports for the fiscal year ended September 
30, 2015. According to Harry:
Although the financial reports were required by the 
bank to be filed within 90 days of the fiscal year-
end, Billy Ray would not allow it to be filed with the 
required disclosure that we hadn’t paid our payroll 
taxes. But I would not allow it to be filed without that 
disclosure. So Billy Ray and I compromised. We had 
a sales prospect who was expected any day to give 
us a $100,000 check as a deposit on a car. That 
money could be used to pay the payroll taxes. We 
decided to let the financial reports be late.
In February 2016, Harry was invited to Billy Ray’s 
house for a baby shower for the accounting manager who 
was preparing to go on maternity leave. This was his first 
visit to the house, and when he arrived, he was shocked 
to find the house was decorated in “modern Arrow.” Cab-
inets, floor tiles, and wall tiles were all identical to those 
used in Arrow headquarters. Harry recalled:
When I went into the house, I couldn’t quite believe 
it. I looked around and saw what looked like a mirror 
image of our office. On Monday morning, I said to 
Robert Smith, I know you’ve examined all of the 
company invoices, but I have now been in Billy Ray’s 
house and you’re never going to convince me that 
company money wasn’t used in that house. I don’t 
know how we’re going to prove it, but I will guaran-
tee you that he has diverted company assets.
That same month, Robert Smith informed the board 
that in the opinion of the heads of the marketing, 
finance, and production departments, the business 
plan Billy Ray was showing potential investors was 
“wildly optimistic.” He believed that Billy Ray’s contin-
ued use of the business plan to solicit funds could be 
construed as being fraudulent.
By March, Arrow’s financial position was critical. 
Employees weren’t being paid; the financial reports still 
had not been issued because the payroll taxes had not 
been paid; $14,000 in checks had bounced; and remain-
ing accounts payable were being ignored. But Billy Ray 
was focused on other things: he and some of his manag-
ers were out of the country, at the Geneva car show.
Harry was ready to take action. He was convinced 
that with Billy Ray as CEO, Arrow was headed for disas-
ter. But before Harry could take any action against Billy 
Ray, he needed Aiden West’s support. Aiden had also 
become increasingly disenchanted with Billy Ray. Aiden 
had been trying to assist Arrow in obtaining financing, 
but he was finding it difficult to do so because the poten-
tial investors he had contacted did not trust Billy Ray. 
Harry brought up the issue over lunch. He explained:
Aiden talked about his inability to raise any money 
because of Billy Ray’s management style. I told him 
about my concerns regarding the probable diversion 
of funds. I also explained that I had pulled out a cou-
ple of Billy Ray’s American Express bills and found 
out that the procedure we thought had been put into 
place had not been implemented. Billy Ray instead 
told the accounting department that they were now 
to pay off from only the face page of the bill. They 
were no longer going to get all account detail.
Harry and Aiden agreed to call the company’s outside 
counsel for advice. The lawyers acknowledged that the 
board did have authority to terminate Billy Ray for cause, 
and they further acknowledged that there appeared to be 
sufficient cause, most particularly the fraudulent busi-
ness plan and diversion of company assets. Harry called 
Mr. Megat, and he agreed to support the other outside 
board members in their decision to terminate Billy Ray.
Harry hand-delivered to Billy Ray a notice for a spe-
cial board meeting to be held on Friday, March 18, 
2016. This notice, which contained no explanation of 
the purpose of the meeting, was given 24 hours in 
advance of the meeting, as was required by company 
by-laws. After receiving this notice, Billy Ray called 
Mr. Megat, who told him that the purpose of the meet-
ing was to terminate Billy Ray as president. Billy Ray 

592
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
immediately called Aiden West and demanded an 
explanation.
Aiden and Billy Ray met for nearly the entire day on 
Wednesday, March 16. Harry was there for part of the 
day. At this meeting, Aiden confirmed what Mr. Megat 
had said and added that the board planned to give him 
the opportunity to resign in the best interest of the 
shareholders. If Billy Ray chose to resign, the board 
would send out a press release explaining that Billy Ray 
had wanted to devote himself to creative aspects of the 
business. If Billy Ray chose not to resign, the board 
would terminate him and sue him for conversion of 
funds.
Billy Ray questioned both why this was happening 
and why now. He said he needed to go to New Jersey for 
discussions with a dealership, and he had a financing 
meeting set up in New York. But Aiden and Harry did 
not want him to make the trip. They did not think he 
should act as president and CEO when he was soon to 
be fired, and they did not want him to raise money by 
using the fraudulent business plan.
Finally, Billy Ray asked that the special board meet-
ing be postponed for 30 days. The board members 
refused this request, but they did agree to postpone 
until Monday to give Billy Ray the weekend to decide if 
he would resign or be terminated. The meeting was 
scheduled for Monday, March 21, at 5:00 p.m. On 
Monday morning, Billy Ray responded by moving into 
the headquarters’ building and barring all outsiders, 
including the board members, from the building.
Exhibit 1  Statements of operations
Years ended September 30
September 12, 2010 (Inception) to 
September 30, 2015 (Cumulative)
2015
2014
2013
Sales, net
$ 1,287,866
$ 754,800
$ 20,000
$ 2,062,666
Cost of sales
974,966
579,800
20,000
1,574,766
Gross profit
312,900
175,000
–
487,900
Costs and expenses
Salaries and wages
917,350
1,533,199
1,253,554
4,251,037
Rental expense
96,358
112,972
128,558
529,088
Utilities expense
91,793
116,578
64,264
316,575
Research and development
1,275,841
718,346
2,340,818
4,878,034
Depreciation and amortization
429,394
466,316
241,437
1,266,813
Advertising and promotion
566,121
535,023
655,194
1,890,137
Professional fees
613,015
324,411
580,852
1,833,288
General and administrative
528,275
917,726
427,820
2,153,405
Warranty expense
27,564
31,157
58,721
Provision for loss 
contingency
–
33,167
–
633,167
Abandonment of property 
and equipment
234,911
234,911
Total costs and expenses
4,545,711
5,623,806
5,692,497
18,045,176
Other income (expense)
Other income
231,299
88,489
214,179
836,211
Other expense
(35,400)
(15,862)
(26,373)
(119,523)
195,899
72,627
187,806
716,688
Net loss
$ (4,036,912)
$ (5,376,179)
$(5,504,691)
$(16,840,588)
Net loss per share
(0.39)
$ (1.11)
$ (1.90)
Weighted average common 
shares outstanding
10,245,056
4,832,556
2,890,329

Arrow Motorcar Corporation
593
EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT
EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT, effective July 1, 2015, by and between ARROW MOTORCAR CORPORATION, a Delaware 
corporation (the “Company”) and BILLY RAY A. REPKO (the “Employee”).
WHEREAS, the Company has, prior to the date of this Agreement, employed the Employee as the Company’s President, and
WHEREAS, the Company desires to continue to employ the Employee on a full-time basis, and the Employee desires to 
be so employed by the Company, from and after the date of this agreement.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein, the parties agree as follows:
Article I
EMPLOYMENT DUTIES AND BENEFITS
Section 1.5 Expenses. The Employee is authorized to incur reasonable expenses for promoting the domestic and 
international business of the Company in all respects, including expenses for entertainment, travel and similar items. The 
Company will reimburse the Employee for all such expenses upon the presentation by the Employee, from time-to-time, 
of an itemized account of such expenditures.
Section 1.6 Employee’s Other Business. Employee shall be allowed to participate in outside business activities pro-
vided (i) such activities do not interfere with Employee’s performance of his duties as a full-time employee of the Com-
pany; and (ii) the outside business is not a Business Opportunity of the Company, as defined herein. A Business 
Opportunity of the Company shall be a product, service, investment, venture or other opportunity which is either:
(a)	directly related to or within the scope of the existing business of the Company; or
(b) within the logical scope of the business of the Company, as such scope may be expanded or altered from time-to-
time by the Board of Directors.
Article II
COMPENSATION
Section 2.1 Base Salary. The Company shall pay to the Employee a base salary of not less than the amount specified 
on Schedule 1. This amount may be adjusted for raises in salary by action of the Board of Directors.
Section 2.2 Bonus. The Employee shall be entitled to receive a bonus at such time or times as may be determined by 
the Board of Directors of the Company.
Article III
TERM OF EMPLOYMENT AND TERMINATION
Section 3.1 Term. This Agreement shall be for a term which is specified on Schedule 1, commencing on its effective 
date, subject, however, to termination during such period as provided in this Article. This Agreement shall be renewed 
automatically for succeeding periods of one year on the same terms and conditions as contained in this Agreement 
unless either the Company or the Employee shall, at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the initial term or of any 
renewal term, give written notice of the intention not to renew this Agreement. Such renewals shall be effective in subse-
quent years on the same day of the same month as the original effective date of this Agreement.
Section 3.2 Termination by the Employee Without Cause. The Employee, without cause, may terminate this Agree-
ment upon 90 days’ written notice to the Company. In such event, the Employee shall not be required to render the 
services required under this Agreement. Compensation for vacation time not taken by Employee shall be paid to the 
Employee at the date of termination.
Section 3.3 Termination by the Company With Cause. The Company may terminate the Employee, at any time, upon 
90 days’ written notice and opportunity for Employee to remedy any non-compliance with the terms of this Agreement, 
by reason of the willful misconduct of the Employee which is contrary to the best interests of the Company. Upon the 
date of such termination, the Company’s obligation to pay compensation shall terminate. No compensation for vacation 
time not taken by Employee shall be paid to the Employee.
Exhibit 2  Excerpts from Billy Ray Repko’s employee contract
(continued)

594
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
 This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 A special conference-call meeting of the compensation 
committee of the board of directors of Database Tech-
nologies, Inc. (DTI) was scheduled for the morning of 
February 23, 2007. DTI, headquartered in Sunnyvale, 
California, was a leader in database-related software. 
The company’s main products helped customers moni-
tor, forecast, and manage data growth in enterprise 
resource planning (ERP) system environments. 
 The main agenda item for the special compensation 
committee meeting was discussion and possible 
approval of a proposed Change in Control Severance 
Agreement. In November 2006, a large, European-
based technology company had expressed interest in 
acquiring DTI. Because of this inquiry, John Hoff man, 
DTI’s chairman/CEO, had asked Alan Adamson, chair 
of DTI’s compensation committee, to have his commit-
tee consider the implementation of a severance agree-
ment. Mr. Adamson agreed. There was some urgency 
to the request because DTI management expected to 
receive the formal acquisition off er sometime in the 
fi rst half of 2007. 
 After a series of discussions with Mr. Hoff man and 
Mr. Adamson, DTI’s outside counsel drew up a proposed 
severance agreement. The agreement, if enacted, would 
provide payments under certain conditions (explained 
below) to a “select group of management or highly com-
pensated employees” of DTI. Included in this select group 
were fi ve executives: DTI’s CEO, COO, CFO, chief tech-
nology offi  cer (CTO), and general counsel/secretary. 
 The materials sent to the committee members in 
advance of the meeting explained that the severance 
agreement was – 
 intended for the benefi t of both the key DTI execu-
tives and the company. It would protect the execu-
tives against signifi cant negative personal as well as 
financial consequences that could result from a 
change in control. Further, having this severance 
agreement in place would help to keep the execu-
tives employed and focused on shareholders’ inter-
ests, rather than on their own interests. That is, it 
would help to ensure that the company would be 
 Schedule 1 
 Duties and Compensation 
 Employee : Billy Ray A. Repko 
 Position : President and CEO 
 Base Salary : $275,000 per year, payable bi-weekly and quarterly performance payment equal to 10% of improvements 
over annual budget as approved by Board from time to time 
 Bonus : As determined by the Board of Directors 
 Term : December 31, 2020 
 Duties and Responsibilities : Supervision and coordination of all operations of the Company; supervision of all other 
operating offi  cers of the Company. 
Exhibit 2 Continued
 CASE STUDY 
 Golden Parachutes? 

Golden Parachutes?
595
able to rely upon the executives to continue in their 
positions without concern that they might be dis-
tracted by the personal uncertainties and risks cre-
ated by the possibility that they might lose their jobs.
Under the terms of the severance agreement, the 
named executives would be entitled to receive benefits 
if the executive received a Qualifying Termination fol-
lowing a Change in Control of the company. Change in 
Control was deemed to have occurred as of the first day 
that 40% or more of the then-outstanding voting secu-
rities changed hands. A Qualifying Termination was 
deemed to have occurred if any one or more of the fol-
lowing events occurred within a 24-calendar-month 
period following the date of a Change in Control:
1.	 An involuntary termination of the executive’s employ-
ment for reasons other than Cause. Cause was defined 
as the occurrence of either or both of the following: 
(a) the executive’s conviction for committing a felony 
or (b) the executive’s willful engagement in miscon-
duct that is significantly injurious to the company.
2.	 A voluntary termination of the employment by the 
executive for Good Reason. Good Reason was defined 
as the occurrence, without the executive’s express 
written consent, of any one or more of the following:
a.	 A material reduction in the nature of status of the 
executive’s authorities, duties, and/or responsi-
bilities or a diminution of the executive’s report-
ing relationship.
b.	A reduction in the executive’s base salary.
c.	 A reduction in the executive’s relative level of 
participation in and relative level of coverage in 
the company’s employee benefit plans. (The com-
pany can eliminate and/or modify existing pro-
grams, but the executive’s level and amounts of 
coverage under all such programs must be at 
least as great as is provided to executives who 
have the same or lesser levels of reporting respon-
sibilities within the company’s organization.)
d.	 The executive is informed by the company with less 
than 180 days’ notice that his/her principal place of 
employment for the company will be relocated to a 
location that is greater than 35 miles away from the 
executive’s principal place of employment for the 
company immediately prior to the Change in Control.
3.	 The company or any successor company repudiates 
or breaches any of the provisions of the Severance 
Agreement.
The executive’s right to terminate employment for 
good reason was not affected by the executive’s inca-
pacity due to physical or mental illness.
Each Qualifying Termination would entitle the 
affected executive to receive:
1.	 A lump-sum payment equal to twice (2×) the execu-
tive’s highest annualized base salary in effect at any 
time on or before the effective date of termination.
2.	 A lump-sum payment equal to twice (2×) the high-
est aggregate bonus(es) paid by the company to the 
executive for any one of the three full fiscal years of 
the company immediately preceding the executive’s 
effective date of termination.
3.	 A lump-sum payment equal to the portion of the 
executive’s account under the company’s qualified 
retirement plan, nonqualified deferred compensa-
tion plan, or any other supplemental retirement plan 
that has not become vested as of the effective date of 
termination. Included in this provision was an imme-
diate vesting of all of the executives’ stock options.
4.	 A continuation of the executive’s car allowance or 
other company perquisites for 24 months following 
the effective date of termination.
5.	 A continuation of the executive’s and his/her fami-
ly’s medical coverage, dental coverage, and group 
term life insurance for 24 months following the 
executive’s effective date of termination.
6.	 A reimbursement of up to $18,000 for outplacement 
services obtained during the 24-month period fol-
lowing the effective date of termination.
7.	 If the payments exceeded the safe harbor amount 
set by the US Congress, the payments would be 
“grossed up” so that the executives would not have 
to pay an excise tax sometimes referred to as a 
“golden parachute” tax.1
1	 If the present value of the severance payments (“parachute 
payments”) exceeded three times the individual’s average annual 
compensation in the most recent five taxable years, a federal “golden 
parachute tax” would have to be paid. This tax legislation was passed 
to try to discourage what the US Congress considered to be “exces-
sive” severance payments. The amount of the golden parachute tax 
was calculated as 20% of the excess of the parachute payments over 
the executive’s average base salary over the prior five-year period.
If the company grossed up the payment, the paid tax amount would 
also have to be treated as part of the parachute payment, and a golden 
parachute tax would have to be paid on this amount also. As a conse-
quence, grossing up the payments could be quite costly. The need to 
pay taxes on the excess and the need to pay additional taxes on the 
gross-up amounts was sometimes likened to a dog “chasing its tail.”

596
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
The executive would not be entitled to receive sever-
ance benefits if employment terminated, regardless of 
the reason, more than 24 months after the date of a 
Change in Control.
An estimate of the amounts that would be paid to 
the five key executives if the payments were triggered 
in 2007 is shown in Exhibit 1. CEO John Hoffman was 
the only executive who would be subject to the so-
called golden parachute tax. John’s proposed severance 
payments exceeded the allowed base amount because 
when John was recruited to DTI, he had been given a 
large number of options with a 10-year vesting period. 
If a Change in Control occurred, all of these options 
would immediately vest. The value of these options 
would comprise approximately half of the Change in 
Control Payments that John would be paid.
The materials sent in advance of the meeting pre-
sented a statement that most companies of DTI’s size or 
larger had such an agreement in place, with the range 
of severance payments typically set between one and a 
half to three times the executives’ base salary plus 
bonuses. However, the committee members were not 
provided with any formal benchmarking data.
A committee member’s reactions
As Dennis Feingold, one of DTI’s three compensation 
committee members, read the proposed severance agree-
ment, he had mixed feelings about it. Dennis believed 
that the purposes of such plans were valid. DTI’s interests 
could be badly hurt if key executives, fearing for their 
jobs, left the company before the acquisition was con-
summated. Most, if not all, of these executives would 
probably not be retained by the management of the 
acquiring company. A severance agreement would prob-
ably keep them on the job until the end, and the pay-
ments would probably enable them to sustain their 
lifestyles until they could obtain another comparable job.
Dennis had particular empathy for DTI’s CTO, who 
was recruited to DTI just a few months earlier from a 
firm located in New York. Losing his job not long after a 
disruptive personal relocation would be difficult for the 
CTO and his family.
Dennis was not particularly concerned about the 
total cost of the severance payments. While the sever-
ance payments would reduce the acquisition price, they 
probably were not large enough to have a negative 
effect on the consummation of the transaction itself. 
Even if all of the severance payments were paid, the 
total cost would probably only be about $12 million, 
not a large amount of money in comparison with the 
company’s acquisition price, which probably would be 
close to $2 billion.
But Dennis did have some concerns about the pay-
ments. Some of the individual payments would be quite 
large. Some of these executives were already quite 
wealthy, and they would be given millions of dollars 
more in severance payments. Dennis knew that share-
holders did not have to approve such payments and prob-
ably would not even become aware of them, but he was 
concerned that if they, or rank-and-file employees, 
became aware of them, there would be some resentment.
Dennis also asked himself whether the company’s 
performance warranted these payments. While the 
company’s stock price had risen over the years, by most 
objective metrics DTI’s performance in recent years 
could be rated only mediocre, perhaps slightly below 
the median as compared to similar technology-intensive 
companies. A part of him thought that, with the excep-
tion of the newly hired CTO, the executives had been 
amply rewarded for their efforts over the years. In 
return, perhaps they should owe loyalty to the company.
Dennis wondered why these five employees, as key 
as they were, should have severance arrangements dif-
ferent from those of any other employee in the com-
pany. Other corporate officers (e.g. VP-operations, 
VP-sales and marketing, VP-human resources, control-
ler) were not included in the severance agreement. In 
fact, Dennis noted that since no DTI employees were 
represented by a union, all DTI employees had always 
been considered to be employed “at will,” meaning they 
could be fired at any time without cause.
Dennis knew that severance payments were a politi-
cal hot button. Many management critics had focused 
much attention on what they perceived as “outrageous” 
management compensation packages, with large sev-
erance payments and potential payments seen as part 
of the problem.2 Dennis knew that some corporate gov-
ernance rating agencies and other “watchdogs” would 
be observing. He did not want to see DTI listed as being 
2	 In 2005 the average parachute payment for CEOs of the top 100 US 
corporations was $28 million. Some payments were much larger, 
such as the $188 million that Gillette’s CEO James Kilts received  
when his company was sold to Procter & Gamble, and the $162 million 
that William McGuire, CEO of United Health, would receive if 
his company were sold. See, for example, “Examining the Largest 
Golden Parachutes,” Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate 
Govern­ance and Financial Regulation, online at corpgov.law.harvard.
edu/2012/02/26/examining-the-largest-golden-parachutes/; 
and M. Brush, “You’re Fired. Here’s Your $16 Million,” MSN Money  
(April 9, 2003), moneycentral.msn.com/content/p44954.asp.

Golden Parachutes?
597
among a “rogue’s gallery” of firms whose boards did 
not exercise their fiduciary responsibilities in the com-
pensation area. Dennis was also concerned about his 
personal reputation. He enjoyed his board service and 
wanted to serve on other boards.
On the other hand, Dennis knew that if he raised 
objections, the other committee members would 
undoubtedly point to the fact that most companies have 
a severance agreement, and the terms of this agree-
ment probably should be judged as reasonable by cur-
rent corporate standards. Dennis himself, the CEO of a 
large company in the food processing industry, was 
covered by a severance agreement. His was not quite as 
lucrative as the one being proposed at DTI, but Dennis 
certainly did not want to go on record as being against 
severance agreements.
So, as Dennis prepared to go to the meeting, he was 
mulling over all of these issues, which accumulated 
into one big question. Should he just “go along” with 
the other two compensation committee members and 
vote to approve the severance agreement as proposed, 
or should he voice his concerns? If the latter, how force-
fully should he press his concerns if the other commit-
tee members did not immediately agree with him?
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.
Executive	
Change in control payment	
Excess parachute payment	
Total payment
CEO	
$4,474	
$1,6703	
$6,144
COO	
2,110	
–	
2,110
CFO	
1,685	
–	
1,685
CTO	
1,400	
–	
1,400
General counsel	
623	
–	
623
Total	
$10,292	
$1,670	
$11,962
3	 Test for the need for a golden parachute tax payment:
Total change in control payments	
$4,474
Safe harbor amount (3x limit)	
 3,402
Difference	
$1,072 (Since the difference is positive, a golden parachute tax must be paid.)
Calculation of the amount of the golden parachute tax:
Total change in control payments	
$4,474
Base amount (ave. salary over last 5 years)	
1,134
Excess parachute	
3,340
Golden parachute tax (20%)	
668
Grossed up golden parachute tax	
$1,670
Exhibit 1  Estimate of DTI parachute payments if paid in 2007 ($000)

598
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
 As a publicly owned company in the United States, 
Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc. (PacSun) was 
required to comply with the provisions of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX). Among other things, SOX 
required top management to test their company’s sys-
tem of internal controls and to certify that it is eff ec-
tive. It also required the company’s external auditors 
to conduct independent tests of those controls and to 
express their independent opinion about the eff ective-
ness of the company’s system. 
 In 2006, after their second year of complying with 
SOX, PacSun management looked back and concluded 
that the process had provided a few benefi ts, but they 
thought that the compliance costs far exceeded the 
benefi ts, at least to the company. With the compliance 
processes now well controlled and the costs of compli-
ance having been sharply reduced, they were turning 
their attention back to issues of more business rele-
vance, such as business continuity planning and, more 
generally, controlling business risks. 
 The company 
 PacSun’s mission is to be “the leading lifestyle retailer 
of casual fashion apparel, footwear and accessories for 
teens and young adults.” The company’s origins were 
as a small surf shop that started in 1980 in Newport 
Beach, California. The company was incorporated in 
August 1982, and it went public in 1993. Its stock is 
traded on NASDAQ using the symbol PSUN. By 2006, 
PacSun was a large company, with annual sales of 
almost $1.4 billion (see  Exhibit  1 ). Over the years, the 
company’s stock was split 3-for-2 six times, and was one 
of the fastest-growing stocks on the NASDAQ stock 
exchange. 
 PacSun operated chains of mostly mall-based stores 
with three distinct retail concepts. As of July 29, 2006, 
it ran 826 PacSun stores, 102 PacSun Outlet stores, 201 
d.e.m.o. stores and six One Thousand Steps stores, for a 
total of 1,112 stores located in all 50 states of the United 
States and Puerto Rico. PacSun and PacSun Outlet 
stores specialized in board sport-inspired casual 
apparel, footwear, and related accessories. d.e.m.o. 
specialized in fashion-focused streetwear. One Thou-
sand Steps, a new concept started in 2006, targeted 18- 
to 24-year-old customers and featured an assortment 
of casual, fashion-forward, branded footwear and 
related accessories. 
 In its stores, PacSun off ered a wide selection of well-
known board-sport-inspired name brands, including 
Quiksilver, Roxy, DC Shoes, Billabong, Hurley, and 
Volcom. The company supplemented the name brand 
off erings with its own proprietary brands. The com-
pany had its own product design group that, in collabo-
ration with the buying staff , designed the proprietary 
brand merchandise. The company also had a sourcing 
group that oversaw the manufacture and delivery of its 
proprietary brand merchandise with manufacturing 
contracted out both domestically and internationally. 
 PacSun’s merchandising department oversaw the 
purchasing and allocation of its merchandise. Its buy-
ers were responsible for reviewing branded merchan-
dise lines from new and existing vendors, identifying 
emerging fashion trends, and selecting branded and 
proprietary brand merchandise styles in quantities, 
colors, and sizes to meet inventory levels established by 
company management. The planning and allocation 
department was responsible for management of inven-
tory levels by store and by class, allocation of merchan-
dise to stores, and inventory replenishment based upon 
information generated by its merchandise manage-
ment information systems. These systems provided the 
planning department with current inventory levels at 
each store and for the company as a whole, as well as 
current selling history within each store by merchan-
dise classifi cation and by style. 
 All merchandise was delivered to the centralized 
distribution facility in Anaheim, California, where it 
was inspected, received into its computer system, allo-
cated to stores, ticketed when necessary, and boxed for 
distribution to its stores or packaged for delivery to its 
Internet customers. Each store was typically shipped 
 CASE STUDY 
 Pacifi c Sunwear of California, Inc. 

Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc.
599
merchandise three to five times a week, providing it 
with a steady flow of new merchandise. The company 
used a national and a regional small package carrier to 
ship merchandise to its stores and Internet customers. 
The company occasionally used airfreight to ship mer-
chandise to stores during peak selling periods.
PacSun’s expansion pace was steady and fast. In 
2005, the company opened 115 net new stores, which 
included 67 PacSun stores, 12 PacSun Outlet stores, 
and 36 d.e.m.o. stores, and also expanded or relocated 
an additional 34 existing stores.
The store operating structure was relatively flat. 
Each store had a manager, one or more co-managers or 
assistant managers, and approximately 6–12 part-time 
sales associates. District managers supervised approxi-
mately 7–12 stores. Regional directors supervised 
approximately 6–10 district managers.
District and store managers and co-managers par-
ticipated in a bonus program based on achieving prede-
termined metrics, including sales and inventory 
shrinkage targets. The company had well-established 
store operating policies and procedures and an exten-
sive in-store training program for new store managers 
and co-managers. It placed great emphasis on loss pre-
vention programs in order to control inventory shrink-
age. These programs included the installation of 
electronic article surveillance systems in all stores, 
education of store personnel on loss prevention, and 
monitoring of returns, voids, and employee sales. As a 
result of these programs, PacSun’s historical inventory 
shrinkage rates were below 1.5% of net sales at retail 
(0.6% at cost).
PacSun’s merchandise, financial, and store com-
puter systems were fully integrated. Its software was 
regularly upgraded or modified as needs arose or 
changed. Its information systems provided company 
management, buyers, and planners with comprehen-
sive data that helped them identify emerging trends 
and manage inventories. The systems included pur-
chase order management, electronic data interchange, 
open order reporting, open-to-buy, receiving, distribu-
tion, merchandise allocation, basic stock replenish-
ment, interstore transfers, inventory, and price 
management. Company management used weekly 
best/worst item sales reports to enhance the timeliness 
and effectiveness of purchasing and markdown deci-
sions. Merchandise purchases were based on planned 
sales and inventory levels and were frequently revised 
to reflect changes in demand for a particular item or 
classification.
All of the PacSun stores had a point-of-sale system 
operating on in-store computer hardware. The system 
featured bar-coded ticket scanning, automatic price 
look-up, electronic check and credit/debit authoriza-
tion, and automatic nightly transmittal of data between 
the store and corporate offices. Each of the regional 
directors and district managers could instantly access 
appropriate or relevant company-wide information, 
including actual and budgeted sales by store, district 
and region, transaction information, and payroll data.
The company’s culture was lean and frugal. To illus-
trate, PacSun’s CFO explained, “We never succumbed 
to management entitlements. Very few employees have 
company paid-for Blackberries, cell phones, and credit 
cards. No one travels by first class airfare.”
Complying with Section 404 
of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
As a company whose securities were sold publicly in the 
United States, PacSun was bound by the provisions of 
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. PacSun was first obli-
gated to comply with the full provisions of SOX in its 
2004 fiscal year (ended January 29, 2005).
The most difficult and expensive provisions in the 
act to comply with were those contained in Section 
404. Section 404 dealt with internal controls over 
financial reporting (ICOFR) – the processes that are 
designed to ensure the reliability of the financial 
reporting process and, ultimately, the preparation of 
financial statements. Section 404, with later clarifica-
tions by the SEC and the PCAOB, required manage-
ment to (1) accept responsibility for the effectiveness 
of the company’s ICOFR; (2) evaluate the effective-
ness of the company’s ICOFR using suitable control 
criteria;1 (3) support the evaluation with sufficient 
evidence, including documentation of the design of 
controls related to all relevant assertions for its sig-
nificant financial statement accounts and disclosures; 
and (4) present a written assessment of the effective-
ness of the company’s ICOFR as of the end of the com-
pany’s most recent fiscal year. The company’s CEO 
and CFO personally had to certify the results of the 
evaluation.
1	 Most companies and auditors, including PacSun and PacSun’s 
auditor (Deloitte & Touche LLP), relied on the language, concepts, 
and evaluation criteria described in the integrated internal control 
framework developed by the COSO (Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations).

600
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
As part of its assessment, management had to 
determine if identified internal control deficiencies –  
individually or in combination – constituted signifi-
cant deficiencies or material weaknesses. An inter-
nal control deficiency exists when the design or 
operation of a control does not allow management or 
employees, in the normal course of performing their 
assigned functions, to prevent or detect misstate-
ments on a timely basis. An internal control defi-
ciency may be either a design or operating deficiency. 
A significant deficiency is a control deficiency, or 
combination of control deficiencies, that adversely 
affects the company’s ability to initiate, authorize, 
record, process, or report external financial data 
reliably in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting principles such that there is more than a 
remote likelihood that a misstatement of the compa-
ny’s annual or interim financial statements that is 
more than inconsequential will not be prevented or 
detected. A material weakness is a significant defi-
ciency, or combination of significant deficiencies, 
that results in more than a remote likelihood that a 
material misstatement of the annual or interim 
financial statements will not be prevented or 
detected. The existence of even a single material 
weakness is grounds for an adverse 404 opinion.
Management then communicated the findings of 
their tests to the external auditor. The company’s 
auditors then had to attest to management’s assertion 
on the effectiveness of internal controls – whether 
they had done enough work to have the basis to 
express their opinion – and to express their own opin-
ion. If management had not fulfilled its responsibili-
ties, the auditor was required to issue a disclaimer 
opinion.
The first year – FY 2004
The PacSun SOX compliance process for FY 2004 began 
in mid-2003. At that time, the company had a lean 
accounting staff and had not previously had an internal 
audit function. The company created its internal audit 
function in mid-2003 (one manager) and outsourced 
the initial direction of the 404 compliance work to a 
Big-4 auditing firm as an “audit consultant.”2 By late 
2004, the internal audit function had been expanded to 
include a director, a manager, and two staff auditors. 
The audit consultant designed a five-step process:
1.	 Scope and plan the evaluation. This required scoping 
the entire internal control evaluation process. What 
controls and locations/units would be included in 
the study? What would be the approach, milestones, 
timeline? What resources would be needed?
2.	 Document the controls. All of the controls over rele-
vant financial statement assertions related to all sig-
nificant accounts and disclosures had to be 
documented. Documentation of controls could take 
many forms and could include a variety of informa-
tion, including policy manuals, process models, 
flowcharts, job descriptions, documents, and forms.
3.	 Evaluate the design and operating effectiveness of the 
controls. Tests of the key controls had to be designed 
and carried out, and the results of the tests had to be 
documented.
4.	 Identify, assess, and correct deficiencies. Findings 
should be communicated and deficiencies corrected, 
if possible.
5.	 Report on internal control. Management had to pre-
pare a written assertion about the effectiveness of 
internal control over financial reporting.
The audit consultant and PacSun personnel identi-
fied 21 major business processes that the company 
used, such as involving property, plant and equipment, 
payroll, and taxes (see Exhibit 2). Each of the processes 
was assigned an “owner,” and deadlines were set for 
the development of detailed process narratives.
The documentation included detailed descriptions of 
the process objectives, the risks that threatened achieve-
ment of the objectives, the controls used to minimize 
the risks, and the process owners who were responsible 
for maintaining and documenting the process. The pro-
cess narratives varied significantly in length depending 
on the complexity of the process. For example, some 
supply-chain narratives were 20–25 pages in length, 
while the equity narrative was only five pages in length.
Each of the 21 major business processes was disag-
gregated into subprocesses. Exhibit 3 shows the busi-
ness objectives, and risks for the Merchandise 
Accounting process, a part of major process number 9 
(Supply Chain Processes/Merchandise Accounting) 
(see Exhibit 2). The narrative of the process is shown in 
Exhibit 4. The two controls associated with this sub-
process that were designated as key are shown in bold 
type in this narrative.
2	 The company could not have outsourced the work to its primary 
auditor. Doing so would have compromised the primary auditor’s 
audit independence.

Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc.
601
In FY 2004, a total of 238 key controls were identi-
fied across the 21 major business processes (as is shown 
in Exhibit 2). PacSun’s CFO explained:
We did a good job in year one paring down the 
number of key controls. (Some big companies have 
identified 10,000 or more key controls.)3 But our 
task was also easier than that of some other com-
panies. We have a simple business model; a simple 
organization; and all of our major operations are 
located in Anaheim.
PacSun and the audit consultant’s personnel jointly 
performed the tests of the controls.
In FY 2004, one significant deficiency was identified 
by company management. This deficiency was caused 
by a variance between PacSun’s accounting and that 
suggested in a February 2005 interpretation letter from 
the SEC’s chief accountant. This new interpretation 
affected virtually all firms in the retail industry. The 
CFO explained:
There were several parts to the problem. First, 
when most retailers buy a store in a mall, they sign 
a 120-month lease. They start construction three 
months before opening but do not have to pay rent 
expense until the store opens. The SEC, though, 
decided that the lease should be expensed over 
123 months. Second, if we received a landlord 
incentive allowance, which is designed to help us 
fund improvements, we treated that allowance as a 
reduction in capital expeditures, rather than a 
deferred lease incentive liability. The SEC ruled that 
it should be treated as a deferred lease incentive 
liability and amortized as a reduction in rent 
expense rather than as a reduction in depreciation 
expense, as we had been doing.
The adoption of the new accounting policy 
resulted in an immaterial reduction in net income of 
less than $25,000 for each period presented. How-
ever, these corrections did result in multi-million 
dollar reclassifications between rent expense 
(within cost of goods sold) and depreciation 
expense (within selling, general and administrative 
expenses), cumulative adjustments to the property, 
plant and equipment and deferred rent amounts on 
the balance sheet, and reclassifications between 
cash flows from investing activities and cash flows 
from operating activities on the company’s state-
ments of cash flow.
The CFO explained what these changes meant from 
his perspective:
In 2005, we had to restate our prior two years’ 
financial statements, which resulted in no mate-
rial change to net income. What purpose did that 
restatement serve? I think the fact that we caught 
and fixed the problem is indicative of good inter-
nal control. But auditors judge restatements as 
deficiencies. But what type of deficiency? Here 
there is no consistency in the auditing industry. 
Two of the Big-4 firms, judged this particular 
type of restatement as only a significant defi-
ciency. The other two judged it to be a material 
weakness.
Certifications
Section 302 of SOX required both the company’s CEO 
and CFO to personally certify the “appropriateness of 
the financial statements and disclosures contained in 
the periodic report” and to guarantee that “financial 
statements and disclosures fairly present, in all mate-
rial respects, the operations and financial condition of 
the issuer.” Exhibit 5 shows the CFO’s certification that 
appeared in the company’s 10-K for FY 2004. About the 
certification requirement, the CFO said, “I feel confi-
dent about my certifications here.”
PacSun top management required their subordi-
nates to share the certification responsibility. All Pac-
Sun officers (vice president level or higher) were 
required to certify that the controls in their area were 
effective (see Exhibit 6). Process owners also had to 
sign a similar certification (see Exhibit 7). The CFO 
noted that there was no resistance to the sharing of the 
certification requirements. He said, “This should not 
just be an accounting exercise; you’ve got to get the 
whole organization engaged.”
In FY 2004, PacSun received “clean” opinions from 
its external auditors, Deloitte & Touche, LLP, both for 
the fair presentation of its financial statements and for 
the effectiveness of the company’s internal control sys-
tem (see Exhibit 8).
3	 A survey commissioned by the Big-4 accounting firms found that the 
average number of key controls identified in year one of Section 404 
compliance by larger firms, those with over $700 million in capitali-
zation, was 669. For smaller firms, those with a market capitaliza-
tion between $75 million and $700 million, the average was 262 key 
controls (CRA International, Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404 Costs and 
Implementation Issues: Spring 2006 Survey Update, Washington, DC, 
April 17, 2006, pp. 4–5). PacSun’s market capitalization was greater 
than $1 billion.

602
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
The year 2 process – FY 2005
In the second year of complying with SOX Section 404, 
the process was much easier. Everybody involved – audit 
consultant, PacSun, and primary auditor personnel – 
had already been through the process once. Most of the 
needed documentation had already been created. 
Rather than involving the audit consultant’s personnel, 
the testing of controls was done by the PacSun internal 
audit staff, which had now grown to four persons. The 
testing was spread more evenly throughout the year, as 
the company was able to anticipate better what needed 
to be done. And the primary auditor was able to com-
bine its financial statement opinion work with the 
404 audit.
In SOX year two, most companies were able to 
make significant reductions in the number of key con-
trols they tested,4 but PacSun’s reductions were rela-
tively small. The number of key controls tested was 
reduced from 238 to 222 in FY 2005, only a 7% reduc-
tion. The CFO explained that this was not surprising 
to him. He argued that PacSun had a tight, effective 
control system even before SOX was implemented; 
the control environment at PacSun was not particu-
larly complicated because the company operated pri-
marily from a single business location and, from a 
control perspective, had a simple business model; 
and PacSun and the audit consultant personnel did a 
good job in identifying the key control points in the 
first year.
But in FY 2005, the company discovered a new sig-
nificant internal control deficiency. The issue related to 
the accounting for the liabilities created by the compa-
ny’s loyalty program called “Pac Bucks.” In the Pac 
Bucks program, shoppers earn $25 in Pac Bucks for 
each $50 they spend. To use their Pac Bucks, the shop-
pers must spend at least another $50 in the stores 
within a set period of time. In FY 2005, the external 
auditors concluded that PacSun’s accounting was not 
recognizing the liabilities and expenses in the proper 
accounting quarter (the full fiscal year was unaffected). 
This accounting problem was deemed to be a signifi-
cant deficiency, but not a material weakness. In FY 
2005, PacSun received clean financial statement and 
404 opinions.
The costs of complying
The cost to PacSun of SOX compliance was significant. 
Exhibit 9 shows an estimate of the costs of 404 compli-
ance and, for comparison purposes, the costs of the 
annual financial statements audit for fiscal years 2004 
and 2005. These figures show that in FY 2004 the total 
cost of compliance – financial statement audit and 404 
compliance – was an estimated $2 million, of which 
only a small portion of the cost was attributed to the 
standard financial statement audit. In year two, the 
costs declined by almost 40%. This reduction is compa-
rable to that reported by other companies.5
But there were also some other, implicit costs. For 
example, the CFO noted that SOX had made it more bur-
densome to serve on the Audit Committee of the Board of 
Directors. At PacSun, the Audit Committee played an 
active role in the SOX 404 compliance process. While Pac-
Sun’s director of internal audit, reported administratively 
to the CFO, he reported functionally directly to the Audit 
Committee. The director of internal audit met with the 
Committee five times a year and had conference calls with 
the committee members at least once a quarter. The CFO 
noted, however, that the relationship with the Audit Com-
mittee had become much more formalized, and time-con-
suming in a sense, due to SOX. “What took 30 minutes a 
couple of years ago takes 2–3 hours now. Everyone now 
asks checklists of questions. If you don’t ask the questions, 
there is no record; and you need to create the record.”
There also were costs associated with training. 
Although PacSun did not have a formal, dedicated SOX 
training program for rank-and-file personnel, several SOX 
orientation sessions were offered in combination with 
other training programs, such as for store personnel.
Management reflections and plans 
for the future
Overall, PacSun management thought that the costs of 
the SOX compliance process far exceeded the benefits. 
The CFO explained:
There were some benefits. When you go through an 
elaborate documentation process, it is inevitable 
that you will see some gaps and some redundan-
cies. We did plug some gaps in our payroll and 
4 	A survey found that larger companies (those with greater than $700 
million in market capitalization) reduced their numbers of key 
controls tested by more than 19%, from 669 in year one to 540 in 
year two (CRA International, 2006, p. 4).
5	 Large companies (those with greater than $700 million in market 
capitalization) reported that their total costs of complying with SOX 
Section 404 declined from $8.5 million in year one to $4.8 million in 
year two, a reduction of almost 44% (CRA International, 2006, p. 3).

Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc.
603
information systems areas. Most of the changes we 
made involved better segregation of duties. For 
example, we had some payroll clerks who had 
access to too many systems. But the process was 
very expensive and, for the most part, not very use-
ful for us. This company has always been tightly 
controlled, so we did not uncover any major issues, 
and the process forced us to create a lot of docu-
mentation that was not needed.
I also wonder about the effectiveness of this leg-
islation for its intended purposes. This process will 
not stop crooks from being crooks. For example, it 
won’t stop people from doing off-balance sheet 
transactions …
When asked if the public disclosure of the significant 
internal control deficiencies had an effect on the com-
pany’s stock price, the CFO responded that he could not 
detect any.
Going into year three of the SOX process, the role 
of the PacSun internal audit function was evolving. 
The focus of the first two years of its existence was 
on financial reporting and ensuring compliance with 
SOX. In FY 2006, the focus was shifting to a broader 
focus on controlling business risks. The department 
was spending a lot less time on SOX compliance and 
a lot more time worrying about business continuity 
planning. It was also preparing to conduct some 
operational audits.
Exhibit 1  Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc.: Consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income
(in thousands, except share and per share amounts)
FISCAL YEAR ENDED
January 28, 2006
January 29, 2005
January 31, 2004
Net sales
$1,391,473
$1,229,762
$1,041,456
Cost of goods sold, including buying, distribution 
and occupancy costs
884,982
781,828
668,807
Gross margin
506,491
447,934
372,649
Selling, general and administrative expenses
309,218
277,921
244,422
Operating income
197,273
170,013
128,227
Interest income, net
5,673
1,889
732
Income before income tax expense
202,946
171,902
128,959
Income tax expense
76,734
64,998
48,759
Net income
$126,212
$106,904
$80,200
Comprehensive income
$126,212
$106,904
$80,200
Net income per share, basic
$1.69
$1.41
$1.05
Net income per share, diluted
$1.67
$1.38
$1.02
Weighted average shares outstanding, basic
74,758,874
75,825,897
76,595,758
Weighted average shares outstanding, diluted
75,713,793
77,464,115
78,849,651
(See notes to consolidated financial statements.)
Source: Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc. Annual Report 2005.

604
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
Exhibit 2  SOX 404 compliance project process index as of 2/10/2005

Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc.
605
PROCESS DOCUMENTATION:	
MERCHANDISE ACCOUNTING
PROCESS OWNER:
EFFECTIVE DATE:	
MAY 25, 2005
CONTENTS:
A.	 Control Objectives
B.	 Risks Which Threaten Objectives
C.	Computer Information Systems
A. CONTROL OBJECTIVES:
1.	 To initiate, process and accurately record appropriate purchases reserves for sales returns, markdowns, charge-
backs, vendor allowances, transfers, adjustments (to units and prices) and related liabilities.
2.	 Develop and maintain relationships with suppliers that meet company requirements.
3.	 Obtain quality merchandise on a timely basis.
4.	 Ensure inventory is properly safeguarded from damage or theft.
5.	 Inventory settings within system are complete.
6.	 Only valid inventory master file information has been captured in the system.
7.	 Accurately record physical and cycle count adjustments.
8.	 Approve and accurately record price changes and unit adjustments.
9.	 All inventory movement between the distribution center and stores (and from store to store) are recorded completely 
and accurately.
10.	 Proper presentation of inventory related line items are reflected on the financial statements.
B. RISKS WHICH THREATEN OBJECTIVES:
A.	 Poor quality merchandise is not identified timely.
B.	 Reserves for sales returns, markdowns and vendor chargebacks are not adequately reflected in the financial state-
ments (e.g. the reserve for sales returns does not reflect actual return rates).
C.	The Company obtains poor quality merchandise and/or obtains it at a different time than needed.
D.	 The Company selects suppliers that fail to meet standards.
E.	 Configured tolerances for physical inventory re-counts are inadequate. Adjustments may be inaccurate and/or posted 
by inappropriate users. Physical and cycle counts, significant adjustments are not investigated for root-cause.
F.	 Changes in prices are not authorized and/or are not automatically activated, resulting in inaccurate prices assigned to 
products.
G.	Improper cutoff procedures result in inaccurate inventory and liability balances at period-end.
H.	Inadequate receiving procedures and system content allow for the receipt of unauthorized purchases.
I.	 Inadequate monitoring of imports in transit result in inaccurate inventory and liability balances.
J.	 DC outbound shipments are not reconciled to receipts at stores resulting in missing/damaged goods not properly 
reflected on the financial statements.
K.	 Inventory accounts (including RTV’s) are not reconciled timely resulting in inaccurate inventory’s AP balances.
L.	 Inventory is not properly safeguarded from damage or theft.
M.	Shortages/discrepancies identified are not monitored or reflected in inventory balances and/or root-cause are not iden-
tified and addressed in a timely manner (e.g. supplier failing to meet standards, employee picking inaccuracies, etc.).
N.	Financial statement presentation and disclosures is inaccurate and/or misleading.
O.	Inventory movements between distribution center and the stores or between stores monitored, reconciled, or are not 
properly recorded.
P.	 Inappropriate inventory system settings may impact financial statements.
Q.	Incomplete or duplicated master data could prevent the initiation or completion of transactions.
R.	 Slow moving inventories are not identified in a timely manner.
S.	 Vendor allowances are being allocated to the wrong class of inventory or to the wrong vendor, and/or allowance 
amount is improperly calculated.
C. COMPUTER INFORMATION SYSTEMS:
Island Pacific, PKMS, Travado POS System
Exhibit 3  Objectives and risks of the merchandise accounting process

606
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
SUBPROCESS: DISTRIBUTION CENTER RECEIVING
Once the PO is EDIed to the vendor, the vendor then fills the PO and requests an Advance Shipping Notice (ASN) from 
Pac Sun. The ASN details out what Pac Sun expects to receive at the case level detail (it is similar to the vendor’s ship-
ping document or packing slip). Currently, Pac Sun has vendors on two different types of EDI: (1) SPS Commerce EDI 
and (2) Traditional EDI. SPS Commerce is a web based EDI tool that allows the vendor to look at the PO online, input 
their shipping information online, and if the shipping parameters are within predefined tolerance levels, Pac Sun will 
automatically generate an ASN for the vendor.
The system will not accept any ASNs outside of the predefined tolerance levels without a manual override of the 
system (SCP6). Only Store Planning and Allocation Managers (SPAMs), the Sr. Programmer Analyst, and the Import 
Assurance Coordinator, at the direction of the buyer, have the ability (and the system access within the EDI user mainte-
nance IP profile control) to perform these types of override (CP7).
With Traditional EDI, the vendor is subject to the same business rules regarding quantity and price that determine if the 
shipment is within tolerance, and if it is, an ASN is generated. The Senior Programmer Analyst monitors all transactions to 
ensure that none are hung up in the system. (SCP8) If an ASN is hung up, the Senior Programmer Analyst will contact the 
buyer so that the vendor can be contacted and any issues resolved. Once both Pac Sun and the vendor have accepted the 
ASN, all of the PO history can be seen in IP and the vendor can print labels for the cartons that will be delivered to Pac Sun.
The PKMS system is based on only allowing one SKU per case. PKMS can also handle prepacks (merchandise pre-
packaged in a set size run – for example, 5 small, 10 medium, 20 large, 12 x-large in a single prepack). The system has 
a subfile that identifies prepacks. Prepacks are still only allowed one SKU per box and they will show up in the system 
as size 1111 (instead of a valid size code). In the IP system, the prepacks are exploded into the individual sizes and eve-
rything is seen by individual SKU. PKMS takes care of all of the warehouse instructions regarding packing and picking of 
the merchandise. The PKMS software generates transactions called PIX’s to bridge PKMS and IP. Based on instructions 
generated from PKMS, the PIX will update IP. A Never Ending Program (NEPS) is constantly running that scoops all of 
the instructions out of PKMS to IP using PIX’s so that IP is continuously being refreshed and updated with the most 
recent movement activity in the warehouse.
When a valid ASN is accepted, it allows the vendor to call the distribution center (DC) and schedule a delivery 
appointment (CP9). When the goods arrive, the trucking company buzzes in at the security gate. In PKMS, the first PIX 
is the receipt of the merchandise.
Merchandise is only received and accepted if there is a valid PO, ASN and delivery appointment (CP10). In order to be 
able to enter the docking facility and be assigned a door number, the truck driver must provide a valid ASN/PO and have a 
delivery appointment. Once the security guard and the receiving office validate everything, the truck is instructed to go to a 
particular door. The truck is parked, the documents are presented to the receiving personnel and the truck is unloaded and the 
cartons scanned by RF gun. The RF scan creates a PIX in PKMS and a receipt in IP. PKMS records the number of cartons 
received and the units in each carton, which is then bridged (via a PIX) into the IP system. The IP system then automatically 
closes the PO if the PO has been filled (SCP11). A receipt number is generated in IP (next available number in the sequence) 
and a purchase is generated in the stock ledger (SCP12). The stock ledger represents the perpetual inventory record for the 
chain. This process helps to ensure that merchandise received is recorded accurately and all merchandise received is recorded.
A predetermined level of test cartons is set (currently set at every 10th carton) whereby the carton is opened on the 
dock to verify that the ASN agrees to the carton contents (SCP13). PKMS will instruct the receivers to conduct random 
audits of cartons by prompting them after a carton has been scanned. The receiving of the goods cannot continue until 
this audit has been completed and the information regarding the quantities in the carton have been input into the RF gun. 
This predetermined level can be adjusted at the vendor level if it has been determined that a vendor has a high incidence 
of discrepancies. If certain checks fail, then the carton will be segregated to the rework area to be resolved with the 
vendors. At this point, there is a 100% review of the shipment prior to it being received in the system (i.e. the entire con-
tents of the trailer are sent to the rework area for review prior to receipt). Any unusual items are forwarded to one of the 
DC Supervisors who investigates the differences and ensures correct treatment.
Rejected merchandise is adequately segregated from good merchandise and regularly monitored to ensure timely 
return to vendors (CP14). If merchandise is known to have problems from the outset (i.e. no ASN) they are sent to the 
“hospital.” Items in the hospital have been physically received, but they are not recorded in IP. (See discussion regarding 
proper cutoff below.) The hospital is the troubled goods area where the inventory is reviewed to determine whether it can 
be reworked or if it should be returned to the vendor. The buyer is contacted if the goods are damaged and the buyer 
obtains a return authorization (RA) number from the vendor. DC personnel (the RTV Supervisor) contact the buyer for RA 
information for merchandise in RT (RTV) status. Once an RA# has been received, the goods are shipped and PKMS and 
IP inventory are relieved.
Exhibit 4  Narrative describing the process and controls surrounding distribution center receiving, a merchandise 
accounting subprocess

Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc.
607
I, __________, certify that:
1.	 I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc.;
2.	 Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a mate-
rial fact necessary in order to make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements 
were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.	 Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly pre-
sent in all material respects the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and 
for, the periods presented in this report;
4.	 The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and 
procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a–15(e) and 15d–15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting 
(as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a–15(f) and 15d–15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)	 Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be 
designed under our supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its con-
solidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the period in which 
this report is being prepared;
b)	 Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to 
be designed under our supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting 
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted account-
ing principles;
c)	 Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our 
conclusions about the effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures as of the end of the period covered 
by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)	 Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during 
the registrant’s most recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that 
has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial 
reporting; and
5.	 The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control 
over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or 
persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)	 All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial 
reporting which are reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and 
report financial information; and
b)	 Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in 
the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting.
Date: April 7, 2005
_______________________________________
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
Exhibit 5  CFO financial statement and internal control certification
Although the goods have been physically received, items in the hospital have not been received in the IP system due 
to the fact that there is something wrong with them. In order to ensure that all items are properly recorded in inventory at 
any quarter- or year-end cutoff warehouse management and either the Merchandise Accounting Manager or the Assistant 
Controller – Merchandise Accounting physically inspect the hospital area at these cutoff dates noting the PO information 
for merchandise in the hospital area so that the goods can be accrued for. (CP15). A reversing journal entry is posted to 
accrue the PO quantity and cost for the goods in the hospital area that have not been systemically received in IP.
Exhibit 4  (Continued)

608
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
I, __________________________, certify that:
1.	 I have brought to the CFO’s attention everything that I believe might be important for purposes of disclosure in the 
Company’s financial statements, including those filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission;
2.	 I am not aware of any material transactions (over $5,000) or agreements that I have not already reported to Finance 
via the monthly accrual sheet or other mode of communication;
3.	 I have not entered into any transactions or agreements on behalf of the Company that are in violation of the Compa-
ny’s policies, including the Company’s Code of Ethics;
4.	 I have not made any false statements of material fact or intentionally omitted facts that would make the information 
underlying the Company’s financial statements misleading as to any material fact;
5.	 I am not aware of (a) any fraud involving management or employees who have significant roles in the system of inter-
nal control or any fraud involving others which could have a material effect on the financial statements, (b) any viola-
tions of laws or regulations whose effects have not been considered for disclosure in the financial statements or as a 
basis of recording a loss contingency, (c) any communications from regulatory agencies concerning noncompliance 
with or deficiencies in financial statements, or (d) any failure to comply with contractual agreements where such fail-
ure would have a material effect on the financial statements that has not been discussed or for which a provision has 
not been recorded; and
6.	 I know of no plans or intentions that may materially alter the valuation of any Company assets or liabilities.
________________________________
Signature
_____________________
Date
Exhibit 6  Officer quarterly disclosure certification
Exhibit 7  Process owner certification
I, _______________________, certify that:
1.	 I am the designated Process Owner for the processes listed below and, as such, I am responsible for maintaining the 
adequacy and accuracy of the Process Narrative which serves as the documentation of disclosure controls and proce-
dures and internal control over financial reporting for those processes. I am responsible for the following processes:
_________________  _________________
_________________  _________________
_________________  _________________
2.	 The process narratives on file with the Internal Audit department for my designated processes accurately document 
the internal control over financial reporting in existence at the end of the quarter covered by this certification.
3.	 I have disclosed to the Director of Internal Audit any change in internal control over financial reporting that occurred 
during the most recent fiscal quarter that has materially, or is reasonably likely to materially affect internal control over 
financial reporting.
4.	 I have evaluated the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting for my designated processes and 
have concluded that such controls and procedures were effective as of the end of the quarter covered by this report.
5.	 Based on my evaluation, I have disclosed to the Director of Internal Audit any control deficiencies in the design or 
operation of internal control over financial reporting which are likely to adversely affect the company’s ability to 
record, process, summarize, and report financial information.
6.	 I have disclosed to the Ethics Review Team or the Audit Committee any fraud, whether or not material, that involves 
management or other employees who have a significant role in the company’s internal control over financial reporting.
________________________________
Signature
_____________________
Date

Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc.
609
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of
Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc.
Anaheim, California
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc. and 
subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of January 29, 2005 and January 31, 2004, and the related consolidated statements of 
income and comprehensive income, shareholders’ equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended 
January 29, 2005. These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is 
to express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
(United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evi-
dence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the account-
ing principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement 
presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of 
Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc. and subsidiaries as of January 29, 2005 and January 31, 2004, and the results of their 
operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended January 29, 2005, in conformity with 
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United 
States), the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of January 29, 2005, based on the 
criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of 
the Treadway Commission and our report, dated April 4, 2005, expressed an unqualified opinion on management’s 
assessment of the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting and an unqualified opinion on 
the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
As discussed in Note 2, the accompanying consolidated financial statements as of January 31, 2004 and for the 
years ended January 31, 2004 and February 1, 2003 have been restated.
Deloitte & Touche LLP
Costa Mesa, California
April 4, 2005
Exhibit 8  Report of independent registered public accounting firm, FY 2004
Exhibit 9  PacSun estimated audit and SOX compliance costs, FY 2004 and FY 2005 ($000)
FY 2004
FY 2005
Primary auditor
Standard financial statement audit
240
225
SOX 404 audit
470
345
Audit consultant
Documentation and testing – non-IT
100
Documentation and testing – IT
600
70
PacSun
Setting up the Internal Audit dept.; started with SOX implementation
200
315
Other costs (rough guess by CFO)
500
300
Total financial statement audit and SOX 404 compliance costs
$2,110
$1,255
This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant, Wim A. Van der Stede and research assistant Fei Du.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede.

610
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
 In 2009, Entropic Communications, a small but grow-
ing semiconductor company headquartered in San 
Diego, California, was implementing a new Enterprise 
Risk Management (ERM) process. Lance Bridges, 
Entropic’s VP/general counsel, had taken the lead in 
developing the process and was coordinating its imple-
mentation. The fi rst full process cycle was completed at 
the end of 2009. Lance was contemplating how eff ec-
tive it had been. 
 Lance was sure that the process had raised issues, 
stimulated discussion, and resulted in some tangible 
measures to mitigate risk. But he had a few areas of 
concern. He thought the risks that were identified 
might have been better aligned with company objec-
tives. He knew that some department heads had not 
taken the process seriously. He was not sure either if 
there had been enough communication between 
departments or if the departments had applied risk 
scores consistently. Lance also wondered if a process 
like ERM might be most helpful in dealing with already 
known risks, and less useful for identifying and analyz-
ing new risks that could arise in the dynamic industry 
in which Entropic operated. And he was unsure of the 
value of the fi nal output of the ERM process – a risk 
management matrix. Some managers in the company 
had shown little or no interest in it. As Entropic headed 
into 2010, Lance was considering how the company 
might improve the process going forward. 
 Company background 
 Entropic Communications, Inc. was a fabless semicon-
ductor company (meaning that it specialized in the 
design and sale of hardware devices while outsourcing 
the fabrication or “fab” of the devices to a specialized 
manufacturer) focused on ground-breaking system 
solutions for connected home entertainment. Entropic 
was incorporated in Delaware in 2001 and went public 
in 2007. The company’s stock traded on NASDAQ under 
the symbol ENTR. In 2009, revenues totaled $116 mil-
lion (see  Exhibit  1 ). At the end of 2009, Entropic 
employed approximately 300 people. The organization 
was structured by functional department (e.g. sales, 
marketing, engineering, human resources). 
 Entropic sold products in four product lines: home 
networking, DBS outdoor unit solutions, broadband 
access, and TV tuners. Entropic’s home networking 
solutions enabled service providers to deliver multiple 
streams of high defi nition (HD) video throughout the 
home using the existing coaxial cable infrastructure. 
Applications of this technology allowed end users to 
download and share or “place-shift” video and per-
sonal content (e.g. photos, games) throughout the 
home. A demonstration of Entropic’s home networking 
solutions can be seen at  www.entropic.com/products/
mocaanimation.htm . Entropic’s DBS outdoor unit solu-
tions supported multiple tuners and simultaneous 
reception of multiple channels, from multiple satellites, 
over a single cable. Formerly each tuner required a 
unique cable, but with Entropic technology, a single 
cable could support 12 tuners. The simplifi ed cabling 
structure allowed satellite broadcasters to roll out new 
services without expensive installation and retrofi t-
ting, while improving aesthetics for the homeowner. 
 Entropic’s broadband access solution was a cost-
effective delivery system for broadband data, video 
networking, and voice services, designed to deliver 
“last kilometer” connectivity to customers in areas 
with fiber optic networks that terminated up to 
600 meters from their home. 
 Entropic also sold silicon tuners with support for 
multiple analog and digital standards for terrestrial 
and cable applications. 
 Most of Entropic’s customers were original equip-
ment manufacturers (OEMs) that sold equipment incor-
porating Entropic technologies to service providers, 
such as telecommunications companies (e.g. Verizon), 
cable companies (e.g. Comcast), and direct broadcast 
satellite (DBS) companies (e.g. DISH Network, 
DirecTV). Entropic worked closely with OEMs and ser-
vice providers to develop customized solutions, and to 
increase the adoption of solutions that included Entropic 
 CASE STUDY 
 Entropic Communications, Inc. 

Entropic Communications, Inc.
611
technology. In 2009, four OEM customers accounted for 
58% of Entropic’s net revenues.
Entropic’s products all provided technological advan-
tages, but they competed in extremely dynamic markets 
characterized by rapid technological advancements, 
evolving industry standards and new demands for fea-
tures and performance of multimedia content delivery 
solutions. Many of Entropic’s competitors had longer 
operating histories and significantly more resources.
Enterprise Risk Management
In 2010, risk was a hot topic in business management. 
Throughout the preceding decade, stricter regulatory 
compliance requirements, rating agency attention, and 
risk reporting requirements all promoted interest in the 
subject. Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) emerged as 
one of the leading management tools used to address risk.
A string of accounting scandals, most notably Enron 
and WorldCom, led to the passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act in 2002. Sarbanes-Oxley focused on internal con-
trols related to fraud, compliance, and financial report-
ing risks. Under Section 404 of the act, management was 
required to produce an annual “internal control report” 
verifying the effectiveness of internal controls over 
financial reporting. To meet the compliance require-
ments, many managers organized their documentation 
and tests of internal controls using the Internal Control 
Framework developed by the Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
In 2004, COSO developed a framework for Enter-
prise Risk Management that incorporated the widely 
used Internal Control Framework, but addressed a 
much broader range of risks. ERM encompassed opera-
tional and strategic risks, as well as the more easily 
defined financial, reporting, and compliance risks. 
COSO defined ERM as “a process, effected by an enti-
ty’s board of directors, management and other person-
nel, applied in strategy setting and across the 
enterprise, designed to identify potential events that 
may affect the entity, and manage risk to be within its 
risk appetite, to provide reasonable assurance regard-
ing the achievement of entity objectives.” The COSO 
framework categorized objectives as strategic, opera-
tional, reporting, and compliance. The framework out-
lined eight “components” or process steps to analyze, 
manage, and monitor risks (see Exhibit 2). The ERM 
framework was designed to align a corporation’s actual 
risk exposure with its risk appetite. The goal of ERM 
was to reduce negative surprises and improve risk 
response decisions, ultimately improving an enter-
prise’s financial performance.
In 2008, the global financial crisis led many to ques-
tion whether risk was being adequately addressed in 
financial institutions specifically, but also in publically 
traded companies more generally. Standard and Poor’s 
Rating Services (S&P) had incorporated risk manage-
ment into their ratings for financial and insurance compa-
nies since 2005. In the latter part of 2008, they began to 
incorporate ERM discussions into regular meetings with 
nonfinancial companies as well. After interviewing more 
than 300 nonfinancial companies, they released prelimi-
nary findings regarding ERM in July 2009 (see Exhibit 3).
In early 2010, the Securities Exchange Commission 
(SEC) amended its proxy statement requirements to 
require a discussion of the board’s role in risk oversight. 
(See Exhibit 4 for SEC’s final rule.) The stated purpose 
was to “improve corporate disclosure regarding risk, 
compensation and corporate governance matters when 
voting decisions are made.” While a formal ERM process 
was not specifically required, the new SEC rule put pres-
sure on boards and management to create a structured 
risk management process of some kind and in some form.
It was in this environment that Entropic’s manage-
ment decided to implement ERM, in part to help the 
board of directors discharge its fiduciary duties. 
Entropic’s finance department already reported finan-
cial risks to the board’s audit committee quarterly; the 
board reviewed operational risks in connection with 
the SEC filings quarterly; and the board regularly dis-
cussed strategic risks at quarterly Board meetings, but 
Lance believed a more comprehensive summary of the 
company’s risk assessment and management practices 
would be helpful. Lance had completed a risk manage-
ment process for the legal department because he 
wanted an organized, systemic approach to identify 
and address risks in his area of responsibility. Lance 
presented his method and findings to the audit commit-
tee of the board in the fall of 2008, and recommended 
rolling out the process to the entire company the fol-
lowing year. Patrick Henry, Entropic’s president and 
CEO, agreed with Lance’s recommendation, so Lance 
embarked on the creation of a comprehensive ERM pro-
cess at Entropic.
The ERM process at Entropic
Implementing an ERM process generally involved five 
steps: event identification, risk assessment, risk 
response, communication, and monitoring.

612
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
Event identification
Lance began the event-identification process with the 
risks discussed in the SEC 10-K filings (see summary in 
Exhibit 5). Like all publicly traded corporations, Entropic 
was required to disclose its risk factors, including busi-
ness, financial, and liquidity risks, in its annual report on 
Form 10-K. Lance sorted those risks by department and 
then charged each department head to develop a more 
comprehensive list of risk events for their respective 
department, using his list as a starting point.
Each department approached the event identification 
task slightly differently. Some used frameworks to make 
the process more systematic and comprehensive. Human 
Resources developed a matrix of functional department 
(benefits, payroll, recruitment) and the life cycle of an 
employee (recruit, hire, separation) as a framework for 
identifying risks. Marketing chose to identify risks by 
functional department, by product line, and by risk type 
(competitive, company, and customer risks). Legal used 
a risk template from an outside source to make certain 
its list was comprehensive. The departments that were 
not as engaged in the process relied heavily, and in some 
cases exclusively, on Lance’s initial list of risks. The final 
output was a catalog of almost 150 potential risk events, 
sorted by department. (See Exhibit 6 for an excerpt from 
the Risk Management Matrix.)
The department heads who invested time in the pro-
cess believed that it was helpful to go through the event 
identification exercise, although most agreed that the 
process itself was more useful than the output. Many 
found it beneficial to spend time analyzing the business 
in terms of risk. They believed that the process provided 
assurance that known risks were clarified and were 
being addressed. For example, Lance was able to pin-
point and clarify legal obligations in areas that he did 
not deal with every day (e.g. facilities and certain labor 
laws) and to make sure that those risks were being mon-
itored by an appropriate department manager.
Most of the risks identified were well known. The lack 
of new findings was not usually considered a failure of 
the process, but was more often attributed to manage-
ment already actively addressing risks. As Patrick Henry 
stated, “If there had been big surprises, it would have 
meant we were asleep at the wheel.” However there was 
some acknowledgement that there could be flaws inher-
ent in the process itself. Suzanne Zoumaras, VP Human 
Resources, explained, “The list is only as good as the 
people who create it. The same people who create a list 
of risks, aren’t going to be surprised by it.”
Risk assessment
Risk assessment or quantification involved prioritizing 
and rating the potential severity of the risks. To that 
end, Lance developed a simple two-dimensional scor-
ing method that was used by all of the departments. To 
locate each item on a “risk heat map,” a severity score 
and a likelihood score were assigned to each risk event. 
The product of the scores became the overall score. 
Severity and likelihood were quantitatively defined, as 
explained in Figure 1 below. Severity was defined in 
terms of cash impact. Likelihood was defined in terms 
of a probability of occurrence in a given timeframe.
Figure 1  Risk heat map
Severity
3
3
6
9
2
2
4
6
1
1
2
3
1
2
3
Likelihood
Severity scale
1 = Not significant (likely annual cash impact from risk 
occurring < $1 million)
2 = Significant but not material (likely annual cash impact 
from risk occurring is $1–$3 million)
3 = Material (likely annual cash impact > $3 million 
OR likely to affect stock price)
Likelihood scale
1 = Unlikely to occur in the next 12 months
2 = Potential for minor occurrences in the next 12 months
3 = Minor occurrences happening now OR potential for 
significant occurrences in next 12 months

Entropic Communications, Inc.
613
Entropic considered the risk events independently; 
there was no attempt to identify or quantify correla-
tions between them. Every department used the same 
scoring system, but the scoring was done solely within 
each department. Individual risk scores were not aggre-
gated into an overall company risk score that could be 
tracked over time. Top management had no enthusiasm 
to introduce an aggregate score into the process.
Most managers were happy with the scoring system. 
They found it easy to implement and useful. In some 
cases, quantifying risks helped department managers 
realize that they didn’t have high-level risks. In other 
cases, quantifying risks enabled managers to prioritize 
and focus. As Vinay Gokhale, Senior VP – Marketing 
and Business Development, explained, “Having metrics 
really helped. Otherwise it would have just been a big 
worry session.” Nevertheless, Lance wondered if every-
one applied the scoring method consistently and rigor-
ously. He suspected that some participants might have 
just backed into the numbers they wanted.
Mitigation measures were summarized in a Risk 
Management Matrix for risks with a score of 4 or less. 
The 16 risks with scores of 6 or 9 received more atten-
tion, and in some cases risk-mitigation programs were 
initiated or improved.
Risk response/control activities
In most cases, mitigation plans were designed to reduce 
risk. For example, the legal department identified the 
lack of a formal document-retention policy and related 
procedures for preserving or destroying documents as 
a risk. As part of the risk response effort, IT and Legal 
collaborated, ultimately developing a Document Reten-
tion Policy that was subsequently implemented at 
Entropic. As a direct result, emails were moved to a 
new server and were only retained for one year rather 
than indefinitely, resulting in potentially significant 
savings and enhancing the company’s ability to comply 
with electronic discovery orders in litigation. In Human 
Resources, ERM stimulated a higher level of compli-
ance to existing standards. For instance, Human 
Resources developed measures to ensure that job 
descriptions were updated when people changed posi-
tions internally.
In other cases, a choice was made merely to accept 
certain risks. One of the few risks assessed as 9 was 
competitive risk, specifically relating to inadequate 
information on competitor’s plans and products. 
Although managers at Entropic aggressively sought 
public information on competitors, they recognized 
that often reliable competitive information was just not 
available or hard to come by in the emerging industries 
in which they operated. This risk was accepted as 
inherent to the business. As Patrick explained, “Any 
company with a viable business model has competitive 
risk. You can’t mitigate it completely, unless you have a 
tiny uninteresting market.”
A third option, avoiding a risk by eliminating the 
risky event altogether, was not employed by any of the 
departments.
Communication
The majority of communication throughout the process 
took place between Lance and the department heads. 
No company-wide meeting dedicated to discussion of 
either the ERM process or the output was scheduled. 
Informally, however, some of the issues identified in 
the ERM process made their way into discussions at 
other formal company-wide meetings, such as the 
Annual Operating Plan (AOP) meetings. In December 
2009, Lance presented the final output – the Risk Man-
agement Matrix with a summary of mitigation meas-
ures – to Patrick Henry and Entropic’s Board of 
Directors.
Monitoring
The last step in the process was to decide how risks 
would be monitored on an ongoing basis. Lance and 
Patrick agreed that it would probably make sense to 
monitor existing risks on a semi-annual basis and to 
update the Risk Management Matrix on an annual 
basis.
Departmental participation
Department heads were given flexibility to tailor their 
department’s level of participation in the ERM process 
to fit their departmental needs. As a result, the amount 
of commitment to the process varied greatly from 
department to department.
The Engineering department was at one end of the 
spectrum. Engineering already had a robust quality 
control process in place that governed not only manu-
facturing but also new product development and testing 
processes. Consequently, engineering managers saw 
the ERM initiative as largely “make-work.” The depart-
ment’s culture, which stressed innovation and creativ-
ity, tended to resist formal process and bureaucracy.

614
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
Management in the Finance department didn’t see a 
great need for ERM, either. In 2008, the Finance 
department had updated its internal controls to comply 
with requirements imposed by Sarbanes-Oxley and the 
SEC for public companies. As a result, the department 
had recently been through a detailed review of its risk 
management practices. With regard to this new ERM 
process, CFO David Lyle explained,
It’s not something that we put a lot of time into. 
When you’re a smaller company and you have a 
smaller department, you tend to have fewer 
resources than are needed to do everything you 
need to do. A separate ERM program is lower on 
the priority for this department because we don’t 
have a lot of time to spend on it. But I’m a huge fan 
of process. I don’t want to discount its value, just 
because I didn’t participate so much in it. We 
already manage risk well. We talk about risk every 
day. I just don’t think Lance’s forms helped us.
On the other end of the spectrum were Human 
Resources and Marketing, two departments that par-
ticipated actively in ERM and that found it useful. Suzy 
Zoumaris explained, “I’m a process person; having the 
right processes and controls in place frees me up to do 
more strategic things.”
Patrick Henry was not troubled by the varying levels 
of commitment to the ERM process. Participation in the 
ERM process had no bearing on performance reviews 
or capital allocations. Patrick had a pragmatic perspec-
tive. He was not interested in championing processes 
for process sake. He recognized the need for good sys-
tems, but was also cognizant of the downside of adding 
too much process too quickly. He explained,
It’s important to layer on process at the right thickness 
and to scale it appropriately to the size of the com-
pany. One of the key benefits of being a small company 
is speed of decision making. We don’t want to become 
too bureaucratic and become a slave to process, as 
opposed to designing processes that serve us.
Final thoughts
Lance and Patrick were largely satisfied with the ERM 
process. They thought that the time spent going 
through the process was valuable and reasonable. But 
they didn’t see a pressing need to further expand or 
elevate ERM in the near future.
Lance considered improving the process by chang-
ing to the COSO organizing framework – strategic, 
operational, reporting, and compliance risks – to iden-
tify and describe types of risk in future iterations. He 
thought that categorizing risks by objective could help 
particularly in identifying risks that intersected multi-
ple departments. He also considered improving the 
process through further work on the back end of the 
process, particularly analyzing how risks were interre-
lated and the extent to which mitigating or addressing 
one risk might increase other risks or lead to new risks 
not previously identified.
Despite Lance’s and Patrick’s overall satisfaction 
with ERM, they recognized some of its limitations. 
The process was redundant for some departments. 
Not all risks could be mitigated. In fact, the most 
severe risk was inherent to the business. Not all risks 
could be anticipated; in the same year that ERM was 
implemented, Entropic mitigated a serious business 
risk that was not on the ERM matrix. A service pro-
vider insisted on using technology that Entropic 
engineers were sure would not meet quality stand-
ards. Entropic management could refuse the service 
provider’s request, or move forward with a sub-opti-
mal solution, but either way they ran the risk of los-
ing an important customer. Entropic management 
was ultimately able to work out a solution, but the 
risk of losing the service provider’s business dwarfed 
any of the risks in the ERM matrix. Patrick felt 
strongly that responding well to surprises was as, or 
more, important than trying to identify and mitigate 
everything upfront. Nevertheless, Entropic planned 
to continue to refine and use the ERM process in the 
future.

Entropic Communications, Inc.
615
Exhibit 1  Entropic Communications, Inc., income statements (2005–2009)
Years Ended December 31
2009
2008
2007
2006
2005
(in $ thousands, except per share data)
Consolidated Statement of Operations Data:
Net revenues
$116,305
$146,033
$122,545
$41,471
$3,719
Cost of net revenues
57,399
79,411
76,196
31,099
1,979
Gross profit
58,906
66,622
46,349
10,372
1,740
Operating expense:
Research and development
45,161
55,769
35,235
11,601
9,574
Sales and marketing
13,955
16,262
10,348
4,112
2,247
General and administrative
10,868
12,752
8,685
2,192
1,846
Write off of in-process research and development
–
1,300
21,400
–
–
Amortization of intangible assets
16
2,735
2,634
–
–
Restructuring charges
2,173
1,259
–
–
–
Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets
208
113,193
–
–
–
Total operating expenses
72,381
203,270
78,302
17,905
13,667
Loss from operations
(13,475)
(136,648)
(31,953)
(7,533)
(11,927)
Other income (expense), net
142
229
31
482
(269)
Income tax (benefit) provision
(93)
(49)
44
–
–
Net loss
(13,240)
(136,370)
(31,966)
(7,051)
(12,196)
Accretion of redeemable convertible preferred stock
–
–
(118)
(126)
(89)
Net loss attributable to common stockholders
$(13,240)
$(136,370)
$(32,084)
$(7,177)
$(12,285)
Net loss per share attributable to common 
stockholders – basic and diluted
$(0.19)
$(2.01)
$(2.47)
$(1.66)
$(3.70)
Weighted average number of shares used to compute 
net loss per share attributable to common 
stockholders
69,834
67,733
13,011
4,325
3,317
Source: 2009 Form 10-K.

616
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
Exhibit 2  COSO Enterprise Risk Management integrated framework – objectives and components
This enterprise risk management framework is geared to achieving an entity’s objectives, set forth in four categories:
• Strategic – high-level goals, aligned with and supporting its mission
• Operations – effective and efficient use of its resources
• Reporting – reliability of reporting
• Compliance – compliance with applicable laws and regulations
Components of enterprise risk management
Enterprise Risk Management consists of eight interrelated components. These are derived from the way management 
runs an enterprise and are integrated with the management process. These components are:
• Internal environment – The internal environment encompasses the tone of an organization, and sets the basis for how 
risk is viewed and addressed by an entity’s people, including risk management philosophy and risk appetite, integrity 
and ethical values, and the environment in which they operate.
• Objective setting – Objectives must exist before management can identify potential events affecting their achievement. 
Enterprise Risk Management ensures that management has in place a process to set objectives and that the chosen 
objectives support and align with the entity’s mission and are consistent with its risk appetite.
• Event identification – Internal and external events affecting achievement of an entity’s objectives must be identified, dis-
tinguishing between risks and opportunities. Opportunities are channeled back to management’s strategy or objective-
setting processes.
• Risk assessment – Risks are analyzed, considering likelihood and impact, as a basis for determining how they should 
be managed. Risks are assessed on an inherent and a residual basis.
• Risk response – Management selects risk responses – avoiding, accepting, reducing, or sharing risk – developing a set 
of actions to align risks with the entity’s risk tolerances and risk appetite.
• Control activities – Policies and procedures are established and implemented to help ensure the risk responses are 
effectively carried out.
• Information and communication – Relevant information is identified, captured, and communicated in a form and 
timeframe that enable people to carry out their responsibilities. Effective communication also occurs in a broader 
sense, flowing down, across, and up the entity.
• Monitoring – The entirety of enterprise risk management is monitored and modifications made as necessary. Monitoring 
is accomplished through ongoing management activities, separate evaluations, or both.
Source: ERM – Integrated Framework, Executive Summary, September 2004.

Entropic Communications, Inc.
617
Exhibit 3  S&P Progress Report: Integrating Enterprise Risk Management analysis into corporate credit ratings, 
July 22, 2009, preliminary findings
Based on our discussions, we note that:
• The level of adoption, formality, maturity, and engagement of ERM varies widely within and across sectors and regions. 
We haven’t seen many companies provide clear examples of definitions for risk tolerance or risk appetite. While that’s 
not surprising (since ERM is still relatively new), a preliminary conclusion could be that many companies find it difficult 
to ensure uniform behavior across the enterprise.
• Many companies exhibit an active management of risks with ongoing risk reviews and the assessment of high-impact/
high-probability risks.
• The way the risk management function fits in the organizational structure indicates how integrated a company’s 
approach is to risk management. We observe that “silo-based” risk management, focused only at the operational man-
agers’ level, continues to be prevalent.
• There appears to be a link between transparency and disclosure and companies’ confidence about ERM; many com-
panies have been willing and able to provide considerable detail about risk management practices.
• Companies with a true enterprise-wide approach to ERM appreciate the importance of going beyond only quantifiable 
risks or even top 10 risks. They increasingly understand the importance of emerging risks.
• Companies often facilitate their ERM execution via separate structures, with associated roles and responsibilities 
clearly defined. The ERM function’s reporting line is typically to the CFO or the CEO, often with a direct line of com-
munication to the board of directors, commonly to the audit committee. However, we have also seen numerous exam-
ples of risk-management structures that lack stature and influence in their organizations.
• Companies in industries with more quantifiable and hedgeable risks are generally more comfortable discussing ERM, 
but they tend to focus on controls of those specific risks. Examples include: energy, pharmaceuticals, agribusiness, 
and some manufacturers.
Just as a company’s introduction of ERM is unlikely to radically change its current decision-making processes, we don’t 
see ERM analysis radically altering our existing credit rating opinions. We expect its value to be incremental in many 
cases, negligible in a few, and eye opening in some.

618
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
Exhibit 4  SEC rule amendments, summary and excerpt
PROXY DISCLOSURE ENHANCEMENTS AGENCY: Securities and Exchange Commission.
ACTION: Final rule.
SUMMARY: We are adopting amendments to our rules that will enhance information provided in connection with proxy 
solicitations and in other reports filed with the Commission. The amendments will require registrants to make new or 
revised disclosures about: compensation policies and practices that present material risks to the company; stock and 
option awards of executives and directors; director and nominee qualifications and legal proceedings; board leadership 
structure; the board’s role in risk oversight; and potential conflicts of interest of compensation consultants that advise 
companies and their boards of directors. The amendments to our disclosure rules will be applicable to proxy and infor-
mation statements, annual reports and registration statements under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and registra-
tion statements under the Securities Act of 1933 as well as the Investment Company Act of 1940. We are also transferring 
from Forms 10-Q and 10-K to Form 8-K the requirement to disclose shareholder voting results.
EFFECTIVE DATE: February 28, 2010
C. New Disclosure about Board Leadership Structure and the Board’s Role in Risk Oversight
3. Final Rule
The final rules also require companies to describe the board’s role in the oversight of risk. We were persuaded by com-
menters who noted that risk oversight is a key competence of the board, and that additional disclosures would improve 
investor and shareholder understanding of the role of the board in the organization’s risk management practices. Com-
panies face a variety of risks, including credit risk, liquidity risk, and operational risk. As we noted in the Proposing 
Release, similar to disclosure about the leadership structure of a board, disclosure about the board’s involvement in the 
oversight of the risk management process should provide important information to investors about how a company 
perceives the role of its board and the relationship between the board and senior management in managing the material 
risks facing the company. This disclosure requirement gives companies the flexibility to describe how the board admin-
isters its risk oversight function, such as through the whole board, or through a separate risk committee or the audit 
committee, for example. Where relevant, companies may want to address whether the individuals who supervise the 
day-to-day risk management responsibilities report directly to the board as a whole or to a board committee or how the 
board or committee otherwise receives information from such individuals.

Entropic Communications, Inc.
619
Investing in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. Before deciding to purchase, hold or sell our common stock, 
you should carefully consider the risks described below in addition to the other cautionary statements and risks described, 
and the other information contained, elsewhere in this Annual Report and in our other filings with the SEC. The risks and 
uncertainties described below are not the only ones we face. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us 
or that we currently deem immaterial may also affect our business. If any of these known or unknown risks or uncertainties 
actually occurs, our business, financial condition, results of operations and/or liquidity could be seriously harmed. In that 
event, the trading price of our common stock could decline and you could lose some or all of your investment.
Risks related to our business
We have had net operating losses for several years, had an accumulated deficit of $242.0 million as of December 31, 
2009 and only recently became profitable, and we are unable to predict whether we will remain profitable.
We face intense competition and expect competition to increase in the future, with many of our competitors being 
larger, more established and better capitalized than we are.
We depend on a limited number of customers, and ultimately service providers, for a substantial portion of our reve-
nues, and the loss of, or a significant shortfall in, orders from any of these parties could significantly impair our financial 
condition and results of operations.
If we fail to develop and introduce new or enhanced products on a timely basis, our ability to attract and retain cus-
tomers could be impaired, and our competitive position may be harmed.
Our results could be adversely affected if our customers or the service providers who purchase their products are 
unable to successfully compete in their respective markets.
If the market for HD video and other multimedia content delivery solutions based on the MoCA standard does not 
develop as we anticipate, our revenues may decline or fail to grow, which would adversely affect our operating results.
Even if service providers, ODMs and OEMs adopt multimedia content delivery solutions based on the MoCA stand-
ard, we may not compete successfully in the market for MoCA-compliant chipsets.
The semiconductor and communications industries have historically experienced cyclical behavior and prolonged 
downturns, which could impact our operating results, financial condition and cash flows.
Our operating results have fluctuated significantly in the past and we expect them to continue to fluctuate in the 
future, which could lead to volatility in the price of our common stock.
Our operating results may be harmed if our 2009 restructuring plan does not achieve the anticipated results or causes 
undesirable consequences
Adverse U.S. and international economic conditions have affected and may continue to adversely affect our reve-
nues, margins and profitability.
The success of our digital broadcast satellite outdoor unit products depends on the demand for our products within 
the satellite digital television market and the growth of this overall market.
Market-specific risks affecting the digital television, digital television set-top boxes and digital television peripheral 
markets could impair our ability to successfully sell our silicon tuners.
The success of our silicon tuners is highly dependent on our relationships with demodulator manufacturers.
The market for our broadband access products is limited and these products may not be widely adopted.
We intend to expand our operations and increase our expenditures in an effort to grow our business. If we are not 
able to manage this expansion and growth, or if our business does not grow as we expect, we may not be able to realize 
a return on the resources we devote to expansion.
Any acquisition, strategic relationship, joint venture or investment could disrupt our business and harm our financial 
condition.
We may not realize the anticipated financial and strategic benefits from the businesses we have acquired or be able 
to successfully integrate such businesses with ours.
The average selling prices of our products have historically decreased over time and will likely do so in the future, 
which may reduce our revenues and gross margin.
Our product development efforts are time-consuming, require substantial research and development expenditures 
and may not generate an acceptable return.
Our products typically have lengthy sales cycles, which may cause our operating results to fluctuate, and a service 
provider, ODM or OEM customer may decide to cancel or change its service or product plans, which could cause us to 
lose anticipated sales.
Fluctuations in the mix of products we sell may adversely affect our financial results.
If we do not complete our design-in activities before a customer’s design window closes, we will lose the design 
opportunity, which could adversely affect our future sales and revenues and harm our customer relationships.
Exhibit 5  Risk factors identified and described in Entropic’s 10-K report
(continued)

620
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
Our products must interoperate with many software applications and hardware found in service providers’ networks 
and other devices in the home, and if they do not interoperate properly, our business would be harmed.
Our customers may cancel their orders, change production quantities or delay production, and if we fail to forecast 
demand for our products accurately, we may incur product shortages, delays in product shipments or excess or insuf-
ficient product inventory.
Our ability to accurately predict revenues and inventory needs, and to effectively manage inventory levels, may be 
adversely impacted due to our use of inventory “hubbing” arrangements.
We extend credit to our customers, sometimes in large amounts, but there is no guarantee every customer will be 
able to pay our invoices when they become due.
We depend on a limited number of third parties to manufacture, assemble and test our products, which reduces our 
control over key aspects of our products and their availability.
When demand for manufacturing capacity is high, we may take various actions to try to secure sufficient capacity, 
which may be costly and negatively impact our operating results.
We believe that transitioning certain of our silicon products to newer or better manufacturing process technologies 
will be important to our future competitive position. If we fail to make this transition efficiently, our competitive position 
could be seriously harmed.
We rely on sales representatives to assist in selling our products, and the failure of these representatives to perform 
as expected could reduce our future sales.
Our products may contain defects or errors which may adversely affect their market acceptance and our reputation 
and expose us to product liability claims.
We depend on key personnel to operate our business, and if we are unable to retain our current personnel and hire 
additional qualified personnel, our ability to develop and successfully market our products could be harmed.
If we fail to comply with environmental regulatory requirements, our operating results could be adversely affected.
Certain of our customers’ products and service providers’ services are subject to governmental regulation.
Our failure to raise additional capital or generate the significant capital necessary to expand our operations and invest 
in new products could reduce our ability to compete and could harm our business.
Our costs have increased significantly as a result of operating as a public company, and our management is required 
to devote substantial time to comply with public company regulations.
Our effective tax rate may increase or fluctuate, and we may not derive the anticipated tax benefits from any expan-
sion of our international operations.
Our ability to utilize our net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards may be limited, which could result in our pay-
ment of income taxes earlier than if we were able to fully utilize our net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards.
If we fail to manage our exposure to global financial and securities market risk successfully, our operating results 
could be adversely impacted.
Risks related to our intellectual property
Our ability to compete and our business could be jeopardized if we are unable to secure or protect our intellectual property.
Our participation in “patent pools” and standards setting organizations, or other business arrangements, may require us 
to license our patents to competitors and other third parties and limit our ability to enforce or collect royalties for our patents.
Any dispute with a MoCA member regarding what patent claims are necessary to implement MoCA specifications 
could result in litigation which could have an adverse effect on our business.
Possible third-party claims of infringement of proprietary rights against us, our customers or the service providers 
that purchase products from our customers, or other intellectual property claims or disputes, could have a material 
adverse effect on our business, results of operation or financial condition.
Our use of open source and third-party software could impose limitations on our ability to commercialize our products.
Because we license some of our software source code directly to customers, we face increased risks that our trade 
secrets will be exposed through inadvertent or intentional disclosure, which could harm our competitive position or 
increase our costs.
Risks related to international operations
We expect a significant portion of our future revenues to come from our international customers, and, as a result, our 
business may be harmed by political and economic conditions in foreign markets and the challenges associated with 
operating internationally.
Our products are subject to export and import controls that could subject us to liability or impair our ability to compete 
in international markets.
Exhibit 5  (Continued)

Entropic Communications, Inc.
621
Our third-party contractors are concentrated primarily in areas subject to earthquakes and other natural disasters.
Any disruption to the operations of these contractors could cause significant delays in the production or shipment of our 
products.
Risks related to ownership of our common stock
Our stock price is volatile and may decline regardless of our operating performance, and you may not be able to resell 
your shares at or above the price at which you purchased such shares.
Future sales of our common stock or the issuance of securities convertible into or exercisable for shares of our com-
mon stock may depress our stock price.
Anti-takeover provisions in our charter documents and Delaware law might deter acquisition bids for us that you 
might consider favorable.
Our principal stockholders, executive officers and directors have substantial control over the company, which may 
prevent you and other stockholders from influencing significant corporate decisions and may harm the market price of 
our common stock.
If securities or industry analysts publish inaccurate or unfavorable research about our business, our stock price and 
trading volume could decline.
We do not expect to pay any cash dividends for the foreseeable future.
Our stock may be delisted from The NASDAQ Global Market if the closing bid price for our common stock is not 
maintained at $1.00 per share or higher.
Exhibit 5  (Continued)
Source: Entropic, Inc. 10-K for fiscal year ending Dec 2009.

622
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
Risk Description
Likelihood
Severity
Risk Score
Engineering
Failing to follow industry “best practices” in product development & designs
2
2
4
Risk of missing a design window due to product development delays
2
3
6
Being unaware of requirements for or failing to obtain government 
certifications related to our products (e.g., compliance with FCC 
standards, safety regulations for consumer products)
1
1
1
Risks re: our products failing to achieve timely certification by a 
standards body or an operator
2
2
4
Risk that our products will not interoperate fully with software or 
hardware in a customer’s product or a service provider network
2
2
4
Risks re: failing to acquire the most appropriate chip design software tools
1
3
3
Infringing patents held by third parties
1
3
3
Infringing third party copyrights
1
2
2
Risk of currency fluctuations increasing our cost of labor in overseas 
development sites
1
1
1
Operations
Product quality – unanticipated warranty returns
2
3
6
Export control (proper permits and licenses, export of encrypted 
product, US Gov’t boycotts)
1
3
3
Product quality – low manufacturing yields
2
2
4
Risk of cost increases from our suppliers that cannot be passed on to 
customers
2
2
4
Risks of supply constraints
2
2
4
Inadequate inventory controls or inability to sell products in inventory 
due to how they are marked or manufactured
2
2
4
Product quality – latent defects
1
3
3
Risk that our MRP systems will prove inadequate for our needs or fail 
to provide necessary functionality
1
3
3
Failing to comply with environmental regulations (worldwide)
1
2
2
General product safety
1
1
1
Risks of supply interruption (e.g., act of god or war)
1
1
1
Risk of currency fluctuations affecting our cost to build product
1
1
1
Failing to maintain ISO certification or pass customer quality audits
1
1
1
Marketing & Business Development
Assuring that product features, costs and availability date meet 
customer requirements
2
3
6
Assuring that length of product life cycle and sales volume will be 
sufficient for required ROI
1
2
2
Pricing products to achieve target gross margins
3
2
6
Accurately assessing market size and forecasting market share for the 
company’s products
2
2
4
Risks re: customer acceptance of products (performance, bugs, 
integration, documentation, etc.)
1
3
3
Risks associated with penetrating new markets or new applications
2
2
4
Inadequate G2 on competitor’s products, plans
3
3
9
Infringement of trademarks held by third parties
1
1
1
Loss of key customer or operator relationships due to personnel changes
2
3
6
Building excessive inventory
1
2
2
Exhibit 6  Risk management matrix
Note: The following matrix is an excerpt from the matrix created by Entropic. Actual likelihood and severity scores assigned 
by the company have been disguised.

Entropic Communications, Inc.
623
Risk Description
Likelihood
Severity
Risk Score
Sales
Failing to accurately forecast product demand, future orders, 
deployment rates and inventories of customers/operators
2
2
4
Not being able to accurately track existing orders or price commitments
1
2
2
Risks associated with use and management of sales reps and distributors
1
2
2
Risks associated with long sales cycles
1
2
2
Sales seasonality
1
1
1
Loss of relevant personnel
3
1
3
Conflicting Sales/Marketing service models
2
3
6
Shipment Terms & Conditions disputes
1
2
2
Risks associated with customer collections & disputes
2
2
4
Risks associated with contract violations & disputes
1
2
2
Failure to meet customer audit requirements
1
1
1
Failure to hire qualified regional Sales/TAM personnel
1
2
2
Product quality/customer returns
1
2
2
CTO
Risks associated with participation in standards bodies (MoCA, ITU, etc.) 
– Notice of IP, RAND license obligations
2
2
4
Risks associated with identifying and addressing competing 
technologies and evolving industry standards
2
3
6
Failure to timely identify new and emerging markets and 
complementary technologies
2
3
6
Failure to develop core technology competencies over the long term
1
3
3
Human Resources
Negligent hiring/background checks
1
1
1
Risks related to “on-boarding” new employees and consultants
1
1
1
Compliance with immigration laws at hire and ongoing
1
1
1
Workplace safety and health
1
1.5
1.5
Health and benefit plans
1
1
1
Privacy protection for employees
1
2
2
COBRA Administration
1
1
1
Discrimination and Sexual Harrassment in the workplace
1
1
1
Risks related to “exiting” employees and consultants
1
1
1
Retaliation/wrongful discharge
1
2
2
Recruiting risk
1
2
2
Risks associated with identifying resource needs early enough to timely 
fill them and ensuring all required competencies are identified
1
2
2
Retention risk
2
2
4
Employee compliance with laws
1
1
1
Ethical business conduct
1
1
1
Compliance with labor laws
1
1.5
1
Facilities
Facilities planning risk
1
2
2
Design & maintenance risks
1
1
1
Special needs risks (e.g., cooling for computer servers, rooftop use, 
network infrastructure, etc.)
1
2
2
Compliance with (i) building codes, (ii) local regulations & (iii) lease 
obligations
1
1
1
Workplace safety and health
2
2
4
Physical security & monitoring of premises
1
2
2
Use & disposal of hazardous materials
1
1
1
Exhibit 6  (Continued)
(continued)

624
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
Risk Description
Likelihood
Severity
Risk Score
IT
Risk that company proprietary information will be compromised due 
to hacking or industrial espionage
2
2
4
Theft/misuse of proprietary information by current or former 
employees and consultants
2
2
4
Service gaps, unscheduled computer downtime or slow network 
impacting productivity
1
1
1
Disaster recovery (e.g., earthquake/fire)
1
3
3
Finance and Accounting
Financial statements/earnings management and manipulation
1
3
3
Risk that all transactions are not accurately recorded or accounted for
1
3
3
Adequate accounting controls (Sarbane-Oxley internal controls of 
financial reporting)
1
3
3
Adequate disclosure controls
1
2
2
Awareness of new accounting rules or pronouncements
1
1
1
Changes in accounting policies required by auditors
1
1
1
Revenue recognition issues
1
3
3
Collection of revenues from customers who take goods on credit
3
2
6
Theft risk for cash accounts
1
1
1
Cash management – loss of principal/illiquidity
1
2
2
Taxes – awareness of tax obligations
1
1
1
Taxes – timely and accurate domestic & int’l filings
1
1
1
Legal
Antitrust & Trade Reg. Compliance; FCPA Compliance
1
3
3
Litigation – patent infringement (including customer indemnification claims)
2
3
6
Litigation – wrongful termination; discrimination; whistleblower claims
1
2
2
Litigation – warranty or product defect claim
2
1
2
Contracts – creating binding obligations without proper review or 
authorization
2
2
4
Contracts – onerous contract obligations, breach of contract
2
2
4
Awareness of new laws or regulations affecting the company
1
3
3
Retention of Documents During Litigation
1
3
3
Management/destruction/return of third party confidential information
1
2
2
Obtaining, maintaining and enforcing intellectual property rights (includes 
patents, trademarks, trade secrets) in the US and in foreign countries
2
3
6
Exhibit 5  (Continued)
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant and research assistant Michelle Spaulding.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

Bio/Precise Medical Devices, Inc.
625
 In early February 2012, Herb Marshall, CFO at Bio/
Precise Medical Devices (BPMD), was reviewing the 
February operating report submitted from the man-
ager of BPMD’s Chinese subsidiary. On page 3 of a six-
page report he saw a vague reference to consulting 
payments that had been made. Since he did not remem-
ber any consulting engagements having been author-
ized for China, he asked Steve Jefferson, BPMD’s 
chairman/CEO, about the payments. Steve did not 
know anything about such payments, either, so they 
started asking questions. They discovered that sales-
people in BPMD’s Chinese subsidiary had been provid-
ing kickbacks to buyers for many years. The Chinese 
country manager said that everyone provided such 
kickbacks, and there was no problem with the practice. 
But Herb and Steve immediately ordered that no more 
kickbacks be paid. 
 The kickback amounts were relatively small, and 
they were not material to BPMD’s consolidated fi nancial 
statements in any accounting period. All the payments 
had been accounted for as expenses. However, the kick-
backs presented a serious problem because they proba-
bly constituted a violation of the bribery provisions of 
the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA). If these 
illegal acts were detected by US government regulators, 
BPMD could be subject to severe fi nancial and business 
penalties, and some of its employees could also face sig-
nifi cant fi nes and even imprisonment. 
 A major portion of the agenda for the meeting of the 
board of directors held in late February 2012 was 
devoted to a discussion of what to do. At this meeting, 
lawyers from BPMD’s outside law fi rm, who special-
ized in FCPA-related issues, laid out the options 
regarding disclosure. They explained that since BPMD 
had discovered the problem itself and since the 
amounts were immaterial, the company had no obliga-
tion to disclose the violations to the regulators. It was 
possible, and maybe even probable, that regulators 
would never become aware that any violations ever 
existed. But, they advised, if BPMD did not self-report 
the violations and the regulators found out about them 
through another source, the penalties would probably 
be much more severe than if the company self-
reported. In any case, steps needed to be taken to 
ensure that no BPMD employees ever made such “facil-
itating payments” again. 
 The company 
 BPMD developed, manufactured, and sold a range of 
medical devices and technologies used to treat an array 
of heart and artery diseases and disorders. The prod-
ucts included coronary and peripheral stents and other 
angioplasty products and related delivery systems, 
heart valve replacement technologies, cardiac ablation 
devices, implantable cardiac resynchronization 
devices, and various other diagnostic and monitoring 
tools for heart-related problems. BPMD sold its prod-
ucts in nearly 50 countries around the world. Sales had 
been growing at an annual rate of about 20%, and 2010 
revenues totaled just over $500 million. BPMD 
launched its IPO in 2000, and its stock was listed on 
NASDAQ. The company’s worldwide headquarters was 
located in Seattle, Washington. 
 BPMD’s Chinese subsidiary, located in a suburb of 
Shanghai, employed about 90 full-time personnel, 
about 30 of whom were in the sales department. The 
sales department had one national sales manager 
for China and four regional sales managers. About 
80% of the company’s sales in China were made by 
BPMD employees. The other 20% of sales were gen-
erated by third-party sales agents or distributors 
representing BPMD in, particularly, some of the 
smaller cities in China. Most of BPMD’s revenue in 
China was derived from sales of products to existing 
customers.  
 The US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
 The FCPA prohibits individuals and entities from off er-
ing to pay, paying, or authorizing the payment of 
“money or anything of value” directly or indirectly (i.e. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Bio/Precise Medical Devices, Inc. 

626
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
through an agent) to foreign officials for the purpose of 
“obtaining or retaining business.” It is one of the most 
significant and feared pieces of legislation for compa-
nies operating abroad.
The term foreign official included all employees of 
governments (whether they were elected, appointed, 
or hired, and paid or unpaid), political parties, party 
officials and candidates, and officers of state-owned 
companies. The act made it unlawful to make a pay-
ment to a third party while knowing that all or a por-
tion of the payment will go directly or indirectly to a 
foreign official. The term “knowing” included both con-
scious disregard and deliberate ignorance that a cor-
rupt payment or offer will be made. Intermediaries 
could include joint venture partners or agents. There 
was no de minimus exception to the FCPA’s prohibition 
on corrupt payments to foreign officials. The FCPA also 
required companies covered by the provisions to make 
and keep books and records that accurately and fairly 
reflect the transactions of the corporation and to devise 
and maintain an adequate system of internal account-
ing controls.
The FCPA was passed in 1977 in response to wide-
spread perceptions that corruption, and in particular 
bribes to foreign government officials for the purpose 
of securing business or otherwise gaining an improper 
business advantage, was a serious and possibly grow-
ing problem. An influential investigation by the US 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) conducted 
in the mid-1970s found that over 400 US companies 
had made over $300 million in questionable or illegal 
payments.
Subsequently, Congress became concerned that the 
FCPA was putting US companies at a competitive disad-
vantage. In 1988, the act was amended to make the 
provisions applicable to foreign firms and persons who 
cause, directly or through agents, an act in furtherance 
of such a corrupt payment to take place within the ter-
ritory of the United States. Congress also directed the 
Executive Branch to commence negotiations with the 
Organization of Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment (OECD) to try to convince the country’s major 
trading partners to enact legislation similar to the 
FCPA. In 1997, almost 10 years later, the United States 
and 33 other countries signed the OECD Convention on 
Combating Bribery of Foreign Officials in International 
Business Transactions.
The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) “is responsi-
ble for all criminal and civil enforcement of the anti-
bribery provisions with respect to domestic concerns 
and foreign companies and nationals,” while the US 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) “is respon-
sible for civil enforcement of the anti-bribery provi-
sions with respect to issuers.” If the FCPA’s “anti-bribery 
provisions” were violated, the following penalties 
could be imposed:
● The corporations were subject to a fine of up to 
$2,000,000 for each violation or twice the benefit 
sought from making the corrupt payment.
● Individuals (e.g. officers, directors, agents) could be 
fined up to $100,000 and imprisoned for up to five 
years for each violation.
For violations of the “accounting and recordkeeping 
provisions” of the FCPA:
● Cases involving negligent record keeping and noth-
ing more can subject the individuals involved to 
fines of up to $5,000 per violation and companies up 
to $50,000 per violation.
● Intentional violations prosecuted criminally by the 
Department of Justice (DOJ) can result in fines of up 
to $5 million and 20 years in jail per violation for 
individuals, and up to $25 million in fine per viola-
tion for companies.
Other considerations:
● Companies are prohibited from indemnifying their 
officers and employees against liability under the 
act.
● Firms or individuals found in violation of the FCPA 
could be barred from doing business with the fed-
eral government.
● FCPA enforcement authorities often couple FCPA 
charges with allegations of violations of other fed-
eral statues, including those regarding money laun-
dering, tax fraud, or racketeering.
● The FCPA investigations often take years. All rele-
vant documents are thoroughly reviewed. All 
employees involved in the transactions are subjected 
to detailed interviews by outside counsel. Every 
inconsistency is probed, often involving multiple 
rounds of interviews. To the managers involved, the 
process can feel “interminable and invasive.”1
The FCPA was intended to have, and indeed had, an 
enormous impact on the way American firms conducted 
1	 A. G. Murphy, Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 
2011), 27.

Bio/Precise Medical Devices, Inc.
627
their business. Several firms whose employees or agents 
paid bribes to foreign officials were the subject of crimi-
nal and civil enforcement actions, resulting in large 
fines and suspension and debarment from federal pro-
curement contracting, and some of their employees and 
officers were sentenced to jail. To avoid such conse-
quences, many firms implemented detailed compliance 
programs intended to prevent and to detect any 
improper payments by employees and agents. However, 
a 2011 Deloitte study found that only 29% of executives 
surveyed were “very confident” that their company’s 
anti-corruption program would prevent or detect cor-
rupt activities.2
FCPA enforcement efforts were increasing sharply. 
In 2011, a total of 48 enforcement actions enforcement 
actions were initiated by the DOJ or the SEC,3 as com-
pared to 74 in 2011, but only 40 in 2009 and 33 in 
2008.4 Many US corporations, including such icons as 
Avery Dennison, McDonald’s, IBM, Whirlpool, Avon, 
and Rockwell Automation, found themselves con-
nected to bribery cases in just China alone.
FCPA-related fines – paid either to the DOJ or the 
SEC, depending on the type of case – were larger and 
were increasing. The largest FCPA case involved 
Siemens, which paid the US regulators $800 million in 
fines and disgorgement of profits to settle alleged viola-
tions of the FCPA. The statutory calculus in this case 
permitted a fine of up to $2.7 billion, but the govern-
ment agreed to the lesser amount because of Siemens’ 
substantial cooperation in the case.5 Siemens also paid 
the German authorities more than $1 billion for the 
same conduct, and it paid its lawyers and forensic 
accountants hundreds of millions of dollars to conduct 
the investigations and to negotiate the settlements. 
Eight of the top 10 monetary settlements in FCPA his-
tory were reached in 2010. Just a more recent examples: 
in 2011, Alcatel-Lucent settled a FCPA case involving 
bribes in nine countries in Africa, Asia, and South 
America for $137 million, and Johnson & Johnson 
agreed to pay $77 million to settle a bribery case in Iraq.
Some individuals found in violation of the act were 
also being sentenced to jail; the longest sentence to 
date was 87 months.6 Both the DOJ and the SEC were 
devoting increasing resources to FCPA enforcement, so 
the increased pace of FCPA prosecutions was seen as 
likely to continue.
The violation at BPMD
The investigation of the “consulting payments” 
launched in February 2012 revealed that the kickbacks 
were being paid to doctors and personnel who con-
trolled the medical device purchasing decisions of cer-
tain hospitals. Most of these hospitals were owned by 
the government of the People’s Republic of China, 
which meant that the hospital employees were “Chi-
nese government officials.”
Further investigations revealed that the improper 
commissions made were typically 3–5% of the gross 
sales generated by the contracts, but sometimes they 
were as high as 20%. The commissions had been made 
since at least late 1999 and over the years totaled over 
$1.6 million (see Table 11). Most of the payments were 
paid in cash and hand-delivered by BPMD salespersons 
to the person who controlled the purchasing decisions 
for the particular hospital department. A few payments 
were delivered by mail or wire transfer. All of the pay-
ments were authorized by the subsidiary general man-
ager. These payments were recorded in the accounting 
records as either (translated from Chinese): (1) sales 
commissions for customers, or (2) sales consulting fees.
It was also determined that some other expenses, 
such as for client meals and entertainment, might also 
have been in violation of the FCPA. But because of poor 
documentation, it was difficult to determine the size of 
this additional potential problem.
Legal explanations
At the October board meeting, lawyers from BPMD’s 
law firm explained that violations of the FCPA were 
serious. Management certainly needed to ensure that 
these practices never occurred again. These steps 
would inevitably involve a combination of new man-
agement in China, new procedural controls, and 
employee training sessions.
2	 Deloitte, “Anti-Corruption Practices Survey 2011: Cloudy with 
a Chance of Prosecution?,” available at http://www.deloitte.
com/assets/Dcom-UnitedStates/Local 
Assets/Documents/FAS_
ForensicCenter_us_fas-us_dfc/us_dfc_fcpa 
compliance 
survey 
report_090711.pdf.
3	 P. Ploeger, M. Somsen, and R. Lamp, “2011 FCPA Enforcement 
Actions Reach Second-Highest Level,” De Brauw Blackstone West-
broek N.V. (February 1, 2012).”
4	 T. C. Cimino, J. A. Zubaira, R. C. Jennings, R. T. Copenhaver, W. 
Hayman, and M. A. Nelson, “Foreign Corrupt Practices Act Trends,” 
The National Law Review (September 8, 2011).
5	 Murphy, Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.
6	 J. Legum, “Trouble for Murdoch: Feds Collecting Billions in Fines, 
Sending Executives to Jail for Corruption Abroad,” Think Progress 
(July 11, 2011).

628
Chapter 13 • Corporate Governance and Boards of Directors
The lawyers explained that BPMD had no obligation 
to disclose the violations to the regulators. But they 
also noted that penalties were typically much lighter 
for companies that did self-report their violations.
If BPMD did self-report the violation, then the com-
pany would be subject to significant penalties plus siz-
able legal defense costs. Almost certainly, the company:
● Would have to pay a significant fine, up to twice the 
gross gain resulting from the offense. Almost all 
sales in BPMD’s Chinese operation were to govern-
ment-owned hospitals. (BPMD’s net profits earned 
in China over the 12-year period of the violations 
totaled approximately $3.5 million.)
● Would have to bring in a new management team in 
the Chinese subsidiary and charge them with 
responsibility for oversight of compliance with the 
FCPA.
● Would have to hire an independent compliance 
expert, likely an external forensic accounting firm, 
to investigate the problems, to recommend a system, 
including policies and procedures, codes of conduct, 
employee training, and disciplinary mechanisms 
relating to FCPA compliance, and to monitor BPMD’s 
ongoing activities in China to ensure FCPA compli-
ance. The focus of the firm’s attention could be lim-
ited to China, or it could be extended to BPMD’s 
operations particularly in other regions or countries 
that pose high risks of corruption, or perhaps even 
worldwide. The firm would probably be required to 
continue its extra compliance activities for a period 
of years. The total cost would be in the millions of 
dollars.
● Would be placed on probation for a multiyear period. 
Additional FCPA violations during the period of pro-
bation would be dealt with harshly.
Less certain were:
● The consequences to individuals involved in the vio-
lations. The general and sales managers in China, 
and possibly the US-based manager to whom the 
Chinese subsidiary reported could be subject to fines 
and imprisonment.
● The effect on BPMD’s US business. The company 
could be barred from selling products to federal gov-
ernment-owned hospitals. Such sales constituted 
about 15% of the company’s sales in the United 
States.
Board decisions to be made
After the lawyers had finished their presentation and 
left the boardroom, the BPMD board began to engage 
in a vigorous discussion of the issues. Perhaps the most 
important, and most immediate, issue that had to be 
decided was whether to self-report the violation. Poten-
tially BPMD could clean up the control and record-
keeping problems internally before the government 
regulators found out about them. But what would that 
require? If the company did self-report the violations, 
the regulators would tell company management what 
needed to be done, but those steps might not be the 
same ones that management would chose voluntarily.
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.
Table 1  BPMD “sales commission” or “sales consulting” 
payments made to Chinese government employees
Year
Amount of commission payments
1999
$7,242
2000
$31,997
2001
$43,851
2002
$36,265
2003
$86,582
2004
$99,203
2005
$120,045
2006
$138,999
2007
$179,360
2008
$275,286
2009
$300,305
2010
$319,681
Total
$1,638,816

Controllers
629
 CHAPTER 14 
 Controllers and Auditors 
 This chapter discusses the roles and challenges of personnel in two important corporate gov-
ernance- and management control system (MCS)-related roles that both require fi nancial 
measurement expertise: controllers and auditors. Personnel in these roles  within the fi rm , such 
as corporate and division controllers and internal auditors, must serve two important roles. One 
role is  management service , which involves helping line managers with their decision-making 
and control functions to help create fi rm value. The other role is  oversight , which involves ensur-
ing that the actions of everyone in the organization, especially the managers, are legal, ethical, 
and in the best interest of the organization and its owners. Fulfi lling both roles often creates 
 tension , as these two roles can, and often do, confl ict. This chapter discusses this confl ict and 
some other issues faced in making individuals in these roles eff ective. 
 The chapter also discusses the control roles of  external auditors, who provide an important 
independent check on managers’ fi nancial reporting, disclosure, and internal control practices. 
They face a diff erent set of role confl icts, those between the need to serve their clients, the need 
to serve the public interest, and the need to earn profi ts for their own employer, the audit fi rm. 
 Controllers 
 The fi nance and accounting functions in a corporation are typically managed by a person with 
the title of  chief fi nancial offi  cer (CFO) or  vice president fi nance (VP Finance). (Terms vary across 
countries. In the United Kingdom, the term  fi nance director is typically used for this role.) In 
recent times, particularly since the early 2000s, this role has gained in status. 1 For example, 
Fazal Chaudhri, group fi nancial director at Exelco, a Belgian diamond concern, said the crisis 
has done his job profi le “a favor” – where once local managers would wait for him to approach 
them about performance, Mr. Chaudhri now fi elds calls from throughout the organization seek-
ing strategic advice, he said. 2 “In an economy in which access to credit and the fi nancial health 
of the business is a major area of focus, it does make sense for the CFO to be involved in impor-
tant decisions the company is making,” another executive said.  3   In other words, the crisis may 
have strengthened the importance of the fi nancial executive’s  management service  role. It, and 
the corporate scandals of the early 2000s, have also strengthened the importance of the fi nan-
cial executive’s  oversight  role. For example, the passing of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in the United 
States added status, but also risk, to the senior fi nancial offi  cer role in publicly held fi rms 
because CFOs must co-sign both the fi nancial statement certifi cations and the opinions as to the 
eff ectiveness of their fi rm’s internal control systems. 

Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
630
As Figure 14.1 shows, the senior financial executive role commonly encompasses two 
domains, which typically exist in larger firms as specific roles with dedicated personnel for 
each: controller and treasurer. (In smaller firms, these roles may be combined.) The controller 
function deals primarily with financial record-keeping, reporting, and control. The treasury 
function deals primarily with raising and managing capital. The treasury function is generally 
highly centralized. The controllership function is often decentralized in large divisionalized 
corporations, with controllers in most or all of the profit centers (business units, divisions) and 
some of the larger cost centers (e.g. manufacturing plants).
Controllers play key roles in line management and in the design and operation of a manage-
ment control system (MCS). They are the financial measurement experts within their firm (or 
their entity), and most of them are key members of the management team. As such, they are 
involved in preparing plans and budgets, challenging operating managers’ plans and actions, 
and participating in a broad range of management decisions, including allocating resources, 
pricing, setting policies regarding receivables and payables, making acquisitions and divest-
ments, and raising money.4
Evidence suggests that controllers have become more and more highly involved in helping 
managers make good business decisions:
The CFO is increasingly being called upon to weigh in on much more strategic decisions 
involving the company, including everything from transactions to providing assessments 
Figure 14.1  Corporate financial management roles
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), p. 640.

Controllers
631
of emerging markets and analyses that go far beyond looking at the books and determining 
whether there will be enough cash to support investment.5
“It began with the trend of increased regulation and the introduction of Sarbanes Oxley. 
A lot of CEOs realized they didn’t have the expertise to deal with that and turned to their 
CFOs,” says Tracy Riley, national managing partner for PwC Canada’s assurance practice. 
“At the same time, they were also dealing with a proliferation of data and the need to gain 
insights about that data. The CFO has been in the middle of all that, and increasingly CEOs 
expect their finance group to take ownership of it. As we get more into business expansion 
on a global basis and managing the risk that comes with it, the opportunity for the CFO to 
play an increased role grows.”6
Or, as another article suggested, “Coming into the 21st century, financial professionals saw 
the emphasis of their responsibilities shift from recording various aspects of a corporation’s 
financial health to joining top executives in a broad-based partnership.”7 But being highly 
involved in management decision making or becoming a “business partner” is not a substitute 
for the other important role controllers must play as their entity’s “chief accountant” – that is, 
their “oversight” and “scorekeeping” role. They, and their subordinates, record transactions, 
prepare performance reports, and fulfill financial, tax, and government reporting obligations. 
They establish and maintain internal control systems that help ensure both the reliability of 
information and the protection of the company’s assets. Depending on the organization, the 
controller also might supervise the internal audit and management information system func-
tions. The same article, then, not surprisingly, also cautions that “as [the financial profession-
als] become ever closely connected with the business, they must also ensure to not become 
subservient to it.”8
Indeed, as chief accountants for their entities, controllers must stay appropriately independ-
ent of their entity managers. They have a fiduciary responsibility to ensure that the information 
reported from their entity, particularly that of a financial nature, is accurate and that the enti-
ty’s internal control systems are adequate. They have a management oversight responsibility to 
inform others inside and outside the organization, such as the relevant regulator or industry 
watchdog, if individuals in their entity are violating laws or ethical norms.
Can controllers who are highly involved as part of the management team maintain the requi-
site degree of independence to fulfill their fiduciary and management oversight responsibilities 
effectively? In other words, can controllers wear two hats, one of a team member and confidant 
and the other of a watchdog or police cop? In one sense, controllers’ fiduciary responsibilities are 
quite consistent with their management oversight responsibilities – both sets of responsibilities 
require a constructively critical mind-set and a sense of independence from management:
“If you think about what CFOs are good at – what’s in their DNA – they are disciplined, 
detailed, they have integrity – these are the traits needed to implement any large-scale 
program that involves change,” says Don Rupprecht, finance effectiveness leader, PwC 
Canada. “The financial crisis showed that those traits could be used outside of finance.”9
That said, the fiduciary and management oversight responsibilities can conflict with the con-
trollers’ management service responsibilities, and if not that, they certainly can create tension. 
Indeed, survey evidence of over 5,000 financial professionals from countries across the globe 
suggests that the respondents recognized “concerns” from their expanding roles, ranging from 
increased pressure from management to fears about their own objectivity.10
It is often claimed that corporate controllers put the interests of their corporate manage-
ment, with whom they are closely connected as a management team, before the interests of 
the shareowners and other stakeholders. Similarly, business-unit or division controllers (entity 
controllers, for short), those located in a decentralized entity such as a business unit, division, 

Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
632
or operating unit, can easily become personally or emotionally attached to their local, decen-
tralized entity and the people they work with in the entity. They want to be part of the team; 
or, as they sometimes say, they may go native. Indeed, entity controllers who are included in an 
incentive compensation plan based on entity performance can have motivations to “go along” 
with their entity management and, worse, condone gamesmanship that affect the results 
measures they are assumed to oversee and report to corporate. To maintain the integrity of the 
controller’s role, firms can, and probably should, implement several additional safeguards to 
ensure that controllers fulfill their management oversight and fiduciary duties effectively.
First, audit committees of boards of directors and internal auditors can be used to oversee 
the controller function. Audit committees were discussed in Chapter 13, and the roles and 
activities of internal auditors are discussed below. Second, controller behaviors can be shaped 
through personnel or cultural controls, such as selection and training. Some controllers have 
better judgment, have a better sense of ethical integrity, and are better able to function effec-
tively in situations with strong role conflict than others. Individuals who are subject to profes-
sional standards may be good choices for controller positions. For example, the American 
Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) bolstered its professional code of ethics by 
requiring CPAs who work in corporations (rather than in public accounting) to report material 
misstatements of their company’s financial statements to their superiors. If the superiors fail to 
respond, the CPA should report the misstatements to the company’s outside auditors or to regu-
lators such as the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Professional codes such as this 
one add weight to the fiduciary responsibility of controllers, who are also CPAs. Finally, training 
programs can remind controllers of their multiple responsibilities and give them the interper-
sonal skills useful in maintaining the proper balance between their management service and 
their management oversight and fiduciary roles.
Designing incentive systems that do not create temptation is a third way to ensure that con-
trollers fulfill their management oversight and fiduciary duties effectively. In particular, control-
lers probably should not be rewarded for performance defined by measures they can manipulate.
Finally, some firms have found that solid-line reporting in the controller’s organization is 
effective for controlling entity controllers’ activities. As shown in Figure 14.2, solid-line 
Figure 14.2  Possible reporting relationships in the controller’s organization
Source: K. A. Merchant, Modern Management Control Systems: Text and Cases (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998), 
p. 642.

Auditors
633
reporting means that the entity controller’s primary reporting relationship is to the corporate 
controller (or, in the case of a lower-level operating unit, a higher-level entity controller). In this 
controllership structure, the corporate controller – not the local entity managers – determine 
the entity controller’s tasks, priorities, and performance evaluations.
Solid-line reporting is designed to reduce the personal attachment between entity control-
lers and the local entity management to which they are assigned. It signals to the entity control-
lers that their most important roles are to protect the corporation’s assets and to ensure that 
financial reports are accurate. This reminder is perhaps more important if the entity is located 
at great distance from headquarters. But for all entity controllers, it provides a heightened 
emphasis on their management oversight and fiduciary responsibilities. The downside of solid-
line reporting, however, is a potential reduction in the quality of the entity controller’s manage-
ment service function. Entity controllers reporting on a solid-line to corporate can come to be 
viewed in the local entity as corporate spies rather than as members of the entity management 
team, which can cause role confusion and stress.11
All told, then, designing an effective controllership function is both difficult and important, 
where the role itself is inevitably challenging:
Increasingly, CFOs are stepping up and volunteering to drive change, asserts Don Ruppre-
cht of PwC. “They aren’t waiting to be tapped. They are calling for better metrics, better deci-
sion making in the field based on data. They are calling for more insight and analytics and 
they are volunteering to lead the effort. This is becoming the norm and will only continue.”12
Auditors
When the word audit is mentioned, most people think first of either a financial audit, in which a 
public accounting firm expresses an opinion about the fairness of presentation of a company’s 
financial statements, or a tax audit, in which government auditors test to see if taxpayers have 
followed the laws and reported taxable income truthfully. Historically, these common audit 
forms have played only limited roles in management control systems, whereas other types of 
audits, such as internal audits, operational audits, and performance audits, have been seen as 
much more critical to the effective operation of internal control systems. Nonetheless, since the 
passing of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in the United States, for example, the external financial 
audit, in particular the portion of it that is designed to express an opinion on the effectiveness of 
a company’ system of internal controls, has become more relevant for MCSs.
Audits
An audit can be defined as a systematic process of (1) objectively obtaining and evaluating evi-
dence regarding objects of importance, (2) judging the degree of correspondence between those 
objects and certain criteria, and (3) communicating the results to relevant users. This definition 
is broad so as to cover all types of audits. It is useful to elaborate on the meaning of the key 
(italicized) terms.
The phrase systematic process is used to connote the fact that audits are not done randomly. 
They involve an orderly sequence of interrelated steps, all designed with one or more audit 
objectives in mind. Every audit starts with what is commonly called a planning phase, which 
involves developing an understanding of the established criteria of the groups who will use the 
audit report and the required scope of the audit. The planning phase is used to design an audit 
program that identifies the specific tasks to be performed and, if appropriate, the schedule for 
starting and completing each task and the persons assigned to each task.

Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
634
The second phase of the audit process, which is typically the most time-consuming, involves 
obtaining and evaluating evidence. This process is objective because auditors are, by definition, 
independent of those being audited. Non-independent reviews, such as superiors inspecting the 
work of their subordinates for which they are also held responsible, are not audits, despite the 
obvious similarities. Depending on the focus and scope of the audit, the evidence gathering may 
involve some or all of the following: observation, interviews, reviews of reports, re-computations, 
confirmations, and analyses. As evidence is gathered, alterations to the original audit program 
may be necessary.
Differences in the objects of importance provide the major reason for the varied labels put on 
different types of audits. Compliance audits are designed to test for compliance with rules about 
behavior or results, such as specific company policies, laws, or loan covenants. Marketing audits 
focus on the effectiveness and efficiency of the marketing function. Financial statement audits 
provide a basis for the external auditors to express an opinion as to whether the financial state-
ments fairly present the financial status and performance of the entity involved.
The third phase of an audit requires a judgment, based on the evidence, as to whether (or to 
what extent) the criteria have been met. While these judgments are professional and evidence-
based, they are inevitably fallible because, in all but the simplest situations, some probability 
exists that the judgments will subsequently be proven incorrect. For example, all of the evi-
dence necessary to make an infallible judgment may or will not be available, or the judgment 
may involve an assessment about an uncertain future.
The criteria for comparison can vary widely across audit types. They may be very narrow 
and specific, such as those used in procedure-related compliance audits (e.g. requirement of 
two signatures on checks). Or they may be no more specific than a vague definition of a desired 
characteristic, such as related to the “efficiency” of a given process or function or the extent to 
which the process or function meets some “value for money” criterion.
Communicating the results to relevant users concludes the audit process. The audit report is 
the primary tangible product of the audit. At a minimum, the audit report describes the evi-
dence examined and presents an opinion as to whether the established criteria were met. In 
issuing the report with the stated opinion, the auditor, in essence, assumes responsibility for the 
opinion, with the risk of economic or reputation loss if the opinion is subsequently determined 
to be incorrect. Sometimes the report highlights areas where improvements can be made, and it 
may go as far as to make specific recommendations.
External and internal auditors
Auditors can be classified as either external or internal. External auditors are primarily prized 
for their independence, meaning that that they have no financial or other interests in the 
auditee (the firm being audited by the auditor or audit firm) except, strictly, performance of the 
audit itself.13 Those performing financial audits (described below) are generally accountants 
employed by a public accounting firm or so-called audit firms. They have professional training 
and experience and are licensed by a professional association. Those executing performance 
audits (described later in this chapter) are employed by a public accounting or consulting firm. 
These auditors can have any of a variety of backgrounds, including in general management, risk 
management, finance, information systems, engineering, or computer science.
Internal auditors are employees of the company they are auditing. They are often referred to 
as “the eyes and ears of management.” Internal audit staffs can operate with either narrow or 
broad charters, and the breadth of charter is one of the major determinants of the size of the 
staff. A narrow charter, which would necessitate a relatively small internal audit staff only, 
leads to mostly compliance audits and performance of some functions for the external auditors 
(such as preparation of audit schedules and documentation of internal controls) to reduce 

Auditors
635
external audit fees. At the other extreme, some staffs operate with a broad charter that can 
include many forms of performance auditing, involvement in the design and improvement of 
business processes and internal control systems, and other forms of what would usually be clas-
sified as management consulting.
The size of internal audit staffs varies widely across firms. Small firms typically have no inter-
nal auditors. Large firms may have a small or a large staff. Internal audit, however, is often prone 
to “cuts” in difficult economic times, ironically when firms might benefit most from the audits. 
For example, the following two reports lament the cuts to public sector internal audit budgets:
The [internal audit] budget decreases in local government mean that there is a significant 
risk that some internal audit functions will get to a point where they no longer have the 
resources to do the work necessary to give a robust annual opinion. This in turn puts the 
objectives of the organization at risk.14
Cuts to some public sector internal audit budgets are an issue. […] The Chartered Insti-
tute of Internal Auditors (IIA) warns that, at a time of major restructuring, a large proportion 
of the public sector may be unnecessarily vulnerable to serious financial or operational 
failures, without adequate arrangements in place to spot potential dangers and put plans 
in place to minimize their impact.15
These quotes suggest that internal audits, especially when broader in scope, which they 
increasingly are, can play important roles in organizations, be they public or corporate:
Internal auditors help organizations to manage the wide range of risks facing them, includ-
ing for example: financial and fraud risks; data security risks; and health and safety risks. 
They help the board and management identify and address risk management, internal con-
trol and corporate governance issues before they become a problem.16
Internal auditors of financial companies are to get a new U.K. code of conduct, aimed at 
securing them increased resources and respect, while getting them to focus more sharply 
on risk management. […] Internal auditors have traditionally focused primarily on fraud 
prevention. But there is a growing view that the department should also monitor the way 
banks measure and manage a variety of risks, including credit risk, market risk and even 
environmental issues. […] “Analysis of the financial crisis and more recent problems in the 
banks emphasizes the need for internal audit to be at the heart of corporate governance. 
To enable this, all parties with an interest in the governance of financial institutions need 
more specific guidance on the role of internal audit,” said Roger Marshall, director of the 
Financial Reporting Council and chair of the audit committee of Old Mutual, an insurer.17
Internal auditor backgrounds vary with their staff’s charter. Many internal auditors have an 
accounting background, but as internal audit charters have broadened, many firms’ audit staffs 
have become more diverse and include, among others, information system specialists, com-
puter experts, and consultants. Moreover, and mainly because the charter of internal audit can 
be so varied, internal audit functions frequently turn to subject matter experts to assist in audit 
coverage requiring deeper knowledge of the specific business, process, or function. What most 
internal audit staffs have in common, however, is that they are typically headed by experienced 
professionals having titles such as chief audit executive, head of internal audit, or variations 
thereof.
Most internal auditors have ties to a professional association that sets professional stand-
ards, adopts a code of ethics, develops a common body of knowledge for internal auditors, and 
runs certification programs leading to the qualification of “Certified Internal Auditor” (or a var-
iation thereof). In the United States, there is the Institute of Internal Auditors, and its UK equiv-
alent is the Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors, mentioned earlier in this chapter. Many 
other countries have similar professional bodies.

Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
636
Organizationally, the internal audit function operates in a staff capacity and almost always 
reports high in the organization, at least to the corporate controller or CFO/VP Finance. How-
ever, experts recommend that the internal audit staff should report directly to the audit com-
mittee of the board of directors to enhance their independence, credibility, and visibility:
For example, the new standards [in the United Kingdom] advise that the appropriate 
reporting line for Heads of Internal Audit in public sector organisations is to the audit com-
mittee, with administrative reporting to the chief executive. But 28% of Heads of Internal 
audit in local government said their teams report to the Chief Financial Officer (CFO). The 
IIA says that this could create a conflict of interest, potentially limiting internal audit’s abil-
ity to be completely objective in fulfilling its scrutiny of financial controls, which also fall 
into the remit of the CFO.18
Finally, many internal audit functions are said to be still heavily stuck in the past, focusing 
on financial and compliance audits (see below), presumably still the hallmarks of the height-
ened regulatory and compliance era (such as triggered by Sarbanes-Oxley in the United States). 
One US survey suggests that only 13% of respondents indicated that their departments allo-
cated at least 25% of resources to strategic and business audits (which we categorize as perfor-
mance audits below), while a majority (57%) assigned this degree of resources to traditional 
financial audits. The survey also suggests, however, that strategic, business, and operational 
audits are among the fastest-growing areas of internal audit focus.19 This perhaps echoes the 
sentiments in a survey in the Asia Pacific region about the role of the finance function more 
generally:
According to nearly two-thirds of the CEOs surveyed, technology was the largest factor 
determining the future role of the CFO. Cloud computing and social media are offering 
CFOs a chance to “leverage technology in new ways,” said Geoff Wilson, chief operating 
officer for the Asia Pacific region at KPMG. Nevertheless, roughly 40% said strict regula-
tion impedes the CFO’s focus, although about the same percentage saw it is an opportu-
nity to pull ahead of competitors.20
Once again, this illustrates the tussle and tension between the compliance and business roles 
that staff in these roles must effectively and reliably navigate.
Common audit types
While the mechanics and techniques are basically the same among all types of audits, the moti-
vations and end results are different. This section briefly describes some of the most common 
types of audits that serve various control purposes.
Financial audits
In a financial audit, independent, external auditors are asked to express an opinion as to 
whether the financial statements prepared by management are fairly presented in accordance 
with applicable accounting standards, such as International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS) in many countries or Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) in the United 
States. The guidelines that external auditors must follow in performing an audit in the United 
States are known as Generally Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS). These guidelines are 
established by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), which was born out 
of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Similarly, International Standards on Auditing (ISAs) are developed 
by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB) of the International Fed-
eration of Accountants (IFAC). These acronyms aside, financial audits essentially provide a tool 
by which outside regulators (such as stock exchanges and government bodies) can enforce 

Auditors
637
standards for the preparation and presentation of accounting information to interested parties 
outside the organization, which is critically important for the efficient functioning of capital 
markets as well as the public sector, among other purposes. A detailed discussion of financial 
audits, however, is outside the scope of this text.
Compliance audits
Organizations are responsible for complying with many laws, rules, procedures, and adminis-
trative policies set down by various authorities. In a compliance audit, the auditors are asked to 
express an opinion as to whether actual activities or results are in compliance with the estab-
lished standards, rules, and regulations. As such, compliance audits generally involve a nar-
rower scope of investigation than do other types of audits. Despite the narrower scope, 
compliance audits nonetheless often unearth fraud and irregularities, even though that is not 
their primary purpose. Both external and internal auditors perform compliance audits. Compli-
ance audits vary widely in the amount of evidence to be gathered and the auditor expertise 
needed. Audits for compliance with more complex rules, such as some tax laws, may require 
considerable specialized knowledge and substantive professional judgment.
Performance audits
Performance audits go by various names such as operational audits, management audits, or stra-
tegic audits. They provide an overall evaluation of the general performance, or some specific 
aspect of the performance of an activity, function, entity, or company and its management. 
Performance audits can be performed by broad-scope internal auditors or external auditors in a 
consulting role. The criteria for comparison are vague in many performance audits, often only 
loosely referring to assessing an activity, function, or entity’s effectiveness. Accordingly, an 
important part of performance audits often involves defining the criteria in more specific terms. 
In many cases, the scope is usefully limited by virtue of focusing on a specific activity, function, 
or entity, or a specific performance dimension thereof (e.g. quality, delivery, information sys-
tems). In addition to making a judgment as to whether performance meets the set criteria, per-
formance auditors usually also produce an important by-product through identifying areas for 
improvement. Although performance auditors generally have broader training and experience 
than other types of auditors, they typically also turn to internal or external subject matter 
experts, depending on the needed coverage on any given assignment. The audit reports may be 
directed to management, government regulatory agencies (such as environmental protection 
agencies), or related parties in the context of certain contractual or business partner arrange-
ments.
The value of audits
Audits create value in two primary ways. First, the audit report adds credibility to the informa-
tion provided to user groups. The auditors provide an independent check against criteria reflect-
ing user needs for whom presumably the knowledge as to whether or to what extent the criteria 
have been met is valuable. As a by-product of this evaluation process, auditors often provide 
what can be an equally valuable benefit through identifying areas for improvement and making 
specific recommendations where practices need to be redressed or issues addressed. These rec-
ommendations can deal with minor procedural changes or major management policy changes. 
Some argue, however, that recommendations should not be part of the audit function. They 
reckon that giving advice compromises audit independence, if not in the first audit, certainly in 
all audits performed by the same auditors after the recommendations are (or are not) imple-
mented. The independence particularly of external auditors, who often also provide perfor-
mance audits, tax services, or various types of consulting to their clients as an extension of their 

Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
638
financial statement audits, has been a thorny issue and the subject of increased regulatory 
attention.21
The second benefit of audits comes not from the audit itself, but from the anticipation of an 
audit. Knowing that an audit will or might take place can strongly motivate the individuals 
involved to conform to the standards they reckon the auditors will use in their evaluation. “Eve-
ryone performs better if they know someone is looking over their shoulder. When you put out 
the word that no one is looking, it’s an invitation to disaster.”22 But this may also explain the 
general “negativity” about audits, as exemplified by the following survey evidence:
While many organizations say they have improved their internal audit capabilities, a survey 
from PwC finds the progress hasn’t been enough to keep pace with the increasingly risky 
and complex business landscape. The survey of more than 1,900 chief audit executives, 
internal audit managers, members of senior management and board members found that 
55% of senior management reported that they do not believe internal audit adds significant 
value to their organization, and nearly 30% of board members believe it adds less than 
significant value.23
Regardless of these views, audits are clearly not equally valuable in all situations. One factor 
that affects the potential value of an audit is the importance of the area audited. The greater the 
potential consequences (the higher the stakes), the greater the audit’s potential value. Audits 
are also potentially more valuable if the probability is high that the established criteria either 
are not being met or would not be met in the absence of the audit. Finally, audits are potentially 
more valuable when other control mechanisms are not feasible. For example, reviews by inde-
pendent auditors are necessary when the user group is not able to satisfy itself directly as to 
whether the established criteria have been or are being met. This inability may be caused by the 
complexity of the subject matter, physical remoteness, institutional barriers preventing access 
to some of the evidence needed (such as in a joint venture), or just reasonable suspicion that 
self-interest (of those being audited) will prevail over the interests of the relevant user group(s) 
in the absence of an independent, objective audit.
Audits can be valuable tools in many management control situations. Auditors can serve as 
the “eyes and ears” of management in assessing what is happening within the organization, and 
they can also share their expertise by providing recommendations for improvement. For man-
agement purposes, the potential value of an audit is greatest if the criteria used for comparison 
are those set by management. Audits commissioned by outsiders, such as financial or environ-
mental audits, are designed to serve the interests of those outsiders, although the auditors may 
provide some observations of use to management. But even for those audits, the benefits can 
come in seemingly unexpected ways. For example, a report commissioned by the UK govern-
ment (to decide if emissions reporting will be mandatory) found that companies that measure 
their carbon emissions do not find the exercise arduous or expensive – some even said it brings 
benefits. Just over half the firms surveyed said reporting emissions carried a net benefit for 
their business. Indeed, although there may be no obvious direct benefits from the act of report-
ing emissions, reporting emissions forces a company to measure them first; that does bring ben-
efits, as measuring emissions produces an incentive to reduce them, which might be done by 
spending less on energy.24
Another benefit is the avoidance or mitigation of costly, harmful, sometimes even calamitous 
outcomes. If internal audits (and controls) are effective at avoiding or minimizing harm, then 
this benefit is inevitably hard to measure. But it can be significant, considering that “internal 
auditors advise on the management of risks including fraud, data security, and health and 
safety; […] they aim to help the board and management identify issues before they become a 
problem; […] and they help reduce the risks of serious problems causing financial loss or expos-
ing the organization to regulatory or legal action.”25

Conclusion
639
Where audits are feasible, they can be an important alternative or supplement to other man-
agement control mechanisms, such as direct supervision or incentives, and they can help assess 
the effectiveness of the controls (including whether they produce any harmful side effects) and/
or the degree of compliance (especially with action controls). Audits can test whether the 
desired behaviors were in fact taken and document any unintended consequences. Auditors can 
usually reach an informed judgment by examining just a small proportion of the relevant evi-
dence. And, in some situations just the threat of an audit can be a powerful deterrent against 
undesirable behavior.
But audits have limitations. One is that they are done only on a periodic basis and thus offer 
little protection against problems occurring in the interim except to the extent that they provide 
a deterrent effect. This limitation of audits is pertinent in situations where something must be 
done properly the first, or every, time. Audits also can create negative reactions, such as defen-
siveness, especially when individuals feel their integrity is questioned or their autonomy is jeop-
ardized. Audits can be costly. They consume considerable time from expert auditors, as well as 
from company employees who have to prepare information for the auditors to review. Moreo-
ver, audits can assess only the past. Thus, audits of one-time occurrences have value only if they 
provide some useful insights about situations that might occur in the future.
All told, audits are invaluable in many situations and have likely increased in importance 
to the point where, just as with CFOs and controllers, chief audit executives (CAEs) are being 
called to become “strategic business partners” alongside the senior executive team given 
their expertise in risk and given how risk has become a core focus of boards and senior exec-
utives.26 Or, as one commentator idealizes this, “for companies to maximize the strategic 
contributions of the CAE, however, they must have both a business-aware auditor and an 
audit-aware board and leadership group.”27 But the elevation of the role of auditors, as the 
quote suggests, implies that business-aware auditors will face similar role duality, and pos-
sibly role conflicts, as controllers do in the execution of their management service versus 
oversight roles.
Conclusion
This chapter focused on the important control-related roles of controllers and auditors, 
both internal and external. These are challenging roles. Auditors, for example, must exam-
ine business processes and employees’ work (such as the work of accountants, managers, 
and so forth) in a limited amount of time and make judgments as to whether the work meets 
the set standards. Some standards, such as those defining significant and material internal 
control weaknesses (as described in Chapter 13) or fairness of presentation, are sometimes 
ill-defined and inevitably require judgment. The controller and internal auditor roles are 
particularly challenging because they involve an inherent conflict of interest. Individuals 
in these roles are asked to serve their organization and its management while at the same 
time fulfilling a management oversight role on behalf of the organization’s owners and 
other stakeholders. Their role may require them to take actions that are quite costly to their 
organization in the short run, such as exposing a fraudulent financial reporting scheme. It 
takes strong, courageous individuals with excellent interpersonal skills to perform such 
roles effectively. But building and maintaining a strong finance function is an important 
foundation of a management control system, and where firms manage to effectively navi-
gate the various role conflicts, they stand to benefit from significant positive spillover 
effects.28

640
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
Notes
	 1	 See, for example, “McKinsey Global Survey Results: 
How Finance Departments Are Changing,” The McKinsey 
Quarterly (April 2009), online at www.mckinseyquar-
terly.com.
	 2	 J. Karaian, “Business Outlook Survey,” CFO Europe (April 
2, 2009), pp. 13–14.
	 3	 “CFOs Have Bigger Roles Than Ever Before – and They 
Like It That Way,” Forbes (August 2, 2013), online at 
onforb.es/17iola9. See also “Asia Pacific CEOs Say Role of 
CFO Increasingly Important,” The Wall Street Journal 
(December 9, 2014), online at blogs.wsj.com/
cfo/2014/12/09/asia-pacific-ceos-say-role-of-cfo-
increasingly-important.
	 4	 See, for example, The New Value Integrator: Insights from 
the IBM Chief Financial Officer Study, IBM Global Business 
Services (March 2010).
	 5	 “CFOs Have Bigger Roles Than Ever Before,” op. cit.
	 6	 “How the Financial Crisis Transformed the CFO from 
Bean Counter to Change Agent,” Financial Post (October 
16, 2014), online at natpo.st/1P9mgPX.
	 7	 See, for example, W. Van der Stede and R. Malone, 
“Accounting Trends in a Borderless World,” Chartered Insti-
tute of Management Accountants (November 2010), online 
at www.cimaglobal.com. See also J. Banks, “Value Creation –  
Support Network,” Excellence in Leadership (November 
2010), pp. 12–15; Institute of Chartered Accountants in 
England and Wales, The Finance Function: A Framework for 
Analysis (2011); H. Chang, C. D. Ittner, and M. T. Paz, “The 
Multiple Roles of the Finance Organization: Determinants, 
Effectiveness, and the Moderating Influence of Information 
System Integration,” Journal of Management Accounting 
Research, 26, no. 2 (2014), pp. 1–32.
	 8	 Van der Stede and Malone, “Accounting Trends in a 
Borderless World,” op. cit.
	 9	 “How the Financial Crisis Transformed the CFO from 
Bean Counter to Change Agent,” op. cit.
	10	 Van der Stede and Malone, “Accounting Trends in a 
Borderless World,” op. cit.
	11	 V. Maas and M. Matejka, “Balancing the Dual Responsi-
bilities of Business Unit Controllers: Field and Survey Evi-
dence,” The Accounting Review, 84, no. 4 (July 2009), 
pp. 1233–53.
	12	 “How the Financial Crisis Transformed the CFO from 
Bean Counter to Change Agent,” op. cit.
	13	 There is an ongoing debate as to whether, or the extent to 
which, the provision of non-audit services by audit firms 
impairs auditor independence. See, for example, M. 
Causholli, D. J. Chambers, and J. L. Payne, “Does Selling 
Non-Audit Services Impair Auditor Independence? New 
Research Says, Yes,” Current Issues in Auditing, 9, no. 2 
(December 2015), pp. 1–6.
	14	 Governance and Risk Report 2014 (Chartered Institute of 
Internal Auditors, 2014), online at www.iia.org.uk/
media/1042498/0819-gov-risk-report-25-11-14.pdf.
	15	 “More than a Third of Public Sector Organizations Do Not 
Have Fully Effective Risk Management Mechanisms,” 
Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors (December 18, 
2013), online at iia.org.uk.
	16	 Ibid.
	17	 “New Code of Conduct for Internal Auditors,” The Finan-
cial Times (September 9, 2012), online at on.ft.
com/1ITZHuu.
	18	 “More than a Third of Public Sector Organizations Do 
Not Have Fully Effective Risk Management Mecha-
nisms,” op. cit.
	19	 See, for example, Business Upheaval: Internal Audit 
Weighs Its Role amid the Recession and Evolving Enterprise 
Risks, PricewaterhouseCoopers (2009), online at www.
pwc.com.
	20	 “CFOs Have Bigger Roles Than Ever Before,” op. cit.
	21	 See, for example, Causholli, Chambers, and Payne, “Does 
Selling Non-Audit Services Impair Auditor Independ-
ence?,” op. cit.
	22	 “UC Sues Official over Alleged Embezzlement,” The Los 
Angeles Times (August 25, 1995), p. A3.
	23	 Survey Roundup: Executives on Analytics, Internal 
Audit,” The Wall Street Journal (April 4, 2014), online at 
blogs.wsj.com/riskandcompliance/2014/04/04/survey-
roundup-executives-on-analytics-internal-audit-value.
	24	 “Carbon Counting Is ‘Good for Business,’” BBC (Novem-
ber 30, 2010), online at www.bbc.co.uk.
	25	 “Auditors Blow Whistle on Inadequate Procedures for 
Reporting Crises,” The Financial Times (February 23, 
2014), online at on.ft.com/1fBCgxC.
	26	 “Social Media Risks Create an Expanded Role for Internal 
Audit,” The Wall Street Journal (August 6, 2013), online at 
deloitte.wsj.com/riskandcompliance/2013/08/06/
social-media-risks-create-an-expanded-role-for-internal-
audit.
	27	 “Leadership in the Risk-Intelligent Organization,” Busi-
ness Week (September 30, 2010), online at www.business-
week.com.
	28	 Chang, Ittner, and Paz, “The Multiple Roles of the Finance 
Organization,” op. cit.

Don Russell: Experiences of a Controller/CFO
641
 In February 1991, Don Russell, chief financial officer 
(CFO) at Eastern Technologies, Inc. (ETI) was mulling 
over a critical decision. Don had joined ETI only 14 months 
earlier and had gradually become convinced that the com-
pany’s fi nancial accounting was excessively aggressive. He 
thought a sizable correcting entry should be made imme-
diately. But if the correction was made, ETI would report 
a large loss that would trigger violations of debt fi nancing 
covenants and place the company’s survival in jeopardy. 
 ETI’s chairman and president were strongly against 
making the correcting entry. They reminded Don that 
the company had a plan to shore up its operations and 
to get cheaper financing in place and that the plan 
needed time to work. But Don was not convinced that 
top management’s plan was viable. 
 Don felt that ETI’s accounting reports were mislead-
ing to decision-makers both outside and inside the 
company. This caused him particular concern because 
he had seen the dangers of manipulating earnings 
reports at his previous employer. But he knew that if he 
forced the change now, he would lose his job. Even if 
ETI survived, he was sure he would be fi red for “not 
being a team player.” As he noted to an observer: 
 It is frightening to know that you’re going to be out 
the door almost immediately after you make the 
decision. It’s even more frightening to me right now 
because I’ve just gone through a divorce and 
remarriage, and now I’ve got six kids and annual 
alimony payments of $60,000. 
 He also thought about the eff ect the decision would 
have on the value of the tens of thousands of ETI stock 
options he had been given. The options would be worth 
several hundred thousand dollars when exercised, and 
half of them could be exercised in two months. 
 Early career 
 Don Russell joined the audit staff  of the Chicago offi  ce 
of Touche & Young (T&Y) in July 1973 immediately 
upon graduation from the University of Illinois. His 
advancement was rapid. In 1983, he was promoted to 
senior manager and was given indications that he was 
on track toward partnership. Over the 1975 – 80 period, 
Don attended DePaul University’s evening MBA pro-
gram and earned his degree in management informa-
tion systems. T&Y gradually shifted his work 
responsibilities to take advantage of his systems exper-
tise. By 1984 Don’s time was split almost equally 
between auditing and systems consulting. 
 In 1985 Don left T&Y to become corporate controller 
for Cook & Spector, Inc. (C&S), a large ($4 billion sales) 
consumer products division of Queen’s Industries, a 
major British corporation. C&S had been acquired by 
Queen’s in 1984. Don was familiar with C&S because it 
was one of his major audit clients. He explained why he 
decided to take the job: 
 When the headhunter fi rst approached me about 
the job I wasn’t interested. C&S had an antiquated 
accounting system. It was a huge company, but 
they still had a manual accounts receivable system. 
They did no planning; no budgeting. It was ridicu-
lous. But C&S’s top managers told me, “You have 
carte blanche to make whatever changes you think 
are necessary. You have complete control.” So I 
was intrigued by the challenge. 
 It was also a great career opportunity. C&S was 
a large, reasonably profitable corporation with 
some outstanding brand names. And my job was 
significant. I had 250 people working for me. I 
reported to the CFO, and the only other person 
reporting to him was the Treasurer who had eight 
people working for him. So I thought I would prob-
ably be next in line for the CFO job. 
 Controllership experiences 
at Cook & Spector 
 Systems development activities 
 Don started at C&S in August 1985. He spent his fi rst 
six months planning the changes he wanted to make to 
the fi rm’s accounting information systems. Then over 
 CASE STUDY 
 Don Russell: Experiences of a Controller/CFO 

642
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
the next three years he implemented major changes. 
He changed the chart of accounts so that the firm could 
produce profit and loss statements down to the product 
level; the new system had 500,000 account/cost center 
combinations. He installed new general ledger, 
accounts receivable, and accounts payable systems that 
would operate in a modern database environment. And 
he implemented a standard cost system in the firm’s 
42 factories. About the cost system change, he observed, 
“C&S had had only an actual cost system. The monthly 
costs fluctuated wildly and weren’t useful. They didn’t 
provide a reflection of what was going on.”
After the accounting systems were computerized, 
Don found it easy to reduce costs in the controller’s 
department. He reduced his accounting staff from 250 
to 110 and saved the company over $4 million per year.
Earnings management activities
In 1985, for a variety of reasons, C&S’s profit perfor-
mance was running $45 million ahead of the $200 mil-
lion plan. To save the profit for periods when it might be 
needed, Don established several types of large reserves. 
For example, C&S had been aggressive in expensing 
the acquisition costs incurred as part of the Queen’s 
acquisition process, so Don set up a large reserve ($53 
million) for taxes, in case the IRS disallowed the 
expense deductions. He also set up reserves for 
unknown liabilities because, “Everybody realized that 
the company had a poor accounting system.” Don 
believed at the time that the reserves were justified and 
that, “It’s better to be safe than sorry. If it turns out that 
we were overly conservative, it’s no big deal.”
These reserves had to be spread across the 34 line 
items in the income statements of each of the over 600 
product lines in 60 divisions in a way that would not 
attract the attention of the analysts on Queen’s corpo-
rate staff or the auditors. Don accomplished this task 
without significant questions being raised.
In 1986, company sales and profits were below fore-
cast and top management told Don they wanted to use 
some of the reserves. They said they wanted to report 
an 8% increase in earnings and to increase significantly 
the amount of expenditures on new product develop-
ment to help the company grow in the future. Don was 
able to free up the reserves to satisfy these requests.
Corporate recognition
Don’s superiors were ecstatic about his efforts. He had 
modernized the company’s accounting systems; had 
saved the company $4 million in overhead annually; 
and had demonstrated great skill in managing the 
accounting profit numbers. After a year with the com-
pany, he was promoted to vice president/controller.
Don was flushed with success:
Every management meeting I was held up as the 
ideal. I remember one top-level meeting when they 
flashed my picture on the screen and said, “Follow 
this guy’s lead. This is the way you should manage 
your department.” One time the president called 
me the Monet of the accounting profession.
My head was exploding. At T&Y they keep telling 
you you are worthless to keep you there and to 
keep your salary down. All of a sudden I’m impor-
tant, and I’m making a lot of money. After I had 
been at C&S six months I gave them my six-month 
plan, and I got a $30,000 bonus right there on the 
spot. I was in shock. I had never had that much free 
money in my life. Plus I was involved. I attended all 
the key management meetings.
Concerns about earnings management
During his third year at C&S, Don began to have con-
cerns about his manipulations of reserves. He said:
I hadn’t really thought much about my manipula-
tions of reserves. I thought I was being a team 
player. This is how the company had been run for 
years. It had a record of 33 consecutive years of 
increasing quarterly earnings. But real results, with 
recessions and everything else that happens, don’t 
happen that way. So I hadn’t invented earnings 
management at C&S, although we were probably 
now doing it on a grander scale than had been 
done before.
But it suddenly dawned on me that something 
was horribly wrong. We were pristine in reporting 
for taxes because I sent my tax manager to the 
operating units to make sure real data were going 
to the IRS. But we didn’t care if real data were going 
to Queen’s. All of a sudden we had two years that 
weren’t comparable and we really didn’t know 
where we were. When people looked back at trends 
they were looking at distorted numbers. And 
because we spread the reserves around we had 
distorted all the product P&Ls.
Don attempted to drain the reserves out of the 
product-level profit and loss statements, but the complex-
ity was overwhelming because each of the 60 divisions 

Don Russell: Experiences of a Controller/CFO
643
and over 600 product lines would now have two P&Ls 
each. Plus the draining provoked a number of arguments 
with the operating managers because the divisions had 
been manipulating the numbers on their own. They had 
not really spent the promotion expense by product as was 
reported, and they had their own buried reserves. In fact, 
the division reserves probably totaled more than those 
created at corporate. So even if Don could eliminate the 
distortions he had caused, the product statements that 
would result still would not yield accurate information.
Don’s concern about the earnings management 
activities rose in 1988:
The year 1988 looked like another down year and 
everybody was saying, “We need more product 
development because last year’s development 
didn’t work.” And the president, of course, was 
saying we need another 8% increase in income.
I told the president that we can’t allow the reserves 
within the division. Every year we’d have something 
like a $200 million target, but we’d have $40 million in 
reserves ready to help us. So everybody would get 
their bonuses; the executive parking lot was filled 
with BMW 750s and Mercedes. I was doing well also. 
My regular salary was around $130,000, but my total 
compensation was nearly $230,000.
While the company was reporting profits, I 
thought we were headed in a downward spiral. The 
old products were still extremely profitable, but we 
were spending a huge amount of money on new 
products and were disguising the fact that the new 
products were a lot less profitable. There was no 
linkage between bonuses and a strategic plan, just a 
link to an accounting number that was not tied to a 
plan. It was just an accounting game. We were get-
ting our bonuses for nothing – actually worse than 
nothing because we were making bad decisions.
Attempts to change the company’s 
financial goals and measurement system
To improve company decision-making and reduce the 
temptations to manage earnings, Don decided to try to 
change C&S’s financial goals and measurements sys-
tem. He was particularly concerned that the potentially 
lucrative bonuses, ranging up to 70–100% of base sal-
ary, were based on operating profit numbers that were 
too easy to manipulate.
He began a fact-finding study. He began interview-
ing all the C&S division heads on his own and soon 
realized that the company was not doing any real 
strategic planning. He found that company planning 
involved just settling on a set of revenue and profit 
numbers that looked reasonable. C&S operating man-
agers were unwilling to tell Queen’s about their real 
plans, such as for new products, because they were 
worried that they would have egg on their face if they 
weren’t able to accomplish their plans.
Among the questions Don asked in the interviews 
was, “What are the most important decisions you make 
on a monthly and annual basis, and what information 
do you use in making those decisions?” The manager of 
the largest operating unit said, “On a monthly basis, 
one of the most important decisions I make is how 
much profit to recognize.”
Don’s reaction:
I was floored. This is one of the most senior manag-
ers in a huge company, and he was telling me that 
one of his most important decisions is how to manip-
ulate the numbers. His operating decisions are sec-
ondary. His first role, he viewed, was to give the 
president the profit number he wanted that month.
And this guy wasn’t unique. Everyone else I 
talked with reinforced this message. Managers 
who missed their monthly budget targets would 
take a lot of flak. The president would quickly call 
them and ask, “What are you doing? How are you 
correcting the problem? Cut your advertising! Fire 
some people!…” This drilled into me what happens 
when you allow manipulations. People don’t focus 
on real problems.
Don planned to take his interview observations to the 
president and tell him:
We’ve got a big problem here because we’re not 
managing the company the way we should be. 
We’re spending four times the amount of product 
development and capital expenditures we need 
because it’s easy to get Queen’s to approve them. 
But Queen’s assumes we are making good deci-
sions, and we’re not.
But Don wanted to be able to propose an alternative, 
and he set out looking for “the Holy Grail of more rea-
sonable financial reporting.”
Don learned that some companies were experiment-
ing with an approach to planning that focused on 
changes in shareholder value. This focused measure-
ment attention on hard numbers – cash flows – rather 
than the easily manipulatable operating profit. He 
studied these approaches and proposed their use to top 

644
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
management, but they were completely opposed to any 
changes. They did not understand why they would 
want to make such a drastic change when the company 
and its management team were doing so well.
The decision to leave
As the pace of accounting systems change slowed, 
Don’s job became more routine, and he became bored. 
He began listening for other career opportunities. He 
thought he wanted to become a chief financial officer so 
that he could work more in finance areas where he had 
had no experience. And he thought he would like even-
tually to move into a line management position.
In early 1989, a headhunter approached Don with an 
opportunity to interview for the position of CFO of 
Eastern Technologies, Inc. (ETI), a public communica-
tions services company. ETI was growing rapidly and 
was raising large amounts of money both from banks 
and direct placements. He was interviewed for the job 
and accepted it when it was offered. He joined ETI on 
December 1, 1989.
CFO experiences at Eastern 
Technologies
The company
ETI, headquartered in Stamford, Connecticut, was 
founded in 1978 as a cable television firm. It had sev-
eral cable franchises in New England and the New York 
metropolitan area. The company had been profitable 
since the early 1980s. It went public in 1984 with an ini-
tial offering price of $11.00 per share. For the 1988 fis-
cal year (ended June 30), revenues were $30 million 
and profits were just above $1 million. The 1988 year-
end stock price was $8.75.
In 1987, ETI’s founder, a skilled electronics engi-
neer, decided to diversify the company’s operations 
into the fast-growing area of satellite broadcasting. 
This business involves sending broadcast signals, such 
as from a concert or a sporting event, to a broadcast sat-
ellite that relays the signal to a network of large dish 
antennas on the ground. These antennas then distrib-
ute the signals to users, such as local television stations.
To finance the construction of antennas and distri-
bution networks throughout the Northeast, ETI raised 
considerable bank financing. By the end of 1987, ETI’s 
debt–equity ratio was 4 to 1, but management figured 
the company still needed $10 million of additional 
capital. They approached a prominent investment 
banking firm to make a bond offering. The investment 
bankers showed ETI management how easy it was to 
raise money with high-yield bonds, and the company 
eventually made a much larger offering – of $25 mil-
lion. When the bonds sold, the company had consider-
able cash but a debt–equity ratio of 6 to 1.
ETI management used the extra cash to accelerate 
the expansion of facilities and to acquire a Baltimore-
based broadcasting firm of similar size to ETI. Growth 
exploded as the company signed more and more long-
term contracts with customers. Revenues totalled 
$81 million in 1989, almost three times the 1988 level. 
But after-tax profits were just under $1 million, as the 
company had to book a large loss in the fourth quarter 
of the year to cover one-time start-up problems with the 
new technology.
ETI made another acquisition in February 1990. 
This was of a Southern California-based consulting 
firm that provided specialized communications ser-
vices primarily to firms in the defense industry. The 
two acquired companies were run as largely autono-
mous divisions within the ETI corporate structure.
Transition of power
When Don joined ETI his major concern was whether 
ETI’s president, Joe Blevins, would allow him auton-
omy in his CFO role. Joe was a former T&Y audit part-
ner who had joined ETI in 1987. But Don found Joe’s 
approach to the transition of power to be quite reason-
able. Joe asked Don to focus his initial attention on 
improving the company’s operating systems: ETI had 
no computerized systems, no planning, and no budget-
ing, and the controller was weak. But Joe let Don sit in 
on the discussions with bankers and investment bank-
ers to help him learn the treasury functions that he 
would eventually assume.
Don quickly found that ETI’s financial focus was on 
earnings per share, and he vowed to change the focus 
to cash flow. Joe said, however, “You don’t really under-
stand the market. I’ll listen to your thoughts, but EPS is 
what the analysts care about. Cash flow may be the lat-
est voodoo thought, but it’s not very realistic.” Still, Don 
thought Joe would be open-minded, and he believed he 
could convince Joe to change.
Don, however, had a lot of work to do before he 
could focus on changes in the company’s planning and 
measurement processes. He focused his attention first 
on ETI’s chart of accounts. Billing was done manually, 
and expenses were assigned only to highly aggregated 

Don Russell: Experiences of a Controller/CFO
645
accounts. For example, the company paid huge bills for 
satellite rental and telephone services with no attempt 
to trace the expenses to contracts or even product lines. 
Another complicating factor: many of the charges were 
not billed regularly, so expenses had to be accrued. But 
the bases on which the accruals were done were not 
well thought out, and the company’s monthly profit fig-
ures fluctuated wildly. Don knew he could not prepare 
a credible budget without a better understanding of 
where the expenses were coming from and what lines 
of business were more profitable than others. That 
understanding required a better accounting system. He 
wanted eventually to be able to produce reliable budg-
ets and operating reports at department, and even pro-
ject, levels of the organization.
Changing the chart of accounts proved to be a diffi-
cult process because few people in the company under-
stood what Don was trying to do. The controller was 
not supportive. He was comfortable with the current 
chart of accounts and liked the fact that it was easy to 
work with. Don observed that, “It didn’t matter to him 
that it did not provide meaningful information. He 
thought of accounts just as pots that you throw 
expenses into. If you make the system more complex 
the assignment of expenses takes more thought.”
Don also had to spend time integrating the systems 
of the newly acquired subsidiaries. He found ETI to be 
much more dynamic than C&S. At C&S he had time to 
plan what he wanted to do. At ETI he had to implement 
changes quickly and hope to fine-tune the systems later.
ETI’s first budgeting process
Don led ETI through its first formal budgeting process in 
June–July 1990. Most of the numbers work was done by 
accounting personnel after they had consulted with the 
operating managers. Budgets were prepared for each divi-
sion using the categories in Don’s new chart of accounts.
When the budget for fiscal year 1991 was consoli-
dated, it showed a $2 million loss. But nobody was sure 
if the budget was realistic. This was the first budget 
that had been prepared at the division level, and no 
division-level historical reports were available for com-
parison purposes. It also quickly became apparent that 
budgeting mistakes had been made. For example, man-
agement soon discovered that a major contract had 
been left out of the budget. Operating managers had 
failed to pass the information to accounting personnel, 
and two months into the year, some significant unbudg-
eted expenses had to be paid.
ETI’s financial reporting strategy
After the budget was prepared, Don began an analysis 
of why the budget showed a loss for FY 1991 even 
though ETI had been reporting profits for years. It 
became obvious to him that the satellite communica-
tions business was in reality very unprofitable. ETI had 
been reporting profits because the company had imple-
mented an extremely aggressive financial reporting 
strategy. Joe Blevins had a theory that all start-ups are 
unprofitable in the beginning and that aggressive 
accounting policies are necessary to make the company 
look profitable so that money can be raised. The profits 
catch up later.
Joe used a number of methods of boosting earnings, 
including the following:
1.	 Virtually all repairs and maintenance were capital-
ized. Because there was so much development going 
on, Joe’s position was that all the engineers’ and 
technicians’ time was spent working on construc-
tion or making modifications that add capability to 
the equipment. Therefore, all the costs were capital-
izable.
2.	 Most interest was capitalized because it was deemed 
to be the cost of financing the construction in pro-
gress. For example, Don found that “We had deferred 
$3.5 million in interest for construction of a new 
video control center. We claimed it hadn’t been put 
into service until May 1990 because we were still 
getting the bugs out of it, but it had actually been up 
and running since mid-1988 and certainly met the 
GAAP criterion of substantially complete.” Don also 
found that “Nothing ever came out of construction 
in progress. They just kept capitalizing more and 
more interest.”
3.	 Most equipment was being depreciated on a 12-year 
life. But electronic equipment, which comprised the 
bulk of the equipment, probably has a maximum 
five-year life, and some of the expensive tubes have 
a maximum 24-month life.
4.	 As many expenditures as possible (for example, 
travel) were classified as being related to one of the 
acquisitions so that they would add to goodwill and 
be amortized over 40 years instead of being 
expensed immediately. Also, if any parts of the 
acquired businesses were suffering operating losses, 
those losses were capitalized. On the other hand, a 
gain of over a half million dollars on the sale of a 
portion of a communications relay station acquired 

646
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
in an acquisition was recorded directly as profit 
instead of as an adjustment to the price of the acqui-
sition. Don noted, “We told the auditors we were just 
selling the rights to that asset since the buyers obvi-
ously couldn’t take the asset with them. The auditors 
swallowed hard but accepted it.”
The auditors had not objected strenuously to ETI’s 
financial reports because they did not understand the 
technology. Satellite communications was a relatively 
new business that was just starting to grow. Few equip-
ment retirements had taken place as yet, so it was diffi-
cult to tell what the true equipment lives were. Don 
found out that, “When the auditors asked questions 
about the 12-year depreciation lives Joe would always 
point to the large antennas and say, ‘They will be there 
for 100 years.’ That’s true, but not much of the compa-
ny’s equipment cost is in the antennas.”
Don also noted:
The auditors had a feeling that there were some 
repairs and maintenance being capitalized, but 
they never really found it. When they did their inves-
tigations the engineers would tell them, “We’re just 
fine-tuning the equipment, getting it ready to use.” 
The auditors weren’t thorough enough. If they had 
studied it carefully they would have found, for 
example, that it takes $400,000 per year to maintain 
each of the fancy video tape decks. If the company 
doesn’t do the maintenance Sony won’t guarantee 
the machines.
By the end of FY 1990, Don judged that of the $10 
million in capital additions for the year, $3.5 million 
was in interest and another $2 million was for items 
that should have been classified as repairs and mainte-
nance expense and engineering salaries. If those 
expenses were moved to the income statement, ETI 
would show a huge loss. But as long as ETI manage-
ment could get funds for more capital additions, they 
would keep deferring those expenses.
Year end 1990
Don went to Joe and proposed a large accounting 
adjustment, of nearly $2 million, approximately twice 
the amount ETI would otherwise report as 1990 profit. 
But Joe was in the middle of an important series of 
negotiations that had begun in 1989 with National 
Telephone Corporation (NTC), a large telecommunica-
tions company. NTC had offered to buy a new offering 
of ETI stock at a substantial premium over market 
prices and to allow ETI to participate as a partner in the 
start of a whole new type of business – satellite tele-
phone communications. This business, which was in an 
early development stage, involved having special tele-
phones manufactured by NTC send a signal to a satel-
lite positioned to handle such transmissions. The 
satellite would relay the call to a ground station that 
fed it into the regular phone network. This business 
was seen to have a large potential market in providing 
easy telephone communications to remote areas and to 
passengers in airplanes throughout the world. NTC 
was attempting to set up a worldwide satellite commu-
nications network and was promising to give ETI the 
East Coast franchise. ETI managers knew that the NTC 
deal was important both for the opportunity to enter a 
new business and for the infusion of cash that would 
allow the retirement of some expensive bonds.
So when Don proposed the accounting adjustment, 
Joe said,
No! No! No! You don’t understand. We’ve got NTC 
going to hand us an enormous amount of money, and 
that will solve the problem. We must report the prof-
its they’re expecting or they’ll back away from us. 
Let’s get through this year and digest these acquisi-
tions. Our interest costs will be lower next year 
because we will be able to renegotiate our loans. 
Let’s focus on the future. I’ll talk to the auditors.
Don attended the meeting with the auditors, but said, 
“I had to leave the room because it was so outrageous.”
The auditors gave the ETI 1990 financial statements 
an unqualified opinion, although they told the board of 
directors that the statements were pushing the edge on 
aggressive reporting. In response to a question about 
how the auditors approved the statements, Don replied:
When I was at T&Y I felt relatively certain that 
nobody could get anything by me. By the time I’d 
left C&S I realized that auditors provide no safety 
net. There is no way you can have relatively 
untrained people (even those with up to five years’ 
experience), no matter how many you have, come 
up against financial people in a company with simi-
lar backgrounds but with a lot more experience and 
a full year to decide how they want to shape the 
financial picture they want to present to the world.
I think Joe also had an effect on the auditors. He 
has an explosive personality. I have watched him 
call the auditors, even the partner, into his office 
and literally shriek at them. He grossly overreacts 

Don Russell: Experiences of a Controller/CFO
647
to things; he’s not emotionally mature. I think 
they’re afraid of him. Even when they realize their 
mistakes they feel a natural pressure to go along to 
keep their client afloat. They hope it works out.
Even though Don felt ETI should not be reporting as 
it did, he knew he did not know what the proper 
accounting should be because he had spent his time 
focusing on improving the company’s systems. Further-
more, he felt that the problem would be fixed in 1991 as 
a lot of goodwill amortization and depreciation of 
equipment put in service would have to be recognized 
as expense. Don was also appeased because manage-
ment had agreed to limit expenditures, and Joe had 
finally agreed to let him change the company’s meas-
urement focus from EPS to cash flows.
Don wrote the management discussion and analysis 
section of ETI’s 1990 annual report. In it he indicated 
that fiscal year 1991 would be a year of restructuring, 
that the company would be amortizing its expenses 
over a much shorter period and, consequently, that 
profits would be much lower. His feeling at the time:
I felt that I had done a reasonable job of telling peo-
ple what was going on. I was signalling that the trend 
should not be plotted from these results. I thought if 
people looked at cash flows they would understand 
what was going on. We had disclosed how much 
interest we had capitalized. I thought that someone 
who was smart and took the time would be able to 
draw the right conclusions from our disclosures.
Fiscal year 1991
The budget proved to be reasonably accurate in the first 
quarter of fiscal year 1991, and Don was convinced that 
the company would actually report something close to 
the $2 million loss that had been forecast unless 
changes were made. He showed his analysis to top 
management and made them promise to make signifi-
cant cuts in expenditures. They committed to cut peo-
ple and travel, to delay the capital additions, and even 
to sell some assets.
But at the end of the second quarter (January 1991) 
the manager of the satellite video division dropped his 
$3.5 million operating profit projection for the year to 
$1.5 million, so company profits were now forecast at 
a $4 million loss for the year. Don visited the presi-
dents of all the divisions and asked them to raise their 
profit forecasts for the year, but they said that was 
impossible. For example, the president of the most 
profitable division said he had made a bad error and 
fired a couple of salespeople and his sales were below 
plan. Plus he said he had budgeted an aggressive level 
of sales that he had known from the beginning he 
could not deliver.
Don was now quite concerned. The rest of ETI’s top 
management team still did not put great faith in the 
budget numbers, and they had not cut costs as sharply 
as Don would have liked. And they still believed that 
the negotiation with NTC pointed the way to the com-
pany’s future. Don knew their stance perpetuated the 
pressures for aggressive financial reporting.
Don wondered what he should do. Should he con-
tinue to work on improving the company’s accounting 
and budgeting systems and keep trying to convince top 
management that ETI had a serious financial problem 
on its hands? Or should he force the issue by making 
the accounting adjustment and hope that the company 
(and his job) survived the loss?
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. The case describes a real situation, but the facts have been dis-
guised, and any resemblance to actual people or events is unintentional.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

648
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
 In 2015, a team of auditors from the Internal Audit staff  
of Desktop Solutions, Inc., an electronic distributor, 
audited the St. Louis branch of the Operations Group. 
Their audit report included the following overall 
judgment: 
  In our opinion, the St. Louis branch’s administrative 
process was  unsatisfactory to support the attain-
ment of branch business objectives. 
 The auditors noted that many of the branch proce-
dures were working eff ectively, but they found that 
major defi ciencies existed in the branch’s equipment 
control and order entry processes. 
 This case focuses on the areas of the audit that led to 
the unsatisfactory audit judgment. It describes what 
the auditors did, what they found, and how manage-
ment responded. 
 Desktop Solutions, Inc. 
 Desktop Solutions produced a broad line of printing 
and scanning systems for desktop printing/publishing 
applications. In 2015, the company’s revenues were 
well over $800 million (see  Exhibit  1 ). The company’s 
printers and scanners were available for rental or pur-
chase. All rental plans in the United States included 
maintenance, service, and parts. For equipment pur-
chase, Desktop Solutions off ered fi nancing plans over 
two- to five-year periods with competitive interest 
rates. Some equipment was sold with trade-in privi-
leges. The company also sold supplies, such as toner, 
developer, and paper. 
 Desktop Solutions’ worldwide marketing and 
sales organization marketed directly to end-user 
customers. The company also used some alternate 
channels, including retail stores, direct mail, and 
sales agents. And it maintained worldwide networks 
of regional service centers (for servicing products) 
and distribution centers (for sales of parts and con-
sumable supplies).  
 Operations Group 
 The Operations Group (OG) was the North American 
sales, marketing, and service operation within Desktop 
Solutions’ Operations Division. Within the OG, the 
most important line organizations were the branches. 
They represented Desktop Solutions’ direct interface 
with customers and were responsible for fulfi lling all 
their equipment and servicing needs. 
 Until the late 2000s, the management of the 
branches in OG had been highly decentralized. The 
decentralized organization was abandoned in the late 
2000s and early 2010s in favor of a functional type of 
organization, which allowed for more direct control 
over branch functions by regional headquarters. Under 
the functional organization, each branch was run by 
three parallel functional managers – a branch sales 
manager, a branch control manager (or branch control-
ler), and a branch technical service manager – each of 
whom reported directly to the respective functional 
manager at the regional level (see  Exhibit  2 ). The sales 
manager was responsible for all sales and leasing of 
Desktop Solutions products in the branch territory. The 
control manager was in charge of all the internal oper-
ating, administrative, and fi nancial reporting systems, 
such as order entry, accounts receivable, equipment 
control, and personnel. The technical service manager 
was responsible for the installation, servicing, and 
removal of sold and leased equipment. 
 The most difficult challenge with the new func-
tional organization was maintaining good commu-
nication between personnel in the different 
functions of the branch. Frequent and effective com-
munications were also important for achieving cus-
tomer satisfaction, which was the most important 
branch success factor. Good communications were 
required to ensure that equipment would be 
installed promptly, that billings would be accurate, 
and that problems would be resolved with a mini-
mum of hassle.  
 CASE STUDY 
 Desktop Solutions, Inc. (A): Audit of the St. Louis Branch 

Desktop Solutions, Inc. (A): Audit of the St. Louis Branch
649
Internal audit
Internal audit had been a centralized function at Desk-
top Solutions since 2000. The function was centralized 
in order to increase auditor independence and to 
improve the professionalism of the staff. In 2015, the 
internal audit organization consisted of 15 people, 
headed by Steve Kruse, who reported to the chief finan-
cial officer, Scott Pepper.
Two features of the Desktop Solutions Internal Audit 
(IA) organization were unique as compared with the 
internal audit groups in most corporations. First, the IA 
personnel had diverse backgrounds, and internal audit 
was not considered a career objective for most of them. 
The accounting/auditing personnel, who predomi-
nated on many corporate internal audit staffs, were in 
the minority; only three of the IA personnel were CPAs. 
The others were trained in a variety of disciplines, 
including engineering, marketing, computer science, 
and liberal arts. Nine of the staff came into IA from out-
side Desktop Solutions. An initial assignment in IA was 
perceived as a good introduction to the company and a 
good training ground for moving into line operations. 
Most staff auditors did, in fact, move into the opera-
tions side of the company after gaining a few years’ IA 
experience.
Second, the IA charter was very broad. The listing of 
IA functions (see Exhibit 3) showed that IA was 
expected to be involved in the development, not just 
the testing, of operational and internal controls. 
Exhibit 4 describes the different types of audits the IA 
staff performed and the allocation of audit resources 
among them in 2015.
Most of the audits were planned at headquarters, 
as part of the review of the company’s controls. How-
ever, IA also received requests for services from line 
managers. In recent years, the number of such 
requests had exceeded IA’s capacity. Balancing the 
needs for regular audit cycles with the needs for spe-
cial services requested was the difficult part in prepar-
ing the IA plan. Audit plans were approved by the 
audit committee of the board of directors, which was 
given regular progress reports throughout the year on 
each audit.
After executing an audit, IA staff gave formal 
presentations to senior line management detailing 
their results and recommendations. They also fol-
lowed up at a later date to see if the deficiencies had 
been corrected and the recommendations had been 
implemented.
Audit of the St. Louis branch
The St. Louis branch was selected for audit in 2015 for 
three reasons. First, the 2015 Master Audit Plan called 
for a number of large branch audits. The St. Louis 
branch, which served customers in Missouri, Illinois, 
and Kansas, was one of the largest of OG’s 52 branches. 
In 2015, it earned revenue of $15.2 million and had a 
sale/lease equipment inventory of 7,710 machines. 
Second, a 2013 audit of the St. Louis branch had uncov-
ered deficiencies in branch equipment control, and IA 
management thought this would be a good time to ver-
ify if improvements had been implemented. And third, 
a new branch control manager (branch controller) was 
recently hired, and the audit would give the new con-
trol manager a chance to work with the auditors and 
learn about the branch’s systems and problems. The IA 
audit team and the new controller arrived at the 
St. Louis branch on the same day.
The objective of the audit was to determine whether 
the branch administrative/control processes were well 
defined, executed, and managed to ensure: (1) con-
trolled and documented equipment movement and 
tracking; (2) timely and accurate order entry; 
(3) proper customer billing and adjustment; and 
(4) effective collections activity.
On the St. Louis audit, like most branch audits, the 
auditors focused most of their attention on equipment 
inventory and accounts receivable. These were the two 
largest branch balance sheet items, and both were 
under the direct control of the branch managers.
Equipment control/billing
Equipment control (EC) involved the tracking of equip-
ment movements in and out of the branch’s physical 
inventory and the simultaneous triggering of changes 
in customer billings. EC was critical to the branch’s 
ability to schedule, deliver, and install machines for 
Desktop Solutions customers, and to be paid for the 
equipment the customers used.
The key control personnel in EC were the order 
administrators (OAs), the equipment administrator 
(EA), and the schedulers. The OAs were responsible for 
editing incoming orders, entering the orders into the 
computer system, keeping track of the orders after they 
were sent to scheduling, and processing the install 
transactions (install date, serial number, meter reads).
The EA was responsible for the accuracy of inven-
tory records, and the timely resolution of equipment 

650
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
discrepancies that delayed orders (thus billing) from 
being completed. The EA maintained the Non-Revenue 
Report (NRR), a computer-generated inventory listing 
(by equipment serial number) of all branch equipment 
not installed at a customer location. The NRR was 
updated daily with information about new installations 
and cancellations. At the beginning of each month, the 
EA took a physical inventory of all equipment at the 
warehouse, matched it with the NRR, and reconciled 
the differences. Equipment on the NRR not found at the 
warehouse was reclassified as uninventoriable (lost). If 
it was not found within 90 days, the branch was 
charged for the net book value of the lost equipment. 
The process for cancellation and deinstallation of 
equipment was very similar.
The schedulers matched the orders with the equip-
ment shown as available on the NRR. A target delivery 
date (ideally two days) was transmitted to the rigger who 
delivered the equipment (by serial number indicated).
Exhibit 5 shows a simplified flow chart of the pro-
cess used in the St. Louis branch for order-entry and 
installation of the high-end printing and scanning sys-
tems. Personnel in the control function of the branch 
played a central communication role, transmitting the 
order information from the sales representatives to the 
rigger (warehouse) personnel and branch technical 
service personnel. They also processed the information 
about installations so as to trigger the customer billing.
Some low-end systems were delivered and installed 
by the sales representatives (reps). When this was done, 
the equipment control process was simplified because 
the rep was responsible for delivering the order paper-
work and the printer serial number to the OA for entry 
into the computer system.
While their operations were quite similar, the 
branches used slightly different administrative pro-
cesses and personnel roles. OG management elected 
not to use a detailed, centralized set of administrative 
processes for all branches. They preferred allowing the 
branch managers to tailor their branch’s processes to 
the local conditions.
Audit procedures
The audit fieldwork at the St. Louis branch took a team 
of four auditors approximately two months to complete. 
Exhibit 6 describes the tests performed on the equip-
ment control process. About 40% of the audit time was 
devoted to equipment control procedures. Initially the 
IA personnel conducted background interviews with 
key branch personnel. They also reviewed organization 
charts and prepared detailed flow charts of the order 
entry, scheduling, and equipment control processes. 
This was done to understand how the branch operated, 
to determine the degree of compliance with company 
procedures, and to determine the efficiency of branch 
personnel. Potential problem areas were noted for spe-
cial attention during the audit fieldwork.
In addition to equipment control, the auditors also 
tested several other areas, including customer billings 
for equipment, supplies, and servicing (for accuracy 
and timeliness), price plan conversion (for compliance 
with company procedures), order entry and cancella-
tion processes (for accuracy and efficiency), credit and 
collections, and order-to-installation time lag. Each of 
these areas represented a cycle or process activity 
which was important to the operation of a branch.
Findings – equipment control
The auditors found that management failed to define 
responsibilities clearly or hold the EA accountable for 
his performance. Branch management was not involved 
in the monitoring and maintenance of the equipment 
control process. And control management did not 
maintain effective contact with marketing and service 
management to ensure that the equipment control pro-
cess was operating properly. Exhibit 7 describes some 
of the deficiencies found.
However, the branch was rated “very good” in other 
areas. The auditors noted that the negative impacts 
from the deficiencies in the equipment control area 
seemed to be effectively minimized:
Although the delayed equipment transaction process-
ing contributed to incorrect billings and an increased 
rate of costly billing adjustments, overall the billing 
function was sufficiently well organized and controlled 
to be able to absorb the pressures generated. The bill-
ing adjustments reviewed were highly accurate, and 
resolution of customer inquiries was satisfactory. The 
credit and collection program was well administered; 
performance budgets were consistently met; and 
adjustment and write-off activity was well controlled.
Recommendations and follow-up
On July 14, 2015, the audit team presented a final list-
ing of the recommendations to the branch managers. 
Shortly thereafter, they prepared a formal audit report 

Desktop Solutions, Inc. (A): Audit of the St. Louis Branch
651
to all OG management responsible for the St. Louis 
branch operations.
In the audit report, the auditors presented a list of 46 
recommendations. Most of the recommendations were 
directed to the new branch control manager, and gen-
erally related to one or more of the following:
1.	 The reconciliation between the physical inventory 
and the inventory records (NRR) should be com-
pleted;
2.	 The deficient equipment processes should be stud-
ied, refined, and documented; and
3.	 The individuals involved in equipment control 
should be given clearly defined responsibilities and 
be held accountable for the accuracy of the equip-
ment reports and billings.
Ultimate responsibility for correcting deficiencies 
rested with line management (branch managers), not 
with IA. Company policy required the branch manag-
ers to prepare an action plan to address each of the defi-
ciencies and recommendations made in the audit 
report. The last written response to the auditors’ rec-
ommendations came from the St. Louis branch control 
manager on December 15, 2016. He addressed each of 
the auditors’ recommendations and noted that most of 
them had already been implemented.
Company policy also required that someone inde-
pendent of both IA and branch management be 
assigned to monitor progress in implementing the audit 
recommendations. In OG, this was usually someone 
from the headquarters finance staff.
Reactions
Martha Sorensen (IA manager) reflected on the audit:
The St. Louis branch had been recognized for some 
time as a problem branch. In most of the branches, 
many of the systems and administrative proce-
dures go back to the days when the branches were 
run by a single branch manager, and the branches 
that were not well run in those days tended not to 
get going well when we switched to the functional 
organization. So going into this audit, we had a 
good idea we would find some problems, and the 
results of the audit confirmed this judgment. I hope 
we’re now well on the way to getting the problems 
ironed out.
Phil Phillips, Region 3 manager, responded to the 
disclosure of the St. Louis branch’s ongoing equipment 
control problem:
We can’t blame these problems on the system 
because it works well in other branches. The prob-
lems occur for a combination of reasons including 
people, management, the sheer volume of work 
that was handled, and the fact that St. Louis is 
larger and has a more diverse organization struc-
ture than most of the other branches. These all cre-
ate problems. We believe the problems are 
manageable but it will take time to whittle away at 
them. We’re making progress, but at this point we 
have not given the St. Louis branch a specific time 
deadline to clear up all their problems.

652
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
Exhibit 1  Summary income statements, Desktop Solutions, Inc. (in $ millions)
Year Ended December 31
2014
2015
Operating Revenues
Rentals and services
$456.2
$524.4
Sales
313.2
352.6
Total operating revenues
769.4
877.0
Cost and Expenses
Cost of rentals and services
203.2
232.4
Cost of sales
155.8
161.2
Research and development expenses
51.8
60.2
Selling, administrative and general expenses
289.2
319.6
Total cost and expenses
700.0
773.4
Operating Income
69.4
103.6
Other Income (Deductions), Net
(18.8)
(4.8)
Income before Income Taxes
50.6
98.8
Income Taxes
13.6
27.2
Income before Outside Shareholder’s Interests
37.0
71.6
Outside Shareholder’s Interests
7.1
11.8
Income from Continuing Operations
29.9
59.8
Discontinued Operations
5.2
2.4
Net Income
$35.1
$62.2
Exhibit 2  Operations Group organization chart

Desktop Solutions, Inc. (A): Audit of the St. Louis Branch
653
Control Environment Audits (24% of resources in 2015)
Control Environment audits evaluate the organizational arrangements; financial planning and analysis; personnel policies 
and practices; and policy definition and communication within operating organizations. The objective is to assess the 
basis on which responsibility is assigned, accountability is determined, performance is measured, and overall specific 
controls are established.
Business Entity Audits (39%)
These are reviews of specific business cycle controls in a business entity such as a branch or small to medium subsidiary.
Business Cycle Audits (17%)
These are reviews of the seven business cycle as set forth in the Desktop Solutions Compendium of Internal Controls to 
determine if the overall and individual cycle control objectives stated there are being met. The overall objectives tested 
are: authorization; accounting transaction processing; and safeguarding of corporate assets. The cycle reviews will also 
include reviews of applicable control environment functions and tests of supporting computer controls.
Financial Audits (11%)
Financial audits, unless otherwise indicated, are in direct support of the annual audit by our external auditors and repre-
sent independent evaluation for the purpose of attesting to the fairness, and reliability of the financial data.
Systems Audit (8%)
System audits are pre-implementation and post-implementation reviews and data center audits. Pre-implementation 
audits consider the integrity, control, performance, security and conformance with policies and standards of each system 
reviewed during the design and development process. Post-implementation audits determine whether cost and perfor-
mance objectives are met and test the system’s integrity, including controls, in its live environment. Audits of data centers 
assess overall performance and the data control function and address security, scheduling and utilization, control, docu-
mentation, organization, training and cost effectiveness.
Exhibit 4  Audit types and 2015 plan for allocation of resources
Exhibit 3  Internal audit functions
1.	 Develop and implement a program of operational, financial, and information systems audits that best meet the 
requirements of the corporation; assure the integrity of operational and internal controls in protecting the assets of the 
company and improve operational effectiveness.
2.	 Assist corporate and operating unit management in identifying and developing operational, financial, and systems 
policies and procedures necessary to accomplish the goals and objectives of the corporation; evaluate activities 
through audit report findings and recommend actions to eliminate problems uncovered during audits.
3.	 Perform special audits in any functional area and for all levels of management as required.
4.	 Present the audit plan and related audit findings to the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors and corporate 
management.
5.	 Coordinate external audit activities and control-related audit fees. Ensure an optimum balance between internal and 
external audit work in fulfilling the basic audit objectives and obtaining annual certification of Desktop Solutions’ 
consolidated financial statements.
6.	 Develop new concepts of auditing responsive to the changing business and technological environment within Desktop 
Solutions and maintain a professional staff skilled in the required disciplines.

654
Exhibit 5  Simplified flow chart of order entry and installation for high-end systems

Desktop Solutions, Inc. (A): Audit of the St. Louis Branch
655
Exhibit 6  Audit tests performed on equipment control at the St. Louis branch
1.	 Physical inventory. A total sample of 1,387 equipment units was examined, including a complete (100%) examina-
tion of the units of one single product. The audit team recorded all the serial numbers of the sample units found at the 
rigger (warehouse) and matched the numbers with those shown on the NRR. Serial numbers not matching up were 
given to the equipment administrator for reconciliation.
2.	 Scheduling process. The auditors examined the paperwork for a sample of 243 installations to see how the schedul-
ers notified the riggers about what equipment to install.
3.	 Install lag test. A sample of 46 machines was examined for the timeliness of the steps in the order-to-install process, 
including how long the sales reps held on to orders before submitting them, how long the OAs took to enter the order 
correctly, how long it took the schedulers to get the machine out to the customer site and then the delay before the 
technical service reps installed the machine; and how long the OAs take to enter the final install information correctly 
into the system to trigger the billing process.
4.	 Cancel lag test. A sample of 33 cancellations was examined for proper adherence to contract terms and cancellation 
policies. The auditors were looking to see if the customer cancellation notification policy was followed, if the stop 
billing date was appropriate, if the removal charges were correctly billed, and if the processing was done on a timely 
basis.
5.	 Low-volume copier installations. A sample of 23 low-volume copier installations was examined to see if transmis-
sion of information from the sales reps to the OAs was adequate.
6.	 Trials. A sample of 22 machines out for customer trial was tested for adherence to company duration guidelines and 
approval procedures.

656
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant with the assistance of Howard Koo.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.
Exhibit 7  Partial list of internal audit findings at the St. Louis branch
1.	 The responsibilities of branch personnel were found to be slightly unusual in order entry and scheduling/equipment 
control. Some special order transactions (e.g., maintenance agreements, price plan conversions) were processed by 
customer service assistants, not OAs. The OAs did not track orders through the order-to-install process. And the 
information about installations and status changes went to the EA, instead of the scheduler, as at most other 
branches.
2.	 The physical inventory of 1,387 mainframe and sorter units showed over 633 discrepancies when compared to the 
NRR. Seven weeks after the audit results were turned over to the branch, the EA had only reconciled 382 of these 
items, leaving 251 items unreconciled: 76 units potentially lost, 15 units potentially found, and 160 location and/or 
status discrepancies. At other branches, 95–100% of the inventory discrepancies were typically reconciled within the 
first two weeks.
3.	 The schedulers had learned they could not rely on the NRR, so they kept their own equipment inventory records. 
They manually assigned serial numbers to incoming orders. To move equipment quickly, they sometimes directed the 
rigger to deliver products directly from the receiving dock before the serial numbers had been recorded in the branch’s 
inventory by the EA. They kept track of movements in or out of the inventory based on information received from 
service personnel, but the auditors found that this listing was also inaccurate.
4.	 It took seven days on average from the date a machine was installed to the time the system recognized it as a valid 
install so that billing could begin. In addition, some documentation was missing: three of the 46 sampled had no 
credit approval; two had no service agreement; four had no valid installation date stamp.
5.	 The cancellation procedure was not working effectively. One hundred machines that had been returned by the cus-
tomer and sent to the refurbishing center had not been noted as canceled by the OAs, and this number had increased 
sharply in the prior three months.
6.	 The low-end printing equipment was not well controlled. Units to be delivered by the sales reps were taken from 
regular inventory, rather than from a special pool of machines in “consignment to sales” status. In nine cases (39%), 
the sales reps did not send the serial numbers of the equipment to the OAs. In one case, the rigger tried to deliver a 
machine to a customer who had received his a week before from the sales rep.
7.	 Of the machines out for customer trial, only three of the 22 tested complied with company policy, and five had no 
approval signature. For four successful trials (i.e., the customer wanted to keep the machine), the ending date was 
recorded improperly, resulting in 29 days of unbilled rental revenue. For eight unsuccessful trials, the removal was 
scheduled two days past the trial expiration. Four trials were extended without approval. The average length past the 
normal trial duration was 17 days, while the average length past the extension deadline was 9.5 days.
8.	 Management failed to define responsibilities clearly or hold the EA accountable for his performance. Management did 
not get involved in the monitoring and maintenance of the equipment control process. Finally, control management 
did not maintain effective contact with marketing and service management to ensure that the equipment control 
process was operating properly as it affected those areas.

Desktop Solutions, Inc. (B): Audit of Operations Group Systems
657
 In September 2015, Don Lindsay, the newly 
appointed manager of the Systems department of the 
Operations Group (OG) of Desktop Solutions, Inc., 
believed that some deep-rooted problems were hin-
dering his unit’s operational effectiveness. Systems 
had a long-standing reputation as being expensive 
and resistant to change, and systems planning in OG 
was generally recognized as deficient. As one man-
ager put it: 
 Don’s predecessor tended to allow the user 
organizations to tell him what to do. The Systems 
personnel work closely with the various users, so 
closely, in fact, that it really became a direct-line 
relationship to the user managers and a dotted-
line relationship to the Systems managers. That 
does not allow for a very effective operation 
because you really don’t have control of the 
organization. All the users had their own paro-
chial demands. They built their own databases, 
and there was very little sharing of fi les even 
between individuals in the same branch. The 
result was that the number of Systems personnel 
needed to meet the increasing number of user 
needs ballooned. People became resistant to 
change, and they were protective of what they 
had created. Virtually no planning or coordination 
was occurring.  
 Don thought that personnel from Desktop Solu-
tions’ corporate Internal Audit (IA) staff  could help 
him by providing an independent opinion as to how 
well Systems was performing, identifying problems 
that might have gone unnoticed, and making sugges-
tions for improvement. He also thought that an audit 
with recommendations for change would increase the 
support he would get from upper-level OG manage-
ment and user organizations for implementing 
changes. He therefore requested a special audit from 
the IA organization. The purpose was to assess OG-
Systems’ ability in performing its centralized system 
support functions. 
 OG-Systems 
 Systems was a centralized systems support organiza-
tion charged with two primary tasks: (1) maintaining 
and enhancing existing OG information systems; and 
(2) planning and implementing replacement systems. 
Because of OG’s diversity, these tasks were formidable. 
OG had 10 regional offi  ces responsible for a total of 
52 branch offi  ces. Each region and branch operated 
their own unique information systems with diff erent 
procedures and databases. Requests for system mainte-
nance and development could come from any of several 
management levels in the user organizations (i.e. 
branch or regional offi  ces), and they were allowed to go 
directly to the fi rst-line (lowest-level) Systems manag-
ers responsible for their particular systems. 
 In 2015, Systems’ budget was $31.6 million, of which 
about 60% was to be spent on systems maintenance, 
planning, and development, and the rest was to be spent 
on data processing operations. All work was fully 
charged back to the user organizations. Systems 
employed 155 people, 93 of whom were directly involved 
in code-creation activity (i.e. programmers, analysts). 
 The Systems organization, which reported directly 
to the OG vice president, was divided into three parts: 
Operations, Planning and Systems Architecture, and 
Control and Administration. The Operations organiza-
tion was responsible for creating new software and 
running three regional data processing centers. The 
Planning and Systems Architecture organization was 
responsible for long-range planning of both software 
and hardware. It also provided technical expertise to 
user organizations and reviewed all new system 
designs for hardware compatibility. The Control and 
Administration organization was responsible for fi nan-
cial planning, analysis and reporting. 
 Audit procedures and fi ndings 
 The OG-Systems audit was planned and executed by 
two auditors who spent approximately 1,600 hours 
each on the entire project. One of the auditors had an 
 CASE STUDY 
 Desktop Solutions, Inc. (B): Audit of Operations Group Systems 

658
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
extensive systems background, and was familiar with 
the operation and history of the Systems organization. 
Exhibit 1 describes the audit steps performed and the 
percent of time spent on each.
The auditors confirmed that systems planning and 
coordination in the OG organization were inade-
quate. They observed that many systems implemen-
tation decisions were being made at lower levels of 
management of the user organizations without refer-
ence to related decisions in other areas. They found 
that Systems did not guide and coordinate the sys-
tems and programming personnel in the user organi-
zations in the development of long-range or annual 
work plans, but they concluded that this problem was 
partly beyond the control of the Systems organiza-
tion. One of the comments in their report was, “Gen-
erally, the current OG group-level business planning 
process does not result in formal management-
approved output that is sufficiently integrated and 
detailed to direct a long-range systems development 
process.”
To improve systems planning, the auditors suggested 
that OG senior management should:
1.	 Designate an information controller in each func-
tional area to be responsible for providing an inter-
face between strategic business planning and 
strategic systems planning. This person would also 
be responsible for integrating information needs 
within the function and between functions and for 
ensuring that all systems development activities 
flowed through OG-Systems. Once senior OG man-
agement had decided on a strategic business direc-
tion and the information needs, Systems personnel 
could develop compatible systems within each user 
organization to satisfy those needs.
2.	 Establish a process of recording and reporting of sys-
tems benefits to improve systems investment 
appraisal decisions and performance evaluations.
They suggested that the vice president of OG-Systems 
(Don Lindsay) should:
1.	 Establish and document responsibilities and proce-
dures to ensure that the systems/user interface took 
place as needed and at the appropriate managerial 
levels within each organization.
2.	 Prepare detailed descriptions of the automated por-
tions of the existing OG information processing 
cycles to support OG function and group-level busi-
ness process planning. These documents should also 
be analyzed in order to identify opportunities to 
integrate existing processes and resources and to 
reduce costs.
3.	 Develop and maintain a description of the OG Sys-
tems Architecture, including hardware, software, 
databases, and networks, which is sufficiently 
detailed to guide Systems planners in the develop-
ment of the Long Range Systems Plan, as well as to 
direct operations managers in the development of 
application systems.
4.	 Establish and document responsibilities and proce-
dures to ensure that Systems planners develop a 
Long Range Systems Plan based on an understand-
ing of the OG Long Range Business Process Plan, the 
OG Systems Architecture, current OG information 
cycles, and future business requirements.
5.	 To ensure the promotion of the Long Range Systems 
Plan, ensure that the first year of the Long Range 
Systems Plan be sufficiently detailed to serve as the 
next year’s Annual Work Plan; assign accountability 
for the execution of the Annual Work Plan to man-
agement in the user organizations; establish and 
document procedures to ensure the review and 
approval by the Systems planning staff of adjust-
ments to the Annual Work Plan; and assign specific 
responsibility within the planning function for 
review of all new applications systems for adherence 
to the Long Range Systems Plan.
In the area of line operations, the auditors concluded 
that a diversity of operational practices existed within 
Systems, due to “a general lack of discipline and defini-
tion in operational practices within user first line oper-
ations, as well as the absence of common operational 
procedures, measures and tools at the group level.” 
This diversity restricted management’s ability to moni-
tor and assess the quality and efficiency of software 
production activities, hindered the realization of econ-
omies of scale.
The auditors also concluded that key elements of 
the software creation process were not sufficiently 
controlled to ensure the efficient production of high-
quality software products. To remedy these deficien-
cies, they presented a long list of specific 
recommendations. These included suggestions for 
developing and implementing procedures for job 
requests and authorizations, scheduling jobs, ensuring 
better software security, and evaluating and docu-
menting changes.

Desktop Solutions, Inc. (B): Audit of Operations Group Systems
659
Management reactions
The reactions to the audit were generally favorable. 
Larry Parton, manager of OG Planning and Systems 
Architecture, expressed his feelings:
You can treat auditors either as outsiders or as a 
resource for management. Desktop Solutions has a 
very strong audit staff, and we like to take advan-
tage of their expertise. We have some problems, 
and we have an awful lot to gain by asking them to 
come in and do an audit. That is the way we treated 
it and that is the way it turned out. We needed an 
independent look at what we were doing, and the 
audit group gave us that.
Don Lindsay was also satisfied:
The reason I invited corporate audit to come in and 
do this audit was relatively straightforward. I had 
my own diagnosis of the problems in the Systems 
Department and an action plan for solving then. I 
just needed to get someone else’s perception of 
the problems and their recommendations. IA is 
really the only group we have to do this kind of 
work. They are not a Gestapo organization; they 
are a support group that has the ability to get into 
this kind of work.
I feel very good about the audit report. I agree 
with their base identification of the issues. They 
confirmed my analysis. I don’t feel they came up 
with a lot of strong recommendations, however. I 
think the solution to many of our problems is a bet-
ter focus on systems planning within the entire OG, 
and that is something that I, by myself, cannot solve. 
That is probably the single most important issue in 
OG, and the audit report dealt with it only superfi-
cially. It discussed planning but seemed to place 
more emphasis on day-to-day operating issues.
It was not my original intention to use the audit 
report as additional leverage to plead my case, but 
that has certainly turned out to be an important 
benefit. After we realized how deeply ingrained our 
problems were, we realized that we had to use 
every means available to get the message across. 
The audit report was one such forum.
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant with the assistance of Howard Koo.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.
Exhibit 1  Audit steps performed and the percent of time spent on each on the OG-Systems audit
1.	 Scoping (30%). Conducted preliminary independent interviews with users and Systems managers about their sys-
tems procedures and working relationships.
2.	 Planning (15%). Reviewed the results of the scoping phase and discussed them with Don Lindsay. Formulated a 
model of how the operations work and developed a set of problem hypotheses. Developed fieldwork questionnaires.
3.	 Fieldwork (25%). Sent questionnaires to a sample of involved or affected personnel, including 11 first-line managers 
and 10 analysts and programmers, all in the Systems organization, and 12 first-line user managers. Followed up the 
questionnaires with personal interviews and prepared a summary of responses. Interviewed five second-line and 
three third-line Systems managers and prepared a summary of these responses.
4.	 Clearing and Summarizing (15%). Verified interview responses where necessary. Developed conclusions drawn from 
fieldwork summaries and proposed recommendations. Presented conclusions and recommendations to OG-Systems 
management.
5.	 Formal Report to Systems Management (15%). Prepared formal written audit report with conclusions and recom-
mendations for Systems management (Don Lindsay).

660
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
 In November 2013, Andrew G. Scavell, chief risk offi  cer at 
maritime operator LP&F Cargo Ltd., was pondering: 
 What is the risk manager’s role? Should it be just 
about preventing bad things from happening— dan-
gers ? Or should the scope of risk management 
include wider commercial challenges— opportuni-
ties , which may have bigger impacts—positive 
impacts, that is—than the dangers?  
 “I think both,” he sighed, “as long as the CRO stays 
well clear of ‘acculturating’ – of going native to put it 
bluntly – with the executives running the business.” 
 In his 19 years at the company, Andy had not always 
been in charge of risk. Risk and risk management 
became Andy’s purview when he was promoted to 
become the company’s CRO, LP&F’s fi rst, in 2009. Since 
then, Andy had kept busy establishing risk manage-
ment as a full-fl edged C-suite function. This, however, 
had not just been about setting up risk management 
systems. Andy’s key challenge had been to try to have 
everyone embrace risk management rather than it 
being seen as merely a bureaucratic nuisance, a ration-
alizing afterthought, or something for which the com-
pany could take out insurance. 
 The company 
 LP&F Cargo Ltd. (LP&F) was a maritime operator 
formed over the years through several mergers of 
smaller operators as the industry grew and sea lanes 
expanded, yet competition intensified, capital 
requirements deepened, margins narrowed, and 
risks soared. Only two of the original operators’ 
names were still captured in the company’s acronym 
(La Porta & Finch), but many others had been swal-
lowed up, integrated with the then-existing fleet and 
operations, and their former company names (grad-
ually) discarded. 
 LP&F wasn’t one of a handful of “super” maritime 
(container ship and tanker) operators like Maersk or 
Evergreen, although it was considered a strong 
second-tier contender for a broad range of services, 
some of which rather specialized and tailored to spe-
cifi c customer needs. For example, LP&F’s fl eet con-
tained several purpose-built vessels to carry products 
to exacting care requirements with respect to handling, 
stowing, ventilation, and in-transit inspections. In both 
the dry and liquid shipping business, LP&F had estab-
lished a reputation for control of conditions in the hold. 
At the same time, and to strengthen its position in this 
unforgiving business, LP&F also had to retain schedul-
ing flexibility, necessitating capital investments in 
interchangeable vessels. 
 LP&F publicized itself as a provider of integrated 
transportation solutions for dry and liquid goods, 
offering services that included mainly transporta-
tion by vessel, terminal handling, and storage. The 
company’s customers, which included mostly manu-
facturers (but also some traders) using or processing 
these materials (including lumber, plywood, wood 
pulp, paper, ferrous and non-ferrous metals, chemi-
cals, petroleum products, oils, and a variety of other 
break-bulk cargoes), relied on LP&F’s speciality 
infrastructure to move and store these products 
around the globe. LP&F’s 10 largest customers 
accounted for approximately 65 percent of its reve-
nues in 2013. 
 Slightly over half of the cargo transported by LP&F 
was carried under long-term contracts, which, despite 
the term, typically covered periods of one year, though 
there was increasing pressure to negotiate longer-term 
contracts. The remaining half was priced on the spot 
market, where the eff ects of market conditions on ship-
ping rates were felt instantaneously. For 2012, total rev-
enues were just shy of £1.3 billion, up nearly one quarter 
from 2010, continuing a slow but steady recovery from 
the deepest of the recession felt in 2009 following the 
onset of the global fi nancial and economic crisis in 2008 
(see  Exhibit  1 ). Tonnage carried was up from 2011, too, 
for the fi rst time since 2008. Due to a decline in freight 
rates since 2009, margins and profits were down, 
although these had begun to recover from 2012 mainly 
 CASE STUDY 
 Andrew G. Scavell, Chief Risk Offi  cer 

Andrew G. Scavell, Chief Risk Officer
661
due to cost efficiencies and a readjustment of the fleet 
through both vessel disposals and new orders as appro-
priate. But because of this recovery, shipping companies 
had again begun to hurry to place orders for vessels 
while they were cheaper to build (due to overcapacity in 
shipbuilding yards around the world), more environ-
mentally friendly, and more fuel efficient, and thus, 
cleaner and cheaper to operate. Supply of shipping 
capacity, however, had again begun to outpace demand, 
which showed in the results for 2013. Andy expected 
that in 2014 the company would barely break even, if 
not show a loss, the first in his entire career with LP&F.
Economically, the fortunes of the industry, and thus 
those of the company, were directly affected by trends 
in world trade. With the downturn since 2008 came 
excess capacity, rising costs, and falling freight rates. 
Too many ships were competing for too little cargo, 
causing freight rates to plunge to levels that scarcely 
covered operating costs. Specialization softened the 
blow for LP&F somewhat, yet cost efficiency (pertain-
ing to the running costs of a vessel) and asset utiliza-
tion (pertaining to the life over which a vessel was able 
to earn revenue) were pressing as ever, the latter espe-
cially due to limited financing for new vessels. Ironi-
cally, overcapacity gave operators more leeway to dock 
vessels for maintenance with good effect on asset pres-
ervation. It also allowed operators to “slow steam” ves-
sels, thereby improving fuel efficiency, although for a 
specialized, customized cargo-handler like LP&F, this 
often was not an option. But to LP&F’s advantage, cus-
tomers often had less choice of operators to handle 
their cargo due to specialization. Indeed, in LP&F’s seg-
ment, its customers normally did not have shipping 
needs that could be easily handled on the spot market 
or that were easily switchable from one long-term con-
tract with a given operator to another.
That said, managing costs remained difficult due to 
erratic fuel prices as one of the main operating costs, 
while fixed costs remained high. Indeed, unfilled 
capacity was “sunk” in the sense that once a vessel left 
port, any excess space was wasted and irredeemable 
for the entire voyage, which sometimes took weeks to 
complete. Global trade imbalances triggered by the 
economic downturn also plagued the industry, where 
vessel operators faced increasing difficulties to fill 
capacity on both the outbound and return legs of the 
voyage. Due to the asymmetrical demand for capacity, 
operators vied aggressively for business.
The industry, and thus the company in response, 
also had changed in perhaps more intangible ways. 
Since about the 1990s, possibly traceable to the Exxon 
Valdez oil tanker environmental disaster in 1989, there 
seemed to have been an avalanche of complex and 
evolving systems of regulation and a jumble of rules 
and security measures imposed by national, regional, 
and international maritime administrations and trade 
bodies. These regulations of course had to be complied 
with, although a culture of voluntary alertness to risk 
issues probably was more effective than merely reluc-
tantly responding to regulation.
The chief risk officer
Andrew (Andy) G. Scavell had a BA with honors in poli-
tics and history. After qualifying as a Chartered 
Accountant, he worked in an old-style merchant bank 
in the City of London for two years; after which he 
moved to one of the bank’s shipping subsidiaries where 
he stayed for two years. He then went to work for 
another international shipping company (now LP&F) 
in their UK office, first in the treasury/corporate finance 
department (six years), followed by eight years as the 
Group Financial Controller (during which he obtained 
his corporate treasury’s qualification). In 2009, Andy 
became the head of Enterprise Risk Management, at 
which time he had just obtained his executive MBA 
from Aston Business School. Everyone referred to Andy 
as the CRO, however, which became his official title 
from 2010.
Thus, in 2009, LP&F began to focus on implement-
ing Enterprise Risk Management (ERM). Introducing 
ERM into LP&F was something that the shareholders 
and the board wanted but, at the same time, did not 
know what form it should take. This was part of the 
journey to be charted by Andy; a journey along a road 
with some junctures that needed careful thought.
CRO role?
First, there was the role of the CRO itself, the job 
description for which eventually emerged as shown in 
Exhibit 2. Specifically, there was some discussion about 
what exactly the CRO’s role was to include, and who 
the CRO should report to. Should the CRO be “indepen-
dently” responsible for identifying all the key risks and 
their applicable mitigations? If so, would that detract 
from management’s role and responsibilities to the 
shareholders? Or should the CRO rather be seen as 
“non-executive management” whose role it was to 
oversee that management had appropriate processes 

662
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
and procedures in place so that the company could 
manage its risks (such as by way of scenario planning, 
risk mapping, and other standard risk tools)? In princi-
ple, however, Andy felt very strongly that “risk pro-
cesses have to work with the business, and not the 
other way around.” Put differently, he reckoned that, at 
least in LP&F’s business, strategy drives risk.
Thus, Andy felt that strategic issues had to be par for 
the course for the CRO:
Strategic issues are one of the key uncertainties that 
matter in any organization. Companies regularly fail 
because of a failure to manage them. My description 
of the CRO role is that of “non-executive manage-
ment” – a bridge between the non-executive direc-
tors and management [which he sketched to look 
like the diagram shown in Exhibit 3].
Andy rambled on:
A spy? I can understand why one might suggest 
that, but no! A difficult role that requires the trust of 
both the board and management, without being a 
patsy to either. A NED [non-executive director] will 
meet three or four times a year and interact with 
management, but even if they met eight times a year 
it wouldn’t be enough. You need a guardian who sits 
with management all the time. Like a shadow CEO? 
No, non-executive. The CEO has a completely dif-
ferent role; managing the business day to day, try-
ing to grow the business, and manage risk. The role 
of the CRO is to challenge management about the 
assumptions that they make; the biases that they 
have. I may have a different opinion about what 
management intends to do, but I am no fortune 
teller. What is important is that the senior managers 
have challenged themselves and that a robust pro-
cess has been undertaken, and that the assump-
tions that they have made are known and 
reasonable. So I explain and give assurance to the 
board. That is what NEDs require from me, their 
non-executive counterpart in management.
Risk appetite?
Second, although the board had no strong sense about 
how to put risk management in place, they seemed ini-
tially absorbed by the notion of “risk appetite,” as so 
many boards were when risk management began to 
gain prominence, and especially following the 2008 
global financial and economic crisis. But, as Andy 
remarked, the process they had in mind for setting the 
risk appetite appeared to be back-to-front; that is, risk 
appetite was seen as the first thing they felt they now 
needed to think about; the thing that drove everything 
else; the line in the sand that could not be crossed. 
Andy suspected that this back-to-front approach was 
due to misreading the wording of umpteen governance 
codes, maintaining something along the lines that “the 
board and management are responsible for determining 
the nature and extent of the significant risks it is willing 
to take in achieving its strategic objectives.”
If “achieving” was to be taken as read, and not to be 
misread as “setting,” then Andy was of the opinion that 
“the board and the management of a company are 
responsible for setting the strategic objectives of the 
organization and ensuring that it has the relevant core 
competencies, capabilities, policies and procedures to 
effectively implement the strategic goals and manage the 
risks that arise from the strategic choices made,” or 
something rather along those lines. In other words, 
Andy was of the view that the board and senior man-
agement should develop the strategy of the organiza-
tion first, and then assess the related risks. This was not 
to suggest that he thought this was strictly one-
directional, however. But although he acknowledged 
inevitable feedback loops, again, he put strategy first, 
musing that:
I don’t believe that a company consciously seeks 
risk as a goal — namely, “We want to take more 
risk.” Boards and management seek profit — now 
and in the future, and as part of this pursuit comes 
risk, which has to be managed. The approach of 
setting a risk appetite is the inverse; namely asking 
companies what risk they would be prepared to 
take — i.e., they are seen as risk seekers. Instead, 
as part of the business strategy discussion/review, 
the company has to understand/assess the risks 
that could arise in trying to execute that strategy. 
As a result, the risk appetite becomes fluid, more 
dynamic, and perhaps confusing — a far cry from 
the “immutability” and predetermined nature that 
risk appetites are usually billed as.
Risk measurement?
Third, although the board was keen on risk measure-
ment, Andy was no big fan of an obsessive focus on quan-
tification per se, or quantification in isolation, for several 
reasons. First, Andy argued that risks can and will 
change frequently, which can easily result in the com-
pany spending too much time trying to put “numbers” 

Andrew G. Scavell, Chief Risk Officer
663
on a risk rather than effectively managing the risk. Sec-
ond, Andy was of the view that it was simply and practi-
cally very difficult to calculate accurate numbers for 
most risks. Many risks were “intelligent guesses of what 
the future could bring” at best. Shipping also did not 
give rise to “big data” especially around the likelihood of 
an event arising. How risks in the future impact cash 
flows constituted an assessment that was highly subjec-
tive. Andy added:
Of course, one can perform Monte Carlo simula-
tions over the DCF [discounted cash flow] figures 
and derive a range of numbers and probabilities. In 
the end, though, I am not sure that the resulting 
numbers will mean much. To give an example, in 
2012, we had a buyer for a vessel for US$70m. We 
withdrew. In 2013, when we really wanted to sell 
that vessel, all we could fetch for it was US$15m. 
We sold. And that is only one small piece — the sal-
vage value—that goes into a standard DCF model.
Andy’s related concern was that seemingly accurate 
risk numbers might create an “illusion of control” that 
the risk was being managed. Instead, he argued that it 
was a company’s failure to understand the nature of the 
risks that they were taking, and not their ability to set 
the correct numerical level of the risk, that was the more 
fundamental problem. That said, Andy quipped that:
I absolutely understand the desire, and need, to 
create risk measures, but sometimes no number is 
better than any number too soon in the process of 
describing and understanding the risks. When the 
initial likelihood estimates and/or dollar impacts are 
seen as low, the risk can become quickly dismissed. 
I guess the opposite holds, too, where risks become 
seen as ominous even though they may not be. To 
avoid that risk measures become risks themselves, 
one has to be inevitably cynical about their accu-
racy, at least in our business, although I respectfully 
submit that the banks in 2008 probably learned that 
lesson the hard way, too.
Risk management practice
So where did all this take the company, then? If they 
could not fully conceptualize how risk management 
should work in theory, would they be able to make it 
work in practice?
In simplified form, and consistent with Andy’s general 
views on risk management, the objective of performing 
ERM was “to allow management to make better deci-
sions to have better outcomes.” Risk management was 
therefore to be strategy-driven and include both oppor-
tunities as well as dangers. Risk management was also 
to be “effectively embedded” in the organization, for 
which Andy had to design a process. Andy believed that 
the process established both horizontal and vertical 
embeddedness.
To enable horizontal embeddedness, Andy devised a 
group risk register that was aligned with the group’s 
strategy. LP&F had a rolling three-year strategic plan-
ning horizon, meaning that they planned three years 
out each year in their executive strategy round. 
Whereas this seemed a relatively short horizon, Andy 
explained that, “this is because we don’t really much 
change what we do; only how we do it.” Indeed, LP&F 
was not a diversified group. They did not change the 
type of service they provided. The main focus was on 
the type, mix, and duration of the shipping contracts 
(on the revenue side) and operating efficiencies (on the 
cost side). Capital expenditure decisions inevitably 
were an important part of the strategy discussions; 
“99.9 percent of LP&F’s CapEx is at the group level – 
buying, selling and upgrading vessels. There is no 
CapEx at the trade [local office] level, and the 0.1 per-
cent that is there is rolled up in their budgets,” Andy 
added.
The group risk register, an excerpt of which is shown 
in Exhibit 4, contained a dozen key risks categorized 
into financial, strategic, organizational, and opera-
tional risks. For each risk, the table showed the likely 
cause of the risk; its anticipated effect; an assessment of 
its likelihood and impact;1 the presence of proactive 
1 “Impact” was rated using 1 (very low) for a gain/loss up to $25k 
[250k] at business unit [group] level; 2 (low) for a gain/loss between 
$25-100k [250k–1m] at business unit [group] level; 3 (medium) 
for a gain/loss between $100-400k [1–4m] or a significant injury 
to a person at business unit [group] level; 4 (high) for a gain/loss 
between $400k and $1m [4–10m] or a single fatality or permanent 
disability, or significant impact on the operations, environment or 
reputation at business unit [group] level; and 5 (very high) for a 
gain/loss greater than $1m [$10m] or a potentially disastrous effect 
or accident (multiple fatalities) or an operational, environmental or 
reputational catastrophe at business unit [group] level. “Likelihood” 
was rated using 1 (very low) if the gain/loss was very unlikely to 
occur before 18 months’ time; 2 (low) if the gain/loss was likely to 
occur in the long term (between 12 and 18 months); 3 (medium) if 
the gain/loss was likely to occur in the medium term (between 6 and 
12 months); 4 (high) if the gain/loss was likely to occur in the short 
term (within the next 6 months); and 5 (very high) if the gain/loss 
was virtually certain to occur and could happen now. Using these 
scores for gains and losses separately allowed constructing a heat 
map for opportunities and dangers, respectively.

664
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
controls; any residual risk after such proactive controls 
were considered; and any further reactive mitigations 
that were deemed necessary. The register also listed 
and tracked any issues that needed attention and/or 
actions that were required.
Under financial, the risk register listed the risk 
shown in Exhibit 4, but also “earnings and cash flow 
volatility resulting from IR, FX, and Freight rate expo-
sures,” which was rated as a gross risk of 5 × 5 = 25 
and as a residual risk of 2 × 5 = 10. Proactive controls 
for this risk consisted of hedging policies, use of a wide 
range of derivatives, formal counter-party limits and 
monthly treasury reviews. Reactive mitigations encom-
passed reconciliations of treasury systems with 
accounts, monitoring of contract closings, and formal 
audits and board reviews.
Just as one other example of another type, the regis-
ter listed the operational risk of “not operating safely – 
LP&F vessels,” rated as a gross risk of 3 × 5 = 15; a 
residual risk of 2 × 3 = 6; and covering proactive con-
trols such as monitoring of vessel performance, steve-
dores and crew training, port vessel inspections, 
preventative maintenance, and vessel whistle-blowing 
hotlines. The effects of risk in this area included dis-
rupted cargo operations, loss of customers, reputa-
tional damage, injury and death of crew, damage to 
cargo and increased insurance costs. One of the reac-
tive mitigations was root cause analysis.
Overall, the gross risks on the register as at the end 
of 2013 were rated ranging from 12 to 25, with the 
residual risks ranging from 3 to 15, indicating that they 
believed that proactive controls were effective in allevi-
ating the listed risks but not in eradicating them. How-
ever, a risk that demonstrated a sustained low residual 
risk through robust controls would eventually be 
moved off of the risk register. All the risks on the regis-
ter were also visually presented on a standard risk heat 
map, with the “red hot” risks being those that were 
deemed highly likely with possibly severe impacts.
Updates and revisions to the risk register followed 
along in pace with the strategic planning cycle. How-
ever, Andy admitted that the risk register was actually 
quite stable as, indeed, if the selected risks were relia-
bly “key” risks, and if the firm’s business model did not 
change drastically, as it didn’t, then one should not 
expect the group’s risk register to change drastically in 
any given year. That said, Andy evinced that the risk 
register was up to date and closely scrutinized by the 
board and management alike. The risk register was 
part of the papers of every board meeting, in addition 
to it being discussed at least five times during the year 
with senior management in Risk Review meetings 
which Andy conducted.
Vertical embeddedness of risk was achieved bottom-
up. The main planning tool at the local office level – 
that is, in the trade offices, as they called them at LP&F –  
was the budgeting process, which was accompanied 
with Quarterly Business Reviews (QBRs) and, impor-
tantly, “Must Achieve Plans” (MAPs), of which risk con-
siderations were an integral part. Budgets for each 
trade office were drawn up each year in consultation 
with the Head Office to ensure synchronicity with the 
firm’s overall strategic plan. Budget targets were fixed 
for the year, but progress against plan was scrutinized 
in great detail, again between the local trade office 
managers and corporate, on a quarterly basis in the 
QBRs.
Importantly, each trade office also had to draw up a 
set of key “Must Achieve Programs” (MAPs) at budget 
time. Each trade office (e.g. in Rio, Shanghai, Tampa, 
Vancouver) had between 3 and 6 MAPs. An example is 
shown in Exhibit 5. From gleaning the 12-point MAP 
template guidance in Exhibit 5, it is clear that MAPs 
were in a way surrogates for strategic planning at the 
local level (e.g. see guidance #1 and #2), and that, cru-
cially, MAPs covered both opportunities and risks or 
“dangers” (#3 and #4). Further, risk identification 
(#6), risk mitigation (#7), and risk assessment fea-
tured prominently in estimates of the likelihood that a 
given MAP would be achieved (#8). Each MAP had an 
owner (#5), needed to detail procedures and processes 
to achieve it (#7), and required an estimate of its US$ 
impact (#9). Plans of action and their timing (#10) 
were regularly reviewed (as part of the QBRs) and 
updated (#11 and #12).
Reviews of budgets and MAPs, and the insights and 
action plans that arose from them during extensive dis-
cussions during QBRs, in turn, were fed back into the 
strategic planning exercise each year at corporate. 
Andy participated in some, but not all, QBRs and con-
solidated all local MAPs into a pivot table which pro-
vided him insights useful for monitoring and/or 
starting discussions at corporate to update and revise 
the group risk register. Andy updated his pivot table on 
the same quarterly cycle as the MAPs were reviewed in 
QBRs. In Andy’s pivot table, each MAP was one record 
that contained a MAP’s reference number, location, 
owner, description, opportunity, danger, estimate of 
achievement, US$ impact, risks, actions and status. 
Andy’s pivot table listed 29 current MAP records in Q4 

Andrew G. Scavell, Chief Risk Officer
665
of 2013 worth US$488.55 in estimated impact, a non-
trivial proportion of LP&F’s gross revenues.
A sample bonus plan for a trade office general man-
ager is shown in Exhibit 6. Thirty-five percent of this 
manager’s annual bonus, which can be up to 58.5% or 
seven months’ worth of salary, was based on individual 
performance (the other 65% of the bonus was based on 
company performance). Andy reckoned that the indi-
vidual performance component of the bonus was nearly 
exclusively based on an evaluation of a manager’s per-
formance and initiative in light of his or her MAPs, as 
indeed the rating criteria shown in Exhibit 6 suggested.
At his level, as CRO, Andy analyzed risks as follows. 
If a new risk was identified, the first step was to deter-
mine whether it was ongoing. The purpose of this was 
to decide whether a process or procedure needed to be 
put in place to manage the risk. Piracy risk was an 
example of this. This was a danger for which LP&F pre-
viously had no procedure to properly manage it. There-
fore, for a period of time, until they had an operational 
and robust procedure in place, piracy risk was included 
on the company’s risk register. After an anti-piracy pro-
cedure had been put in place and was deemed effective 
(consisting of crew training; fitting vessels with fences; 
extra watchmen and armed guards on board; higher 
sailing speed; vessel convoy formations; coordinated 
communication with onshore security forces; insur-
ance, and so on), this danger was taken off the com-
pany risk register as the risk was being managed by the 
business as part of their daily operations. However, if 
any level of residual risk was deemed to increase, it 
could be moved back onto the company’s risk register.
Andy did the same whenever LP&F did “something 
new.” For example, in one Southeast Asia location, 
LP&F converted a vessel into a floating warehouse 
which was used as a platform to load cargo from land 
and from there onto ocean-going vessels. For any such 
new activity, Andy would carry out a full risk assess-
ment and issue procedures and action plans to be moni-
tored until the activity became stable and part of 
routine operations. This often involved taking outside 
advice given the complexity and risks of many of these 
activities, including, but not only, health and safety 
issues. New customers, new routes, new cargos, and so 
on, also always underwent detailed risk assessments.
LP&F did not have separate Key Risk Indicators (KRIs); 
instead, they had several Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) which they used as “inverted” KRIs. The key meas-
ures for a shipping company included, essentially, gross 
profit per day per vessel (the so-called “voyage result”) 
and various operational cost and productivity measures 
per vessel and/or by cargo type (e.g. metric tons per day). 
At firm level, the weighted average shipping contract cov-
erage (in years) also was considered a key measure. Meet-
ing delivery dates for customers and accidents, near-misses 
and safety were considered key nonfinancial information. 
Key accounting controls comprised debtor days, creditor 
days, number of credit notes issued, and, inevitably, any 
changes in voyage results. It was decided that given that 
these were the key day-to-day performances that had to 
be managed, then these same numbers could be used as 
KRIs. Andy opined that “management was averse to risk 
management being seen in the business as merely another 
‘IT project’ or just another ‘reporting requirement.’”
Encounters with risk
From Andy’s experience, the biggest causes of bad out-
comes were the following (whether related to dangers 
or failure to manage opportunities):
a.	 Assumptions made were invalid;
b.	Risks were too readily discounted;
c.	 Outcomes were not seen as symptomatic of underly-
ing risks; and/or,
d.	Execution risk.
Incorrect assumptions
Andy recalled several instances where they got the 
assumptions wrong, such as when they were falsely 
thinking that the markets they competed in wouldn’t 
change, which he also dubbed the risk of complacency. An 
instance of this occurred when LP&F tendered for a major 
contract with an existing customer. The customer nudged 
LP&F to try and come up with another way to provide the 
service they were offering. However, when they ten-
dered, they offered the same type of service, because:
We did not want to change, making the incorrect 
assumption that no existing player had the size to 
take this contract from us despite being aware that 
we were one of three companies tendering, and 
that we did not know who the third company was. 
We were wrong. Another company snatched the 
contract from us, and worse, entered our market as 
a viable competitor on other contracts as well.
Andy also recalled the following example:
At the top of the shipping boom we considered 
hedging a significant proportion of our income 

666
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
stream for the next 1 to 2 years. Despite distressing 
signs (e.g. new vessels being built and problems in 
the financial markets), we decided, however, that it 
was too risky, or rather “too prudent” I reckon, to 
lock in lower, but still excellent, returns. We were 
wrong. The shipping markets collapsed.
That said, Andy felt that LP&F had significantly dif-
ferent challenges regarding risk assessment than, say, 
the banking and actuarial world had, where there were 
a lot of data to use. In shipping, in contrast, the problem 
was that the data populations were relatively small. As 
a result, determining the probability of an event was 
very subjective. The impact, if an event occurred, was 
much easier to determine. This made objective risk 
assessment a challenge. Andy lamented that,
Risk discussions often are a contest of the strong-
est personalities, although perhaps one factor that 
often has a big sway is when a risk has already 
inflicted a competitor. Then the risk becomes real 
– we exhale a sigh of relief and quickly consider our 
own mitigations.
Risks being discounted
An example of this was a discussion about an environ-
mental issue with eucalyptus trees in South America. 
These types of trees were used to make pulp, which 
LP&F transported. As a matter of fact, LP&F was one of 
the largest transporters of pulp from South America 
(which was the lowest cost producer in the world 
because the trees grew quicker there than anywhere 
else in the world due to climatic factors). This type of 
cargo used about 30–50% of LP&F’s vessel fleet capac-
ity. The risk raised was about what would happen if 
eucalyptus trees suffered from disease and died. If that 
were to occur, all of LP&F’s pulp shipping contracts 
would be null and void (due to the force majeure clause 
in the contract). Andy recounted:
At first, this risk was dismissed as fanciful, but it 
was pointed out that a similar risk had happened in 
the Northern hemisphere with pine trees. Then it 
was challenged as being the customers’ problem 
until the issue of the force majeure clause came up. 
Again the business executives tried to dismiss it, 
stating that the customers must have plans to deal 
with this, and that we could rely on these plans 
(even though we didn’t know anything about these 
plans). Eventually the business accepted that it 
was a risk and that it could bankrupt the company, 
and so this risk needed mitigation. In the end, we 
took out additional insurance to cover this type of 
eventuality, which would reduce the financial 
impact.
At LP&F, they had similar risk discussions about 
political risks in the Middle East, as the company had a 
number of shipping contracts where specialized vessels 
that cannot be used for another purpose had to sail 
through the Strait of Hormuz. If the strait were closed, 
then the shipping contracts would be null and void due 
to force majeure, and vessels could not be used in other 
activities to generate income. As above, the main miti-
gation was insurance, although in this case LP&F was 
able to introduce other mitigations as well, such as 
emergency stocks (of the cargo) and use of other dis-
charge ports.
Incidents (and accidents) not seen 
as symptomatic of underlying risks
Andy recalled that senior management often tended to 
see risks as arising from employees lower down in the 
organization who were not doing what they should be 
doing; not following the procedures. Andy made two 
observations. First, while in the shipping business 
human errors and accidents on a vessel or in ports 
occurred with nontrivial frequency, they did not usu-
ally tend to create significant strategic risks. That said, 
such events could have a major impact. Second, and 
most importantly, the root cause of such events had to 
be identified, rather than just putting out fires when 
such events occurred. Someone needed to try and “see 
a trend” if there was one across a series of seemingly 
isolated incidents or accidents.
Sure, someone made an error, but such errors are 
more likely to occur when a captain is promoted 
“over his head” or, as may be the case in some 
locations more than in others, when equipment and 
contract labor conditions are poor and threaten 
safety cargo work.
Execution risk
This risk is related to the inability to implement effec-
tive mitigations to risks that had been identified. This 
problem arose, particularly, due to a major reorganiza-
tion of the group which resulted in limited management 
time being available to focus on events that had not yet 
happened, but if they would, whose impact could be sig-
nificant. Andy proffered that for an organization to 

Andrew G. Scavell, Chief Risk Officer
667
effectively manage risk (uncertainties that are impor-
tant), the present must be “stable” enough otherwise 
the company will just be focusing on fire fighting and 
not plan enough for the future. Andy called this the 
risk of inattention. But, of course, he added that “when 
the present is too stable, you run into the risk of 
complacency.”
The future
To date, all the risk reporting and business risk discus-
sions at LP&F took place through the business plan-
ning and quarterly business review processes. This 
was intentional to reinforce the point that managing 
risk was part of every manager’s “day job” and not a 
separate activity done as and when time was available 
or when specifically requested by corporate. Andy 
also thought that it was important to embed risk man-
agement into the day-to-day business by not using 
KRIs, but instead using KPIs as their equivalent. How-
ever, this raised the issue regarding what the role of 
the CRO/Risk Manager should be. Andy’s view was 
that,
CROs/risk managers must develop into non-
executive management whose role is to challenge 
the executive team about the bases on which they 
are making decisions, and to support a robust 
strategic risk identification process. I am not an 
expert in many, if even any, of the decision areas 
that our business managers face, but I can offer 
an independent risk perspective. I don’t know 
anything about eucalyptus trees, but I had a 
sense that the source of risk was the same as one 
that had actually occurred in another hemisphere 
with another kind of tree. And when we spot 
important risks, I can source in external advice if 
we don’t have any internal reference point or 
experience, and above all, I can try to make sure 
that we have quality discussions about the risks 
instead of, or at least in addition to, just putting 
numbers on risks and then carry on as usual. And 
having been a finance person for most of my early 
career has given me a broad overview of the 
business.
Asked if indeed finance is the best training ground for a 
CRO, Andy paused:
Interesting question! The two key things for a CRO 
are to be involved early enough, yet not getting 
sucked into the executive. An operations person 
could make for a good CRO … certainly to have a 
handle on the business, but maybe at the risk of 
lack of independence. But not a commercial per-
son, I don’t think … typically not familiar enough 
with the guts and whole of the business. A CRO 
must be able to engage with everyone in all key 
areas.
Andy had also recently started to submit certain 
MAPs “Existing Controls in Place” (#7 in Exhibit 5) 
to internal audit. If an internal audit finds that the 
procedures, processes, contracts, and/or measures 
that are currently in place are, say, only effective 
50% of the time, then that is a more objective assess-
ment than some of the estimates that may have been 
initially made in earlier drafts of the MAP. But not 
only that, Andy hoped that such audits would help 
him identify robust and transferable practice, in 
addition to it becoming merely just another “traffic 
light” and/or “blame shifting” system, although it 
did give a good sense of how well controls were being 
implemented.
Andy also was adamant that risk processes have to 
work with the business, and opined that presumably 
“integrated” ERM systems that can be sourced off the 
shelf were just too generic – “they put risk before busi-
ness,” he lamented.
Andy felt, however, that he was behind the curve on 
“big data” and, although he was wary of uncritical 
quantification, he imagined that big data could be 
brought to bear to unearth patterns of risk, or indeed, 
opportunities for that matter, too. One problem that 
came to mind was port congestion, where valuable ves-
sel capacity is wasted just waiting, especially when 
LP&F is not paid to wait. “But if we know the location of 
every vessel headed for a given port, and we have data 
on wind speeds, navigation routes, weather patterns, 
stevedore schedules, and what not, couldn’t we predict 
and accordingly adjust better,” he wondered? “Maybe 
we’d learn something about ‘black swan’ risks, too, 
such as impacts of global warming on our business and 
port operations.”
Finally, as was fashionable since the crisis, Andy 
commented that LP&F was looking into being more 
specific about their risk appetite. But then he quickly 
added that he rated behavioral biases related to both 
assumptions and symptoms, if not about the actual rec-
ognition of some risks, as the greatest challenge to 
overcome. “A lot of it is very subjective,” he exclaimed.

668
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
Exhibit 1  LP&F Cargo Ltd., selected financials (in GBP 000s)
Years ended December 31,
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
INCOME STATEMENT DATA (selected):
Total revenues
£ 1,455,859
£ 1,071,456
£ 1,200,211
£ 1,299,524
£ 1,255,275
Voyage related expenses
(725,225)
(509,393)
(581,172)
(613,006)
(717,963)
Vessel operating expenses
(229,983)
(204,648)
(201,205)
(201,317)
(198,518)
Time charter rental expenses
(187,390)
(131,790)
(157,692)
(121,962)
(137,032)
Depreciation and amortization
(84,530)
(79,501)
(75,603)
(86,401)
(65,280)
Gain on disposal of assets
39,590
3,180
4,320
12,970
12,840
Selling, general and administrative 
expenses
(100,580)
(73,150)
(75,600)
(86,401)
(80,250)
Income from operations
167,740
76,154
113,259
203,407
69,072
Income from affiliates
37,451
10,602
25,920
5,400
7,383
Interest expense, net
(26,751)
(16,961)
(27,253)
(29,160)
(37,450)
Other income (expense)
(20,331)
49,822
(8,104)
(4,321)
(3,794)
Provision for income taxes
15,178
(7,355)
3,218
(6,670)
(3,000)
Net income
173,287
112,262
107,041
168,656
32,211
BALANCE SHEET DATA 
(at period end, selected):
Cash and cash equivalents
£ 269,264
£ 367,903
£ 168,118
£ 161,586
£ 148,497
Property, plant and equipment, net
792,443
884,071
972,258
899,426
965,959
Total assets
1,365,942
1,519,032
1,470,355
1,383,937
1,472,014
Total debt
287,831
683,948
631,804
477,361
642,011
Shareholders’ equity
764,421
610,713
695,680
622,498
614,536
CASH FLOW DATA (selected):
Capital expenditures
£ 117,700
£ 10,165
£ 30,240
£ 88,457
£ 46,440
EBITDA
255,788
152,475
184,543
276,839
121,512
EBITDA margin
17.6%
14.2%
15.4%
21.3%
9.7%

Andrew G. Scavell, Chief Risk Officer
669
Exhibit 2  LP&F Cargo Ltd., chief risk officer job description
Reporting to:
Holding Company Board (with an administrative dotted line to the CEO)
Key Working 
Relationships:
Executive Management
Operational Management
Finance Director
Main Purpose 
of Job:
To develop and lead the Risk Management and Assurance function of LP&F with the aim of:
•	Enabling the efficient and effective governance and management of significant risks – Enterprise 
Risk Management (ERM);
•	Providing assurance that the key risks of the group are being appropriately identified, assessed, 
managed and monitored – that Management have appropriate plans in place to reduce the level 
of residual risks to an agreed level within an acceptable timescale;
•	Providing assurance that the key ‘building blocks’ of ERM and internal controls are in place and 
operating effectively in all key business processes;
•	Consolidating/coordinating the efforts of all providers of assurance on the adequacy of the 
controls framework in LP&F so that an overall picture can be provided to Management and the 
Audit Committee; and,
•	Supporting Management in discharging its Corporate Governance responsibilities with regards 
to the identification and management of risk.
Key Tasks:
•	To develop and maintain a risk management and assurance plan which effectively discharges the 
scope of risk management and assurance activities as set out in the Audit Committee remit. The 
plan should be submitted annually to the Audit Committee for approval.
•	To maintain effective liaison with Management to ensure that:
•	Effective processes are in place to identify and manage all key risks of the business;
•	Any necessary amendments to risk management and assurance plans are made resulting from 
changes in the risk profile of the business;
•	The results of review work are understood and appropriately actioned by Management; and,
•	Best risk management and internal control practices are shared within the group.
•	To have oversight responsibility for risk governance and assurance.
•	To identify staff with appropriate skills to effectively complete the risk management and audit 
plan. (NB: this may also involve coaching non-audit staff to allow them to effectively participate in 
delivering the overall audit plan.)
•	To provide Executive Management and the Audit Committee with regular reporting summarizing 
risk management and assurance reviews and findings; including progress in implementing 
agreed recommendations as well as an overall assessment of the control environment and how 
this is changing within the group.
•	To liaise closely with the group’s external Auditors and other providers of assurance and to 
coordinate effort and ensure that all key risks are appropriately assessed.
Accountability:
The performance of the CRO will be formally assessed on an annual basis by the Board based on 
feedback gathered from Management and the interaction with board members.

670
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
The Person:
•	Graduate Qualified Accountant.
•	MBA from a respected business school.
•	Age 40+.
•	Minimum 10 years post qualification experience gained in a management position in either:
•	LP&F;
•	a major international company;
•	a major audit firm;
with:
•	Proven communication skills both orally and in writing;
•	Initiative and a proactive approach to problem solving;
•	Ability to exercise commercial judgment when assessing risks against the need for control;
•	Credibility at Management and Board level; and,
•	Experience of the Shipping Industry would be useful although this is not considered essential.
Exhibit 2  (Continued)
Group Board
Rest of C-Suite
Management Team
CEO
CFO
CRO
Exhibit 3  LP&F Cargo Ltd., “back-of-an-envelope” organization chart

671
Exhibit 4  LP&F Cargo Ltd., excerpt from LP&F’s group risk register
Risk
Non-compliance with Antitrust Competition (ATC), Antibribery & Corruption (ABC), Sanctions, Tax and Legal (Permits and Licences) Legislation
Risk Area
Finance
Causes
Lack of 
procedures
Lack of 
training
Complex business
Non-experts 
making 
decisions
Inexpe­
rienced 
personnel
High 
personnel 
turnover
Lack of clear 
communica­
tion on 100% 
compliance
Resulting in
Prosecution, 
fines, 
imprisonment
Reputational 
damage
Loss of customers
Unable to 
access/
operate in 
certain 
markets
Unable to 
execute  
business 
strategy
Harder to 
access 
finance
Ejected 
from MACN
Ejected 
from SSI
High legal 
fees
Gross Risk
Likelihood = 3
Impact = 5
Total = 15
Proactive 
Controls
Annual ABC 
training
ABC policy
Tone from the top
Board 
reporting 
papers/
discussions
Personnel 
training
Tax officer
External 
audits
ABC 
audits
Formal 
personnel 
reference 
checks
Formal 
personnel 
appraisals
Professional 
qualified 
teams
Pay good 
salaries
Residual 
Risk
Likelihood = 1
Impact = 5
Total = 5
Reactive 
Mitigations
ABC audits
Replace 
personnel
Disciplinary action
External 
audits
Updated 
message
Updated 
policy
Updated 
training
Insurance
Issues/
Actions 
Required
ATC policy 
requires 
update
ATC training 
update and 
module in 
voyager
Take out insurance 
to cover costs of 
ABC/ATC 
investigation?
Tax officer to 
support 
MPK?

672
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
Exhibit 5  LP&F Cargo Ltd., “Must Achieve Program” template
1.	 Must Achieve Program. This is the goal that is imperative for LP&F to achieve in the next twelve months. The MAP 
can be realizing an opportunity or preventing a danger from arising; however, it is likely to be something that con-
tributes to the achievement of LP&F’s strategy.
2.	 Why is the MAP Critical? This describes why the objective is a MAP, as opposed to a day-to-day action; eg, how 
the MAP contributes to the attainment of LP&F’s strategy. However, not all MAPs will necessarily be of strategic 
significance. For example, the MAP could be to comply with safety/regulatory requirements.
3.	 Opportunity. This is where the MAP arises from pursuing and realizing an opportunity.
4.	 Danger. This is the type of MAP where LP&F has benefited from preventing (a) bad event(s) from arising.
5.	 Owner. This is the LP&F person who is directly responsible for achieving the MAP.
6.	 Risks and Type. The risks are events that could prevent the MAP from being achieved or assist in its achievement. 
Trying to articulate the type of risk will help us in ensuring that they are actively managed. The management of these 
risks will primarily be achieved by determining what actions must be completed (see #10 below).
7.	 Existing Controls in Place. These are the procedures, processes, contracts and/or measures that are currently in 
place, or will be used as a matter of course, to ensure that the MAP is achieved.
8.	 Current Assessment of the MAP. This is an evaluation of how confident we are of achieving the MAP given the risks 
identified and the existing controls in place (see #6 and #7 above). The level of confidence is expressed is percent-
age terms – eg, a confidence level of 90% means that we are extremely confident that the MAP will be achieved, 
whilst a confidence level of 10% indicates that we had little or no confidence. A confidence level of 50% means that 
we are highly uncertain that the MAP will be achieved.
9.	 Impact of Achieving the MAP. This is an estimate the US$ impact of achieving the MAP. The main reason of esti-
mating the US$ impact is to ensure that we are correctly utilizing our finite resources. However, it should be noted 
that not all MAPs will necessarily have a US$ impact. For example, a MAP that required us to widen our customer 
base may not increase our net income, but instead change our risk profile. Likewise, a MAP relating to regulatory 
compliance may not have a US$ impact.
10.	 Action Plan/Dates. These are the additional actions that have been identified as being necessary to be completed 
for us to achieve the MAP.
11.	 Status of Actions. This is the status of the actions (see #10 above) at the time of the quarterly update assessment 
of the MAP.
12.	 Quarterly Update of MAP status. This is a subsequent quarterly assessment of the likelihood of achieving the MAP and 
the current estimate of the US$ impact of doing so, after taking into account the actions that have been achieved to date.

Andrew G. Scavell, Chief Risk Officer
673
1.	 Must Achieve Program (MAP): 2014
Improve ELA [Europe–Latin America] trade by finding ways to expedite 
voyages and increase carrying capacity
2.	 Why is MAP Critical?
With outbound trade results under increasing pressure, results need to 
improve to support ELA round-voyage result
3.	 Opportunity: Yes
4.	 Danger: Yes
5.	 Owner: PBK
6.	 Risk(s) and Type:
•	Expected increasing competition on spot cargoes (oversupply of tonnage)
•	Port congestion (especially for pulp, which forms the majority of available cargoes)
•	Brazilian economy (in case growth drops)
•	Shifting trade patterns, eg, Europe losing out to Asia & US as cargo supplier
•	Scheduling limitations/tightness of program preventing time for inbound cargo
•	Accommodating larger vessel types, eg, Flex IIs need cargo on board to fit under existing loading spouts in Spain
7.	 Existing controls/measures in place to help achieve the MAP
•	Relationship with existing COA [Contract of Affreightment] partners and extension of COAs achieved during 2012 
(two core customers extended through April 2015)
•	Identified areas of possible improvement:
a)	 round voyage coordination with LP&F Rio + Program
b)	 cargo clearance issues in Brazil (causing delays for malt cargoes)
c)	 increased storage capacity in Santander (investigating Rubb Shed cost)
d)	 potential port switch from Recife to Portocel (increasing draft/intake)
•	A healthy level of spot market activity will bring us closer to market opportunities (3rd ship a month critical for this)
8.	 Current Assessment of MAP: Likelihood of achieving the MAP = 100%
Improvements will certainly be made, but likelihood of achieving some goals are very strong (eg, RV coordination) 
whilst others less so (eg, switch to Portocel)
9.	 Impact of Achieving MAP: Up to about US$2m
Breakdown as follows:
a)	 One third of 32 voy saving 1 day ballast, 11 voy × 1 day × ($15,000 + FO) = $350,000
b)	 10 days saved × $15,000/day = $150,000
c)	 6 calls × 12,000 mt / 5,000 vs 7,500 mt/d = 5 days × ($15,000 + wharfage) = $125,000
d)	 6 calls × 10,000 mt additional cargo × $25/mt = $1,500,000
10.	Action Plan/Dates required to achieve MAP
11.	 Status of Actions
Q1 Make detailed plan
Q2-4 Implement plan
12.	Quarterly update of MAP
Likelihood of achieving MAP
Impact of achieving MAP
Q1 2014
%
US$
Q2 2014
%
US$
Q3 2014
%
US$
Q4 2014
%
US$
Exhibit 5  (Continued)

674
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
Exhibit 6  LP&F Cargo Ltd., template senior business management bonus plan
MEMO
To:	
Andres Almodovar
Date: 28 November 2013
From:	
Benjamin Stevensen
	
Chairman, LP&F Cargo Ltd
LP&F BONUS PLAN 2014
This memo is to introduce and confirm your participation in the LP&F 2014 bonus plan.
The purpose of the LP&F bonus plan is to recognize above-target performance.
The plan has two components:
i.	 Company Performance
ii.	 Individual Performance
The relative weight of these components for you is as follows:
The Plan
The plan structure, eligibility and award criteria will be subject to annual review and revision.
The plan may be subject to revision in the event of changes in tax jurisdiction, dividend policy, capital 
structure, accounting principles, mergers/major acquisitions, major changes in the ownership and/or financing 
of the fleet.
Whilst LP&F has established a bonus plan for 2014, it is subject to annual review and the opportunity to participate in 
this type of plan should not be considered as guaranteed in future years.
Eligibility
Participating employees will qualify to receive a variable bonus payment based on their 2014 total gross salary under the 
following criteria:
•	 Provided they have completed their probationary period
•	 Provided they are in active employment during the bonus year
•	 Provided they have not resigned as of December 31, 2014
•	 Provided they are employed by LP&F or a Company in the LP&F Group as of December 31, 2014 (Note that in 
redundancy cases eligibility criteria will be separately confirmed)
•	 Provided their performance review has been completed and submitted for review
Bonus Calculations
The value of the award will be calculated on a pro-rata basis in the following circumstances:
•	 When an employee is not in active employment (ie, due to long-term sickness absence or maternity leave)
•	 When an employee has less than 12 months employment with the Company during the bonus year
•	 When the employee moves into a different Category during the bonus year
•	 When an employee receives a salary adjustment during the bonus year
•	 When an employee is made redundant with an effective termination date prior to December 31, 2014
Award criterion
Category III
Company Performance
65%
Individual Performance
35%

Andrew G. Scavell, Chief Risk Officer
675
Company Performance Component
There are five objectives with targets which form the Company performance component:
Objective	
Weighting
1.	 To achieve a net income target	
30%
2.	 To reduce SG&A levels vs 2013 budget	
25%
3.	 Generate new business revenue	
20%
4.	 To develop business niches to deliver a minimum
Return on Investment (ROE) of 12%	
15%
5.	 To achieve a reduction in the costs of OpEx	
10%
Payout levels for the Company performance component will be determined after Company performance for the fiscal 
year is known and following approval of FY2014 audited accounts.
Further information about these objectives is contained in Appendix I.
Hurdle
The Company component of the plan is designed to trigger 2014 payments only when a net result of £37.5 million is 
achieved.
Individual Performance Component
The assessment of individual performance will be based on the fulfillment of pre-agreed individual objectives that form 
part of your documented annual performance plan. These objectives must be stretch objectives which go beyond the 
day-to-day requirements of your role, and they must have defined targets and measures that can be used to evaluate 
performance. An approved copy of your performance plan should be held on MyLP&F (the HR Information System) for 
you to qualify for this part of the bonus program.
Your performance will be reviewed and evaluated with your immediate manager as part of the annual performance 
appraisal process and signed off by the next level manager. The table below shows the award level for the individual perfor-
mance element of the bonus plan based on the achievement of objectives that exceed day-to-day requirements of your role.
Overall Evaluation
Definition/Explanation
Pct. of 
Bonus Paid
Exceptional 
Performance
Has exceeded all expectations, has made a significant noteworthy 
contribution to the Department/Company. Usually this contribution was not 
planned and goes beyond the normal scope of the individual’s role.
96—100%
Exceeded all 
Objectives
All objectives have been exceeded. The employee has contributed 
significantly over and above the requirements of the role; results exceed 
the measures/targets that were agreed.
90—95%
Priority Objectives 
Exceeded
All the important heavily weighted objectives have been exceeded and 
other objectives have been met. Performance is above the requirements 
of the role, shows initiative, taken on additional responsibility and little or 
no supervision is required.
80—89%
Some priority 
objectives exceeded
Some, but not all, of the highly weighted objectives have been exceeded, 
requires very little supervision, has taken on increased responsibility.
70—79%
All objectives 
achieved, takes 
initiative
All objectives and targets have been achieved with minimum supervision; 
results are of a high standard, takes responsibility, uses initiative, acts 
responsibly.
60—69%
Objectives achieved, 
meets requirements
Objectives have been achieved; performance is good and meets 
expectations and requirements of the role.
50—59%
Less than 50% of 
objectives achieved
Some, but not all, requirements for the role have been met; requires guidance/
assistance on an ongoing basis. New hire/newly appointed to the role.
zero
No objectives 
achieved
Performance below requirements, employee requires constant guidance/
assistance and work may need to be checked on a regular basis to ensure 
accuracy or compliance. Not showing initiative.
zero
Exhibit 6  (Continued)
(continued)

676
Chapter 14 • Controllers and Auditors
Targeted Size and Limitations of Total Bonus Payments
The total combined bonus award (the sum of the two components) will be limited as a maximum percentage of salary, 
as below.
Award Maximum
Category III
Maximum percent of salary
58.50%
Equivalent months’ salary
7
Company component – maximum award as percent of salary
37.50%
Individual component – maximum award as percent of salary
21.00%
Exhibit 6  (Continued)
This case was prepared by Professor Wim A Van der Stede.
Copyright © by Wim A Van der Stede.

 
677
 CHAPTER 15 
 Management Control-Related 
Ethical Issues 
 Managers involved in designing and using management control systems (MCSs) should have a 
basic understanding of ethics. Ethics is the fi eld of study that is used to prescribe morally accept-
able behavior. It provides methods to distinguish between “right” and “wrong” and to system-
atically determine the rules that provide guidance as to how individuals and groups of 
individuals should behave. Its systematic nature goes beyond what even thoughtful people do 
in making sense of their own and others’ moral experiences. 
 Ethics is important to understand for managers involved with MCSs. Ethical principles can 
provide a useful guide for defi ning how employees should behave. Further, employees’ ethics 
are an important component of personnel and cultural controls (which we discussed in 
 Chapter  3 ). If good ethics can be encouraged in an organization, they can substitute for, or aug-
ment, actions controls ( Chapter   3   ) or results controls ( Chapter   2   ). In the aggregate, the ethical 
principles that employees follow help defi ne the organization’s core values and, hence, its cor-
porate culture and work climate. 
 Ethics is a diffi  cult subject for many managers to understand. Many managers’ basic disci-
pline training is in economics or business. 1 Two common assumptions in economics are that 
rational people should act to maximize their own self-interest and that the primary purpose of 
employees in for-profi t organizations is to maximize shareholder value.  2 Ethics, however, pro-
vides alternative assumptions about how people should, and do, behave. It assumes that ethical 
individuals must consider the impact of their actions on other  stakeholders – those aff ected by 
their actions – including employees, customers, suppliers, local communities, and other users of 
shared resources, such as people and animals, that might be aff ected by corporate use of land, 
water, and air. 
 Ethical behavior and value-maximizing behavior are not equivalent. While the commonly 
cited aphorism “good ethics is good business” is usually true, it is not always true. Good ethics 
do not always “pay off ” for the individuals or organizations involved, and defi nitely not always 
in the short term. Ethical individuals sometimes must take actions that are not in their own self-
interest, and/or not in their organization’s owners’ best interest, due to some legitimate inter-
ests of other stakeholders. Employees must be accountable to these non-ownership stakeholders 
as well, and no group, not even owners, automatically has priority over the other stakeholders. 
Indeed, it is the struggles between being selfi sh and doing “what is right” that provides the most 
interesting and important ethical issues that must be considered. 
 It would be comforting to think that people will be rewarded, at least in the long term, for 
doing the right things. But that does not always happen. Many employees who do what is right 
sometimes earn lower bonuses, are passed over for promotions, or are even fi red. Miscarriages 
of justice like these have led to the passing of laws (such as the whistle-blower protection 

Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
678
provisions in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act) to protect the rights of employees who were doing the 
right things. Conversely, employees who act unethically often benefit from their unethical 
actions. Sometimes they are not caught, and sometimes their bosses are complicit in the uneth-
ical practices, look the other way, pressure them, or even reward them for doing the wrong 
things.3 The following quote illustrates some form of this:
Whenever you see a company where the CEO takes an active, ongoing interest in how 
transactions are accounted for, that’s a huge red flag [for aggressive accounting]. Chief 
executives need to run the business, they don’t need to run the accounting.4
The potential for personal sacrifice while acting ethically is reflected in many codes of pro-
fessional conduct. The preamble of the Code of Professional Conduct of the American Institute 
of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) states, “The Principles call for an unswerving commit-
ment to honorable behavior, even at the sacrifice of personal advantage.”5 But when are the 
ethical principles so important that they dominate natural self-interest concerns? This is a core 
ethical question.
This chapter provides an introduction to the complex subject of ethics. It discusses how to 
conduct good ethical analyses and why they are important, the reasons why people behave 
unethically, and where MCS-related ethical issues are commonly found. The chapter concludes 
with some suggestions for encouraging ethical behavior in organizations.
Good ethical analyses and their importance
Unethical behaviors are costly to individuals, organizations, markets, and societies. They create 
needs for extra laws and standards from governments and regulatory agencies, and extra rules, 
reviews, or supervision within organizations. These extra enforcement mechanisms are incom-
plete, imperfect, and expensive, and have the typical drawbacks of rigid action controls. Good 
ethics is the glue that holds organizations and societies together. In the words of Christine 
Lagarde, managing director at the International Monetary Fund (IMF):
Regulation alone cannot solve the problem. Whether something is right or wrong cannot 
be simply reduced to whether or not it is permissible under the law. What is needed is a 
culture that induces bankers to do the right thing, even if nobody is watching.6
Lapses in ethics are often precursors of more serious problems, such as fraud. Mark Carney, 
governor of the Bank of England, refers to this more generally as “ethical drift”:
The traders who rigged LIBOR worked in a clubby, laddish atmosphere, a world removed 
from the woolly commitments to good behavior set out in banks’ mission statements.7
An example of ethical drift is “aggressive” financial reporting, which many interpret as less 
than ethical but maybe not quite illegal, and which often appears to be one step on a “slippery 
slope” that eventually culminates into costly, fraudulent activities. As Warren Buffett, chair-
man of Berkshire Hathaway, put it:
Once a company moves earnings from one period to another, operating shortfalls that 
occur thereafter require it to engage in further accounting maneuvers that must be even 
more “heroic.” These can turn fudging into fraud.8
Indeed, many of the worst corporate failures had aggressive accounting practices in common 
in the years leading up to their eventual ruin.9 And, even if aggressive accounting practices do 
not lead to ruin, they can be costly.10 We have given numerous examples throughout this text, 

Good ethical analyses and their importance
679
such as the opening examples in Chapter 1, which prove this point.11 To add another example, 
Tesco, the United Kingdom’s biggest supermarket chain, was said to be “consistently aggressive –  
Tesco had a more aggressive policy than its peers with regard to revenue recognition, deprecia-
tion and property-profit allocation.”12 In late 2014, Tesco faced the worst crisis in its 95-year 
history when it announced it had overstated its expected profits by £250 million, “prompting 
the suspension of four senior executives and wiping more than £2 billion off the value of the 
supermarket behemoth, bringing its share price to an 11-year low as regulators with the power 
to impose unlimited fines hovered.”13
Just as they need good skills in their technical disciplines in order to make good business 
judgments, managers need good ethical reasoning skills to make good ethical judgments. Sen-
ior managers themselves should know how to behave so that they can serve as moral exemplars, 
or role models, within their organizations. This is the foundation of what is commonly referred 
to as tone at the top, which we discussed in Chapter 3.
Top management should also design their MCSs to promote moral points of view and ethical 
behaviors. A number of highly specific controls, including some policies and procedures and 
elements of measurement and reward systems, stem from ethical analyses. But these controls 
need to be supplemented with some other controls that help ensure ethical behaviors in areas 
where totally precise organizational prescriptions are impossible, including training sessions, 
sets of values, codes of conduct, and credos that help employees identify, appreciate, and assess 
ethical issues.14
Second, ethical issues often are addressed with simplistic rules, such as “always tell the 
truth,” “do no harm,” or “do unto others as you would have them do unto you.” Such simple, 
conscience-based rules work only when the values of the person invoking the rule are shared by 
the others who are or might be affected. As a consequence, they rarely provide guidance for 
ethical behaviors in specific (management control) situations because people’s values often 
vary widely.
Ethical models
The first challenge in adapting ethical thinking to managerial settings is in recognizing the 
existence of the ethical issues that do or might exist. The ethics literature includes numerous 
normative models of behavior. Almost all of these models recognize that, in a social context, 
ethics is about how actions affect the interests of other people. Every ethical issue involves mul-
tiple parties, some of whom benefit while others are harmed, slighted, or put at risk by a par-
ticular action. The characterizations of harm, slight, or risk are made in terms of one or more 
ethical principles, rules, or values that are embedded in the various normative models of behav-
ior. The following sections describe briefly four commonly cited ethical models – utilitarianism, 
rights and duties, justice/fairness, and virtues.15 Each model has merits, but none is perfect; 
each has its own limitations.
Utilitarianism
Using the utilitarianism (or consequentialism) model, the rightness of actions is judged on the 
basis of their consequences.16 Adopted by many businesses because of its tradition in econom-
ics, utilitarian-type thinking has been embedded in many public policy decision procedures, 
such as welfare economics and cost-benefit analyses. In this model, an action is morally right if 
it maximizes the total of good in the world; that is, if it produces at least as much net good (ben-
efits less costs and harms) as any other action that could have been considered. Sometimes this 
objective is phrased as the greatest good for the greatest number of people. Utilitarianism does not 
mean that the right action is the one that produces the most good for the person performing the 
act, but rather the one that produces the most good for all parties affected by the action.

Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
680
Utilitarian models have some obvious limitations, however. Quantifying net good is difficult 
because the benefits of some actions or decisions, such as job satisfaction, freedom from stress, 
or a risky possibility of additional profits at some time in the future, are difficult to measure, 
aggregate, and compare across individuals. Further, using utilitarian-type reasoning makes it 
easy to sacrifice the welfare of a few individuals for the benefit of others. For example, in a 
famous case from the 1970s, Ford Motor Company’s management decided not to do a safety 
retrofit of the company’s Pinto subcompact car to prevent the gas tank from rupturing in rear-
end collisions. They used the logic that the expensive retrofit of 11 million Pintos would save 
only a maximum of 180 deaths, so it would not be cost effective from a societal point of view. 
Nonetheless, some people did die in horrible, fiery accidents.17
Rights and duties
The rights and duties model maintains that every individual has certain moral entitlements by 
virtue of their being human. Commonly cited basic rights in most modern societies include the 
rights to dignity, respect, and freedom. Some societies also accept that people should have 
welfare rights, such as the right to be educated and to have access to healthcare and good hous-
ing. Regardless of what is on the list, every right that an individual has creates a duty for some-
one else to provide, or at least not to interfere. So if an individual is said to have a right to 
privacy, then others have a duty not to interfere with that person’s privacy. If top management 
has a right to be given informative performance reports, then the managers or employees 
reporting to them have the duty to provide those reports. In other words, rights and duties 
need to be mutually observed by those participating in the group to which those rights and 
duties apply.
The rights and duties model has some significant limitations. It is sometimes difficult to get 
agreement as to what rights different individuals or groups of individuals should have. Rights 
can proliferate. They can also conflict. Do smokers have the right to smoke, or do others have 
the right to be free of second-hand smoke? Does management have a right to receive totally 
informative performance reports, or should those reporting to them have the right to retain 
some of their private information to themselves in order to, for example, protect themselves 
from some risk, such as a potential risk of dismissal?
Justice/fairness
The justice or fairness model maintains that people should be treated the same except when 
they are different in relevant ways. Most societies conclude that processes, not necessarily out-
comes, should be fair. Most people are not concerned when an already wealthy person wins a 
lottery if the process was fair. Having a fair process, such as in evaluating employee perfor-
mance, depends on such things as impartiality and consistency. This may explain why alleged 
pay inequality inside organizations is, unlike the lottery example, not always accepted as fair. 
This view is illustrated by opinions such as “trust in business will be damaged by the perception 
that an executive ‘elite’ is reaping all the rewards from economic growth,” and “all employees 
should share in a company’s success and gaps between those at the top and low and middle 
earners cannot just get wider and wider,” suggesting that the pay-setting and/or performance 
evaluation and incentive systems and processes are improper.18
Treating people the same except when they are different in relevant ways needs proper cali-
bration. People differ in many ways. Thus, determining which of these differences should be 
considered relevant is a core issue that must be addressed in applying the justice/fairness 
model. Employees may not be concerned when their compensation packages differ when it 
arises from differences in the nature of the job. It is seen as fair for people with jobs that are 
more difficult, more stressful, or riskier to be paid commensurately. But some may not deem it 
fair for people who have greater needs, such as a single parent, to be paid more than others 

Good ethical analyses and their importance
681
performing like jobs by virtue of being a single parent. They feel such hardship needs should be 
taken care of elsewhere, such as through government support programs.
Another limitation of the justice/fairness model is that it is easy to ignore effects on both 
aggregate social welfare and specific individuals. Perceived justice for one group may harm 
another group. For example, when pharmaceutical companies are ordered to pay large dam-
ages to plaintiffs who allegedly suffered ills even in cases where there is little direct evidence of 
the drugs causing those ills, could one submit that justice has been done for the plaintiffs but not 
for the companies?
Virtues
A final commonly used model of moral behavior is rooted in virtues. Prominent examples of 
virtues are integrity, loyalty, and courage. Individuals with integrity have the intent to do what 
is ethically right without regard to self-interest. Integrity has many components, including hon-
esty, fairness, and conscientiousness. Loyalty is faithfulness to one’s allegiances. People have 
many loyalties, including to other persons, organizations, religions, professions, and even 
causes. When loyalties conflict, their relative strength dictates how the conflict is resolved. 
Courage is the strength to stand firm in the face of difficulty or pressure.19
Virtues are often reflected in both professional and corporate lists of values, credos, and 
codes of conduct. For example, the Statement of Ethical Professional Practice from the Institute 
of Management Accountants (IMA) is organized into four areas of virtue: competence, confi-
dentiality, integrity and credibility.20 The Financial Executives International’s Code of Ethics 
also uses virtue concepts as it requires members to conduct their business and personal affairs 
with honesty and integrity.21 Similarly, the document describing the Code of Conduct for 
Google (now Alphabet) starts by describing the company’s informal corporate motto – “don’t be 
evil” (which was changed to “do the right thing” for Alphabet).22 It then goes on to describe a 
number of corporate principles or values. In the area relating to “Serving Our Users,” Google 
employees are asked to have their actions guided by the following principles: usefulness (of 
products, features, and services), integrity, responsiveness (to users), and taking action.23 Parts 
of many corporate codes of conduct define how individuals ought to behave; in other words, in 
terms of duties. Virtue theory does not deal directly with duties, although often duties can be 
derived quite logically from virtues.
Virtues provide their own intrinsic rewards. Virtuous individuals appreciate, and hence pur-
sue, these rewards. But not all employees in organizations should be taken as virtuous prima 
facie, which is why other forms of controls are necessary. As such, publicized sets of virtues can 
be a valuable part of an organizational control system. However, action controls, such as poli-
cies and procedures, cannot always be made both specific and complete. This limitation is 
reflected in Google’s Code of Conduct:
It’s impossible to spell out every possible ethical scenario we might face. Instead, we rely 
on one another’s good judgment to uphold a high standard of integrity for ourselves and 
our company. We expect all Googlers to be guided by both the letter and the spirit of this 
Code. Sometimes, identifying the right thing to do isn’t an easy call. If you aren’t sure, don’t 
be afraid to ask questions of your manager, Legal or Ethics & Compliance.24
Virtues fill in the gaps and provide guidance as to what is the right thing to do. They are an 
element of personnel or cultural control.
Virtue-based approaches, however, also have limitations. One problem is that the list of 
potential virtues is long. For example, in addition to those mentioned in the codes mentioned 
above, one might consider character, generosity, grace, decency, commitment, frugality, inde-
pendence, professionalism, idealism, compassion, responsibility, kindness, respectfulness, and 
moderation. Critics of the virtue model argue that it is not obvious which set of virtues should 

Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
682
be applied in any given setting. In addition, some characteristics considered virtues can actu-
ally impede ethical behavior. Courage, for example, is sometimes essential to commit fraud, 
and respect for elders (superiors) might actually stop someone from exposing a fraud. It is also 
difficult to know whether particular virtues exist in any individuals, how to develop virtues in 
individuals and groups of individuals, and how to recognize when day-to-day pressures are 
eroding the virtues.
Analyzing ethical issues
Good ethical behavior needs to be guided by more than opinions, intuitions, or gut feeling. 
Where the ethics of an action is in question, individuals should structure their situational analy-
sis by using a proper reasoning or decision model. Various models exist, but most involve the 
following steps:
1.	 Clarify the facts. What is known, or what needs to be known, to help define the problem? 
The facts should identify what, who, where, when, and how.
2.	 Define the ethical issue. What about the situation causes an ethical issue to be raised? This 
logic should be phrased using the terms of one or more of the ethical models. Which stake-
holders are harmed or put at risk? Are there conflicts over rights? Is someone being treated 
unfairly? Is someone acting dishonestly (lacking integrity)?
3.	 Specify the alternatives. List the alternative courses of action, including those that repre-
sent some form of compromise.
4.	 Compare values and alternatives. See if there is a clear decision. If one course of action is 
so compelling, then the analysis can be concluded.
5.	 Assess the consequences. Identify short- and long-term, positive and negative conse-
quences for the major alternatives. This step will often reveal unanticipated results as, for 
example, short-term benefits will be shown to be dwarfed by long-term costs.
6.	 Make a decision. Balance the consequences against the primary ethical principles or values 
and select the alternative that best fits.
It is important to recognize that different people can consider identical situations and reach 
different conclusions even after structuring their decision processes equally carefully and 
thoroughly. This can occur because they prioritize the various ethical principles differently. 
None of the ethical models is perfect and complete, and the models sometimes lead to different 
conclusions. That insight is important by itself. Managers need to be open to different 
approaches because different people will be viewing and judging their actions through differ-
ent lenses.
Why do people behave unethically?
People behave unethically for several reasons. One reason is ignorance. Managers who do not 
understand ethics, or who do not analyze the issues carefully, can make any of a number of 
mistakes that can lead to high probabilities of unethical behaviors within their organizations. 
They sometimes fail to recognize some ethical issues when they arise. One common problem is 
that managers sometimes equate ethical and legal issues; they conclude that if an action is not 
illegal, it must be ethical. This is clearly not true. For example, it is possible to conclude that 
many forms of earnings management are unethical, even though they might not be illegal. 
While many laws do indeed prohibit immoral practices, it is impossible to write laws to prohibit 
all unethical behaviors. Lying is usually considered immoral; however, laws prohibiting lying 

Why do people behave unethically?
683
would be hard and inefficient to enforce. As a consequence, lying is against the law only in the 
most important circumstances, such as perjury.
But many people behave unethically at times even when they fully understand that what 
they are doing is wrong. There are some people who unscrupulously act as bad apples. They are 
essentially dishonest. For them, the burden of good ethics is greater than what they are willing 
to bear. Those who work in the field of fraud often refer to the so-called “10-80-10 rule,” which 
maintains that approximately 10% of the population will be dishonest. These bad apples are 
contrasted with the two other categories. The bulk of the population (80%) is honest most of the 
time but can be tempted to be dishonest if opportunity and need arise simultaneously. The 
other 10% are honest under all circumstances, even in situations where they are sure they will 
not get caught.
Why someone – those in the 80% category – might act unethically can be understood in ref-
erence to the well-established fraud triangle model (Figure 15.1). Fraud is just an extreme form 
of unethical behavior. The three legs of the triangle are opportunity, motivation, and rationali-
zation. Generally, all three of these factors have to be present at the same time in order for 
someone to commit fraud. Opportunity is created, most commonly, in situations with poor 
internal controls, little supervision, and not much checking, such as by auditors. The motives for 
committing fraud can be greed or the need for money. But the motives can also be non-monetary, 
such as caused by pressures to perform, which can be internally or externally generated. And 
fraud is encouraged by rationalizations. People committing fraud generally know that what 
they are doing is wrong, but they often find rationalizations to justify their behaviors. These 
rationalizations include such justifications as “if we don’t manage earnings this quarter, we’ll 
have to lay off some valued employees”; “aggressive financial reporting may not be totally  
honest, but everyone does it – we’re only shooting ourselves in the foot if we don’t”; “I shouldn’t 
be taking office supplies home for the kids, but some of my colleagues are doing much worse 
things than I do, and it isn’t really hurting anybody”; “we’re uncomfortable about the aggressive 
“The company owes me, I am underpaid.”
“Everyone else is doing it.”
“If they don’t know i’m doing it, they deserve to 
lose the money.”
“I did it for a noble purpose.”
“Nobody will miss the money.”
“I’ve made this company a lot of money”
“I didn’t get the bonus I deserved”
“I lost income due to stupid management 
policies.”
“I’m just borrowing the money. I’ll pay it back.”
“I didn’t personally beneﬁt.”
Internal Controls
  • None in place
  • Not enforced
  • Not monitored
  • Ineﬀective
Too much trust
No “tone at the top”
No segregation of duties (do more 
with less)
Increased span of control = 
less review 
No management oversight/ 
knowledge
Motivation
The Fraud Triangle
Opportunity
Rationalization
- Debt
- Greed
- Vices: gambling, drugs
- Pressure to perform
- Too much work
Figure 15.1  The fraud triangle

Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
684
estimates of our tax liabilities, but we decided as a team that this was all right”; and “my boss 
knows about it – she said we’ll be ok.” Some of these rationalizations stem from a poor corporate 
culture. Fraudulent and unethical behaviors are contagious.
The rationalizations, and the subsequent unethical behaviors, are more common in people 
who lack moral courage. These people know they are doing something wrong, but they do not 
have the strength to do the right thing despite fear of the consequences. It is well known that 
those who insist on acting ethically can suffer any of many negative consequences, including 
shame, ostracism, and even dismissal. People with poorly formed ethical beliefs and/or little 
moral courage may easily “capitulate.” Those who wish to build up their moral courage should 
clarify their core values – those values they are willing to uphold regardless of the consequences.
Those who recognize that they do not have the needed moral courage should choose their 
work environments carefully. They should choose environments in which it is unlikely they will 
be pressured into decisions that require good ethical judgment. They may not be suitable for the 
financial controller-type jobs we discussed in Chapter 14, as indeed one commentator noted 
that for these jobs around the globe:
[I don’t] know of a senior financial professional who is not under pressure from others 
around their organization. The difference may be that in the West they face pressure from 
the executives to show bigger returns for stock markets, whereas in the East they may be 
under pressure from a powerful majority shareholder to pinch profits from minority share-
holders. But they are always between a rock and a hard place. The rock and the hard place 
are just different parties.25
Unethical actions that are not fraudulent differ slightly from fraudulent actions because those 
acting unethically might not be aware that they are doing something wrong. They might be igno-
rant or morally disengaged. They might not recognize an ethical issue when they face one, such as 
when they have an unconscious bias (which causes them to discriminate, say), so their conscience 
does not stop them from behaving unethically. They do not even need a rationalization.
Some common management control-related ethical issues
Many ethical issues arise in the context of MCSs. Some people even use ethical arguments to 
question the basic foundations of management “control” and “capitalist systems” that “coerce” 
management into making decisions on “economic” grounds (only). They argue that “value” is 
put before “values” and that corporate restructurings and downsizings aimed at reducing costs 
are unethical because they put profits before employee and societal welfare. Others counter, 
however, that the restructurings are necessary responses to changes in the environment. While 
they may cause pain to displaced employees, they help ensure that the restructured businesses 
remain competitive and, thus, able to gainfully employ their remaining employees. They call 
this “creative destruction” – that is, a painful yet necessary condition for innovation and pro-
gress, affecting all sectors, not just the for-profit sector, and for which the underlying rationale 
is that welfare is best served by not propping up old models but making the new ones work.26 
(We discuss this further to some extent in Chapter 16.)
Such political economy-related ethics debates are, however, not within the scope of the fol-
lowing sections. Instead, in what follows, we identify and briefly discuss four narrower, but 
common and important, MCS-related ethical issues: (1) creating budget slack; (2) managing 
earnings; (3) responding to flawed control indicators; and (4) using controls that are “too good.” 
These issues are important, and the analyses required to deal with them are representative of 
those that could be used to analyze similar issues that might arise.

Some common management control-related ethical issues
685
The ethics of creating budget slack
As discussed in Chapter 8, many performance targets, particularly those used at managerial 
organization levels, are negotiated as part of annual budgeting processes between those who 
are ultimately held accountable for meeting the budget and their managers, those one step up in 
the organization chain or hierarchy. Negotiation processes provide opportunities for those pro-
posing their budget to “game” the process; that is, to distort their positions in order to be given 
more easily achievable targets against which they subsequently will be evaluated and on the 
basis of which they typically stand to earn performance-contingent rewards.27 This distortion 
is often colloquially referred to as sandbagging or creating slack. As we discussed in Chapter 5, 
building slack into budgets is quite common. But is it ethical?
When employees create slack, they are exploiting their position of superior knowledge about 
their entity’s prospects. They are failing to disclose to their superiors all of their available infor-
mation and informed insights and, as such, are presenting a distorted picture of their entity’s 
business. Therefore, creating budget slack can be deemed in violation of several of the obliga-
tions listed in the Statement of Ethical Professional Practice of the Institute of Management 
Accountants.28 For example, the credibility standard requires management accountants to 
“communicate information fairly and objectively.”
Analysis from the tenets of utilitarianism also suggests that slack creation constitutes an 
ethical issue. Typically, those creating budget slack will benefit personally from it. Slack pro-
tects them against unfavorable occurrences such as an increase in costs, thus mitigating the 
probability that performance targets would be missed and performance-based rewards left 
unearned. If the reward-performance function is continuous (i.e. not capped), slack will also 
increase the size of the rewards that will be earned. Whereas these benefits accrue to those cre-
ating the slack, the slack creation can be costly to other stakeholders, especially the firm and its 
owners. Budgets containing slack are often less than optimally motivating. When achievement 
of the target is assured, employee effort may be waning. Moreover, exceeding the target may be 
deemed unwise because it may trigger a higher, more difficult target for the following period. 
This is called target ratcheting.29 Employees and managers may not work as hard, they may 
make unnecessary expenditures to consume the excess, or they may be motivated to play games 
to “save” the profit not needed in the current year. Slack creation also can be deemed less than 
correct from the standpoint of the users of the budget submissions – higher-level management –  
as they will rely on the information in the budget to make investment, resource allocation, and 
performance evaluation decisions that will become distorted.
On the other hand, some arguments can be raised to support the position that slack creation 
is ethical, or at least can be seen as justifiable. Many managers argue that creating slack is a 
rational response within a results-control system. They do not view slack as a distortion but as a 
means of protecting themselves from the downside risks of an uncertain future. Viewed this 
way, slack serves a function identical to that of the accepted management accounting practices 
of variance analysis and flexible budgeting, both of which are used to eliminate the effects on 
the performance measures of some uncontrollable factors (see Chapter 12), and in so doing 
shield managers from the risk these factors create. This protection from risk is particularly valu-
able in firms that treat the budget targets as “hard promises” or “performance commitments” 
with little or no tolerance for missed targets, or “underperformance” with possible dismissal as 
a consequence when it occurs. In the same way, some managers argue that budget slack is some-
times necessary to address the imbalance of power that is inherent in hierarchical organiza-
tions. It offers protection or “insurance” against evaluation unfairness that may arise from 
imperfect performance measures or evaluation errors or biases by superiors.
Finally, managers who defend slack creation also often point out that it is an accepted prac-
tice in their organization’s budget negotiating process. Managers at all levels of the organization 

Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
686
negotiate for slack in their budgets, and everyone is aware of the behavioral norm. Indeed, they 
point out, many senior managers were promoted into their positions precisely because they 
were good at negotiating for slack and, hence, for achieving their budget targets consistently 
over time. In many organizations, superiors may actually (implicitly) encourage their subordi-
nates to create slack because they also benefit from it. The superiors’ targets are usually con-
solidations of the targets of their subordinates, so they enjoy the same reduction in risk and 
increase in the expected values of their rewards as the slack creators. When creation of slack is 
widespread and the practice is encouraged, can we say that the organizational culture is 
encouraging unethical behavior? Or, does it indicate that in this community, at least, slack crea-
tion is rationalized as an acceptable behavioral norm?
Combined, then, in making judgments as to whether slack creation is ethical in any specific 
setting, many factors must be considered, including the following:
● How good the performance measures are (the extent to which they reflect underlying perfor-
mance and are unaffected by factors the managers cannot control).
● Whether budget targets are treated as a rigid promise from managers to the corporation.
● Whether the manager’s intent in creating the slack primarily reflects self-interest.
● Whether (or how much) superiors are aware of the slack.
● Whether the superiors encourage the creation of slack.
● Whether the amount of slack is “material.”
● Whether the individual(s) involved are bound by one or more of the sets of standards of pro-
fessional conduct. (Most accountants are, whereas most managers are not.)
The ethics of “managing earnings”
A second ethical issue involves the data manipulation problem discussed in Chapter 5. A com-
mon form of manipulation is earnings management, which includes any action that changes 
reported earnings (or any other income statement or balance sheet item) while providing no 
real economic advantage to the organization and, sometimes, actually causing harm. Gener-
ally, earnings management actions are designed either to boost earnings, such as to achieve a 
budget target or increase stock price, or to smooth earnings patterns to give the impression of 
higher earnings predictability and, hence, lower risk. Some actions might also be designed to 
reduce earnings, such as to “save” profits for a future period when they might be needed, or to 
lower stock price to facilitate a management buyout, or to lower the strike price just before a 
stock option grant.30
Earnings management can be deemed unethical for several reasons. First, when the actions 
are not apparent to either external or internal users of financial statements or the reported 
information more generically, those engaging in earnings management are deriving personal 
advantage through deception. This is pertinently expressed in the following excerpt:
It would be very helpful to know where people push the boundaries. If all companies could 
be ranked in terms of aggressiveness or conservative accounting policies, as judged by 
their auditors, then that would be helpful information. […] If they’re pushing the envelope, 
you want to know about it. If they’re pushing the envelope and technically you can’t qualify, 
we don’t find out.31
Second, professional managers and accountants can be said to have a duty to disclose fairly 
presented information. Indeed, most professional associations state so in their codes of ethics. 
Specifically, the IMA code referenced above requires to “disclose all relevant information that 
could reasonably be expected to influence an intended user’s understanding of the reports, 

Some common management control-related ethical issues
687
analyses or recommendations.”32 Hence, the distortions can be interpreted as not being consist-
ent with a professional’s obligation to report and disclose information credibly.
Third, the rewards earned from managing earnings are not fair when the reported perfor-
mance is only cosmetic, not real. This is the reason for recent changes in compensation practices 
that have so-called claw backs, which allow bonuses or other incentive payouts to be rescinded if 
in retrospect these appeared to have been based on managed or manipulated performance.33
Managers may have several justifications for managing earnings, however. They might be 
using their private information about company prospects to smooth out some meaningless, 
short-term perturbations in the earnings measures to provide more, rather than less, informa-
tive performance signals to financial statement users. As with slack creation, they might argue 
that they take these actions merely to protect themselves from rigid, unfair performance evalu-
ations. They might also take actions that make it unnecessary for them to take other, possibly 
more damaging actions, such as suspending research and development expenditures.34 Some 
earnings management actions are easy to rationalize in this way.
Curiously, most people judge accounting methods of managing earnings more harshly than 
operating methods even though the purposes of the two earnings management methods are 
identical, and the economic effects of the operating methods are typically far more costly to the 
firm.35 As discussed in Chapter 5, accounting methods of managing earnings involve the selec-
tion of accounting methods and the flexibility in applying those methods to affect reported 
earnings. Operating methods involve the altering of actual operating decisions, such as the tim-
ing of sales or discretionary expenditures. Clearer standards for judging accounting perfor-
mance (i.e. accounting standards) could explain this finding. As such, employees may be less 
likely to engage in earnings management (or other questionable behaviors) when they believe it 
violates established rules, which accounting standards are, suggesting that people use clarity of 
laws, rules, standards, or procedures as a basis for reaching an ethical conclusion.
Several situational factors are likely to influence judgments as to whether earnings manage-
ment actions are deemed (un)ethical, including (1) the direction of the manipulation (boost, 
shrink, or merely smooth earnings); (2) the size of the effect (materiality); (3) the timing (quar-
ter- vs. year-end, random timing vs. immediately preceding a bond offering or stock option 
grant); (4) the method used (adjusting reserves, deferring discretionary expenditures, or 
changing accounting policies); (5) the managers’ intent regarding the informativeness of the 
numbers (and disclosures); (6) the clarity of the rules prohibiting the action; and (7) the degree 
of repetition (one-time use vs. ongoing use even after a warning).
Making judgments about earnings management is complex, although in so doing, it is proba-
bly judicious to err on the side of caution rather than rationalization. Speaking out against what 
he deemed unrelenting earnings management practices, Arthur Levitt, former chairman of the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), called these practices so serious that “we need to 
embrace nothing less than a cultural change.”36 The incidence and size of various corporate 
scandals and failures, including in major financial institutions such as Bear Stearns and Lehman 
Brothers in only the first decade of the twenty-first century, seem to have proven him right.37
The ethics of responding to flawed control indicators
Results targets and action prescriptions provide signals to employees as to what the organization 
considers important, be it profits, growth, quality, or any other desired performances. When the 
targets and prescriptions are not defined properly, they can actually motivate behaviors that 
employees know are not in the organization’s best interest. The employees earn rewards for doing 
what they are asked to do, not what they know they should do, and the organization suffers. Indeed, 
many fraud cases involve employees taking unethical and illegal actions that they perceive to be 
“necessary” for their company to thrive or survive, sometimes under pressure from higher-ups,38 

Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
688
but about which they are too ashamed or embarrassed to tell their relatives. This is pertinently 
expressed in the following quote from a letter by Matthew Lee, a Lehman Brothers senior vice 
president who believed “senior management” may have violated their own internal code of ethics 
by misleading investors and regulators about the true value of the then-firm’s assets:
“I believe the manner in which the firm is reporting [certain] assets is potentially misleading 
to the public and various governmental agencies,” Mr. Lee wrote.39
Mr. Lee addressed his letter to the then-CFO, among others, only days before he was ousted 
from the firm.
We discussed one common flawed-response example in detail in Chapter 11 – that of myopia. 
It occurs when companies place a high emphasis on the achievement of short-term profit tar-
gets, even though some profit-increasing activities (such as reducing investments in employee 
development, customer acquisition and loyalty, or R&D) may diminish shareholder value in the 
long run. Relevant to the discussion here, managers who engage in myopic behaviors often 
know that they are curtailing long-term value or even causing long-term harm to their entity 
and their company; yet, perhaps under pressure, they decide to do it anyway.
What should employees do if they know the results measures or action prescriptions are flawed? 
Should they act to generate the results for which they will be rewarded, or should they sacrifice their 
own self-interest in favor of what they believe to be “truly” best for the organization? When they face 
this conflict of interest, most employees will choose to follow the rules of the reward system, perhaps 
while lobbying to get the measures changed. This behavioral norm might not be ethical. Financial 
professionals have standards of ethical conduct (duties) that require them to further their organiza-
tion’s “legitimate interests.” For example, Financial Executives International’s Code of Ethics requires 
its members to “Act in good faith, responsibly, with due care, competence and diligence, without 
misrepresenting material facts or allowing one’s independent judgment to be subordinated.”40
Managers and employees not bound by those professional standards perhaps should be 
bound by a sense of loyalty (a virtue) to their organization. But not everyone is. This is the rea-
son why, applied to the banking sector, some financial markets have taken drastic steps to try to 
boost ethics in their country’s financial services. In the Netherlands, for example, top bankers 
must already swear an oath to behave with integrity, and the industry body will extend the oath 
to cover bankers at lower levels.41
The ethics of using control indicators that are “too good”
Another ethical issue relates to the use of control indicators that are too good. Highly, perhaps 
excessively, tight control indicators have been made possible by advances in technology. For exam-
ple, computer surveillance programs that allow companies to monitor their employees’ personal 
computer screens, data use, and Internet traffic are widespread today. Supervisors can listen in on 
employees’ sales calls; cameras can record all the actions some employees take; computers can 
count the number of keystrokes by data entry clerks and telephone operators to gauge productivity; 
and location devices can track an employee’s whereabouts throughout the workday.42 A recent 
example from Credit Suisse, the Swiss-based global bank, illustrates this trend very well:
In truth, errors and misbehavior happen everywhere. In a well-run institution, though, man-
agers spot problems early. Then measures are taken to limit the damage and make amends. 
Culture is key, but so are resources. […] In that context, Credit Suisse’s announcement 
makes perfect sense. It has joined forces with Palantir, a CIA-backed artificial intelligence 
firm, to use data-driven behavioral analysis to root out rogue traders and insider dealing. 
Mr. Thiam [the bank’s chief executive] says he wants to change Credit Suisse’s culture. But 
if his employees don’t feel comfortable admitting to problems, at least his bank will soon 
be a lot better at catching them.43

Spreading good ethics within an organization
689
What is the ethical issue? The number of correct keystrokes and reports of employees’ loca-
tions-by-time may be good results measures in certain situations. They may describe what the 
organizations want from their employees, and they can be measured accurately and on a timely 
basis. That said, there is a fine line between the employer’s right to monitor and the employees’ 
rights to autonomy, privacy, or freedom from oppressive controls that suggest they are working 
in electronic sweatshops. Thus, questions relevant to determinations of whether use of such 
measures is ethical probably include:
● Is the use of the measures disclosed to employees?
● Are safeguards in place to protect the collected data?
● Are safeguards in place to ensure that the data are used for their intended purposes only (e.g. 
for quality monitoring of customer calls, or for monitoring employees in training, not experi-
enced employees)?
● When supervisors use these tight controls, do they emphasize quality rather than just quan-
tity (“grab everything”)?
But some companies also make the news with allegations of subjecting their employees to 
conditions that presumably resemble an era of physical sweatshops. For example, when 11 
employees committed suicide in a short period, the Taipei-based company Foxconn “was intro-
duced to much of the world in the worst terms imaginable – as an industrial monster that treats 
workers like machines […] to make products like the iPhone at seemingly impossible prices.” 
For the image-conscious businesses that Foxconn supplies, including IBM, Cisco, Microsoft, 
Nokia, Sony, HP, and Apple, the suicides were a public-relations nightmare and a challenge to 
the “off-shoring strategies” that were essential to their bottom lines.44 But whether Foxconn’s 
controls were “too tight” is actually difficult to judge. “[Foxconn] pays workers on time and for 
overtime according to the regulations, and that’s why workers always queue to work there,” 
said Geoffrey Crothall, spokesman for Hong Kong-based China Labor Bulletin, a worker-rights 
organization, adding that “despite […] the intense nature of the work, it’s still better than a 
small workshop with no guarantee you’ll get paid.”45 An anonymous former employee said: 
“The factories themselves are top notch although they are fairly intense working environments. 
Westerners would find it very difficult to work there.”46
Clearly what is acceptable to some is not acceptable to others, and, as the last quote sug-
gests, views may differ across (national) cultures. What is clear, however, is that when con-
trols are “too good” or “too tight” – or “oppressive,” as some would argue – they are likely to 
induce unintended and/or undesirable consequences, such as by triggering job-related ten-
sion and even stress-related health complaints. This may be especially true for action controls; 
indeed, at Foxconn, it was said that “obviously work is tiring and there’s pressure; there are 
lots of rules here.”47 But results controls can also be “too tight” in that they induce myopia and 
pressures for earnings management, as we discussed earlier in this chapter and elsewhere in 
this text.
Spreading good ethics within an organization
Ethical progress within an organization typically proceeds in stages. In an early stage, when the 
organization is small, the organization becomes an extension of the founder or the top manage-
ment group. The founder acts as a role model, setting the ethical tone, and is usually able to 
monitor employees’ compliance with that tone.
In later stages of development, organizations implement more formal corporate ethics pro-
grams. These programs include three main elements. First is a set of policies, codes, and values 

Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
690
that define how the organization wants its employees to act. These policies might originate first 
in a set of memoranda from top management, but in larger organizations, they evolve into 
formal policy manuals and codes of ethics or codes of conduct. Some of the behavioral prescrip-
tions might be quite specific, such as “accept no gifts greater than $50 in value.” But necessarily, 
because not every possibility can be foreseen, some guidance is quite general. It is common to 
list a set of organizational values that employees are expected to live up to, such as the virtues 
mentioned earlier in this chapter.
Second is a set of programs designed to ensure that employees understand the specific 
policies and to help them think through ethical issues that are not specifically spelled out in 
the written prescriptions. Oftentimes, companies ask their employees to sign a statement 
certifying that they understand and will abide by the rules. At Boeing, the large aircraft 
manufacturer, employees are asked to certify annually that they will adhere to the compa-
ny’s Code of Conduct, which outlines the ethical business conduct required of employees in 
the performance of their company responsibilities. The company website explains that 
“Individuals certify that they will not engage in conduct or activity that may raise questions 
as to the company’s honesty, impartiality or reputation or otherwise cause embarrassment 
to the company.”48
Reinvigorating a code of conduct is also sometimes an effective way to reinforce change, to 
send a clear signal. This happened when Antony Jenkins, boss of Barclays, the UK-based global 
bank, told the bank’s 140,000 employees to sign up to a new code of conduct, or leave.
Following from this, good ethics programs must involve some enforcement mechanisms, 
which include monitoring and application of sanctions where called for. The monitoring might 
be informal, such as is done by direct supervisors, or it might involve formal investigations by 
internal or external auditors, or even law enforcement agencies.
The codes also might need updating from time to time, even though the underlying princi-
ples of good ethical conduct may remain largely the same. For example, at Google, the docu-
ment that lays out the company’s “Ten Things” of their corporate philosophy states right at the 
top: “We first wrote these ‘10 things’ several years ago. From time to time we revisit this list to 
see if it still holds true. We hope it does – and you can hold us to that.”49
Even the best laid-out codes of ethics and signed employee certification statements may not 
be sufficient. Consider the following excerpt from the Statement of Vision and Values Principles 
of a large publicly traded corporation:
Because we take our responsibilities to our fellow citizens seriously, we act decisively to 
ensure that all those with whom we do business understand our policies and standards. 
Providing clearly written guidelines reinforces our principles and business ethics. [Our] 
employees at all levels are expected to be active proponents of our principles and are 
trained to report without retribution anything they observe or discover that indicates our 
standards are not being met.
Compliance with the law and ethical standards are conditions of employment, and vio-
lations will result in disciplinary action, which may include termination. New employees are 
asked to sign a statement indicating that they have read, understand and will comply with 
this statement, and employees are periodically asked to reaffirm their commitment to these 
principles.
Which company, do you reckon, espoused these principles and required signed statements 
certifying understanding and compliance with the principles? It was Enron, a corporation now 
held up as the epitome of corporate evil!50
This Enron example shows that merely having a set of ethical standards and rules and taking 
steps to ensure that employees have read them is not sufficient. The standards must be made 

Conclusion
691
operational. Top management must set a credible tone at the top, and they must endeavor to 
maintain a good internal MCS so that potential violators know that there is a good chance that 
they will be caught. Monitoring should be done by both employees’ superiors, colleagues 
(mutual control), and internal auditors. Violators of the rules should be sanctioned. These sanc-
tions help give employees the courage to resist counter pressures. Companies also often appoint 
a designated ombudsperson to help employees facing ethical issues.
Tone at the top can be an effective form of cultural control when it is consistent, and supervi-
sion and mutual monitoring can be effective when given teeth in an otherwise trusting organi-
zational climate. Under effective corporate cultures, ethical behaviors are “shaped” rather than 
merely “enforced” from time to time, often after a major violation has occurred and damage has 
been done.
Conclusion
This chapter has provided a brief introduction to the topic of ethics as it relates to the design and 
use of MCSs. To create the right ethical environment, management must have moral expertise 
and know where and how to provide it.
The sampling of issues discussed in this chapter should have made it obvious that many ethi-
cal issues are MCS-related, and many important ethical issues do not have black or white 
answers. One cannot conclude unequivocally that, for example, creating budget slack is always 
unethical or that controls are too tight to be ethical. The “greyness” of the judgments makes it 
all the more important for managers to subject the various ethical issues to a formal analysis. 
That said, many situational factors must be considered in making ethical judgments. For exam-
ple, judgments of what is ethically acceptable vary across national cultures, suggesting that 
multinational companies wishing to achieve similar levels of ethicalness across entities located 
in different countries will have to rely on different sets of controls.
Employees face many pressures and temptations that can cause them to act unethically. 
They can easily bow to performance deadlines and crises, reward temptations, pressures for 
conformity, and even counterproductive orders from their bosses. Unless managers act to 
deflect these pressures and temptations on a fairly consistent basis, their company’s ethical 
climate will be weakened. Managers must help guide the behaviors of their employees who 
are incapable of thinking through ethical issues (distinguishing right from wrong) them-
selves. They must understand how and why individuals will reach different ethical conclu-
sions, and, importantly, they must take a stance as to how they want employees in their 
organization to behave.
Every organization has an ethical culture or climate of some sort; either good, bad, or 
mixed. It is important for managers to build a good ethical climate, one that respects the rights, 
duties, and interests of stakeholders inside and outside the firm. An organization that fosters 
unethical behaviors from its employees, even those that benefit the company in the short run, 
will probably eventually find itself the victim of its own policies. Such organizations are more 
likely to attract people who feel comfortable bending the rules; they may even entice sincere 
people to bend the rules. Bad cultures are contagious. Yet, weakened or poor ethical climates 
can lead to unethical behaviors that can damage or destroy individual and organizational rep-
utations. Once ethical climates are weakened and reputations are damaged, they can be quite 
difficult to rebuild.

692
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
Notes
	 1	 See, for example, H. Mintzberg, Developing Managers, Not 
MBAs (Harlow, UK: Financial Times/Prentice Hall, 
2005).
	 2	 See, for example, “Shareholders vs. Stakeholders: A New 
Idolatry,” The Economist (April 24, 2010), online at econ.
st/KA1p7h; “Maximizing Shareholder Value: The Goal 
That Changed Corporate America,” The Washington Post 
(August 26, 2013), online at wpo.st/8EXX1.
	 3	 See, for example, “Scathing Report Says Toshiba CEOs 
Had Role in Accounting Scandal,” The Financial Times 
(July 20, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1KgFnZB.
	 4	 “Ebix’s Raina Loses Magic Touch as U.S. Probes Account-
ing,” Bloomberg (June 20, 2013), online at www.bloomb-
erg.com.
	 5	 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, AICPA 
Code of Professional Conduct (see, for example, on page 5 
of the version most recently available as of this text edi-
tion on October 26, 2015), online at www.aicpa.org/
Research/Standards/CodeofConduct.
	 6	 “Christine Lagarde Calls for Shake-Up of Bankers’ Pay,” 
The Financial Times (May 6, 2015), online at on.ft.
com/1hgJZCY.
	 7	 “A Bigger Stick,” The Economist (June 13, 2015), online at 
econ.st/1MsDNRB.
	 8	 See “Why Honesty Is the Best Policy,” The Economist 
(March 9, 2002), online at econ.st/JxdsXd.
	 9	 See, for example, “Findings on Lehman Take Even Experts 
by Surprise,” The New York Times (March 12, 2010), 
online at nyti.ms/1UFar9L.
	10	 See, for example, “Accounting Scandal Set to Shake Up 
Toshiba,” The Financial Times (July 16, 2015), online at 
on.ft.com/1fMNz7h.
	11	 See also “Bankers Not Only Ones Pushing Ethical Bound-
aries,” The Financial Times (September 25, 2015), online 
at on.ft.com/1FmAXiS.
	12	 “Tesco Was Warned in 2010 about ‘Aggressive Account-
ing,’” BBC (September 25, 2014), online at www.bbc.
co.uk/news/business-29364273.
	13	 “Tesco in Crisis: UK Managing Director among Four Exec-
utives Suspended after Exposure of Accounting Scandal,” 
The Independent (September 22, 2014), online at www.
independent.co.uk. See also “Not So Funny: Booking Rev-
enues, Like Comedy, Is All about Timing,” The Economist 
(September 27, 2014), online at econ.st/1qxwvPw.
	14	 See, for example, “A Bigger Stick,” op. cit.
	15	 For an overview and more detailed treatment of some of 
these ethical models, see J. Gaa and R. Ruland (eds.), Eth-
ical Issues in Accounting (Sarasota, FL: American Account-
ing Association, 1997). See also J. Driver, Ethics: The 
Fundamentals (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2006).
	16	 See also, J. Driver, Consequentialism (New York: Rout-
ledge, 2011).
	17	 See, for example, D. Birch and J. Fielder, The Ford Pinto 
Case: A Study in Applied Ethics, Business, and Society 
(Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1994).
	18	 See, for example, “Executive Pay ‘180 Times Average,’ 
Report Finds,” BBC (July 14, 2014), online at www.bbc.
co.uk/news/28286264; “City Leaders Urge Radical 
Reforms of ‘Unfair’ Executive Pay,” The Financial Times 
(May 8, 2016), online at on.ft.com/1T5Qnel.
	19	 See also J. Gaa and R. Ruland, “Ethics in Accounting: An 
Overview of Issues, Concepts and Principles,” in Gaa and 
Ruland, Ethical Issues in Accounting, op. cit.
	20	 The Statement of Ethical Professional Practice from the 
IMA is available at www.imanet.org/tools-and-resources/
ethics-center (accessed May 6, 2015).
	21	 The Financial Executives International (FEI) Code of Eth-
ics can be found at www.financialexecutives.org/about/
FEICodeofEthics.pdf (accessed May 6, 2015).
	22	 “Alphabet Drops Google’s Famous ‘Don’t Be Evil’ Motto,” 
Fortune (October 25, 2015), online at for.tn/1j93MVV.
	23	 See Google Code of Conduct at abc.xyz/investor/other/
google-code-of-conduct.html. The Alphabet version can 
be found at abc.xyz/investor/other/code-of-conduct.
html (as accessed on May 6, 2015).
	24	 See Google Code of Conduct, op. cit.
	25	 Chartered Institute of Management Accountants, Global 
Perspectives on Governance: Lessons from East and West 
(2010), p. 8, online at www.cimaglobal.com.
	26	 See, for example, “Creative Destruction,” The Economist 
(June 28, 2014), online at econ.st/1v8uCMm.
	27	 See also M. Jensen, “Corporate Budgeting Is Broken: Let’s 
Fix it,” Harvard Business Review (November 2001), 
pp. 94–101; M. Jensen, “Why Pay People to Lie?” The Wall 
Street Journal (January 8, 2001), p. A32; and “Companies 
Get Budgets All Wrong,” The Wall Street Journal (July 22, 
2013), online at on.wsj.com/1OfjJaR.
	28	 Statement of Ethical Professional Practice, IMA, op. cit.
	29	 For an academic treatment of budget ratcheting, see R. J. 
Indjejikian, M. Matějka, K. A. Merchant, and Wim A. Van 
der Stede, “Earnings Targets and Annual Bonus Incen-
tives,” The Accounting Review, 89, no. 4 (July 2014), 
pp. 1227–58, as well as the other papers in this issue of 
The Accounting Review titled “A Forum on Ratcheting and 
Incentives.”
	30	 For a more extensive discussion of earnings management 
practices, see C. Mulford and E. Comiskey, The Financial 
Numbers Game: Detecting Creative Accounting Practices 
(Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 2002). See also J. 
Graham, C. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, “The Economic 
Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting,” Journal 
of Accounting and Economics, 40, no. 1–3 (December 
2005), pp. 3–73; I. D. Dichev, J. R. Graham, C. R. Harvey, 
and S. Rajgopal, “Earnings Quality: Evidence from the 
Field,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 56, nos. 2–3 
(Supplement, December 2013), pp. 1–33; and A. Edmans, 
L. Goncalves-Pinto, Y. Wang and M Groen-Xu, “Strategic 
News Releases in Equity Vesting Months,” Working Paper 
(2016), online at papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2489152.

693
Notes
	31	 “Assurance Today and Tomorrow,” PwC (2012), online at 
www.pwc.com/gx/en/audit-services/publications/
assets/pwc-global-investor-survey.pdf.
	32	 Statement of Ethical Professional Practice, IMA, op. cit.
	33	 See, for example, “Five Trends in Stock Compensation,” HR 
Times (March 20, 2014), online at hrtimesblog.com; “UK 
Bankers Face Tough Bonus Clawbacks,” The Financial Times 
(July 29, 2014), online at on.ft.com/1k5Te8U; “SEC 
­Proposes Rules on Executive Pay and Performance,” The New 
York Times (April 29, 2015), online at nyti.ms/1OeoKcQ.
	34	 See, for example, J. Graham, C. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, 
“Value Destruction and Financial Reporting Decisions,” 
Financial Analysts Journal, 62, no. 6 (November 2006), 
pp. 27–39.
	35	 K. Merchant and J. Rockness, “The Ethics of Managing 
Earnings: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of 
Accounting and Public Policy, 13, no. 1 (Spring 1994), 
pp. 79–94. For another study of how ethical judgments of 
earnings management vary across different user groups 
(shareholders vs. non-shareholders), see S. Kaplan, “Fur-
ther Evidence on the Ethics of Managing Earnings: An 
Examination of the Ethically Related Judgments of Share-
holders and Non-Shareholders,” Journal of Accounting 
and Public Policy, 20, no. 1 (Spring 2001), pp. 27–44.
	36	 A. Levitt, The Numbers Game, Speech at New York Univer-
sity Center for Law and Business (September 28, 1998).
	37	 See, for example, “Findings on Lehman Take Even Experts 
by Surprise,” The New York Times (March 12, 2010), 
online at nyti.ms/1UFar9L. See also “Bankers Not Only 
Ones Pushing Ethical Boundaries,” The Financial Times 
(September 25, 2015), online at on.ft.com/1FmAXiS.
	38	 See, for example, “WorldCom Official Tried to Quash 
Employee’s Accounting Concerns,” The Wall Street Jour-
nal (August 27, 2002), p. B6.
	39	 “Lehman Insider’s Letter Warned about Violating Code of 
Ethics,” The Wall Street Journal (March 20, 2010), online 
at on.wsj.com/1zkM59z.
	40	 Financial Executives International Code of Ethics, FEI, op. cit.
	41	 “Banking Conduct Body Faces Rocky Road to Reform,” 
The Financial Times (May 19, 2014), online at on.ft.
com/1jOhPbk.
	42	 See, for example, H. J. Wilson, “Wearables in the Work-
place,” Harvard Business Review (September 2013), online 
at hbr.org/2013/09/wearables-in-the-workplace; “Track-
ing Workers’ Every Move Can Boost Productivity – and 
Stress,” The Los Angeles Times (April 8, 2013), online 
at 
w w w.lat i mes.com / la-f i-ha rsh-work-tec h- 
20130408,0,6413037.story; “A High-Tech New Way for 
Your Boss to Follow You Everywhere,” Bloomberg (August 
1, 2014), online at bloom.bg/1TTKSOI; “Wearables at 
Work: The New Frontier of Employee Surveillance,” The 
Financial Times (June 8, 2015), online at on.ft.
com/1IB7dz1; “Banks Listen in to Traders’ Banter for Evi-
dence of Market Abuse,” The Financial Times (February 
14, 2016), online at on.ft.com/1odkTb1.
	43	 “Credit Suisse Spooked by What Lurks Within,” The 
Financial Times (March 25, 2016), online at on.ft.
com/1RAT5Vt.
	44	 “Everything Is Made by Foxconn in Future Evoked by 
Gou’s Empire,” Business Week (September 9, 2010), online 
at www.bloomberg.com.
	45	 Ibid.
	46	 “Foxconn Suicides: ‘Workers Feel Quite Lonely,’” BBC 
(May 28, 2010), online at www.bbc.co.uk.
	47	 Ibid.
	48	 See Boeing’s website at www.boeing.com/principles/eth-
ics-and-compliance.page, and specifically www.boeing.
com/resources/boeingdotcom/principles/ethics_and_
compliance/pdf/english.pdf for the document that 
employees sign.
	49	 See www.google.com/intl/en/about/company/philoso-
phy (accessed May 6, 2015).
	50	 Enron’s Code of Ethics (July 2000), online (no longer 
available).

Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
694
 In the three years since he had been appointed man-
ager of the Mobile Communications Division (MCD) of 
Advanced Technologies Corporation (ATC), Joe super-
vised the preparation of two sets of annual budget 
numbers. When ATC’s bottom-up budgeting process 
began, Joe instructed his subordinates to set aggressive 
performance targets because he believed such targets 
would push everyone to perform at their best. 
 Then, before Joe presented his budget to his superiors, 
he added some  management judgment. He made the fore-
casts of the future more pessimistic, and he added some 
allowances for  performance contingencies to create what 
he called the  easy plan. Sometimes the corporate manag-
ers questioned some of Joe’s forecasts and asked him to 
raise his sales and profi t targets somewhat. However, 
MCD operated in a rapidly growing, uncertain market 
that Joe understood better than his superiors, and Joe 
was a skillful and forceful negotiator. In each of the past 
three years, the end result was that the targets in the offi  -
cial budget for MCD were highly achievable. MCD’s per-
formance had exceeded the targets in the easy plan by an 
average of 40%, and Joe earned large bonuses. Joe did 
not show his superiors the targets his subordinates were 
working toward, but some of Joe’s direct reports were 
aware of the existence of the easy plan. 
 In his subjective evaluations of his subordinates’ 
performances for the purposes of assigning bonuses 
and merit raises, Joe compared actual performance 
with the aggressive targets. In the last three years, only 
approximately 25% of the aggressive targets had been 
achieved. Joe did not fi re any of his managers for fail-
ing to achieve their targets, but he reserved the vast 
majority of the discretionary rewards for the managers 
who had achieved their targets. 
 This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 The year 2015 was a good one for the General Prod-
ucts Division (GPD) of Altman Industries, Inc., a large 
industrial products manufacturer. Sales and profi ts 
in the division were significantly above plan due 
largely to unexpectedly brisk sales of a new product 
introduced at the end of 2014. The good fortune 
induced Robert Standish, the GPD general manager, 
to think about how he could save some of the profi ts 
for periods in which he might need them more. He 
believed that GPD’s plan for 2017 would be tough to 
achieve because the corporation as a whole was not 
doing well, and corporate managers would expect 
GPD to show growth even above this year’s abnor-
mally high sales and profi t levels. In addition, already 
 CASE STUDY 
 Two Budget Targets 
 CASE STUDY 
 Conservative Accounting in the General Products Division 

Education Food Services at Central Maine State University
695
in September 2016, Robert was sure that his divi-
sion’s 2016 profi t would exceed the level above which 
no additional bonuses were awarded for higher per-
formance – 120% of plan. Robert wanted to save 
some of the 2016 profi ts so that he could report them 
in a year in which they would augment his bonus and 
those of his direct reports. 
 Robert asked his staff  to do what they could before 
the end of the year to “stash some acorns” that he could 
use in future years. He suggested to Joanne, his con-
troller, that she start preparing the pessimistic scenar-
ios that could be used to justify the creation of 
additional reserves and start thinking about how 
expenses could be accelerated and revenues could be 
deferred at year-end. 
 Joanne was uncomfortable. She reminded Robert 
that because of continuing order declines, Altman 
executives were looking for ways to report higher, not 
lower, profi ts in the current year and that if that situa-
tion did not turn around quickly, layoff s were threat-
ened. 
 But Robert explained that GPD would still be report-
ing very high profi ts; he just wanted to save a portion of 
the excess above plan. And in any case, GPD could not 
help the corporation much because it was such a small 
part of the entire corporation. 
 This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Pam Worth, Manager of Education Food Services at 
Central Maine State University (CMSU), is meeting 
with a researcher to explain some apparent discrepan-
cies in last year’s budgeted fi gures and the actuals. The 
researcher, a faculty member at another university, is 
doing fi eld studies in the food service business. Pam is 
explaining why she always tries to hide some slack in 
her numbers when she prepares her budget. She says 
that it is her understanding that she is just doing what 
others in her company and in her industry do. She 
agreed to speak to the researcher only with guarantees 
of strict confi dentiality. 
 I like to have a moderate cushion in my budget. The 
stakes are high. If I make my budget my perfor-
mance review will be good, almost regardless of 
whatever else I do during the period, and I will earn 
my 20% bonus. If I miss my budget without valid 
reasons I may not be allowed to keep my job. 
 More than that, however, the cushion in the 
budget allows me to do a better job. I don’t have 
to worry that my staff  is working at peak effi  ciency 
all the time, so I don’t have to supervise every 
action. That is better for the staff , also; they hate 
it when I’m looking over their shoulders. The 
cushion also allows me to buy things that I can 
use to provide the university with better service. 
For example, this year I was able to buy several 
portable bars that we have used already for some 
parties.  
 Pam, an accounting graduate of Northern Univer-
sity, is an employee of Contract Food Services Corpora-
tion (CFSC), a large corporation that provides food on a 
contract basis to universities, hospitals, and businesses. 
Pam runs a profi t center that provides services only to 
one university – CMSU. Her operation provides food at 
two major, on-campus cafeterias serving 12,000 stu-
dents and nearly 2,000 faculty and staff . Pam also has 
responsibility for the vending machine business on 
campus, and her employees sometimes provide cater-
ing services for on-campus business meetings. Pam’s 
 CASE STUDY 
 Education Food Services at Central Maine State University 

696
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
operation employs 59 regular employees and between 
150 and 180 students on a part-time basis. Annual rev-
enues are slightly in excess of $3 million.
Relations between CFSC and CMSU are governed by 
a contract that is renegotiated each January for the fol-
lowing academic year. The contract defines the respon-
sibilities of each party. For example, CMSU 
administrators are given the power to review and 
approve CFSC’s service plans and prices. The university 
provides all equipment costing over $100. CFSC sets 
the menus and hires the employees.
The contract also defines limits on the profits CFSC 
can earn from the CMSU operation. CFSC earns 100% 
of the profits from the food operation up to a limit of 
10% profit on sales. Beyond that limit, profits are split 
equally with CMSU. The contract is set this way as an 
incentive to CFSC managers to provide extra quality 
and services after they have ensured themselves a rea-
sonable profit.
Budgets are prepared on a bottom-up basis. In July, 
corporate headquarters personnel send planning guide-
lines and assumptions (e.g. employee benefits, infla-
tion) to all operating units. The operating managers 
forecast their customer counts, which determines their 
food requirements, and then estimate their operating 
costs for the 18-month period starting in January. Since 
the university owns the buildings and equipment, the 
bulk of CFSC’s costs are for food and labor.
After the units’ budgets are prepared, a series of 
budget challenge rounds are held to review the numbers 
at successively higher CFSC consolidation levels – 
district, region, division, group, and corporate. If the 
numbers meet the managers’ profit expectations, 
the budgets are accepted. Typically, however, each of the 
managers in the hierarchy is asked to raise his or her 
profit targets. These requests lead to a series of meetings 
designed to explore whether revenue projections should 
be raised or cost projections cut. The size of these profit 
increase requests are not predictable, but in recent years 
they have ranged from zero to 15%.
Pam explains that she routinely hides some cushion 
in both labor and food costs:
I can build the budget cushion in a lot of places. This 
year for example:
● I kept the proportion of meals served on board con-
tracts (which are more lucrative for us) equivalent to 
last year’s level even though I know that proportion 
will be growing because the trend is to have more 
students living on campus.
●	 I planned for a number of labor hours at $7.15 when 
I knew that I would hire students for those hours, 
and students don’t earn that much.
●	 I planned no efficiency improvements when I know 
we almost always improve our efficiency. There is a 
learning curve in this business. My superiors know 
about this learning curve too – they ran operations 
just like this – but they don’t object to my having a 
cushion. It is to their advantage to have me meet my 
budget too.
These types of things add up. I put just enough in so 
that I am sure I will be able to meet my budget targets 
even after corporate management squeezes some of my 
cushion out in their reviews.
I know more about what is happening at CMSU than 
anyone else. My bosses can’t come here and check 
every assumption that I have in the plan. They don’t 
have the time. My immediate boss, for example, is 
responsible for nine units spread over a fairly large geo-
graphic area.
You can easily identify new managers – they submit 
budgets that are realistic. Experienced managers build 
in pads for themselves. It’s a bit devious, sure, but it’s 
not theft. It’s just playing with projections. The money’s 
there. Besides, if you don’t build a cushion for yourself 
you’re not going to survive for long in this business.
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.

The “Sales Acceleration Program”
697
 In early October, Priscilla Musso, general manager of 
the Specialty Products Division (SPD) of Consolidated 
Furniture Corporation (CFC), was studying the divi-
sion’s third quarter fi nancial reports. Sales were run-
ning signifi cantly below plan, and it became quite clear 
to Priscilla that SPD would need strong performance in 
the last quarter of the year in order to reach its annual 
profi t target. Meeting budget was very important to 
Priscilla and her management team because they were 
included in CFC’s lucrative executive bonus program, 
and they would lose all of their bonus opportunities if 
SPD did not achieve the profi t targets. 
 To brainstorm for ideas, Priscilla called her manage-
ment team together. At fi rst the managers on the team 
expressed only discouragement. Everybody had been 
working hard, but the market was softening, and com-
petitors were being very aggressive. 
 Then, after some delay with nobody else suggesting 
any options, Jonathan Robbins, SPD’s manager of sales 
and marketing, suggested that the division could imple-
ment a new sales program to pull some sales that might 
ordinarily be made next year into the current year. Any 
customers who accepted delivery in the fourth quarter 
would not have to pay their invoice for six months. 
(Normally payments in the industry were to be made 
within 30 days.) 
 Priscilla’s fi rst reaction was favorable; this program 
might, indeed, achieve the desired result. But she asked 
the members of her team for their reactions. 
 Shirley Covey, manager of human resources noted 
that if this program was successful, it would probably 
cause SPD’s employees to have to work overtime at the 
end of the year, and that was something they tradition-
ally did not want during the holiday season. But Priscilla 
reminded Shirley that the employees would be paid time-
and-a-half for all the overtime hours that they worked. 
 Priscilla asked Bill Bennett, SPD’s controller, if this 
program would violate any accounting rules. Bill said 
there would be no problem recording the sales as long 
as the items were shipped and billed before December 
31. The accounting would be consistent with GAAP. But 
Bill cautioned that this program was probably only pro-
viding a short-term, cosmetic profit improvement. 
While it might well make the current year look better, it 
would probably cause signifi cantly lower sales to be 
recorded in the fi rst quarter of next year. So next year 
the division would start in a deep hole. They would be 
scrambling all year to trying to dig themselves out of 
that hole, with no guarantees that they could pull it off . 
It was just postponing the problem. In addition, Bill 
reminded the team that this program would be very 
expensive. On top of the overtime expense that would 
have to be incurred in the production areas, the pro-
gram would greatly increase SPD’s accounts receivable. 
CFC was currently paying about 12% on its lines of 
credit, so this increase in working capital would be 
quite expensive for the corporation. 
 But Priscilla cut Bill short. She reminded him that 
CFC did not allocate interest expenses to SPD, so she 
was not particularly concerned about the corporation’s 
increased borrowing costs. She was more worried with 
her superiors’ negative reactions if she did not make 
this year’s profi t plan than she was about their reac-
tions to her allowing the receivables’ balance to 
increase in the early part of the year. And while she 
acknowledged that they might be creating a problem 
for next year, she suggested it would be best to worry 
about that problem when, and if, it became real. 
 With no other options on the table to solve the cur-
rent year’s budget problem, the SPD managers decided, 
unanimously, to implement what they called the “Sales 
Acceleration Program.” 
 This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 CASE STUDY 
 The “Sales Acceleration Program” 

698
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
 On September 30, Jianxin (Jimmy) Wu, manager of the 
Information Systems Department for Southwest Indus-
tries (SWI), was in panic mode. SWI was a medium-
size manufacturer of portable shelters, tents, and 
awnings. Jimmy was panicking because the company’s 
Citrix software had just died. Because of his oversight, 
an invoice had not been paid, and the SWI’s license to 
use the software had expired. 
 Jimmy knew that something had to be done very 
quickly. Many of the company’s information systems 
users, who were situated at three diff erent locations, 
relied heavily on the Citrix software. All of SWI’s applica-
tions ran under Citrix. The Citrix software gave all 
employees access to the SWI applications they needed no 
matter where they were, as long as they had access to the 
Internet. The Citrix license renewal would cost $3,600, 
but going through the purchasing department to get a 
requisition issued would take several days. The users 
could not be without the Citrix capability for that long. 
 Then Jimmy thought about using his purchasing 
card. The card, which worked like a credit card, was 
intended for small purchases, not including travel, 
hotels, or food. SWI issued the card to some of its key 
personnel to avoid the costs of processing the paper-
work required for many small, incidental purchases. 
The company only had to make one single payment to 
the credit card company, and the credit card company 
did all the processing. 
 The maximums placed on Jimmy’s card were $2,000 
for any single purchase, and $5,000 per month. Jimmy 
knew that these limits were strictly enforced. Person-
nel in the accounting department scanned the bills 
monthly looking for violations. But Jimmy thought that 
he could get Citrix to split the bill in two, and then the 
accounting department personnel would not raise any 
objections. 
 With no other apparent options at hand, Jimmy 
decided to try to use his card to renew the license. The 
Citrix salesman agreed to charge the card in two trans-
actions of $1,800 each. The license was renewed 
quickly, and few of SWI’s Citrix users were ever aware 
that there had been a problem. 
 This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant and Leslie R. Porter. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Leslie R. Porter. 
 CASE STUDY 
 The Expiring Software License 

Wired, PLC
699
 Don Sperber was the CFO of Wired, PLC, the Thailand 
subsidiary of Wunderphone, a large telecommunica-
tions company based in Germany. Wunderphone 
owned 70% of Wired. The other 30% was listed on the 
Bangkok stock exchange and publicly traded. Wunder-
phone was also a public company and was listed on the 
NYSE as well as the Frankfurt stock exchange. Wired 
was a relatively small subsidiary of Wunderphone in 
terms of revenue. With US$2 billion in annual revenue, 
it represented less than 4% of Wunderphone’s total rev-
enue, which exceeded US$50 billion annually. How-
ever, Wired was important to Wunderphone because it 
operated in an emerging market and had better earn-
ings growth potential than many of Wunderphone’s 
larger subsidiaries, which operated in more mature 
and more saturated markets. 
 Don, a US native, enjoyed living in Thailand and 
working at Wired: 
  My job was exciting. Here I was, early in my career, 
the CFO of a public company. I loved the people I 
worked with. And the telephone industry was 
dynamic. I had the opportunity to head up major 
initiatives, such as debt refi nancings and mergers 
and acquisitions. It was fun.  
 Don was also involved in investor relations and spoke to 
equity analysts from investment fi rms regularly about 
Wired’s fi nancial position and earnings trends. 
 Early in 2012, Don was working on the acquisition 
of a wholesaler that bought cell phone minutes from 
Wired and resold them to the public for a profi t. Wired 
management planned to integrate vertically so that the 
company could bring the retail margins from cell 
phone minute sales onto its income statement. This 
acquisition would increase Wired’s revenues by 
approximately 6%. 
 Steven Sarit, Wired’s CEO, asked Don to have 
Wunderphone’s capital expenditure committee review 
the acquisition proposal. This committee met often, 
and it typically approved expenditures with minimal 
administrative eff ort. If approved, then this transac-
tion could be accounted for as an ordinary capital 
expenditure. 
 Don argued, however, that the proposed transaction 
was a business acquisition. The proposal should be sub-
mitted to the mergers and acquisitions committee and, 
if approved, it should be accounted for as a business 
combination. He explained that the accounting rule 
governing the transaction was IFRS Statement #3. If 
Wired had planned to buy an asset that did not consti-
tute a business, such as a customer list, the asset pur-
chase could be treated as a capital expenditure. But 
Wired planned to purchase assets constituting an 
entire operating business. Further, the acquisition con-
tract specifi ed that the transaction was to be a “busi-
ness” (rather than an asset) acquisition. If the 
transaction were to be treated as an asset purchase, 
under Thai law Wired would not assume the acquired 
company’s customer contracts. Continuing the target’s 
customer relationships after the acquisition was critical 
to the success of the transaction. 
 But Steven was not ready to give up. He escalated 
the issue to Philip Behrens, Wunderphone’s CFO. Philip 
explained to Don that it was better for the company to 
record the purchase as an ordinary capital expendi-
ture. The cell phone market had matured, and the 
industry’s growth rate had stalled. Industry analysts 
were scrutinizing earnings growth and trends closely. 
Earnings derived from a business combination would 
not be valued as favorably as “organic” growth. Philip 
naturally wanted earnings to be valued as favorably as 
possible. He told Don and Steven to fi nd a way to “get 
this done as an asset purchase.” 
 Steven was agreeable, but Don pushed back, argu-
ing that the transaction involved an earn-out, which he 
maintained was almost impossible to reconcile with an 
asset purchase. Still, Philip was sure that with a little 
creativity, Don could work out a way to account for the 
transaction as a capital expenditure. The conversation 
became quite heated, and both parties fi nally agreed to 
get an opinion from the accounting fi rm hired to assist 
in the due diligence on the transaction. This firm 
 CASE STUDY 
 Wired, PLC 

700
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
agreed with Don, that they could not credibly classify 
the transaction as an ordinary capital expenditure. 
 While he was relaying this news to Philip, Don 
thought that he would add a practical constraint to the 
argument. He told Philip that the fi nite amount of money 
in the capital expenditure budget had either already 
been spent or earmarked for real and necessary projects. 
 Philip thought that the budget issue was a minor hur-
dle that could be overcome and, unconvinced about Don’s 
conclusion about the accounting treatment, Philip took 
the accounting issue to the independent accounting fi rm 
hired to audit Wired’s fi nancial statements. The partner at 
the auditing fi rm consulted his fi rm’s technical experts, 
and they concluded that the issue was “gray.” Since the 
acquisition target was reselling minutes they had bought 
directly from Wired, they thought that perhaps a theoreti-
cal argument could be made to support an asset purchase. 
 That was all Philip needed to hear. Philip told Don that 
the debate was over. Philip was Don’s superior, and he 
wanted the transaction treated as a capital expenditure. 
He expected Don to fi gure out how to make it happen. 
 Don was at a crossroads. He believed the accounting 
treatment was just plain wrong, and he did not want 
any part of it, but his signature was required on the 
fi nancial statements. He wondered if he could get in 
trouble if the accounting was done as Philip wanted. He 
was also worried that Philip would fi re him if he contin-
ued to challenge him or if he refused to comply. 
 This case was prepared by Research Assistant Michelle Spaulding and Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Donna Stoneman was the CFO of Mean Screens USA, 
Inc. Headquartered in Seattle, Mean Screens USA was 
the sales and distribution division of Mean Screens, 
Ltd., a privately owned Chinese company founded in 
2007 that produced inexpensive LCD screens manufac-
tured in China for sale in the US market. By 2009, rapid 
growth necessitated a signifi cant infusion of capital. A 
decision was made to spin off  a portion of Mean Screens 
USA in an IPO. 
 Since the beginning of the company, Donna had 
worked together closely with Thomas Yee, Mean 
Screens USA’s division president, to build the division. 
She continued to play an instrumental role in the com-
pany’s subsidiary initial public off ering (IPO) process, 
travelling around the world to describe the investment 
opportunity to potential investors. 
 However, Donna was troubled by the earnings pro-
jections that Thomas had instructed her to present. She 
felt the forecast was extremely aggressive. She was 
uncomfortable presenting numbers that she did not 
think were realistic, and she was concerned that there 
would be a backlash from investors if Mean Screens 
USA failed to meet the projections. She expressed her 
concerns to Thomas who agreed to lower the projec-
tions slightly, but he still kept them well above what 
Donna believed was realistic. 
 Donna decided to accept Thomas’s revised numbers. 
She felt she had done all she could, as she explained: 
 The earnings projections were not offi  cially under 
my jurisdiction. I really had no authority to change 
them. And by defi nition forecasts are not black and 
white. It was possible that Thomas’s numbers were 
on target. 
 A successful IPO was launched in May 2009, and 
Mean Screens USA, Inc. was listed on NASDAQ. Mean 
Screens, Ltd. retained 51% of the public shares of the 
subsidiary. In the fi rst fi scal year, however, as Donna 
 CASE STUDY 
 Mean Screens USA, Inc. 

Lernout & Hauspie Speech Products
701
had feared, Mean Screens USA missed its profi t projec-
tions by more than 30%. 
 Thomas was alarmed by the shortfall. He asked 
Donna what they could do to increase earnings so that 
the company’s fi nancial statements would mirror the 
forecasts, and in this way pacify the new investors. His 
fi rst idea was to deem some receivables as obviously 
collectable to avoid setting up reserves. Donna thought 
that the idea was ridiculous. She told Thomas that she 
could not falsify fi nancial statements for any reason. 
Thomas insisted that there was no falsifi cation. The 
setting up of reserves was a gray area of accounting 
that depended on judgment. Donna explained that the 
company was now public, and the audits would be 
more thorough. The auditors would surely insist on the 
establishment of reserves for uncollectible receivables. 
 Thomas was persuaded that perhaps this plan was 
impractical, so he suggested another possibility. He 
suggested that they postpone the writing off of 
inventory that had likely become obsolete. Again, 
Donna rebuff ed his request. 
 Thomas was becoming increasingly angry at Don-
na’s refusal to work with him. He threatened her bonus 
and even told her that the long-term viability of the 
company was at stake. Donna was sickened. She began 
to wonder if Thomas was naïve or just unethical. She 
was unwilling to sacrifi ce her own principles and integ-
rity, not to mention her CPA license, but she began to 
fear that her job was on the line. 
 The reserves issues had still not been resolved when 
Thomas came to Donna with a third request that he 
hoped would appease his most important investors. He 
wanted to ask the parent company for favorable trans-
fer prices for a year or so in order to shift some earn-
ings from the parent company to the subsidiary. He 
would agree to reverse the favorability of the transfer 
prices when Mean Screens USA could aff ord higher 
prices. 
 Donna did not even know how to respond. Was Thomas 
this ignorant about fi nancial reporting requirements, or 
was he just basically dishonest? If the latter, she had to con-
sider whether or not she wanted to work for someone who 
was capable of such dishonesty. But she was also worried 
about her bonus and, ultimately, her job. She had a family 
to support, and with the country in a severe recession, it 
would probably not be easy to fi nd another job. 
 Tis case was prepared by Research Assistant Michelle Spaulding and Professor Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant. 
 This case is a tragic blow not just for Belgium but also for 
all of Europe. It shows how badly we need much greater 
transparency and a sense of corporate governance. For too 
long, banks and businesses did not feel they should be held 
accountable to shareholders. That has to change. 1 
 Philippe De Buck, Executive Director, Belgium 
Federation of Industries 
 Mr. De Buck was referring to the demise of Lernout & 
Hauspie Speech Products (L&H), which had been con-
sidered a world leader in speech-recognition technology 
and one of Belgium’s most promising hi-tech compa-
nies. The company declared bankruptcy in October 
2001 after the discovery of a massive accounting fraud 
that implicated many L&H managers, including the top 
management team. Like many others, Mr. De Buck won-
dered how this could have happened and what might be 
done to avoid other scandals like this in the future. 
 1  William Drozdiak, “Lost in the Translation; Voice-Recognition 
Firm’s Failure Holds Painful Lesson for Europeans,”  The Washington 
Post (December 17, 2000). 
 CASE STUDY 
 Lernout & Hauspie Speech Products 

702
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
The company
The entrepreneurs
L&H was founded in 1987 when Jo Lernout, then a 
sales executive with the Belgian arm of Wang Laborato-
ries, Inc., grew intrigued by an early Wang voice-mail 
system. The system was not selling well because many 
Europeans still had rotary phones and could not use 
them to select amongst the voice-mail choices. 
Mr. Lernout’s idea was to create software that allowed 
users to make voice-mail selections by speaking into 
the phone. He set up a company to commercialize 
speech technology. Pol Hauspie, who owned a small 
firm that made accounting software, joined him. 
Belgium seemed a good location from which to operate 
the company because the country was home to many 
software engineers fluent in multiple languages. The 
two partners based their company in Ieper, Belgium.
To finance the business, Mr. Hauspie sold his soft-
ware firm and Mr. Lernout sold his house. Mr. Lernout, 
an ebullient chain-smoker with ruddy cheeks and a 
mop of sandy-blond hair, recalled in an interview that 
convincing his wife “was the hardest road show I’ve 
had.”2 The company barely survived several early 
financial crises. At one point, it couldn’t make the pay-
roll and bailiffs came to seize property, Mr. Lernout 
recalled. But he seemed to thrive on crisis. One of his 
favorite sayings is, “The grass is always greener on the 
other edge of the precipice.”3
Starting any new company is difficult, but two fac-
tors helped L&H survive in its early years. The first was 
Belgium’s national pride. Like much of Europe, Belgium 
envied America’s great hi-tech engine of wealth. And 
now here were two guys with ambitions to turn a rural 
corner of Flanders into a Silicon Valley of language 
technology. In L&H’s early years, Flanders, Belgium’s 
Dutch-speaking region, formed a tax-exempt zone in 
Ieper – which gradually became known as the “Flanders 
Language Valley” – and showered L&H with research 
grants. The Flanders regional government became a 
major L&H investor through a venture capital arm. 
During one of L&H’s cash crunches, it guaranteed 75% 
of a bank loan to the company. “Without that,” 
Mr. Lernout says, “we would have gone broke.”4 Stefaan 
Top, a Belgian venture capitalist, says the combination 
of ambitious entrepreneurs and a government that 
sorely wanted “a local tech champion was a combusti-
ble mix – it was dangerous.”5
The second was a series of complex financing plans 
dreamed up by Mr. Hauspie. The taciturn former tax 
accountant set up an intricate holding-company struc-
ture that let the founders retain control while selling 
various minority interests. Devising such structures is 
“Pol’s forte,” Mr. Lernout says. “He’s very creative. 
Legally it’s all right, and it helps you survive.”6
In late 1995, the company went public with a listing 
on the NASDAQ Stock Exchange, even though it had 
never been profitable and had just a few million dollars 
in annual revenue. As with many hi-tech firms, the 
hope lay in a glittering future. “Natural speech inter-
face is the next technology wave,” one securities ana-
lyst wrote, “a potential multimillion dollar market.”7 
L&H’s managers dreamed of creating software that 
would let computers effortlessly understand human 
speech, speak back, and translate among the world’s 
tongues.
The company seemed to face many challenges. 
Technical development was painstakingly slow, as the 
systems had to cope with many different accents and 
speech patterns, not to mention the need to sort out 
homonyms such as “wait” and “weight.” And industry 
demand was sluggish. Many rivals struggled. One, 
Kurzweil Applied Intelligence, Inc., in Massachusetts, 
imploded after auditors found that its managers had 
faked a large proportion of the company’s sales. 
Another Massachusetts rival, Dragon Systems, Inc., 
eked out only slow growth in the mid-1990s. At L&H, 
however, sales quadrupled in 1996 to $31 million. 
Though some small acquisitions produced part of the 
growth, L&H seemed to be relying on sales to custom-
ers with which it had financial ties.
Over the years, many of L&H’s customers received 
investments from Flanders Language Valley Fund 
(FLV Fund), a venture-capital pool that Mr. Lernout 
and Mr. Hauspie helped create the year L&H went pub-
lic. Mr. Lernout and Mr. Hauspie were directors of the 
fund’s management arm until 1997, and even after-
ward they maintained considerable sway over its 
affairs. Michael Faherty, a former L&H salesman in the 
United States, says he and others were encouraged to 
2	 Mark Maremont, Jesse Eisinger, and John Carreyrou, “Muffled 
Voice: How High-Tech Dream at Lernout & Hauspie Crumbled in 
Scandal,” The Wall Street Journal (December 7, 2000), p. A1.
3	 Ibid.
4	 Ibid.
5	 Ibid.
6	 Ibid.
7	 Ibid.

Lernout & Hauspie Speech Products
703
refer potential customers who were cash-poor to the 
FLV Fund. “If FLV invests $1 million in the customer,” 
he says, “it was understood that we’d get about 
$300,000” [in the form of license fees paid by that cus-
tomer to L&H].8 Though the FLV Fund denied financial 
links between L&H and FLV, the close dealings between 
the two were evident to some informed parties from 
the start. In 1995, for example, FLV took a 49% stake in 
the Belgian unit of Quarterdeck Corp., a high-flying 
California software company. This Belgian unit became 
L&H’s largest customer, accounting for 30% of revenue 
that year, and Quarterdeck in California accounted for 
another 6.5% of L&H’s sales.9
The CEO
In late 1996, Gaston Bastiaens was hired as L&H’s pres-
ident and CEO. Mr. Bastiaens was an engineer who led 
the failed Newton project at Apple Computer, Inc. But 
he flourished at L&H. Around the time Mr. Bastiaens 
joined L&H, the company discovered a new and unu-
sual source of revenue: its own research-and-
development needs. This required an intricate 
accounting maneuver, one that L&H had continued to 
lean on throughout its tenure as a public company. L&H 
knew it was trailing competitors in developing soft-
ware to recognize words spoken at an ordinary clip. “If 
we didn’t catch up, we were cooked,” Mr. Lernout 
recalled in an interview. “But we couldn’t catch up, 
because we didn’t have enough R&D dollars.”10
The solution was to start a company and have it con-
tract with L&H to develop the software. L&H said it 
gathered outside investors to fund the start-up, called 
Dictation Consortium, NV. But L&H employees wrote its 
business plan and did the software work under contract. 
When the software was finished, L&H had an option to 
buy the Dictation Consortium at a profit to the investors. 
The arrangement ensured that L&H could claim to be 
growing at a rapid pace. Dictation Consortium provided 
L&H with $26.6 million in revenue in 1996 and 1997, 
about one-quarter of its 1996 sales and 19% of its 1997 
sales. Since Dictation Consortium bore the R&D costs, 
they didn’t burden L&H’s bottom line. In 1998, L&H 
bought Dictation Consortium for $40 million, gaining 
control of the software it so badly wanted. Since 
Dictation Consortium had few assets and almost the 
entire price represented goodwill, it could be amortized 
over seven years, further shielding L&H’s bottom line.
Buoyed by such deals and a spate of fresh acquisi-
tions, L&H’s revenue mushroomed to $211.16 million 
in 1998, more than double 1997’s. The stock soared. 
Mr. Lernout and Mr. Hauspie became entrepreneurial 
celebrities, Belgium’s answer to Microsoft’s Bill Gates 
and Paul Allen.
With the stock price up, Mr. Bastiaens bought technol-
ogy leaders such as Kurzweil Technologies, Inc., a speech-
recognition company in Wellesley Hills, Massachusetts, 
and Mendez Translation Group of Brussels, Belgium. In 
1997, a year after he came on board, Mr. Bastiaens landed 
an important investor: Bill Gates. Microsoft invested $45 
million in L&H, ending up with an 8% stake. The early 
Microsoft investment gave L&H much needed credibility 
and revenues. In 1999, Intel invested $30 million in L&H 
and formed a venture with it to develop e-commerce and 
telecommunications products.
Though all seemed well from the outside, internally 
there were continuing glitches with L&H’s technology. 
A 1998 presentation Mr. Lernout gave to French execu-
tives in Paris turned into a debacle when the software 
failed to recognize many words, an L&H insider 
recalled. “The bottom line was that the technology 
wasn’t ready and the market wasn’t ready,” this person 
says, “but management had to deliver every quarter.”11 
Under Mr. Bastiaens, it did. L&H kept reporting growth. 
Its sales rose 63% in 1999 to $344 million. Its Asian 
sales exploded to more than $150 million from less 
than $10 million in 1998. In March 1998, its stock hit 
$72.50, up 2,500% from its initial offering price four 
and a half years earlier.12
However, financial analysts had been suspicious of 
L&H’s financial results as far back as 1997. In February 
1997, Lehman Brothers’ Brian Skiba issued a report, 
claiming that L&H’s growth in the United States and 
Europe was much lower than investors had assumed, and 
that the company was not coming clean. Mr. Bastiaens 
denied it, but in a conference call, he refused to give a 
geographic breakdown of sales.13 Still, investors ignored 
financial analysts’ warnings and applauded the year-
2000 acquisitions of Dictaphone, based in Stratford, Con-
necticut, and Dragon Systems, of Newton, Massachusetts. 
The future did, indeed, look bright. L&H seemed to have 
8	 Ibid.
9	 Ibid.
10	 Ibid.
11	Ibid.
12	Ibid.
13	Ibid.

704
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
a lock on some of the best speech-recognition software, 
and the company was powerfully positioned as the Web 
migrated into phones and cars, where people would talk 
to machines and machines would talk back. At the time, 
Mr. Bastiaens assured anybody who would listen, “This 
market is going to explode.”14 With the purchase of the 
company’s two main US rivals, L&H was suddenly a soft-
ware company with $1 billion in annual sales, and it was 
poised to follow SAP and Nokia Corp. into Europe’s tech-
nology elite.
The Dictaphone purchase, however, meant more 
than half of L&H’s business was in the United States. 
This obliged the company to file detailed accounts with 
the SEC. Analysts learned that sales in Korea had 
soared from a mere $97,000 in 1998 to $58.9 million in 
the first quarter of 2000, some 52% of the total sales of 
the company. Suspecting an attempt to pump up 
results, investors began to dump the stock in 2000.15
The Wall Street Journal report
In August 2000, The Wall Street Journal reported that 
some Korean companies L&H described as customers 
denied doing business with it, while some others said 
they had bought less than L&H said they had:
In all, the Journal contacted 18 of about 30 compa-
nies claimed by L&H as customers. Three of the 
companies said they weren’t, in fact, L&H custom-
ers … Three more companies said their purchases 
from L&H over the past three quarters were smaller 
than figures provided by Mr. Bastiaens or Sam Cho, 
vice president of L&H Korea. One additional com-
pany said it is in a joint business with L&H that pro-
duces considerably less revenue than L&H claims. 
Officials from an eighth company initially said it had 
formed a joint venture with L&H and that the joint 
venture, not the company itself, had purchased 
products from L&H…
Of the other 10 companies, three confirmed they 
were customers but wouldn’t give the size or timing 
of their purchases. Officials at another six con-
firmed total purchases totaling $450,000 to 
$5.5 million in the period since [September 1999]. 
One company says it signed a $10 million contract 
with L&H and paid in May 2000.
All told, of the 12 companies that responded to 
inquiries about their purchases from L&H in the 
period since [September 1999], the revenue tallied 
roughly $32 million. From all of its customers in 
Korea, in 1999 and the first quarter of 2000, L&H 
posted $121.8 million of Korea sales, and it had said 
that it expected second-quarter revenue from that 
country to exceed the first quarter’s $58.9 million.16
L&H responded with a statement saying that com-
ments attributed to L&H customers were “misquoted or 
factually incorrect” and that other information in the 
article was “distorted.”17 To buttress its case, L&H com-
missioned a mid-year audit by KPMG.
After the Korea scandal broke, Mr. Bastiaens rushed 
to restore confidence. He contacted several of the Korean 
customers interviewed for the Journal story, and they 
publicly said they were misquoted. A trip to Korea was 
arranged for two financial analysts, both of whom were 
impressed with the company’s business there. “I met cus-
tomers and saw L&H products really being used,” says 
Kurt Janssens of KBC Securities in Brussels.18 Most 
important, Mr. Bastiaens asked for the KPMG special 
audit. “He wouldn’t be so stupid as to ask for an audit if 
he had something to hide,” says Pierre-Paul Verelst, an 
analyst at Brussels brokers Vermeulen Raemdonck.19
By this time, founders Lernout and Hauspie thought 
Mr. Bastiaens had become a liability. On August 25, 
2000, he was replaced with John Duerden, a British-
born US citizen who had worked at Xerox Corp. and 
Reebok International, Ltd., before running Dicta-
phone.20 In November 2000, L&H admitted for the first 
time that “mistakes and irregularities” had slipped into 
the annual accounts. Mr. Hauspie resigned as an officer, 
and in March 2001, Mr. Lernout was dismissed. In 
November 2000, L&H filed for bankruptcy protection.21
Discovery of a massive fraud
In January 2001, Philippe Bodson replaced Mr. Duerden 
as L&H’s chief executive, and PricewaterhouseCoopers 
14	 William Echikson and Ihlwan Moon, “How to Spook Investors,” 
Business Week (September 18, 2000), pp. 69–72.
15	 Ibid.
16	 Mark Maremont, Jesse Eisinger, and Meeyoung Song, “Tech Firm’s 
Korean Growth Raises Eyebrows,” The Wall Street Journal (August 
8, 2000), p. C1.
17	 Mark Maremont, “Lernout & Hauspie Shares Fall 19% as It Attacks 
Article,” The Wall Street Journal (August 9, 2000), p. A16.
18	 Echikson and Moon, “How to Spook Investors.”
19	 Ibid.
20	Ibid.
21	 “Dossier Lernout en Hauspie,” De Standaard (January 2011), online 
at www.standaard.be.

Lernout & Hauspie Speech Products
705
(PwC) was brought in for an investigation. The PwC 
report was released on April 6, 2001. It revealed that 70% 
of the nearly $160 million in sales booked by L&H’s 
Korean unit between September 1999 and June 2000 
were fictitious. In an effort to earn rich bonuses tied to 
sales targets, the Korean unit’s managers developed 
highly sophisticated schemes to fool L&H’s regular audi-
tor, KPMG International. One especially egregious 
method involved funneling bank loans through third 
parties to make it look as though customers had paid 
when in fact they had not.
L&H’s new chief executive, Philippe Bodson, said 
that upon learning of PwC’s findings he “was very 
impressed by the level of sophistication” of the fraud 
and “the amount of imagination that went into it.”22
To fool auditors, L&H Korea used two types of 
schemes. The first involved factoring unpaid receiva-
bles to banks to obtain cash up front. Side letters that 
were concealed from KPMG gave the banks the right to 
take the money back if they couldn’t collect from L&H 
Korea’s customers. Hence, the factoring agreements 
amounted to little more than loans.
The second, more creative scheme was set in motion 
after auditors questioned why L&H Korea wasn’t col-
lecting more of its overdue bills from customers. L&H 
Korea told many customers to transfer their contracts 
to third parties. The third parties then took out bank 
loans, for which L&H Korea provided collateral, and 
then “paid” the overdue bills to L&H Korea using the 
borrowed money. The upshot is that L&H Korea was 
paying itself. When the contracts were later cancelled, 
L&H Korea paid “penalties” to the customers and the 
third parties to compensate them “for the inconven-
ience of dealing with the auditors.”23
The probe also found that the bulk of L&H Korea’s 
sales came from contracts signed at the end of quarters, 
so managers could meet ambitious quarterly sales targets 
and receive large bonuses. For instance, 90% of the reve-
nue recorded by L&H Korea in the second quarter of 2000 
was booked in 30 deals signed in the final nine days of the 
quarter. But L&H Korea was forced to subsequently can-
cel 21 of those contracts because the customers – most of 
them tiny start-ups – didn’t have the means to pay.
The fraud appears to have begun in earnest when 
L&H bought a small Korean firm called Bumil Informa-
tion & Communication Co. in September 1999 and put 
Bumil’s management, headed by Joo Chul Seo, in 
charge of L&H Korea. L&H Korea, which had been 
reporting negligible sales until then, recorded nearly 
$160 million in license revenue between the time 
Bumil was acquired and June 30, 2000. Mr. Seo made 
$25 million from the sale of Bumil to L&H and earned 
another $25 million in bonuses for meeting sales tar-
gets while at the head of L&H Korea.24
Where were the auditors?
In the aftermath of the accounting scandal at L&H, 
angry investors turned their gaze on KPMG Interna-
tional, the giant accounting firm that audited L&H’s 
books and gave the company clean opinions in 1998 
and 1999. KPMG also gave a clean 1999 opinion regard-
ing the accounting for L&H’s South Korean operations, 
where sales had grown improbably to $62.8 million 
from just $245,000 in the previous year. Michael G. 
Lange, a partner at a Boston law firm that was leading 
one of the shareholder lawsuits seeking class-action 
status against L&H, said that the accounting irregulari-
ties at L&H “were so pervasive and included so many 
aspects of the business” that “there had to be red flags” 
that KPMG auditors missed.25
KPMG, in its defense, accused the former top man-
agement of L&H of signing off on revenue over-inflation 
tactics, of lying about key business structures within the 
company, of influencing others to give false information 
to KPMG auditors, and of orchestrating a campaign to 
minimize their involvement in the events that had led to 
the calamitous downfall of the company. In April 2001, 
a few hours before the release of an abridged version of 
PwC’s report, KPMG filed a lawsuit against L&H’s for-
mer management in a Belgian court. The complaint 
alleged that former senior L&H executives “deliber-
ately” provided “false or incomplete information” to 
KPMG and conspired to obstruct the firm’s audits.26
In its complaint, KPMG said that L&H’s former top 
management “was fully aware and actively involved in 
the irregularities and that these people have wittingly 
given false information to KPMG.”27 KPMG alleged that 
22	John Carreyrou, “Lernout Unit Book Fictitious Sales, Says Probe,” 
The Wall Street Journal (April 9, 2001), p. B2.
23	Ibid.
24	Ibid. According to the PwC report, investigators have been unable 
to track down Mr. Seo since L&H fired him in November 2000. 
Mr. Bodson said Mr. Seo was last spotted in China.
25	Mark Maremont, “KPMG, Former Auditor of L&H, May Draw 
Investor Ire,” The Wall Street Journal (January 18, 2001).
26	Robert Conlin, “KPMG: Lernout & Hauspie Top Management Lied,” 
www.CRMDaily.com (May 11, 2001).
27	 Ibid.

706
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
Mr. Hauspie was implicated in a scheme to illegally 
raise money for a fund he participated in. The scheme 
involved a complex web of Korean banks, L&H subsidi-
aries, and Joo Chul Seo, the company’s former head of 
Korean operations. KPMG also alleged that the com-
pany co-founder Jo Lernout, at the very least, partici-
pated in the campaign to conceal information from its 
auditors.
In addition, KPMG commented that the practice of 
inflating revenues was a common one at L&H. “After-
wards [referring to a period in 1999] it appeared that 
the antedating of contracts to increase the turnover of 
the relevant quarter was common practice,” said the 
KPMG report.28 “The company, on a regular basis, 
increased its turnover of a particular year or quarter by 
means of various kinds of irregularities.”29
The aftermath
In April 2001, Mr. Lernout and Mr. Hauspie were 
arrested in Belgium and placed under custody for nine 
weeks on charges of forgery and market manipulation. 
The arrests came after a new round of audits uncovered 
an additional $96 million in fictitious sales, which 
brought the tally of fake sales from early 1998 to mid-
2000 to $373 million, or 45% of reported revenue.30
L&H was declared bankrupt in October 2001 after 
the commercial court in Belgium rejected the compa-
ny’s request for bankruptcy protection. US-based Scan-
soft purchased the speech technology and kept some 
L&H personnel in employ, but the name L&H was axed.
KPMG and its Belgian affiliate settled a lawsuit for 
$115 million brought against it by shareholders. KPMG 
stated that they settled to avoid a protracted legal trial, 
and maintained that they had acted appropriately in 
their audit of L&H at all times.31 The court hearings 
started in May 2007 against Mr. Lernout, Mr. Hauspie, 
and 19 others, including former senior corporate and 
subsidiary managers. In September 2010, a Belgian 
court found the company’s co-founders, Mr. Hauspie 
and Mr. Lernout, as well as former CEO Bastiaens and 
another senior manager, guilty on various charges 
relating to financial fraud, including falsification of 
annual accounts, forgery, and market manipulation. 
Mr. Hauspie, Mr. Lernout, and the senior manager were 
all sentenced to five years in prison, of which three 
years effective and two years probationary. Mr. Basti-
aens was sentenced to two years effective imprison-
ment. Under Belgian prison terms, however, they were 
unlikely to have to clock any jail time.32
While KPMG was cleared, its partner responsible for 
the accounting supervision at L&H was fined €2,478.93. 
The court declared that the professional fault held 
against him was not intentional, but he was found 
guilty of negligence.33
These charges, however, covered the criminal liabil-
ity of those involved in the company’s fraud only. The 
question of compensation was to be tackled in pending 
civil proceedings, which were slated to start by the end 
of 2011.34   
28	Ibid.
29	Ibid.
30	John Carreyrou, “Lernout & Hauspie Figures Are Arrested,” The 
Wall Street Journal (April 30, 2001).
31	 Mark Maremont, “KPMG to Settle Suit over Audit of Lernout,” The 
Wall Street Journal (October 8, 2004).
32	 Charles Forelle, “Lernout Founders Guilty of Fraud,” The Wall Street 
Journal (September 2, 2010), p. B1; Mark Eeckhaut, “L&H-Toplui 
Wellicht Nooit Naar de Cel,” De Standaard (September 22, 2010); 
www.deminor.com (September 23, 2010).
33	 www.deminor.com (September 23, 2010).
34	Ibid.

Lernout & Hauspie Speech Products
707
Appendix 1  Appendix to the August 8, 2000 The Wall Street Journal report
A Kick from Korea
Lernout & Hauspie’s sales by region or country for the three months ended March 31, 2000 ($000). The company’s 
South Korean business soared after an acquisition in September 1999.
1999
2000
Europe (excluding Belgium)
22,435
19,748
United States
20,154
19,939
Belgium
14,739
9,178
Singapore
10,430
501
Other Far East
2,853
2,396
South Korea
97
58,932
Source: The Wall Street Journal (August 8, 2000), p. C1.
Appendix 2  10 steps to Chapter 11
A Lernout & Hauspie chronology
June 30, 2000
L&H reveals that nearly all of its overall growth in recent quarters came from South Korea and 
Singaporean business.
Aug. 8, 2000
The Wall Street Journal reports that some Korean customers claimed by Lernout & Hauspie do no 
business with the company. Others said their purchases were smaller than L&H reported.
Aug. 25, 2000
CEO Gaston Bastiaens steps down; former Dictaphone CEO John Duerden steps in. The company’s 
stock falls 9% to $31.
Sept. 20, 2000
The SEC launches a formal investigation of L&H’s accounting practices.
Sept. 22, 2000
The Wall Street Journal reveals that 25% of L&H’s 1999 revenue came from start-up companies 
that it helped create.
Sept. 25, 2000
Europe’s Easdaq launches a formal investigation into L&H.
Sept. 27, 2000
L&H issues a profit warning for the third quarter.
Nov. 9, 2000
L&H says it will revise financial statements for 1998, 1999, and the first half of 2000 to make up for 
past accounting “errors and irregularities”; co-chairmen Jo Lernout and Pol Hauspie resign their 
executive posts; trading of L&H stock is suspended.
Nov. 16, 2000
The company’s accounting firm KPMG International withdraws its audits of 1998 and 1999 results.
Nov. 29, 2000
L&H files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection along with its Dictaphone unit, after $100 million is 
discovered missing in the firm’s South Korean unit.
Source: The Wall Street Journal (November 30, 2000), p. A3.

708
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
 This case was prepared by Professors Kenneth A. Merchant, Wim A. Van der Stede, and research assistant Xiaoling (Clara) 
Chen. The case was revised with the help of Professor Martine Cools. 
 Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant and Wim A. Van der Stede. 
 Appendix 3  Accounting for auditing problems – recent large settlements paid by auditors 
 Auditor 
 Company audited 
 Year 
 Allegations 
 Settlement amount 
($ millions) 
 Ernst & Young 
 Cendant 
 1999 
 Infl ated revenue, understated expenses 
 $335 
 Ernst & Young 
 Informix 
 1999 
 Infl ated revenue 
 $34 
 Arthur Anderson 
 Waste 
Management 
 1998 
 Overstated assets and other accounting 
problems 
 $75 
 Coopers & 
Lybrand* 
 Centennial 
Technologies 
 1998 
 Bogus sales 
 $20 
 *Now part of PwC. 
  Source :  The Wall Street Journal (January 18, 2001), p. C1. 
 A strong commitment to ethics is critical to our long-
term success as a company. The message for each 
employee is clear: any success that is not achieved ethi-
cally is no success at all. At Cisco, we hold ourselves to 
the highest ethical standards, and we will not tolerate 
anything less. 
 —John Chambers, CEO, Cisco Systems, Inc. 1   
 Cisco Systems, Inc. (Cisco), a large, multinational 
networking technology company headquartered in 
San Jose, California, won multiple awards for its 
ethics program, known internally as Ethics@Cisco. 
For example, as it had each year since 2008, Cisco 
was honored in 2012 as one of the World’s Most Ethi-
cal (WME) companies by the Ethisphere Institute, 
an international think-tank dedicated to the crea-
 1  http://www.cisco.com/web/about/citizenship/ethics/index.html 
tion, advancement and sharing of best practices in 
business ethics and corporate social responsibility. 
The Ethisphere website explained that the WME 
designation “recognizes companies that truly go 
beyond making statements about doing business 
“ethically” and translate those words into action.” 
Similarly, Cisco’s program was named in both 2009 
and 2010 by  Corporate Secretary magazine as the 
“The Best Overall Governance, Compliance and Eth-
ics Program” in the large-capitalizationcompany 
category. 
 Phil Roush (Vice President – Governance, Risk and 
Controls) explained that Cisco’s ethics program 
  … not only demonstrates the Company’s eff ort to 
be a good corporate citizen, it also provides a com-
petitive advantage. It signals to potential custom-
ers how seriously we take ethical conduct, and it 
translates into how Cisco approaches all of our 
internal and external interactions. 
 CASE STUDY 
 Ethics@Cisco 

Ethics@Cisco
709
Company background
Cisco was the world leader in networking technology 
for the Internet. The company designed, manufac-
tured, and marketed a broad range of Internet Protocol 
(IP)-based networking and other related products and 
services primarily to customers in the communications 
and information technology industries located around 
the world. The company’s diverse product portfolio 
included storage, web conferencing, routing, digital 
video, wireless, switching, and voice technology. Cisco 
had a significant market share in each of its product 
categories. The company distributed and sold its prod-
ucts through a large network of channel partners and 
resellers.
Cisco was founded in 1984 by a married couple, two 
scientists from Stanford who invented the multi-proto-
col router so they could send messages to each other 
from separate office buildings. Ever since then, the 
company’s focus had been “connecting lives.” The com-
pany’s stock became publicly traded on February 16, 
1990.
Cisco’s growth was rapid. In fiscal year 2011 (ended 
July 31, 2011), the Company had annual revenues 
exceeding $43 billion (see Exhibit 1), and it employed 
approximately 65,000 people in almost 500 different 
offices in over 165 countries. Cisco spent over $5 billion –  
roughly 13% of its revenue – on R&D. Its workforce was 
highly educated: one-third of the employees were engi-
neers, and another onethird were in sales.
The Cisco culture emphasized open communication, 
innovation, and trust. Phil Roush explained,
When I joined Cisco, many executives indicated 
that this is a company that is built for speed and 
that we have a high-trust environment. John Cham-
bers [CEO] often refers to the employees as being 
part of the Cisco family. But in a family of 65,000 
co-workers you’re going to have some issues arise. 
You better have some rules, and some accountabil-
ity, that help facilitate the speed and high-trust 
environment. Proper governance processes can 
actually assist a company in moving more rapidly.
Ethics@Cisco
The Ethics@Cisco program was designed to ensure 
that all Cisco employees adhere to a very high standard 
of business and professional conduct. Cisco had only 
one ethics policy that was applied globally.
The company, however, faced some quite unique 
and difficult challenges in attaining its compliance and 
ethics goals. Cisco was a large company with a rela-
tively young workforce with many different cultural 
norms and languages. Cisco continued to grow rapidly, 
and much of the company’s growth came from acquisi-
tions. Since 2000, Cisco had acquired 105 companies, 
all of which had to be assimilated into Cisco’s culture 
and processes. As a hi-tech firm operating in a dynamic 
environment, the company had a “freewheeling spirit” 
that sometimes needs to be reined in. Perhaps not sur-
prising for a networking company, 85% of Cisco’s work-
force worked “virtually,” regularly working from home 
or on the road. And much of the Cisco business was sold 
through channel partners in over 180 countries who 
were regularly presented with a wide variety of gift 
giving and receiving conundrums on a regular basis. 
The partners also presented a challenge in that their 
actions were more difficult to monitor than were those 
of employees.
The three core elements of the Ethics@Cisco pro-
gram were (1) a Code of Business Conduct (COBC); 
(2) an extensive employee awareness, training and 
certification program; and (3) internal investigations. 
These are described below.
Cisco’s ethics program was over 15 years old. Previ-
ously the program was administered by the Human 
Resources (HR) department. In 2005, a dedicated, 
three-person Ethics Office assumed responsibility for 
this function. In 2012, this office was composed of sen-
ior manager Jeremy Wilson, program manager Joel 
Mark, and marketing communications manager Ruth 
Savolaine. The Ethics Office’s mandate was to drive 
awareness of Cisco’s ethics policies.
In its early years, the Ethics Office reported to 
Human Resources. In 2008, it became part of Govern-
ance, Risk and Controls, which reported to the Finance 
department. In August 2012, the Ethics Office was 
moved to become part of a new centralized Compliance 
department reporting to Cisco’s General Counsel. 
According to Cisco’s benchmarking studies, this latest 
reporting structure was consistent with best practices 
across publicly held companies. The General Counsel 
had the oversight on driving the ethics programs and 
policies.
The Code of Business Conduct
The cornerstone of the Ethics@Cisco program was a 
Code of Business Conduct (COBC).2 The COBC was 

710
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
designed to help every Cisco employee understand how 
to make ethical decisions that were consistent with the 
company’s values as well as with applicable laws and 
regulations. The core company values underlying the 
COBC were integrity, respect, open communication, 
social responsibility, diversity, and empowerment.
Among the specific topics covered in the COBC were 
sharing concerns, respecting others, using resources 
responsibly, avoiding conflicts of interest, understand-
ing gift and entertainment policies, protecting Cisco 
assets, following the law, and adhering to internal 
financial and accounting policies. The COBC included 
some specific policies, such as the requirement of pre-
approvals for the giving and receiving of gifts valued at 
US$100 or more, but it also included many more gen-
eral decision-making principles. The wording in the 
COBC was mostly general, but it was supported by 
detailed policies in some areas of activity. The COBC 
was published in English and 12 other languages.
To make the COBC easily understandable, with low 
use of jargon, the key principles necessary to demon-
strate the company’s commitment to integrity were 
summarized in the COBC in ten “I statements” (see 
Exhibit 2).
The COBC also included an ethics decision tree that 
was designed to help employees think through difficult 
ethical issues (see Exhibit 3). The decision tree helped 
employees find laws and policies that might apply in 
the situation they are facing and to ask important ques-
tions and/or seek guidance from managers, the Ethics 
Office, or the legal department before they take action.
Financial employees had an additional Code of Con-
duct that included more specific financial reporting 
guidelines and a requirement to be a role model of ethi-
cal behavior (see Exhibit 4).
Prior to 2007, the COBC was a static document writ-
ten in legal terms that could be challenging for a non-
lawyer to understand and apply to real life situations. 
Between 2009 and 2011, the ethics team completely 
overhauled the document with the goal of bringing the 
COBC “to life.” They shortened it, made it more reada-
ble, and added more color and graphics. They replaced 
legal jargon with text written at a more elementary 
reading level. They also included practical “what if” 
examples to make the COBC more relevant to the issues 
employees faced every day (see Exhibit 5).
In 2012, the Ethics Office team brought the COBC 
onto an online portal and made it into an interactive 
eBook, with pages that appeared to turn, intuitive pop-
ups, embedded videos, and purposeful animation. 
Employees were able to ask questions and engage in a 
two-way dialogue with experts on the ethics team. 
They could also disclose gifts and potential conflicts of 
interest using an online reporting tool. The team hoped 
that with these changes employees would view the 
COBC as a practical reference tool that could be used 
whenever they faced an ethical issue.
Ethics awareness, training, 
and certifications
Cisco used many methods to help ensure that all 
employees (and partners and agents) were aware of, 
and understood, the COBC. These included electronic 
display boards, websites, a management portal, a dis-
cussion forum, and various forms of training.
Most companies’ ethics training is live, but most all 
of Cisco’s training was done online, due to the compa-
ny’s highly virtual workforce. Annually, employees 
were required to go through interactive training that 
took about 20 minutes. They answered ethics questions 
using the COBC as a reference and received instant 
feedback if they answered assessment questions incor-
rectly. The training also included two brief videos that 
used humor to communicate two key messages: (1) the 
COBC is robust and easy to use, and (2) there are sev-
eral ways to get ethics assistance at Cisco. These videos 
were shown with subtitles for employees whose native 
language was not English.
In 2012, the videos received positive employee feed-
back, with 87% of employees reporting that the videos 
enhanced or somewhat enhanced their understanding 
of the COBC and the resources available to them. One 
of the training videos, an ethical-mindset video aimed 
at new managers, won a Gold Medal in 2011 from the 
New York Festivals International TV & Film Awards® in 
the category Internal Use Training Videos.
On request, the Ethics Office developed targeted, 
job-specific training for individual business units. For 
example, a five-minute anti-bribery video was pro-
duced specifically for employees who interacted with 
government officials. Other targeted training videos 
focused on conflicts of interest, ethics for sales associ-
ates, new hires, new managers, antitrust, and anticor-
ruption. These topic- and role-specific videos were very 
targeted and short, because it was known that most 
2	 The complete document is shown at http://files.shareholder.com/
downloads/CSCO/2047645290x0x563236/f8c558b8-11dd-4f32-
89cd-7b9da77895d1/Cisco_Code_of_Business_Conduct_FY12.pdf

Ethics@Cisco
711
people’s attention spans are short, and resistance to 
training increases sharply after about 10 minutes. The 
videos explained where additional information could 
be found. The Ethics Office also ran special awareness 
campaigns, such as an end-of year campaign reiterat-
ing the company’s gift policies.
Annually, all Cisco employees were required to certify 
that they had reviewed, understood, and agreed to abide 
by the COBC. Certification was a condition of employ-
ment, and failure to sign the certification document pro-
vided grounds for corrective action, up to and including 
termination of employment where permissible by law.
Before 2009, the COBC certification was not manda-
tory. In 2009, however, the ethics team obtained a 
mandate from the Audit Committee to have all employ-
ees sign the certification annually going forward. Per-
sonnel in the Ethics Office and department managers 
used Ethics Connect, a proprietary tool that provided 
instruction, created records of employees who had 
signed the COBC and agreed to abide by it, and sent tar-
geted email messages to those who had not yet fulfilled 
their certification obligation. After a five-week cam-
paign ending in early June, COBC certifications were 
received from 100% of Cisco employees.
Initially there was some resistance to the certifica-
tion requirement, not because the content of the COBC 
was objectionable, but because the idea of something 
being mandatory was a cultural shift. This was one of 
Cisco’s first global mandates. Jeremy Wilson (Ethics 
Office manager) explained that, “The last one percent 
(600–700 people) created a bit of a challenge as they 
were not familiar with the process.”
Tone from the top also played a large part in driving 
ethical behavior. Prat Bhatt (Corporate Controller) 
reflected,
Training has a positive impact, but the effects are 
short-lived. Some people think that training is a 
check-the-box exercise that everyone has to do. Con-
trols and processes can be circumvented. If you don’t 
have the tone and culture to support ethics, with pub-
lic hangings for wrong-doing and recognition for 
doing the right things, the rest is superficial. What I’ve 
found unique about Cisco is the culture and the tone, 
which is set from all the way at the top with the CEO.
Internal investigations
A 24-person Internal Investigation group also reported 
to the Compliance department. Sixteen members of the 
group were investigators responsible for investigating 
employee fraud. These investigators had backgrounds 
in accounting, auditing, and law enforcement. The 
cases they investigated ranged from expense fraud to 
deal manipulation, diversion, and corruption.
Approximately 100 investigation cases were open in 
a typical quarter, but on average only about 10% of 
those cases were actionable. Many cases were initiated 
in the employee online incident reporting tool. Some 
reports were malicious, such as occurred when vendors 
“threw mud at each other.” Sometimes reports were 
valid, but they were not supported with strong enough 
evidence to warrant disciplinary action. In those 
instances, the internal investigations personnel 
attempted to get more details from the whistle-blower. 
Even if they were not able to prove wrongdoing, they 
could use the incident to evaluate and perhaps improve 
internal controls. Many cases were identified as a result 
of Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) control testing. For example, 
one expense audit uncovered a $200,000 expense 
fraud scheme that was successfully investigated. An 
employee had found a way to log in as her boss to 
approve her own expense reimbursements.
When Internal Investigations were able to substanti-
ate that there had been an infraction of the COBC or 
local laws, employees were disciplined. If theft was 
involved, Internal Investigations made an attempt to 
obtain voluntary restitution from the employee rather 
than involving outside law enforcement. Depending on 
the infraction, employees could be terminated or 
receive verbal and written warnings. In order to avoid 
unfair termination lawsuits in the United States, Cisco 
employees were only terminated if they violated a spe-
cific, published policy. Written warnings provided use-
ful documentation should a second infraction be 
committed. In other countries it could be even more dif-
ficult to legally terminate employees because of strong 
labor protection laws. Typically, very few employees 
were terminated for policy violations or other improper 
actions. All incidences of fraud were reported to the 
Audit Committee, even if the infraction was committed 
by someone below the Vice President level.
Sarbanes-Oxley compliance
Cisco relied on strong SOX compliance teams to ensure 
ethical behavior in some important areas of activity, 
including financial reporting, antitrust, bribery, and 
insider trading. Kristin White headed a team of 18 pro-
fessionals responsible for financial and business pro-
cess controls, reporting to Prat Bhatt (Corporate 

712
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
Controller). The Information Technology (IT) organi-
zation owned its own SOX controls and had its own 
18-member team, reporting to the Chief Information 
Officer (CIO) of IT/Risk Management. These teams 
were responsible for understanding the US SOX 
requirements and SOX-like requirements in other 
countries, and they strove to maintain consistent con-
trols internationally. These teams partnered heavily, 
and monitored the effectiveness of almost 1,000 key 
controls. In addition to performing standard SOX 
duties, the SOX compliance teams made sure that con-
trols were in place in companies that Cisco acquired, in 
new project venture areas, and in international expan-
sion initiatives.
According to Kristin, working on SOX was reward-
ing at Cisco because of the company’s strong ethics. 
“Cisco has embraced SOX compliance,” she explained. 
“It’s part of the DNA of the company, and it is highly vis-
ible.” According to Kristin, John Chambers, the CEO of 
Cisco, took controls very seriously. He was committed 
to spending quality time reviewing the information 
and processes to ensure accuracy and adequacy of their 
public reporting, and he expected his senior managers 
to highlight issues and let him know if they had any 
concerns.
Operation of the System
The Ethics@Cisco system encouraged employees who 
were unsure as to how to act in any circumstance to 
escalate questions to higher levels of management 
without fear of repercussion. Difficult ethical questions 
were often escalated all the way to the General Coun-
sel. Van Dang (Senior Vice President, Regulatory and 
Compliance), explained:
There is an escalation process. People opinion 
shop. If they don’t get the answer they like and they 
don’t agree, they go up the chain and appeal to 
higher levels of management because lower level 
managers are less likely to take risks. In some com-
panies if you escalate you lose your job, but not at 
Cisco. It’s a very open company. Employees can go 
directly to a higher-level manager.
If employees did not want to get talk with someone 
in the management hierarchy to get advice on an ethi-
cal issue and/or to report a potential problem, they had 
several other options. They could correspond with per-
sonnel in the Ethics Office or use an email alias that 
sent a message directly to the Audit Committee of the 
Board of Directors, an anonymous online incident 
reporting tool, or a multilingual telephone hotline. 
More than 84% of reports and questions came through 
email or online sources, with more than 60% being 
handled by the Ethics Office directly.
The number of ethics calls made at Cisco had been 
fairly stable at approximately 100–150 calls per quarter. 
The total number of calls was aligned with those at other 
hi-tech companies, at less than 1% of the workforce size. 
Of the calls made, more raised questions (60%) than 
allegations (40%). The top five call categories were:
1.	 Policy Issues (policy interpretation/application)
2.	 Employee Relations (harassment, intimidation, dis-
crimination)
3.	 Conflicts of Interest – general
4.	 Conflicts of Interest – gifts
5.	 Conflicts of Interest – personal relationships
Financial reporting breaches were alleged less than 
once per year.
The ethical issues raised tended to spike around 
times of training, annual certification, and special 
events. For example, Cisco was the technology sponsor 
of the 2012 London Olympics, so Cisco employees 
fielded many requests for tickets or special event 
access, and questions arose. After the ethics team intro-
duced a video showing an employee reporting a second 
job, there was a 700% increase in disclosures of outside 
jobs. Cisco had also developed an online disclosure tool 
to automate the exception-approval process.
The COBC made it very clear that retaliation against 
whistle-blowers would not be tolerated. The culture at 
Cisco also supported open discussion, as evidenced by 
the fact that 82% of people who reported ethics violations 
or asked ethics questions chose to identify themselves.
Cisco was trying to automate some portions of the 
control processes. For example, they were considering 
flagging some forms of reimbursements for an auto-
matic review.
An example: gift acceptances
Most of the guidelines in the COBC were derived from 
Cisco’s values. It was not possible to provide specific 
rules for every type of situation that might be encoun-
tered. The guidelines needed to be interpreted and 
applied to the specific situations faced. Acceptable 
behaviors in areas presenting frequent or serious risks 
were spelled out in more detail.

Ethics@Cisco
713
For example, employees’ accepting gifts from 
suppliers was a common risk area. It was known that 
in the past some employees had not reported gifts 
they had received, and some had even sold them on 
eBay.
The gift-acceptance guidelines explained in the 
COBC were:
● Have no obligation or expectations (stated or 
implied)
● Be made openly
● Have reasonable value, defined as less than US$100 
per source per year
● Conform to the giver/reviewer’s rules
● Be appropriate, legal and accurately documented.
Any exception had to be approved in writing by the Eth-
ics Office. Some gifts could require approvals from a 
Vice President in the relevant organization or a Human 
Resources (HR) manager.
With inquiries about gift acceptances, there were 
three plausible answers: (1) acceptable, (2) unaccepta-
ble (the gift must be returned), or (3) the gift may be 
accepted, but the employee must turn it over to Cisco for 
public display or donation. Those approving the requests 
tried to adhere to the COBC guidelines while also trying 
to allow for reasonable special circumstances.
The multiple channels for grants of exceptions made 
ethics feedback easily accessible, but could occasion-
ally cause confusion. In one instance, a supplier gave a 
watch to 200 people in the same department. Only six 
of those 200 employees asked permission to accept the 
gift, but because some asked the Ethics Office, some 
asked HR, and some asked the Vice President in their 
own organization, they received three different 
answers. When these discrepancies were discovered, 
follow-up meetings were held to provide a better 
understanding of the process and to implement a uni-
form approach.
Evidence of effectiveness
Annually, Cisco conducted an internal survey of all 
65,000+ employees to get feedback on key aspects of 
the Company’s culture. Results from the 2012 survey 
reflected well on the ethics program (see Exhibit 6). 
Among other things, on this survey 91% of the employ-
ees reported that they were confident that Cisco took 
ethical business concerns seriously.
Overall, there was a strong sense of pride in Cisco’s 
ethics program. Phil Roush observed:
It starts with the well-defined “tone at the top” on 
the expectations of ethical conduct of Cisco’s 
employee base. From those expectations, it cas-
cades out to all of the Company on our approach to 
business and how we deal with the inevitable ques-
tions and unique situations that arise when you do 
business in over 100 countries.
We still have opportunities to raise awareness 
across a very diverse and geographically dispersed 
population. Plus, there are always new questions 
and concerns that do come up, for example how to 
consistently address the various forms of social 
media that are prevalent today. We want our 
employees to embrace the new technology that is 
available, but do it in a way that does not expose 
the Company to negative consequences.
If we do meet with the SEC [U.S. Securities and 
Exchange Commission] or the DOJ [U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice], and they inquire about Cisco’s 
Ethics program – we feel that there are many proof 
points of how seriously we take the expectations 
on ethical behavior. No company will likely be per-
fect, but I am confident Cisco has a strong process.

714
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
Exhibit 1  Cisco Systems, Inc., income statements (2010–2012)
(In millions, except per-share amounts)
FY 2012 Year Ended 
July 28, 2012
FY2011 Year Ended 
July 30, 2011
FY2010 Year Ended 
July 31, 2010
NET SALES:
Product
$	
36,326
$	
34,526
$	
32,420
Service
9,735
8,692
7,620
Total net sales
46,061
43,218
40,040
COST OF SALES:
Product (a), (b) & (d)
14,505
13,647
11,620
Service (a)
3,347
3,035
2,777
Total cost of sales (a), (b) & (d)
17,852
16,682
14,397
GROSS MARGIN (a), (b) & (d)
28,209
26,536
25,643
OPERATING EXPENSES:
Research and development (a) & (c)
5,488
5,823
5,273
Sales and marketing (a) & (c)
9,647
9,812
8,782
General and administrative (a) & (c)
2,322
1,908
1,933
Amortization of purchased intagible assets (b)
383
520
491
Restructuring and other charges (d)
304
799
Total operating expenses (a)-(d)
18,144
18,862
16,479
OPERATING INCOME (a) - (d)
10,065
7,674
9,164
Interest income
650
641
635
Interest expense
(596)
(628)
(623)
Other income (loss), net
40
138
239
Interest and other income, net
94
151
251
INCOME BEFORE PROVISION 
FOR INCOME TAXES (a) - (d)
10,159
7,825
9,415
Provision for income taxes (e)
2,118
1,335
1,648
NET INCOME (a) - (e)
$	
8,041
$	
6,490
$	
7,767
Net income per share:
Basic (a) - (e)
$	
1.50
$	
1.17
$	
1.36
Diluted (a) - (e)
$	
1.49
$	
1.17
$	
1.33
Shares used in pre-share calculation:
Basic
5,370
5,529
5,732
Diluted
5,404
5,563
5,848
Cash dividends declared per common share
$	
0.28
$	
0.12
Exhibit 2  Ten “I” statements in the Code of Business Conduct
Cisco “DNA”
• I am ethical
• I know the Code
Values/Integrity
• I share my concerns
• I respect others
Four Core Ethics Areas
• I use resources responsibly
• I avoid conflicts of interest
• I understand policies related to gifts and entertainment
• I protect what is ours
Foundational
• I follow the law
• I am accurate and ethical with our finances

Ethics@Cisco
715
Exhibit 3  Ethics decision tree
Yes
The action may
have serious 
consequences
do not do it
Yes
Yes
Yes
Is it legal?
?
Does this
comply with
Cisco policy?
?
Does this
reﬂect Cisco 
values and 
culture?
?
No
The action may
have serious 
consequences
do not do it
No
The action may
have serious 
consequences
do not do it
No
The action may
have serious 
consequences
do not do it
Could this
adversely
aﬀect com-
pany stake-
holders?
?
Not sure?
Contact the
Legal Department
for guidance
Not sure?
Check Cisco Policy
Central for more 
information. Talk to your 
manager, your Human
Resources representative,
or the Legal Department 
for guidance.
Not sure?
Check the Ethics 
Oﬃce website 
or contact 
your manager 
or Ethics Oﬃce
for guidance.
Not sure?
Talk to your manager the
Legal Department or
the Ethics Oﬃce for
guidance.
No
Would I feel
concerned if
this appeared
in a news
headline?
Yes
The action may
have serious 
consequences
do not do it
?
Not sure?
Talk to your
manager the
Legal Depatment,
or the Ethics Oﬃce 
for guidance.
No
Could this
adversely
aﬀect Cisco if
all employees 
did it ?
No
The decision
to move forward 
appears appropriate.
Yes
The action may
have serious 
consequences
do not do it
?
Not sure?
Talk to your
manager the
Legal Depatment,
or the Ethics Oﬃce
for guidance.
Source: Cisco Code of Business Conduct

716
Chapter 15 • Management Control-Related Ethical Issues
Exhibit 4  Special ethical obligations for employees with financial reporting responsibilities (revised Feb 2012)
All employees have an obligation to abide by the Cisco Code of Business Conduct (COBC), which includes adhering to 
all internal financial and accounting policies. There are also special ethical obligations that apply to employees with 
financial reporting responsibilities.
Our Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and Finance Department employees must adhere to 
the following principles and also foster a culture throughout the company that helps to ensure the fair and timely report-
ing of Cisco’s financial results and condition. Because of their special role, the CEO, CFO and all members of the Cisco 
Finance Department are bound by the following Financial Officer Code of Ethics, and each agrees that he or she will, in 
his or her capacity as an employee of Cisco:
Integrity and Compliance
1.	 Act with honesty and integrity, avoiding actual or apparent conflicts of interest in personal and professional relation-
ships
2.	 Provide information that is accurate, complete, objective, relevant, timely, and understandable to help ensure full, fair, 
accurate, timely, and understandable disclosure in reports and documents that Cisco files with, or submits to, gov-
ernmental agencies and in other public communications
3.	 Comply with the rules and regulations of federal, state, provincial, and local governments, and of other appropriate 
private and public regulatory agencies
4.	 Act in good faith, responsibly, and with due care, competence, and diligence, without misrepresenting material facts 
or allowing his or her independent judgment to be subordinated
Protecting Information and Assets
5.	 Respect the confidentiality of information acquired in the course of doing his or her work, except when authorized or 
otherwise legally obligated to disclose information; confidential information acquired in the course of his or her work 
will not be used for personal advantage
6.	 Achieve responsible use of and control over all assets and resources employed by or entrusted to Cisco
Personal Accountability and Serving as a Role Model
7.	 Share knowledge and maintain skills important and relevant to stakeholders’ needs
8.	 Proactively promote and be an example of ethical behavior as a responsible partner among peers, in the work envi-
ronment and the community
9.	 Promptly report to the Vice President of Governance, Risk, and Controls (GRC) and/or the Chairman of the Audit 
Committee any conduct that he or she believes to be a violation of law or business ethics or of any provision of the 
COBC, including transactions or relationships that reasonably could be expected to give rise to such a conflict. (Note: 
It is against Cisco policy to retaliate against an employee for good-faith reporting of any potential or actual Code 
violations.)
Violations
Violations of the Financial Officer Code of Ethics are serious. A violation, including a failure to report potential violations 
by others, will be viewed as a severe disciplinary matter and may result in personnel action, including termination of 
employment.
Stakeholder and Public Reporting
If anyone believes that a violation of the Financial Officer Code of Ethics has occurred, please contact Cisco Legal, the 
Ethics Office, or the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
The Financial Officer Code of Ethics is complementary to the Cisco Code of Business Conduct and does not replace 
responsibilities all employees have under the Cisco Code of Business Conduct and Cisco policies.

Ethics@Cisco
717
What If…
What if my manager is exerting pressure to “make the numbers work?”
Your responsibility is to be honest and accurate. If you feel pressured to do otherwise, contact the Ethics Office, Legal or 
Human Resources. You may also contact the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. If you feel uncomfortable going 
through internal channels, you can call the multilingual Cisco Ethics Line anytime, night or day, worldwide.
What if I am asked to book a deal without a purchase order?
All deals must be accompanied by a purchase order from a customer. These sales records ensure that our finances are 
accurate and protect the company from fraud. Refer to the Global Bookings Policy for the required elements of a pur-
chase order.
What if I am asked to create a deal to sell a product or service to a reseller who I know is not authorized to receive it, 
or for purposes other than for which a specific discount was given for competitive reasons?
This could result in product diversion to the “grey market” causing damage to Cisco’s legitimate resellers and possible 
service abuse. If you believe that product/service is being sold outside the approved deal, contact Brand Protection and 
the Ethics Office.
What if I am asked to structure a deal where the customer can choose only high discounted products?
Such a situation is called “cherry picking” and is not allowed. This can also result in discount leakage and potential prod-
uct diversion. Refer to your Finance controller or the Ethics Office if you believe you are being asked to structure a deal 
in this way.
Exhibit 5  Examples provided in the COBC
Source: Cisco Code of Business Conduct
Exhibit 6  Results of pulse survey
Year
# of Employee 
Respondents
Q: I can voice my 
opinion without 
fear of retaliation
Q: I know where to 
go to report ethics 
concern or question
Q: I have confidence 
Cisco takes ethical 
business concerns 
seriously
Q: My mgt team sets a 
good example of values, 
culture and COBC
2012
53,306
78%
87%
91%
84%
2011
55,158
75%
83%
90%
81%
2010
50,490
72%
83%
91%
81%
2009
47,245
65%
79%
92%
84%
This case was prepared by Research Assistant Michelle Spaulding and Professors Kenneth A. Merchant, Leslie Porter, and Lori 
Smith.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant, Leslie Porter and Lori Smith.

This page intentionally left blank

 
719
 SECTION VI 
 Management Control when 
Financial Results Are Not the 
Primary Consideration 

This page intentionally left blank

 
721
 CHAPTER 16 
 Management Control in Not-for-profi t 
Organizations 
 In this fi nal section and chapter, we turn our attention to management control systems (MCSs) 
in  organizations where fi nancial results are not the primary consideration or objective . As we dis-
cussed earlier, particularly in  Chapter  10 , the primary objective of  for-profi t organizations is to 
maximize shareholder (or owner) value –  fi rm value , for short – subject to some constraints, 
such as compliance with laws and adequate concern for employees, customers, and other stake-
holders. In such  for-profi t organizations – which are typically referred to as  fi rms ,  companies , or 
 businesses in a conversational sense, or  corporations  in a legal sense – profi t is rarely the only, 
but it is still the dominant or primary, objective. 
 Many corporations actively engage with a broad range of stakeholders; set targets related to 
environmental and social goals such as carbon reduction or investments in education or com-
munity development; 1 and report on these activities under the rubric of  sustainability or  corpo-
rate social responsibility (CSR), 2 or in the form of  triple bottom lines  (related to their economic, 
natural, and social capitals), 3 either as stand-alone reports or as part of their annual reports. An 
often-cited corporation in this regard is Unilever. 4 Several studies have examined whether CSR 
or similarly termed  non-profi t  initiatives by corporations are substantive or symbolic,  5 lead to 
real benefi cial environmental or social impacts,  6   and/or add value for the fi rm.  7   Studies to date 
have provided early and mixed evidence. But regardless of the strength or balance of evidence, 
corporations have responsibilities to a broader set of stakeholders, including employees, cus-
tomers, suppliers, and society, and fulfi lling these stakeholder responsibilities is both impor-
tant and requires tradeoff s. It also requires eff ective MCSs that properly  align every employee’s 
actions and behaviors with the intended balance of the fi rm’s objectives with proper accounta-
bility, as we have discussed throughout this text. The following quote pertinently summarizes 
the changed focus in recent years in this regard: 
 While in the past it was common for CSR to reside in the purviews of marketing or com-
munications, this is beginning to shift amid criticism that companies might be using their 
initiatives as a form of ‘greenwashing’, i.e., to build reputations not backed by substance. 
Instead companies are moving toward business units having ownership [over sustainability] 
at the highest levels, with sustainability teams providing guidance and support. [. . .] Com-
panies at the forefront in this area integrate ESG [environmental, social, governance] con-
siderations into overall strategic planning and identify a few areas that are the most 
relevant to the long-term health of the business. [. . .] They voluntarily issue sustainability 
reports using the Global Reporting initiative framework. 8 
 However, not every corporation is willing or intends to subjugate every social or environ-
mental objective to the primacy of economic value maximization. That is, some organizations 

Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
722
“do good” for reasons stronger than what is justified by “doing well” or for reasons other than 
that “it pays” or “is profitable” to do good. Here are two examples:
Messrs. Gilbert and Houlahan, friends as undergraduates at Stanford University, helped 
start the basketball shoe and apparel company AND1. As the company grew, co-founder 
Gilbert and president Houlahan emphasized financial success along with corporate social 
responsibility: the firm paid employees respectable wages, donated 5% of profits to char-
ity, and made sure factories in China met their standards. The company was generating 
close to $250 million in annual revenue when it was sold to American Sporting Goods in 
2005. Gilbert and Houlahan were personally enriched – but disempowered: they watched 
their effort to create an innovative business model vanish under the new owners. [. . .] 
Gilbert and Houlahan were not alone. Ben & Jerry’s, known for its ice cream and its social 
responsibility, was sold to Unilever in 2000. Although some board members had misgiv-
ings, they voted for the sale because Vermont, like most states, required the board to act 
in the interest of the shareholders, which meant accepting Unilever’s exceptionally lucra-
tive offer.9
To protect their “triple bottom line” of combined financial, social, and environmental perfor-
mance even as companies switch owners and/or struggle with shareholder pressure for returns 
or dividends, some firms have changed their standard incorporation as a C corporation to a 
“benefit” incorporation or B corporation. As opposed to standard corporations, the crucial fea-
ture of B corporations is that they allow their boards and managers to sacrifice shareholder 
value for the greater good. However, this requires that they specify their social and environ-
mental goals in their corporation’s bylaws; that they have their sustainability and corporate 
social responsibility strategies certified as credible and transparent by a third party (such as 
B Lab);10 and that they publish an annual report that measures how well these goals are being 
met. When they meet these criteria, B corporations are allowed to shift their firm’s emphasis 
from shareholder value to stakeholder value.11 When this is the case, and for such an alternative 
pursuit of objectives to be effective, these firms’ MCSs will have to be aligned accordingly to cre-
ate the desired goal congruence.
But B corporations, while still corporations, may exhibit certain characteristics that place dif-
ferent demands on the standard MCSs as discussed throughout this text. For example, they may 
attract, or wish to attract, employees that are motivated to work for organizations that espe-
cially care about social and environmental causes and impacts. They are also likely to have 
unique and strong organizational cultures (see Chapter 3). These and other characteristics are 
likely to have implications for the types of incentives, say, that these firms put in place (as 
discussed in Chapter 9).
Corporations, B corporations, and not-for-profits
In C corporations, investor-owned corporations, or corporations for short, the owners (sharehold-
ers) of the firm exercise control by voting for its directors who provide control over management 
(as discussed in Chapter 13). The residual earnings of the firm belong to the owners and manage-
ment is responsible primarily to the shareholders for the profitability of the firm. In other words, 
the primary goal of investor-owned corporations is shareholder value maximization. In contrast, 
and as explained in the last section, benefit (B) corporations allow boards and managers to sacri-
fice shareholder value for the greater good under specified conditions (as listed earlier, but which 
vary by jurisdiction of incorporation). A third broad type of corporation is often referred to as 
not-for-profits (sometimes also called tax-exempt corporations). Not-for-profits differ principally 

Key differences between for-profit and not-for-profit organizations
723
from investor-owned corporations because they have no shareholders, and no single individual 
or body of individuals has ownership rights to the firm’s residual earnings or exercises control of 
the firm. Instead, control is exercised by what is typically called a board of trustees. The primary 
goal of most not-for-profit organizations generally takes the form of a mission, such as to offer 
education, pursue cancer research, or provide healthcare.
In prior chapters, we focused on MCSs in for-profit organizations (corporations of the first 
type, but also by reasonable extension to benefit corporations of the second type, which 
adopt a more explicit focus or priority on supplemental social and environmental objec-
tives). Not-for-profit organizations, however, deserve some specific focus because they are in 
some ways quite different from the other types of corporations. They are also important. 
Not-for-profit organizations fill a number of important societal roles. All (or virtually all) 
government organizations, museums, labor unions, and political and fraternal organiza-
tions are not-for-profit organizations. Many, if not most, schools and hospitals are, too. Col-
lectively, not-for-profit organizations comprise a considerable portion of the economy the 
world over.
That said, even not-for-profit organizations have many things in common with their for-profit 
brethren. Most of them provide services (or, less commonly, products) and have to compete 
with other organizations to be the chosen provider. They have professional managers who 
develop objectives, strategies, and budgets. Many not-for-profit organizations are large, and so 
their managers delegate authority and hold their employees accountable in specific perfor-
mance areas. But not-for-profit organizations’ MCS alternatives and challenges are often quite 
different from those faced by “pure-play” or “benefit-type” for-profit organizations. This chap-
ter focuses on these differences. Despite the finer-grained distinctions among corporations that 
we have elaborated above, we do this under the broad rubric of differences between “for profit” 
and “not-for-profit” organizations in the next section. But the lines can be blurry, as the follow-
ing quote suggests:
Companies recognize that aligning with non-profit organizations makes good business 
sense, particularly those non-profits with goals of economic prosperity, social well-being 
and environmental protection.12
Key differences between for-profit and not-for-profit organizations
Ironically perhaps, but strictly speaking, the defining difference between for-profit and not-
for-profit organizations does not lie in how much profit they can generate, but instead in how 
it is distributed. A not-for-profit organization’s profit cannot be paid out to the owners or any-
one else associated with the organization; instead, it must be dedicated to the purpose or 
mission of the organization. Hence, the major defining characteristic of a not-for-profit organ-
ization is the organization’s purpose; its mission or goal. As such, a not-for-profit organization 
typically has as its primary purpose to provide some kind of public service. The not-for-profit 
category, however, includes a large and diverse set of organizations, so the types of services 
provided vary widely. They can be charitable, religious, scientific, educational, or even politi-
cal. Included in the not-for-profit category are governmental organizations and their various 
institutions, authorities, agencies, and programs. Also included are a large number of private 
organizations operated for public benefit, such as museums, hospitals, universities, and 
schools. Some not-for-profit organizations, such as religious organizations and charitable 
foundations, serve various private benefit purposes. And some, such as cooperatives, and 
labor, fraternal, trade, and homeowners’ associations, are operated for the mutual benefit of 
their members.

Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
724
Unlike for-profit organizations, not-for-profit organizations do not have any outside equity 
interest. However, like all corporations, they do have to generate revenues to fund their opera-
tions. Many not-for-profit organizations earn revenues by selling services or products, such as 
by charging admissions to see a museum exhibit or a theatrical presentation. Others are given 
money by a third party in exchange for providing their service. For example, a government 
entity might provide a school a fee or subsidy for every child enrolled in the school. However, 
money (that is, cash flows and surpluses of revenues over expenses) is only a constraint; it is 
not normally the overriding goal of a not-for-profit organization. That said, some entities 
within not-for-profit organizations do have goals to earn profits. For example, governments 
run lotteries, hospitals run gift shops, and universities sell books, meals, and athletic tickets. 
In earning their profits, they compete with for-profit organizations. But whatever profits they 
earn are meant to be used to further the organizations’ overriding purpose and not to be paid 
out to the owners or anyone else associated with the organization. Not-for-profit organizations 
do not pay dividends. All the resources they acquire must be used to further the organizations’ 
primary purpose.
In sum, all not-for-profit organizations have in common the above purpose and profit distri-
bution (ownership) characteristics. However, although not-for-profit organizations are some-
times perceived as relatively small organizations working for altruistic purposes, such as food 
banks and community charities staffed by a small number of dedicated managers and unpaid 
volunteers, being not-for-profit does not necessarily mean being small or being charitable. 
Many not-for-profit organizations are major employers, and a large part of the revenues they 
generate is needed to cover their expenses or overheads. In other words, besides the not-for-
profit purpose and the lack of shareholders, it is often difficult to tell some of these not-for-
profit organizations from their for-profit counterparts. Nevertheless, not-for-profit 
organizations tend to have some characteristics with MCS implications that apply to them far 
more than they apply to for-profit organizations. The following sections describe these charac-
teristics and their MCS implications.
Goal ambiguity and conflict
As discussed at the outset in Chapter 1, MCSs should be designed to enhance the probability 
that the organization’s goals will be achieved, and assessments about MCS effectiveness 
should be predicated upon judgments of the likelihood (or degree of) goal achievement, 
regardless of whether these goals are primarily financial or a balance of financial, social, and 
environmental goals. Although put somewhat simplistically, goal clarity exists, or is more 
likely to be commonly shared or understood, in for-profit organizations by virtue of their 
value-maximizing mantra.13 Furthermore, although again somewhat simplified, managers of 
publicly traded firms particularly can obtain timely feedback on their goal achievement by 
monitoring their firm’s stock performance and comparing it to that of their competitors and 
the overall market.
This level of goal clarity, however, does usually not exist in not-for-profit organizations. 
Many constituents typically have an interest in the organization, its goals, and its perfor-
mance. But these constituents often do not agree; their values and interests conflict. The 
board of trustees of a museum may perceive their primary goal as to inspire a diverse public 
through the collection and exhibition of works of art of the highest quality. Other stakehold-
ers, such as the local community and government officials, might be more interested in hav-
ing the museum present exhibitions aimed at children. Still others, such as religious leaders, 
might be most concerned about whether or not the art is, in their view, socially and morally 

Difficulty in measuring and rewarding performance
725
acceptable. Resolving these conflicts and differences in perceptions requires unique deci-
sion-making mechanisms.
Conflict is also inevitable in government organizations. These organizations are often 
directed from a number of sources, including the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of 
government and, possibly, from various levels of government, some national and some local. 
Law enforcement agencies, for example, have to respond to laws passed and rulings made by all 
levels of legislatures. Their funding, and their consequent accountability, may also be to multi-
ple authorities. Managers of these organizations face external pressure because the press and 
public in democratic societies have access to considerable information. Some key officials may 
face reelection pressures and, thus, feel a need to please campaign donors and the public at 
large. This diffusion of direction and potential conflict greatly complicates management gener-
ally, and goal congruence in management control specifically. At best, it causes goal complex-
ity; at worst, it triggers conflict and confusion.
As an example, consider the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (DWP), which had 
long regarded itself more as a private company than as the city’s public utility, causing a chronic 
source of tension with city officials. The city controller had repeatedly accused DWP officials of 
wasting hundreds of thousands of dollars on community events, staff perks, and parties. DWP 
officials, however, rebutted that the city bureaucrats just misapprehend the organization, which 
at the time raised more than $3 billion in revenues for the city annually. “The parties may seem 
like unnecessary expenses, but they are essential for supporting the community and boosting 
the morale of DWP employees,” said the utility’s general manager. Separately, the state attorney 
general filed a claim against the DWP, alleging that the utility gouged customers during the 
energy crisis by overcharging ratepayers, to which DWP management retorted that “[we] sold 
power for less than the maximum but more than the cost.” Although the DWP received high 
marks for power quality and reliability, customer service, price, value, and company image in 
an independent survey by J.D. Power and Associates, city officials and DWP management 
seemed to disagree about the organization’s goals. “They are neither behaving like a Fortune 
500 company that is accountable to shareholders, nor like a public utility that is accountable to 
ratepayers,” said the city controller. But even city officials disagree, as one councilman said: 
“[The DWP] takes in $3 billion worth of people’s money; who wouldn’t expect them to give 
some back to the community.”14
Without clarity as to what goals should be achieved and how tradeoffs among them should be 
made, it is difficult, if not impossible, to judge how well the organization’s control system or, 
indeed, how well the management team, is performing. Some not-for-profit organizations struggle 
with these fundamental problems of goal ambiguity and conflict. That said, goal ambiguity must 
be addressed to establish an effective control system while reflecting the legal, regulatory, policy, 
and resource environment within which the particular not-for-profit organization operates.
Difficulty in measuring and rewarding performance
Even if not-for-profit organizations’ goals are quite clear, managers of these organizations 
typically do not have at their disposal any single, quantitative bottom-line performance 
indicator, like the profit and return measures available to corporations. The degree of 
achievement of the organization’s overall goals – the provision of quality service to its con-
stituents – usually cannot be measured accurately in financial terms. If a hospital’s goal is to 
save lives or to cure the ill, for example, how is success to be judged? By time to attend to 
patients brought to the emergency ward? By survival rates among emergency patients expe-
riencing heart attacks? By cancer cure rates? Or should there be measures of prevention 

Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
726
rather than merely curing? And how about costs? And because one focus can be compro-
mised in favor of another (e.g. cost vs. care; prevention vs. cure), what importance is to be 
placed on each? The following excerpt illustrates the multitude of problems faced when 
trying to adequately measure performance in a healthcare setting:
The Obama administration’s goal of tying more Medicare payments to the quality – not the 
quantity – of health care by 2018 has intensified the debate over how “quality” is defined 
and measured. Many doctors, hospitals, insurers and cost experts want to move away 
from the myriad quality metrics that largely measure process – from tracking the percent-
age of patients with chest pain who get an aspirin in the ER, to how hair is removed from 
ambulatory surgery patients – toward broader measures that assess patient outcomes. 
[. . .] The National Quality Forum, a non-profit advisory group, submitted recommendations 
on 199 performance measures for Health and Human Services to consider in 20 federal 
programs. [. . .] Many of the proposals seek to better align measures among various pro-
grams and replace narrow process-oriented metrics with “measures that matter.” For 
example, one recommendation would replace individual metrics on the percentage of dia-
betes patients who get foot exams, eye exams and blood-glucose checks with a compos-
ite measure of diabetes control. [. . .] But some doctors question whether the measures 
that exist can adequately measure quality. [. . .] And there is little agreement on what meas-
ures matter most or are more likely to produce good value. “In many areas of patient care, 
we do not yet have high-quality outcome measures with enough specificity to drive 
improvement” [and] “measurement fatigue is a real problem in hospitals” [where] “to me, 
the only metric that matters is, did you get better?” [. . .] Some have complained that 
safety-net hospitals are being unfairly penalized because low-income patients may be 
sicker and have less support at home, which would require adjusting some measures for 
socioeconomic status. And, [. . .] there are problems capturing data across multiple hospi-
tals: “When people have surgical complications, they are unlikely to go back to the same 
hospital where they had the surgery done.”15
Without a small set of quantifiable performance indicators, the tasks of management and 
management control become more complicated. It becomes difficult to:
● Measure organizational performance in light of the overall goals and, thus, to use results 
controls (including performance-based incentives) even at a broader organizational level;
● Analyze the benefits of alternative investments or courses of action;
● Decentralize the organization and hold entity managers accountable for specific areas of per-
formance that relate exactly or precisely enough to the organization’s overriding goal; and,
● Compare the performances of entities performing dissimilar activities.
Boards of trustees or overseers and regulators of not-for-profit organizations have been espe-
cially criticized for their lack of focus or inability to measure performance. They have been cen-
sured for failing to determine “what matters most” or, as in the example above, to effectively 
measure “what got the patient better.”
Interest in increasing the use of performance measurements by public-service organiza-
tions and in disseminating more such data to the general public has been growing, however. 
The goal of these initiatives is to supplement the traditional input-focused measures (such as 
expenditures and staffing levels) with results-oriented measures (such as output, quality, 
and timeliness), and in so doing, to improve governmental efficiency and effectiveness by 
increasing public managers’ accountability.16 Such “government accountability” and public 
management “reforms” have been introduced in almost all sectors of government in many 
countries around the world.

Accounting differences
727
One must caution, however, that an increased focus on measurement may produce some of 
the same dysfunctional side effects that are also common in for-profit organizations, such as 
behavioral displacement (concentration on the areas measured to the exclusion of other impor-
tant but unmeasured areas) and gaming (misrepresentation of data). For example, “some qual-
ity metrics [have been] removed from consideration when a high percentage of physicians score 
well or ‘topped out’ on them,” thus curtailing their potency to demonstrate improvements.17
However, some studies have provided evidence of beneficial effects or other positive exter-
nalities of performance measurement in some not-for-profit settings. For example, one study of 
managers in not-for-profit hospitals found that performance measurement and associated 
incentives attracts managers who are more talented at balancing the books (financial perfor-
mance) while achieving not-for-profit objectives.18 A number of not-for-profit organizations also 
have reported success with combination-of-measures approaches (e.g. balanced scorecards) to 
manage their operations effectively.19
Survey evidence suggests that not-for-profit and government organizations are keenly inter-
ested in incentive-compensation practices. For example, according to the 2016 Vivient Consult-
ing and World-At-Work survey, over three-quarters of the sampled US not-for-profit and 
government organizations make significant use of short-term cash incentives (STIs) to motivate 
and reward employees, although long-term incentive (LTI) usage is rare, with only about one-
sixth of these organizations using them (compared to over half of the privately held organiza-
tions in their sample). More than four-fifths of the non-profit and government organizations 
said their annual incentive plans were effective and that they will continue using them. The 
survey concluded that “STI budgets at non-profit/government organizations are starting to 
approach the levels reported by the private, for-profit organizations.”20
All told, then, when carefully designed, and when adequate performance measures can be 
found, performance measurement and incentive systems might have many similarities between 
for-profit and not-for-profit organizations, both in their purported functional, but possibly also 
dysfunctional, effects.
Accounting differences
The financial statements prepared by not-for-profit organizations vary widely from those used 
in for-profit organizations in both form and content. A comprehensive standard for general-
purpose external financial statements provided by not-for-profit organizations did not exist in 
the United States until the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Financial 
Accounting Statement No. 117 in 1993 (FAS 117). Up until that time, some not-for-profit organ-
izations provided consolidated financial statements whereas others did not. Some not-for-profit 
organizations provided cash flow information, but most did not. FAS 117 was intended to 
improve the relevance, understandability, and comparability of not-for-profit organizations’ 
financial statements. Since then, financial statement standards for not-for-profits have been 
issued and updated globally, such as under the auspices of International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS) and other standard setters.21
The individual accounting standards used by not-for-profit organizations for operating 
transactions also have historically been different from those used in for-profit corpora-
tions, such as for depreciation, for example. Most experts, however, now conclude that the 
accounting principles used in not-for-profit organizations should be similar if not identical 
to those used in for-profit organizations, with one exception: not-for-profit organizations 
need separate accounts, called funds, to segregate operating transactions from contributed 
capital transactions.

Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
728
For-profit organizations acquire their resources by selling stock, borrowing money, and 
earning profits through the selling of the goods and services they provide. Their managers can 
use those resources in any legal way they wish. Most of the resources obtained by not-for-profit 
organizations, on the other hand, are donated or granted to the organization. The terms of the 
donation or grant can restrict the purposes for which those resources can be used. The restric-
tion may involve use of the resources for a specific purpose (such as to conduct cancer research), 
a particular type of expenditure (such as for a new building), or a particular time period (such 
as only until or not before a given date).
Ensuring that each of these donations or grants is used only for its intended purpose places 
extra demands on the managers of not-for-profit organizations. Some of these restrictions are 
legal obligations; others are moral obligations from the organization to the donor. To satisfy the 
extra dimension of accountability that these restrictions involve, most not-for-profit organiza-
tions use fund accounting. Fund accounting separates resources restricted for different pur-
poses from each other. Each fund has its own set of financial statements: balance sheet and 
statement of changes in fund balances. Each not-for-profit organization also has a general fund 
that is used to account for all operating transactions and resources not included in any of the 
restricted funds.
Most not-for-profit organizations prepare consolidated financial reports. The fund accounting 
counterpart of the for-profit organizations’ income statement (which can be called a statement of 
activities, operating statement, or statement of income and expenses) provides important informa-
tion about the financial performance of the not-for-profit organization. Figure 16.1 shows a rep-
resentative example of a consolidated statement of activities, in this case for the University of 
Southern California (USC).22 The statement shows that USC, a private university, raised over 
$4.24 billion in revenues in its 2015 fiscal year, but nearly $200 million of those revenues were 
restricted, either temporarily or permanently (the two middle columns). Expenses totaled nearly 
$4 billion. Thus, USC was able to invest the surplus of about $262 million in its assets, most par-
ticularly buildings and various other kinds of restricted and unrestricted investments.
The statement of activities is quite informative because if resource inflows are persistently 
less than resource outflows, the not-for-profit organization will not survive. On the other hand, 
inflows that exceed outflows consistently by too great a margin is not by itself desirable, either. 
It may indicate that the organization is not fulfilling its primary mission as well as it could with 
the resources it has available to it.
External scrutiny
Most not-for-profit organizations do not directly serve, and do not have to answer to, a group 
with ultimate authority, like a shareholder group. They do, however, have to answer to a 
number of external constituencies, often including donors, government entities, alumni, 
and even society at large to some extent. These external constituencies often are demand-
ing. This is natural because most not-for-profit organizations were established precisely to 
provide valuable social services, and as a consequence, they are often held to a higher stand-
ard.23 In that context, performance reports can provide valuable information that helps the 
constituents make informed choices, such as regarding which school to send their children 
to, which hospital to entrust their health with, or which charity to donate their money to. To 
help inform the public, websites have been developed, such as Charity Navigator (www.
charitynavigator.org), which claims to be “America’s premier independent charity evaluator, 
[which] works to advance a more efficient and responsive philanthropic marketplace by 
evaluating the financial health of America’s largest charities.”

External scrutiny
729
Figure 16.1  Consolidated statement of activities, University of Southern California, for the year ended 
June 30, 2015
Year Ended June 30, 2015
Unrestricted 
Net Assets
Temporarily 
Restricted 
Net Assets
Permanently 
Restricted 
Net Assets
Total Net 
Assets
Revenues
1
Student tuition and fees
$1,710,225
$1,710,225
2
Less financial aid
(460,276)
(460,276)
3
Net student tuition and fees
1,249,949
1,249,949
4
Endowment income
45,527
$432
45,959
5
Investment and other income
14,360
205
14,565
6
Net appreciation (depreciation) in fair value of 
investments
33,565
$73,090
(2,214)
104,441
7
Contracts and grants
455,177
455,177
8
Contributions
248,837
124,011
164,917
537,765
9
Sales, services and other
217,457
217,457
10
Auxiliary enterprises
308,515
308,515
11
Health care services
1,310,882
1,310,882
12
Present value adjustment to annuities payable
37
(2,033)
(1,996)
13
Net assets released from restrictions/ 
redesignations
161,063
(164,473)
3,410
14
Total Revenues
4,045,332
32,665
164,717
4,242,714
Expenses
15
Educational and general activities
2,415,602
2,415,602
16
Health care services
1,300,218
1,300,218
17
Depreciation and amortization
198,357
198,357
18
Interest on indebtedness
66,178
66,178
19
Total Expenses
3,980,355
3,980,355
20
Increase in Net Assets
64,977
32,665
164,717
262,359
21
Beginning Net Assets
3,417,909
1,966,794
2,077,885
7,462,588
22
Ending Net Assets
$3,482,886
$1,999,459
$2,242,602
$7,724,947
Nature of specific net assets
23
Designated
$808,017
$808,017
24
Externally restricted
$53,802
$25,422
79,224
25
Pledges
327,070
321,549
648,619
26
Unexpended endowment income
214,053
214,053
27
Annuity and living trusts
54,168
88,222
142,390
28
True endowment and net appreciation
1,564,419
1,807,409
3,371,828
29
Funds functioning as endowment
1,337,683
1,337,683
30
Debt service funds
86,322
86,322
31
Invested in plant
1,036,811
1,036,811
32
$3,482,886
$1,999,459
$2,242,602
$7,724,947
The accompanying notes are an integral part of this statement.

Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
730
High societal expectations lead to high demands for accountability, as we have seen ear-
lier. Sometimes benefactors, or the general public, bring direct political pressure on the 
organization. If an organization is perceived not to be performing effectively or appropri-
ately, donations can be withheld, and managers and boards of trustees can be forced out of 
office. Government regulators can shut the organizations down or place additional 
restrictions on them.
For example, when the Los Angeles convention center’s occupancy rate dropped by over 
10 percentage points in a given year, city officials, hotel owners, and regional business advo-
cates rapidly pressed for changes and reforms at the Visitor Bureau, the not-for-profit group 
responsible for renting the city-owned convention center and promoting regional tourism. The 
various constituents threatened to monitor the bureau’s activities more closely, set performance 
benchmarks, or else cut ties with the Visitors Bureau.24 They pressured the non-profit organiza-
tion to act fiscally responsibly.
And when the American Red Cross – an affiliate of the International Red Cross network, 
which had rolled out a global disease prevention program with a strong anti-smoking compo-
nent – refused to stop accepting donations from tobacco companies, officials at the parent com-
pany said that the US group risked damaging not only its own reputation, but that of the entire 
global humanitarian network. “We have been very clear about the potential reputational dam-
age not just for them but for all of us,” and although "we have not taken the route of public con-
demnation, [. . .] we continue ‘to put pressure’ on the American Red Cross to change its policy.” 
Pressure on the American Red Cross was coming from other fronts as well. Some of the largest 
US public health advocacy organizations, including the Public Health Law Center and Action on 
Smoking & Health, wrote to the American Red Cross president urging the organization to stop 
taking tobacco donations.25 Clearly, the extra scrutiny from parties often external to the organ-
ization places extra control system-related demands on not-for-profit organizations and on their 
managers and boards of trustees.
Members of not-for-profit organizations’ boards are sometimes selected, however, for 
reasons that do not always pertinently qualify them to exercise organizational oversight 
optimally. For example, they may have been selected because they are potentially large 
donors to the organization or because they have held high-ranking government or other 
positions but in unrelated areas. In addition, most not-for-profit trustees are paid little or 
nothing (or are barred to be paid) for their services, so they may be less committed to, or 
more easily distracted from, their tasks. Although not-for-profit governance has been tight-
ened generally, the consequence is that, as one set of authors concluded, “Effective govern-
ance by the board of a not-for-profit organization is a rare and unnatural act.”26 When the 
organization’s internal oversight comes up short, direct pressure is more likely to be brought 
from external constituencies.
The sometimes-intense external scrutiny can also shape some decision-making processes, 
including some MCS-related processes. Planning and budgeting processes are likely to be 
more important and more time-consuming because the external parties must be heard and 
their concerns must be accommodated. Management and employee compensation in not-
for-profit organizations is also often subject to considerable political pressure. In the words 
of a Los Angeles city official who commented on the city’s review of employee bonuses: “A big 
piece of the process is not just money; it’s inspiring confidence. People don’t have confidence 
[city officials] are spending tax dollars wisely. You’ve got to be hyper-focused in the atten-
tion to detail.”27
A related concern, and one which naturally transitions into our next section, is that “in the 
charitable sector, there tends to be more trust and less scrutiny [. . .] the Achilles heel in the 
charitable sector is that people appear to be more trusting and have less internal controls and 
oversight; that is a weakness.”28

Conclusion
731
Employee characteristics
Employees of not-for-profit organizations often have some characteristics that distinguish 
them from those in for-profit organizations, and those characteristics can have both positive 
and negative control implications. The sizes of the compensation packages of employees in 
many not-for-profit organizations are not competitive with those offered at for-profit organi-
zations. This can cause control problems if employee quality is diminished, as one of the 
main control problems – personal limitations – may be more salient. For example, when an 
audit revealed that the Los Angeles County Department of Mental Health had sloppy book-
keeping, weak controls over its expenditures, and spotty compliance with county contract 
regulations, the department’s chief deputy director replied that “it was essentially a lack of 
training and [. . .] we need to make sure that our staff understands what the requirements 
are and follow them.”29
To address some of the personnel-related control problems, the mayor of Los Angeles and 
other city leaders have defended large salaries to lure top managers away from private compa-
nies, while government critics have called these high salaries “an outrageous waste of taxpayer 
money”. The mayor, however, stood by his policy of hiring good people and holding them 
accountable, even “if that means paying top dollar – if you think it’s expensive to hire talented 
people, try hiring untalented people; it’s penny wise and pound foolish,” the deputy mayor 
said.30 Many not-for-profits also face retention issues and lack formal employee retention strate-
gies to address them. For example, one survey suggests that,
The vast majority of nonprofits surveyed (90%) do not have a formal strategy for retain-
ing staff despite many indicating that staff retention is an organizational challenge. 
Interestingly, according to survey respondents, the top three functional areas experi-
encing the most growth are also the top three functional areas experiencing the great-
est challenges with retention (direct services, program management/support, and 
fundraising/development, respectively).31
On the other hand, not-for-profit organizations often attract employees who can be highly 
committed to their organization’s goals. Such employees may find it more intrinsically reward-
ing to pursue their organization’s goal, whether that is providing shelter for the homeless, food 
for the hungry, or a cure for AIDS, compared to creating value for shareholders in an abstract, 
dispassionate sense. Some not-for-profit employees even work with an idealistic fervor. When 
such employees are attracted and can be retained, their high commitment minimizes the other 
control problems: lack of direction and lack of motivation. Control, then, can be more easily 
achieved through personnel/cultural means.
Conclusion
Control in not-for-profit organizations exhibits both similarities with, and differences from, 
control in for-profit organizations. The basic needs for good control are the same. Managers of 
not-for-profit organizations have to address the same set of control problems – lack of direc-
tion, lack of motivation, and lack of ability (personal limitations) – as do their for-profit coun-
terparts. They also have basically the same set of control tools – action, results, and personnel/
cultural controls – at their disposal. They also face many of the same problems, including the 
need to implement goal-congruent performance measurement and incentive systems, and the 

Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
732
need to avoid many of the same dysfunctional side effects that we discussed elsewhere in this 
text. And as an earlier quote suggested, the reverse is also true, where for-profit corporations 
recognize that espousing some non-profit principles and practices can make good business 
sense, particularly related to goals of social well-being and environmental protection in addi-
tion to economic prosperity.32
However, MCSs in not-for-profit organizations are sometimes not as well developed as 
those in for-profit organizations for a number of reasons, such as relating to the types of per-
sonnel that they attract and manage to retain, as well as resource constraints and public or 
even political pressure, to name a few. On the other hand, many larger and perhaps more 
professional not-for-profit organizations implement many of the control features used in for-
profit organizations.
That said, MCSs often must differ appreciably in not-for-profit organizations. Managers of 
these organizations often find that a command-and-control style of management is not effec-
tive. They must spend considerable time managing elaborate, open decision processes 
designed to build consensus. Even then, the decisions often get tied up in lengthy approval 
processes involving multiple regulators, overseers, and interest groups. Managers cannot eas-
ily define results measures and motivate behavior through financial incentives. The goals are 
not always clear; the important results are often difficult to measure; internal auditors cannot 
just be ordered into a department to do a performance audit; and the provision of incentives 
may be unfeasible or unaffordable. There are no stock options to offer as long-term incentives. 
Bonuses are often specifically prohibited by law or labor contracts, and if not that, subject to 
public scrutiny and scorn.
There are, however, several success stories that suggest lessons not-for-profit managers can 
learn from for-profit managers. Richard Riordan, a successful businessman who went on to 
serve two terms as the mayor of Los Angeles, implemented mission statements for various 
departments and formal results-oriented performance evaluations backed up by, in some cases, 
merit pay. A study revealed that his city officials – “executives,” as he called them – ranked 
among the most richly compensated public officials in the country. Mr. Riordan’s organizational 
changes produced some successes, although he kept lamenting that “in government there is too 
much talk about process and not enough talk about results.”33
Or, in the words of Jasmine Whitbread of Save the Children, a global children’s charity that 
fights for children’s rights in 120 countries across the world:
Usually people are drawn to work for an organization like Save the Children through want-
ing to make the world a better place, but, arguably, people choose to work for businesses 
for that reason too. We want to attract top talent. We know we can’t compete with busi-
nesses, we can’t pay the same amount – but we do need to pay to attract talent. Charities 
are complex businesses and maybe we haven’t communicated that message. Save the 
Children is a $1.8 billion operation in over 120 countries, running programs that have 
evolved over decades in high-risk, highly uncertain markets. The skills needed to run even 
part of that operation are the same skills needed in business. It’s about people, direction, 
strategy, resources, raising funds, making investments. Save the Children is a business – 
but our bottom line is saving children’s lives. Our founder Eglantyne Jebb, all those years 
ago, said that, because money is donated, it behooves us to use modern business meth-
ods – and people are still entrusting us with their money.34
Prior to joining the non-profit sector, Ms. Whitbread was a managing director with Thomson 
Financial, a global financial information provider. But many not-for-profit or public sector 
organizations are not run by business men or women, sometimes for good reasons. As is some-
times said, “Martin Luther had a dream, not a business plan.”35

733
Notes
	 1	 See, for example, “Currents of Change: The KPMG Survey 
of Corporate Social Responsibility Reporting 2015,” 
KPMG (2015), online at www.kpmg.com/reporting.
	 2	 See, for example, G. Michelon, S. Pilonato, and F. Ricceri, 
“CSR Reporting Practices and the Quality of Disclosure: 
An Empirical Analysis,” Critical Perspectives on Account-
ing, 33 (2015), pp. 59–78.
	 3	 See, for example, T. F. Slaper, “The Triple Bottom Line: 
What Is It and How Does It Work?” Indiana Business 
Review (Spring 2011), pp. 4–8; A. Rambaud and J, Rich-
ard, “The ‘Triple Depreciation Line’ Instead of the ‘Triple 
Bottom Line’: Towards a Genuine Integrated Reporting,” 
Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 33 (2015), pp. 92–116.
	 4	 See, for example, “Doing Well by Doing Good: An Interview 
with Paul Polman, CEO of Unilever,” The Huffington Post 
(May 9, 2016), online at www.huffingtonpost.com/alexan-
dre-mars/doing-well-by-doing-good-_1_b_9860128.html.
	 5	 Michelon et al., “CSR Reporting Practices and the Quality 
of Disclosure,” op. cit.
	 6	 Rambaud and Richard, “The ‘Triple Depreciation Line’ 
Instead of the ‘Triple Bottom Line,’” op. cit.
	 7	 See, for example, H. Servaes and A. Tamayo, “Doing Well 
by Doing Good,” Business Strategy Review, no. 1 (2014), 
p. 6; B. Hong, Z. Li, and D. Minor, “Corporate Governance 
and Executive Compensation for Corporate Social 
Responsibility,” Journal of Business Ethics (December 
2015), pp. 1–15; K. Lins, H. Servaes, and A. Tamayo, 
“Social Capital, Trust, and Firm Performance: The Value 
of Corporate Social Responsibility during the Financial 
Crisis,” European Corporate Governance Institute (ECGI) - 
Finance Working Paper No. 446/2015 (February 2016), 
online at papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=2555863.
	 8	 D. T. Whalen, “Sustainability Matters, but What Does It 
Mean for Your Company?” NACD Directorship (July 30, 
2015), NACDonline.org, online at https:// www.nacdonline.
org/Magazine/Article.cfm?ItemNumber=17504.
	 9	 “B Corporation: A New Sustainable Business Model,” 
Darden Business Publishing (Technical Note, 2010).
	10	 See, for example, bimpactassessment.net and bcorpora-
tion.net.
	11	 “B Corporation: A New Sustainable Business Model,” op. 
cit.; and “To ‘B’ or not to ‘B’,” Impact, 21, no. 11 (November 
2015).
	12	 Slaper, “The Triple Bottom Line,” op. cit., p. 6.
	13	 See, for example, “Shareholders vs. Stakeholders: A New 
Idolatry,” The Economist (April 24, 2010), online at econ.
st/KA1p7h. See also “Maximizing Shareholder Value: 
The Goal That Changed Corporate America,” The Wash-
ington Post (August 26, 2013), online at wpo.st/bRTb1.
	14	 “DWP’s Spending Comes under Scrutiny,” The Los Angeles 
Times (March 31, 2002), p. B1.
	15	 “Debate Heightens over Measuring Health Care Quality,” 
The Wall Street Journal (January 30, 2015), online at on.
wsj.com/1EvciGo.
	16	 See, for example, K. Cavalluzzo and C. Ittner, “Imple-
menting Performance Measurement Innovations: 
Evidence from Government,” Accounting, Organizations 
and Society, 29, no. 3–4 (April–May 2004), pp. 243–67.
	17	 “Debate Heightens over Measuring Health Care Quality,” 
op. cit.
	18	 L. Eldenburg, F. Gaertner, and T. Goodman, “The Influence 
of Profit-Based Compensation on Non-Profit Objectives,” 
Working Paper (University of Arizona, 2010). For similar 
studies, see W. Baber, P. Daniel, and A. Robert, “Compen-
sation to Managers of Charitable Organizations: An Empir-
ical Study of the Role of Accounting Measures of Program 
Activities,” The Accounting Review, 77, no. 3 (July 2002), 
pp. 679–93; L. M. Parsons and A. L. Reitenga, “College and 
University President Pay and Future Performance,” 
Accounting Horizons, 28, no. 1 (March 2014), pp. 125–42.
	19	 See, for example, A. Gumbus, D. Bellhouse, and B. Lyons, 
“A Three Year Journey to Organizational and Financial 
Health Using the Balanced Scorecard: A Case Study at a 
Yale New Haven Health System Hospital,” Journal of 
Business and Economic Studies, 9, no. 2 (Fall 2003), 
pp. 54–64.
	20	 “Incentive Pay Practices: Non-Profit/Government Organi-
zations,” A Report by World-At-Work and Vivient Consult-
ing (February 2016), online at www.worldatwork.org/
adimLink?id=79940.
	21	 See, for example, International Financial Reporting for the 
Not-for-Profit Sector (CCAB, February 2014), online at 
www.ccab.org.uk.
	22	 University of Southern California 2015 Financial Report, 
available at about.usc.edu/files/2015/12/USC-FY-
2015-Financial-Report.pdf.
	23	 “Room for Improvement: Foundations’ Support of Non-Profit 
Performance Assessment,” The Center for Effective Philan-
thropy (2012), online at www.effectivephilanthropy.org/
wp-content/uploads/2014/01/RoomForImprovement.pdf.
	24	 “Officials Target Visitors Bureau,” The Los Angeles Times 
(April 7, 2002), p. B1; “Audit Urges Major Reforms of Visi-
tors Bureau Spending,” The Los Angeles Times (October 
15, 2002), p. B1.
	25	 “American Red Cross Pressured to Rid Itself of Tobacco 
Money,” Reuters (January 7, 2015), online at reut.
rs/1s5ORPf.
	26	 B. Taylor, R. Chait, and T. Holland, “The New Work of the 
Non-Profit Board,” Harvard Business Review, 74, no. 5 
(September–October 1996), p. 36.
	27	 “Public Enemy No. 1: Bonuses,” The Daily News (March 9, 
2006), p. 1.
	28	 “Blumenthal May Investigate Charities Ripped Off by 
Madoff,” Forbes (December 22, 2008), online at www.
forbes.com. See also “Many Non-Profits Lack Financial 
Knowledge: Survey,” Chicago Tribune (February 29, 
2012), online at articles.chicagotribune.com.
	29	 “Audit Finds Myriad Woes in Department of Mental 
Health,” The Los Angeles Times (August 15, 2003), p. B3.
Notes

Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
734
	30	 “Riordan OKs Raises for Top Officials,” The Los Angeles 
Times (January 30, 2001), p. B1.
	31	 2013 Nonprofit Employment Trends Survey (Nonprofit HR 
Solutions, 2013), online at www.nonprofithr.com/wp-
content/uploads/2013/03/2013-Employment-Trends-
Survey-Report.pdf.
	32	 Slaper, “The Triple Bottom Line,” op. cit., p. 6.
	33	 “Riordan OKs Raises for Top Officials,” op. cit.
	34	 “Taking Business Skills into the Non-Profit Sector: 
Jasmine Whitbread of Save the Children,” Forbes (May 7, 
2014), online at www.forbes.com.
	35	 “Should Philanthropies Operate Like a Business?” The 
Wall Street Journal (November 28, 2011), online at on.
wsj.com/sy0702.

SCI Ontario: Achieving, Measuring, and Communicating Strategic Success 
735
 CASE STUDY 
 SCI Ontario: Achieving, Measuring, and Communicating 
Strategic Success 
 Professor Neil Bendle wrote this case solely to provide mate-
rial for class discussion. The author does not intend to illus-
trate either eff ective or ineff ective handling of a managerial 
situation. The author may have disguised certain names 
and other identifying information to protect confi dentiality. 
  This publication may not be transmitted, photocopied, 
digitized or otherwise reproduced in any form or by any 
means without the permission of the copyright holder. 
Reproduction of this material is not covered under 
authorization by any reproduction rights organization. To 
order copies or request permission to reproduce materi-
als, contact Ivey Publishing, Ivey Business School, West-
ern University, London, Ontario, Canada, N6G 0N1; (t) 
519.661.3208; (e)  cases@ivey.ca ;  www.iveycases.com . 
 Copyright©2014, Richard Ivey School of Business Foundation
Version: 2014-11-07 
 In fall 2014 Gillian Lynne-Davies had just seen the 
2013/14 Spinal Cord Injury Ontario (SCI Ontario) 
annual report finalized after a busy, but worthwhile 
few months. The not-for-profi t organization she worked 
for, SCI Ontario, headquartered in Toronto, was part of 
a federation of organizations that served over one mil-
lion people. Notable achievements from the past year 
included responding to 4,700 requests for information 
and working with the Ontario government to get $8 mil-
lion infused into community-based attendant services. 
 In 2012, the organization, a leader in client service 
and community reintegration, had adopted a bold 
three-year strategic plan it called “Good to the Core.” 
(The plan was later extended to 2017.) SCI Ontario 
aimed to be an exemplar of not-for-profi t management 
and to take a leadership role regarding people living 
with spinal cord injuries in the province. 
 Communications and reporting were vital elements 
of the strategy, which Lynne-Davies, as senior manager 
of marketing and communications, was tasked with 
delivering. Reporting helped SCI Ontario monitor its 
progress and let stakeholders gain a greater under-
standing of the organization and, through this, an 
enhanced commitment to it. 
 Change was on the horizon: Bill Adair, the chief 
executive offi  cer (CEO), had announced his decision to 
retire and Lynne-Davies would have to work to ensure 
the transition was seamless. Given the need to imple-
ment the strategy while managing the transition, she 
saw two major goals in the coming months: 
 ●  To further develop an internal reporting system to 
complement the external reporting system. A dash-
board would allow the new CEO to see how SCI 
Ontario was performing against the strategic plan, 
fi nancial targets and operational objectives. 
 ●  To refi ne SCI Ontario’s communications strategy to 
help achieve and critically measure its success in 
becoming the provincial expert on living with spinal 
cord injury. This would fulfill the organization’s 
leadership role and its mandate to be the “most reli-
able voice, advocate and leading expert on living 
with spinal cord injury in Ontario.” 
 Achieving these goals would make a huge contribution 
to SCI Ontario and its important mission. 
 The History of Spinal Cord Injury Ontario 
 World War II saw an infl ux of veterans with spinal cord 
injuries. These otherwise healthy veterans were scat-
tered around hospitals where the medical staff 
expected little of them. In 1945, two veterans, John 
Counsell and Ken Langford, determined to help those 
living with the injuries engage more fully with the 
community. With the backing of prominent philan-
thropists, they established the Canadian Paraplegic 
Association. Its initial focus was on people with 

736
Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
affected motor function in their lower extremities, 
hence the use of the term paraplegic in its name. At the 
time, this represented the vast majority of the spinal 
cord injuries community as any injury severe enough 
to cause quadriplegia—affecting function of the legs, 
arms and torso—would have been fatal. Since then, 
advances in medical research, knowledge and support 
had significantly improved the prospects of those with 
spinal cord injuries. Thus, at the beginning of the 
twenty-first century, the community included a far 
greater range of experiences and injuries. In Novem-
ber 2012, to demonstrate commitment to all those 
with spinal cord injuries, the organization was 
renamed Spinal Cord Injury Ontario (SCI Ontario).
Spinal Cord Injury Ontario – Our Mission
Spinal Cord Injury Ontario assists persons with spi-
nal cord injuries and other physical disabilities to 
achieve independence, self-reliance and full com-
munity participation.
Every year, there were close to 600 people who sus-
tained new spinal cord injuries in Ontario alone, and 
approximately 33,000 Ontarians lived with a spinal 
cord injury. The economic costs were estimated at a 
massive $2.67 billion in Canada as a whole. Even more 
important than the financial cost was the human cost. A 
spinal cord injury was a traumatic event significantly 
impacting those experiencing the injury as well as 
friends, family, employers and the wider community. 
Such injuries could happen to anyone; indeed, the two 
age groups most at risk were those over 70 and those in 
the 20 to 29 age range. The top two causes of spinal cord 
injuries were accidental falls and motor crashes, every-
day events that accounted for approximately 43 per cent 
of cases. Those experiencing a spinal cord injury were 
roughly twice as likely to be male than female.
Despite the stress caused by spinal cord injuries, it 
must be understood that people were often able to posi-
tively adjust to life afterwards, given time and the right 
support. On average, it took a person two to three years 
to gain independence, typically after critical care, 
rehabilitation and transition to community living.
Experiencing a spinal cord injury was a life-chang-
ing event as Chris, who received support from SCI 
Ontario, said, “It’s like you’ve been given a new body. 
You relearn everything from scratch.” The peer support 
that SCI Ontario provided to those who had experienced 
an injury could be invaluable in helping rehabilitation. 
As Christine, a disability educator, remarked, “A disa-
bility doesn’t need to be an inability. We just have to be 
more creative about how we do things.” SCI Ontario 
was there to help people achieve their goals. As Lubna 
said, “Sometimes just a little support gets you where 
you want to be.”
The Organization of SCI Ontario
SCI Ontario was incorporated under the Canadian Not-
For-Profit Corporations Act as a corporation without 
share capital. It was a registered charity under the 
Income Tax Act (Canada), which meant that it did not 
pay taxes and was able to issue receipts for tax deduc-
tion of donations made to it.
SCI Ontario provided the following programs:
● Attendant Services (AS) in the greater Toronto area.
● Regional Services (RS) to assist clients transitioning 
from acute care through rehabilitation into the com-
munity.
● Employment Services (ES) to help people with disa-
bilities in the Greater Toronto Area.
● Peer Support (PS) to provide one to-one matches 
with trained volunteers.
● Public Policy Program to bring awareness and edu-
cation to elected officials and to work with members 
on advocacy initiatives that aim to create an inclu-
sive province.
● Research and partnership: financial support of fel-
lowships and partners.
● Communications: disseminating information and 
raising awareness.
● Networks and Alliance to improve the quality of life 
for people with disabilities in Ontario.
● Informational Services for people with disabilities.
● Knowledge Enterprise, the learning centre for SCI 
Ontario.
● Member Services.
● Advocacy.
SCI Ontario employed close to 170 full- and part-
time staff of whom 30 per cent identified as having a 
disability. The organization maintained 17 branches 
across the province from Thunder Bay to Ottawa, with 
the provincial headquarters in Toronto. Further details 
of the organization, its mission and values are con-
tained in Exhibit 1.

SCI Ontario: Achieving, Measuring, and Communicating Strategic Success 
737
In addition to its day-to-day operations, SCI Ontario 
controlled the Ontario Paraplegic Foundation. This 
foundation, which was established in 2000, received 
bequests and other donations from supporters. All the 
resources of the foundation must ultimately be used for 
the benefit of SCI Ontario programs or research sup-
ported by SCI Ontario. The accounts for the Ontario 
Paraplegic Foundation are shown in Exhibit 2.
The Strategic Plan
The Good to the Core strategic plan1 was adopted in 
2012 after extensive stakeholder consultation. This 
consultation included focus groups and interviews 
with individual stakeholders designed to refine and 
develop support for the strategic plan.
The five directions highlighted in the strategic plan 
were:
1.	 Advancing service access and excellence.
2.	 Being the most reliable voice, advocate and leading 
expert on living with spinal cord injury in Ontario.
3.	 Sharing knowledge and driving change related to 
spinal cord injury.
4.	 Excellence in governance, management and 
accountability.
5.	 Increasing and diversifying revenues.
In 2010, the organization adopted a balanced score-
card reporting system to allow management and other 
stakeholders to better understand organizational per-
formance. The balanced scorecard reporting process 
was reviewed and developed as part of the 2012 strate-
gic plan. The key dimensions now monitored included 
financial, customer, internal business processes and 
learning and growth. The measures assessed were 
widely circulated and the achievement against the plan 
presented as part of the annual report.
Financial Reporting at SCI Ontario
Stakeholders are interested in knowing that resources are 
being used effectively and that the organization has the 
ability to continue its mission. To this end, SCI Ontario 
provided financial statements and made these publicly 
available on its website. These statements were similar to 
the financial statements of for-profit corporations. They 
detailed the activities of the organization in the past year 
and changes in net assets, cash flows and the position at 
the end of the year. Every year, the financial statements 
were audited by a professional services firm; in 2014, that 
firm was Grant Thornton.
Two key statements, the Statement of Financial 
Activities and Statement of Financial Position, cor-
responded to the Income and Expenditure Statement 
and Balance Sheet, respectively, of a corporation. 
Given that organizations such as SCI Ontario did not 
have a bottom line profit, the statements noted the 
“Excess of Revenue over Expenses” each year. A sum-
mary of the revenue and expenses for the period 
2008 to 2014 is attached in Exhibit 3. A summary of 
assets and liabilities as of March 31 each year from 
2009 to 2014 is provided in Exhibit 4. Raising funds 
effectively and efficiently is crucial for the success of 
a not-for-profit. Notes to SCI Ontario’s financial 
statements gave more detail on fundraising; a sum-
mary for the period 2009 to 2014 is included in 
Exhibit 5.
In addition to their financial statements, charities in 
Canada also reported basic financial details to the Can-
ada Revenue Agency (CRA), which posted these on the 
CRA website. Details of this reporting are shown in 
Exhibit 6.
To allow stakeholders to better assess the perfor-
mance of not-for-profits, independent organizations 
also assess relative performance (see Exhibit 7). While 
such relative performance measures are potentially 
informative, concerns are sometimes expressed that 
comparing organizations with different missions make 
ranking especially challenging. Furthermore, there is 
inevitably considerable judgment about how to classify 
the activities of a not-for-profit, which potentially 
allows managerial decisions to impact the data used for 
the comparions.
Creating a Dashboard
The information presented in the annual reports2 was 
designed to be helpful to the external user. For instance, 
the breakdown of funds raised and spent was expressed 
in the form of a pie divided between the sources and 
application of funds. It was in this spirit of openness 
1	 “Good to the Core,” www.sciontario.org/sites/sciontario.org/files/
CPA%20Ontario%20strategic%20plan%20overview%20final.pdf, 
accessed November 06, 2014.
2	 For more details, see “The Harvest: Spinal Cord Injury Ontario 
2013–2014 
Annual 
Report, 
www.sciontario.org/sites/scion-
tario.org/files/2014-SCI-Ontario-Annual-Report.pdf, 
accessed 
November 06, 2014.

738
Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
and user friendliness that the balanced scorecard con-
tained indicators of how the organization was perform-
ing on critical dimensions (see Exhibit 8). (Note that 
elements in the scorecard occasionally changed to 
improve the reporting.)
Best practice internal reporting—reporting 
focused on aiding managerial decisions—is built on 
similar foundations to external reporting in that 
user needs are paramount. Reporting to the new 
CEO could use the same principles of ease of use. 
This was especially important as Lynne-Davies 
couldn’t be sure what skills the new CEO would 
have. For instance, the new CEO might have more 
expertise in client service in the spinal cord injury 
community than financial management. Any system 
adopted would have to be useful to any CEO regard-
less of his or her professional background. A tradi-
tional approach was a monthly dashboard 
highlighting the performance of the organization 
against its various goals.
A good dashboard would be clear, visually appeal-
ing, focused on the key goals of the organization and 
limited to items that the manager receiving the 
information could hope to impact. The dashboard 
should aid efforts to run the organization. The anal-
ogy was to the dashboard of a vehicle, which con-
tains the key information the driver needs to control 
the car, such as a speedometer, indicator lights and 
fuel level. Lynne-Davies wondered what a good dash-
board for SCI Ontario would look like and whether 
one could be used to help the new CEO manage the 
organization.
Maintaining and Enhancing the 
Leadership Role
The leadership role—being the expert voice on liv-
ing with spinal cord injury in Ontario—was central 
to the organization’s mission. SCI Ontario wanted to 
be the organization to which anyone who wanted to 
know about spinal cord injuries would turn. Lynne-
Davies had ideas on how to achieve this objective, 
but it wasn’t easy. Because so many worthwhile 
causes existed, how could SCI Ontario ensure that 
those who needed the organization’s services heard 
of them? How would potential volunteers and 
donors understand the good work being done? How 
could she encourage the media and other opinion 
leaders to put SCI Ontario on their speed dials for 
when expert advice was needed? Indeed, how 
should SCI Ontario advocate to ensure that the 
interests of the spinal cord injury community were 
properly addressed?
In addition to these questions was another chal-
lenge: How could Lynne-Davies know if SCI Ontario 
was being successful in developing the leadership 
role? How could she measure progress and demon-
strate that any plan that was adopted was actually 
helping to fulfil its strategic objectives? Given the 
importance of raising the profile of the spinal cord 
injury community, and SCI Ontario in particular, the 
organization was already monitoring mentions in 
the media as part of the balanced scorecard. Were 
the current measures adequate? How could they be 
improved? Was focusing on the media enough to con-
clude whether SCI Ontario was performing its lead-
ership role? Counting website visits was a possible 
way of tracking how useful SCI Ontario was to the 
community, but was reporting that data enough? 
What else could be done to monitor community 
engagement?
As she began to plan, Lynne-Davies pondered the big 
questions: How should SCI Ontario perform its internal 
reporting? What would being successful at community 
leadership look like and how could performance 
against this goal be monitored?

SCI Ontario: Achieving, Measuring, and Communicating Strategic Success 
739
Exhibit 1  SCI Ontario Mission and Values
OUR MISSION: Spinal Cord Injury Ontario (formerly Canadian Paraplegic Association Ontario) 
assists persons with spinal cord injuries and other physical disabilities to achieve independence, 
self-reliance and full community participation.
WHO WE ARE: 17 offices, 9 different client programs and services, 13 departments, 168 staff serv-
ing people with spinal cord injuries and other physical disabilities in Ontario.
OUR VALUES:
• RESPECT for spinal cord injury experience, for each other and for all communities
• EXCELLENCE in all we do
• ACCOUNTABILITY through transparency and ownership of outcomes
• LEADERSHIP in service and quality of life
• INCLUSION in all communities and within our organization
• INNOVATION in overcoming challenges
OUR VISION: SCI Ontario champions excellence in service, advocacy and quality of life for people 
with spinal cord injuries.
Source: “The Harvest: Spinal Cord Injury Ontario 2013–2014 Annual Report, www.sciontario.org/sites/sciontario.org/
files/2014-SCI-Ontario-Annual-Report.pdf, accessed November 06, 2014.
All in $000s
Financial Position
As at March 31 2014
As at March 31 2013
Assets
Investments, at market value
$ 7,011
$ 6,681
Due from SCI Ontario
$ 174
$ –
Other
$ 4
$ 2
Total Assets
$ 7,189
$ 6,683
Liabilities
Due to SCI Ontario
$ –
$ 286
Other
$ 15
$ 14
$ 15
$ 300
Funds balances
General Fund
$ 6,471
$ 5,655
Restricted Fund—Research
$ 404
$ 462
Restricted Fund—A.T. Jousse
$ 144
$ 128
Restricted Fund—Ken Langford
$ 155
$ 138
$ 7,174
$ 6,383
Total Liabilities and Funds Balances
$ 7,189
$ 6,683
Results of operations
Donations and bequests
$ 13
$ 50
Change in value of investments
$ 855
$ 553
Grants from (to) SCI Ontario
$ 7
$ (614)
Other Expenses
$ (84)
$ (66)
Excess (deficiency of revenue over expenses for the year)
$ 791
$ (77)
Restricted funds: Funds that must be used for the specific purposes outlined by the donor.
Source: Company files.
Exhibit 2  Financial Position of the Ontario Paraplegic Foundation

740
Year End March 31
Actual
Actual
Budget
Actual
Budget
Actual
Budget
Actual
Budget
Actual
Budget
Actual
REVENUE  
(All in $000s)
2008
2009
2010
2010
2011
2011
2012
2012
2013
2013
2014
2014
Donations and 
other public 
support, net
$
2,385
$ 2,283
$
2,553
$ 2,208
$
2,717
$
2,370
$
2,743
$
2,320
$
2,451
$
1,921
$
2,081
$
1,800
Grants
$ 6,290
$ 7,314
$
7,549
$
7,668
$
7,681
$
7,649
$
7,749
$
7,728
$
7,649
$
7,903
$
7,627
$
7,963
Fees for service
$
89
$
79
$
64
$
54
$
64
$
55
$
31
$
52
$
57
$
32
$
57
$
82
Amortization of 
deferred capital 
contributions
$
144
$
136
$
128
$
136
$
106
$
108
$
66
$
80
$
58
$
118
$
57
$
44
$ 8,907
$ 9,812
$ 10,294
$ 10,066
$ 10,568
$ 10,182
$ 10,589
$ 10,180
$ 10,215
$
9,974
$ 9,822
$ 9,889
EXPENSES
Staff salaries and 
benefits
$
5,668
$ 6,348
$
7,050
$
6,810
$
7,503
$
7,233
$
7,583
$
7,333
$
7,793
$
7,408
$
7,734
$
7,549
Purchased services
$
973
$ 1,019
$
794
$
1,025
$
685
$
732
$
762
$
815
$
623
$
727
$
547
$
612
Office
$
641
$
767
$
757
$
743
$
749
$
734
$
767
$
721
$
693
$
712
$
561
$
611
Travel
$
638
$
734
$
778
$
678
$
773
$
670
$
758
$
646
$
680
$
580
$
615
$
518
clients
$
324
$
277
$
239
$
241
$
268
$
286
$
222
$
172
$
97
$
199
$
87
$
260
Amortization of 
capital assets
$
180
$
170
$
162
$
162
$
125
$
133
$
79
$
145
$
91
$
154
$
88
$
114
Medical research 
grants
$
121
$
122
$
127
$
124
$
126
$
147
$
129
$
138
$
131
$
110
$
93
$
93
National office
$
120
$
106
$
130
$
83
$
122
$
26
$
61
$
105
$
26
$
26
$
26
$
89
Professional 
development
$
113
$
95
$
105
$
83
$
75
$
97
$
90
$
78
$
57
$
40
$
53
$
26
Miscellaneous
$
130
$
173
$
150
$
115
$
140
$
122
$
136
$
26
$
21
$
15
$
16
$
15
$ 8,906
$ 9,810
$ 10,292
$ 10,064
$ 10,567
$ 10,180
$ 10,587
$ 10,179
$ 10,212
$
9,971
$ 9,820
$ 9,887
Excess of revenue 
over expenses
$
1
$
1
$
1
$
2
$
1
$
2
$
2
$
1
$
3
$
3
$
2
$
2
Notes to the Revenue and Expenses (All Years)
SCI Ontario is highly dependent on the support of dedicated volunteers. Their value is not quantifiable in the above financial statements. Donations and other public support grossed revenue of $2.023 million in 
2013/14, $2.16 million in 2012/13, $2.547 million in 2011/12, $2,687,000 in 2010/11, $2,531,576 in 2009/2010 and $2,966,211 in 2008/2009. Direct fundraising expenses of $222,976 in 2013/14, $240,000 in 2012/13, 
$227,000 in 2011/12, $317,000 in 2010/11, $323,500 in 2008/10 and $682,829 n 2008/2009 have netted against this total.
SCI Ontario controls the Ontario Paraplegic Foundation, which was established in March 2000 to receive bequests and donations from supporters of the Association. The Foundation is registered under the Income 
Tax Act and the Association appoints the majority of the Foundation’s Board of Directors. According to the Foundation’s bylaws, all resources of the Foundation must ultimately be used for the benefit of the 
Association via operating and research grants to the Association of $614,000 in 2012/13, $361,000 in 2011/12, $200,000 in 2010/11 and $220,000 in 2010/09 which are included in the category Donations and other 
public support. In 2013/14, SCI Ontario returned $7,000 in grants to the Foundation.
Source: Company files.
Exhibit 3  SCI Ontario Revenue and Expenses 2008 to 2014

SCI Ontario: Achieving, Measuring, and Communicating Strategic Success 
741
Exhibit 4  Assets and Liabilities 2008 to 2014
As at March 31
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
ASSETS
Current
Cash and cash 
equivalent
$
829
$
447
$
493
$
214
$
210
$
824
Grants receivable
$
3
$
3
$
137
$
70
$
93
$
52
Accounts receivable
$
430
$
434
$
499
$
524
$
459
$
155
Prepaid expenses and 
other assets
$
98
$
114
$
110
$
105
$
103
$
141
Total current assets
$
1,360
$
998
$
1,239
$
913
$
865
$
1,172
Capital assets, net
$
746
$
650
$
565
$
571
$
474
$
402
$
2,106
$
1,648
$
1,804
$
1,484
$
1,339
$
1,574
LIABILITIES AND NET ASSETS
Current
Accounts payable and 
accrued charges
$
1,084
$
744
$
970
$
755
$
677
$
713
Due to Ontario 
Paraplegic Foundation
$
174
Deferred revenue
$
159
$
125
$
130
$
48
$
58
$
126
Total current liabilities
$
1,244
$
869
$
1,100
$
803
$
735
$
1,013
Long-term
Deferred capital 
contributions
$
566
$
571
$
494
$
470
$
390
$
344
Total long-term liabilities
$
566
$
571
$
494
$
470
$
390
$
1,357
Net Assets
Invested in capital 
assets
$
89
$
78
$
71
$
100
$
85
$
57
Surplus
$
117
$
130
$
139
$
111
$
129
$
159
Total Net Assets
$
206
$
208
$
210
$
211
$
214
$
216
$
2,016
$
1,648
$
1,804
$
1,484
$
1,339
$
1,573
Source: SCI Ontario Financial Statements
Year ended March 31st
Heading
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009
From Direct Fundraising
$ 2,030,409
$ 1,546,753
$
2,186,450
$ 2,486,792
$ 2,208,854
$ 2,550,354
From Foundation
$
(7,273)
$
614,253
$
360,898
$
199,764
$
220,000
$
415,857
Gross Donations and 
Other Public Support
$
2,023,136
$
2,161,006
$
2,547,348
$ 2,686,556
$ 2,428,854
$ 2,966,211
Direct Fundraising Costs
$
222,976
$
239,649
$
226,804
$
316,789
$
323,500
$
682,829
Net Donations and Other 
Public Support in 
Accounts
$
1,800,160
$
1,921,357
$ 2,320,544
$ 2,369,767
$
2,105,354
$ 2,283,382
Source: Company files.
Exhibit 5  Donation Breakdown

742
Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
Exhibit 6  CRA Reporting
Charities in Ontario report a T3010 to the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) containing the basic revenue and expenses 
and balance sheet of the charity. This is made available online. In addition to reporting the financial statements and 
compensation levels, CRA reports a few key categories of Revenue and Expenditure to facilitate comparison between 
charities. This appears as the “Quick View” of the charity on the CRA website.
Categories used for “Quick View”
Receipted donations
Non-receipted donations
Gifts from other charities
Government funding
All other revenue
Total revenue
Charitable program
Management and administration
Fundraising
Political activities
Gifts to other registered charities and qualified donees
Other
Total expenses
Source: CRA website, www.cra-arc.gc.ca/chrts-gvng/lstngs/menu-eng.html, accessed November 06, 2014.
It is important for charities to be seen to be making good use of the funds available. Several organizations rate the 
charities to help potential donors. One such, Moneysense, has four categories that it combines to create an overall 
grade. For each area, scores are compared only to similar charities.
CHARITY EFFICIENCY: Money spent on charitable programs and money donated to other charities was added up and 
divided by the total expenses.
FUNDRAISING EFFICIENCY: Fundraising costs divided by the total of money raised through tax-receipted and non-tax 
receipted donations and money raised through fundraising.
GOVERNANCE: Based upon answers to a governance questionnaire.
RESERVES: Points were awarded for the amount of reserves. Interestingly, most points are given for moderate reserve, 
i.e., enough to cover three months to three years of expenses. Any reserves that are more or less than this lose points.
Exhibit 7  Ranking Charities
Source: Moneysense, Charity Grades, www.moneysense.ca/the-2013-charity-100-grades accessed November 06, 2014.

743
2009/10 Indicator Measures
Reaching 100%
2009/2010
Outcome
Annual Target
Total
Total Clients Served (AS, RS, ES, Peer Support, SCI Pilots)
1,445
1,779
Clients with SCI Served (AS, RS, ES, Peer Support, SCI Pilots)
985
1,243
Core Services Provided (AS, RS, ES, Peer Support, SCI Pilots, Info)
4,680
4,667
Direct Service Hours (AS, RS, Peer Support, SCI Pilots, Info)
115,593
115,402
Clients with NEWSCI Reached (RS, Peer Support)
414
277
Clients with EXISTING SCI Reached (RS, Peer Support)
178
Information Requests (Info, RS, Peer Support)
2,775
2,487
Total Members
1,750
1,335
Job Placements (ES)
75
47
Unit Cost (AS)
$
36.43
$
36.41
Advocacy
Outcome
Annual Target
Total
Systemic Advocacy Issues Addressed
6
12
Multi-Agency Coalition Memberships
12
59
Service Enhancements at SCI Ontario Based on New Knowledge
3
8
Quality Service
Outcome
Annual Target
Total
Staff Satisfaction
75%
85%
Client Satisfaction (AS, ES, RS, PS) (From new, cross-organizational, independent survey.)
85%
65%
Clients Who Would Recommend SCI Ontario Services (AS, ES, RS, PS) (From new, cross-organizational, 
endependent survey.)
New
90%
Staff Turnover
25%
15%
Average Training Hours per Employee
20 hours
38
Volunteers (Fundraising, Community Development, Board, Peer Support)
580
654
Volunteer Hours
11,600
10,611
Stable Funding
Outcome
Annual Target
Total
Central Fundraising Revenue Variance
Exceed target
$
184,549
Community Fundraising Revenue Variance
Exceed Target
$
139,212
Increase in MOH Annual Funding (AS+RS)
0
$
146,689
Variance From Budget
Positive
$
620
Board Donations
100%
81%
Staff Donations
100%
94%
Exhibit 8  Balanced Scorecard Results 2010 to 2014
(continued)

744
Indicators
Annual Target 
2010—11
Actual 
2010—11
Annual Target 
2011—12
Actual 
2011—12
Total Revenue
$10,531,466
$10,205,967
$10,565,312
$10,396,117
Government Revenue
$7,635,789
$7,580,878
$7,637,175
$7,648,937
% Fundraising growth vs. prior year
28%
10%
13%
−8%
SCI Ontario staff and board making annual donations
80%
68.50%
70%
54%
Total Expenses
$10,530,443
$10,204,239
$10,563,771
$10,394,709
Unit cost across services (AS, RS, PS, SCC)
$47.97
$47.56
$49.28
$47.53
Total cost of raising a dollar through fundraising activities
less than 35%
40%
35%
39%
Value of volunteer service hours
$142,517
$179,096
$145,350
$161,924
# of individuals with a new SCI reached (PS, RS, ES)
430
368
350
320
# of individual clients with a new SCI served
363
539
454
528
# of individual clients with an existing SCI served
793
996
971
777
# of individual clients served (total)
1,802
2,161
1,943
2,006
% of clients who are satisfied or very satisfied with services 
received
74%
74%
75%
79%
% of clients who would recommend SCI Ontario services
85%
86%
85%
92%
# of actual changes to municipal, provincial and/or federal 
government priorities, policies and procedures that will 
enhance quality of life for Ontarians living with an SCI
2
2
2
4
% of members renewing their membership on an annual basis
85%
20%
50%
46%
% of staff reporting moderate to high job satisfaction
75%
80%
80%
79%
% of staff turnover
25%
21.40%
25%
15.70%
% of client service delivery hours (direct and indirect) vs. 
overall hours
85%
91%
87%
90%
# of individuals we assisted with discharge to the community 
and/or avoidance of admission to long term care
12
26
26
20
% of staff reporting that professional development contributed 
to job performance
75%
88%
80%
95%
% of strategic partnerships (formal and informal) with allied 
organizations that benefit SCI Ontario services
58
101
80
107
Exhibit 8  (continued)
(continued)

745
2012—2014 Balanced Scorecard
2012—2013
2013—2014
Indicators
Target
Actual
Target
Actual
Balance organizational Expenses to Revenues to achieve a modest 
fiscal operating surplus
$2,265
$2,747
$1,090
$2,683
% of total budget spent on administration, less than
15%
11%
< 15%
11%
% of total revenue derived from government
75%
80%
80%
81%
% of SCI Ontario board members making annual donations
100%
84%
NA
NA
Total net revenue raised through fund development activities 
compared to budgeted target
$1,740,000
$1,180,000
$1,445,000
$1,595,000
# of individuals with a new SCI served
528
565
539
552
# of individuals with an existing SCI served
814
858
817
781
# of individual clients served (total)
2021
2136
2013
1969
% of clients who reported being satisfied with SCI Ontario Service
80%
80%
80%
83%
% of clients who would recommend SCI Ontario services
90%
87%
90%
86%
# of actual changes to municipal, provincial and/or federal 
government priorities, policies & that will enhance quality of life for 
Ontarians living with a SCI
3
4
4
6
# of media mentions recognizing SCI Ontario
New
107
NA
NA
# of website visitors
NA
NA
58,500
61,431
% change in Social Media Engagement
NA
NA
15%
9%
% change in media mentions recognizing SCI Ontario
NA
NA
15%
44%
% of staff reporting moderate to high job satisfaction
80%
83%
80%
90%
% of staff turnover
20%
13%
15%
22%
% of client service delivery hours (direct and indirect) vs. overall 
hours
80%
90%
88%
92%
# of volunteers
730
668
550
795
# of volunteer service hours
6,369
7,744
5,000
6,372
% of staff reporting that SCI Ontario supports their health & safety 
in workplace
90%
94%
90%
88%
% of staff reporting that professional development from SCI Ontario 
contributed to job performance
85%
78%
85%
72%
# of strategic partnerships (formal and informal) with allied 
organizations that benefit individuals with an SCI
100
103
100
89
Source: Company files.
Exhibit 8  (continued)
Financial
Customer
Internal Business
Learning &  
Growth
(continued)

Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profi t Organizations
746
 In 1981, a major change was made to decentralize the 
management of the University of Southern California. 
Deans of schools and managers of administrative units 
were given the authority for most of the decisions that 
would determine the university’s academic and fi scal 
success. To hold the operating managers accountable 
for the fi nancial consequences of their decisions, the 
university implemented a fi nancial control system orig-
inally called the Revenue Center Management System. 
Most people who were familiar with the system cred-
ited it with playing a signifi cant role in USC’s success 
over the years, particularly because it provided a high 
degree of fi nancial transparency and encouraged aca-
demic deans to be entrepreneurial, market-savvy, and 
fi scally responsible. 
 This system, which over time became to be known 
as the Responsibility Center Management System 
(RCMS), was still being used in 2008, but critics com-
plained that the system had a number of serious, unin-
tended, dysfunctional side eff ects. USC administrators 
had modified some of the RCMS elements over the 
years to try to maintain the advantages of the system 
while minimizing these side effects. More changes 
were possibly forthcoming. 
  The University of Southern California 
 The University of Southern California (USC), estab-
lished in 1880, was California’s oldest private, research 
university. Located on the perimeter of downtown Los 
Angeles, USC was a diverse and complex organization. 
It ran 19 colleges and schools, more than any other pri-
vate university in the United States. It enrolled over 
33,000 students from all 50 US states and from 
115 countries. The student body included almost 7,000 
international students, more than at any other univer-
sity in the United States. Undergraduate students could 
design degrees from 77 majors and 147 minors. Gradu-
ate students could earn degrees in 139 areas of study. 
The “Trojan Family” included over 194,000 living 
alumni. USC employed over 3,200 full-time faculty 
members, and had annual operating revenues of 
$2.5 billion. It was the largest private employer in Los 
Angeles and the third largest in the state of California. 
 Exhibit  1 shows some quantifi ed university highlights. 
 The university’s academic and administrative pro-
grams were led by president Steven Sample (see 
 Exhibit  2 ). All of the school deans and a number of sen-
ior academic administrators reported to the provost, 
Max Nikias, who was USC’s chief academic offi  cer (see 
 Exhibit  3 ). 
 As a research university, USC’s goals included both 
creation and transmission of knowledge (see the state-
ment of mission and goals in  Exhibit   4   ). Thus USC’s fac-
ulty was expected to engage in basic or applied research 
as well as to perform their teaching. USC supported its 
activities primarily by generating tuition revenues, 
securing research sponsorship, and attracting philan-
thropic contributions. Because its endowment-per-
student was relatively small, the university was heavily 
dependent on tuition revenues. However, it was suc-
cessful in generating research funds. For example, USC 
ranked 17th among the nation’s universities in receipts 
of federal research and development funds. 
 Overall, USC’s top priority was to enhance its aca-
demic reputation, and there is evidence that it was 
doing so successfully. In recent years, USC had risen 
sharply in the many university rankings. For example, 
in 2008,  US News & World Report ranked USC 27th in its 
list of “America’s Best Colleges,” up from a ranking of 
41st just 10 years earlier. 
 Strategies 
 On October 6, 2004, USC’s Board of Trustees approved a 
new strategic plan called the Plan for Increasing Aca-
demic Excellence. 1 This plan stated the following 
 CASE STUDY 
 University of Southern California: Responsibility Center 
Management System 
 1   The full text of the plan can be seen at  www.usc.edu/about/core_
documents/2004_strategic_plan.html 

University of Southern California: Responsibility Center Management System
747
objective: “USC intends to become one of the most influ-
ential and productive research universities in the world.”
The strategic plan focused attention and resources 
on three areas that had to be addressed for USC to 
achieve its goal of providing leadership to the academic 
world and society as a whole:
1.	 Meeting societal needs, through research and edu-
cation that examines, anticipates, and resolves 
pressing societal urgencies;
2.	 Expanding USC’s global presence, through collabo-
ration with institutions around the world, especially 
in the Pacific Rim; and
3.	 Promoting learner-centered education, through 
adaptive and flexible approaches that redefine 
learning, as the context and content of higher educa-
tion change rapidly.
The plan also identified four strategic capabilities 
that should be developed to position USC for success. 
These were (1) span disciplinary and school bound-
aries to focus on problems of social significance, (2) 
link fundamental to applied research, (3) build net-
works and partnerships, and (4) increase responsive-
ness to learners.
The Management System  
Prior to RCMS
Prior to implementation of RCMS, decision-making 
power at USC was centralized. One senior administra-
tive officer – the provost – played the key role in all 
major resource allocation decisions. Dennis Dougherty, 
USC’s chief financial officer (CFO), remembered that 
“The old system relied on personal negotiation. The 
resource allocation decisions were made behind the 
scenes in a ‘smoke filled room.’”
Also in the old system, financial accountability for 
the unit heads was weak. Each university unit (schools 
and departments) had its own financial statement, but 
the statements were not complete. Some revenues and 
costs were neither traced nor allocated to the units that 
generated them. Some deans felt that the more money 
their schools generated, the greedier the central 
administrators became.2 Furthermore, unit heads were 
not sanctioned for producing unfavorable variances as 
compared to their budget. One finance manager 
recalled that:
Some units would consistently overrun their budg-
ets, and some had substantial overruns. Most of 
the overruns were due to under-generated reve-
nues, rather than cost overruns. No one had any 
explicit incentives to manage differently.
Some deans were also seen as spendthrifts, and some 
in the central administration believed that one of their 
key roles was to protect the university and its units 
from financial ruin.3
RCMS Design Principles
Work on the RCMS began in 1981, at the beginning of a 
period that promised to be difficult because significant 
declines in the population of traditional college-aged 
persons necessitated budget cuts. The RCMS was 
designed by a Task Force on Budget Incentives appointed 
by then-university president James Zumberge. The Task 
Force based much of the RCMS design on the system 
used at the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) which, in 
turn, was adapted from the system in use at the General 
Electric Company. Reginald Jones, GE’s then-chairman, 
had been on the board of trustees at Penn, and he 
insisted that this kind of system would provide a better 
alignment of authority and responsibility and, hence, 
better university management.
The objectives of systems like that used at Penn 
included “clarifying roles and responsibilities between 
local and central units, linking cause and effect through 
revenue and indirect cost allocations, placing local aca-
demic planning decision making in a cost/benefit con-
text, and unleashing entrepreneurship.”4 Overall, they 
allow universities to focus on outcome measures rather 
than relying on bureaucracies to administer process 
controls.
USC’s design task force developed the following 
nine management principles to guide their develop-
ment of the USC RCMS:5
2	 A. Rahnamay-Azar, “Revenue Center Management at the Univer-
sity of Southern California: A Case Study,” unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, 2008.
3	 Ibid.
4	 J. R. Curry and J. C. Strauss (2002), Responsibility Center Manage-
ment: Lessons from 25 Years of Decentralized Management (Annap-
olis Junction, MD: National Association of College and University 
Business Officials), p. 3.
5	 J. R. Curry (1991), “Afterword: The USC Experience with Revenue 
Center Management,” in E. L. Whalen, Responsibility Center Budg-
eting: An Approach to Decentralized Management for Institutions of 
Higher Education (Bloomington: Indiana University Press), p. 178.

748
Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
1.	 Responsibility should be commensurate with 
authority, and vice versa.
2.	 Decentralization should be proportional to organi-
zational size and complexity.
3.	 Locally optimal decisions are not always globally 
optimal: central leverage is required to implement 
corporate (global) priorities.
4.	 Outcome measures are preferable to process con-
trols.
5.	 Accountability is only as good as the tools which 
measure it.
6.	 Quantitative measures of performance tend to drive 
out qualitative measures.
7.	 Outcomes should matter: plans that work should 
lead to rewards; plans that fail should lead to sanc-
tions.
8.	 Resource-expanding incentives are preferable to 
resource-dividing ones.
9.	 People play better games when they own the rules.
The new RCMS system had to include three basic 
elements that would permit a decentralized manage-
ment system within USC. First, the university had to be 
divided into responsibility centers. Second, the perfor-
mance reports, including methods for tracing or allo-
cating shared revenues and costs to the primary 
operating units, had to be designed. Third, the extent 
of decision authority to be delegated to the operating 
units needed to be clarified.
Responsibility Centers
USC was comprised of two types of responsibility cent-
ers, revenue centers and administrative centers. Reve-
nue centers were organizational units to which revenues 
could be uniquely attributed. Some of these, the col-
leges, schools, and research institutes, were called 
“academic” revenue centers. The other revenue cent-
ers, including athletics, residence halls, bookstores, 
parking operations, and food services, were called 
“auxiliary” revenue centers. Administrative centers 
were entities that did not generate revenues directly 
but performed activities that supported the revenue 
centers. Examples included Admissions and Financial 
Aid, Business Affairs, Financial Services, Legal 
Services, Library, Office of the President, and Registrar.
Most of the responsibilities for raising revenues and 
expending resources were delegated to the revenue 
center managers. As noted in USC’s 1985 Financial 
Report:
At USC, we believe that the primary planning takes 
place at the operating unit level: the school or 
auxiliary enterprise, or the administrative unit. We 
believe that people closest to the action know 
their programs, their customers, and their markets 
best; they are best informed and, therefore, the 
most capable of strategic thinking. The role of 
central planners is primarily one of coordinating 
and monitoring.
The central administration maintained the power to 
hold the responsibility center managers accountable 
for attaining their targets. The academic revenue 
center managers (i.e. school deans) were evaluated in 
terms of their units’ academic excellence (research and 
teaching), generation of sponsored research grants, 
faculty development, fundraising, and bottom line 
financial performance. Their performances were 
reviewed formally every five years.
Performance Reports
USC produced an elaborate set of reports to facilitate 
control of each responsibility center’s operations. A 
monthly financial report presented the current month’s 
and year-to-date performance as compared to budget. 
Other reports provided information on gifts, grants, 
enrollments, student numbers, personnel, space usage, 
and the detailed items affecting the revenues and 
expenses of each responsibility center. The financial 
reports included four primary categories of accounts: 
revenues, direct expenses, indirect expenses, and par-
ticipations/subventions.
Revenues
The revenue centers were allowed to keep the reve-
nues they generated. The university generated two 
types of revenues: designated and undesignated. 
More than 25% of the total funds available to support 
operations were designated, meaning that they were 
given to the university for a specific purpose or pro-
ject. These funds came from grants and contracts 
from the federal government and other sponsors of 
specific research projects, from gifts from private 
donors and foundations, and from income from 
endowments to support specific individuals and/or 
activities. The designated revenue funds had to be 

University of Southern California: Responsibility Center Management System
749
used only for the specific purpose for which they were 
given and were not allowed to be transferred to an 
undesignated account without prior permission from 
the central administration.
The other revenues were undesignated. They came 
from tuition and fees, unrestricted gifts, and indirect 
cost recoveries from government contracts. Tuition 
revenue was credited 100% to the revenue center 
offering the course taken. Undergraduate student aid 
was administered centrally and charged to academic 
centers on a predetermined percent of undergraduate 
tuition. For FY08, that rate was set at 28%. The indi-
rect cost recoveries were determined by formula 
negotiated with each funding source. For example, 
USC’s indirect cost recovery rate on US government 
projects was 63% of direct costs. That is, for every 
dollar reported as the approved direct costs of a 
research project, the university received an addi-
tional 63 cents to help cover indirect costs. But on 
other projects, the recovery rate was lower. Those 
funded by the Kellogg Foundation, for example, pro-
vided only an 8% recovery rate, and some grants pro-
vided for no overhead cost recovery.
Expenses
Under RCMS, each revenue center was responsible 
for the full costs of its operations. The direct expenses 
of a revenue center included the costs of the people 
and the equipment directly assigned to that center. 
Indirect expenses included the costs of shared 
resources, such as buildings, utilities, and various 
kinds of support (e.g. libraries, computing, security, 
transportation, student aid) provided by the adminis-
trative centers.
Since the inception of RCMS, the university relied on 
a complex set of allocation methods. University admin-
istrators, in collaboration with revenue center manag-
ers, determined what centers shared what cost pools 
and how the costs would be spread across pool partici-
pants. Some cost allocations were based on actual 
usage, but others were based on approximations.
John Curry, USC’s then-vice president of budget and 
planning, acknowledged that the allocations were 
based on:
[. . .] imperfect rules, some of which were totally 
arbitrary. We used Federal government allocation 
guidelines as a guide, but we also put together a 
group of deans and administrators and hammered 
the rules out.
Dennis Dougherty concurred:
Our allocations of indirect cost are done with 
thumbnail methods that are much less precise than 
precise. No study was done, but the allocations 
were somewhat thoughtful. We developed rules of 
thumb and tried to remove blatant inaccuracies.
Over time, the number of cost pools grew. By the late 
1990s, the number of allocation bases in USC’s indirect 
cost allocation system grew to more than 150.
Participations and subventions
University administrators used a system of participa-
tions and subventions to maintain a degree of control 
over university-wide resource allocation decisions and 
to even out the distribution of monies between revenue 
centers. Participations were contributions required 
from all academic revenue centers, based on an equal 
proportion of tuition and fees, sales or service income, 
and indirect cost recoveries, to further the objectives 
and well-being of the entire university. In the revenue 
center financial reports, participations were shown as 
negative indirect income.
These contributions, along with revenues from other 
discretionary funds (investment income and income 
from endowment restricted to the provost), were redis-
tributed back to revenue centers as block grants histori-
cally called subventions. Provost Nikias avoided use of 
the word “subventions” because, he believed, it 
made the grants sound like entitlements. He preferred 
to call them either Academic Initiatives or Provost’s Ini-
tiatives. Academic Initiative funding was defined in 
USC’s 2007 financial report as for “specific activities for 
a limited time period.” Provost’s Initiatives funding 
was allocated “to support university priorities.”
When they made their allocations of subventions, 
the administrators, particularly the provost and presi-
dent, tended to focus on three key factors: (1) differen-
tials in the costs of educating students in different 
fields; (2) the revenue centers’ cost/quality ratios; and 
(3) university priorities.
The cost of educating students varied widely 
between schools. Some schools could educate their stu-
dents effectively by teaching them in large sections, 
while others had to provide instruction in small classes 
or in expensive laboratories. John Curry explained:
The cost of educating a music major is large, espe-
cially in a conservatory-like program like ours. The 
dominant mode of instruction is one-on-one; a 

750
Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
master pianist and pupil on the same bench. Busi-
ness education is much less expensive, as account-
ing and finance can be taught well to classes of 25 
or 50, or even more. But we as a university have 
decided to charge both music and business stu-
dents the same tuition. Common price, but most 
uncommon “unit” costs!
Part of the subvention allocations was aimed at even-
ing out this cost disparity.
The subjectively determined ratio of costs to aca-
demic excellence represented what the university 
administrators perceived they were receiving for their 
investment. This is illustrated in Figure 1. A school 
located near point 3, such as the Thornton School of 
Music, with both high cost of instruction and high aca-
demic excellence,6 was most likely to get a dispropor-
tionately high subvention. It offered high-quality 
programs and research productivity but was unable to 
cover its costs through tuitions. A school located near 
point 4 was valuable to the university because it offered 
high quality and financial independence. It could prob-
ably provide funds that can be used in other parts of the 
university, but administrators had to be careful to allow 
it to keep enough funds to maintain its excellence. A 
school located near point 2 was in trouble. It was a can-
didate for new leadership or program discontinuance.
To illustrate the wide disparity in subvention 
amounts, Table 1 shows the 2007 summary income 
statement numbers for the Marshall School of Business 
and the Thornton School of Music.7 As can be seen, the 
6	 Rolling Stone magazine ranked the USC Thornton School of Music 
as one of the top five music schools in the United States.
7	 The entire USC 2007 financial report can be seen at www.usc.edu/
private/factbook/USC.FR.2007.pdf. On pages 20–23, this report 
shows revenue center summaries for all of USC’s colleges, schools, 
centers, institutes, healthcare services, auxiliaries, and athletics.
Figure 1  Cost/academic excellence ratios
Thornton School received much larger subventions, 
both in total and in a relative sense.
Intercenter Bank
The RCMS included one other significant element, an 
Intercenter Bank. This bank provided revenue centers, 
but not administrative centers, the opportunity to carry 
unrestricted funds across fiscal year boundaries. It thus 
provided revenue center managers incentives to produce 
year-end surpluses rather than just to meet a break-even 
bottom-line. It also reduced the “use-it-or-lose-it” men-
tality, present in some not-for-profit organizations, 
which causes managers to spend all the money that had 
been approved in their budget before the year-end.
The Intercenter Bank was used both by revenue 
centers reporting surpluses and by those reporting 
losses. If a revenue center had a surplus, it was given an 
account in the bank and provided interest on the 
account balance at the fiscal treasury-bill rate as of 
July 1 of the year just started. These revenue center 
managers were to spend their account balance in future 
years, but only up to a maximum of 20% of the balance 
each year. Conversely, revenue centers with a deficit 
were assigned a loan from the bank that charged inter-
est at the treasury-bill rate. They had to budget for 
repayment of the loan at a rate of at least 20% of the 
beginning balance each year.
Criticisms of the RCMS System
Over the years, various faculty groups and other critics 
voiced a number of complaints about the RCMS. These 
included criticisms that the system discouraged inno-
vation, multidisciplinary research, and the seeking of 
some outside grants and that it encouraged both the 
proliferation of redundant and inappropriate courses 
and end-of-period financial gameplaying. It also stimu-
lated numerous debates about the fairness of alloca-
tions of indirect costs.
Discouragement of innovation
The discouragement-of-innovation criticism stemmed 
from the belief that the RCMS forced deans to think of 
their mission more in financial terms than in terms of 

University of Southern California: Responsibility Center Management System
751
their academic mission. An open letter sent by some 
faculty to President Sample stated:
The system in place makes few allowances for the 
various missions and contributions of the academic 
units of the university. Those units unable to show a 
“profit” under current budgetary formulas are con-
demned to live in a deficit situation, to depend 
upon subventions given after demeaning negotia-
tions, and to face inferior status among other units 
in the university.
Some believed that the financial pressure discouraged 
innovation and even teaching quality. One committee 
report noted that “innovators whose ideas do not imply 
immediate income feel that no one in the system will 
give those ideas a sympathetic hearing and so are dis-
couraged from innovating.” Another added that, “Fac-
ulty under pressure to produce income are not focused 
on students.” Some even believed that the emphasis on 
financial performance would lead university administra-
tors to hire deans with, perhaps, more financial manage-
ment abilities than leadership vision for their schools.8
Another group of critics believed that innovation 
and initiative were stifled because RCMS institutional-
ized decentralization only to the level of the deans and, 
thus, did not go far enough. Deans were unlikely to 
carry the delegation any further and, as a consequence, 
the university was stripped of the entrepreneurial ener-
gies of many faculty leaders.
Still another group of critics lamented that much of 
the power and discretionary funds had been taken 
from the USC’s top-level managers, and their roles 
essentially became those of administrators, not leaders. 
Table 1  Individual revenue center summary (2007–2008 budget) ($000)
Marshall School of Business
Thornton School of Music
Undesignated
Designated
Undesignated
Designated
Revenues:
Direct:
$126,866
$12,928
$22,044
$2,404
Center
156,799
12,928
28,862
2,404
UG Student Aid Fund
(25,434)
(6,012)
Facilities Improvement Fund
(4,499)
(806)
Indirect:
(8,485)
2,951
Participation
(10,078)
(1,911)
Academic Initiatives
4,500
Provost’s Initiatives
35
97
Graduate Programs
1,558
265
Total Revenues
$118,381
$12,928
$24,995
$2,404
Expenses:
Direct
$85,846
$12,928
$17,106
$2,404
Indirect
32,535
7,889
Allocated Central Costs
30,292
6,944
Facilities Based
2,243
945
Total Expenses
$118,381
$12,928
$24,995
$2,404
8	 Indeed several of the new deans recently hired at USC (e.g., Medi-
cine, Libraries) had MBA degrees in addition to the terminal degree 
for their field. But Provost Nikias argued that to be successful in 
the twenty-first century, deans needed both leadership vision and 
financial management skills, in that order.

752
Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
One critic noted, “Neither [the president or provost at 
that time] has become identified with any public posi-
tion. All the leadership that is being exerted is coming 
from the [good] deans.”
Discouragement of  
multidisciplinary research
Some faculty believed that the best research, particu-
larly that of an applied nature, was multidisciplinary, 
involving researchers with different skills and perspec-
tives. But since RCMS emphasized financial priorities, 
most deans could not see the financial benefits of multi-
disciplinary research.
In fact, it could be a burden trying to figure out how 
to share project revenues. If, for example, faculty from 
three schools were involved in a multidisciplinary 
research project, should the revenues be shared 
equally? If not, how much should be allocated to the 
school whose personnel conceived of the research idea? 
How much to the school whose personnel prepared the 
proposal? How much to the school that provided the 
facilities where the project was completed? What if 
facilities from two schools were used but the costs of 
these facilities were quite different? The effort required 
to answer all these questions could be sizable. And 
depending on how the revenues and costs of the cross-
revenue center work were shared, the outcome could 
be a financial drain on a revenue center, not a benefit.
Critics noted that little multidisciplinary work was 
being done at USC. They blamed the RCMS, at least in 
part, and cited examples in which deans had repri-
manded faculty members for getting involved in research 
with someone from outside their revenue center.
Discouragement of the seeking  
of outside grants
Some faculty were discouraged from seeking some out-
side funding grants because those grants appeared to 
be “unprofitable” to the revenue center. This is because 
those grants provided indirect cost recoveries at rates 
lower than the departments’ actual spending rates. For 
example, even the US government’s recovery rate of 
63%, which was higher than the recovery rates allowed 
by many foundations, did not cover the overall USC 
average overhead rate, which was approximately 68% 
of direct costs. Furthermore, the indirect cost rates in 
some departments, such as those with expensive labo-
ratories, were several times higher than the overall 
university average.
Encouragement of  
“inappropriate” courses
Some courses tended to proliferate across campus 
because tuition revenues were captured by the school 
who offered the course. Thus many schools offered sim-
ilar or even identical courses (e.g. statistics, communi-
cations) in order to retain all of the tuition dollars at 
their school. Many schools created general education 
courses intended to have market appeal to large num-
bers of undergraduate students. Some schools were 
also accused of offering courses that were popular for 
the wrong reasons. Among the examples cited were 
“gut” (excessively easy) courses that fell below tradi-
tional university standards and the toleration of profes-
sors who graded “liberally” to keep their courses 
popular. Although proposals for new courses were sub-
ject to review and approval by the university’s curricu-
lum committee, this control was deemed by many not 
to have been effective.
Encouragement of end-of-period  
financial gameplaying
Many examples were cited of revenue center managers 
moving revenues and expenses between fiscal years 
depending on whether they were in a budget surplus or 
deficit position. For example, they could ask donors to 
accelerate or delay contributions, or they could deposit 
June donations immediately or wait until after July 1, 
the start of the new fiscal year. They could move 
expenses between years by, for example, accelerating 
or delaying discretionary expenditures or by asking 
faculty and staff members to submit requests for reim-
bursement of expenditures already made in the current 
or following fiscal year.
The deans and many others within the university 
did not consider such manipulations unethical 
because they had observed top-level university 
administrators taking the same types of actions. In its 
entire 126-year history, USC had never posted a fiscal 
year deficit. That record was seen as important 
because it provided evidence that the university was 
well-run, and it contributed to the high quality (Aa1) 
bond rating that USC was given by Moody’s and 
Standard and Poor’s. Both of these indicators facili-
tated the raising of capital and donations from 
alumni, foundations, and the investment community. 
As Dennis Dougherty noted, “Big donors will not give 
to a school running a deficit. They assume the people 
there can’t handle the money.”

University of Southern California: Responsibility Center Management System
753
Debates about the fairness  
of cost allocations
Under RCMS, each revenue center was responsible for 
the full costs of its operations, including its share of indi-
rect costs, the allocated costs of centralized support ser-
vices. Since the inception of RCMS, the university relied 
on a complex set of allocation methods. University 
administrators, in collaboration with revenue center 
managers, determined which centers shared which cost 
pools and how the costs would be spread across pool 
participants. Some cost allocations were based on actual 
usage, but others were based on one or more approxima-
tions. Eventually, the number of allocation bases in 
USC’s indirect cost allocation system grew to nearly 150. 
Doing all the calculations required a major effort.
Not surprisingly, the system caused much tension 
and many debates about the fairness of the allocations 
of indirect costs. Deans would closely examine their 
indirect costs and compare them with their perceived 
usage of central services. Then they would argue as to 
why they should not be charged with costs from a given 
pool, or charged only at a reduced rate perhaps because 
the central services duplicated services provided 
locally by the school or because they simply did not 
value the centralized services. Indeed, the students 
from some schools made little use of such services as 
the central library, computer labs, career services, and/
or transportation services. These discussions con-
sumed considerable time and effort, and the outcomes 
of the discussions often led to an even greater prolifera-
tion of cost pools and more complex calculations. 
Deans worried about their ability to predict what the 
allocation parameters and, hence, their indirect costs, 
would be in the forthcoming year.
Refinements Over the Years
Over the years, USC administrators made a number of 
changes to the RCMS to try to address some of the criti-
cisms of it. These changes included the following:
Centralization of General  
Education courses
In fiscal year 1998 (FY98), the offering of all General 
Education (GE) courses for undergraduate students 
was centralized in the College of Letters, Arts and Sci-
ences (“the College”). The various schools loved the 
opportunity to offer GE courses because they provided 
access to large numbers of students, many of whom 
were non-majors who might develop an interest in the 
School’s offerings. But while most of the GE courses 
offered in various Schools were well designed and 
effectively delivered, these courses seemed to provide 
some of the greatest opportunities for offering courses 
seemingly only for revenue reasons. The decision to 
centralize the offering of GE courses was made to 
ensure academic quality.
This change created a large revenue boost for the 
College and significant revenue challenges for some 
other schools. To allow schools that were adversely 
impacted by this change to adjust their operations and 
priorities, the provost instituted a two-year phase-in 
period. Most schools quickly adapted and stabilized 
themselves financially, but a couple continued to strug-
gle with largely fixed costs (e.g. tenured faculty) and 
sharply reduced revenues. The survival of one school 
was seriously threatened.
Centralization of doctoral  
program finances
In FY03, the finances related to doctoral education 
were centralized. This was done to encourage cross-
school cooperation, to make sure that the best teaching 
and research assistants were employed. Formerly doc-
toral programs were treated like all other graduate pro-
grams. The schools were credited with the revenues 
generated from the courses they offered and were 
charged with the costs of teaching those courses.
But this policy created some revenue/expense mis-
matches. For example, many students from the Engi-
neering School can serve quite effectively as teaching 
assistants in math or physics courses, which are offered 
by the College. Math has a large undergraduate popula-
tion but few graduate students. Formerly, if engineer-
ing students worked as teaching assistants in math 
classes, engineering would get the revenue because the 
engineering students would probably take most, if not 
all, of their courses in engineering, but math would 
have to pay the teaching assistant cost. This type of 
mismatch discouraged schools from using PhD stu-
dents from outside their school.
After the change, starting in FY03, all of the PhD 
revenue was captured centrally and used to cover all 
the costs of PhD student fellowships, teaching 
assistantships, and research assistantships. This 
change allowed schools to hire the best PhD student 
help for their courses and research projects without 
concern for possibly adverse financial consequences.

754
Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
Removal of constraints on  
capital investments
In FY02, a major change was made to USC’s capital-
planning processes. In earlier years, a school had to 
raise nearly all of the money needed to build a new 
facility, plus funds to endow most of the costs of main-
tenance, before construction could start. This conserv-
ative requirement caused significant delays in building 
and often caused completed buildings to be smaller 
than the actual needs of the school.
In FY02, USC’s trustees adopted a centralized capi-
tal program that enabled the university to use debt 
capital, as well as other resources, to build capital pro-
jects more quickly. Academic deans would still be 
responsible for fundraising, but gifts intended to fund 
an academic building would be heavily levered. The 
gift monies would actually be invested in USC’s endow-
ment pool to support the academic programs to be 
housed in the new facility. The facility would be built 
with funds from USC’s new Capital Plan, with debt pay-
ments made from a number of sources, including sub-
ventions, indirect cost recoveries, and investment 
income. Although the Capital Plan originally sought to 
expand the university’s research infrastructure, the 
Plan has since been used also to fund some seismic 
upgrades and renovations. Non-academic (i.e. auxil-
iary) units still had to pay for the entire costs of their 
capital projects through their fundraising efforts and 
operating budgets.
Early evidence suggested that many deans were 
reenergized in their efforts to seek new monies for con-
struction of new facilities. Many new facilities were 
being built and planned.
Changing of the participation “tax”
When the RCMS was first implemented, the schools’ 
participation rate was lowered. It started at 20% of tui-
tion and fees, sales or service income, and indirect cost 
recoveries. At that participation rate, all schools were 
put in a deficit unless they could negotiate with the 
provost for some subvention relief. Thus, the focus of 
every dean during the bonus meetings was on how to 
increase their subvention.
Then-provost Lloyd Armstrong decided that he 
wanted to change the tenor of the budget meetings and 
to increase the decentralization level. Thus, at his direc-
tion, the participation rate was lowered in FY95 to 10%. 
It was lowered again in FY00 to 3.4%. Since then the 
participation rate had been increasing gradually. It was 
6.4% in both FY07 and FY08. When the participation 
rate was 5% or lower, most of the schools could balance 
their budgets even without receiving a subvention.
In FY08, the subvention pool was approximately 
$100 million. About $60 million of this amount was 
spent to balance the budget of some schools that could 
not do so on their own. The other $40 million was to be 
used to further the provost’s strategic objectives.
Modifications of assignments  
of indirect costs
As mentioned earlier, the methods used to allocate 
indirect costs to revenue centers were complex and 
controversial. University officials sought to simplify the 
situation. In FY00, it was decided that the 157 cost 
pools would be collapsed into one. The allocations of 
indirect costs in FY99 would become the new baseline 
going forward. Future years’ allocations were deter-
mined simply by applying the average rate increase in 
all the administrative cost pools, regardless of how 
much of the central services they and their students 
consumed. In recent years, growth in the overall pool 
of administrative center expenses was capped at 5%.
Margo Steurbaut, Associate Senior Vice President 
and University Budget Director, explained:
The allocation of central costs is one of the most 
widely debated and most reviewed aspects of 
RCMS. Any allocation system needs to allocate 
costs in an efficient manner, yet the allocated costs 
should bear some resemblance to actual usage. 
Most of the allocations are based on averages. 
Since the averages do not represent actual for any 
individual unit, the methodologies can become 
dysfunctional over time.
While there will always be a spirited discussion 
over allocation methodologies, most of the focus 
should be on managing the central costs – not allo-
cating them. Once the costs are established, the 
allocations of those costs then create a zero sum 
game on a consolidated level.
Over the years, the number of allocation pools 
used at USC was reduced from 157, to 5, to 1. Hav-
ing fewer pools allowed revenue centers to predict 
future costs more accurately and allowed central 
administration to focus on controlling costs rather 
than trying to determine how to allocate those 
costs. We sacrificed a degree of accuracy for pre-
dictability, and this trade-off was well received by 
both revenue centers and central administration.

University of Southern California: Responsibility Center Management System
755
A major problem with the original allocation sys-
tem with 157 pools was that it penalized any reve-
nue center that was growing faster than the 
university. That revenue center would experience 
allocated indirect cost increases at a rate larger 
than the growth in overall costs. The pie wasn’t 
becoming more caloric, but they had to take a 
larger slice of the pie. The move to a simplified 
methodology was driven by central administra-
tion’s desire to encourage growth.
After the FY00 cost allocation method change, the 
revenue centers that were growing their operations 
faster than the growth in the indirect costs benefited 
from this change because the indirect costs would 
become a smaller proportion of their overall budgets. 
Those that were growing more slowly faced an increas-
ingly large indirect cost burden.
In 2002, an attempt was made to devise a new indi-
rect cost allocation system based on only five or six 
allocation bases. A number of analyses were completed 
that showed a different set of revenue center “winners” 
and “losers.” In particular, schools with new buildings 
would have received significantly higher indirect costs. 
Then-provost Lloyd Armstrong decided at that time to 
stick with the one-pool system.
In 2007, updated numbers were input into the allo-
cation model developed in 2002. This analysis showed 
quite a number of surprising differences in “winners” 
and “losers.” But Provost Nikias decided not to imple-
ment an allocation change. He concluded that the one-
pool system was achieving the desired goals: it enabled 
schools to be able to predict future costs easily, and it 
rewarded growth. Further, there was concern about 
the relatively large number of new deans – eight – who 
had been hired recently. Some senior managers did not 
think it was fair to confront these new deans with, pos-
sibly, a dramatically different financial picture than the 
one they were shown during the interviewing process.
More flexibility in the use of Intercenter 
Bank funds
The Intercenter Bank was originally intended to allow 
some cross-year flexibility in the use of funds. Academic 
units generating surpluses could put those surplus 
funds into the Intercenter Bank and withdraw a portion 
of the balance in a subsequent year to use for any pur-
pose. In the original RCMS design, the dean had to 
withdraw 20% of the balance in the subsequent year. 
But the 20% withdrawal rate was not seen as enough of 
an incentive for deans to turn in their surplus. Thus the 
withdrawal amount was raised in a later year to 33% to 
allow the deans quicker access to their monies.
The vision of Max Nikias, who assumed the provost 
role in 2005, was that all of the surplus funds would be 
placed in a provost reserve account. Deans would have 
to submit a proposal to justify the withdrawal and 
spending of monies from that account. Details of this 
procedure were still being worked out. It was expected 
that before approving any withdrawal, Provost Nikias 
would examine the reasons why the surplus was gener-
ated. Was it for good reasons, such as an increase in the 
student retention rate? Or was it for bad reasons, such 
as the creation of a questionable new course that “stole” 
students from another school? He would also be look-
ing for a good academic justification for spending these 
monies. In addition, he might require the schools to 
maintain a minimum balance of, perhaps, 8–10% of the 
school’s operating budget as an emergency reserve.
Some Senior Management Opinions 
about RCMS
Here are some opinions about RCMS from USC’s CFO, 
an experienced dean, and a recently appointed dean:
Dennis Dougherty
Dennis Dougherty had been USC’s CFO for the entire 
period that USC had used the RCMS. He was closely 
involved in the original RCMS implementation, and he 
thought the system had served its purposes well over 
the years.
One of the advantages of the system is that it’s very 
transparent. You can see everybody’s financial 
statements. But to make it work you need good 
information systems, which not all universities have.
Dennis also noted that the current provost, Max 
Nikias, was making some subtle shifts in the applica-
tion of RCMS:
We will be shrinking our undergraduate student 
population. Max is encouraging the deans to gen-
erate new money, such as from graduate educa-
tion, sponsored research, intellectual property, and 
continuing professional education. The deans are 
not going to get subvention monies based on size. 
He will base them on the quality of the schools’ 
academic plans and the degree to which they are in 
sync with the university’s academic plan.

756
Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
Elizabeth Daley
Elizabeth Daley had served as the dean of USC’s School 
of Cinematic Arts (until 2006 named the School of Cin-
ema-Television) since 1991.
RCMS enables USC to attract people who like to 
build something. The key message in RCMS is very 
clear: you bring in the revenue, and you manage it, 
as long as what you do is academically sound. It 
allows a school to establish itself, grow itself, and 
manage itself. In industry, I had to make payments 
on time and balance a budget. Here too I am 
responsible for the bottom-line. I prefer it that way.
[. . .] With a top-down management system, 
deans might have little control over their own des-
tiny. For example, they might be forced to ask 
their provost questions like, “When can we get 
another faculty line assigned?” With [RCMS] we 
don’t ask that question because we know 
the answer. If the faculty hire is appropriate for 
the academic program, then we can make the hire 
when we have raised the money to sustain that 
position! So, for example, if we want an animation 
program, we know that if we raise the money, pre-
pare a solid curriculum, and show that there is 
demand for the program, then we can do it. This 
is important because I can go to potential donors 
knowing that we have the freedom to propose 
that they fund such a program. We can assure 
them that the funds they give us will indeed be 
used for that program.
[. . .] Without a system like RCMS, I might not 
have been as interested in staying here because 
the cinema school needed a great deal of outside 
support that it did not have at the time I came. 
RCMS enabled us to take the entrepreneurial 
approach that was required to build the resources 
we needed.
[. . .] Sure, there are things I don’t like with any 
budget system. I don’t like surprises. I don’t like 
unfunded mandates, as not every proposal from a 
central administration office fits every school 
equally well. And I don’t like what I sometimes con-
sider as “excessive” taxation. But the negatives are 
very minor compared with how much I like RCMS.
[. . .] I do want to note that I have always believed 
that there are some programs, important programs 
for the university’s academic mission, that probably 
can’t be self-supporting. They need central funding 
help. There are other programs that don’t fit in any 
revenue center but are necessary for the good of the 
whole university. They also need central funding and 
no doubt some of that funding has to come from the 
revenue centers. RCMS has to be balanced between 
self-sufficiency/independence and the good of the 
whole. It’s a philosophy that I think is healthy as long 
as it is applied with some flexibility.
Jim Ellis
Jim Ellis, one of the eight USC deans appointed in 2007, 
was dean of the Marshall School of Business:
It’s a good system for a school like this one with 
critical mass. It carries with it an “eat-what-you-kill” 
philosophy. We know how much we need to raise to 
cover our expenses and to hire new faculty. It’s 
tougher for some small schools. Those deans have 
to go hat in hand to the provost because they don’t 
generate as much income, and their alumni are not 
as wealthy or as generous as some of ours are.
[. . .] I don’t worry about the arbitrary cost alloca-
tion bases as long as they are maintained on a con-
sistent basis year to year. This is not like a business. 
We know our revenue stream. But the indirect costs 
are very significant for us. If the indirect costs 
change, our whole income statement can get 
screwed up. If I feel some uncertainty about the 
size of indirect cost allocations that we will have to 
cover, I will be very conservative in what I do. If I 
know the parameters, I will deal with them.
[. . .] Some of the other deans yell at us for steal-
ing their revenue. That is because the undergradu-
ate business minor has become huge. But we 
require our students to take two courses in math 
and two in economics, and those are taught by pro-
fessors in the college. So we give back. We under-
stand that we are not just here for ourselves; we are 
part of the larger university community.
Looking to the Future
RCMS was more than an accounting system; it defined a 
complete style of decentralized management in a large, 
complex academic setting. Almost no one connected 
with USC wanted to abandon that style of management. 
Some of USC’s successes were attributed to the use of 
RCMS. The system tended to encourage deans to be 
entrepreneurial, yet fiscally prudent. Clearly further 
refinements were necessary, but USC administrators 
were loathe to make changes too quickly.

University of Southern California: Responsibility Center Management System
757
Exhibit 1  Highlights of the University
June 30 2007
June 30 2006
Financial (in thousands)
Total revenues
$2,523,525
$2,257,234
Total cash gifts and equipment gifts
$350,725
$379,471
Capital expenditures
$240,851
$283,869
Total assets at year end
$6,342,621
$5,533,079
Total debt at year end
$505,897
$406,771
Increase in net assets
$674,181
$461,496
Market value of endowment
$3,715,272
$3,065,935
Executed contracts, grants, subcontracts and 
cooperative agreements
$726,485
$794,363
Property, plant and equipment, net
$1,444,566
$1,293,549
Net Asset Balances:
Unrestricted
$3,731,115
$3,147,924
Temporarily restricted
$209,520
$208,009
Permanently restricted
$1,266,961
$1,177,482
Students
Enrollment (head count, autumn):
Undergraduate students
16,729
16,897
Graduate and professional students
16,660
15,939
Degrees conferred:
Bachelor degrees
4,676
4,269
Advanced
5,380
5,274
Certificates
209
188
Annual tuition rate
$33,314
$31,458
Faculty and Staff
Faculty
4,596
4,510
Staff
7,992
7,855

758
Exhibit 2  USC Organization Chart

759
Exhibit 3  USC Provost Organization

760
Chapter 16 • Management Control in Not-for-profit Organizations
Exhibit 4  Role and Mission of USC
This case was prepared by Professor Kenneth A. Merchant with the assistance of Sahil Parmar.
Copyright © by Kenneth A. Merchant.
The central mission of the University of Southern California is the development of human beings and society as a whole 
through the cultivation and enrichment of the human mind and spirit. The principal means by which our mission is 
accomplished are teaching, research, artistic creation, professional practice and selected forms of public service.
Our first priority as faculty and staff is the education of our students, from freshmen to postdoctorals, through a broad 
array of academic, professional, extracurricular and athletic programs of the first rank. The integration of liberal and pro-
fessional learning is one of USC’s special strengths. We strive constantly for excellence in teaching knowledge and skills 
to our students, while at the same time helping them to acquire wisdom and insight, love of truth and beauty, moral 
discernment, understanding of self, and respect and appreciation for others.
Research of the highest quality by our faculty and students is fundamental to our mission. USC is one of a very small 
number of premier academic institutions in which research and teaching are inextricably intertwined, and on which the 
nation depends for a steady stream of new knowledge, art, and technology. Our faculty are not simply teachers of the 
works of others, but active contributors to what is taught, thought and practiced throughout the world.
USC is pluralistic, welcoming outstanding men and women of every race, creed and background. We are a global institu-
tion in a global center, attracting more international students over the years than any other American university. And we 
are private, unfettered by political control, strongly committed to academic freedom, and proud of our entrepreneurial 
heritage.
An extraordinary closeness and willingness to help one another are evident among USC students, alumni, faculty, and 
staff; indeed, for those within its compass the Trojan Family is a genuinely supportive community. Alumni, trustees, vol-
unteers and friends of USC are essential to this family tradition, providing generous financial support, participating in 
university governance, and assisting students at every turn.
In our surrounding neighborhoods and around the globe, USC provides public leadership and public service in such 
diverse fields as health care, economic development, social welfare, scientific research, public policy and the arts. We 
also serve the public interest by being the largest private employer in the city of Los Angeles, as well as the city’s largest 
export industry in the private sector.
USC has played a major role in the development of Southern California for more than a century, and plays an increas-
ingly important role in the development of the nation and the world. We expect to continue to play these roles for many 
centuries to come. Thus our planning, commitments and fiscal policies are directed toward building quality and excel-
lence in the long term.
Adopted by the USC Board of Trustees, February, 1993.

761
 INDEX 
 accountability 
 action  90 – 1 ,  92 ,  94 ,  134 – 7 ,  225 
 of employees (controllability principle)  518 ,  522 – 3 
 in governmental organizations  725 ,  726 
 accounting 
 conservative  694 – 5 
 fund  728 
 mark-to-market  456 
 measures  see accounting measures 
 accounting measures  397 ,  398 ,  401 – 4 
 fi nancial reporting  645 – 6 
 improving  455 – 6 
 at King Engineering Group, Inc.  434 – 5 
 return-on-investment  406 – 11 
 see also fi nancial performance measures 
 accounting methods, of data management  178 
 accounting rules/standards  404 
 and earnings management  687 
 for not-for-profi t organizations  728 
 Ace Hardware  14 
 act of nature  520 – 1 
 action accountability  90 – 1 ,  92 ,  94 ,  134 – 7 ,  225 
 action controls  86 – 95 
 action accountability  90 – 1 ,  134 – 7 
 advantages/disadvantages of  224 – 7 
 behavioral constraints  86 – 90 ,  132 – 3 
 behavioral displacement and  176 – 7 ,  224 
 conditions determining eff ectiveness of  93 – 5 
 and control problems  91 – 2 
 costs of  227 
 and creativity/innovation  225 
 defi nitions of actions  134 – 5 
 and negative attitudes  181 – 2 ,  225 – 6 
 planning and budgeting  297 
 preaction reviews  90 
 tight  131 – 7 
 understandability of  95 
 action reinforcement  136 – 7 
 action tracking  90 ,  94 ,  95 ,  135 – 6 
 activity elimination  16 – 17 
 adaptation, to change  230 – 1 
 adaptation costs  182 – 6 
 administrative constraints  88 ,  132 – 3 
 administrative costs, managerial assignment of  523 
 Adoboli, Kweku  3 
 Advanced Technologies Corporation (ATC)  694 
 Aff ordable Care Act  225 – 6 
 Air Products Chemicals Inc.  35 
 Airbus  37 
 Alibaba  100 ,  101 ,  183 – 4 
 Allfi rst Financial  93 
 Alphabet  452 
 Altman Industries, Inc.  694 – 5 
 Amazon  102 ,  133 ,  450 
 Ambition-to-Action (Statoil)  502 – 6 
 Anderson, Philip  189 – 90 
 Anderson Industries, Inc.  332 – 3 
 Anglo-American corporate governance  573 ,  574 
 anomalies in market valuation  400 – 1 
 Aon Hewitt  363 ,  365 – 6 
 Apple Computer, Inc.  102 ,  231 
 arm’s length transfer pricing  271 
 Arrow Motorcar Corporation  588 – 94 
 asset misappropriations  88 
 asymmetry, of information  178 ,  182 ,  302 
 at-risk pay/compensation  365 
 Atlanta Home Loan (AHL)  25 – 9 
 Atlantis Chemical Industries  212 – 20 
 attitudes  see behavior; negative attitudes 
 attribution theory  528 – 9 
 audit committees  583 – 5 ,  632 
 audit fi rms  634 
 auditors  633 – 9 
 external  634 
 internal  634 – 6 
 audits  633 – 9 
 at Bellagio Casino Resort  150 – 2 
 compliance  637 
 at Desktop Solutions, Inc.  649 – 51 
 external  634 
 fi nancial  636 – 7 
 internal  91 ,  634 – 6 ,  649 
 judgment in  634 
 performance  637 

Index
762
process/procedure 151–2
types of 636–7
value of 637–9
automation 17–18
autonomy 227, 229, 232
Axeon N.V. 121–7
B corporation 722–3
balanced scorecards 456–60
Ballmer, Steve 400
Bank of America 14, 181–2
Bank of Scotland – Corporate 10, 11
Bank of the Desert (BoD) 554–60
Barclays 355
base salaries 356
Bausch & Lomb 130
Bear Stearns 89
behavior, unethical, reasons for 682–4
behavioral displacement, costs 174–6
and action controls 224
behavioral focus 231
behaviors 11–14
constraints on 86–7, 93, 132–3
detecting/preventing undesirable 92
self-interested 13
Beifang Chuang Ye Vehicle Group 532–4
Bellagio Casino Resort 142–67
benchmarking 304
benchmarks 131
Berkshire Industries PLC 442–7
best-guess performance targets 304
Better Beauty, Inc. (BBI) 194–205
beyond-budgeting management model 311–12
Bezos, Jeff 102, 133
bias in measurement 43
Billings Scorecard (Game Shop, Inc.) 244–5
Bio/Precise Medical Devices (BPMD) 625–8
Black, Virginia 226
Black & Decker 353
blackjack dealers at Bellagio Casino Resort 145–6
BNP Paribas 174
boards of directors 580–3
Boeing Company 521
Bogsnes, Bjarte (Statoil) 501–06
Bonnaroo Festival 265
bonuses 358–9
at Bellagio Casino Resort 152
claw-back 368
at Harwood Medical Instruments PLC 374–5
bottom-up planning and budgeting 308
BP 355, 517
Bratton, William J. 41
Bregier, Fabrice 37
bribes 94
Brin, Sergey 452
British Gas 130–1
Brownstein Group 222–3
budget slack 177
budgeting see planning and budgeting
bugs, count as measure 175
bureaucratic organizations 180
business environments 184–5
business models
and financial responsibility centers 269
business risks 184–5, 520
business-unit controllers 631–2
C corporation 722–3
Cadbury Committee 573
capital budgeting 299–300, 452
at Better Beauty, Inc. 196–7
capitalization of investments 455
Carrefour 36–7
case studies
Advanced Technologies Corporation 694
Altman Industries, Inc. 694–5
Anderson Industries, Inc. 332–3
Arrow Motorcar Corporation 588–94
Atlanta Home Loan 25–9
Atlantis Chemical Industries 212–20
Axeon N.V. 121–7
Bank of the Desert (BoD) 554–60
Beifang Chuang Ye Vehicle Group 532–4
Bellagio Casino Resort 142–67
Berkshire Industries PLC 442–7
Better Beauty, Inc. 194–205
Bio/Precise Medical Devices 625–8
budget targets 694
Catalytic Solutions, Inc. 462–9
Central Maine State University (CMSU) 695–6
Cisco Systems, Inc. 708–17
conservative accounting 694–5
Consolidated Furniture Corporation (CFC) 697
Corbridge Industries, Inc. 424–32
Desktop Solutions, Inc. 648–59
Diagnostic Products Corporation 233–41
Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH 470–7
Eastern Technologies, Inc. (ETI) 641–7
Entropic Communications, Inc. 610–24
audits (continued)

Index
763
expiring software licenses 698
EyeOn Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 114–20
Family Care Specialists Medical  
Group, Inc. 252–8
Fine Harvest Restaurant Group 561–4
Fit Food, Inc. 206–11
Game Shop, Inc. 242–51
Global Investors, Inc. 285–96
golden parachutes 594–7
Haengbok Bancorp 422–4
Hoffman Discount Drugs, Inc. 534–40
Houston Fearless 76, Inc. (HF76) 78–85
Howard Building Corporation (HBC) 541–53
Industrial Electronics, Inc. 421–2
Johansen’s Scorecard System 478–87
King Engineering Group, Inc. 433–41
Kooistra Autogroep 71–8
Kranworth Chair Corporation 275–82
Las Ferreterías de México 417–20
Leo’s Four-Plex Theater 22–3
Lernout & Hauspie Speech Products (L&H) 701–8
Lincoln Electric 36
LP&F Cargo Ltd. 660–76
Mainfreight 488–500
Mean Screens USA 700–1
Office Solutions, Inc. 48–57
Olympic Car Wash Company 531–2
Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc. 598–609
PCL Consumer Electronics 168–72
Platinum Pointe land deal 106–13
Private Fitness, Inc. 23–5
Puente Hills Toyota 58–70
Raven Capital, LLC 384–93
Robinson Brothers Homes 106–13
Royal Wessanen NV 315–22
Sales Acceleration Program 697
SCI Ontario 735–45
Statoil 501–16
Stuart & Co. 189–90
Sunrise Medical 36
Sunshine Fashion 190–4
Superconductor Technologies, Inc. 375–83
The Stimson Company (TSC) 323–31
University of Southern California (USC) 746–60
VisuSon, Inc. 342–52
Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation 333–41
Wired, PLC 699–700
Witsky and Associates, Inc., 105–6
Wong’s Pharmacy 23
Zumwald AG 283–4
cash and credit management/controls
at Bellagio Casino Resort 146–8
cash flow, discounted 300, 455
cast members 100
Catalytic Solutions, Inc. 462–9
Central Maine State University (CMSU) 695–6
centralization 18
Chandler, Richard 36
change, adaptation to 230–1
channel stuffing 405
Chaudhri, Fazal 629
checklists, for accountability 90
Chen, Tony 38
chief executive officers (CEOs) 577
chief financial officers (CFOs) 577, 629
at Eastern Technologies, Inc. (ETI) 641–7
China
consumer electronics in 168
corruption in 36–7
incentives/controls in 353
Cho, Fujio 180
churning accounts 174
Cisco Systems, Inc. (Cisco) 264, 708–17
Citibank 38–9
Citigroup 133–4, 449
claw-back of bonuses 368, 454
cloud computing 16
Coca-Cola 363, 526
codes of conduct 98–9, 681, 690, 709–10
collusion
between employees 88, 132
combinations of measures 397
systems to remedy myopia 456–60
commissions and churning accounts 174
at Houston Fearless 76, Inc. 81
commitment, to targets 305–6
compensation committees 585–6
compensation systems
at Beifang Chuang Ye Vehicle Group 533–4
at Catalytic Solutions, Inc. 465–6
at Diagnostic Products Corporation 235–8
at Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH 471–2
at Family Care Specialists Medical  
Group, Inc. 254–6
pay-for-performance 33–4, 365
at Raven Capital, LLC 386–7
at Superconductor Technologies, Inc. 376–8
see also incentive systems
competitive factors and uncontrollability 520
complete profit center 266

Index
764
completeness of controls 130
compliance audits 637
congruence 39
and accounting measures 402, 403
and behavioral displacement 175
and market measures 398
and results controls 128–9
consequentialism ethical model 679–80
Consolidated Furniture Corporation (CFC) 697
Continental Airlines 176
contingency planning/exercises 526
control
good 15, 231–2
control alternatives 19
control-caused operating delays 180
control deficiency, defined 578
control indicators, ethics and 687–9
control loss 15
control problems 37–8
action controls and 91–2
avoidance of 15–19
causes of 12–14
and lack of direction 12
and motivation 12–14, 37
and personal limitations 14
personnel/cultural controls and 101
controllability principle 42–3, 518, 522–3
controllable profit 523
controllers 629–33
at Eastern Technologies, Inc. (ETI) 641–7
controls
choice of 222–9
coordination, planning for 298
Corbat, Michael 38–9
Corbridge Industries, Inc. 424–32
corporate ethics programs 689–90
corporate governance 573–86
Anglo-American system 573, 574
defined 573
European/Japanese system 573, 574, 575
laws and regulations 574–5
management control system and 573–4
see also Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX)
corporate social responsibility (CSR) 721
Corus 304
cost centers 263–4
cost efficiency of measures 45–6
cost-efficient reward systems 366
cost-focused entities 265
cost of capital 403–4
costs 173–86
of action control 227
adaptation 182–6
administrative, managerial assignment of 523
of automation 18
of capital 403–4
direct 173–4
of financial results control systems 262
indirect 174–82
of longer-term investments 451
of management intervention 306–7
courage, and ethics 681–2
creativity, and control 225
Crédit Agricole 449
critical success factors 229
Cronk, William F. 101
Cryan, John 367
cultural controls 86, 97–103
behavioral displacement and 177
and control problems 101
design and evaluation 222–4
effectiveness of 101–3
tight 137–9
culture 223
at Volkswagen 223–4
cutoffs/caps, in incentive system 364–5
data manipulation/management
of earnings 405, 449, 642–3, 686–7
as indirect cost 178–9
Davis Service Group 298
decentralization 35, 36, 37, 121
at Atlantis Chemical Industries 214–15
decision authority 132
decision-making authority 267
Dell 139
Deloitte 176–7
design and evaluation 221–32
personnel/cultural controls 222–4
desired actions 93–5
desired results 42–3, 128–30, 221
Desktop Solutions, Inc. 648–59
Deutsche Bank 16
developmental expenses 451
Diagnostic Products Corporation 233–41
direct costs 173–4
direct supervision//monitoring 90
directors 580–3
finance director 629
discounted cash flow 300, 455

Index
765
discretionary cost centers 264
Disneyland 100
distorted incentives 175
division controllers 631–2
divisionalization 406
and financial responsibility centers 267–8
at Kranworth Chair Corporation 277–8
document assembly software 17
Domino’s Pizza 527–8
Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH (DKG) 470–7
Dreyer’s Grand Ice Cream 101
Drucker, Peter 448
dual-rate transfer prices 273
Dudley, Bob 355
DuPont 35
earnings, management of 405, 449, 642–4, 686–7
see also profits
Eastern Technologies, Inc. (ETI) 641–7
economic factors and uncontrollability 520
economic income 399, 455
Economic Value Added (EVA) 412–13, 456
Education Food Services 695–6
effort-directing incentives 355
effort-inducing incentives 355
electronic control regimes 226
electronic sweatshops 689
Elson, Charles 581
EMC 16
Emerson Electric 457
Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) 434
employees
accountability of (controllability principle) 518, 522–3
action tracking 90, 94, 95, 135–6
and autonomy 227, 229, 232
collusion between 88, 132
controllability principle 42
lack of direction 12
licensing of 149
loyalty of 95
and motivation 12–14, 355
in not-for-profit organizations 731
and performance measures 39
personal limitations 14
punishments 40
risk aversion 228, 519
rotation of 100
selection and placement 95–6
subjectivity in contracts 364
timeliness 44
empowerment 34
engineered cost centers 263
engineered targets 302
Enron 691
enterprise risk management, at Entropic 
Communications, Inc. 611–13
entrepreneurial model 35
Entropic Communications, Inc. 610–24
escalating commitment 300
ethical analyses, importance of 678–82
ethical issues 677–91
analyzing 682
codes of conduct 98–9, 681, 690, 709–10
management control-related 684–9
ethical models 679–82
ethics
and budgetary slack 685–6, 695–6
at Cisco Systems, Inc. 708–17
codes of conduct 98–9, 681, 709–10
and control indicators 787–9
and earnings management 642–4, 686–7
good 689–91
European/Japanese corporate  
governance 573, 574, 575
evaluation see design and evaluation
ex post facto 528
exchange rate variance 525
excuse culture 528
Exelco 629
expectancy theory 41
expiring software licenses 698
external audit/auditors 634
external scrutiny, not-for-profit organizations 728–30
external targets 303–4
extrinsic rewards 41
EyeOn Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 114–20
facilitating payments 94
falsification, of data 178
Family Care Specialists Medical Group, Inc. 252–8
feasibility
of automation 18
of controls 224
of market measures 401
of results controls 227
feed-forward control 298
feed-forward control system 458
feedforward control 298
fiduciary duties/obligations 574
of controllers 631

Index
766
finance director 629
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) 727
financial audits 636–7
financial performance measures 397–413
accounting measures see accounting measures
and congruence 402, 403
and divisionalized organizations 406
Economic Value Added (EVA) 412–13
market measures 397, 399–401
nonfinancial measures 397
summary measures 397, 401, 402
value creation 498–9
see also performance evaluation and measurement; 
performance targets
financial reporting
at Eastern Technologies, Inc. 645–6
at SCI Ontario 737
financial responsibility centers 261–274
choice of 267–9
and controllability principle 522
cost centers 263–5
investment centers 266
profit centers 264–6
revenue centers 263
and transfer prices 266, 269–74, 287–9
types of 262–6
and uncontrollable factors 522–3
financial results control systems 261–2
Financial Services Authority (FSA) 3, 4
financial statement fraud 88
Fine Harvest Restaurant Group 561–70
firm value 397, 721
Fit Food, Inc. 206–11
fixed performance targets 302–3
flexible budgets 526
flexible performance standards 526–7
flexible performance targets 302–3
foolproof system 89
force majeure 520–1
forecasting
at Houston Fearless 76, Inc. 80
at Statoil 504–6
forecasting errors 527
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 94
foreign currency translation risk 185–6
formulaic rewards 364
franchises 90
fraud triangle model 683–4
frauds 3–4
and collusion between employees 88, 132
at Lernout & Hauspie Speech Products 704–5
occupational 88
sophisticated 136
at Sunshine Fashions 191–3
fraudulent trading 3–4
free riding effect 370
full cost plus a markup transfer pricing 270, 272
full cost transfer pricing 270, 272
functions of management 7
fund accounting 728
future-oriented control 15
Game Shop, Inc. (GSI) 242–51
games controls, at Bellagio Casino Resort 149–52
gamesmanship/gameplaying
and budget targets 307–8
as indirect cost 177–9
slack resources, creation of 177–8
stock market valuations 449
gaming laws and regulations 144–5
garbage collectors, and behavioral displacement 175–6
General Electric (GE) 229, 449, 450, 526
General Motors (GM) 35–6
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) 
361, 636
Gill, Gary 13
Giraldo, Maria 40
Global Investors, Inc. 285–96
Global Restructuring Group (GRG) 264
goals see targets/goals
golden parachutes 594–7
Goldman Sachs 138
good control 15, 231–2
GoodData 11
Google 452
Code of Conduct for 681
Gorsky, Alex 36
government intervention, and business risk 184–5
governmental organizations 723
accountability of 725, 726
conflict in 725
Grace, Adrian 10, 11
Green, Stephen 368
Griffith, Ray 14
gross book values (GBV) 410
gross margin center 266
gross margins 265
group rewards 99–100, 370
Gulf of Mexico oil leak 355, 517
Gulliver, Stuart 4

Index
767
Haengbok Bancorp 422–4
Haier 301, 353
Hakes, Howard 48
Hamel, Gary 304
Hammer, Michael 35
Handelsbanken 359
Harch Capital Management 449
Harding, Andrew 17
Harwood Medical Instruments PLC (HMI) 374–5
Havens, John 133–4
Hay Group 33
healthcare, in Los Angeles 253
Hewlett-Packard (HP) 232
hierarchies, control through 16
hindsight bias 364
hindsight effect 528
historical targets 302
Hitchcock Automotive Services 48
Hoffman Discount Drugs, Inc. 534–40
Hofrichter, David 365
Hofstede, Geert 183
Hollandsworth Ltd. 121–2, 124
Honesty Project (game) 139
honeypots 88
Houston Fearless 76, Inc. (HF76) 78–85
Howard Building Corporation (HBC) 541–53
HSBC 4, 369
Huawei 37
IBM 178, 405–6, 450
incentive formula 364
incentive system 36, 37, 39, 353–70
as action reinforcement 136–7
at Atlantis Chemical Industries 213
at Bank of the Desert 555
and base salaries 356
at Berkshire Industries PLC 442–3
at Better Beauty, Inc. 197
bonuses see bonuses
and compliance 356
cutoffs/caps in 364–5
design 364–5
effort-directing 355
effort-inducing 355
evaluation criteria 365–70
at Fit Food, Inc. 206–7
at Houston Fearless 76, Inc. 82–4
informational purpose of 355
Johansen’s Scorecard System 479–81
at King Engineering Group, Inc. 437–9
at Kranworth Chair Corporation 278–9
at Las Ferreterías de México 418–19
long-term 359–64, 453–4
monetary 354–5, 357–64, 366–70
motivational aspect of 355–6
non-monetary 353–4
purposes of 355–7
results controls and 130–1
short-term 358–9, 364
tailored systems 41
and taxation 356
see also compensation systems; rewards
incomplete profit center 266
indexed options 362
indirect costs 174–82
individualism, and national culture 183
Industrial Electronics, Inc. 421–2
industry volume variance 525
inflation 185
information asymmetry 178, 182, 302
information sharing, in target setting 309
innovation, and control 225
insurance 18–9, 522
integrity, ethical virtue 681
intended strategy 10
interdependence, and uncontrollability 521
internal audit/auditors 91, 634–6, 649
internal controls 89, 137, 580
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 87
internal targets 303–4
International Financial Reporting  
Standards (IFRS) 361
intra-organizational transfers 100
intrinsic motivation 95
intrinsic rewards 41, 681
investment centers 266
investment myopia 404–6
Jaburg Wilk 96
JDA 16
Jensen, Michael 398
job design 97
job rotation 100
Jobs, Steve 102
Johansen’s Scorecard System 478–87
Johnson & Johnson 36, 450
Jones Day 38
judgment
in audits 634
professional 90

Index
768
Juschus, Alexander 5
justice/fairness ethical model 680–1
K-values 138
Kelleher, Herb 102
Kellogg 138
key actions/results 221, 229
key performance indicator (KPI) 229
at Statoil 502–6
killing entrepreneurship 180
King, Joe 16
King Engineering Group, Inc. 433–41
Kitson, Alison 228
knowledge
of desired actions 93–5
of desired results 42
in objectives setting 9–10
Koch, Charles 34
Koch Industries 34
Kooistra Autogroep 71–8
Koskinen, John 87
KPMG 12, 13
KPMG Forensic 133, 138
KPMG International 705–6
Kranworth Chair Corporation 275–82
lack of direction 12, 222, 300
Lagarde, Christine 678
Lampert, Edward 36
Las Ferreterías de México 417–20
leased assets 411
Lee, Matthew 688
Leo’s Four-Plex Theater 22–3
Lernout & Hauspie Speech Products (L&H) 701–8
Levi Strauss 177
Lewitt, Michael 449
Liang, Charles 132
licensing of employees 149
likely results 221
Lincoln Electric 36
Lloyd 358
local institutions 184
long-term incentive plans (LTIPs) 360, 453–4
at Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH 472–4
long-term incentives 359–364
Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (DWP) 725
loyalty 95
as ethical virtue 681
LP&F Cargo Ltd. 660–76
Luckhurst, Jason 9, 10
MacLeod, Andrew 365
Mainfreight 488–500
Mairena, Bob 48
Mairena, Cindy 48
managed cost centers 264
management
defined 6–7
management-by-exception 38, 262, 298
management control system (MCS) 11
characteristics of good 15
and corporate governance 573–4
problem avoidance 15–19
situational factors 231
views of 7–8
see also control problems
management intervention, uncontrollability of 522
managerial myopia 130
marginal cost transfer pricing 270, 271–2
marginal costs plus a fixed lump-sum fee 273
mark-to-market accounting 456
market-based transfer pricing 271
market prices 270
market share variance 525
market value, of firm 399
marketing
at Houston Fearless 76, Inc. 80–2
markets
control through 16
Marriott International 521
masculinity, and national culture 183
master games worksheet (Bellagio) 150–1
material weakness (Sarbanes-Oxley Act) 577, 578
May, Theresa 229
Mayo, Mike 449
McCormick, Matt 449
McDonald, David 242
McDonald’s 90
McGunnigle, Paul 541
Mean Screens USA 700–1
means-ends inversion 176
measurement see performance evaluation and 
measurement
MemorialCare Health System 45
meritocracies 34
Merrill Lynch 181–2
MGM MIRAGE see Bellagio Casino Resort
micro profit centers 265
Microsoft 400, 577, 579
model-based targets 302
models of ethics 679–82

Index
769
Moneta Group 96–7
monetary incentives 354–5, 357–364
evaluation criteria 366–70
moral courage 684
moral disengagement 684
motivation 12–14, 37, 41, 298, 305, 355–6
intrinsic 95
multinational organizations (MNOs) 182–3
multiple transfer pricing methods 274
multitasking nature of jobs 397
mutual benefit organizations 723
myopia problem 398, 404–6
accounting measures improvement 455–6
measurement horizon 453–4
remedies to 448–60
and shareholder value 455
and stock market valuations 448–9
mystery shoppers 90, 150
naming and shaming 353
national culture
and adaptation costs 183–4
defined 183
taxonomies of 183
National Health and Hospitals Reform  
Commission 33–4
negative attitudes
and action controls 225–6
costs of 180–2
negotiated targets 302
negotiated transfer pricing 270–1, 272–3
net book values (NBV) 409, 410
Netflix 132
New York City Police 41
non-monetary incentives 353–4
nonfinancial measures 397
not-for-profit organizations 721–31
accounting differences 727–8
employees in 731
external scrutiny 728–30
for-profit organizations vs. 723–4
performance of 725–27
objective setting 9–10
objectives 221 see also congruence; targets/goals
objectives-driven control 15
objectivity
of action reports 94
of results control measurements 39, 44
occupational frauds 88
Office Solutions, Inc. 48–57
Olympic Car Wash Company 531–2
Opel 35
operating delays, as indirect cost 180
operating expenses 451
operating income 451
operating methods, of data management 178–9
operating myopia 404–6
operational budgeting 300–1
optimal control 15
optimistic projections, and targets 306
option plans 360–4
organizational architecture 37
organizational culture see management style/culture
organizational strategy see strategy
organizational structure
centralization 18
decentralization 35, 36, 37, 121
divisionalization 267–8, 277–8, 406
and financial responsibility centers 267–9
Ott, Linda 342
out of control 15
out-of-pocket costs 173
outcome effect 528
Pacific Sunwear of California, Inc. (PacSun) 598–609
Page, Larry 452
Parker, Tim 37
pay-for-performance 33–4, 358, 365
pay-performance function 364
PCL Consumer Electronics 168–72
penetration testers 88
perfect control 15
performance audits 637
performance bonds 454
performance-dependent rewards 356
performance dimensions 38–9
performance evaluation and measurement 39–40
at Atlantis Chemical Industries 213
at Bank of the Desert 555
at Bellagio Casino Resort 143
at Fine Harvest Restaurant Group 562–3
Johansen’s Scorecard System 479–81
at King Engineering Group, Inc. 434–5
at Kranworth Chair Corporation 278–9
at Mainfreight 492–3
in not-for-profit organizations 725–7
objectivity of 39, 44
precision of 43–4
relative performance evaluation (RPE) 400, 527–8

Index
770
reporting 523
results controls 228
at Statoil 506–7
subjective judgments/evaluations 39
subjective performance evaluations 528–9
and tight results control 130
timeliness 44
at University of Southern California 748–50
weighting 40
see also financial performance measures
performance management system (PMS)
Mainfreight 489
performance options 362
Performance Prisms method 457
Performance Share Units (PSUs) 363
performance stock plans 362–4
performance targets
and commitment 305–6
and costs of management intervention 306–7
engineered targets 302
external targets 303–4
financial targets issues 304–10
fixed targets 302–3
flexible targets 302–3, 526–7
internal targets 303–4
and motivation 305
negotiated targets 302
and optimistic projections 306
setting 40, 301–10
at Statoil 504–6
see also gamesmanship/gameplaying; targets/goals
performance-vested options 362
personal limitations 14
personnel see employees
personnel controls 86, 95–7
behavioral displacement and 177
and control problems 101
design and evaluation 222–4
effectiveness of 101–3
tight 137–9
Petter, James 16
Philippines’ Bureau of Internal Revenue 130
physical arrangements 100
physical constraints 86–7, 132
physical sweatshops 689
Pita Pit 96
planning and budgeting 297–312
as action controls 297
budget targets 694
budgetary slack 177–8, 685–6, 695–6
at Corbridge Industries, Inc. 425–6
at Dortmunder-Koppel GmbH 471
Fine Harvest Restaurant Group 562–70
flexible budgets 526
at King Engineering Group, Inc. 435
and motivation 298
practices 310–12
purpose of 297–9
rolling budgets 527
at Royal Wessanen NV 316–18
scenario planning 526, 527
at VisuSon, Inc. 344–5
see also performance targets
planning cycles 299–301
Platinum Pointe land deal 106–13
poka-yokes 89
pooled interdependencies 521
Powell, Richard 133
power distance, and national culture 183
Practicus 9, 10
preaction reviews
as action control 90
for management oversight 298
and negative attitudes 181
and tight controls 133–4
precision 43–4, 94
premium options 362
private benefit organizations 723
Private Fitness, Inc. 23–5
proactive controls 298
problem avoidance 15–19 see also control problems
processes of management 7
professional employees 35
professional judgment 90
profit centers 264–6
profits
as accounting measure 403
controllable 523
repatriation of 270
and short-termism 450–1
and uncontrollable factors 520, 523
Progressive (Ohio-based insurance company) 450
public benefit organizations 723
Puente Hills Toyota (PHT) 58–70
punishments 40, 353
ratcheting 302
Raven Capital, LLC 384–93
reactive controls 298
performance evaluation (continued)

Index
771
reciprocal interdependencies 521
redundancy, as action control 91
Reilly, Nick 35–6
relative performance evaluation (RPE) 400, 527–8
repatriation of profits 270
reporting
financial see financial reporting
segregated performance reports 523
solid-line 632–3
residual income measures 411–13
responsibility centers see financial responsibility 
centers
restricted stock plans 361
restricting decision authority 132
results controls 33–46
advantages and disadvantages of 227–9
behavioral displacement and 174–6
completeness of 130
conditions determining effectiveness of 42–6
and control problems 37–8
controllability principle 42–3
desired results 42–3, 128–30, 221
elements of 38–41
and empowerment 34
financial systems 261–2
likely results 221
negative attitudes produced by 181
prevalence of 34–7
tight 128–31
return-on-investment (ROI) measures 406–11
problems caused by 408–11
revenue centers 263
reversible rewards 366
rewards 40, 181
cost efficient 366
durable 366
extrinsic 41
formulaic 364
group 99–100, 370
intrinsic 41, 681
performance-dependent 356
reversible 366
understandability of 366
see also incentive system
rights and duties ethical model 680
Rio Tinto 17
Riordan, Richard 732
risk
aversion, employees 228, 519
business 184–5, 520
enterprise, at Entropic Communications Inc. 611–13
foreign currency translation 185–6
limiting 16
sharing 18–19
see also uncontrollable factors
Robinson Brothers Homes 106–13
ROI trees 406
role-based allowances 356–7
rolling budgets 527
Rosner, Josh 449
Royal Bank of Scotland 264, 358
Royal College of Nursing (RCN) 228
Royal Wessanen NV 315–22
rubber stamping 134
Russell, Don 641–7
salaries
base 356
increases in 357
variable pay 356, 358
see also incentive system
Sales Accleration Program (Consolidated  
Furniture) 697
sales-focused entities 265
sales forecasting
at Houston Fearless 76, Inc. 82
sales price variance 525
Samaniego, Luis (Family Care Specialists) 252–8
Samsonite 37
sandbagging 685
Sanofi-Aventis 35
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) 574, 575–80
and auditors 633
compliance at Cisco 711–12
compliance at Game Shop, Inc. 243
compliance at Pacific Sunwear 599–602
provisions of 576–7
and whistle blowers 677
Scavell, Andrew G. 660–76
scenario planning 526, 527
Schloth, Peter 359
scientific management 13
scorecards 39
balanced 456–60
at Game Shop, Inc. 244–5
Johansen’s 478–87
at Statoil 502–4
Section 365 (Sarbanes-Oxley Act)
compliance at Pacific Sunwear 599–602
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 137, 574–5

Index
772
segregated performance reports 523
segregation of information principle 88
self-interested behaviors 13
self-monitoring 95
separation of duties 88–9
September 11 terrorist attacks 521
sequential interdependencies 521
shareholder value 455
shareholders 184, 575
Shell 367
short-term incentives 358–9, 364
short-termism
of employees (bonuses) 368
and profits 450–1
and results controls 174
see also myopia problem
significant deficiency, defined 578
simultaneous tight-loose controls 230
situational factors 231
slack, creation of 177–4, 685–6, 695–6
Slater & Gordon 370
Sloan, Alfred P. 35, 402–3
social arrangements 100
software licenses 698
solid-line reporting 632–3
South Bend Tribune newspaper 226
Southwest Airlines 102, 230
Specificity, of performance expectations 129
Spinal Cord Injury Ontario (SCI Ontario) 735–45
stakeholders 9, 38, 184, 677
standard cost centers 263
Stanek, Roman 11
Statoil 501–16
Stern Stewart & Company 456
Stimson, Henry 323
Stock Appreciation Rights (SARs) 363
stock market valuations 448–9
stock option plans 360–4
strategic business unit (SBU) 35, 182
strategic planning 299
at Corbridge Industries, Inc. 427–8
at SCI Ontario 737
strategy 221
and financial responsibility centers 268–9
formulation of 10
intended 10
at Statoil 502–4
Stuart & Co. 189–90
subjective performance evaluations 528–9
subjectivity in employment contracts 364
suboptimization 398
and ROI measures 408
subsidiary companies
of Axeon N.V. 123–4
summary accounting measures 397, 401, 402
Sunrise Medical 36, 179
Sunshine Fashion 190–4
Super Micro Computer 132
Superconductor Technologies, Inc. 375–83
supervision/surveillance, at Bellagio Casino Resort 150
talent 185
targets/goals
ambiguity/conflict in not-for-profit organizations 724–5
communication/internalization 129
see also performance targets
targets-incentives-measurement 297
taxation 356
teamwork 177
Tesco 14, 131, 179, 679
theft, at Sunshine Fashions 191–3
The Stimson Company (TSC) 323–31
Thompson, Wade 33
Thor Industries 33
3M Corporation 457
Tiffany’s 89
tight action controls 131–7
behavioral constraints 132–3
preaction reviews 133–4
tight controls 229–30
tight personnel/cultural controls 137–9
tight results controls 128–31
and engineered targets 302
timeliness
in results control 44
in tracking actions 95
Tirole, Jean 40
today businesses/tomorrow businesses 452
tone at the top 100
top management oversight 298
Toshiba 102
Toyota Motor Corporation 180
trafficking rings and performance targets 39
training 96–7
transaction cost economics 16
transfer pricing 266, 269–74
alternatives 270–3
at Global Investors, Inc. 287–9
and interdependencies 521
purposes of 269–70

Index
773
Treadway Commission 573
treasury function 630
Turner Broadcasting 133
UBS 3–4, 367
uncertainty, country-specific environmental 184
uncertainty avoiding individuals 183
uncontrollable factors
and controllability principle 518–20
controlling distorting effects of 522–9
issues 529
and profits 520
and results controls 228
types of 520–2
understandability
of accounting measures 402
of combination of measures systems 458
of results controls 44
of rewards 366
unethical behavior, reasons for 682–4
United Parcel Service (UPS) 181
University of Southern California (USC) 728, 746–60
US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) 625–7
US Government Accountability Office (GAO) 137
utilitarianism ethical model 679–80
valences 41
valuation anomalies in markets 400–1
value creation 398–9
value drivers 456–60
van der Veer, Jeroen 367
variable pay 356, 358
variance analysis 263, 524–5
vice president finance (VP Finance) 629
virtues ethical model 681–2
VisuSon, Inc. 342–52
Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation 333–41
volcanic ash cloud, effects of 521
Volkswagen 4–5, 223–4
Volvo 303, 304
Wabash National Corporation 137–8
Wal-Mart 36–7, 131
Warren, Venkat 45
weighted average cost of capital 411
Welch, Jack 229, 304
whistle-blowers 101, 677
Wired, PLC 699–700
Witsky and Associates, Inc., 105–6
Wong’s Pharmacy 23
Wright, Sean 206
Wright, Vicky 33
zero-based budgeting 302
Zhengfei, Ren 37
Zumwald AG 283–4

