
Contents
Foreword
Introduction
Chapter 1. Airway management
Definition of airway management
Concept of a stepwise approach
Basic anatomy of the airway
Basic airway management manoeuvres
Basic airway adjuncts
Advanced airway adjuncts and cricothyroidotomy
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 2. Assisted ventilation
Definition of assisted ventilation
Indications for assisted ventilation
The literature and complications associated with assisted ventilation
Equipment and procedures for assisted ventilation
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 3. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation and basic life support
Definitions
The chain of survival
2

Adult basic life support
Basic life support in pregnancy
Mechanical chest compression devices
The recovery position
Paediatric basic life support
Newborn life support
Foreign body airway obstruction (choking)
Chapter key point
References and Further reading
Chapter 4. Defibrillation
Definition of defibrillation
The literature behind defibrillation
Procedure for defibrillation
Definition of transcutaneous cardiac pacing (TCP)
Terminology used in transcutaneous cardiac pacing
Indications for use of transcutaneous cardiac pacing
The literature behind transcutaneous cardiac pacing
Equipment
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
5. Cardiovascular observations and examination techniques
The assessment of pulses
Capillary refill time measurement
Blood pressure measurement
3

The electrocardiogram
Cardiac auscultation
Temperature measurement
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 6. Respiratory observations and examination techniques
Indications for respiratory assessment
Respiratory rate
Respiratory depth assessment
Chest and respiratory inspection
Chest compliance
Respiratory pattern/rhythm assessment
Oxygen saturations/pulse oximetry
Peak flow measurement
Chest percussion
Tactile vocal fremitus
Chest auscultation
Vocal resonance
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 7. Neurological observations and examination techniques
Definitions
Level of consciousness assessment
Pupillary assessment
4

Assessing motor function
Assessment of reflexes
Assessment of movement and power
Assessment of co-ordination
Assessment of abnormal movements
Sensory function assessment
FAST
Vital signs
Blood glucose testing
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 8. History taking and communication
Definitions
Key communication skills
Communication models
The practitioner–patient relationship
A standardised history framework
Questioning techniques
Consent
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 9. Documentation and record keeping
Definitions
Why keep healthcare records?
5

What constitutes good medical records?
Models of record keeping
Abbreviations
Key documents in record keeping and documentation
The Caldicott Guardian
Electronic patient records
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 10. Drug administration
Definitions
Legislation related to paramedic administration of drugs
Drug formulations
Drug documentation
Storage of drugs
Routes of administration
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 11. Medical gases
Definition and indications for the use of Entonox
Advantages of Entonox
Contraindications to the use of Entonox
Equipment
Principles of administration of Entonox
Procedure for administering Entonox
6

Troubleshooting
Definition of oxygen therapy
Indications for use
Cautions and contraindications to the use of oxygen
Equipment
Procedure for administering oxygen
Use of cylinders and cylinder safety
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 12. Infection control
Definitions
Indications for infection control
Hand hygiene
Personal protective equipment
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 13. Vascular access devices
Definition of a vascular access device
Anatomy of veins
Peripheral cannulas
Indications for peripheral cannulation
Selection of device for peripheral cannulation
Selection of vein
Techniques of venodilatation
7

Complications of peripheral venous cannulation
Procedure for peripheral venous cannulation
Intraosseous infusion
Anatomy of bones
Indications for intraosseous access
Contraindications to intraosseous access
Equipment for intraosseous access
Complications of intraosseous access
Location sites for intraosseous access
Procedures for intraosseous access
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 14. Needle thoracocentesis
Definitions
The literature surrounding needle thoracocentesis
Equipment
Indications for use
Contraindications for use
Potential problems of use
Procedures for needle thoracocentesis
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 15. Pain assessment and management
Definitions
8

Acute pain v chronic pain
Assessing pain
Assessing pain in cognitively impaired patients
Overview of pain management techniques
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 16. Fracture and soft tissue injury management
Definitions: What are fractures, sprains, strains and dislocations?
General principles of musculoskeletal injury management
Principles of splinting
Slings and support bandages
Box splints
Vacuum splints
Neighbour strapping
Traction splints
SAM splints
Pelvic fractures
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 17. Spinal management
Relevant gross anatomy
Evidence on how to immobilise the spine
Hazards and complications associated with spinal immobilisation
Indications for spinal immobilisation
9

Equipment and procedures
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 18. Assessment and management of wounds and burns
Definitions
Classification of wounds
Wound healing
Principles of wound management
The use of tourniquets and haemostatic dressings
Burns assessment
Burn management principles
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Chapter 19. Moving and handling procedures
Definitions
Why is moving and handling important?
Key legislation
Manual handling and no lift policies
Risk assessment in moving and handling
Biomechanical principles
Principles of manual handling
Additional principles
Lifting aids
Chapter key points
10

References and Further reading
Index
11

12

This edition first published 2010
© 2010 by Pete Gregory and Ian Mursell
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February
2007. Blackwell’s publishing programme has been merged with Wiley’s
global
Scientific,
Technical,
and
Medical
business
to
form
Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered office
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West
Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom
Editorial offices
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, United Kingdom
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for
information about how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright
material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/
wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been
asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act
1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as
permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without
the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some
content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often
claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this
book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks
of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any
product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to
13
Proudly sourced and uploaded by [StormRG] 
   Kickass Torrents | TPB | ET | h33t

provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject
matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not
engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other
expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional
should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gregory, Pete, BSc.
Manual of clinical paramedic procedures / Pete Gregory and Ian Mursell.
p.; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN
978-1-4051-6355-2
(pbk.
:
alk.
paper)
1.
Emergency
medicine–Handbooks,
manuals,
etc.
2.
Emergency
medical
technicians–Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Mursell, Ian. II. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Emergency Treatment–methods–Handbooks. 2. Emergency
Medical Technicians–Handbooks. WB 39 G823m 2009]
RC86.8.G743 2009
616.02′5–dc22
2009005456
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
1 2010
14

Pete Gregory
With thanks to Alison and Natalie Gregory for their patience and support
during the writing of this book.
Ian Mursell
For Kate and Ollie.
15

Foreword
The Manual of Clinical Paramedic Procedures is unique in its extensive
use of references to support the practical guidance that it offers.
Evidence-based medicine is a core principle of practice in the modern UK
National Health Service and in many other health providers throughout the
world.
Its
application
in
pre-hospital
care
is,
however,
still
under-developed, but this text goes a long way towards addressing this
deficiency.
Both authors are experienced paramedics and educators, and draw on a
considerable body of expertise to meet the needs of their readers. The
appropriate audience for this book includes student paramedics, who will
find this a rich source of material to support their studies, but also the
broadest range of practitioners in pre-hospital care, resuscitation, and
emergency medicine, including registered paramedics, doctors, nurses,
resuscitation officers, and medical students.
Each chapter starts with a definition of the topic to be addressed. Where
appropriate, the relevant anatomy and physiology are briefly but helpfully
reviewed, followed by a detailed description of each clinical procedure.
The use of copious colour pictures adds significantly to the utility of the
clear, concise, and eminently readable text. Scenarios are used to establish
the context of each chapter in true-to-life clinical settings, and break-out
boxes prompt the reader to apply the principles described as they read
through the material. Step-wise descriptions of each procedure are
supported by detailed rationales for each sub-process and provide an
important insight into the concepts behind each technique. Key points
boxes emphasise particularly critical issues and summarise chapter
contents, and each chapter ends with an extensive reference and further
reading list. The use of this wide range of methods for presenting
information means that this book will suit most readers, regardless of their
preferred learning style, will aid retention, and prevent boredom.
I am naturally a lazy reader when studying, preferring to disappear into a
good
science
fiction
novel
rather
than
a
textbook.
Yet
I
can
enthusiastically
recommend
the
Manual
of
Clinical
Paramedic
Procedures as the book that I wish had been available to me when I was
studying to become a paramedic, and the one which I wish I had written
myself! It should take pride of place on the bookshelf of any student or
16

experienced practitioner of pre-hospital care – but should be re-read at
regular intervals to support the highest standards of clinical practice that
we all aspire to.
Malcolm Woollard, PA02584, MPH, MBA, MA(ED), DipIMC (RCSED),
PGCE, RN, MCPara, NFESC, FASI, FHEA, FACAP
Professor
in
Pre-hospital
and
Emergency
Care
and
Director,
Pre-hospital, Emergency & Cardiovascular Care Applied Research
Group, Coventry University Chair, College of Paramedics
Honorary Consultant Paramedic, West Midlands & South East Coast
Ambulance Service NHS Trusts
Professor in Pre-hospital Care, Charles Sturt University, NSW, Australia
Adjunct Senior Research Fellow, Monash University, Victoria, Australia
17

Introduction
Clinical skills are fundamental in the day-to-day work of prehospital care
providers, yet it is difficult to find a text book that not only demonstrates a
step-by-step approach to clinical skills, but also provides evidence to
support the approaches being advocated. At a time where pre-hospital
providers are becoming ever more high-profile and public expectations are
increasing,
it
is
essential
that
Paramedics,
Emergency
Medical
Technicians (EMT), and those working in the voluntary services adopt
practices that are supported by the evidence. There is currently a dearth of
high-quality research in prehospital care to either support or refute many
of the activities carried out by prehospital providers but there is often good
evidence from other disciplines that can be extrapolated to fill the void.
The Manual of Clinical Paramedic Procedures serves to review the
available literature surrounding the application of key skills in prehospital
care, challenges some current practices, and offers recommendations
based upon the findings. The clear diagrams, pictures and supporting
evidence will provide a sound reference text for those at the beginning of
their health care careers through to those who are already established as
competent practitioners. It will also serve the many proactive members of
the voluntary ambulance organisations looking to enhance the service that
they provide to their communities.
For the qualified Paramedic, the manual provides the evidence to underpin
their practice and offers a ready source of information that will prove
invaluable when mentoring paramedic students. It will also add to the
Paramedic’s
portfolio
of
continuing
professional
development
by
challenging current thinking and allowing the Paramedic to reflect upon
how the evidence has influenced changes in their practice. Many of the
clinical skills discussed within the book also fall within the remit of
non-paramedic prehospital practitioners so there is plenty of value for the
EMT, first responder and members of a voluntary care organisation. For
the Paramedic student, the book is invaluable for learning clinical skills
and has the advantage over other texts in that it clearly cites its references,
which can easily be integrated into academic essays and reflections.
The
application
of
clinical
skills
in
emergency
care
is
rarely
straightforward, especially in the hostile prehospital environment. It is
hoped that by using this manual as a basis for performing clinical skills,
18

the practitioner will be better placed to make decisions and will have the
underpinning knowledge to perform the skills safely and to greatest
patient benefit.
19

Chapter 1
Airway management
Content
Definition of airway management
Concept of a stepwise approach
Basic anatomy of the airway
Basic airway management manoeuvres
Basic airway adjuncts
Advanced airway adjuncts and cricothyroidotomy
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
In emergency care, airway management is an essential first step as a
means of achieving both oxygenation and ventilation. Failure to manage
and maintain the airway can lead to neurological dysfunction and even
death within minutes.1 This chapter discusses the concept of a stepwise
approach to airway management and provides the rationale for the airway
interventions currently available to the paramedic.
20

Definition of airway
management
Airway management may be defined as the provision of a free and clear
passageway for airflow. Obstruction of the airway may be partial or
complete and may occur at any level from the nose to the trachea. In the
unconscious patient, the most common site of airway obstruction is at the
level of the pharynx2 and this obstruction has usually been attributed to
posterior displacement of the tongue caused by reduced muscle tone.
However, the cause of airway obstruction is often the soft palate and the
epiglottis rather than the tongue.3,4 Obstruction may also be caused by
vomit or blood, swelling of the airway (e.g. anaphylaxis), a foreign body,
or laryngeal spasm.
Concept of a stepwise
approach
Airway management techniques range from basic manual manoeuvres to
the
more
complex
techniques
of
tracheal
intubation
and
cricothyroidotomy. Each technique comes with its own inherent risks and
it is essential that the paramedic is aware of the problems and limitations
of each technique. It is advocated that a stepwise approach that leads from
the least invasive to the most invasive technique be adopted.1 The
paramedic may choose to miss out certain steps based upon the needs of
the patient, but a risk-benefit analysis should be undertaken to ensure that
the most appropriate airway management technique is employed. It should
be noted that measurement of airway adjuncts only provides a starting
point for deciding on the appropriate size; it is essential to assess the
effectiveness of any airway manoeuvre once undertaken.
Scenario
You are called to attend a 37-year-old female patient in cardiopulmonary arrest. On
arrival you find that the patient is in the third trimester of pregnancy lying supine on the
21

floor. What anatomical and physiological changes occur during pregnancy that may
affect your airway management strategy? How would you manage the patient’s airway?
Basic anatomy of the airway
See Figure 1.1.
Safe airway management requires sound knowledge of the relevant
anatomy. This section provides an overview of the nose, pharynx, larynx,
trachea and main bronchi; the practitioner is advised to refer to an
appropriate anatomy text book for a deeper description of the airway.
Nose
The nose can be divided into external and internal portions. The external
portion provides a supporting structure of bone and cartilage for the
overlying muscle and skin; it is lined with a mucous membrane. The bony
framework of the external nose is formed by the frontal bone, nasal bones
and maxillae.
The internal portion lies inferior to the nasal bone and superior to the
mouth and contains both muscle and a mucous membrane. It is worth
remembering that the internal nares extend in an anterior-posterior
direction, especially when inserting a nasopharyngeal airway.
Mouth
The mouth is not strictly a part of the airway, but as many airway
management interventions involve the mouth, it is worth reviewing basic
anatomy. The mouth is formed by the cheeks, hard and soft palates, and
the tongue.5 The lips surround the opening to the mouth and each lip is
attached to its respective gum by the labial frenulum. The vestibule is the
space between the cheeks or lips, and the teeth. The roof is formed by the
hard and soft palates, whilst the tongue dominates the floor. The anterior
portion of the tongue is free but connected to the underlying epithelium by
22

the lingual frenulum. The border between the mouth and the oropharynx
extends from the dangling uvula to the base of the tongue.6
Figure 1.1 Lateral wall of nasal cavity. Reproduced from Faiz, O. and
Moffat, D. Anatomy at a Glance, 2nd edn, copyright 2006, with
permission of Blackwell Publishing.
Pharynx
The pharynx is divided into three anatomical sections; the nasopharynx
(extending from the internal nares to the posterior edge of the soft palate),
the oropharynx (extending to the base of the tongue at the level of the
hyoid bone) and the laryngopharynx (extending to the opening of the
oesophagus).
Larynx
See Figures 1.2 and 1.3.
This is a very important structure in terms of airway management and it is
essential to know the anatomy in depth. Basic anatomy is outlined here
but it is recommended that revision should be undertaken with an
appropriate anatomy text (see reference 5).
Figure 1.2 Cartilages of the larynx. Reproduced from Faiz, O. and Moffat,
D. Anatomy at a Glance, 2nd edn, copyright 2006, with permission of
Blackwell Publishing.
23

Figure 1.3 Larynx as viewed through a laryngoscope. Reproduced from
Faiz, O. and Moffat, D. Anatomy at a Glance, 2nd edn, copyright 2006,
with permission of Blackwell Publishing.
The larynx consists of nine cartilages; three paired and three single, as
described below.
The epiglottis projects above the glottis and protects the larynx during
swallowing. The thyroid cartilage forms most of the anterior and lateral
surfaces of the larynx and tends to be more prominent in men. The cricoid
cartilage is the ring-shaped cartilage that connects the larynx to the
trachea. The three paired cartilages are found within the interior structure
of the larynx and are the arytenoids, corniculate and cuneiform cartilages.
Trachea
See Figure 1.4.
The trachea is approximately 11–12 cm long and 2.5 cm in diameter. It is
held open by ‘C’ shape cartilage, which is open posteriorly to allow for
extension of the oesophagus during swallowing. The trachea bifurcates
into the left and right main bronchi around the level of the 5th thoracic
vertebra. The right main bronchus is larger in diameter than the left and
24

extends at a steeper angle – an endotracheal tube that has been inserted too
far is most likely to locate itself in the right side, as are foreign body
obstructions.
Figure 1.4 Trachea and main bronchi. Reproduced from Faiz, O. and
Moffat, D., Anatomy at a Glance 2nd edn, copyright 2006, with
permission of Blackwell Publishing.
Basic airway management
manoeuvres
Head tilt and chin lift
This manoeuvre has been the mainstay of basic airway management for
nearly 50 years with few changes advocated since the early 1960s. The
rescuer’s hand is placed on the patient’s forehead and the head gently
25

tilted back; the fingertips of the other hand are placed under the point of
the patient’s chin, which is gently lifted to stretch the anterior neck
structures (Figure 1.5).
Jaw thrust
The jaw thrust is recommended where there is a risk of cervical spine
injury but it may be used electively on any patient. Where there is no risk
of spinal injury, the manoeuvre may be applied on its own or in
conjunction with a head tilt manoeuvre.
The jaw thrust brings the mandible forwards and relieves obstruction by
the soft palate and epiglottis. The practitioner places their index and other
fingers behind the angle of the mandible and their thumbs on the mandible
itself (Figure 1.6). The thumbs gently open the mouth whilst the fingers
are used to apply pressure upwards and forwards. This movement causes
the
condyles
of
the
mandible
to
sublux
anteriorly
in
the
temporomandibular joints. This displaces the mandible and tongue
anteriorly, thereby clearing the airway.7
Figure 1.5 Head-tilt, chin-lift.
Figure 1.6 Jaw thrust.
26

THINK
Is there any circumstance where it would be permissible to perform a head tilt and
chin lift manoeuvre in a patient with suspected cervical spine injury?
Basic airway adjuncts
Nasopharyngeal airway
See Figure 1.7.
The nasopharyngeal airway (NPA) is a simple airway adjunct that is used
by a number of different healthcare disciplines. It has advantages over the
oropharyngeal airway (OPA) in that it can be used in the presence of
trismus, an intact gag reflex, or oral trauma.8 Despite these advantages,
the NPA is used less frequently than the OPA.9,10
Figure 1.7 Nasopharyngeal airways.
27

Figure 1.8 Bevel of NPA against the septum.
The NPA is designed to relieve soft tissue upper airway obstruction in a
patient requiring airway support. The tube follows the natural curvature of
the nasopharynx and extends to the posterior pharynx below the base of
the tongue where it separates the soft palate from the pharynx. The distal
end is bevelled to facilitate placing of the tube; the bevel should be placed
against the nasal septum (Figure 1.8).
Sizing of an NPA
Traditional methods of sizing have tended to compare the NPA with the
patients little finger or the size of their external nares; these methods are
based on anecdote rather than evidence and are likely to be flawed. Both
methods place emphasis on the diameter of the tube rather than the length
28

despite an earlier study clearly showing that the length of the tube was
more important than the diameter.11 This study suggested that the tube
should lie within 1 cm of the epiglottis. If too short the airway would not
separate the soft palate from the posterior wall of the pharynx and if too
long would enter either the larynx and stimulate laryngeal reflexes, or
enter the vallecula with the inherent risk of obstructing the airway.
One small study has shown that neither of the traditional methods for
measuring the NPA correlated with the nasal anatomy of the subject, so
are unreliable.12 A clear correlation between patient height and their
nares-epiglottis length has been demonstrated11 so it is perhaps more
sensible to base NPA size on the patient’s height and sex. In the absence
of a more accurate measurement, it is recommended that a size 6 (130 mm
length) be used for an average female and a size 7 (150 mm length) for an
average male.8,12 Longer or shorter lengths may be considered for patients
who are taller or shorter than average.
Once the initial choice has been made the NPA should be measured to
ensure that only the correct length is inserted. A reasonable way of
ascertaining this is to measure from the tip of the nose to the tragus of the
ear. There is sufficient anatomical correlation for this to prove reliable
although checks to ensure correct placement should be undertaken
afterwards. When the length has been ascertained, the safety pin should be
inserted into the proximal end of the NPA at the maximum point of
insertion; this will prevent the NPA from being inserted too far into the
pharynx and possibly into the oesophagus. For example, if a size 7 (150
mm) had been selected and the measure from the tip of the nose to the
tragus was 145 mm, the pin should be placed 5 mm distal to the flange of
the NPA. The safety pin is not there to prevent loss of the NPA into the
external nares. When inserting the safety pin, place to the side of the NPA
to allow free passage for suction catheters if required.
Contraindications
A commonly taught contraindication to the use of an NPA is a potential or
known basal skull fracture. Two published case reports of an NPA being
inserted through a fractured cribriform plate into the cranial vault13,14
may have been responsible for the development of this contraindication
and it has been propagated by the Advanced Trauma Life Support Manual
and courses. It is difficult to know whether these were isolated
29

occurrences or whether further reports are less likely as it is no longer a
novel complication, plus there may be a tendency to under report clinical
errors.15 The consensus appears to be that NPA placement may be
necessary,
even
where
relative
contraindications
exist,
to
avoid
sub-standard airway management in patients with suspected or apparent
base of skull fracture.
Complications
The most common complication is bleeding, which may cause serious
airway obstruction if not managed. Blood tends to coagulate in the trachea
and will form a solid occlusion to the passage of air. Patient positioning
may help if bleeding does occur and suctioning will also be of benefit,
although it is possible that suctioning may not be sufficient to maintain a
clear airway.
If the bleeding is in the anterior portion of the nose, consider use of a
tampon to stem the flow. If in the posterior portion of the nose, it may be
necessary to insert a device such as a urinary catheter so that the balloon
can be inflated to prevent aspiration of blood. Any practitioner who inserts
an NPA must have a contingency plan for managing haemorrhage should
it occur.
Necrosis of the anterior aspect of the nose may also occur if the diameter
of the NPA is too large. If there is evidence of blanching around the
external nares the NPA should be removed and a smaller one inserted.
Necrosis will commence within about 20 minutes of the occlusion of
blood supply and it is very difficult to cosmetically alter any damage.
Equipment required
•
Range of nasopharyngeal airways
•
Water-based lubricant
•
Devices to arrest haemorrhage in both anterior and posterior portion
of nose should it occur.
Technique for insertion
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
30

1. Select appropriate size, 7.0 as a
starting point for an average adult male
and 6.0 for an average adult female.
2. Once the selection has been made,
measure from the tip of the nose to the
tragus of the ear. Insert safety pin to
mark the maximum depth of insertion
(this should be at the proximal end of
the NPA).
If too short the airway would not
separate the soft palate from the
posterior wall of the pharynx; if too
long may enter either the larynx or
vallecula where the airway could
become obstructed.
3. Where no risk of cervical spine injury
exists, hyperextend the head and neck.
Stretches the anterior neck structures
to relieve obstruction of the soft palate
and epiglottis.
4. Lubricate the exterior of the tube
with a water-soluble gel.
Minimises trauma during insertion.
5. If there is no obvious nasal
deformity, it is recommended that the
right nostril be used.12
The bevel of the NPA is designed to
cause less trauma to the mucosa when
inserted into the right nostril.
6. Where deformity exists, the most
patent nostril should be selected.
7. If inserting into the left nostril the
bevel is placed alongside the septum and
the airway rotated through 180° when it
enters the nasopharynx.
To minimise trauma to the internal
nares.
8. Insert the tube into the selected
nostril and follow the nasal floor parallel
to the mouth. It is imperative that the
airway is not pushed in a cephalad
direction.
This ensures correct location and
reduces risk of cranial insertion where
basal skull fracture exists.
9. Avoid pushing against any resistance.
If resistance is felt, remove the airway,
review technique and reinsert using the
other nostril.
Pushing against resistance may cause
bleeding and kinking of the NPA.
10. Verify appropriate position by
listening for clear breath sounds and
looking for chest rise and fall. Air may
also be felt at the proximal end of the
airway in the spontaneously breathing
patient.
Ensures correct placement.
31

11. Check to make sure there is no
blanching of the patient’s nostrils. If
there is, remove NPA and select a
smaller diameter.
Prevents necrosis of the tissues.
Oropharyngeal airway
See Figure 1.9.
Oropharyngeal airways (OPA) are available in sizes suitable for neonate
(00) to large adult (4). It is a curved plastic device designed to follow the
curvature of the palate. It works to keep the tongue away from the
posterior pharynx and to separate the soft palate from the pharyngeal wall.
The OPA is designed to be used in unconscious patients requiring airway
support and should only be inserted in those patients who have absent
laryngeal and glossopharyngeal reflexes.16 Use of an OPA in patients with
these reflexes intact may cause vomiting or laryngospasm.
The oropharyngeal airway can become obstructed at three possible sites:17
part of the tongue can occlude the end of the airway; the airway can lodge
in the vallecula; and the airway can be obstructed by the epiglottis.
Sizing of an OPA
There is little evidence to support or contradict the traditional methods of
sizing an OPA. Current teaching suggests that the length of the OPA
should correspond with the vertical distance between the patient’s incisors
and the angle of the jaw (Figure 1.10).16 This measurement is achieved by
placing the flange of the OPA against the patient’s cheek, parallel to the
front of the incisors and viewing the tip at the angle of the jaw.18 If the
airway is too long it may occlude the airway by locating within the
vallecula and displacing the epiglottis; if too short it will not separate the
soft palate or tongue from the posterior wall of the pharynx.
Figure 1.9 Oropharyngeal airways.
32

Figure 1.10 Measuring an OP airway.
Contraindications
The OPA should not be used in any patient with an intact gag reflex.
Equipment required
Range of oropharyngeal airways.
33

Techniques for insertion
Procedure
Additional information/
rationale
1. Select appropriate size.
If too short the airway would
not separate the soft palate
from the posterior wall of the
pharynx; too long may
displace the epiglottis.
2. Where no risk of cervical spine injury exists,
hyperextend the head and neck. Grasp the
patient’s jaw and lift anteriorly.
Stretches the anterior neck
structures to relieve
obstruction of the soft palate
and epiglottis.
3. Using other hand, hold the OPA at its proximal
end and insert it into the patients mouth with the
tip pointing towards the roof of the mouth.
Avoids unnecessary trauma
to the delicate tissues in the
mouth and inadvertent
blocking of the airway by
pushing the tongue back.
4. Once the tip reaches the level of the soft
palate, gently rotate the airway 180° until it comes
to rest over the tongue.
Brings the OPA into the
alignment required for use.
5. The flattened, reinforced section of a correctly
sized OPA should lie between the patient’s teeth/
dentures or gums. The lips should not be pulled
over the flange of the OPA as this may cause
damage to the labial frenulum.
Acts as a bite block.
6. Verify appropriate position by listening for
clear breath sounds and looking for chest rise and
fall.
Ensures correct placement.
See also Figures 1.11–1.14.
In small children the above technique should not be used due to the friable
nature of the hard palate. Instead a tongue depressor should be employed
and the OPA should be inserted ‘right side up’ with the tip pointing
towards the tongue rather than the roof of the mouth.19 This technique
may also be utilised for adult patients where a tongue depressor is
available.18
Figure 1.11 Insertion of an OPA.
34

Figure 1.12 Insertion of an OPA.
Figure 1.13 Insertion of an OPA.
35

Figure 1.14 Insertion of an OPA.
THINK
What factors would influence you when deciding whether to use a nasopharyngeal
or oropharyngeal airway?
36

Advanced airway adjuncts
and cricothyroidotomy
Laryngeal mask airway
See Figure 1.15.
The laryngeal mask airway (LMA) comprises a wide-bore tube with an
elliptical inflatable cuff designed to seal around the laryngeal inlet.16 The
proximal end of the tube is fitted with a standard 15/22 mm connector.
The LMA can be placed blind, requires less skill and is easier to insert
than a tracheal tube.20–26 The LMA provides for more efficient ventilation
than with a bag-valve-mask (BVM) alone,27 and when an LMA can be
inserted without delay, it is recommended that bag-mask ventilation be
avoided altogether.16
Figure 1.15 Laryngeal mask airway.
The LMA has been studied during cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
but no studies have made a direct comparison with endotracheal
intubation. The literature suggests that during CPR successful ventilation
is achieved with an LMA in 72–98% of cases28–34 and there is a reduction
in the number of cases of regurgitation.35 The perceived disadvantages of
the LMA over endotracheal intubation surround the increased risk of
37

aspiration and the inability to provide adequate ventilation for those with
low lung or chest compliance.16 There is currently no evidence
demonstrating whether it is possible to perform continuous chest
compressions with an LMA in situ; this may be one of the main benefits
of endotracheal intubation.
A case series suggests that the LMA may have a use in the prehospital
management of critically ill patients with inaccessible airways following
trauma,36 a contention supported by a manikin-based study comparing
LMA with endotracheal intubation or Combitube in a simulation of
restricted access to the patient’s airway.37 Times to ventilation with the
LMA were much more rapid than with either of the other options but
further research is required before a categorical recommendation can be
made. Given the current level of evidence it is reasonable to suggest that
where basic airway adjuncts do not provide the level of airway support
required and endotracheal intubation is constrained by poor access to the
patient’s airway, the LMA should be considered as an alternative.
There are significant concerns regarding the intubation success of
paramedics (mainly from literature in the USA [see later in this chapter])
and the LMA may be a reasonable alternative where endotracheal
intubation has failed, or electively as part of a stepwise approach to airway
management.
Sizing of a laryngeal mask airway
Sizing of the LMA is based upon the weight of the patient and this
information can normally be found on the sterile packet and the LMA
device itself. Table 1.1 gives typical ranges, but these values may change
depending upon the brand of LMA used.
Contraindications
The LMA cannot be used in a patient with an intact gag reflex.
As the LMA is less effective at preventing aspiration, consideration needs
to be given to alternative methods in patients at higher risk of
regurgitation; for example, patients who are pregnant or who have a hiatus
hernia.38
38

Table 1.1 Typical values for LMA
Size Age/weight range
Maximum cuff inflation (mL air)
1
Neonates up to 5 kg 4
1.5
Children 5–10 kg
7
2
Children 10–20 kg
10
2.5
Children 20–30 kg
14
3
Children 30–50 kg
20
4
Small/normal adults 30
5
Normal/large adults 40
Equipment required
•
LMA – range of sizes
•
50 mL syringe
•
Tie
•
Lubrication
•
Stethoscope.
Procedure
Note: this describes the ‘classic’ technique; modified techniques exist for
specific situations and LMA devices.
Procedure
Additional information/
rationale
Check and prepare all equipment:
1. Check the cuff by inflating it with 50% more air
than is required.
• Completely deflate the cuff, conforming it so that
no folds appear near the tip; this may be achieved
by pressing the device, cuff down, on a flat surface.
Use the inside of the sterile LMA packet to
minimise the risk of contamination.
• Lubricate the base of the device with a
water-soluble lubricant.
Reduces the risk of
inserting a device that will
fail.
To ensure that the cuff will
inflate and seal correctly
when in situ. Hygiene.
Minimise trauma during
insertion.
39

2. The patient should be preoxygenated prior to
insertion and ventilation should be interrupted for
no more than 30 seconds to achieve correct
placement. Before inserting the LMA, the patient’s
neck is flexed and the head extended (‘sniffing
position’) by pushing the head from behind with the
non-dominant hand.39
Preoxygenation replaces
the primarily nitrogenous
mixture of ambient air,
which constitutes the
patient’s functional
residual capacity, with
oxygen, so increases the
interval before desaturation
in a patient who is
hypoventilating or apnoeic.
3. Place the index finger of the dominant hand in
the notch between the tube and the cuff
4. Open the patient’s mouth and slide the convex
side of the airway against the roof of the patient’s
mouth.
Guides the LMA and
avoids pushing the tongue
backwards with the risk of
airway obstruction.
5. Use your finger to push against the hard palate
and advance past the tongue; once past the tongue,
the LMA should advance easily. It is usually
necessary to remove the dominant hand from the
tube in order to facilitate final positioning of the
LMA into the hypopharynx. Maintain a hold of the
LMA with the sub-dominant hand whilst the
dominant hand is withdrawn and then ease the
LMA into its final position with the dominant
hand.
6. Inflate the cuff with the appropriate amount of
air and, if properly positioned, the LMA should
move out of the airway slightly (1–2 cm).
Inflation of the cuff forms
a sealaround the laryngeal
inlet.
7. Following inflation, ventilate the patient and
look for rise and fall of the chest. Auscultate the
chest toconfirm air entry.
Re-oxygenates the patient
andensures correct
placement.
8. Secure the tube with an appropriate tie and
consider using a rigid cervical collar to reduce
flexion and extension of the head and neck.
The LMA was not
designed to be used in
patients who are being
transported so careful
attention must be paid to
the airway during any
patient manoeuvres.
40

Complications
Complications from LMA use can be categorised into mechanical,
traumatic and pathophysiological.40 Mechanical complications relate to
the technical performance as an airway device and include failed insertion
(0.3–4%), ineffective seal (>5%), and malposition (20–35%).40 Traumatic
complications relate to local tissue damage and include sore throat (10%
with ranges between 0–70%), dysphagia (4–24%), and dysarthria
(4–47%).40 Pathophysiological complications relate to the LMA’s effects
on the body and include coughing (<2%), vomiting (0.02–5%) detectable
regurgitation (0–80%), and clinical regurgitation (0.1%).40
There is little evidence available from prehospital studies so the figures
presented above are derived largely from studies in the operating
department. It has been stated that prehospital LMA success rates are
lower than those seen in the hospital cardiac arrest or elective surgical
patient but the data are old and may not reflect current trends.41
An incident of gastric rupture associated with paramedic use of the LMA
during CPR has been reported although there appears to be only one
published report of such an occurrence;42 healthcare professionals should
not discount the use of the LMA on the basis of one case report.
Endotracheal intubation
Endotracheal intubation (ETI) is considered to be the ‘gold standard’ of
airway management43 and involves the introduction of a cuff-sealed tube
into the trachea. The cuffed tube seals the trachea up to peak pressures of
approximately 50 mbar and prevents aspiration of solid or liquid foreign
material.44 Endotracheal intubation confers numerous advantages over the
bag-valve-mask:44
•
Secure ventilation with patient-adjusted airway pressures
•
Optimum protection against aspiration
•
Option of administering medication (e.g. epinephrine, lidocaine,
atropine, naloxone)
•
Bronchial suction.
The indications for prehospital ETI may be dependent upon the
availability of sedatives or neuromuscular-blocking agents to facilitate
41

endotracheal
intubation;
without
pharmacological
adjuncts,
the
practitioner may be unable to intubate unless the patient has a severely
reduced level of consciousness.
There are numerous concerns surrounding out-of-hospital intubation by
paramedics as studies evaluating either survival or neurological outcome
following out-of-hospital ETI have failed to show any significant
benefits.45–59 It is acknowledged that there are weaknesses in many of
these studies in that they were mainly retrospective analyses of trauma
patients involving a single centre or countrywide trauma register. Studies
tended to evaluate survival to discharge only rather than long-term
follow-up, and often inferred neurological outcome based on discharge
destination, e.g. to home, to rehabilitation centre; none used formal
neurological scales to measure outcomes. Not all studies took into account
the confounding factors that may have affected patient outcome, which is
a major factor in retrospective studies, and some did not adjust outcomes
for severity of injury or illness.
Although there are inherent weaknesses in the studies, it has to be
recognised that multiple studies have arrived at similar conclusions.
THINK
You have tried unsuccessfully to intubate a patient but still believe this to be the
correct course of action. What can you do to improve your chances of success?
Equipment required
•
Oxygen and ventilation equipment
•
Laryngoscope handle and blades
•
Endotracheal tube, bougie
•
10 mL syringe
•
Water-soluble lubricant (see notes below)
•
Magill forceps
•
Tape, tie or commercial tube securing device
•
Suction.
42

Preparation of equipment and discussion
•
Oxygen: Ensure adequate supply of oxygen with which to ventilate
the patient.
•
Endotracheal tube: Select correct tube size. The size of the tube is
printed on the sterile package as well as on the tube itself.
Traditionally, the largest diameter was advocated to minimise
resistance to airflow; 9 mm for an adult male, 8 mm for an adult
female and 7 mm for an adolescent60 (see Table 1.2 for paediatric
sizes). Balance the desire for a large diameter with the risk of
mucosal damage that may be caused by an oversized tube.60
•
Inflate the cuff with 10 mL of air and check there are no leaks.
•
Check to ensure that the connector is firmly attached to the
proximal end of the tube.
•
There is debate as to whether tubes should be cut or uncut;
cutting tubes to the appropriate length reduces the risk of right
bronchial intubation and may reduce movement and rotation of
the tube when connected to a ventilator.
•
Laryngoscope blades and handle: It is best to have a selection of
blades available as some patients may be easier to intubate with one
rather than another. Check the integrity of the blade, and the
brightness and tightness of the bulb. A straight61 or McCoy blade62
may improve the view at laryngoscopy; however, extra skill and
training are required for these laryngoscopes to be effective. There
is no evidence to suggest that it is appropriate to have either the
straight or the McCoy blade available for paramedics.63 A recent
device, the Airtraq laryngoscope has proved successful in manikin
trials,64,65 and will be discussed later in this chapter.
•
Bougie: Bougies are 60 cm long tracheal tube introducers with an
external diameter of 5 mm to accommodate tracheal tubes >6 mm
internal diameter. There is generally a ‘coudé’ tip, which comprises
a 35 degree angle 2.5 cm from the distal end; this facilitates
insertion of the bougie through the vocal cords when only the
epiglottis (Grade III view) or tip of the arytenoids (Grade II view)
can be visualised. The traditional technique has been for a 2nd
operator to thread the tube over the bougie although there is sense
in having the tube already positioned on the bougie in prehospital
care given the emergency nature of the intubation.
43

•
A literature review recommended that the bougie should be
available to paramedics as long ago as 200066 but it is likely
that many paramedics do not have access to, or have not been
trained in their use.63 A shaped bougie has been shown to be
better than a straight bougie,67 and JRCALC are now
advocating that a bougie be available for all prehospital
intubation. Given that the practitioner should be aiming for a
first time successful intubation, it is reasonable to assert that a
bougie should be used for EVERY intubation rather than
visualising first only to find a grade III view.
•
Recommendation: All ambulance paramedics should have
access to and be trained in the use of bougies. Paramedics
should routinely use a bougie for tracheal intubations to avoid
delays
created
when
a
poor
view
is
obtained
through
laryngoscopy.
•
Magill forceps: Magill forceps are curved forceps that may be
useful for removing obstructions under direct vision, or helping to
guide the tip of the tube towards the trachea.
•
Lubricant: Tubes for orotracheal intubation are usually lubricated
prior to use as a matter of routine based on tradition. Searches have
identified no literature to support the use of water-based lubricant
to ease the passage of the tube and products such as KY Gel have
been shown not to reduce the incidence of post-operative sore
throat.68 There has been a report of obstruction of a lubricated
tracheal tube with a flexible clear membrane said to be ‘like a lump
of glue’.69 Analysis suggested that the most likely contaminant that
caused the problem was a water-based lubricant.70
•
It has been stated that lubricants may result in tube obstruction
and interfere with inspection of the tube70 and there appears to
be nothing to be gained from lubricating oral tracheal tubes.71
•
Recommendation: Routine lubrication of orotracheal tubes is
to be discouraged until evidence shows that benefits outweigh
the potential problems.
Table 1.2 Recommended tracheal tube sizes for children
Age
Diameter (mm) Length (cm)
Birth
3
10
1 month
3
10
44

3 months
3.5
11
6 months
4
12
9 months
4
12
12 months 4.5
13
18 months 4.5
13
2 years
5
14
3 years
5
14
4 years
5
15
5 years
5.5
15
6 years
6
16
7 years
6
16
8 years
6.5
17
9 years
6.5
17
10 years
7
18
11 years
7
18
Reference: Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. UK
Ambulance Service Clinical Practice Guidelines. London: JRCALC,
2006.
Confirming placement of the tube
There has been concern over the safety of endotracheal intubation by
paramedics in the prehospital environment. At time of writing no studies
have taken place in the UK to evaluate paramedic success rates although
the College of Paramedics (CoP) Research and Audit Committee are
looking to facilitate this study. Reports suggest that between 5.8% and
25% of endotracheal intubations carried out by paramedics are misplaced
and unrecognised on arrival at the emergency department (ED).72,73,74,75
In a 2004 survey, 76% of UK ambulance services provided nothing more
than a stethoscope to confirm tube placement.63 A stethoscope on its own
is unreliable to confirm correct placement as breath sounds have been
shown to be present in 48% of oesophageal intubations.76
45

Additional
measures
for
confirming
tube
placement
•
Oesophageal detector devices: The oesophageal detector device
(ODD) is a suction device fitted to an endotracheal tube (ETT) and
depends on anatomical differences between the oesophagus and the
trachea. When suction is applied with an oesophageal ETT
placement, the oesophageal wall collapses and very little air can be
suctioned. The person operating the device will notice a marked
resistance. With correct ET tube placement, the rigidity of the
tracheal cartilage prevents collapse so air can be suctioned and no
resistance will be noticed.
•
Reports on the effectiveness of the ODD have varied. One
report found that only 50% of oesophageal intubations were
detected,77 whilst two other studies found the ODD to have
high sensitivity for oesophageal intubation but low specificity
for tracheal intubation (meaning correctly placed tubes may
have been removed)78,79 A further study found the ODD to be
more specific for tracheal intubation than end tidal CO2 in the
context of cardiac arrest although this study was undertaken in
the ED rather than out of hospital.80
•
Recommendation: The ODD is useful as a further adjunct to
confirm tube placement but it is neither sensitive enough nor
specific enough to be used as the sole measure of correct
placement.
•
Capnometry: Capnometry measures the amount of CO2 in a gas
sample.
Capnometers
may
use
colorimetric
or
electronic
technology. Colorimetric capnometers use a chemical reaction to
detect the presence of CO2 in exhaled gas. A filter containing
metacresol purple is placed between the ETT and ventilation device
and when CO2 is greater than 2%, the filter turns yellow. This
reaction is rapid and should occur with each breath.38 Electronic
capnometers detect and calculate the amount of CO2 in each breath
and provide real-time indication of the patient’s CO2 levels. It
should be noted that capnometry is one of the minimum standards
used by UK anaesthetists81 and its use should be compulsory in
pre-hospital care.
46

•
Condensation in the tube: Teaching related to condensation in the
tube is based on tradition rather than evidence. Only one study has
been conducted to evaluate the value of misting in the tube and that
was conducted on dogs so has limited applicability to humans. In
this study, condensation appeared in 100% of tracheal intubations
and 83% of oesophageal intubations.82
•
Recommendation: Evidence is limited but condensation in the
tubing should not be relied upon as an indicator of tracheal
tube placement.
Key Point
No single method of assessing tube placement is infallible so practitioners should
use more than one methodology. Combined use of visualisation, ODD,
capnography, auscultation, and patient condition should conspire to improve the
recognition rate for misplaced intubations.
How many attempts?
•
A large multi-centre prospective study looked at the number of
attempts
required
by paramedics,
out-of-hospital
nurses and
physicians
to
accomplish
out-of-hospital
ETI.83
Cumulative
success for the first three attempts was 69.9%, 84.9% and 89.9%
respectively
with an overall success rate of 91.8%. When
considering the number of attempts, the practitioner needs to assess
the time taken to undertake ETI. Rapid sequence induction has been
shown to add 10.7 minutes to on scene times whilst standard ETI
added a mean of 5.2 minutes.84
•
Recommendation: It would be reasonable to suggest a
maximum of three attempts at ETI as the overall success rate
does not increase with subsequent attempts but the increased
time to secure an airway, the delay on scene and the emergency
nature of the intubation suggest that fewer attempts should be
made. Where an intubation fails, consider if another member of
the team is better placed to successfully perform the task. It
may be better to limit the number of intubation attempts on any
patient to a maximum of two to minimise the risks to the
patient.
47

Airway positioning and manipulation
•
Head position: The ‘sniffing’ position has been widely accepted as
the correct position for alignment of the airway.85,86 In cases of
Cormack and Lehane grade III view under direct laryngoscopy,
elevation of the patient’s head beyond the sniffing position and
external laryngeal pressure may improve the view.87 The utility of
the
‘sniffing’
position
for
intubation
outside
the
hospital
environment has not been established.88
•
Cricoid pressure v Bimanual laryngoscopy v BURP: Initially
described by Sellick in 1961,89 cricoid pressure is used during
laryngoscopy to prevent regurgitation of stomach contents into the
lungs by compressing the oesophagus. The value of this manoeuvre
has been questioned in a study that found that the oesophagus was
lateral to the larynx in > 50% of study subjects and that cricoid
pressure caused a small amount of airway compression in 81% of
the subjects studied.90 Cadaver studies have demonstrated the
efficacy of cricoid pressure91 and clinical studies showing that
gastric insufflation with air during mask ventilation is reduced
when cricoid pressure is applied.92
Studies have demonstrated that the quality of laryngeal view is likely to be
worsened by cricoid pressure. 93,94
Bimanual laryngoscopy – the manipulation of the larynx by the free hand
of the intubationist – has been shown to improve the laryngeal view
compared with cricoid pressure and backwards, upwards, right pressure
(BURP) on the thyroid cartilage, or no manipulation.95
•
Recommendations:
The
sniffing
position
is
important
in
prehospital intubation but where a grade III view exists, the
practitioner should consider asking an assistant to elevate the head
beyond the sniffing position and applying external laryngeal
pressure. Cricoid pressure should not be used to improve the view
during laryngoscopy but may be useful when ventilating with a
bag-valve-mask. Bimanual laryngoscopy should be taught and
practitioners should use this technique in preference to cricoid
pressure or BURP of the thyroid cartilage.
48

Preoxygenation
Preoxygenation replaces the primarily nitrogenous mixture of ambient air,
which constitutes the patient’s functional residual capacity, with oxygen,
so increasing the interval before desaturation in a patient who is
hypoventilating or apnoeic. The effectiveness of preoxygenation has been
found to be limited in those with significant cardiopulmonary pathology
such as congestive heart failure and respiratory failure complicated by
excessive secretions,96 and it is likely that patients who will be intubated
in the prehospital environment will be physiologically compromised.
Preoxygenation may be difficult to achieve but effort should be expended
to ensure that the patient is well oxygenated before intubation attempts
take
place.
There
is
no
categorical
evidence
as
to
how
much
preoxygenation is required but it is likely to be more than the 4–8 vital
capacity breaths used in elective preoxygenation.97 It is suggested that
SpO2 levels should be 100% for two minutes prior to intubation and
should not be allowed to fall below 96%38 although SpO2 readings will
not be available in a cardiac arrest situation.
Procedure
Procedure
Additional
information/
rationale
1. Check, prepare and assemble equipment.
• Ask colleague to preoxygenate patient whilst equipment is
being prepared• Remove the patient’s upper and lower
dentures, if present, immediately before laryngoscopy.
• Position patient in the ‘sniffing’ position.
Increases
interval before
desaturation
during
intubation
attempt
Provides greater
aperture for
inserting
laryngoscope
and tubes.
Aligns the axes
of the airway
2. Holding the laryngoscope in the left hand, insert blade in
right hand side of mouth and displace tongue to the left. Move
A curved blade
should be
49

the blade towards the midline and advance until the distal end
is located in the vallecula; lift the laryngoscope handle slightly
upward and towards the feet without levering back on the teeth
or gums. At this point check the position of the blade – it may
need to be adjusted to visualise the cords.
placed in the
vallecula, a
straight blade is
normally used
to lift the
epiglottis
directly.
3. Visualise the larynx and insert the ETT under direct vision.
Consider use of bimanual laryngoscopy and/or repositioning of
the patient’s head if the view is sub-optimal.
4. Use a bougie to aid tracheal placement.
5. The black mark on the distal end of the tube should pass
just beyond the vocal cords.
Reduces the risk
of intubation of
the right main
bronchus and
prevents
inflation of the
cuff between the
vocal cords.
6. Inflate the cuff with just enough air to stop the leaking
sound around the tube. In a correctly sized tube this should
require only 4–6 mL38. Ventilate the patient using BVV or
mechanical ventilator.
Forms a seal to
prevent
aspiration.
7. Check tube placement by listening across the stomach and
then across the lungs for bilateral breath sounds. Use ODD,
and capnometry as per local guidelines. When in doubt,
remove the tube and re-ventilate.
Ensures correct
placement of
endotracheal
tube.
8. Insert OP airway.
Acts as a bite
block.
9. Secure tube with commercially produced device, tape or
bandage.
Helps to
maintain correct
tube positioning
during patient
movement.
10. Consider applying cervical collar.
Minimises tube
movement
during
transportation of
the patient.
50

11. Recheck tube placement periodically, especially after
patient movement.
Ensure that the
tube is still
correctly
located.
Airtraq®
The Airtraq is an anatomically shaped laryngoscope with two separate
channels: An enclosed channel that contains a high definition optical
system, and a guiding channel that holds the endotracheal tube (ETT) and
guides it through the vocal cords. It is a single-use device that can be used
with any standard endotracheal tube. Recent studies have shown that the
device improves the view, reduces time for tracheal tube placement, and
appears to be easier for less experienced intubationists to acquire the skills
of intubation.98–100 At time of writing the device is not available for use
by UK paramedics, but it is felt that this is such an important breakthrough
that its inclusion is warranted.
Procedure
Procedure
Additional information/
rationale
Preparation
1. Check, prepare and assemble equipment.
2. Ask colleague to preoxygenate patient whilst
equipment is being prepared.
Increases interval before
desaturation during
intubation attempt.
3. Remove the patient’s upper and lower dentures,
if present, immediately before laryngoscopy.
Provides greater aperture
for inserting Airtraq and
tubes.
4. Use of the ‘sniffing the morning air’ position is
less important with the Airtraq but the patient’s head
should not be hyperextended on the neck.
5. Select the ETT size and the corresponding
Airtraq.
51

6. Turn the light ON. Wait until the light stops
blinking if the patient is breathing spontaneously.
When the light stops
blinking, the lens is heated
to prevent misting. This is
only necessary in a
breathing patient.
7. Lubricate the ETT and place it into the Airtraq’s
guiding channel.
Facilitates easy passage of
tube through Airtraq
device.
Airtraq placement
1. Insert the Airtraq into the midline of the patient’s
mouth.
2. Slide the Airtraq through the oropharynx and
larynx, keeping it in the midline.
3. Look through the eyepiece to view the airway
and to identify structures.
4. Place the tip of the Airtraq at the vallecula.
Gently lift up the Airtraq to expose the vocal cords.
5. Alternatively the tip can be placed under the
epiglottis (Miller style).
ETT insertion
1. Align the centre of the visual field by gently
moving the tip of the Airtraq.
2. Advance the ETT by gently pushing it down the
guiding channel until you see the ETT passing
through the vocal cords.
3. If the ETT won’t advance, slowly repeat the
BACK & UP manoeuvre until vocal cords are
centred in the view field: BACK: Rotate the Airtraq
back, taking it away from the glottis. UP: Gently
pull the Airtraq Up.
Should help to align the
tip of the ETT with the
opening of the glottis.
Verification, Airtraq removal and disposal
1. Verify ETT placement and insertion length as
previously described. Inflate the ETT cuff, connect
the ETT to the breathing circuit and verify
placement and seal.
52

2. Separate the ETT from the Airtraq by pulling it
laterally and then rotate the Airtraq backwards.
Make sure to hold the ETT.
3. Insert OP airway.
Acts as a bite block.
4. Secure tube with commercially produced device,
tape or bandage.
Helps to maintain correct
tube positioning during
patient movement.
5. Consider applying cervical collar.
Minimises tube movement
during transportation of
the patient.
6. Recheck tube placement periodically, especially
after patient movement.
Ensure that the tube is still
correctly located.
Needle cricothyroidotomy
Needle cricothyroidotomy is a technique used as a temporary life-saving
procedure when it is determined that the airway and ventilation cannot be
maintained in any other way101. It represents the final step in the Difficult
Airway Society’s guidelines for managing the ‘can’t intubate, can’t
ventilate’ emergency.102 Needle cricothyroidotomy involves the insertion
of a 14/16 gauge cannula into the trachea via the cricothyroid membrane
with ventilation achieved via a low-pressure oxygen set-up or, less
commonly, jet ventilator. Needle cricothyroidotomy is inferior to the
surgical procedure due to the limited airflow afforded by the narrow
lumen but has been shown to be the technique of choice in the prehospital
and emergency department.103–108 The use of a low-pressure oxygen
delivery system is ineffective and all ambulance services should be
provided
with
high-pressure
jet
ventilation
systems.101
Needle
cricothyroidotomy should be considered as an emergency procedure to be
used for no longer than 15–45 minutes until a more definitive airway can
be secured.109
Indications for use
Can’t intubate; can’t ventilate emergencies.
53

Complications
•
The technique provides high flow of oxygen to the lungs but does
not allow for proper ventilation. CO2 levels will rise quickly so
transportation should be expedited rapidly in order to secure a
definitive airway.
•
Bleeding may occur at the wound site although this is rare.
•
Subcutaneous emphysema through incorrect catheter placement and
excessive air leakage around the insertion site.
•
Risk of barotrauma or pneumothorax when using jet ventilation –
this can be minimised by opening the release valve only long
enough to ensure adequate rise of the chest.
Equipment required
•
14/16 gauge catheter-over-needle cannula with 10 mL syringe
attached
•
Alcohol swab
•
Oxygen tubing with 3-way tap
•
Oxygen cylinder and flow-meter
•
Tape.
Procedure
Procedure
Additional information/
rationale
1. Check, prepare and assemble equipment.
Remove the blood reservoir
from the rear of the cannula and
attach the 10 mL syringe.
2. Maintain attempts at oxygenating the
patient and clearing obstruction whilst
preparing equipment.
May prevent the need for the
procedure if the airway can be
cleared by other means.
3. Identify the cricothyroid membrane in the
midline between the thyroid cartilage and
cricoid cartilage.
Locates the correct point of
insertion.
4. Swab the site and then insert tip of cannula
through the membrane angled at 45° towards
the feet; aspirate on the syringe as the needle is
inserted.
Tracheal entry can be confirmed
when air freely enters the
syringe.
54

5. Railroad the cannula over the needle into
the trachea and secure with tape.
6. Connect one end of oxygen tubing to the
catheter and the other end to the jet ventilator.
This can be achieved by
connecting the oxygen supply
via a Y-connector – give 15
L/min for an adult.
7. Open the release valve on the jet ventilator
and adjust the pressure to provide adequate
chest rise.
8. Auscultate over both apices and lung bases,
and over the epigastrium.
To confirm placement.
Chapter Key Points
1. Airway management is a key feature of prehospital care.
2. It is essential to understand the anatomy of the airway in order to perform
airway management knowledgably.
3. Airway management techniques should be used in a step-wise approach.
4. The practitioner needs to be able to justify airway management decisions.
5. Each airway technique has its own inherent problems; the practitioner
should be aware of the problems and limitations associated with each
technique and have tools to remedy them.
References and Further reading
1 Gregory P, Ward A. Sander’s Paramedic Textbook. London: Elsevier,
2009.
2 Baskett TF. Arthur Guedel and the oropharyngeal airway. Resuscitation
2004;63: 3–5.
3 Boidin MP. Airway patency in the unconscious patient. Br J Anaesth
1985;57:306–310.
4 Nandi PR, Charlesworth CH, Taylor SJ, Nunn JF, Dore CJ. Effect of
general anaesthesia on the pharynx. Br J Anaesth 1991;66:157–162.
5 Tortora GJ, Derrikson B. Principles of Anatomy and Physiology, 11th
edn. New York: Wiley, 2006.
55

6 Martini FH, Bartholemew EF. Essentials of Anatomy and Physiology,
4th edn. San Francisco: Pearson, 2007.
7 Tong JL, Ashworth DR, Smith JE. Cardiovascular responses following
laryngoscope assisted, fibreoptic orotracheal intubation. Anaesthesia
2005;60:754–758.
8 Roberts K, Whalley H, Bleetman A. The nasopharyngeal airway:
dispelling
myths
and
establishing
the
facts.
Emerg
Med
J
2005;22:394–396.
9 Roberts K, Allison KP, Porter KM. A review of emergency equipment
carried
and
procedures
performed
by
UK
front
line
paramedics.
Resuscitation 2003; 58(2): 153–158.
10 Allison K, Porter K. Nasopharyngeal airways: an under-utilised
pre-hospital resource. Pre-Hosp Immediate Care 2000; 4(4): 192–193.
11
Stoneham
MD.
The
nasopharyngeal
airway.
Anaesthesia
1993;48:575–580.
12 Roberts K, Porter K. How do you size a nasopharyngeal airway.
Resuscitation 2003;56:19–23.
13 Muzzi DA, Losasso TJ, Cucchiara RF. Complication from a
nasopharyngeal airway in a patient with a basilar skull fracture.
Anesthesiology 1991;74:366–368.
14 Schade K, Borzotta A, Michaels A. Intracranial malposition of
nasopharyngeal airway. J Trauma 2000;49:967–968.
15 Ellis DY, Lambert C, Shirley P. Letters – Intracranial placement of
nasopharyngeal airways: is it all that rare? Emerg Med J 2006;23:661.
16 Nolan JP, Deakin CD, Soar J, Böttiger BW, Smith G. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines for Resuscitation 2005 Section 4. Adult
advanced life support. Resuscitation 2005; 67S1, S39–S86.
17 Marsh AM, Nunn JF, Taylor SJ, Charlesworth CH. Airway obstruction
associated
with
the
use
of
the
Guedel
airway.
Br
J
Anaesth
1991;67:517–523.
18 Bledsoe BE, Porter RS, Cherry RA. Essentials of Paramedic Care.
New York: Prentice Hall, 2005.
56

19
Jevon
P.
Paediatric
Advanced
Life
Support.
London:
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2003.
20 Davies PR, Tighe SQ, Greenslade GL, Evans GH. Laryngeal mask
airway and tracheal tube insertion by unskilled personnel. Lancet
1990;336:977–979.
21 Flaishon R, Sotman A, Ben-Abraham R, Rudick V, Varssano D,
Weinbroum AA. Antichemical protective gear prolongs time to successful
airway
management:
a
randomized,
crossover
study
in
humans.
Anesthesiology 2004;100:260–296.
22 Ho BY, Skinner HJ, Mahajan RP. Gastro-oesophageal reflux during
day case gynaecological laparoscopy under positive pressure ventilation:
laryngeal mask vs. tracheal intubation. Anaesthesia 1998;53:921–924.
23 Reinhart DJ, Simmons G. Comparison of placement of the laryngeal
mask airway with endotracheal tube by paramedics and respiratory
therapists. Ann Emerg Med 1994;24:260–263.
24
Rewari
W,
Kaul
HL.
Regurgitation
and
aspiration
during
gynaecological laparoscopy: comparison between laryngeal mask airway
and tracheal intubation. J Anaesth Clin Pharmacol 1999;15:67–70.
25 Pennant JH, Walker MB. Comparison of the endotracheal tube and
laryngeal mask in airway management by paramedical personnel. Anesth
Analg 1992;74:531–534.
26 Maltby JR, Beriault MT, Watson NC, Liepert DJ, Fick GH.
LMA-Classic and LMA-ProSeal are effective alternatives to endotracheal
intubation for gynecologic laparoscopy. Can J Anaesth 2003;50:71–77.
27 Alexander R, Hodgson P, Lomax D, Bullen C. A comparison of the
laryngeal mask airway and Guedel airway, bag and face mask for manual
ventilation following formal training. Anaesthesia 1993;48:231–234.
28 Rumball CJ, MacDonald D, The PTL. Combitube, laryngeal mask, and
oral airway: a randomized prehospital comparative study of ventilatory
device
effectiveness
and
cost
effectiveness
in
470
cases
of
cardiorespiratory arrest. Prehosp Emerg Care 1997;1:1–10.
57

29 Verghese C, Prior-Willeard PF, Baskett PJ. Immediate management of
the airway during cardiopulmonary resuscitation in a hospital without a
resident anaesthesiologist. Eur J Emerg Med 1994;1:123–125.
30 Tanigawa K, Shigematsu A. Choice of airway devices for 12,020 cases
of
nontraumatic
cardiac
arrest
in
Japan.
Prehosp
Emerg
Care
1998;2:96–100.
31
The
use
of
the
laryngeal
mask
airway
by
nurses
during
cardiopulmonary resuscitation: results of a multicentre trial. Anaesthesia
1994;49:3–7.
32 Grantham H, Phillips G, Gilligan JE. The laryngeal mask in prehospital
emergency care. Emerg Med 1994;6:193–197.
33 Kokkinis K. The use of the laryngeal mask airway in CPR.
Resuscitation 1994;27:9–12.
34
Leach
A,
Alexander
CA,
Stone
B.
The
laryngeal
mask
in
cardiopulmonary resuscitation in a district general hospital: a preliminary
communication. Resuscitation 1993;25:245–248.
35 Stone BJ, Chantler PJ, Baskett PJ. The incidence of regurgitation
during cardiopulmonary resuscitation: a comparison between the bag
valve mask and laryngeal mask airway. Resuscitation 1998;38:3–6.
36 Hulme J, Perkins GD. Critically injured patients, inaccessible airways,
and laryngeal mask airways Emerg Med J 2005;22:742–744.
37 Hoyle JD Jr, Jones JS, Deibel M, Lock DT, Reischman D.
Comparative study of airway management techniques with restricted
access to patient airway. Prehosp Emerg Care 2007;11(3):330–336.
38 Margolis GS. Airway Management: Paramedic. Boston: Jones and
Bartlett, 2004.
39 Asai T, Morris S. The laryngeal mask airway: its features, effects and
role. Can J Anaesth 1994;41(10):930–960.
40 Brimacombe JR. Problems with the laryngeal mask airway: prevention
and management. Int Anesth Clin 1998;36:139–154.
41 Grantham H, Phillips G, Gilligan JE. The laryngeal mask in
pre-hospital emergency care. Emerg Med 1994;28:97–102.
58

42 Haslam N, Campbell GC, Duggan JE. Gastric rupture associated with
use of the laryngeal mask airway during cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
BMJ 2004; 329;1225–1226.
43 Baskett PJF, Bossaert L, Carli P et al. Guidelines for the advanced
management
of
the
airway
and
ventilation
during
resuscitation.
Resuscitation 1996;31:201–230.
44 Dörges V. Airway management in emergency situations. Best Pract
Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2005;19(4):699–715.
45 Bulger EM, Copass MK, Sabath DR et al. The use of neuromuscular
blocking agents to facilitate prehospital intubation does not impair
outcome after traumatic brain injury. J Trauma 2005;58:718–723.
46 Davis DP, Hoyt DB, Ochs M et al. The effect of paramedic rapid
sequence intubation on outcome in patients with severe traumatic brain
injury. J Trauma 2003;54:444–453.
47 Davis DP, Peay J, Sise MJ et al. The impact of prehospital
endotracheal intubation on outcome in moderate to severe traumatic brain
injury. J Trauma 2005;58:933–939.
48 Gausche M, Lewis RJ, Stratton SJ et al. Effect of out-of-hospital
pediatric endotracheal intubation on survival and neurological outcome a
controlled clinical trial. JAMA 2000;283:783–790.
49 Lockey D, Davies G, Coats T. Survival of trauma patients who have
prehospital tracheal intubation without anaesthesia or muscle relaxants
observational study [abstract]. BMJ 2001;323:141.
50 Murray JA, Demetriades D, Berne TV et al. Prehospital intubation in
patients with severe head injury. J Trauma 2000;49:1065–1070.
51 Sloane C, Vilke GM, Chan TC et al. Rapid sequence intubation in the
field versus hospital in trauma patients. J Emerg Med 2000;19:259–264.
52 Stockinger ZT, McSwain NE Jr. Prehospital endotracheal intubation
for trauma does not improve survival over bag-valve-mask ventilation. J
Trauma 2004;56:531–536.
59

53
Wang
HE,
Peitzman
AB,
Cassidy
LD
et
al.
Out-of-hospital
endotracheal intubation and outcome after traumatic brain injury. Ann
Emerg Med 2004;44:439–450.
54 Winchell RJ, Hoyt DB. Endotracheal intubation in the field improves
survival in patients with severe head injury Trauma Research and
Education Foundation of San Diego. Arch Surg 1997;132:592–597.
55 Bochicchio GV, Ilahi O, Joshi M et al. Endotracheal intubation in the
field does not improve outcome in trauma patients who present without an
acutely lethal traumatic brain injury. J Trauma 2003;54:307–311.
56 Christensen EF, Hoyer CC. Prehospital tracheal intubation in severely
injured patients a Danish observational study. BMJ 2003;327:533–534.
57 Cooper A, DiScala C, Foltin G et al. Prehospital endotracheal
intubation for severe head injury in children a reappraisal. Semin Pediatr
Surg 2001;10:3–6.
58 DiRusso SM, Sullivan T, Risucci D et al. Intubation of pediatric
trauma patients in the field predictor of negative outcome despite risk
stratification. J Trauma 2005;59:84–90.
59 Suominen P, Baillie C, Kivioja A et al. Intubation and survival in
severe paediatric blunt head injury. Eur J Emerg Med 2000;7:3–7.
60 Dolenska S, Dala P, Taylor A. Essentials of Airway Management.
London: Greenwich Medical Media, 2004.
61 Henderson JJ. The use of paraglossal straight blade laryngoscopy in
difficult tracheal intubation. Anaesthesia 1997;52:552–560.
62 Chisholm DG, Calder I. Experience with the McCoy laryngoscope in
difficult laryngoscopy. Anaesthesia 1997;52:906–908.
63 Ridgway S, Hodzovic I, Woollard M, Latto IP. Prehospital airway
management in Ambulance Services in the United Kingdom. Anaesthesia
2004;59(11):1091–1094.
64 Woollard M, Lighton D, Mannion W. Airtraq vs standard laryngoscopy
by student paramedics and experienced prehospital laryngoscopists
managing a model of difficult intubation. Anaesthesia 2008;63:26–31.
60

65 Woollard M, Mannion W, Lighton D. Use of the Airtraq laryngoscope
in a model of difficult intubation by prehospital providers not previously
trained in laryngoscopy. Anaesthesia 2007;62:1061–1065.
66 Pitt K, Woollard M. Should paramedics bougie on down? Pre-hosp
Imm Care 2000;49:68–70.
67 Hodzovic I, Wilkes AR, Latto IP. To shape or not to shape – simulated
bougie-assisted
difficult
intubation
in
a
manikin.
Anaesthesia
2003;58:791–797.
68 Stock MC, Downs JB. Lubrication of tracheal tubes to prevent sore
throat from intubation. Anesthesiology 1982;57:418–420.
69 Tackley R. Transparent obstruction of RAE tube. Anaesthesia
2001;56(3):279–280.
70 Badrakumar A, Ball DR, Jefferson PD. Why KY? Anaesthesia
2001;56(8):799–820.
71 Sprague NE, Moffett SP. Oral tracheal tubes. Is lubrication necessary?
Today’s Anaesthetist 1989;4:140–142.
72 Jones JH, Murphy MP, Dickson RL, Somerville GG, Brizendine EJ.
Emergency physician-verified out-of-hospital intubation: miss rates by
paramedics. Acad Emerg Med 2004;11:707–709.
73 Jemmett ME, Kendal KM, Fourre MW, Burton JH. Unrecognized
misplacement of endotracheal tubes in a mixed urban to rural emergency
medical services setting. Acad Emerg Med 2003;10:961–965.
74 Wirtz DD, Ortiz C, Newman DH, Zhitomirsky I. Unrecognized
misplacement of endotracheal tubes by ground prehospital providers.
Prehosp Emerg Care 2007;11:213–218.
75 Katz SH, Falk JL. Misplaced endotracheal tubes by paramedics in an
urban
emergency
medical
services
system.
Ann
Emerg
Med
2001;37:62–64.
76 Caplan RA, Posner KL, Ward RJ, Cheney FW. Adverse respiratory
events in anaesthesiology. A closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology
1990;72:828–833.
61

77 Pelucio M, Halligan L, Dhindsa H. Out-of-hospital experience with the
syringe esophageal detector device. Acad Emerg Med 1997;4:563–568.
78 Takeda T, Tanigawa K, Tanaka H, Hayashi Y, Goto E, Tanaka K. The
assessment of three methods to verify tracheal tube placement in the
emergency setting. Resuscitation 2003;56(2):153–157.
79 Tanigawa K, Takeda T, Goto E, Tanaka K. Accuracy and reliability of
the self-inflating bulb to verify tracheal intubation in out-of-hospital
cardiac arrest patients. Anesthesiology 2000;93:1432–1436.
80 Bozeman WP, Hexter D, Liang HK, Kelen GD. Esophageal detector
device versus detection of end-tidal carbon dioxide level in emergency
intubation. Ann Emerg Med 1996;27:595–599.
81
Association
of
Anaesthetists
of
Great
Britain
and
Ireland.
Recommendations for Standards of Monitoring During Anaesthesia and
Recovery. London: AAGBI, 2000.
82 Kelly JJ, Eynon CA, Kaplan JL, de Garavilla L, Dalsey WC. Use of
tube condensation as an indicator of endotracheal tube placement. Ann
Emerg Med 1998;31:575–578.
83 Wang HE, Yealy DM. How many attempts are required to accomplish
out-of-hospital
endotracheal
intubation?
Acad
Emerg
Med
2006;13:372–377.
84 Cudnik MT, Newgard CD, Wang H et al. Endotracheal intubation
increases out-of-hospital time in trauma patients. Prehosp Emerg Care
2007;11:224–229.
85
Magill
IW.
Technique
in
endotracheal
anaesthesia.
BMJ
1930;2:817–819.
86
Benumof
J.
Conventional
(Laryngoscopic)
Orotracheal
and
Nasotracheal Intubation (Single-Lumen Tube). St Louis, MO: Mosby,
1996.
87 Schmitt HJ, Mang H. Head and neck elevation beyond the sniffing
position improves laryngeal view in cases of difficult direct laryngoscopy.
J Clin Anesthes 2002;14:335–338.
62

88 Walz JM, Zayaruzny M, Heard SO. Airway management in critical
illness. Chest 2007;131:608–620.
89 Sellick BA. Cricoid pressure to control regurgitation of stomach
contents during induction of anaesthesia. Lancet 1961;2:404–406.
90 Smith KJ, Dobranowski J, Yip G et al. Cricoid pressure displaces the
esophagus: an observational study using magnetic resonance imaging.
Anesthesiology 2003;99:60–64.
91 Salem M, Joseph N, Heyman H et al. Cricoid compression is effective
in obliterating the esophageal lumen in the presence of a nasogastric tube.
Anesthesiology 1985;63:443–446.
92 Lawes EG, Campbell I, Mercer D. Inflation pressure, gastric
insufflation and rapid sequence induction. Br J Anaesth 1987;59:315–318.
93 Noguchi T, Koga K, Shiga Y et al. The gum elastic bougie eases
tracheal intubation while applying cricoid pressure compared to a stylet.
Can J Anaesth 2003;50:712–717.
94 Haslam N, Parker L, Duggan JE. Effect of cricoid pressure on the view
at laryngoscopy. Anaesthesia 2005;60:41–47.
95 Levitan RM, Kinkle WC, Levin WJ et al. Laryngeal view during
laryngoscopy:
a
randomized
trial
comparing
cricoid
pressure,
backward-upward-rightward pressure, and bimanual laryngoscopy. Ann
Emerg Med 2006;47:548–555.
96 Mort TC. The value of preoxygenation in the critically ill patients
requiring emergency intubation. Crit Care Med 2005;33:2672–2675.
97 Mort TC. Complications of emergency tracheal intubation: immediate
airway-related
consequences:
Part
II.
J
Intensive
Care
Med
2007;22:208–215.
98 Maharaj CH, Costello JF, Higgins BD, Harte BH, Laffey JG. Learning
and performance of tracheal intubation by novice personnel: a comparison
of
the
Airtraq®
and
Macintosh
laryngoscope.
Anaesthesia
2006;61(7):671–677.
99 Maharaj CH, Ni Chonghaile M, Higgins B, Harte B, Laffey J. Tracheal
intubation by inexpexrienced medical residents using the Airtraq and
63

Macintosh
laryngoscopes–a
manikin
study
Am
J
Emerg
Med
2006;24(7):769–774.
100 Mahara CH, Costello JF, McDonnell JG, Harte BH, Laffey JG. The
Airtraq® as a rescue airway device following failed direct laryngoscopy: a
case series. Anaesthesia 2007;62(6):598–601.
101 Scrase I, Woollard M. Needle vs surgical cricothyroidotomy: a short
cut to effective ventilation. Anaesthesia 2006;61:962–974.
102 Henderson JJ, Popat MT, Latto IP, Pearce AC. Difficult Airway
Society. Difficult Airway Society guidelines for management of the
unanticipated difficult intubation. Anaesthesia 2004;59:675–694.
103 Roberts K, Allison KP, Porter KM. A review of emergency
equipment carried and procedures performed by UK front line paramedics.
Resuscitation 2003;58:153–158.
104 Ridgway S, Hodzovic I, Woollard M, Latto IP. Prehospital airway
management in Ambulance Services in the United Kingdom. Anaesthesia
2004;59:1091–1094.
105
Ryder
IG,
Paoloni
CC,
Harle
CC.
Emergency
transtracheal
ventilation: assessment of breathing systems chosen by anaesthetists.
Anaesthesia 1996;51:764–768.
106 Porter K, Allison KP, Greaves I. Variations in equipment on UK front
line ambulances. Pre-Hospital Immediate Care 2000;4:126–131.
107 Ratnayake B, Langford RM. A survey of emergency airway
management in the United Kingdom. Anaesthesia 1996;51:908–911.
108 Wong DT, Lai K, Chung FF, Ho RY. Cannot intubate cannot ventilate
and difficult intubation strategies: Results of a Canadian national survey.
Anesthes Analges 2005;100:1439–1446.
109
TinUnalli
JE,
Kelen
GD,
Stapczynskl
JS.
Surgical
airway
management. In: Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study Guide,
6th edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2004, pp. 119–124.
64

Chapter 2
Assisted ventilation
Content
Definition of assisted ventilation
Indications for assisted ventilation
The literature and complications associated with assisted ventilation
Equipment and procedures for assisted ventilation
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Assisted ventilation is one of the core skills of the prehospital practitioner.
There has been a tendency to view assisted ventilation as a simple skill for
ambulance practitioners yet it can be difficult to ventilate a patient
correctly in the prehospital environment. This chapter discusses the
indications for assisted ventilation and the equipment and techniques that
can be used in the field.
Definition of assisted
ventilation
Assisted ventilation is where the practitioner offers ventilatory support to
a patient whose alveolar ventilation is inadequate to maintain normal
partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide. This can be achieved by
65

using either mechanical or manually generated positive pressure and may
be a lifesaving treatment. In prehospital care the pressure may be
generated
using
expired
air
ventilation
(mouth-to-mouth/nose),
a
mechanical
ventilator
such
as
the
Pneupac®
paraPAC,
or
a
bag-valve-mask (BVM) (Figures 2.1 and 2.2). Either may be used with a
mask or endotracheal tube/laryngeal mask airway.
Normal inspiration occurs when the diaphragm (primary muscle of
inspiration) contracts, causing an increase in the size of the thoracic
cavity. As a result, intrathoracic pressure falls to below that of
atmospheric pressure and air is drawn into the lungs. Assisted ventilation
creates a positive pressure that pushes air into the lungs. Failure to provide
adequate ventilation for an indicated patient will lead to hypoxia, retention
of CO2, development of acidosis and cardio-respiratory arrest.
Figure 2.1 Pneupac® paraPAC. Reproduced with permission of Smiths
Medical International.
Figure 2.2 Silicone bags
66

Scenario
You are called to attend an elderly male patient who is known to suffer from COPD. On
arrival you are confronted with a centrally cyanosed obese male patient with poor
respiratory effort – you assess his respiratory rate to be 5 breaths per minute. The patient
opens his eyes to voice but is unable to speak due to inadequate ventilation. You notice
he has a full moustache and beard.
•
Make a list of the problems you may encounter when attempting to support the
ventilation of this patient and identify some techniques you may be able to use to
overcome them.
•
Would you use a bag-valve-ventilator or mechanical ventilator? Provide a rationale
for your answer.
Indications for assisted
ventilation
Inadequate ventilation is the overriding indication for assisted ventilation.
In cases of apnoea, the indication is unequivocal but, for patients with
depressed ventilation, the requirement may be less obvious. Artificial
ventilation should be provided as soon as possible in any patient in whom
spontaneous ventilation is inadequate or absent.1
Patients with a life-threatening respiratory emergency will present in
either respiratory failure or respiratory distress.2 Those with respiratory
distress are still able to compensate for the effects of their illness, and
urgent treatment may prevent their further deterioration. These patients
present with signs and symptoms indicative of increased work of
breathing but may show few signs of the systemic effects of hypoxia or
hypercapnia. Patients with respiratory failure tend not to show evidence of
increased work of breathing as exhaustion overrides their ability to
compensate. These patients will normally exhibit signs of the systemic
effects of hypoxia and hypercapnia, and immediate treatment will be
required to prevent cardiac arrest. Box 2.12 shows the key findings
associated with increased work of breathing and weak respiratory effort;
these are indicative of a patient with a life-threatening respiratory
condition. For these patients, it is suggested that assisted ventilation
should be undertaken if the respiratory rate is <10 or >29/min (adult),
titrated to SpO2.2 However, some patients presenting with respiratory
67

rates between 10 and 29/min will still benefit from assisted ventilation; it
is a clinical judgement for the paramedic to make based upon ALL
physical observations not just the respiratory rate.
Box 2.1 Key findings indicating increased work of
breathing or weak respiratory effort2
Increased work of breathing
•
Stridor associated with other key findings
•
Use of accessory muscles
•
Adopting orthopnic position (sat upright)
•
Tracheal tug
•
Intercostal recession
•
Expiratory wheeze associated with other key findings
•
Cessation of expiratory wheeze without improvement in condition
•
Inability to speak in whole sentences
•
Respiratory rate <10 or >29
Weak respiratory effort
•
Decreased, asymmetrical, or absent breath sounds
•
Oxygen saturation <92% on air or <95% on high concentration oxygen
•
PEFR <33% of normal
•
Hypercapnia (measured with end tidal CO2 monitor where available)
•
Tachycardia (≥120) or bradycardia (late and ominous finding)
•
Arrhythmias
•
Pallor and/or cyanosis (particularly central cyanosis)
•
Cool clammy skin
•
Falling blood pressure (late and ominous finding)
•
Changed mental status – confusion, feeling of impending doom,
combativeness
•
Falling level of consciousness
•
Exhaustion (+/−muscular chest pain)
Fatigue induced by a prolonged, severe asthma attack, head injury induced
hypoventilation, and drug induced respiratory depression (e.g. opiates) are
typical causes of inadequate ventilation requiring assisted ventilation.
Apnoea is an absolute indication for assisted ventilation irrespective of the
cause.
68

The literature and
complications associated
with assisted ventilation
The most common initial form of ventilatory assistance in the emergency
clinical setting is usually accomplished using bag-valve-ventilation (BVV)
techniques. The BVV mask was developed in 1955 by Henning Ruben in
Denmark and has been the most common method of ventilating a patient
in respiratory or cardiac arrest since that time.3 Performing ventilation
with a bag-valve-mask device is regarded as a relatively simple task that
all healthcare personnel should be able to perform with little training.
Ventilation utilising this technique is accepted worldwide and considered
to be the standard of care in a variety of clinical settings.4,5
Even though the technique is considered to be safe and effective and has
been used in the emergency setting for many years, it has some potentially
fatal complications. Among them are decreased oxygenation, lung
aspiration due to gastric dilatation, or even gastric rupture.6 The main
complications should be recognised early but it is questionable as to
whether problems are always rectified. Gastric over-distention, aspiration
of gastric contents, and barotrauma can lead to the premature death of a
patient.7 By utilising too much pressure whilst ventilating, the rescuer
may overcome the lower oesophageal sphincter pressure and produce
aspiration.8
In a patient with an unprotected airway, the distribution of inspiratory gas
volume between lungs and stomach during bag-valve-mask ventilation
depends on several variables. These variables include: upper airway
pressure, inspiratory flow rate, airway resistance and compliance, and
lower oesophageal sphincter pressure.9 The lower oesophageal sphincter
pressure is normally 20 to 25 cm H2O in a healthy adult, but is
significantly reduced in patients with cardiac arrest.10 Bag-valve-mask
(BVM) ventilation is often applied with a high flow rate over a short
inflation time, which inevitably produces a high peak airway pressure. If
the peak airway pressure exceeds the lower oesophageal sphincter
pressure during ventilation, the stomach is inflated. Thus, it is essential to
69

keep the peak airway pressure to a minimum during ventilation of a
non-intubated patient.
Several strategies are available to reduce peak inspiratory flow rates, and
therefore, peak airway pressure. These include the use of a paediatric
bag-valve-mask instead of an adult one, use of cricoid pressure, or a
mechanical ventilator.11,12 Studies looking at the efficacy and safety of
mechanical ventilators suggest that pulmonary barotrauma may result
from excessive peak inspiratory flow rates, so a recommendation has been
made that lower peak inspiratory flow rates should be used.13 There have
been few studies investigating the effectiveness of mechanical ventilators
although one study does suggest significant benefits of a mechanical
ventilator over BVV. The study found that when compared with the
resuscitation ventilator, the bag-valve-mask resulted in significantly
higher peak airway pressure and significantly lower oxygen saturation.14
This study suggests that the mechanical ventilator may be a suitable
alternative to BVM even in the non-intubated patient.
A further option is offered by the SMART BAG®, which has a
pressure-responsive flow-limiting valve. If properly squeezed, there are no
differences in performance between this valve and a standard valve. The
piston provides both a tactile and visual feedback to the provider when
excessive pressure is applied and prevents excessively high peak airway
pressure.
In
simulated
scenarios,
this
bag
provided
ventilation
performance that was more consistent with current guidelines and
delivered similar tidal volumes when compared with ventilation with a
traditional bag-valve-mask resuscitator.15 However, in the patient with
low compliant lungs it is possible that this bag will not allow for adequate
ventilation.
The ventilation rate is also very important as hyperventilation of a patient
during cardiac arrest is linked with adverse haemodynamic effects and
decreased cerebral perfusion, which translate into increased mortality.16
Several studies have documented high respiratory rates during pre-hospital
resuscitation,17,18 despite the recommended rate of 10 breaths per
minute.1
THINK
70

Can you remember the last time you ventilated a patient with a BVM? Did you
ventilate once every 6 seconds as per the guidelines? How can you improve your
performance?
There are many potential reasons for the apparent failings in assisted
ventilation, including stress, fatigue, the inability to convert training into
real world situations, failings in training manikins, and an erroneous belief
that in cardiac arrest the patient can never receive too much oxygen. The
use of a correctly set-up mechanical ventilator may overcome many of
these issues although the question of bag or machine remains unanswered.
When using a mask rather than a tube, the seal between face and mask is
the key component to minimising the risk of leakage and hypoventilation
(Figure 2.3). Traditionally, ambulance staff have been expected to perform
this as a single-handed operator in the rear of a moving vehicle, but it is
unlikely that this is an effective procedure due to movement, stress and the
need to undertake other tasks. This is particularly true in the case of obese
patients or those without teeth or with abundant facial hair. In addition,
practitioners with smaller hands may not be able to squeeze the bag
sufficiently to ventilate the patient.19 When using a ventilator with a mask
it is best practice for one person to hold the mask in place whilst
maintaining the patient’s airway and the second person squeezes the bag,
paying particular attention not to overinflate20 (Figure 2.4). This would
require a second person to squeeze a BVV device (not always available),
so it may be necessary to connect the mask to a mechanical ventilator in
order to achieve this.
Figure 2.3 Making a seal (single-operator).
71

Figure 2.4 Making a seal (two-operators).
In an intubated patient or a patient with an LMA in situ, use of a
mechanical ventilator has been shown to allow paramedics to accomplish
extra tasks, improve documentation and provide better patient care.21 In
addition, side effects are no different between the automatic transport
ventilator and the bag valve ventilator.
72

Equipment and procedures
for assisted ventilation
Bag-valve-ventilator
The bag-valve-ventilator comprises of a squeezable bag, oxygen reservoir
and oxygen connection tubing, one way valve, and 15 mm/22 mm
universal connector (Figure 2.2). When squeezed, the increase in pressure
forces air forward to the patient’s lungs via a one-way valve; when
released, the bag self-inflates and draws air from the ambient atmosphere
or oxygen reservoir if attached. The valve is designed to function during
both spontaneous and manually controlled ventilation. A self-inflating bag
can be connected to a face mask, tracheal tube, or alternative airway
device.1
There are many types of face masks, varying in design, size, and
construction materials. Transparent masks are preferred because they
allow
for
inspection
of
lip
colour,
condensation,
secretions,
and
vomitus.22 The mask’s size and shape must conform to the facial anatomy
if a good seal is to be achieved, thus several different mask shapes and
sizes should be available.
Suction should be available and normal airway management techniques
should be utilised prior to attempting ventilation (see Chapter 1).
Procedure
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
Preparation
1. Test the bag-valve device’s
capability for delivering
positive-pressure ventilation before
use.
To ensure that the device will function
correctly.
Seal the bag-valve device connector with
the thumb and squeeze the bag with
reasonable force. If it is difficult to
compress the bag or if air is forced
73

between the connector and thumb,
positive pressure can be delivered.
2. Connect mask to patient delivery
valve and oxygen tubing to oxygen
supply.
3. Turn on oxygen (normally 15
L/min for an adult) and allow
reservoir to fill.
One-hand technique23
1. Place the thumb and index finger
on the body of the mask while your
other fingers pull the jaw forward and
extend the head (see Figure 2.3).
Helps to maintain the airway and creates
a seal with the mask.
Caveat: Extreme caution is advised in
patients with cervical spine injuries, in
which flexion or extension of the neck is
contraindicated. In this situation, the
jaw-thrust manoeuvre without head
extension is indicated.25
2. Place your middle and ring fingers
on the ridge of the mandible and the
fifth finger behind the angle of the
mandible.22,24
Prevents obstruction of the airway
created by pushing the tongue against the
palate.24
3. Minimize the pressure applied to
the submandibular soft tissues.
4. Maintain an adequate seal whilst
extending the patient’s head,
thrusting the jaw forward, and then
squeeze the bag with the other hand.
5. Ventilate the lungs at 10 breaths
min with a tidal volume of no more
than 10 ml/kg. 1 Deliver each breath
over approximately 1 sec and give a
volume that corresponds to normal
chest movement.
This represents a compromise between
giving an adequate volume, minimising
the risk of gastric inflation, and allowing
adequate time for chest compression
during CPR.1
6. Assess adequacy of ventilation by
inspecting and auscultating the chest
and abdomen.
Rising and falling of the chest and breath
sounds synchronous with the delivered
tidal volume suggest adequate
ventilation. Epigastric sounds and
abdominal distension indicate gastric
insufflation and poor ventilation
74

Two-hand technique23
1. Hold the mask with two hands,
with each hand positioned as
described in the one-hand technique
(see Figure 2.4).
2. A second person should compress
the bag-valve device in the same way
as described above.
3. Assess adequacy of ventilation
using the same techniques as for
one-hand technique.
Mechanical ventilator
There are many different transport mechanical ventilators available but
this section will discuss the Pneupac® paraPAC as it is the most
commonly used in UK prehospital practice (Figure 2.5). The figure lays
out the controls and the functions of each; this will be useful reference
when viewing the procedures.
The Pneupac® paraPAC is suitable for transportation use by trained
prehospital providers. It has dual controls that allow easy selection of tidal
volume and frequency to match the patient’s ventilatory requirements, and
is suitable for ventilation during controlled or emergency transportation.
The paraPAC includes a CPR setting, CMV/Demand* (SMMV**), air
mix, integrated pressure monitoring/alarm system and a separate tidal
volume control, allowing for selection of optimum ventilation. The
‘demand’ system detects spontaneous breathing by an adult patient and
inhibits the ventilator appropriately to the level of breathing. The tidal
volume required to completely inhibit the ventilator is about 450 ml.
Figure 2.5 Controls and features of ParaPac 20D.
1.Inflation pressure monitor
2. Frequency Control
3. Tidal Volume Control
4. Air mix control
5. Supply gas failure alarm
75

6. Main pneumatic switch (Demand-CMV/Demand)
7. Patient valve
8. Patient hose
9. Input hose
10. Inlet connection
11. Audible alarm
12. Relief pressure control
Functional check and procedures26
•
Functional check
1. Check the ventilator controls as follows:
a. Main pneumatic switch ‘Demand’ (model 20D)
b. ‘0’
(model 20)
c. Frequency
12 b/min (detent position)
d. Tidal volume
800 ml
e. Air mix switch
‘No air mix’
f. Relief pressure
30cm H2O
2. Connect the probe on the input hose to an appropriate gas outlet.
3. If connected to a cylinder regulator, turn on cylinder valve
slowly.
4. Check that the visual alarm for supply gas failure has changed
from red to white.
5. Switch the main pneumatic switch to ‘CMV/Demand (model
20D) or ‘1’ (model 20). The ventilator should commence cycling.
76

Occlude the output port on the patient valve and check that the
manometer gives a reading of between 30 and 50cm H2O during
each inspiratory phase. The audible alarm should sound. Check that
the unit cycles every 5 seconds.
6. Switch over to air mix and repeat step 5; the change in the
manometer reading should not exceed 5cm H2O.
7. Set the ‘tidal volume’ to its minimum setting, occlude the output
port and check that at least 20 cm pressure is attained on the
manometer. Gradually increase the flow setting and observe how
the pressure rises. At the end of the green segment, the pressure
should be attaining the nominal set value.
8. Reset the ‘tidal volume’ to its minimum setting and select ‘no air
mix’. Occlusion of the output port should now cause the manometer
to rise sharply to between 30 and 50cm H2O and the alarm should
sound.
9. Set the ‘frequency’ and ‘tidal volume’ controls to the extremes
of their range. By listening to the gas flow, check that the ventilator
is responding
to the
controls
and that
no irregularities
of
performance can be discerned.
10. Finally, set the controls as specified in step 1 so that the
ventilator is left set for emergency use.
THINK
Why set the tidal volume at 800 ml when the average adult tidal volume is only
around 500 ml?
Procedure
Additional
information/
rationale
Operation
This equipment should only be used and operated by
personnel trained and competent in its use.
For patient
safety.
1. Connect supply hose to gas supply.
2. Turn on gas supply slowly (if relevant).
77

3. Check that the visual alarm for supply gas failure has
changed from red to white.
Determines
problem with gas
supply or unit.
4. Turn the main pneumatic switch to ‘CMV/Demand (model
20D) or ‘1’ (model 20).
CMV ventilates
the
non-breathing
patient, demand
overrides.
5. Set ventilation parameters to suit patient.
Ensure correct
volumes and
rates are chosen
for age of
patient.
6. Briefly occlude the patient connection port of the patient
valve with the thumb and check that the peak inflation
pressure reading on the manometer is appropriate for the
patient and that the audible alarm sounds.
Safety check
prior to
commencing
ventilation.
7. Having ensured a clear airway, apply face mask to patient,
or connect patient valve to ET tube/LMA.
8. Check chest movement and Inflation Pressure Manometer
is appropriate to ensure correct ventilation.
9. Make adjustments as necessary.
The patient’s condition and chest movement, as well as the inflation
pressure monitor should be kept under constant observation so that
adverse ventilation conditions can be detected and corrected before the
patient is put at risk. When ventilating with a mask, the peak inflation
pressure should be kept below 20cmH2O to minimise the risk of gastric
insufflation.
Chapter Key Points
1. Artificial ventilation should be provided as soon as possible in any patient
in whom spontaneous ventilation is inadequate or absent.
2. The most common initial form of ventilatory assistance in the emergency
clinical setting is usually accomplished using the bag-valve ventilation
technique. Even though the technique is considered to be safe and effective and
78

has been used in the emergency setting for many years, it has some potentially
fatal complications.
3. A high flow rate over a short inflation time inevitably produces a high peak
airway pressure in an unprotected airway. High peak airway pressure
overcomes the pressure of the lower oesophageal sphincter and causes gastric
inflation.
4. Use of a paediatric BVM, cricoid pressure, or mechanical ventilation may
help to overcome the high pressures involved.
5. The ventilation rate is very important as hyperventilation of a patient during
cardiac arrest is linked with adverse haemodynamic effects and decreased
cerebral perfusion; the recommended rate is 10 breaths per minute.
6. When using a ventilator with a mask it is best practice for one person to
hold the mask in place whilst maintaining the patient’s airway and the second
person squeezes the bag, paying particular attention not to overinflate.
7. In an intubated patient or a patient with an LMA in situ, use of a mechanical
ventilator has been shown to allow paramedics to accomplish extra tasks,
document better, and provide better patient care.
References and Further reading
Website
with
flash
animation
of
issues
surrounding
BVV
http://vam.anest.ufl.edu/checkout/check-sirb.html
1 Nolan JP, Deakin CD, Soar J, Böttiger BW, Smith G. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines for Resuscitation 2005 Section 4. Adult
advanced life support. Resuscitation 2005; 67(S1): S39–S86.
2 Woollard M, Greaves I. The ABC of community emergency care; 4
shortness of breath. Emerg Med J 2004; 21:341–350.
3
Ruben
H.
A
new
non-rebreathing
valve.
Anesthesiology
1995;16:643–645.
4 Noordergraaf GJ, van Dun PJ, Kramer BP, Schors MP, Hornman HP, de
Jong W. Airway management by first responders when using a bag-valve
device and two oxygen-driven resuscitators in 104 patients. Eur J
Anaesthesiol 2004;21:361–366.
5 Dorges V, Knacke P, Gerlach K. Comparison of different airway
management strategies to ventilate apneic, nonpreoxygenated patients.
Crit Care Med 2003;31:800–804.
79

6
Smally
AJ,
Ross
MJ,
Huot
CP.
Gastric
rupture
following
bag-valve-mask ventilation. J Emerg Med 2002;22:27–29.
7 Wenzel AH, Idris AH, Banner MJ et al. Respiratory system compliance
decreases after cardiopulmonary resuscitation and stomach inflation
impact of large and small tidal volumes on calculated peak airway
pressure. Resuscitation 1998;38:113–118.
8 Zecha-Stallinger A, Wenzel V, Wagner-Berger HG, von Goedecke A,
Lindner KH, Hormann C. A strategy to optimize the performance of the
mouth-to-bag resuscitator using small tidal volumes effects on lung and
gastric
ventilation
in
a
bench
model
of
an
unprotected
airway.
Resuscitation 2004;61:69–74.
9 Wenzel V, Idris AH. The current status of ventilation strategies during
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Curr Opin Crit Care 1997;3:206–213.
10 Rabey PG, Murphy PJ, Langton JA, Barker P, Rowbotham DJ. Effect
of the laryngeal mask airway on lower oesophageal sphincter pressure in
patients during general anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth 1993;70:380–381.
11 Wenzel V, Idris AH, Banner MJ, Kubilis PS, Williams JL. Influence of
tidal volume on the distribution of gas between the lungs and stomach in
the nonintubated patient receiving positive pressure ventilation. Crit Care
Med 1998;26:364–368.
12 Stallinger A, Wenzel V, Wagner-Berger H et al. Effects of decreasing
inspiratory flow rate during simulated basic life support ventilation of a
cardiac arrest patient on lung and stomach tidal volumes. Resuscitation
2002;54:167–173.
13 Guidelines 2000 for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency
cardiovascular care. International consensus on science. Circulation
2000;102(Suppl):1–384.
14 von Goedecke A, Wenzel V, Hormann C et al. Effects of face mask
ventilation in apneic patients with a resuscitation ventilator in comparison
with a bag-valve-mask. J Emerg Med 2006;30:63–67.
15
Busko
JM,
Blackwell
TH.
Impact
of
a
pressure-responsive
flow-limiting valve on bag-valve-mask ventilation in an airway model.
Can J Emerg Med 2006;8(3):158–163.
80

16 O’Neill JF, Deakin CD. Do we hyperventilate cardiac arrest patients?
Resuscitation 2007;73:82–85.
17
Aufderheide
TP,
Sigurdsson
G,
Pirrallo
RG
et
al.
Hyperventilation-induced
hypotension
during
cardiopulmonary
resuscitation. Circulation 2004;109:1960–1965.
18 Aufderheide TP, Lurie KG. Death by hyperventilation: a common and
life-threatening problem during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Crit Care
Med 2004;32:S345–351.
19 Thomas AN, Dang PT, Hyatt J, Trinh TN. A new technique for
two-hand bag valve mask ventilation. Br J Anaesthes 1992;69:397–398.
20 Roberts I et al. Airway management training using an LMA: a
comparison
of
two
different
training
programmes.
Resuscitation
1997;33(3):211–214.
21 Weiss SJ, Ernst AA, Jones R, Ong M, Filbrun T, Augustin C, Barnum
M, Nick TG. Automatic transport ventilator versus bag valve in the EMS
setting:
a
prospective,
randomized
trial.
South
Med
J
2005;98(10):970–976.
22 Miller RD (Ed) Miller’s Anesthesia, 6th edn. New York: Churchill
Livingstone, 2005.
23 Ortega R, Mehio AK, Woo A, Hafez DH. Positive-pressure ventilation
with a face mask and a bag-valve device. N Engl J Med 2007;357:e4.
24 Barash PG, Cullen BF, Soelting RK. Clinical Anesthesia, 5th edn.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Willams & Wilkins, 2006.
25
Wilson
WC,
Grande
CM,
Hoyt
DB.
Trauma:
Emergency
Resuscitation, Perioperative Anesthesia, Surgical Management. New
York: Informa Healthcare, 2007.
26 Smiths Medical. paraPAC20 and 20D Ventilator User’s Manual. Issue
4. Luton: Smiths Medical, 2003.
*CMV/Demand = Continuous mandatory ventilation.
**SMMV = Synchronised minimum mandatory ventilation.
81

Chapter 3
Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation and basic life
support
Content
Definitions
The chain of survival
Adult basic life support
Basic life support in pregnancy
Mechanical chest compression devices
The recovery position
Paediatric basic life support
Newborn life support
Foreign body airway obstruction (choking)
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Sudden death as a result of cardiac arrest is a leading cause of ischaemic
heart disease deaths in Europe.1 Survival rates calculated from cardiac
arrest to hospital discharge is estimated to be 10.7% in all types of cardiac
arrest with cardiac arrest of ventricular fibrillation origin having the
82

highest survival rate at 21.2%.1 However these figures are a culmination
of both in-hospital and out of hospital cardiac arrests; taken in isolation,
out of hospital cardiac arrests have a survival rate of approximately 6.4%.2
The provision of cardiopulmonary resuscitation is paramount in the
management of all patients in cardiac arrest by potentially maintaining
low
level
circulation
to
key
organs.1
This
chapter
discusses
cardiopulmonary resuscitation across the age continuum, including the use
of mechanical chest compression devices. In addition procedures allied to
life support in the treatment of foreign body airway obstruction and the
unconscious casualty will be reviewed.
Definitions
Cardiac arrest is defined as the sudden and complete loss of cardiac output
due to asystole, ventricular fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia or loss of
mechanical cardiac function.3 The clinical diagnosis is based upon the
patient being unconscious and pulseless (breathing can take some time to
stop after cardiac arrest). Death is virtually inevitable unless effective
treatment is given.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) or basic life support (BLS) consists
of a series of manoeuvres that attempt to maintain a low level of
circulation to perfuse the vital organs such as the heart and brain until
more definitive treatment such as defibrillation or advanced life support
can be given or there is a return of spontaneous circulation.1,4 For the
purposes of this chapter CPR and BLS are used interchangeably.
The chain of survival
The chain of survival (Figure 3.1) is a sequence of events that are
necessary to maximise the chances of survival following a cardiac arrest.
The chain is based upon the principle that a patient in cardiac arrest is
most likely to survive if all of the links in the chain are present and timely.
The focus of this chapter will be upon steps 1 and two of the chain.
83

Further information regarding the following steps of the chain is provided
in other chapters (e.g. defibrillation).
Figure 3.1 The chain of survival. Reproduced with kind permission of
Laerdal Medical Ltd.
The importance of CPR
CPR is aimed at providing oxygen delivery to vital organs until more
definitive treatment or spontaneous circulation can be restored and is
therefore of great significance in the management of cardiac arrest.
Several studies have supported the role of early CPR in cardiac arrest,
with improved outcomes, including the role of bystander CPR in
successful cardiac arrest outcome.5–9 It is believed that successful
outcomes from cardiac arrest are improved by CPR due to the creation of
a ‘bridge to successful defibrillation’, whereby CPR prolongs the phase of
ventricular fibrillation which has a higher successful resuscitation rate.1,10
With such a wealth of evidence supporting the use of CPR in cardiac
arrest and subsequent outcomes, a clear understanding of the process of
CPR is imperative.
Lay rescuers versus healthcare
providers
There is a distinct difference between the provision of CPR between the
trained healthcare provider and the lay person. It is important to bear this
in mind when attending a scene where bystander CPR is underway. This
chapter will describe the process of CPR for the trained healthcare
84

provider, however the main differences between the processes are
highlighted below:
•
Lay rescuers are not taught to assess for pulses or signs of life. The
lay rescuer may commence CPR in an unresponsive patient with
abnormal breathing.
•
The
lay
rescuer
may
not
perform
rescue
breathing
or
‘mouth-to-mouth’ ventilation due to fears of contamination.13
The change to recent guidelines for the lay person not to assess for a pulse
or absence of breathing is a result of studies into the ability of the lay
person (and healthcare professionals) to undertake carotid pulse checks.11
In addition confusion has been found over the presence of agonal
breathing and an association as normal breathing.12 Therefore it may be
found that the lay person has undertaken CPR on a premise that differs
from the trained healthcare provider.
Adult basic life support
This section contains the guidelines for single rescuer CPR. The
recommendations of this are based upon the 2005 International Consensus
Conference
on
Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation
and
Emergency
Cardiovascular Care Science document13 and European Resuscitation
Council Guidelines,1 with further supporting evidence included.
Figure 3.2 shows the adult CPR algorithm, whilst it is designed for the lay
rescuer the principles remain the same for the trained healthcare provider.
This chapter will outline the process of basic life support, for further
information
and
guidance
upon
principles
raised
such
as
airway
management and defibrillation please see the relevant chapters of this text.
Figure
3.2
Adult
basic
life
support
algorithm.
Reproduced
with
permission of Resuscitation Council UK.
85

The main principle of basic and advanced life support is the adherence to
the ABC approach.
A Airway
B Breathing
C Circulation
86

You should remain on each level until any major deficiencies are rectified.
Source: Resuscitation Council UK.1
Sequence of BLS
1. Ensure personal/patient and bystander safety:
•
This is of undoubted importance to all healthcare providers
and lay persons.
2. Check the victim for a response:
•
Gently shake the shoulders and ask loudly ‘are you all right?’
•
Consider any suggestion of cervical spine injury and provide
support for the c-spine during shaking the shoulders as
required. This can be achieved by holding the head still with
one hand whilst shaking the patient’s shoulders.
3. If the patient responds:
•
Urgent medical assessment may be required.
•
During
this
time
consider
oxygen
therapy,
clinical
assessment and treatment.
4. If the patient does not respond:
•
Consider requesting assistance.
•
Turn the patient onto their back (considering c-spine injury).
•
Open the airway, if no c-spine injury suspicion use the head
tilt and chin lift technique. See airway management chapter
for guidance.
•
If there is suspicion of c-spine injury consider a jaw thrust or
chin lift with assistance from others to manually stabilise the
head and neck. If a life threatening airway obstruction
persists, despite airway manoeuvres add a head tilt gently a
small amount at a time. The lack of patency of an airway
overrides the hypothetical risk of a cervical spine injury.
5. Keeping the airway open look, listen and feel for breathing for
no more than 10 seconds:
•
Look for chest movement.
•
Listen for breath sounds.
•
Feel for air upon your cheek.
87

•
In the first few minutes after cardiac arrest a victim may be
breathing (barely) or be taking infrequent noisy gasps, this
shouldn’t be confused for normal breathing.1,13
6. Check for the presence of a carotid pulse for no more than 10
seconds. This can be undertaken at the same time as checking for
the presence of normal breathing for those who are experienced in
clinical assessment. Inexperienced providers may check for a
carotid pulse after checking for breathing:
•
There may be other signs of life such as movement which
may contradict the absence of a palpable pulse. Remember to
view the patient as a whole.
7. If the victim is breathing normally and has a pulse:
•
Turn the patient into the recovery position. This is discussed
later in the chapter.
•
Continue to monitor airway status, breathing and pulse.
•
Continue to perform a medical assessment and required
interventions.
8. If there is a pulse but no breathing:
•
Ventilate the patient’s lungs using a bag-valve-mask, pocket
mask or mouth to mouth ventilations. This should be at a rate
of 10 min-1, the easiest way to determine this is to provide a
breath when you would need a breath. Be careful not to
hyperventilate or over-inflate.
•
To provide mouth-to-mouth ventilation:
a. Ensure head tilt and chin lift.
b. Pinch the soft part of the nose closed with the index
finger and thumb of your hand on the forehead.
c. Open the mouth a little, but maintain the chin upwards.
d. Take a breath and place your lips around the mouth,
making sure that you have a good seal.
e. Blow steadily into the mouth over about 1–1.5 sec
watching for chest rise.
f. Maintaining head tilt and chin lift, take your mouth
away from the victim and watch for the chest to fall as
air comes out.
88

g. Only those who are confident and competent in
assessing for breathing and a pulse will be able to make
this diagnosis. If in doubt treat as if the patient is in
cardiac arrest.
9. If there is abnormal breathing, no pulse or signs of life:
•
Commence CPR.
•
Kneel beside the patient. Place the heel of one hand in the
centre of the chest.
•
Place the heel of the other hand on top of the other hand.
•
Interlock the fingers and ensure that pressure is not applied
over the ribs but over the sternum (Figure 3.3). Do not apply
pressure over the upper abdomen or lower part of the
sternum.
•
Position yourself vertically above the victim’s chest with the
arms straight.
•
Press the sternum down approximately 4–5 cm.
•
After each compression release the pressure off of the chest,
without losing contact between the hands and the sternum.
•
Repeat at a rate of 100 min−1 for 30 compressions.
•
Compression and release should take equal amounts of time.
10. Follow with two rescue breaths:
•
After 30 compressions, re-open the airway and provide two
ventilations using a bag-valve mask, pocket mask or mouth
to mouth ventilation.
•
Use an inspiratory time of 1 second and provide enough
volume to produce a chest rise as in normal breathing.
•
Allow for the chest to fall prior to the second ventilation.
•
If a ventilation fails repeat until successful up to a maximum
of five attempts.
11. Recommence chest compressions as before. This cycle should
continue until definitive care is reached or provided.
12. Reassess the patient only if changes occur such as signs of life.
If not continue CPR.
13. If assistance is available consider changing rescuer every two
minutes to avoid fatigue and subsequent reduction in quality of
CPR.1
Figure 3.3 Positioning the hands for chest compressions.
89

Figure 3.4 Overhead CPR.
90

14. In the case of lone rescuer or CPR in confined spaces, overhead
CPR or straddle CPR may be used for resuscitation.1 See Figure
3.4.
•
Note that the hands must be positioned so that the heel of the
bottom hand is over the sternum as with the ‘standard’ chest
compression position. This reduces pressure over the ribs and
ensures compressions are delivered to the correct area with
reduced likelihood of rib fracture.
Rescuer danger
The safety of the rescuer and victim are paramount during resuscitation.
There have been a relative few incidences of rescuers suffering adverse
effects from CPR, with isolated reports of infections such as tuberculosis
and severe acute respiratory distress syndrome being transmitted via
mouth-to-mouth ventilation.1 There have been no reported incidences of
HIV being transmitted during CPR. With the availability of filters, barrier
devices and one way valves it is recommended that rescuers take
appropriate precautions and risk assess each situation.
Initial rescue breaths
During the first few minutes following non-asphyxial cardiac arrest blood
oxygen remains high and lack of oxygenation to the vital organs is limited
91

more by the lack of cardiac output. It is therefore less important to provide
initial rescue breaths than to provide chest compressions.14 In addition it
is
recognised
that
rescuers
are
often
unwilling
to
undertake
mouth-to-mouth ventilation, therefore the emphasis has been placed upon
effective chest compressions as opposed to ventilation.
Chest compressions
Chest compressions produce blood flow by increasing intrathoracic
pressure and directly compressing the heart.13 Chest compressions are
able to produce systolic blood pressures of 60–80 mmHg, this enables a
crucial amount of blood flow to the vital organs.15 There is little evidence
to support the specific placement of the hands during chest compressions,
however the placement of the hands in the current position is aimed at
being simplistic and reducing injury to underlying tissues.16
Chest compression depth is aimed at providing an adequate intra-thoracic
pressure and compression of the heart to allow for the forcing of blood to
the vital organs. The recommended depth for adult chest compression is
4–5 cm. The majority of evidence that supports the recommended
compression depth is based upon animal studies due to the ethical nature
of such research. It is believed that blood flow increases with compression
force and depth during CPR, thus improving circulation.17,18 However
studies suggest that in both out of hospital cardiac arrest and in hospital
cardiac arrest that compression depths are often inadequate.19 It is
suggested in a small scale animal study that a reduction in compression
depth of 30% can significantly reduce coronary perfusion pressure and
subsequent successful resuscitation.20 However no large scale study has
been undertaken to validate these results.
Compression rate is recommended at 100 min-1; this rate is suggested as a
speed for compressions not as a target for the number of compressions to
be given per minute. This number will be reduced by a number of
interruptions such as airway management and defibrillation. The rate of
compressions is aimed at maintaining coronary perfusion pressure (CPP)
and to allow for the heart to refill with blood following each ejection.
Therefore rates that are too slow will allow CPP to fall thus reducing
perfusion, whereas rates that are too high will cause reduced cardiac
filling and subsequent falls in CPP.13 Whilst there is little evidence to
92

support the recommended rate mathematical models suggests that this rate
would achieve best blood flow.13
Compression to ventilation ratio
Insufficient human studies have been undertaken to support a specific
compression to ventilation ratio, however a small number of animal
studies suggest that a ratio above 15:2 is required to optimise blood flow
and oxygen delivery.21 Interruptions to chest compressions should be
minimised as stopping chest compressions causes the coronary flow to
decrease
substantially;
on
resuming
chest
compressions,
several
compressions are necessary before the coronary flow recovers to its
previous level. Therefore a ratio of 30 compressions to 2 ventilations is
now recommended. Studies utilising this new ratio suggest that CPR has
been improved with increased chest compression numbers and reduced
time where no CPR was being performed,22 with a perceived benefit to
patient outcome being identified.23 However this is yet to be demonstrated
in a large scale prospective study.
Compression only CPR
Both lay persons and healthcare professionals are often reluctant to
perform mouth-to-mouth ventilation when no device is available to
provide protection from contamination. Animal studies have demonstrated
that compression only CPR may be as effective as standard CPR in the
first few minutes following non-asphyxial cardiac arrest.24 In adults chest
compression only CPR has also been demonstrated to be more effective
than no CPR on survival rates.25 Recent human observational studies have
supported this concept finding no significant differences in survival rates
between standard CPR and compression only CPR by lay persons.26,27 It
has been suggested but yet to be empirically proven that compression only
CPR may provide some level of passive airflow to ventilate patients when
the airway is open and elastic recoil of the chest allows for air
exchange.28,29 Based upon current evidence it is recommended that
compression only CPR should be undertaken as an alternative to no
resuscitation.
93

Key Point
Basic life support and CPR follows a stepwise approach to patient assessment and
management. It is important that any deficits at each level are rectified prior to
moving onto the next step. If acting without equipment (i.e. in a non professional
capacity) chest compression only CPR may suffice in the event that artificial
ventilations are not possible.
Basic life support in
pregnancy
Cardiac arrest seldom occurs late in pregnancy, however survival from
such an event is exceptional.30 There are a number of physiological
changes that are peculiar to pregnancy that may affect life support and
resuscitative measures, these include relative haemodilution (increased
blood volume but relatively less red blood cells); increased gastric
pressure due to the enlarged uterus and laryngeal oedema making airway
management more difficult.30,31 However in the third trimester the most
important physiological change is the compression of the inferior vena
cava by the gravid uterus (aortocaval compression). In a full term patient
(without known obstetric abnormality) the vena cava may be completely
occluded when in the supine position, this is believed to occur in up to
90% of cases and may result in a stroke volume of only 30% of the value
expected in a non pregnant patient.32 During cardiac arrest or when in the
supine position the gravid uterus in a noticeably pregnant woman should
be displaced to the left, either by manually displacing the uterus using two
hands or by tilting the pelvis to the left by between 15° and 30° (a wedge
or pillow/blankets may be used to achieve this),32 Angles of greater than
30° will greatly inhibit adequate chest compressions and should therefore
be avoided. It is recommended that a lateral tilt or manual displacement of
the uterus is achieved or considered in any third trimester patient, this can
be seen in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5 Manual displacement of the uterus.
94

Key Point
The gravid uterus may significantly reduce cardiac output during CPR, therefore
displacement of the uterus is paramount in effective CPR.
Mechanical chest
compression devices
Following concerns over a variety of factors within CPR, such as provider
fatigue and the health and safety issues of performing CPR on a stretcher
in a moving ambulance,33 a series of mechanical devices have been
designed to provide continuous chest compressions. An example of this is
the LUCAS device (Lund University Cardiopulmonary Assist System)
which is a gas driven CPR device which provides active compression/
decompression (ACD) CPR.34 ACD devices lift the anterior chest actively
during decompression. Decreasing intra-thoracic pressure during the
decompression
phase
increases
venous
return
to
the
heart.
This
theoretically enables an increased cardiac output, coronary/cerebral
perfusion pressures during the compression phase. In randomised animal
studies, the use of ACD devices has been demonstrated to improves
95

cardiac output and coronary perfusion pressure.31,35 However throughout
a series of studies no consensus has been reached to support a definitive
use of or rejection of such devices, suggesting that greater research is
required to fully validate the introduction of such devices.36
The recovery position
There are several variations of the recovery position, however there is no
single position that will suit all patients and no evidence to support a
single recovery position. The recovery position is designed to ensure that
the unconscious casualty has a clear unobstructed airway which allows for
postural drainage of any secretions or vomit that may occur. The position
should be stable and be as near to lateral as possible, with no pressure
upon the chest to inhibit breathing.
The Resuscitation Council UK recommends the following sequence of
actions to place a patient in the recovery postion.1:
1. Remove any spectacles or loosen any tight clothing around the
neck.
2. Kneel beside the victim and ensure that both of the legs are
straight.
3. Place the arm nearest to you out at right angles with the elbow
bent with the palm uppermost (Figure 3.6).
4. Bring the far arm across the chest and hold the back of the hand
against the patient’s cheek nearest to you.
5. With the your other hand grasp the far leg, just above the knee
and pull it up, keeping the foot upon the ground (Figure 3.7).
6. Keeping the hand pressed against the cheek pull on the far leg to
roll the patient towards you onto their side.
7. Adjust the upper leg to place the knee and hip at right angles,
this will provide stability for the patient.
8. Tilt the head back to ensure that the airway is open. If necessary
adjust the hand under the cheek to keep the head tilted (Figure 3.8).
9. Ensure that the airway, breathing and circulation is re-checked
frequently.
96

10. If the patient remains in the recovery position for long periods
(>30 minutes) then consider alternating the sides to reduce pressure
upon the lower arm.
Figure 3.6 The recovery position: Step one.
Figure 3.7 The recovery position: Steps two and three.
Figure 3.8 The completed recovery position.
97

Paediatric basic life support
Paediatric basic life support guidelines have been recently amended to
include both the latest evidence and to allow for simplification to assist
skill
retention.
The
following
guidance
is
recommended
by
the
Resuscitation Council (UK)1 and the European Resuscitation Council.13
Age definitions
New guidance upon paediatric resuscitation has allowed for a simplified
defining of age groups in relation to basic life support protocols.
•
An infant is a child under 1 year of age.
•
A child is between 1 year and puberty. It is unnecessary and
inappropriate to establish the onset of puberty formally. If you feel
the patient is a child then the paediatric guidelines should be used.
Sequence of paediatric BLS
1. Ensure the safety of yourself, bystanders and the child.
2. Check the child’s responsiveness:
•
Gently stimulate the child and ask loudly, ‘Are you all right?’
98

•
Do not shake infants, or children with suspected cervical
spine injuries as this may potentiate injury.
3. If the child responds by answering or moving:
•
Leave the child in the position in which you find him
(provided no further danger).
•
Continue to monitor airway status, breathing and pulse.
•
Continue to perform a medical assessment and required
interventions.
4. If the child does not respond:
•
Shout for help or call for assistance.
•
Turn the patient onto the back (considering c-spine injury).
•
Open the airway, if no c-spine injury suspicion use the head
tilt and chin lift technique.
•
Do not push on the soft tissues under the chin as this may
block the airway.
•
If you still have difficulty in opening the airway, use the jaw
thrust method.
•
If there is a suspicion of cervical spine injury try to open the
airway using chin lift or jaw thrust alone. If this is
unsuccessful, add a head tilt a small amount at a time until
the airway is open. The lack of patency of an airway
overrides the hypothetical risk of a cervical spine injury.
5. Keeping the airway open, look, listen, and feel for normal
breathing:
•
Putting your face close to the child’s face and looking along
the chest
•
Look for chest movements.
•
Listen at the child’s nose and mouth for breath sounds.
•
Feel for air movement on your cheek.
•
Look, listen, and feel for no more than 10 sec before deciding
that breathing is absent.
6. If the child is breathing normally:
•
Turn the child onto his side into the recovery position (see
adult recovery position above).
•
Monitor for continued breathing.
7. If the child is not breathing or is making agonal gasps
(infrequent, irregular breaths):
99

•
Carefully remove any obvious airway obstruction.
•
Give 5 initial rescue breaths.
•
While performing the rescue breaths note any gag or cough
response to your action.
•
Rescue breaths for a child over 1 year:
a. Ensure head tilt and chin lift.
b. Pinch the soft part of his nose closed with the index
finger and thumb of your hand on his forehead.
c. Open his mouth a little, but maintain the chin upwards.
d. Take a breath and place your lips around his mouth,
making sure that you have a good seal.
e. Blow steadily into his mouth over about 1–1.5 sec
watching for chest rise.
f. Maintaining head tilt and chin lift, take your mouth
away from the victim and watch for his chest to fall as air
comes out.
g. Take another breath and repeat this sequence 5 times.
Identify effectiveness by seeing that the child’s chest has
risen and fallen in a similar fashion to the movement
produced by a normal breath.
•
Rescue breaths for an infant:
a. Ensure a neutral position of the head and apply chin
lift.
b. Take a breath and cover the mouth and nasal apertures
of the infant with your mouth, making sure you have a
good seal. If the nose and mouth cannot both be covered
in the older infant, the rescuer may attempt to seal only
the infant’s nose or mouth with his mouth (if the nose is
used, close the lips to prevent air escape).
c. Blow steadily into the infant’s mouth and nose over
1–1.5sec sufficient to make the chest visibly rise.
d. Maintain head tilt and chin lift, take your mouth away
from the victim, and watch for his chest to fall as air
comes out.
e. Take another breath and repeat this sequence 5 times.
100

f. If you have difficulty achieving an effective breath, the
airway may be obstructed:
g. Open the child’s mouth and remove any visible
obstruction. Do not perform a blind finger sweep as this
may force an obstruction further into the airway.
h. Ensure that there is adequate head tilt and chin lift but
also that the neck is not overextended.
i. If head tilt and chin lift has not opened the airway, try
the jaw thrust method.
Make up to 5 attempts to achieve effective breaths. If still
unsuccessful, move on to chest compressions. Please note:
This describes mouth to mouth ventilation for those trained to
do so. If the equipment is available, the bag valve mask
ventilation should be used. The airway management and
ventilation chapters will demonstrate how this is achieved.
8. Check for signs of a circulation:
•
Take no more than 10 sec to look for signs of a circulation.
These include any movement, coughing, or normal breathing
(not agonal gasps – these are infrequent, irregular breaths).
•
Check the pulse (if you are trained and experienced) but
ensure you take no more than 10 seconds to do this:
a. In a child over 1 year – feel for the carotid pulse in the
neck.
b. In an infant – feel for the brachial pulse on the inner
aspect of the upper arm.
9. If you are confident that you can detect signs of a circulation
within 10 sec:
Continue rescue breathing, if necessary, until the child starts
breathing effectively.
•
Turn the child onto his side (into the recovery position) if
they remain unconscious.
•
Re-assess the child frequently.
10. If there are no signs of a circulation or no pulse, or a slow pulse
(less than 60 min−1 with poor perfusion), or you are not sure:
•
Start chest compressions.
•
Combine rescue breathing and chest compressions.
101

•
For all children, compress the lower third of the sternum:
•
To avoid compressing the upper abdomen, locate the
xiphisternum by finding the angle where the lowest ribs join
in the middle. Compress the sternum one finger’s breadth
above this.
•
Compression should be sufficient to depress the sternum by
approximately one-third of the depth of the chest.
•
Release the pressure, then repeat at a rate of about 100min-1.
•
After 15 compressions or 30 if a lone rescuer, tilt the head,
lift the chin, and give two effective breaths.
•
Continue compressions and breaths in a ratio of 15:2.
•
Lone rescuers may use a ratio of 30:2, particularly if they are
having difficulty with the transition between compression
and ventilation.
•
Although the rate of compressions will be 100min-1, the
actual number delivered will be less than 100 because of
pauses to give breaths. The best method for compression
varies slightly between infants and children.
11. Chest compression in infants:
•
The lone rescuer should compress the sternum with the tips
of two fingers (Figure 3.10).
•
If there are two or more rescuers, use the encircling
technique:
•
Place both thumbs flat, side by side, on the lower third of the
sternum (as above), with the tips pointing towards the
infant’s head.
•
Spread the rest of both hands, with the fingers together, to
encircle the lower part of the infant’s rib cage with the tips of
the fingers supporting the infant’s back.
•
Press down on the lower sternum with your two thumbs to
depress it approximately one-third of the depth of the infant’s
chest (See Figure 3.11).
12. Chest compression in children over 1 year:
•
Place the heel of one hand over the lower third of the
sternum (as above).
•
Lift the fingers to ensure that pressure is not applied over the
child’s ribs.
102

•
Position yourself vertically above the victim’s chest and,
with your arm straight, compress the sternum to depress it by
approximately one third of the depth of the chest.
•
In larger children, or for small rescuers, this may be achieved
most easily by using both hands with the fingers interlocked
as with adult patients.
13. Continue resuscitation alternating between ventilations and
chest compressions until:
•
the child shows signs of life (spontaneous respiration, pulse,
movement) or further qualified help arrives.
14. If only one rescuer is present, undertake resuscitation for about
1 min before going for assistance. To minimise interruptions in
CPR, it may be possible to carry an infant or small child whilst
summoning help.
Figure 3.9 Paediatric basic life support algorithm. Reproduced with
permission of Resuscitation Council UK.
103

Figure 3.10 Two finger chest compressions.
104

Figure 3.11 Encircling technique in infant CPR.
Compression to ventilation ratio
Recent guidelines have sought to clarify the ratio of compressions to
ventilation,1,13 with a consensus that ratio should be based upon the
number of rescuers. With 30:2 for lone rescuers to allow for simplicity.
However in situations of two or more trained rescuers a ratio of 15:2 is
recommended. This has been validated in both animal and mathematical
studies,
however
for
ethical
reasons
human
studies
are
not
applicable.37–39
105

Despite these recommendations there is little evidence to support the
superiority of any ratio; however studies comparing 5:1 and 15:2 ratios
suggest that a 5:1 ratio delivers too few chest compressions to be
effective.35,40
Chest compression technique
The modified age definitions allow for a simplified approach to chest
compressions. Previous guidance has been superseded in an effort to
reduce compression of the upper abdomen as opposed to the chest.41
Infant chest compression technique has remained the same however older
children chest compressions have moved to a dynamic choice between one
or two hands, with an emphasis upon providing adequate depth.42
Key Point
In paediatric life support 5 initial rescue breaths are provided due to the increased
likelihood of a primary respiratory cause, this differs from adult guidance. A
compression/ventilation rate of 30:2 is recommended for the lone rescuer, whereas
15:2 should be used in the event of 2 or more rescuers.
Newborn life support
During the birthing process the foetus experiences a potential period of
hypoxia due to inadequate placental oxygen exchange. Although most
babies are able to tolerate this experience, a few may require newborn life
support post delivery.1
Newborn life support sequence
The following guidance is recommended by the Resuscitation Council
(UK)1 and the European Resuscitation Council13 in the treatment of the
newborn.
1. Keep the baby warm and assess:
106

•
Babies are born small and wet. They can experience rapid
heat loss, especially if they remain wet and in a draught.
•
Whatever the problem, ensure the cord is securely clamped
and then dry the baby, remove the wet towels, and cover the
baby with dry towels.
•
For significantly preterm babies (30 weeks and below), there
is now good evidence that placing the baby under a radiant
heater and without drying the baby beforehand, immediately
covering the head and body, apart from the face, with
food-grade plastic wrapping, is the most effective way of
keeping these very small babies warm during resuscitation or
stabilisation at birth.
•
Drying the baby will provide significant stimulation and will
allow time to assess colour, tone, breathing, and heart rate.
•
Reassess these observations regularly (particularly the heart
rate) every 30 sec or so throughout the resuscitation process.
The first sign of any improvement in the baby will be an
increase in heart rate.
•
A healthy baby will be born blue but will have good tone,
will cry within a few seconds of delivery, will have a good
heart rate (the heart rate of a healthy newborn baby is about
120–150 beats min-1), and will rapidly become pink during
the first 90 seconds or so.
•
A less healthy baby will be blue at birth, will have less good
tone, may have a slow heart rate (<100 beats min-1), and may
not establish adequate breathing by 90–120 seconds.
•
An ill baby will be born pale and floppy, not breathing and
with a slow or very slow heart rate.
•
The heart rate of a baby is best judged by listening with a
stethoscope. It can also be felt by gently palpating the
umbilical cord but a slow rate at the cord is not always
indicative of a truly slow heart rate – feeling for peripheral
pulses is not helpful as the anatomy of the baby makes this
difficult to achieve with confidence.
2. Before the baby can breathe effectively the airway must be open:
•
Place the baby on his back with the head in the neutral
position, i.e. with the neck neither flexed nor extended. Most
newborn babies will have a relatively prominent occiput,
which will tend to flex the neck if the baby is placed on his
107

back on a flat surface. This can be avoided by placing some
support under the shoulders of the baby, but be careful not to
overextend the neck.
•
If the baby is very floppy it may also be necessary to apply
chin lift or jaw thrust.
3. If the baby is not breathing adequately by about 90 seconds give
5 inflation breaths. Until now the baby’s lungs will have been filled
with fluid. Aeration of the lungs in these circumstances is likely to
require sustained application of pressures of about 30 cm of water
for 23 sec – these are ‘inflation breaths’.
•
If heart rate was below 100 beats min-1 initially then it
should increase as oxygenated blood reaches the heart. If the
heart rate does increase then it can be assumed that you have
successfully aerated the lungs. If the heart rate increases but
the baby does not start breathing independently, then
continue to provide regular breaths at a rate of about 30–40
min−1 until the baby starts to breathe.
•
If heart rate does not increase following inflation breaths,
then either you have not aerated the lungs or the baby needs
more than lung aeration alone. The most likely is failure to
aerate the lungs effectively. If the heart rate does not
increase, and the chest does not passively move with each
inflation breath, then you have not aerated the lungs
effectively.
4. If the heart rate remains slow (less than 60 min-1) or absent
following 5 inflation breaths, despite good passive chest movement
in response to your inflation efforts, start chest compressions as
indicated below:
5. Chest compressions should commence only when the lungs have
been aerated successfully.
•
In babies, the most efficient method of delivering chest
compression is to grip the chest in both hands in such a way
that the two thumbs can press on the lower third of the
sternum, just below an imaginary line joining the nipples,
with the fingers over the spine at the back.
•
Compress the chest quickly and firmly, reducing the
antero-posterior diameter of the chest by about one third.
108

•
The
ratio
of
compressions
to
inflations
in
newborn
resuscitation is 3:1.
•
Chest compressions move oxygenated blood from the lungs
back to the heart. Allow enough time during the relaxation
phase of each compression cycle for the heart to refill with
blood. Ensure that the chest is inflating with each breath.
Figure 3.12 Newborn life support algorithm. Reproduced with permission
of Resuscitation Council UK.
109

Key Point
In the newborn patient a slow pulse (below 60bpm) is an inadequate pulse rate for
vital organ perfusion therefore CPR should be commenced at a compression/
ventilation ratio of 3:1.
Foreign body airway
obstruction (choking)
Definition
Choking is defined as the presence of a foreign body within the airway
causing a partial or complete obstruction.43 Foreign body airway
obstruction (FBAO) is an uncommon but preventable cause of cardiac
arrest,44 with the key element of treatment being swift recognition
followed by a set of simple steps.1 Key signs and symptoms of the
choking patient include:
•
History – the patient may have been eating, or a child playing with
a small toy.
•
The victim may clutch their neck (universal choking sign).
•
The victim may be coughing.
•
Inability to breathe or cough (severe airway obstruction).
•
The victim may be unconscious.
Figure 3.13 FBAO algorithm (adult). Reproduced with permission of
Resuscitation Council UK.
110

Guidance for the treatment of the choking patient has been devised
and standardised in the UK by the Resuscitation Council (UK)1 and
the
European
Resuscitation
Council13
utilising
current
best
evidence and will therefore be recommended here.
Adult choking sequence
1. If the patient has a mild airway obstruction encourage them to
cough. No other action is required.
2. If the patient shows signs of severe airway obstruction and is
conscious:
•
Give up to five back blows.
•
Stand to the side of but slightly behind the patient.
•
Support the chest with one hand and lean the victim well
forward, so that any obstructing objects that are removed
comes out of the mouth rather than progresses down the
airway.
•
Give up to five sharp blows between the shoulder blades with
the heel of your other hand (Figure 3.14).
3. Check to see if each back blow has cleared the obstruction. If the
obstruction is removed do not continue to give all five back blows.
111

4. If five back blows fail, continue to give up to five abdominal
thrusts.
•
Stand behind the patient and put both hands around the upper
part of the abdomen.
•
Lean the patient forward.
•
Clench your fist and place it between the umbilicus and
inferior to the xiphisternum.
•
Grasp this hand with the other hand and pull sharply inwards
and upwards (See Figure 3.15).
•
Repeat up to five times.
5. If the obstruction is not relieved then continue to alternate five
back blows with five abdominal thrusts.
6. If the patient becomes unconscious begin CPR as described
earlier in this chapter. This should be undertaken even if the
choking patient has a pulse, this is because chest compressions
(thrusts) will reproduce pressure within the thoracic cage to
potentially expel a FBAO.
Figure 3.14 Deliver up to five sharp blows between the shoulder blades.
A single method for relieving FBAO?
Clinical data for the relieving of FBAO is relatively sparse with mainly
single case studies and retrospective data being used. However some of
this data is influential in the care of the FBAO victim. Approximately
112

50% of all FBAO cases are not relieved by a single technique,45 whereas
the use of multiple techniques such as back blows, abdominal thrusts and
chest thrusts significantly improves the likelihood of success.46
There is much debate as to what technique should be utilised to relieve
FBAO,
however
no
consensus
has
been
reached.
Cadaver
and
anaesthetised volunteer studies have demonstrated that chest thrusts can
deliver a significantly higher airway pressure than abdominal thrusts, thus
have the potential to be a more effective treatment for FBAO.40,47 A
similar study comparing abdominal thrust and back blows found that
abdominal thrusts produced significantly higher airway pressures and
where therefore more likely to dislodge a foreign body.48 However there
is no evidence of suitable quality to validate or dispute any of the
suggested techniques or to change current practice.
Aftercare following a choking episode
There has been anecdotal evidence that suggests the use of FBAO
relieving techniques, especially the abdominal thrust can result in
underlying injury such as rib fracture, oesophageal rupture and gastric
rupture among others.40,49 Therefore it is always recommended that any
victim of choking who has required abdominal thrusts should be reviewed
by a doctor.1,13
Paediatric choking sequence
1. If the patient has a mild airway obstruction, encourage them to
cough. No other action is required.
2. If the patient shows signs of severe airway obstruction and is
conscious:
•
Give up to five back blows as with the adult patient (see
Figure 3.14 above).
3. If back blows do not relieve the FBAO then provide chest thrusts
to infants or abdominal thrusts with children.
4. Back blows in an infant:
•
Support the infant in a head down position to allow for
gravity to assist in removing the foreign body.
113

•
A seated or kneeling position may assist in this with the child
across the lap.
•
Support the infants head by placing the thumb of one hand at
the angle of the jaw and one or two fingers of the same hand
at the same point on the other side of the jaw.
•
Deliver up to five sharp back blows with the heel of the other
hand, aiming to relieve the obstruction with each blow.
5. In a child over 1 year this may be achieved with the same
technique, or if a large child support the child in a forward position
as with adults.
6. Chest thrusts are performed in the same way as with adults i.e.
using a chest compression but sharper and at a slower rate.
7. Abdominal thrusts should only be performed in children over 1
year of age using the same technique as with adults. This is due to
increased likelihood of underlying intra-abdominal injury in the
younger child.
8. The cycle of back blows and abdominal thrusts or chest thrusts
(in the child under 1) should continue until the obstruction is
cleared.
9. In the unconscious child CPR should be commenced as with
Paediatric Basic Life Support.
Figure 3.15 The abdominal thrust.
114

Figure
3.16
The
paediatric
choking
algorithm.
Reproduced
with
permission of Resuscitation Council UK.
115

Key Point
If the patient is still able to cough effectively then supportive measures only are
required. If the patient deteriorates then FBAO manoeuvres should be considered.
Chapter Key Points
1. Basic life support and foreign body airway obstruction is age specific. It is
essential that you are comfortable with the processes involved in each age group
so that you are less anxious and more prepared in the event of attending a
paediatric or adult cardiac arrest or choking.
2. There is a clear step by step approach to resuscitation across the age continuum
provided by the Resuscitation Council (UK) that is based upon current best
evidence and provides standardised care.
References and Further reading
1 Resuscitation Council UK Resuscitation Guidelines. Resuscitation
Council, UK, 2005.
2 Nichol G, Stiell I, Laupacis A, Pham B, Maio V, Wells G. A cumulative
meta-analysis of the effectiveness of defibrillator-capable emergency
medical services for victims of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Ann Emerg
Med 1999;34:517–525.
116

3 Boon N, Colledge N, Walker B. (Eds) Davidson’s Principles and
Practice of Medicine, 20th edn. London: Churchill-Livingstone, 2006.
4 Deakin C, O’ Neill J, Tabor T. Does compression only cardiopulmonary
resuscitation generate adequate passive ventilation during cardiac arrest?
Resuscitation 2007;75:53–59.
5 Becker L, Ostrander M, Barrett J, Kondos J. Outcome of CPR in a large
metropolitan
area
–
where
are
the
survivors?
Ann
Emerg
Med
1991;20(4):355–361.
6 Bang A, Biber B, Isaksson L, Lindqvist J, Herlitz J. Evaluation of
dispatcher assisted cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Eur J Emerg Med
1999;6(3):175–183.
7 Eisenberg M, Hallstrom A, Carter W, Cummins R, Bergner L, Pierce J.
Emergency
CPR
instruction
via
telephone.
Am
J
Pub
Health
1985;75(1):47–50.
8 Engdahl J, Bang A, Lindqvist J, Herlitz J. Factors affecting short and
long term prognosis among 1069 patients with out of hospital cardiac
arrest and pulseless electrical activity. Resuscitation 2001;51(1):17–25.
9 Gallagher E, Lombardi G, Gennis P. Effectiveness of bystander
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and survival following out of hospital
cardiac arrest. J Am Med Ass 1995;274(24):1922–1925.
10 Berg R, Sanders A, Kern K, Hilwig R, Heidenreich J, Porter M, Ewy
G. Adverse hemodynamic effects of interrupting chest compressions for
rescue breathing during cardiopulmonary resuscitation for ventricular
fibrillation cardiac arrest. Circulation 2001;104:2465–2470.
11 Bahr J, Klingler H, Panzer W, Rode H, Kettler D. Skills of lay people
in checking the carotid pulse. Resuscitation 1997;35:23–26.
12 Hauff S, Rea T, Culley L, Kerry F, Becker L, Eisenberg M. Factors
impeding dispatcher assisted telephone cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Ann Emerg Med 2003;42:731–737.
13 International Consensus Conference on Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
and Emergency Cardiovascular Care Science: European Resuscitation
Council. European Resuscitation Council Guidelines for Resuscitation.
Resuscitation 2005;67S1:S7–S23.
117

14 Kern KB, Hilwig RW, Berg RA, Sanders AB, Ewy GA. Importance of
continuous chest compressions during cardiopulmonary resuscitation:
improved outcome during a simulated single lay-rescuer scenario.
Circulation 2002;105:645–649.
15 Paradis NA, Martin GB, Goetting MG et al. Simultaneous aortic,
jugular
bulb,
and
right
atrial
pressures
during
cardiopulmonary
resuscitation
in
humans.
Insights
into
mechanisms.
Circulation
1989;80:361–368.
16 Handley J. Teaching hand placement for chest compression – a simpler
technique. Resuscitation 2002; 53:29–36.
17 Ditchey R, Winkler J, Rhodes C. Relative lack of coronary blood flow
during closed chest resuscitation in dogs. Circulation 1982;66:297–302.
18 Bellamy R, DeGuzman L, Pedersen D. Coronary blood flow during
cardiopulmonary resuscitation in swine. Circulation 1984;69:174–180.
19 Tomlison A, Nyaether J, Kramer-Johansen J, Steen P, Dorph E.
Compression
force-depth
relationship
during
out
of
hospital
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Resuscitation 2007;72:364–370.
20 Ristagno G, Tang W, Jorgenson D, Russell J, Wang T, Sun S, Weil M.
Effects of variable depth of chest compression on outcomes of CPR.
Circulation 2006; 114:1205–1206.
21 Sanders AB, Kern KB, Berg RA, Hilwig RW, Heidenrich J, Ewy GA.
Survival and neurologic outcome after cardiopulmonary resuscitation with
four different chest compression-ventilation ratios. Ann Emerg Med
2002;40:553–562.
22 Hostler D, Rittenberger J, Roth R, Callaway C. Increased chest
compression to ventilation ratio improves delivery of CPR. Resuscitation
2007;74:446–452.
23 Olasveengen T, Wik L, Kramer-Johansen J, Sunde K, Pytte M, Steen
P. Is CPR quality improving? A retrospective study of out of hospital
cardiac arrest. Circulation 2007;116:384.
24 Kern KB, Hilwig RW, Berg RA, Sanders AB, Ewy GA. Importance of
continuous chest compressions during cardiopulmonary resuscitation:
118

improved outcome during a simulated single lay-rescuer scenario.
Circulation 2002;105:645–649.
25 Becker LB, Berg RA, Pepe PE et al. A reappraisal of mouth to-mouth
ventilation during bystander-initiated cardiopulmonary resuscitation. A
statement for healthcare professionals from the Ventilation Working
Group
of
the
Basic
Life
Support
and
Pediatric
Life
Support
Subcommittees,
American
Heart
Association.
Resuscitation
1997;35:189–201.
26 Bohm K, Rosenqvist M, Herlitz J, Hollenberg J, Svensson L. Survival
is similar after standard treatment and chest compression only in out of
hospital
bystander
cardiopulmonary
resuscitation.
Circulation
2007;116:2908–2912.
27
Iwami
T,
Kawamura
T,
Hiraide
A
et
al.
Effectiveness
of
bystander-initiated cardiac only resuscitation for patients with out of
hospital cardiac arrest. Circulation 2007;116:2900–2907.
28 Berg RA, Kern KB, Hilwig RW, Ewy GA. Assisted ventilation during
‘bystander’ CPR in a swine acute myocardial infarction model does not
improve outcome. Circulation 1997;96:4364–4371.
29
Deakin
C,
O’
Neill
J,
Tabor
T.
Does
compression
only
cardiopulmonary resuscitation generate adequate passive ventilation
during cardiac arrest. Resuscitation 2007;75:53–59.
30 Morris S, Stacey M. ABC of resuscitation: resuscitation in pregnancy.
Br Med J 2003;327:1277–1279.
31 Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. UK Ambulance
Service Clinical Practice Guidelines. London: JRCALC, 2006.
32 Grady K, Howell C, Cox C. Managing Obstetric Emergencies and
Trauma: The MOET Course Manual, 2nd edn. London: Royal College of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 2007.
33 Stapleton E. Comparing CPR during ambulance transport: Manual
versus mechanical methods. J Emerg Med Serv 1991;16(9):63–72.
34 Steen S, Liao Q, Pierre L, Paskevisius A, Sjoberg T. Evaluation of
LUCAS, a new device for automatic mechanical compression and active
decompression resuscitation. Resuscitation 2002;55(3):285–299.
119

35 Rubertsson S, Karlsten R. Increased cortical cerebral blood flow with
LUCAS; a new device for mechanical chest compressions compared to
standard external compressions during experimental cardiopulmonary
resuscitation. Resuscitation 2005;65:357–363.
36 Lafuente-Lafuente C, Melero-Bascones M. Active chest compression –
decompression for cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Cochrane Database
Systematic Review CD002751, 2004.
37 Berg RA, Hilwig RW, Kern KB, Babar I, Ewy GA. Simulated
mouth-to-mouth
ventilation
and
chest
compressions
(bystander
cardiopulmonary resuscitation) improves outcome in a swine model of
prehospital
pediatric
asphyxial
cardiac
arrest.
Crit
Care
Med
1999;27:1893–1899.
38 Dorph E, Wik L, Steen PA. Effectiveness of ventilation compression
ratios 1:5 and 2:15 in simulated single rescuer paediatric resuscitation.
Resuscitation 2002;54:259–264.
39 Turner I, Turner S, Armstrong V. Does the compression to ventilation
ratio affect the quality of CPR: a simulation study. Resuscitation
2002;52:55–62.
40 Whyte SD, Wyllie JP. Paediatric basic life support: a practical
assessment. Resuscitation 1999;41:153–217.
41 Clements F, McGowan J. Finger position for chest compressions in
cardiac arrest in infants. Resuscitation 2000;44:43–46.
42 Stevenson AG, McGowan J, Evans AL, Graham CA. CPR for children:
one hand or two? Resuscitation 2005;64:205–208.
43 Ho P, Tung P, Law S, Wong J. Review of the Heimlich Manoeuvre.
Ann Coll Surg 1999;3:7–10.
44 Langhelle A, Sunde K, Wik L, Steen P. Airway pressure with chest
compressions versus Heimlich manoeuvre in recently dead adults with
complete airway obstruction. Resuscitation 2000;44:105–108.
45 Redding JS. The choking controversy: critique of evidence on the
Heimlich maneuver. Crit Care Med 1979;7:475–479.
120

46 International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation. Part 2. Adult Basic
Life
Support.
2005
International
Consensus
on
Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation
and
Emergency
Cardiovascular
Care
Science
with
Treatment Recommendations. Resuscitation 2005;67:187–200.
47 Ruben H, McNaughton FI. The treatment of food-choking. Practitioner
1978;221:725–729.
48 Day R, Crelin E, DuBois A. Choking: The Heimlich abdominal thrust
vs back blows: An approach to measurement of inertial and aerodynamic
forces. Pediatrics 1982;70(1): 113–119.
49 Croom D. Rupture of stomach after attempted Heimlich manoeuvre. J
Am Med Ass 1983;250:2602–2603.
121

Chapter 4
Defibrillation
Content
Definition of defibrillation
The literature behind defibrillation
Procedure for defibrillation
Definition of transcutaneous cardiac pacing (TCP)
Terminology used in transcutaneous cardiac pacing
Indications for use of transcutaneous cardiac pacing
The literature behind transcutaneous cardiac pacing
Equipment
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Out-of-hospital cardiac arrest is a public health problem that results in
survival to hospital discharge rates of between 6% and 7%.1 Ventricular
fibrillation is the most common initial rhythm in out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest2 and has a significantly higher survival rate than patients presenting
in non-shockable cardiac arrest rhythms. In some exemplary systems,
survival to hospital discharge approaches 30%.3 Early defibrillation is the
key to successful resuscitation of these patients. External cardiac pacing is
not commonly used in ambulance services but may have value in the
management of symptomatic bradycardia that does not respond to
pharmacological intervention.
122

Definition of defibrillation
Defibrillation is the only effective therapy for cardiac arrest caused by
ventricular fibrillation and can be defined as an attempt to depolarise a
critical mass of the myocardium in order to restore the synchronicity of
the heart’s electrical conduction system.4 The overarching aim is to
achieve the highest efficacy with the lowest possible energy and current,
allowing for depolarisation of the myocardial cells with minimal or no
myocardial damage.5
There are numerous factors that may impact on the effectiveness of
defibrillation:
Scenario
You are a first responder called to attend a 55-year-old female patient in cardiac arrest
following a short period of ‘crushing’ central chest pain. The patient has a previous
history of ischaemic heart disease and has recently been discharged from hospital with
unstable angina. You are the first on scene and the responding ambulance crew is not
expected for another 5 minutes. The only other person at the location is the patient’s
mother who is 79 years of age.
1. What are your priorities with this patient given that you are the only health care
professional on scene?
2. Given the history it is highly likely that this patient is in a shockable rhythm, when
will you connect the defibrillator and what will you stop doing in order to achieve
this?
The literature behind
defibrillation
Strategies before defibrillation
Precordial thump
There is little high quality evidence to support the use of a precordial
thump although 3 old case series suggest that VF or pulseless VT was
123

converted to a perfusing rhythm by a precordial thump.6,7,8 It has been
suggested that an effective precordial thump may be delivered by the
closed fist from between 5 and 40 cm.9 There are suggestions that a
precordial thump may lead to rhythm deterioration but it is not possible to
judge the likelihood of this occurring. Current recommendations suggest
that a single precordial thump may be considered after a monitored
cardiac arrest if a defibrillator is not immediately available.9
CPR before defibrillation
In two studies, 1½–3 minutes of CPR by paramedics or EMS physicians
before attempted defibrillation improved return of spontaneous circulation
(ROSC) and survival rates for adults with out-of-hospital VF or VT when
the response interval and time to defibrillation was ≥4 to 5 minutes.10,11 A
more recent trial contradicted these results and found no improvement in
ROSC in adults with out-of-hospital VF or VT, in which 1½ minutes of
paramedic CPR was delivered before defibrillation.12 In animal studies of
VF lasting 5 minutes, CPR (often with administration of epinephrine)
before defibrillation improved haemodynamics and survival rates.9
Recommendation
In the case of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest attended, but unwitnessed, by
healthcare professionals equipped with manual defibrillators, 2 minutes of
CPR should be given prior to defibrillation (approximately 5 cycles of
30:2).13
Transthoracic impedance
Energy
selection
and
transthoracic
impedance
are
the
two
main
determinants
of
intracardiac
current
flow
during
defibrillation.
Transthoracic impedance (TTI) is the resistance to current flow created by
body size and structure. Factors that determine TTI include energy
selected, electrode size, paddle–skin coupling material, number and time
interval of previous shocks, phase of ventilation, distance between
electrodes (size of the chest), and paddle electrode pressure.9
124

Pad/paddle positioning and size
See Figure 4.1.
No human studies have evaluated the effect of pad/paddle position on
defibrillation
success
or
survival
rates;
most
studies
evaluated
cardioversion or used secondary endpoints such as TTI.9 A review of the
science in 2005 suggests that placement of paddles or electrode pads on
the superior-anterior right chest and the inferior-lateral left chest were
effective,
whilst
alternative
positions
such
as
apex-posterior
and
anteroposterior positions were also reported to be effective.9 Where
paddles are being used it is suggested that the apical paddle should be
placed longitudinally to maximise contact with the chest;14 it is not clear
if this is applicable to adhesive pads. Care should be taken to avoid
placing pads or paddles directly on breast tissue as this has been shown to
increase TTI.15
One human study16 and one animal study17 documented higher success
rates with larger 12.8 cm paddles compared with 8 cm paddles. A number
of studies have reported reduced TTI with larger paddles15,18-23 and one
animal study has shown significant myocardial damage when using small
(4.3 cm electrodes) when compared with 8 cm or 12.8 cm pads.24
Figure 4.1 Defibrillation electrode position.
125

Recommendations9
•
Pads should be placed on the superior-anterior right chest and
inferior lateral left chest where possible.
•
In large-breasted women it is reasonable to place the left electrode
pad/paddle lateral to or beneath the breast, where paddles are used;
the apical paddle should be placed longitudinally.
•
Defibrillation success may be improved with 12.3 cm pads rather
than 8 cm pads, small pads should be avoided to reduce the risk of
myocardial injury.
•
Where paddles are being used, the apical paddle should be placed
longitudinally.
Adhesive pads or paddles?
Several
studies
reported
in
the
2005
International
Consensus
on
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation suggest that levels of TTI are similar with
both paddles and pads. It has been suggested that TTI is reduced where an
126

optimum 8 kg of pressure is applied to paddles but there are several safety
and practical advantages to the use of pads, particularly in the prehospital
environment.9
Ventilation status
During the inspiratory cycle the patient’s lungs are filling with air, which
increases TTI. Delivering shocks at the end of expiration when the lungs
are deflated will reduce TTI and increase the chances of successful
defibrillation.4
Recommendations
•
Adhesive pads are safe and effective and suitable as an alternative
to paddles.
•
Defibrillation should coincide with the peak of expiration to
minimise TTI.
Defibrillation waveform
Biphasic v monophasic defibrillation
Defibrillation waveforms are complex interventions; it is not important to
understand the waveforms used by these defibrillators but it is important
that the most effective devices are used. Monophasic waveforms vary in
the speed at which the waveform returns to the zero voltage point –
gradually (damped sinusoidal) or instantaneously (truncated exponential)
– and deliver a current that proceeds in a single direction.25 All new
defibrillators produce a biphasic waveform, which means that the current
flows initially in a positive direction and then, after a predetermined time
reverses to a negative direction. The modern generation of biphasic
defibrillators are calibrated to alter the waveform delivered to the patient
based on TTI (that is, impedance compensated biphasic waveforms
(ICB)). These devices aim to deliver a shock ‘dose’ that is proportional to
each patient.26
This waveform has been shown to be more effective than the monophasic
waveform defibrillators,27 and is successful with fewer shocks.28 Biphasic
127

defibrillators are smaller and lighter than monophasic defibrillators and
use lower energy levels so require less battery power.
Recommendation
•
Biphasic waveform shocks are safe and effective for termination of
VF when compared with monophasic waveform shocks.9
Energy levels for defibrillation
A metanalysis identified insufficient evidence for or against a specific
energy level for either first or subsequent shocks when using a
defibrillator.9 It is reasonable to use energy levels of 150–200 joules with
BTE waveform biphasic defibrillators, and 120 joules with the rectilinear
biphasic waveform. An initial shock of 360 joules is considered
reasonable when using a monophasic waveform defibrillator.9
Automated external defibrillation
Automated external defibrillators (AED) are sophisticated, computerised
devices that deliver defibrillatory shocks to those in cardiac arrest caused
by VF or ventricular tachycardia (VT).29 AEDs use voice and visual
prompts to guide the practitioner in the delivery of defibrillatory shocks
and have become more sophisticated and safer over recent years. For
AEDs to perform reliable ECG signal analysis and make a shock/no-shock
decision, CPR must be discontinued due to the artefacts introduced by
chest compressions and ventilations;30 this introduces periods where there
is no blood flow from compressions. One study identified that patients
were not perfused for approximately 50% of the time when an AED was
used in out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.31 Animal studies have shown these
delays to be linked to a worse outcome in cases of prolonged VF.32
A number of studies indicate that the use of AEDs by trained lay and
professional responders has significantly improved the outcome for those
who suffer an out-of-hospital VF cardiac arrest where an effective
response plan is in place.33–37 The evidence for the use of AEDs by
trained responders (e.g. police and fire) is less clear with some studies
indicating improved survival whilst others show no improvement.9
128

Recommendations
Use of AEDs by trained lay and professional responders is recommended
to increase survival rates in patients with cardiac arrest. Use of AEDs in
public settings (airports, casinos, sports facilities, etc) where witnessed
cardiac arrest is likely to occur can be useful if an effective response plan
is in place.9 In order to minimise the time where there is no blood flow
due to interruptions in compressions, professional ambulance staff should
be trained in and have the use of manual defibrillators.
Procedure for defibrillation
Procedure
Additional
Information
rationale
1. Perform CPR until defibrillator/monitor is attached.
Maximises
perfusion whilst
awaiting
equipment.
2. Prepare patient’s chest. Check for:
• Patches (e.g. GTN) remove if found.
• Jewellery or piercings in the pathway of defibrillation;
remove if found.
• Moisture: dry wet chests.
• Pacemaker sites: avoid defibrillating over pacemaker
sites.
• Underwired bras: remove if found.
Maximises contact
between pads and
chest and reduces
TTI.
2. It may be necessary to shave chest hair for pad
positioning but this should not delay defibrillation if no
razor is available.
3. Place the right (sternal) electrode to the right of the
sternum, below the clavicle, and the apical paddle vertically
in the mid-axillary line, approximately level with the V6
ECG electrode position or the female breast.
Ensures that the
current passes
through a critical
mass of the
myocardium.
4. Assess rhythm.
To identify
shockable or
129

non-shockable
rhythm.
5. Select appropriate energy for defibrillator.
6. Use strong verbal commands: ‘VF/VT seen’ ‘Charging
at 150 joules’ (energy stated here is an example only).
Ensure safety
during
defibrillation
7. Confirm that nobody is in direct or indirect contact with
the patient. Consider commands such as: ‘Top, middle,
bottom clear’ whilst checking those specific areas of the
patient.
8. Ensure that oxygen is off and intravenous lines are
down.
9. State: ‘stand clear’.
10. Perform a final quick visual check to ensure that
everyone
11. Deliver shock.
12. Immediately recommence CPR irrespective of the
presenting rhythm.
Definition of transcutaneous
cardiac pacing (TCP)
External (transcutaneous) pacing is a temporary method of pacing a
patient’s heart during an emergency. Pulses of electrical current are
delivered through the patient’s chest to stimulate the cardiac muscle to
contract. It restores electrical stimulation to the myocardium in an
emergency setting and can be initiated quickly by any healthcare
professional who has undertaken the necessary training.38
130

Terminology used in
transcutaneous cardiac
pacing
•
Capture: The presence of a QRS complex after a pacing spike
(electrical capture). If the patient has a palpable pulse consistent
with the heart rate on the monitor then mechanical capture has also
been achieved.
•
Demand pacing: The provision of a pacing stimulus only when the
patient’s heart rate falls below a predetermined limit.
•
Fist (percussion) pacing: The use of serial rhythmic blows with
the closed fist over the left lower edge of the sternum to pace the
heart. This will only be used in the emergency setting in P-wave
asystole and profound bradycardia resulting in clinical cardiac
arrest.39
•
Fixed-rate pacing: The provision of a pacing stimulus irrespective
of the patient’s intrinsic heart rate.
•
Threshold: The minimum energy required to maintain consistent
capture.
Indications for use of
transcutaneous cardiac
pacing
The European Resuscitation Council Guidelines for resuscitation 2005
advocate TCP in bradycardia where there is no response to atropine, if
atropine is unlikely to be effective or if the patient is severely
symptomatic, particularly if there is high-degree block (Möbitz Type II or
third-degree block).40 The Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison
Committee (JRCALC) also advocates the use of TCP where available.41
131

THINK
How does atropine work?
Can you explain how the different heart blocks manifest themselves on the ECG
and relate them to the electrophysiology of the heart?
The literature behind
transcutaneous cardiac
pacing
There are few studies evaluating the use of transcutaneous pacing in the
prehospital environment and all are over 15 years old. The conclusion of a
systematic review of the literature suggests that there is no evidence to
support the use of TCP in bradyasystolic cardiac arrest, and inadequate
evidence to determine the efficacy of prehospital TCP in the treatment of
symptomatic bradycardia.42 However, temporary pacing has become the
standard method for providing immediate treatment of severe bradycardias
and certain tachycardias for the past 20 years.43
A pilot study has been undertaken to assess the feasibility of undertaking a
randomised controlled trial (RCT) to evaluate the safety and effectiveness
of prehospital TCP;44 its results may help provide further evidence to
support or refute the use of prehospital TCP.
Equipment
•
Defibrillator/ECG monitor with TCP function.
•
Pacing pads.
•
Scissors.
•
Analgesia may also be required.
132

Skin preparation
Prepare the patient by removing excess hair; this will help to improve
contact between the electrodes and the patient’s skin. It is recommended
that scissors are used for this rather than a razor as any nicks in the skin
can cause burns and excessive discomfort.45,46 Consider cleaning the
patient’s skin with alcohol to remove salt residue from sweat as this has
been linked to increased discomfort and a reduction in the effectiveness of
pacing.47
Pad positioning
The positioning of the electrodes will depend upon whether the electrodes
used are multi-function electrodes (MFE) capable of defibrillation and
pacing, or pacing only electrodes.
Pacing only electrodes
An anterior/posterior (AP) position is recommended for use so that
defibrillation pads can be applied rapidly in the event that defibrillation
becomes necessary. The anterior electrode is placed on the left anterior
chest (i.e. left of the sternum) centred over the position for lead V3. The
posterior electrode should be placed to the left of the thoracic vertebrae,
opposite the anterior electrode position.45
Multi-function electrodes
These electrodes are capable of defibrillation and monitoring as well as
pacing. They must be placed in a position where defibrillation and chest
compressions can be performed if required. Either an AP position or a
right pectoral and apical position may be chosen. The AP position is
preferred but should not be used if the patient is in cardiac arrest as
compressions should not be interrupted to allow placement of the posterior
electrode.39
133

Procedure for TCP
Procedure
Additional information/
rationale
1. Explain the procedure to the patient, gain
consent and co-operation.
Legal requirement.
2. Attach ECG electrodes to the patient and
connect to the ECG monitor.
3.Prepare the patient’s chest.
Reduces discomfort and
improves effectiveness of
pacing.
4.Remove excess hair (preferably trim with
scissors) and consider cleaning chest with
alcohol.
Improves electrode contact
whilst reducing discomfort.
5.Following the instructions on the package,
apply the MFE or pacing electrodes and connect
to the pacing machine.
6. Select the appropriate pacing mode – demand
pacing is normally selected in the emergency
setting.
7. Set an appropriate rate; normally 60–90
beats/minute.45 Start the output at the lowest
setting and gradually increase until electrical
capture is gained.
If the bradycardia was
extreme, it is recommended
that the initial pacing rate be
lowered.39
8. The output needs to be higher than the
threshold so it is recommended that output is
increased by about 2 mA.45
Allows capture to be
maintained once threshold has
been reached.
9. Monitor the patient’s heart rate and rhythm to
assess ventricular response to pacing; assess the
haemodynamic response by palpating central
pulses and taking blood pressure.38
Ensures mechanical as well as
electrical capture and assesses
the patient’s physiological
response to the procedure.
10. Administer analgesia as required and per
guidelines.
To minimise pain.
11. Monitor and adjust output if capture is lost.
Chapter Key Points
134

1. Defibrillation is the only effective therapy for cardiac arrest caused by
ventricular fibrillation and can be defined as an attempt to depolarise a critical
mass of the myocardium in order to restore the synchronicity of the heart’s
electrical conduction system.
2. A 1½ to 3-minute period of CPR may be considered before attempting
defibrillation in adults with out-of-hospital VF or pulseless VT when the EMS
response (call to arrival) interval is >4 to 5 minutes
3. Adhesive pads are safe and effective and suitable as an alternative to
paddles.
4. Defibrillation should coincide with the peak of expiration to minimise TTI.
5. External (transcutaneous) pacing is a temporary method of pacing a
patient’s heart during an emergency.
6. The European Resuscitation Council Guidelines for resuscitation 2005
advocate TCP in bradycardia where there is no response to atropine, if atropine
is unlikely to be effective or if the patient is severely symptomatic, particularly
if there is high-degree block (Möbitz Type II second- or third-degree block).
References and Further reading
1 Nichol G, Stiell IG, Laupacis A, Pham B, De Maio VJ, Wells GA. A
cumulative meta-analysis of the effectiveness of defibrillator-capable
emergency medical services for victims of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest.
Ann Emerg Med 1999;34:517–525.
2 Kuisma M, Repo J, Alaspää A. The incidence of out-of-hospital
ventricular fibrillation in Helsinki, Finland, from 1994 to 1999. Lancet
2001:358(9280):473–474.
3
Cobb
LA,
Fahrenbruch
CE,
Walsh
TR
et
al.,
Influence
of
cardiopulmonary resuscitation prior to defibrillation in patients with
out-of-hospital ventricular fibrillation. JAMA 1999;281:1182–1188.
4 Graham-Garcia J, Heath J, Andrews J. Defibrillation and biphasic
shocks: Implications for perianesthesia nursing. J Perianesthes Nurs
2005;20(1):23–34.
5 Weisfeldt ML, Kerber RE, McGoldrick RP et al. American Heart
Association Report on the Public Access Defibrillation Conference,
December 8–10, 1994. Automatic External Defibrillation Task Force.
Circulation 1995;92:2740–2747.
6 Befeler B. Mechanical stimulation of the heart: its therapeutic value in
tachyarrhythmias. Chest 1978;73:832–838.
135

7 Volkmann HK, Klumbies A, Kühnert H, Paliege R, Dannberg G, Siegert
K.
Terminierung
von
Kammertachykardien
durch
mechanische
Herzstimulation
mit
Präkordialschlägen
[Terminating
ventricular
tachycardias by mechanical heart stimulation with precordial thumps]. Z
Kardiol 1990;79:717–724.
8 Caldwell G, Millar G, Quinn E. Simple mechanical methods for
cardioversion: defence of the precordial thump and cough version. BMJ
1985;291:627–630.
9 International Consensus on Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation. Part 3,
Defibrillation. Circulation 2005;112:III-17–III-24.
10 Cobb LA, Fahrenbruch CE, Walsh TR, Copass MK, Olsufka M,
Breskin M, Hallstrom AP. Influence of cardiopulmonary resuscitation
prior
to
defibrillation
in
patients
with
out-of-hospital
ventricular
fibrillation. JAMA 1999;281:1182–1188.
11 Wik L, Hansen TB, Fylling F, Steen T, Vaagenes P, Auestad BH,
Steen
PA.
Delaying
defibrillation
to
give
basic
cardiopulmonary
resuscitation to patients with out-of-hospital ventricular fibrillation: a
randomized trial. JAMA 2003;289:1389–1395.
12 Jacobs IG, Finn JC, Oxer HF, Jelinek GA. CPR before defibrillation in
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest: a randomized trial. Emerg Med Australas
2005;17:39–45.
13
Resuscitation
Council
(UK).
Adult
Advanced
Life
Support.
Resuscitation Guidelines 2005 available online at www.resus.org.uk
14 Deakin CD, Sado DM, Petley GW, Clewlow F. Is the orientation of the
apical
defibrillation
paddle of importance
during manual external
defibrillation? Resuscitation 2003;56:15–18.
15 Pagan-Carlo LA, Spencer KT, Robertson CE, Dengler A, Birkett C,
Kerber RE. Transthoracic defibrillation: importance of avoiding electrode
placement
directly
on
the
female
breast.
J
Am
Coll
Cardiol
1996;27:449–452.
16 Dalzell GW, Cunningham SR, Anderson J, Adgey AA. Electrode pad
size,
transthoracic
impedance
and
success
of
external
ventricular
defibrillation. Am J Cardiol 1989;64:741–744.
136

17 Thomas ED, Ewy GA, Dahl CF, Ewy MD. Effectiveness of direct
current defibrillation: role of paddle electrode size. Am Heart J
1977;93:463–467.
18 Kerber RE, Grayzel J, Hoyt R, Marcus M, Kennedy J. Transthoracic
resistance in human defibrillation: influence of body weight, chest size,
serial shocks, paddle size and paddle contact pressure. Circulation
1981;63:676–682.
19 Dalzell GW, Cunningham SR, Anderson J, Adgey AA. Electrode pad
size,
transthoracic
impedance
and
success
of
external
ventricular
defibrillation. Am J Cardiol 1989;64:741–744.
20 Samson RA, Atkins DL, Kerber RE. Optimal size of self-adhesive
preapplied electrode pads in pediatric defibrillation. Am J Cardiol
1995;75:544–545.
21 Atkins DL, Sirna S, Kieso R, Charbonnier F, Kerber RE. Pediatric
defibrillation: importance of paddle size in determining transthoracic
impedance. Pediatrics 1988;82:914–918.
22 Atkins DL, Kerber RE. Pediatric defibrillation: current flow is
improved by using ‘adult’ electrode paddles. Pediatrics 1994;94:90–93.
23 Killingsworth CR, Melnick SB, Chapman FW, Walker RG, Smith
WM, Ideker RE, Walcott GP. Defibrillation threshold and cardiac
responses using an external biphasic defibrillator with pediatric and adult
adhesive
patches
in
pediatric-sized
piglets.
Resuscitation
2002;55:177–185.
24 Dahl CF, Ewy GA, Warner ED, Thomas ED. Myocardial necrosis from
direct current counter-shock: effect of paddle electrode size and time
interval between discharges. Circulation 1974;50:956–961.
25 Cummins RO, Hazinski MF, Kerber RE et al. Low-Energy Biphasic
Waveform Defibrillation: Evidence-Based Review Applied to Emergency
Cardiovascular Care Guidelines: A Statement for Healthcare Professionals
From
the
American
Heart
Association
Committee
on
Emergency
Cardiovascular Care and the Subcommittees on Basic Life Support,
Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and Pediatric Resuscitation. Circulation
1998;97:1654–1667.
137

26 Adgey AAJ, Spence MS, Walsh SJ. Theory and practice of
defibrillation:
(2)
defibrillation
for
ventricular
fibrillation.
Heart
2005;91:118–125.
27
International
Liaison
Committee
on
Resuscitation.
Part
3:
Defibrillation. Circulation 2005;67:203–211.
28 Page RL, Kerber RE, Russell JK, Trouton T, Waktare J, Gallik D et al.
for
the
BiCard
Investigators.
Biphasic
versus
monophasic
shock
waveform for conversion of atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol
2002;39:1956–1963.
29 Handley AJ, Koster R, Monsieurs K, Perkins GD, Davies S, Bossaert
L. European Resuscitation Council Guidelines for Resuscitation 2005
Section 2. Adult basic life support and use of automated external
defibrillators. Resuscitation 2005;67S1:S7–S23.
30 Eilevstjønn J, Kramer-Johansen J, Eftestøl T, Stavland M, Myklebust
H, Steen PA. Reducing no flow times during automated external
defibrillation. Resuscitation 2005;67:95–101.
31
International
Liaison
Committee
on
Resuscitation.
Part
3:
Defibrillation. Resuscitation 2005;67:203–211.
32 Berg RA, Hilwig RW, Kern KB, Sanders AB, Xavier LC, Ewy GA.
Automated
external
defibrillation
versus
manual
defibrillation
for
prolonged ventricular fibrillation: lethal delays of chest compressions
before and after countershocks. Ann Emerg Med 2003;42:458–467.
33 The Public Access Defibrillation Trial Investigators. Public-access
defibrillation and survival after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. N Engl J
Med 2004;351:637–646.
34 Valenzuela TD, Roe DJ, Nichol G, Clark LL, Spaite DW, Hardman
RG. Outcomes of rapid defibrillation by security officers after cardiac
arrest in casinos. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1206–1209.
35 Caffrey SL, Willoughby PJ, Pepe PE, Becker LB. Public use of
automated external defibrillators. N Engl J Med 2002;347:1242–1247.
36 O’Rourke MF, Donaldson E, Geddes JS. An airline cardiac arrest
program. Circulation 1997;96:2849–2853.
138

37 Page RL, Joglar JA, Kowal RC, Zagrodzky JD, Nelson LL,
Ramaswamy K, Barbera SJ, Hamdan MH, McKenas DK. Use of
automated external defibrillators by a US airline. N Engl J Med
2000;343:1210–1216.
38 Gibson T. A practical guide to external cardiac pacing. Nurs Stand
2008;22(20):45–48.
39 Resuscitation Council UK. Advanced Life Support, 5th edn. London:
Resuscitation Council UK, 2006.
40 Nolan JP, Deakin CD, Soar J, Böttiger BW, Smith G. European
Resuscitation Council Guidelines for Resuscitation 2005 Section 4. Adult
advanced life support. Resuscitation 2005;67S1:S39–S86.
41 Fisher JD, Brown SN, Cooke MW (Eds) UK Ambulance Service
Clinical Practice Guidelines 2006. Norwich: IHCD, 2006.
42 Sherbino J, Verbeek PR, MacDonald RD, Sawadsky BV, McDonald
AC,
Morrison
LJ.
Prehospital
transcutaneous
cardiac
pacing
for
symptomatic bradycardia or bradyasystolic cardiac arrest: A systematic
review. Resuscitation 2006;70:193–200.
43 Abate E, Kusumoto FM, Goldschlager NF. Cardiac Pacing for the
Clinician. United States, Springer, 2007.
44 Morrison LJ, Long J, Vermeulen M, Schwartz B, Sawadsky B, Frank J,
Cameron B, Burgess R, Shield J, Bagley P, Mauszl V, Brewer JE, Dorian
P. A randomized controlled feasibility trial comparing safety and
effectiveness
of
prehospital
pacing
versus
conventional
treatment:
‘PrePACE’. Resuscitation 2008;76:341–349.
45
Craig
K.
How
to
provide
transcutaneous
pacing.
Nursing
2005;35(10):52–53.
46
Jevon
P.
Cardiac
Monitoring,
Part
3.
Nursing
Times
2007;103(3):26–27.
47 Ellenbogen KA, Wood MA. Cardiac Pacing and ICDs. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishing, 2005.
139

Chapter 5
Cardiovascular observations
and examination techniques
Content
The assessment of pulses
Capillary refill time measurement
Blood pressure measurement
The electrocardiogram
Cardiac auscultation
Temperature measurement
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Assessment of vital signs is a very important aspect of health care and
assessment
as
these
can
rapidly
reflect
basic
health
status
or
manifestations of physiological and psychological reactions of stress or
disease processes. Vital signs or observations include areas such as pulse
rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure and temperature, in addition, in
advancing healthcare investigations such as blood glucose measurements,
peak expiratory flow and oxygen saturations are common clinical
observations that are measured.
In understanding disease processes and homeostatic mechanisms the
body’s physiological responses can be assessed through the accurate
140

measurement of such vital signs. Therefore the ability to undertake and
perform correct observation techniques is essential in patient monitoring.
This chapter will guide the practitioner through the process of performing
vital sign measurements and provide a theoretical underpinning for each
skill using best evidence.
THINK
What methods can you think of that will enable you to assess the cardiovascular
function of a patient? Consider the wider effects of an altered cardiovascular
system.
The assessment of pulses
A pulse is the alternating expansion and recoil of arteries during each
cardiac cycle; it is felt as the pressure wave passes through the arterial
tree.1 A pulse can be palpated in any artery that lies close to the surface of
the body by compressing the artery against firm tissue such as bone; this
provides a simple method of counting heart rate. Due to accessibility the
radial pulse is the most routinely used, the radial artery surfaces
prominently at the wrist. However there are a variety of sites that can be
utilised and may be clinically important; these include:
•
The carotid artery
•
The subclavian artery
•
The brachial artery
•
The aorta
•
The ulna artery
•
The femoral artery
•
The popliteal artery
•
The dorsalis pedis artery.
The locations of and flow of these can be found in the majority of
anatomy and physiology textbooks or on-line.
141

Indications for measuring a pulse
A
pulse
is
taken
for
a
variety
of
reasons,
both
clinically
and
psychologically, these include:
•
To gather information on the patients cardiovascular status
•
To gain a baseline measurement for future review and monitoring
•
To provide reassurance and gain a bond with patients who may be
anxious.
The pulse is palpated to assess for the following:
•
Rate
•
Rhythm
•
Amplitude.
Pulse rate
Normal pulse rates vary across client groups with factors such as age (see
Table 5.1) and health status affecting rate. The pulse may also vary due to
posture, for example a healthy adult male may have a pulse of 66 beats per
minute when laying down, however this may rise to 70 when sitting up
and rise again to 80 upon standing. This may rise further during times of
distress or vigorous exercise; rates of between 140–180 are not unusual at
these times.1
A normal adult resting pulse rate is between 60–100 bpm,2 with rates
below 60 bpm termed as bradycardic and greater than 100 bpm
tachycardic. These definitions are however arbitrary and should be taken
in context of the clinical situation. There are numerous causes of both fast
and slow pulse rates, examples of these can be seen in Table 5.2.
The pulse rate is a major factor in cardiac output, cardiac output is the
volume of blood ejected by each ventricle per minute. This is a factor of
stroke volume which is the volume pumped by each contraction of the
ventricle and the heart rate. The relationship between these is shown in the
following equation:
Cardiac output = heart rate × stroke volume
142

The pulse rate of a healthy individual tends to be relatively constant,
however in disease states or injury the stroke volume can be reduced, this
is especially prominent in damage to cardiac muscle and reduced blood
volume states.2 In these cases cardiac output can only be maintained by
increases in heart rate.
Table 5.1 Normal pulse rates per minute across the age continuum
Table 5.2 Causes of bradycardia and tachycardia, adapted from Douglas
G, Nicol F, Robertson C. (2005) Macleod’s Clinical Examination.
London: Elsevier.2
Fast heart rate (tachycardia)
Slow heart rate
(bradycardia)
Exercise
Sleep
Pain
Athletic training
Excitement/anxiety
Hypothyroidism
Fever
Medication (beta
blockers, digoxin)
Medication (sympathomimetics, vasodilators)
Complete and second
degree heart block
Hyperthyroidism
Sick sinus syndrome
Cardiac arrhythmia (atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter,
supraventricular tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia)
Carotid sinus
sensitivity
Pulse rhythm
The rhythm of a pulse is regular in health, due to the co-ordination of the
cardiac muscle fibres. The heart has an independent, co-ordinated
conduction system that is a function of gap junctions and the hearts
intrinsic cardiac conduction system.1,3 Gap junctions in cardiac muscle
cells form interconnections between adjacent cells allowing for the
passing of charged ions and therefore nervous impulses from cell to cell.
The
intrinsic
cardiac
conduction
system
consists
of
a
group
of
non-contractile cardiac cells specialised in initiating and distributing
143

impulses throughout the heart, so that it depolarises and contracts in an
orderly manner.1
It is important to identify any irregularity of the pulse rhythm, considering
whether this is a permanent change or an intermittent problem. A normal
pulse may be altered by extra systoles, ectopic beats or cardiac
arrhythmia. Common causes of an irregular pulse can be seen Box 5.1.
Often the pulse wave produced by an extra systole is difficult to palpate at
the wrist as it is too weak, therefore this may produce a pulse deficit
where the pulse felt at the wrist differs from the heart rate at the apex of
the heart.2 Ventricular ectopic beats (extra beats originating from within
the ventricles) are followed by a compensatory diastolic pause to allow for
increased ventricular filling, thus a delayed beat is noted following the
extra systole.
The presence arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation or second degree heart
block cause an irregularity in pulse rhythm due to loss of co-ordination of
the electrical conduction system this may be through rapid electrical
discharge or delayed discharge. Pulse rhythms can be classed either
regular or irregular, however variations exist as seen in Table 5.3.
Box 5.1 Common causes of an irregular pulse2
Sinus arrhythmia
Atrial extrasystoles
Ventricular extrasystoles
Atrial fibrillation
Second degree heart block
Table 5.3 Heart rate rhythm abnormalities4
Regular
Self explanatory. It should be noted that heart rate can accelerate
with inspiration and decrease with expiration in the normal adult.
This is due to reduced tone of the vagus nerve (which slows the
heart) during inspiration6. This is often referred to as sinus
arrhythmia.
Irregularly
irregular
This is a completely random pattern of pulsation. This is normally
associated with atrial fibrillation where irregular impulses reach the
ventricles causing irregular pulsation with no discernable pattern.
144

Regularly
irregular
It is possible to have an irregular beat that occurs in a regular pattern.
This is commonly seen in second degree heart blocks and pulsus
bigeminus.
Regular
with
ectopics
A normal heart rate may be interrupted by a beat that is out of
sequence making the pulse feel irregularly irregular. This requires
electrocardiography to confirm.
Pulse volume/character
Also referred to as amplitude, the strength of a pulse is a reflection of
force of ejection of blood from the ventricles and the elasticity of the
arterial wall. The flexibility of an elastic artery in a healthy young adult
feels different from a hardened arteriosclerotic vessel. A large volume
pulse may be felt during times of high cardiac output such as exercise,
stress, heat and pregnancy. It may also occur with fever, thyrotoxicosis,
anaemia, peripheral arteriovenous shunts and Paget’s disease.2 It may also
be caused by aortic regurgitation, a condition which results in back flow
of blood through the aortic valve. A low volume pulse is a sign of reduced
stroke volume secondary to cardiovascular disease or peripheral vascular
disease. A weak or thready pulse is most commonly seen in the
hypovolaemic patient.3,5
The term character has a similar yet distinct meaning, with volume you
are looking for the strength of a pulse, however with character the strength
is assessed alongside how quickly or slowly this is achieved.6 This is best
assessed at the carotid artery as the source is nearer to the heart and less
subject to damping and distortion from the arterial tree. This is not an easy
skill to acquire and requires experience therefore further reading is
suggested (see References).
Pulse symmetry
Symmetry of the major arteries can provide useful information, however
this is not routinely required. The undertaking of these tests is usually as a
result of clinical suspicion of conditions such as acute aortic dissection or
obstruction of the arterial tree.7 Pulses should be bilaterally equal and felt
simultaneously, any delay or reduction of volume could indicate an
145

abnormal pathology. Any delay between the radial artery and femoral
artery on the same side may also indicate an underlying condition.
Technique for pulse taking
The technique for pulse taking applies to all pulses with only the location
altering. A step by step guide to the process of pulse taking can be seen
below.
The procedure for pulse taking
Procedure
Rationale
1. Explain and discuss the procedure
to the patient
This is vital for both consent and relaxing
the patient to get a more accurate reading.
2. Place the first, second and third
finger along the artery and press
gently.
The thumb should not be used as it has a
strong pulse which may be mistaken for
the patient’s pulse (although in stronger
pulses such as the brachial or the carotid
it may be used as there is less likelihood
of confusion). Pressing hard will occlude
the artery making it difficult to palpate
the pressure wave in the artery.
3. The pulse should be counted for
15 seconds (minimum) and
multiplied by 4 to provide the
number of beats per minute.7 If the
beat is irregular or is either too rapid
or too slow then a 60 second count
may be more appropriate.8,9 Make
note of the strength and character of
the pulse.
An irregular, slow or fast pulse may be
poorly estimated using a short counting
period, therefore a longer period will
allow for a more accurate estimation of
pulse rate.
4. Counting should start from 1 as
opposed to 0.
This method has been proven more
accurate in recording heart rate.8
5. Record the pulse rate on the
patient record.
This allows for trends to be recognised
over time.
6. Now palpate the opposite artery in
the same manner. This should not be
undertaken with the carotid artery.
If either pulse feels diminished in volume
confirm the difference by simultaneously
palpating the arteries. This may indicate
146

conditions such as coarctation, blockage
of any artery or aneurysm. You should
not palpate both carotid arteries
simultaneously as this will reduce
cerebral blood flow.
7. In carotid artery palpation the
patient should lie on a bed or couch.
Palpation of the artery may cause a reflex
bradycardia; this may cause a reduction in
blood pressure and subsequent syncope.
Locating the artery
There are four key arteries for pulse taking; the radial artery; the brachial
artery; the femoral artery and the carotid artery. However, any artery may
be of clinical significance, for example dorsalis pedis artery in the foot in
extremity trauma, which is often used in assessing peripheral blood flow
beyond the site of a leg injury.
The radial artery
The radial artery is most commonly palpated proximal to the wrist on the
radial (thumb) side of the palmar aspect (inner) of the forearm. In some
patients you may be able to see the pulsation of the artery; therefore it is
often worth visually inspecting the area prior to locating the pulse.
The brachial artery
The brachial pulse is located medially to the bicep tendon in the crease of
the elbow. In the anatomical position this will be on the medial aspect of
the arm.
The femoral artery
This is palpated at the midway point between the upper extremity of the
pubis and the anterior portion of the iliac spine.
147

The carotid artery
The carotid artery is located between the larynx and the anterior border of
the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Gently pressing between these structures
should allow for palpation of the artery.
The dorsalis pedis artery
This is often referred to as the pedal pulse and is located over the dorsum
of the foot. This is felt by compressing over the tarsal bones of the
mid-foot.
Key Point
It is important not only to assess for the presence of a pulse but to consider the
rate, volume and rhythm as these factors may indicate altered physiology and
disease processes.
Capillary refill time
measurement
Capillary refill time (CRT) is defined as the time taken for blood that has
been removed from the tissues by the application of pressure to return to
the tissues.10 Traditionally CRT has been taught as a tool for rapid
cardiovascular assessment and an indication of the adequacy of tissue
perfusion (often after traumatic injury). Normal CRT is proposed to be
less than two seconds, with any time longer than this deemed as prolonged
or abnormal, however there is considerable debate as to the accuracy of
such a parameter.11
What can influence CRT?
In three studies that sought to verify the accuracy of a parameter for
‘normal’ CRT, results of up to 6 seconds were found.12 Findings suggest
that CRT is age, sex and environment dependant, with adult males and
148

children having significantly shorter CRT than women and the elderly. It
has also been noted that ambient and body temperature can significantly
alter CRT with reduced temperatures increasing CRT.12,13 There is also a
potential influence upon CRT with the use of vasoactive medications such
as inotropes in the critically ill.
Where do I measure?
Traditionally CRT is measured on the pulp of a digit,11 however the
sternum and forehead are also areas of common usage. In the assessment
of tissue perfusion below the site of an injury then naturally the site must
be distal to the injury for the assessment to be of use. There is little
definitive evidence to suggest one area for measurement is superior to
another; however the use of differing areas for measurement, such as the
foot may be linked to an increase CRT in cooler ambient temperatures.13
Is this accurate?
In a series of studies into the predictive value of CRT as an indicator of
severity of illness or hypovolaemic status there appears little confidence in
CRT use, with little validity found. Holcomb et al.14 and Schriger and
Baraff15 found that CRT had little specificity and sensitivity in
recognising hypovolaemia in trauma field studies and lab based studies
respectively. A further study by Klupp and Keenan,16 suggests that CRT
is a poor predictor of peripheral vascular supply and therefore limited in
its application.
Whilst there is little evidence to support the use of CRT as a measure of
haemodynamic status, it is perceived as a quick and easy test that can be
undertaken in any condition17 and is therefore likely to remain as a part of
clinical practice in the near future. It must however be considered as a part
of a holistic assessment process and not in isolation.
149

Technique for measuring capillary
refill time
There is no evidence to support a specific process for the measurement of
CRT, therefore guidance is based upon current opinion and practice.
Capillary refill time measurement procedure
Procedure
Rationale
1. Explain the
procedure to the
patient and gain
informed consent.
This is vital in all episodes of patient care to ensure
conformity to professional duty of care and legal
implications of consent.
2. If using the pulp
of the finger raise the
hand to the level of
the heart.
This will ensure assessment of arteriolar capillary and
venous stasis refill.11
3. Apply pressure to
the digit for five
seconds to compress
blood from the
tissues. The pressure
should be enough to
produce blanching.
There is little evidence to support a specific time for this,
however shorter times may not remove blood from the
tissues and subsequently falsely reduce CRT. A single
study in neonatal patients suggests that there is no
significant difference between 3s–7s.18 However in the
absence of strong evidence a suggested time of at least 5
seconds is recommended.
4. Release the
pressure and time
how long it takes for
the colour of the
digit to return to the
same colour as the
surrounding tissues.
This is the capillary refill time.
5. Document the
findings.
This is essential to monitor trends over time.
6. Remember to
consider ambient
temperature, patient
temperature and
other findings.
This will allow for more appropriate application of the
findings.
150

Blood pressure measurement
Blood pressure is defined as the force per unit area exerted on a vessel
wall by the contained blood.1 Within the context of prehospital care blood
pressure refers to systemic arterial blood pressure. The nearer a blood
vessel is to the heart the higher the blood pressure. It is this pressure
gradient that maintains blood movement throughout the body.1 Blood
pressure is highest during the systolic phase of the cardiac cycle following
contraction of the ventricle and lowest during the diastolic phase when the
ventricles relax and refill. Blood pressure is usually expressed in term of
millimetres of mercury (mmHg); this is the force exerted by a column of
mercury of a height stated in millimetres. It is recorded as a systolic value
over a diastolic value, for example 135/76 mmHg. The gap between the
systolic pressure and the diastolic pressure is known as the pulse
pressure.1
Blood pressure is a function of two main factors: (i) how much the elastic
arteries near to the heart can be stretched and (ii) the volume of blood
forced into them at any one time.1
Indications for monitoring blood
pressure
Blood pressure is monitored for a variety of reasons including:
1. To record a baseline for future measurements
2. To record changes in response to treatments or condition
3. To monitor haemodynamic status.
What Influences blood pressure?
Influences upon blood pressure are wide and varied. Blood pressure can
be affected by weight, age, diet, time of day, pain, pregnancy, anxiety and
further wide ranging medical conditions.19,20 The circumstances of the
measurement itself may also be a factor in blood pressure readings with
rises in systolic blood pressure of over 20 mmHg being attributed to
151

anxiety and a perceived ‘white coat effect’.21 White coat hypertension is a
condition in which a normotensive subject becomes hypertensive during
blood pressure measurement, but then becomes normotensive again
outside of the medical environment.
THINK
What medical conditions can you think of that will cause alterations to blood
pressure? What conditions may lead to increased or decreased blood pressure?
Normal blood pressure
Normotension is a difficult notion as blood pressure can vary in
individuals and can fluctuate due to a variety of factors. General
consensus suggests that systolic readings of around 120 mmHg and
diastolic readings around 80 mmHg are considered ‘normal’.22 However
these may vary between 140/90 mmHg to 100/60 mmHg.3 Any blood
pressure reading must be taken in context as a blood pressure of 100/60
mmHg in a patient who has a normal blood pressure of 180/110 mmHg
may well be hypotensive.
Hypertension
Hypertension is an elevation of the blood pressure that may be acute or
chronic. In an adult this is generally considered to be any values above
140/90 mmHg and defined as ‘the level of blood pressure at which there is
evidence that blood pressure reduction does more good than harm’.23
With variations in blood pressure measurement and the fluctuating nature
of blood pressure, diagnoses of high blood pressure are not made upon
single measurement but upon a series of measures. Hypertension is a
significant risk factor for cardiovascular diseases such as myocardial
infarction and stroke, therefore early diagnosis and treatment are key.
Hypotension
Hypotension or low blood pressure is generally defined as a systolic
reading below 100 mmHg.1 It may simply be a variation in blood
152

pressure, however in the acutely ill patient it may be an indication of
hypovolaemia, sepsis or cardiogenic shock.24 Orthostatic or postural
hypotension is a fall in systolic blood pressure of at least 20 mmHg or 10
mmHg in diastolic blood pressure within three minutes of quiet
standing.25 This may be asymptomatic or cause the patient to feel
light-headed and in older patients this is linked with falls and poor
mobility.26
Mean arterial pressure
Mean arterial blood pressure is the average pressure required to move
blood through the circulatory system. The mean arterial pressure may be
calculated
mathematically
or
electronically.
Mathematically
it
is
calculated as below:
For example, a blood pressure of 120/90 mmHg gives a mean arterial
pressure of 100 mmHg.
Measuring blood pressure
There are two overall methods for measuring blood pressure; direct and
indirect. Direct methods are considered more accurate, however these
involve the placement of a pressure transducer (sensor) into an artery to
directly measure the blood intra-arterial pressure. This method is
commonly used in critical care areas such as intensive care units where
patients require continuous and accurate monitoring. However this is not
practical outside of these areas. Indirect blood pressure monitoring uses
external cuffs to assess blood pressure either through auscultation or
changes in cuff pressure. Wherever the environment, blood pressure
measurements should be undertaken by trained healthcare professionals
using equipment that is accurate, validated and well maintained. Failure to
achieve this may result in erroneous or inaccurate readings being obtained.
The
auscultatory
method
of
measurement
using
mercury
sphygmomanometers
(a
sphygmomanometer
is
a
blood
pressure
measuring device) has been the mainstay of blood pressure measurement
153

since blood pressure has been measured. However with an anticipated
withdrawal of mercury devices for health and safety reasons alternative
devices are required.27
Mercury sphygmomanometers
The mercury sphygmomanometer has been the perceived gold standard
equipment for blood pressure measuring for many years. The simplistic
design of these devices makes them easy to use and maintain. However
there is a risk of chemical spillage, therefore special precautions are
required in areas where they are used.26 Despite the simplistic design this
equipment requires maintenance with studies finding that many devices
are often inaccurate or defective due to poor maintenance schedules.28,29
This system relies upon the pressure created by a column of mercury
within the device to provide a measurement.
Aneroid sphygmomanometers
In these devices the pressure is registered by a series of metal bellows that
expand as the cuff pressure increases and a series of levers that register
pressure on a circular scale.26 This device is however susceptible to
damage from rough handling and poor maintenance.30 The accuracy of
these
monitors
does
appear
questionable
with
variations
between
manufacturer and mercury devices.31
Non-invasive automated sphygmomanometers
The use of automated devices has been common place for many years,
with many ambulance services and acute care settings opting for the ease
of use to reduce staff workload and to allow for measurement in a variety
of settings. The majority of these devices are based upon a technique
known as oscillometry. This relies upon oscillations of pressure being felt
in the cuff being maximal at mean arterial pressure.32 The oscillations
begin well above systolic blood pressure and continue below diastolic
blood pressure. This requires the blood pressure to be estimated from an
algorithm. This method has the benefit of not requiring the cuff to be
placed on specific points over the brachial artery as there is no transducer
as with the mercury and aneroid sphygmomanometer.
154

The sphygmomanometer
A sphygmomanometer consists of a compression bag or bladder within a
non-elastic cuff and an inflation bulb, pump or other device that is linked
to the bag by durable tubing. In addition there is a measurement scale for
reading the value and a control valve to release the pressure within the
cuff.
Measuring blood pressure (manual
methods)
Location of the measurement
The standard location for blood pressure measurement is the upper arm,
with a stethoscope positioned over the brachial artery at the crease of the
elbow. There are other sites that can be used such as the wrist, finger and
leg but these have yet to fully validated for accuracy.33,34
Posture of the subject
Posture effects blood pressure, generally blood pressure will generally
increase from the lying to the sitting or standing position. In the clinical
setting the position of the patient should be based upon how they are most
comfortable,
however
the
position
should
be
considered
when
documenting findings and making clinical decisions.
Arm position
The position of the arm can have a major influence upon blood pressure
measurement. The upper arm should be at the level of the right atrium
(mid-sternal level). If the arm is too high readings can be falsely low or if
the arm is too low readings can be too high. It is suggested that the change
in reading may be up to 10 mmHg or 2 mmHg for every inch above or
below the heart level.35 If the arm in which measurement is being taken is
unsupported this results in isometric exercise which can increase blood
pressure and heart rate. Effects of this are estimated to be as much as a
155

10% increase in diastolic blood pressure, therefore supporting the arm is
recommended.36
Which arm?
This remains a controversial area as some studies have found differences
in
blood
pressure
between
arms
in
same
subject
simultaneous
measurements.37 At present there appears no agreed reason for this,
although a consensus of opinion suggests any marked difference (<20
mmHg systolic or>10 mmHg diastolic pressure) between arms should be
investigated further as they may indicate pathology of the aorta or upper
extremity arterial obstruction.26 It is recommended that blood pressure
should initially be checked in both arms and the arm with the higher blood
pressure should be used for subsequent measurements.26,38,39
The cuff and bladder
The sizing of the cuff and bladder in blood pressure measuring is
paramount to accurate findings. The estimation of intra-arterial pressure
by indirect means such as sphygmomanometry is predicated on a proper
relationship between cuff size and the extremity. However sophisticated
the measuring device used if it is dependent upon cuff occlusion of the
arm, it will be prone to inaccuracy due to miscuffing. Several dated
studies noted that undersized cuffs cause falsely high reading and
oversized cuffs produced falsely low readings.40,41 With more recent
studies suggesting that a cuff that is too small produces larger errors in
blood pressure recording than a cuff that is too large.42–45 The optimal
size of cuff that should be used should have a bladder length that is 80%
of the arm circumference and a width that is at least 40% of arm
circumference.26,46
The stethoscope (auscultation)
Using a stethoscope placed over the brachial artery it is possible to
identify a series of five stages as the blood pressure reading falls from the
systolic to the diastolic.1,26 These sounds are known as Korotkoff’s
sounds. During the raising of the pressure in the cuff and bladder the
blood flow through the brachial artery is cut occluded, as it is gradually
156

deflated pulsatile blood flow is restored though the artery, resulting in a
series of sounds. These sounds have been classified as phases as seen
below:
Phase 1: A clear tapping sound corresponding with the return of a palpable
pulse. The onset of phase 1 corresponds with systolic blood pressure.
Phase 2: Sounds become softer and longer.
Phase 3: Sounds become crisper and louder.
Phase 4: Sounds become softer and muffled.
Phase 5: Sounds disappear completely. This is considered to be the
diastolic blood pressure value.
The Korotkoff sounds method tends to give lower systolic values than that
of intra-arterial methods and diastolic values that are higher.47–50 There
has been disagreement over the reliability of using phase 4 or 5 to
determine diastolic value as it is often difficulty in differentiating when
phase 4 commences, in addition this tends to give an inaccurately high
diastolic value. It is now considered appropriate to use phase 5 sounds for
diagnostic accuracy as they are easier to determine. This method is not
however possible in all patients, as in some patients, the disappearance of
sounds does not occur despite complete deflation of the cuff. In this
scenario the 4th phase sound should be used.37,51 Patients who are prone
to the continuation of the Korotkoff sounds include pregnant women,
those with aortic insufficiency and patients with arterio-venous fistulas
(for haemodialysis).
In older patients with a wide pulse pressure the Korotkoff sounds may
disappear between the systolic and diastolic pressures and reappear as the
cuff is deflated, this is known as the auscultatory gap.26 The auscultatory
gap is thought to be a result of fluctuating intra-arterial pressures or organ
damage.52
Palpatory estimation of blood pressure
In some situations such as a noisy road traffic collision site it can be
difficult to achieve a valid blood pressure based upon auscultatory
techniques. This is also the case with those patients in whom it is difficult
157

to determine the Korotkoff sounds. In these situations it is possible to
estimate systolic blood pressure by palpation of the brachial artery when
deflating the cuff.53 The cuff should firstly be inflated to approximately
30 mmHg above where the brachial pulse can no longer be felt and then as
the cuff is deflated the return of the pulse should be noted. This is
suggested to be the approximate value of the systolic blood pressure.
Advanced Trauma Life Support principles54 suggest that if the patient has
a carotid pulse that the systolic blood pressure is 60–70 mmHg; if carotid
and femoral pulses are present the systolic blood pressure is 70–80 mmHg
and if the radial pulse is present the systolic blood pressure is greater than
80 mmHg. However there is little support provided for these broad
estimations, Deakin and Low (2000)55 found these figures to be an
overestimate of actual intra-arterial blood pressure in a small scale study.
It appears that the suggested ATLS estimations may not be reliable and
management should not be based solely upon information gained by this
technique until further evidence has been provided to either support or
dispel the proposal.
THINK
How will you assess the blood pressure or circulatory assessment in a trapped
patient at a noisy RTC? What else can you do to assess your patient?
Technique for blood pressure
measurement (auscultatory
measurement)
A
step-by-step
guide
to
blood
pressure
measurement
Procedure
Rationale
1. Explain to the patient the
procedure and gain informed
consent.
To reduce the likelihood of ‘white coat’
hypertension and gain a more accurate
measurement.
158

2. Allow the patient to rest if
possible.
To reduce anxiety and orthostatic changes
can be eliminated.
3. Ensure that the upper arm is
exposed, supported and positioned
at heart level.
This allows access to the brachial artery for
measurement and ensures that a true
measurement is achieved as arm height can
influence blood pressure.
4. Ensure that tight or restrictive
clothing from the upper arm is
removed.
To reduce any tourniquet effect above the
measurement site as this will alter blood
pressure recording.
5. Select and appropriate sized cuff
(covers 80% of the circumference
of the arm and width is 40% of the
arm circumference).
Both overcuffing and undercuffing can
influence blood pressure measurement (see
earlier in this section).
6. Apply the cuff firmly around the
upper arm with the indicator line or
centre of the bladder of the brachial
artery.
This ensures that the pressure sensor is
over the site of the artery and the site for
auscultation is clear.
7. Place the measurement scale
where it can easily be seen.
So the reading can be clearly seen.
8. Ask the patient to remain still
and not talk during the procedure.
This can cause inaccurate measurements
and inhibit the ability to hear the Korotkoff
sounds.
9. Palpate the brachial artery.
To ensure that the site for auscultation can
be clearly identified.
10. Inflate the cuff, noting when
the brachial pulse disappears and
inflate the cuff a further 30 mmHg.
This can assist in providing an estimate of
systolic blood pressure.
11. Slowly deflate the cuff noting
when the brachial pulse returns.
12. Wait for approximately 30
seconds and then re-inflate the cuff
to 30 mmHg above where the
brachial pulse is lost.
The previous steps allow for an estimation
of when the Korotkoff’s sounds are
expected.
13. Place the diaphragm of the
stethoscope over the brachial artery
just below the cuff.
This is the ideal site for auscultating for
Korotkoff’s sounds.
159

14. Deflate the cuff slowly (approx
2 mmHg per second or per heart
beat).
This will allow for a precise measurement.
15. The systolic value is taken
when distinct clear tapping sounds
can be heard (phase 1).
This will be expected around the identified
pressure when the brachial pulse is no
longer felt.
16. When all sounds disappear the
diastolic value is recorded (phase
5); be aware of the auscultatory gap.
This can be problematic in certain groups;
therefore the sound may not be fully lost.
17. Record all relevant details.
To monitor trends in blood pressure over
time or pre- and post-treatment.
In automated blood pressure measurement the principles remain the same
whereby cuff size and placement is paramount, alongside arm and patient
positioning. It is recommended that the user refers to the guidance for the
equipment in their workplace.
Common sources of error
Errors in blood pressure measurement are often the result of incorrect
technique or faulty equipment.56 Whilst equipment failure can be limited
by regular checks and maintenance, observer error is more widely
prevalent.54 Observer error can be classified into three broad areas.57
•
Systematic error – This may be caused by lack of concentration,
poor hearing, poor technique and failure to interpret Korotkoff’s
sounds.
•
Terminal digit preference – This refers to the notion that observers
will commonly ‘round up’ or ‘round down’ to the nearest 0 or 5.
Studies into this area report high levels of reporting for the figures
ending in 0 or 5, suggesting that this may be a common
occurrence.58,59
•
Observer prejudice or bias – This is the practice whereby the
observer adjusts a blood pressure measurement to meet a perceived
notion of what the blood pressure should be. This is most evident
when an arbitrary figure is placed against what a blood pressure
should be, for example to justify a treatment.60
160

Utilising the suggested blood pressure measuring technique will assist in
the reduction of such observer error and lead to more accurate recording
of blood pressure parameters.
Blood pressure measurement in
special situations
Arrhythmias can be a cause of considerable variation in blood pressure.
When the cardiac rhythm is very irregular the cardiac output and blood
pressure can vary greatly from beat to beat.26 This can make the
interpretation of Korotkoff sounds virtually impossible, with evidence
suggesting that the presence of major arrhythmia can cause a high level of
observer error.60 There are no set guidelines for the measurement of blood
pressure in patients with arrhythmias, therefore it is suggested that blood
pressure should be measured several times and an average value used.
Automated devices are also of questionable benefit in the patient with a
significant arrhythmia, with frequent inaccuracies reported; therefore any
device used should be validated for that patient group.61 If severe
bradycardia is present (i.e. under 50 beats per minute) deflation of the cuff
should be slower to prevent underestimation of systolic blood pressure and
over estimation of diastolic blood pressure.
Key Point
The position of the patient, the arm and inappropriate use of equipment may all
lead to erroneous blood pressure measurements; therefore careful adherence to the
detailed procedure is essential for accurate blood pressure measurement. Ensure
the cuff is the correct size and that the arm is supported at the level of the heart.
The electrocardiogram
Contraction of muscle is secondary to depolarisation of cells whereby
ionic movements within the sodium, potassium and calcium channels
cause a shift in the electrical balance. These electrical currents that are
generated in and transmitted through the heart can be detected throughout
the body by electrodes, using a machine known as an electrocardiograph.1
161

This technology allows for the collection of a graphic record of the
electrical activity of the heart, referred to as an electrocardiogram (ECG).
It is not the intention of this chapter to provide the reader with the ability
to interpret the ECG but to provide the reader with techniques and
understanding of how to prepare the patient and collect an ECG tracing.
Indications for ECG recording
There are a variety of situations when an ECG is required including:
•
Electively prior to surgery or drug treatments.
•
As an investigation into the acutely unwell patient usually in the
presence of indicators such as chest pain, cardiac rhythm changes
or haemodynamic disturbance.
•
In the assessment of the collapsed patient or in cardiac arrest.
Types of ECG
There are two common types of ECG tracing that are undertaken. These
are the 3-lead ECG and the 12-lead ECG. Both types of ECG have
specific areas of value, with the 3-lead ECG being commonly used for
gross rhythm abnormality assessment in cardiac arrest and for continuous
monitoring. However the 12-lead ECG is more commonly used for its
diagnostic capability in acute coronary syndromes and cardiac assessment.
Whilst the each procedure will be discussed individually, the general
principles of patient preparation will be discussed as a whole as it does not
markedly differ between the two types of ECG recording. It is important
to note that the term lead does not refer to the number of cables running
from the ECG machine to the patient but to the number of ‘views’ of the
electrical activity that these leads provide.
Basic principles of
electrocardiography
The ECG is a non-invasive procedure that records all action potentials and
electrical activity within the heart, not just a tracking of a single action
162

potential through the heart.1 The electrocardiograph is a galvanometer (a
sensitive electromagnet) which can detect and record changes in
electromagnetic potential. It has a positive pole and a negative pole. The
wire extensions from these poles have electrodes at each end; a positive
electrode at the end of the extension from the positive pole, and a negative
electrode at the end of the extension from the negative pole. The paired
electrodes together constitute an electrocardiographic lead. Recording
electrodes (leads) are placed at various sites of the body to ensure that a
variety of ‘views’ of the conduction system of the heart are obtained. An
electrode is normally attached to the skin using a sticky pad that has a
layer of conductive gel on the skin surface side to allow for transmission
of action potentials through the skin to the electrocardiograph.
A typical 3-lead ECG will comprise of 3 bipolar leads that measure the
voltage difference between two electrodes, either between the arms or
between an arm and a leg as seen in Figure 5.1. These lead are referred to
as standard leads I, II, and III and measure the voltage between two
distinct pints for each lead.
Lead I: Right arm to the left arm
Lead II: Right arm to the left leg
Lead III: Left arm to the left leg.
The relationship between these leads is known as the principle of
Einthoven’s Triangle and is used in the determining the electrical axis of
the heart. As an action potential is generated within the heart and moves
along the conduction pathways it will move away from one electrode to be
nearer to another. When this current is moving toward an electrode it will
cause a positive (upward) deflection on the electrocardiogram; if the
current moves away from the electrode it will result in a negative
(downward) deflection. In the event that the current moves at an
equidistant point between two electrodes or there is no electrical activity
the electrocardiogram will see neither a positive or negative deflection
(isoelectric). Typically patients will be monitored using standard lead II as
this provides the most electrical information regarding the electrical
conduction pathways of the heart.
The development of the 12-lead ECG as an improved diagnostic tool saw
the inclusion of 9 further views of the heart from the placement of
163

additional unipolar leads (using a further 7 not 9 extra electrodes). These
leads take a view of the electrical activity of the heart from a single
electrode; these electrodes are designed to measure the voltage that passes
towards it. Again electrical activity towards the electrode will result in a
positive deflection, and away from the electrode will produce a negative
deflection. These leads include three limb leads (aVR, aVF and aVL) and
six chest (or pre-cordial) leads (V1–V6).
The limb leads are unipolar and are placed on the limbs, they are often
referred to as the augmented limb leads (thus prefixed with the letter ‘a’).
This means that the voltage (V) is amplified (by approximately 50%) to
make it more readable. These leads are derived from the standard leads (I,
II, III), however they look at the heart from a different angle to the
standard leads as shown in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1 Three bipolar leads and augmented limb leads.
Figure 5.2 The horizontal plane of the precordial leads. From Petersen O.
Human Physiology Lecture Notes, 5th edn, copyright 2007, with
permission of Blackwell Publishing.
164

The pre-cordial or chest leads (V1–6) are not augmented as they are near
enough to the heart for a strong electrical signal to be obtained. These
leads view the hearts electrical activity from the horizontal plane and
measure anterior voltage change (Figure 5.2).
Each pre-cordial lead has a view and section of the heart that it views the
best:
V1–V2: The right side of the heart
V3–V4: The interventricular septum and apex
V5–V6: The left side of the heart.
ECG settings
A standard electrocardiograph is set to run at a paper speed of 25 mm/
second although some machines are set to run at different speeds. In the
ECG paper the vertical lines are set to show time, these show small boxes
that equate to 0.04 seconds and larger boxes (made up of 5 small boxes
that equates to 0.2 seconds (hence there are 5 large boxes per second). The
horizontal lines show amplitude, in a standard electrocardiograph the
paper is set to record 1 cm (10 mm) per millivolt (mV). A standard ECG
recording will provide a calibration signal of 1 mV prior to the recording
165

to ensure that the machine is correctly calibrated for interpretation. An
example of ECG standard paper setting can be seen in Figure 5.3
Figure 5.3 Standard ECG paper settings.
Patient preparation
Unrestricted access to the skin in the chest area, arms and legs is required
to allow for the correct placement of ECG electrodes.62 The practitioner
should ensure that the patient is relaxed and dignity is maintained at all
times to ensure that minimal artefact is present on the recording. The
appearance of the ECG can vary depending upon the position of the body
at the time of recording; therefore current guidance suggests that the
patient should be in a recumbent position with any variation upon this
position documented upon the ECG.63 Ideally the patient should be upon a
comfortable surface and relaxed to reduce motion and muscular artefact as
this can aid in the collection of a clinically accurate recording.
Skin preparation is often required to help produce an artefact free accurate
ECG, as such there are a variety of methods available that are designed to
reduce the impedance between the skin and the electrode.63 The American
Heart Association
and British Cardiovascular
Society suggest the
following methods can be used.63
166

•
The removal of chest hair using a razor to allow for greater contact
between the electrode and the skin. This requires consent, a clean
razor and sharps disposal box.
•
Exfoliation of the skin may be required and should be undertaken
gently using a paper towel, gauze swab or specifically designed
abrasive tape. This can further reduce impedance between the skin
and the electrode.
•
It may be necessary to cleanse the skin to remove excess
contaminants or sweat, a variety of methods can be used such as
soap and water or alcohol wipes. However care should be taken if
there is broken or sensitive skin.
Positioning of the electrodes
General principles
There are a few principles that are applied relating to general placement in
both 3- and 12-lead ECGs, adherence to these principles can significantly
improve ECG recording and subsequent interpretation.
Procedure
Rationale
1. Make the
patient at ease.
A tense or anxious patient is likely to have increased movement
and subsequently increased artefact. If the patient is not relaxed
the ECG will record somatic muscle action potentials as well as
cardiac thus making the ECG more difficult to interpret; a
common example of this is clenched fists.
2. Place the
electrode over
bone not
muscle.
This will reduce the likelihood of muscle movement interfering
with the recording.
3. Place the
patient in a
recumbent
position.
Other positions may alter the trace by increased muscle activity
in sitting or by altering the anatomic position of the heart.
4. The patient
should be on a
surface (i.e.
couch) that can
This will again reduce muscle movement and artefact. If the
patient is not in a recumbent position this should be noted upon
the trace as it may affect comparison with subsequent ECG
recordings.
167

support the
limbs.
THINK
Are you able to achieve this with all patients? When might it be difficult to
achieve a high quality ECG? What can you do to improve the tracing?
The positioning of the electrodes is primarily determined by the type of
ECG being recorded with the 3-lead ECG differing from the 12-lead ECG.
The 3-lead ECG
Due to the 3-lead ECG being non-diagnostic, there are often differing
derivations of lead placement used in clinical practice.64 However the
alteration of lead placements can lead to changes in the amplitude of an
ECG and subsequent interpretation, therefore it is important that a
standardised approach is used. This is especially important in 12-lead
electrocardiography due to the diagnostic quality of the tracing.
In a 3-lead ECG there are naturally, 3 electrodes; these electrodes are
commonly colour coded to allow for easy recognition or are labelled to
identify their position. The leads are:
•
Right arm limb lead (RA/or red electrode) – right forearm,
proximal to the wrist.
•
Left arm limb lead (LA/or yellow electrode) – left forearm,
proximal to the wrist.
•
Left leg limb lead (LL/or green electrode) – left lower leg, proximal
to ankle.
•
Some machines may have a fourth lead (right leg lead [RLL]/or
black electrode), this lead acts as an ‘earth’ and is neutral to prevent
current interference – right lower leg, proximal to the ankle.
The 12-lead ECG
The 12-lead ECG is a diagnostic tool and therefore the placement of the
leads is paramount. Small changes in position of electrodes may lead alter
168

the appearance of the ECG and evidence suggests that such variations may
invalidate subsequent diagnosis.65–67 To ensure consistency between
recordings it is recommended that that the electrodes are placed in
standardised positions.63
The limb leads should be placed as per the standard leads as shown with
3-lead electrocardiography. It is imperative that any recordings made from
other sites (for example the upper arms for RA and LA leads in a patient
with excessive limb tremor) are clearly identified as such to avoid later
confusion or misdiagnosis. The correct anatomical positions for the
precordial leads have been defined and are shown in Table 5.4.
This is shown anatomically in Figure 5.4.
When recording an ECG in female patients, convention suggests that the
lateral chest electrodes (V4, V5, V6) should be placed below the left
breast. There is recent evidence to suggest that positioning of the
electrodes over the breast may not attenuate the signal,68,69 however there
is currently insufficient evidence to make an informed decision upon this.
Table 5.4 The position of the precordial leads63
Lead/electrode Position
V1
Fourth intercostal space at the right sternal edge
V2
Fourth intercostal space at the left sternal edge
V3
Midway between V2 and V4
V4
Fifth intercostal space mid-clavicular line
V5
Left anterior axillary line at the same horizontal level as V4
V6
Left mid axillary line at the same horizontal level as V4 and V5
Figure 5.4 The anatomical placement of the precordial leads. Reproduced
from
Clinical
Guidelines
by
Consensus,
‘Recording
a
12-lead
Electrocardiogram: An Approved Methodology’, copyright 2006 with
permission of The Society for Cardiological Science and Technology.
169

Recording the ECG
In order to record a good quality ECG it is imperative that the patient is
relaxed and comfortable to ensure reduced muscle artefact; this may be
problematic in some patients due to anxiety or pre-existing medical
conditions, try to make the patient as comfortable and relaxed as possible.
It may be necessary to adapt the recommended ECG recording techniques,
for example the wheelchair patient or amputee. Any change from the
standard position of the patient or leads should be annotated in the patient
notes and on the ECG to make sure that diagnostic changes are not
influenced. Patient details should be recorded upon the tracing (either
inputted into the machine or hand written); failure to do so will mean that
the recording is discarded as it cannot be linked to the specific patient.
Ideally place the patients name and another identifier such as date of birth
or hospital number on the ECG.
If the ECG complexes are of a high or low voltage the recording can be
difficult to interpret, in such an event the ‘gain’ (scale) of the recording
can be adjusted to aid interpretation. Any change to the gain should be
noted on the tracing as this may alter diagnostic criteria.
Key Point
170

The positioning of the electrodes, especially in the case of a diagnostic 12-lead
ECG are of utmost importance. The leads should be placed as described; any
variation of this (if unavoidable) should be noted on the ECG tracing.
Cardiac auscultation
The recognition and interpretation of heart sounds is an infrequently used
skill for prehospital care providers, however the information gathered
from such an investigation can be useful in the assessment and diagnosis
of many conditions. Normal heart sounds are created by the noise of the
valves of the heart closing (they do not make a noise when they open). It
is therefore essential to have a clear comprehension of cardiac anatomy
and the cardiac cycle to understand the sounds that are produced in the
normal or abnormal heart. The recognition of heart sounds is often
problematic as the sound of a normal heart may well be faint and
abnormalities are often very subtle, in addition prehospital care staff often
have little exposure to such a skill therefore skill decay is likely.
It is not the purpose of this section to provide a detailed description of
heart sounds and classification of abnormal heart sounds but to provide
the practitioner with the basic skills in cardiac auscultation.
THINK
Do you understand the anatomy and physiology of the heart and cardiac cycle? If
not then refer to a good anatomy and physiology text to help.
Indications for auscultation of the
heart
There are a variety of reasons for cardiac auscultation that are often
dependent upon your area of work. Indications include:
•
The assessment of chest injury and consideration of cardiac
contusion or tamponade.
171

•
The assessment of cardiac function, especially if suspicious of
cardiac murmur.
•
As a part of the assessment for the confirmation of death.
General principles of cardiac
auscultation
To adequately assess cardiac sounds it is essential to have a stethoscope
that incorporates a bell and a diaphragm; correct use of this will enhance
the quality of heart sounds.70 The ‘bell’ when applied gently to the skin
will pick up low frequency sounds, however the diaphragm when pressed
firmly against the skin will allow for high pitched sounds to become more
audible.
The normal heart has two distinct sounds heard during the a single cardiac
cycle, these are described as a ‘Lub’ and ‘Dub’.2,4 The first heart sound
(S1) (Lub) is generated by the vibrations from the closure of the mitral
valve and tricuspid valve during ventricular systole; this is usually heard
as a single sound but on occasion the two distinct valve closures can be
heard.71 The second heart sound (S2) (Dub) is produced by the closure of
the aortic and pulmonary valves at the start of ventricular diastole. As the
pressure of blood in the aorta is usually higher than in the pulmonary
artery the aortic valve closure is often louder resulting in a potential ‘split’
sound whereby the two valves closing can be heard separately.
There are a variety of ‘added’ or abnormal sounds, it is beyond the scope
of this section to describe each sound however the added sounds heard are
described as one of the following categories:
•
Extra heart sounds – These are classed as third and fourth heart
sounds. A third heart sound (S3) is a low pitched sound in early
diastole best heard at the apices of the heart. It coincides with rapid
ventricular
filling
immediately
after
the
opening
of
the
atrioventricular valves. A fourth heart sound is less common as is
caused by the forceful atrial contraction against a non compliant
ventricle. The fourth heart sound is actually heard before the first
heart sound and is described as soft and low pitched.2
•
Added sounds – These consist of snaps (caused by the sudden
opening of a stenosed mitral valve); ejection clicks (occurs in early
172

systole – caused by pulmonary or aortic stenosis); mid-systolic
clicks (occur in mitral valve prolapse).
•
Mechanical heart valves – These valve replacements make a sound
both on opening and closing. They are described as high pitched
and metallic sounding. They may be audible without a stethoscope.
•
Pericardial rub – This is described as a superficial scratching sound
that is best heard with the diaphragm of the stethoscope. It is most
commonly caused by conditions such a viral pericarditis.
•
Murmurs – These are caused by turbulent blow flow over an
abnormal valve, septal defect, obstruction or increased blood flow
over a normal valve. There are numerous causes of heart murmur
ranging from innocent murmurs in a healthy heart to severe cardiac
disorders. Murmurs are characterised by a number of factors
including timing; duration; character; pitch; intensity; location and
radiation.
Examples of heart sounds and additional information can be found in essential
reading and on-line at websites such as:
http://depts.washington.edu/physdx/heart/demo.html
http://www.merck.com/
The technique of cardiac auscultation
There is no consensus upon what constitutes a correct structure for
auscultation of the heart, however it is essential to have a structured
approach so that the examination is performed fully. There are four
standard sites that are utilised for this procedure:
•
Mitral area – The left fifth intercostal space in the mid-clavicular
line. This is the best site for auscultating the mitral valve.
•
Tricuspid area – The left fourth intercostal space lateral to the
sternum. This location will provide the best site for auscultating the
tricuspid valve.
•
Pulmonary area – Second intercostal space at the left sternal border.
This is noted as the best location for auscultating the pulmonary
valve.
•
Aortic area – Second intercostal space at the right sternal border.
This is where the aortic valve sounds are best heard.
173

These can be seen in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5 Standard sites for cardiac auscultation.
The procedure of cardiac auscultation
Procedure
Rationale
1. Explain the procedure to the
patient.
To ensure that you have informed consent
and a co-operative patient.
2. Whilst ensuring patient dignity,
expose the patient’s chest.
Patient dignity is essential; however
exposure of the relevant anatomy is vital in
locating the relevant auscultation areas.
3. Ensure that the environment is
as quiet as possible.
The heart sounds may be difficult to hear in
ideal circumstances therefore the less
ambient noise present the better.
4. Position the patient in a supine
position at an angle of
approximately 45°.
This aligns the auscultation areas with the
underlying heart.
5. Ask the patient to breathe
normally.
Deep breathing or Valsalva manoeuvre in
holding the breath can either interfere with
auscultation or reduce venous return thus
causing murmurs to become quieter.2,71
6. Using the diaphragm auscultate
over the mitral area at the same
time palpate the carotid artery.
This will allow easier determination of S1
and S2, the carotid pulse will coincide with
S1.
174

7. Continue to auscultate using the
diaphragm over the tricuspid,
pulmonary and aortic areas.
Identify S1 and S2 at all points, assess for
the presence of any added sounds or third/
fourth heart sounds.
8. Ask the patient to roll into a left
lateral position (known as left
lateral decubitus), auscultate using
the bell over the mitral area.
This will bring the left ventricle nearer to
the chest wall making mitral valve disorders
easier to hear. The sound of mitral stenosis
for example is a low pitched mid-diastolic
sound.
9. Note and record the presence of
normal heart sounds (S1 and S2);
also record the presence of any
sound splitting, added sounds or
murmurs.
It is essential to note any examinations
undertaken and the results obtained to
examine changes over time.
10. Remember that the absence of
heart sounds or the muffling of
sounds may be clinically
significant.
As previously stated, this is a rarely undertaken and difficult to master
skill, therefore a sound understanding of cardiac auscultation is vitally
important for those times when the skill is required. See References for
suggested resources for this skill.
Temperature measurement
Accurate temperature measurement and monitoring is a critical component
of the assessment and management of the critically ill patient and in minor
illness assessment. All cell metabolism results in heat production and any
illness, injury, activity or environmental change may affect the body’s
temperature. Generally the body’s temperature is maintained between 36
and 37.5°C.4 Humans are described as homoeothermic which is defined as
have a core temperature that is regulated despite environmental changes.
The human body is generally broken down into two compartments in
reference to temperature, the peripheral compartment and the core thermal
compartment.
The
peripheral
compartment
is
described
as
non-homogeneous in which temperature may vary over time and be
influenced by extremes of environment and physiological challenges.71
175

The core thermal compartment is well-perfused and comprises of 50–60%
of the body mass including the major organs of the trunk and head. This
compartment is relatively stable as it is well supplied by arterial blood and
represents the balance between heat generation and heat loss well.72 The
body core generally has the higher temperature, with temperature at the
exterior (skin) being the coolest. As such core body temperature is
considered the most accurate and effective method of temperature
assessment.3,72
Indications for temperature
measurement
There are a variety of reasons for temperature monitoring, these include:
•
To determine a set a baseline observations for the monitoring of
trends over time.
•
In the presence of infection or severe systemic illness.
•
In extreme environmental conditions, i.e. in cold water near
drowning or falls in the elderly in a cold environment, or in hot
temperatures with suspected heat-related illness.
These are just a few of the indications for temperature measurement it is
recommended that the practitioner considers the necessity for temperature
measurement on an individual case basis.
Extremes of temperature
There are a variety of causes of temperature fluctuation including elevated
temperature in the morning due to the body’s circadian rhythm3; elevated
temperature due to ovulation, exercise and eating1 and the effects of
aging. In the emergency setting there are three key concepts of
temperature; normothermia; hypothermia and pyrexia.
Normothermia is the state of normal core body temperature (between 36
and 37.5°C), this is maintained by the body’s homeostatic mechanisms. A
body temperature outside of this range will result in derangement of the
cellular activity of the body. Hypothermia is defined as a core body
temperature below 35.0°C, at temperatures below this point the patient
176

will deteriorate in neurological, cardiovascular and respiratory function
and ultimately death will occur at temperatures below 23°C.72 There are a
variety of causes of hypothermia, those most relevant to the prehospital
care practitioner are:
•
Environmental conditions.
•
Medications that increase heat loss or alter cold perception (such as
alcohol).
•
Metabolic conditions such as hypoglycaemia.
Pyrexia (sometimes referred to as hyperthermia or fever) is defined as a
significant rise in core body temperature above 37.0°C; beyond this
pyrexia may be referred to as low grade (normal – 38.0°); moderate to
high-grade pyrexia (38.0–40.0°C) and hyperpyrexia (40.0°C and above).3
As with hypothermia extremes, symptoms will include changes to
neurological, cardiovascular and respiratory function and ultimately death.
Methods of temperature measurement
There are a variety of methods of temperature measurement each with
relevant flaws and benefits. These include:
Pulmonary artery catheterisation
A pulmonary artery catheter is the passing of a probe into the pulmonary
artery where it is bathed in arterial blood. This is considered the most
accurate method of core temperature measurement,73 however this
method
is
inappropriate
in
the
pre-hospital
and
non-critical
care
environment due the technical and invasive nature.
Tympanic thermometry
Tympanic thermometry is the preferred instrument of non-invasive
temperature measurement in the majority of emergency and primary care
settings, often due to the rapidity and simplicity of measurement. The
tympanic thermometer works by recording temperature of the tympanic
membrane, using infra-red light to detect thermal radiation, which
receives blood from the internal carotid artery, which also supplies blood
to the hypothalamus (the thermoregulatory centre of the brain).74
177

However, despite the appeal of tympanic thermometers there are a number
of factors that may influence recording. These include operator technique,
patient anatomy, calibration, accuracy and inherent error.72,74 Values
obtained from this equipment vary due to the position of the probe in the
ear canal with temperature being highest nearer to the tympanic membrane
and reducing with distance away from the tympanic membrane. Exposure
and accessibility of the tympanic membrane may be improved with a
‘tugging’ technique that aligns the ear canal. By pulling back on the pinna
of the ear it is proposed that the probe will be able to pass further into the
ear canal.
However despite the anatomical justification of this technique little
evidence exists to support the ‘tug’ technique over simply placing the
probe in the ear.72,74 It is recommended that whichever technique for
insertion is used that a seal must be obtained around the probe to stop
environmental air being sensed at the probe as this may alter the acquired
reading.3
Mercury thermometers
Mercury thermometers were initially the mainstay of temperature
recording; however they are now being phased out due to concerns over
mercury safety, the time constraints of their use and efficacy of
thermometers at extremes of temperature.3 As such these thermometers
are not recommended for use in the prehospital environment.
Digital analogue probe thermometers
These thermometers are growing in popularity due to ease of use and
timeliness of measurements. These non-disposable probes are used
alongside disposable covers to ensure infection control measures are
adhered to and may be placed either orally (in the sub-lingual pocket),
rectally or in the axilla (armpit). Whilst the measurements acquired from
these methods appear to be reliable and accurate, evidence suggests for
accurate measurements to be obtained the probe should be in place for
between 6–10 minutes.75
178

Chemical thermometry
Chemical thermometers rely upon a chemical reaction to heat to provide a
readable measurement. These disposable probes are increasing in use
within the prehospital field as they provide a cheap alternative to other
methods. These probes can be placed orally, in the axilla or rectally
(dependent
upon
manufacturer),
however
they
are
restricted
in
temperature range (35.5–40.4°C).76
Temporal artery thermometers
These thermometers use radiation sensors to capture the infra-red heat
from the temporal artery by scanning the forehead. The temporal artery
branches from the carotid artery, therefore is suggested to be a reliable
indicator if core body temperature. Recent studies suggest that this method
is a reliable measure in children, however there is little evidence at present
to support the use in adults.74
Which thermometer and site is most
accurate?
There is little conclusive data to suggest that one site of temperature
recording is more accurate and reliable than another. The rectal route is
not recommended for prehospital care due to issues of privacy and the
duration of such a procedure. Comparison of oral temperature sites and
tympanic sites suggest that the oral route is preferred due to decreased
variability of results74 yet data also suggest that the tympanic route is
reliable. Overall there is insufficient evidence to support one particular
method, placing the onus upon the user to understand the limitations of all
devices and subsequent clinical decision making. There is a growing body
of evidence that the side (i.e. left versus right ear) of temperature
recording may cause fluctuations of between 0.1–1.0°C.3,77
There is little evidence to support the use of one thermometer over another
(excluding the impractical pulmonary artery catheter), therefore no
specific guidance can be issued at this point.74–76 It is recommended that
the practitioner ensure that they are suitably knowledgeable about the
179

instrument of use in their own clinical area and apply caution in all
temperature measurement interpretations. The use of digital thermometers
and chemical thermometers may be limited in application due to the time
constraints associated with their use.
The procedure of temperature
assessment
Due to the common use of both tympanic and digital thermometers a
procedure for each will be discussed.
Tympanic thermometer: A step-by-step guide to
tympanic temperature recording
Procedure
Rationale
1. Explain and discuss the procedure with the
patient.
To ensure that informed
consent is gained.
2. Wash your hands.
To minimise the risks of
cross infection.
3. Remove the thermometer from the base and
ensure it is clean and the probe is clear. Use a dry
wipe if required.
Alcohol based wipes can
lead to low measurement
and degrade the
instrument.
4. Place a disposable probe cover on the instrument
as per manufacturer guidelines.
This protects the probe and
minimizes infection risk.
5. Carefully place the probe into the ear canal
ensuring a snug fit. Tugging of the pinna may align
the ear canal making this easier to place the probe.
A snug fit is required to
reduce the flow of ambient
air to the probe tip.
6. Press the scan button (as per manufacturer
guidance).
To commence scanning.
7. Remove the probe as soon as the measurement is
complete.
This procedure can be
uncomfortable.
8. Read the recording and document, include which
ear is measured.
The reading may vary
between ears therefore a
baseline is essential.
180

9. Remove and dispose of the probe cover.
To ensure infection risk is
minimised.
Digital thermometer: A step-by-step guide to
digital temperature recording
Procedure
Rationale
1. Repeat steps 1 to 4
above.
2. Place the
thermometer in the
axilla or sub-lingual
pocket (as appropriate).
There appears to be no link between oxygen or
medical gases and reducing oral temperature; the
axilla is less invasive for the patient and enables them
to talk during measurement.
3. Leave the probe in
place for between 5–10
minutes.
Peak measurement occurs at approximately 9 minutes.
4. When a peak reading
is reached remove the
thermometer and record
the reading.
Chapter Key Points
1. The process of cardiovascular assessment is complex and altered by a large
number of variables.
2. It is advisable to further research this area and take up any opportunities to
gain experience to gain confidence and proficiency of skills. It is important to
note the process of assessment of cardiovascular observations as slight changes
in technique may cause significant changes in findings.
References and Further reading
1 Marieb E, Hoehn K. Human Anatomy and Physiology, 7th edn. San
Francisco: Pearson Education, 2007.
2 Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. MacLeod’s Clinical Examination.
London: Elsevier, 2005.
3 Boon N, Colledge N, Walker B (Eds) Davidson’s Principles and
Practice of Medicine, 20th edn. London: Churchill-Livingstone, 2006.
181

4 Thomas J, Monoghan T. Oxford Handbook of Clinical Examination and
Practical Skills 5. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
5 Cox L, Roper T (Eds) Clinical Skills. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2006.
6 Swash M (Ed) Hutchinson’s Clinical Methods. Edinburgh: W.B.
Saunders, 2002.
7 Hwu Y. Coates V, Lin F. A study into the effectiveness of different
measuring times and counting methods of human radial pulse rates. J Clin
Nurs 2000;9:146–152.
8 Sneed N, Hollerbach A. Measurement error in counting heart rate:
potential sources and solutions. Crit Care Nurse 1995;15(1):36–40.
9 Sneed N, Hollerbach A. Accuracy of heart rate assessment in atrial
fibrillation. Heart and Lung 1992;21(5):427–433.
10
Jevon
P.
Measuring
capillary
refill
time.
Nurs
Times
2007;103(12):26–27.
11 Anderson B, Kelly A et al. Impact of patient and environmental factors
on capillary refill time in adults. Am J Emerg Med 2008;26:62–65.
12 Schriger D, Baraff L. Defining normal capillary refill: variation with
age, sex and temperature. Ann Emerg Med 1988;17:932–935.
13 Gorlick M et al. Effect of ambient temperature on capillary refill in
healthy children. Paediatrics. 1993;92(5):699–702.
14 Holcomb JB, Niles SE, Miller CC et al. Prehospital physiologic data
and
life
saving
interventions
in
trauma
patients.
Military
Med
2005;170:7–13.
15 Shriger DL, Baraff LJ. Capillary refill – is it a useful predictor of
hypovolaemic states? Ann Emerg Med 1991;20:601–605.
16 Klup, NL, Keenan A. An evaluation of the reliability and validity of
the capillary refill time test. Foot 2007;17(1);15–20.
17 Lewin J, Maconochie I. Capillary refill time in adults. Emerg Med J
2008;25:325–326.
182

18 Strosik KS, Pieper CH, Cools F. Capillary refilling time in newborns –
optimal pressing time, sites of testing and normal values. Acta Paed
1998;87(3):310–312.
19 O’ Brien E, Asmar R, Beilin L et al. European Society of hypertension
recommendations for conventional, ambulatory and home blood pressure
measurement. J Hypertens 2003;21(5):821–848.
20 Beevers G, Lip G, O’Brien E. ABC of hypertension; Blood pressure
measurement. BMJ 2001;322,981–985.
21 Ben-Dov I, Perk G, Ben-Arie L, Mekler J, Bursztyn M. Pulse pressure
is more susceptible to the white coat effect than is systolic blood pressure.
Am J Hypertens 2004;17:535–539.
22 Joint British Societies. Joint British Societies Guidelines on Prevention
of Cardiovascular Disease in Clinical Practice. Heart 2005;91(suppl
5):v1–v52.
23 National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Hypertension: Management
of primary hypertension in adults in primary care. Clinical Guideline 34.
London: NICE, 2006.
24 Hinckley P, Walker S. Measuring blood pressure. New Pract Nurse
2005;29(9):54–61.
25 Pickering T, Hall J, Appel L et al. Recommendations for blood
pressure measurement in humans and experimental animals: Part 1: Blood
pressure measurement in humans: A public statement for professionals
from the sub-committee of professional and public education of the
American Heart Association council on high blood pressure. Circulation
2005;111:697–716.
26 Jevon P, Holmes J. Blood pressure measurement: Part three: lying and
standing blood pressure. Nurs Times 2007;103(20):24–25.
27 Williams B. Poulter N. Brown M et al. Guidelines for management of
hypertension:
report
of
the
fourth
working
party
of
the
British
Hypertension Society, 2004-BHS IV. J Hum Hypertens 2004;18:139–185.
28 Mion D, Perrin A. How accurate are sphygmomanometers? J Hum
Hypertens 1998;12:245–248.
183

29 Markandu N, Whitcher F, Arnold A, Carney C. The mercury
sphygmomanometer should be abandoned before it is proscribed. J Hum
Hypertens 2000;14:31–36.
30 Yarows S, Qian K. Accuracy of aneroid sphygmomanometers in
clinical usage. Blood Press Monit 2001;6:101–106.
31 Canzanello V, Jensen P, Schwartz G. Are aneroid sphygmomanometers
accurate
in
hospital
and
clinic
settings?
Arch
Intern
Med
2001;161:729–731.
32 Mauck G, Smith C, Geddes L, Borland J. The meaning of the point of
maximum oscillations in cuff pressure in the indirect measurement of
blood pressure. J Biomechan Engin 1980;102:28–33.
33 Wonka F, Thummler M, Schoppe A. Clinical test of a blood pressure
measurement device with a wrist. Blood Press Monit 1996;1:361–366.
34 Sesler J, Munroe W, McKenny J. Clinical Evaluation of a finger
oscillometric blood pressure device. DICP 1991;25:1310–1314.
35 Netea, R, Lenders J, Smits P, Thien T. Arm position is important for
blood pressure measurement. J Hum Hypertens 1999;13:105–109.
36 O’Brien E, Petrie J, Littler W et al. Blood Pressure Measurement:
Recommendations of the British Hypertension Society, 3rd edn. London:
BMJ Publishing, 1997.
37 Lane D, Beevers M, Barnes N et al. Inter-arm differences in blood
pressure:
when
are
they
clinically
significant?
J
Hypertens
2002;20:1089–1095.
38 Beevers G, Lip G, O’Brien E. Blood pressure measurement – Part one:
sphygmomanometry;
factors
common
to
all
techniques.
BMJ
2001;322;981–985.
39 Medicines and Healthcare Regulatory Agency. Measuring Blood
Pressure – Top Ten Tips. London: MHRA, 2006.
40 Ragan C, Bordley J. The accuracy of clinical measurement of arterial
blood pressure. Bull John Hopkins Hosp 1941;69:504.
184

41 Berliner K, Fujiy H, Lee D, Yildiz M, Garnier B. Blood pressure
measurements
in
obese
persons;
comparison
of
intra-arterial
and
auscultatory measurements. Am J Cardiol 1961;8:10–17.
42 Linfors E, Feussner J, Blessing C et al. Spurious hypertension in the
obese patient. Effect of sphygmomanometer cuff size on prevalence of
hypertension. Arch Intern Med 1984;144:1482–1485.
43 Bovet P, Hungerbuler P, Quilindo J et al. Systematic difference
between blood pressure readings caused by cuff type. Hypertension
1994;24:786–792.
44 Arcuri E, Santos J, Silva M. Is early diagnosis of hypertension a
function of cuff width? J Hypertens (Suppl) 1989;7:s60–s61.
45 Russell A, Wing L, Smith S et al. Optimal size of cuff bladder for
indirect measurement of arterial blood pressure in adults. J Hypertens
1989;7:607–613.
46
Wallymahmed
M.
Blood
pressure
measurement.
Nurs
Stand
2008;22(19):45–48.
47 Hunyor S, Flynn J, Cochineas C. Comparison of performance of
various sphygmomanometers with intra-arterial blood pressure readings.
BMJ 1978;2:159–162.
48 Roberts L, Smiley J, Manning G. A comparison of direct and indirect
blood pressure determinations. Circulation 1953;8:232–242.
49 Breit S, O’Rourke M. Comparison of direct and indirect arterial
pressure measurements in hospitalised patients. Austral NZ J Med
1974;4:485–491.
50
Holland
W,
Hummerfelt
S.
Measurement
of
blood
pressure;
comparison of intra-arterial and cuff values. BMJ 1964;2:1241–1243.
51 Perloff D, Grim C, Flack J et al. Human blood pressure determination
by sphygmomanometry. Circulation 1993;88:2460–2470.
52 Cavallini M, Roman M, Blank S, Pini R, Pickering T, Deveraux R.
Association of the auscultatory gap with vascular disease in hypertensive
patients. Ann Intern Med 1996;124:877–883.
185

53 Beevers G, Lip G, O’Brien E. ABC of hypertension: blood pressure
measurement. BMJ 2001;322:1043–1047.
54 American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma. Advanced
Trauma Life Support, 7th edn. Chicago: American College of Surgeons,
2004.
55 Deakin C, Low L. Accuracy of the advanced trauma life support
guidelines for predicting systolic blood pressure using carotid, femoral
and radial pulses: observational study. BMJ 2000;321:673–674.
56 Parati G, Faini A, Castaglioni P. Accuracy of blood pressure
measurement: sphygmomanometer calibration and beyond. J Hypertens
2006;24:1915–1918.
57 Rose G. Standardisation of observers in blood pressure measurement.
Lancet 1965;1:673–674.
58 Wingfield D, Cooke J, Thijs L et al. Terminal digit preference and
single number preference in the Syst-Eur trial: influence of quality
control. Blood Press Monit 2002;7:169–177.
59 Wen S, Kramer M, Joey J, Hanley J, Usher R. Terminal digit
preference, random error and bias in routine clinical measurement of
blood pressure. J Clin Epidemiol 1993;46:1187–1193.
60 Sykes D, Dewar R, Mohanaruban K et al. Measuring blood pressure in
the elderly: does atrial fibrillation increase observer variability? BMJ
1990; 300:162–163.
61 Stewart M, Gough K, Padfield P. The accuracy of automated blood
pressure measuring devices in patients with controlled atrial fibrillation. J
Hypertens 1995;13:297–300.
62 The Society for Cardiological Science and Technology. Clinical
Guidelines
by
Consensus:Recording
a
Standard
12-lead
Electrocardiogram. London: British Cardiovascular Society, 2006.
63 Kligfield PD et al. Recommendations for the standardisation and
interpretation of the electrocardiogram – American Heart Association. J
Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 49(10): 1109–1127.
64 Jevon P. Cardiac monitoring. Nurs Times 2007; 103(1): 26–27.
186

65 Pahlm P et al. Evaluation of changes in standard electrocardiographic
QRS waveforms recorded from activity-compatible proximal limb lead
positions. Am J Cardiol 1992;69:253–257.
66 Sevilla DC et al. Invalidation of the resting electrocardiogram obtained
via exercise electrode sites as a standard 12-lead recording. Am J Cardiol
1989;63:35–39.
67 August T. et al. Positional and respiratory changes in precordial lead
patterns
simulating
acute
myocardial
infarction.
Am
Heart
J
1958;55:706–714.
68 Colaco C et al. False positive ECG reports of anterior myocardial
infarction in women. J Electrocardiol 2000;33:239–244.
69 Macfarlane PW et al. Precordial electrode placement in women. Neth
Heart J 2003:11;118–122.
70 Chizner M. Cardiac auscultation: rediscovering the lost art. Curr Probl
Cardiol 2008;33:326–408.
71
Hooper
V.
Thermoregulation.
In:
Quinn
D,
Schick
L
(Eds)
Perianaesthesia Nursing Core Curriculum. St. Louis: Saunders, 2004.
72 Greaves I, Porter K, Hodgetts T et al. Emergency Care: A Textbook for
Paramedics. Edinburgh: Saunders, 2006.
73 Hooper V, Andrews J. Accuracy of non-invasive core temperature
measurement in acutely ill adults: The state of the science. 8iol Res Nurs
2006;8;1;24–34.
74 Pullen R. Using an ear thermometer. Nursing 2003;33(5):24.
75 Latman N, Hans P, Nicholson L et al. Evaluation of clinical
thermometers for accuracy and reliability. 8iomed Instrument Technol
2001;35:259–265.
76 Farnell S, Maxwell L, Tan S et al. Temperature measurement:
comparison of non – invasive methods used in adult critical care. J Clin
Nurs 2005;14:632–639.
77 Heusch A, Suresh V, McCarthy P. The effect of factors such as
handedness, sex and age on body temperature measured by an infrared
‘tympanic’ thermometer. J Med Engin Technol 2006;30(4);235–241.
187

Chapter 6
Respiratory observations
and examination techniques
Content
Indications for respiratory assessment
Respiratory rate
Respiratory depth assessment
Chest and respiratory inspection
Chest compliance
Respiratory pattern/rhythm assessment
Oxygen saturations/pulse oximetry
Peak flow measurement
Chest percussion
Tactile vocal fremitus
Chest auscultation
Vocal resonance
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
188

The respiratory system has two primary functions – to supply the body
with oxygen and dispose of carbon dioxide.1 To achieve these four
processes, collectively known as respiration must occur:
•
Pulmonary ventilation – Movement of air into and out of the lungs,
usually referred to as breathing.
•
External respiration – Movement of oxygen from the lungs into the
blood and movement of carbon dioxide from the blood into the
lungs.
•
Transport of respiratory gases – Oxygen and carbon dioxide must
travel from the lungs to the tissues and from the tissues to the lungs
respectively.
•
Internal respiration – Movement of oxygen from the blood to the
tissues and movement of carbon dioxide from the tissues to the
blood.
The respiratory system comprises of the nose, nasal cavity, pharynx,
larynx, trachea, bronchi, smaller airways (bronchi and bronchioles) and
the alveoli.1 Due to the location of the lungs a major proportion of
respiratory assessment requires an assessment of the anterior and posterior
chest as well as the axillae. The lungs are situated within the thoracic cage
with the apex sitting above the level of the clavicle and the anterior
portion of the base at approximately the sixth rib. However due to the
conical shape of the lungs the posterior base of the lung sits much lower at
approximately the level of the eleventh rib. This is reflected in some of the
examination techniques used in respiratory assessment.
The control of ventilation occurs through voluntary mechanisms regulated
by the central nervous system and involuntary mechanisms controlled by
the respiratory centre in the medulla oblongata and pons in the brain
stem.2 Breathing consists of two distinct phases, the inspiratory phase –
lasting for approximately 2 seconds as the lungs fill; and the expiratory
phase – a passive phase lasting approximately 3 seconds where air is
expelled from the lungs.1 The volume of air that is moved in and out of
the lungs per minute is termed minute volume, this is determined by the
respiratory rate and the tidal volume (volume of air moved by each
breath), and therefore changes in either of these values can significantly
change minute volume and the subsequent delivery of oxygen to the
alveoli and carbon dioxide from the lungs to the environment.
189

The deterioration of breathing is one of the major causes of critical illness
in the UK,3 therefore the accurate assessment and management of
respiratory function is paramount in patient care.
Indications for respiratory
assessment
There are a variety of conditions that require respiratory assessment of
varying levels, the level of assessment and observation should be based
upon
clinical
judgement;
however
a
basic
assessment
should
be
undertaken in any patient contact. Common indications for respiratory
assessment are:
•
To determine a baseline level of respiratory function and adequacy
for future assessment.
•
To provide diagnostic information in respiratory conditions such as
asthma and COPD.
•
To provide assessment of the efficacy of treatments/interventions.
Respiratory rate
Respiratory rate is the number of times per minute that a person breathes.
There is some disagreement over what constitutes a ‘normal’ rate or
Eupnoea in adults, with normal rates varying from 10 breaths per minute
to 25 breaths per minute.1,2,4,5 It is agreed however that breathing rates
rise in the young and in the elderly,6 as can be seen below. The ratio of
respiratory rate to pulse rate is suggested to be approximately 1:5,6 with
some authors suggesting a ratio of 1:4.7 As there is little consensus as to
what constitutes a normal rate, it is therefore difficult to ascertain what is
abnormal rate, therefore consideration of respiratory rate should be taken
as an overall picture using other observations of the patient, such as level
of consciousness or colour, as a guide.
190

THINK
List what factors can influence respiratory rate? How will this affect your
assessment and management of respiratory rate?
Tachypnoea
Tachypnoea is an abnormally fast respiratory rate based upon norm values
(>20 breaths per minute),8 and can be one of the first indications of
respiratory distress. There can be numerous causes of tachypnoea such as
anxiety, fever, exercise, hypoxia and pain.1,4,9 The British Thoracic
Society (2007) suggest that respiratory rate is a major indicator in severity
of respiratory illness, with respiratory rates of over 25 breaths per minute
indicative of acute severe exacerbation of conditions such as asthma (in
adults).10
Table 6.1 Respiratory rates by age8
Age
Respiratory rate (range)
<1 year
30–40 (breaths/min)
1–2 years
26–34 (breaths/min)
2–5 years
24–30 (breaths/min)
5–12 years 20–24 (breaths/min)
>12 years
12–20 (breaths/min)
Bradypnoea
Bradypnoea is an abnormally slow respiratory rate (<12 breaths per
minute),8 that can indicate a severe deterioration of a patients condition.10
Causes include fatigue, hypothermia, central nervous system depression
and certain drugs such as opiates.11
191

Measuring respiratory rate
There is little evidence of how to measure respiratory rate, however
consensus suggests that rate should be counted over a minute with the
patient at rest and ideally without the patients knowledge it is being
counted so as not to make them conscious of their respiratory rate.2,5
There are a variety of methods that can be used to identify respiratory rate
as seen below:
•
Direct vision of chest movement.
•
Use of specialist oxygen masks that incorporate respiratory rate
indicators. The accuracy of these has been validated within the
Emergency Department; however large scale studies have not been
undertaken.12
•
Counting of respiratory rate during auscultation.
Other methods have been suggested such as the visualisation of
condensation on the inside of an oxygen mask; however the use of such
techniques has not been validated and cannot be recommended.
Respiratory depth
assessment
Respiratory depth is the volume of air inhaled and exhaled from the lungs
with each respiration. The volume of air moved in a normal breath is
termed tidal volume, in the average adult tidal volume is considered to be
500 mL.1 This is typically measured with a spirometer, however a
spirometry is not commonly utilised in prehospital care, and therefore the
estimation of respiratory depth is undertaken by reviewing chest
expansion or through the use of ventilatory methods discussed in other
chapters such as the bag-valve-mask. However the assessment of the
depth of respiration is important when considering the respiratory status of
any patient.
THINK
192

What is more important respiratory rate or depth? Or are they equally important?
Can you assess depth of breathing accurately? If not what can you do to make this
estimation more accurate?
Chest and respiratory
inspection
Whilst there is no scientific evidence to support the visualisation and
inspection of the respiratory system, it is an inherent consideration for all
patients with respiratory disease and related injury as visual indicators can
emphasise the level of effort required for the patient to breathe, highlight
the presence of injury, and provide clues in the formulation of a diagnosis.
A thorough inspection of the airways, the neck (larynx and trachea), and
the chest (for signs such as bruising, deformity, accessory muscles and
equality of chest movement) can aid the practitioner and should form a
part of every respiratory assessment. It is recommended that a thorough
understanding
of
the
underlying
anatomy,
physiology
and
pathophysiology of illness and injury be achieved so that the presence of
and importance of visual indicators can be fully understood.
Chest compliance
Healthy lungs are stretchy and distensible; this is known as lung
compliance.
Lung
compliance
is
determined
by
two
factors,
the
distensibility of the lung tissue and alveolar surface tension.1 However
since the lungs are contained within the thoracic cage the compliance of
the thoracic wall is also a key factor in lung compliance. Within the
prehospital setting it is not possible to measure lung compliance, however
thoracic wall compliance can be considered using a simple technique. In
the healthy adult both sides of the thorax should expand symmetrically.
Failure of the chest wall to expand either unilaterally or bilaterally may
indicate disorders such as fibrosis, lung collapse or pleural effusion.
193

Assessing chest compliance
There is little evidence regarding the use of chest compliance as a
measurement of respiratory function, however it can be a useful tool in the
assessment of respiratory illness or injury. The method described below is
a simple technique to assess the equality and depth of respiration.
Step-by-step
procedure
for
assessing
chest
compliance
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent from the patient and
explain the procedure.
This procedure involves
placing the hands upon the
chest and back; therefore
consent is vital.
2. To assess the function of the lower lobes place
the hands firmly upon the chest with the fingers
spread around the sides of the chest and extended
thumbs meeting at the midline of the chest as seen
in Figure 6.1 below.
This will provide an
assessment of the expansion
of the lower ribs and
anterior chest wall.
3. The thumbs should be lifted slightly off of the
chest.
This will allow easier
movement of the hands
upon the chest wall with
inspiration and exhalation.
4. Ask the patient to inhale deeply (take a deep
breath).
A normal inhalation may
not provide enough
movement to give an
adequate assessment of the
movement of the chest wall.
The thumbs should move apart symmetrically at
least 5 cm.14
This is the expected norm
for chest expansion in a
healthy adult.
This technique may also be performed upon the
back with the hands placed below the scapula
(Figure 6.2 below).
This will provide an
indication of the movement
and expansion of the
posterior chest wall.
Figure 6.1 Expansion of the lower anterior chest.
194

Figure 6.2 Expansion of the posterior chest.
Respiratory pattern/rhythm
assessment
The normal respiratory rhythm has regular cycles co-ordinated by the
central nervous system, with the expiratory phase slightly longer than the
inspiratory phase. However, variations exist in the presence of underlying
disorders. It is therefore important to note the rhythm of breathing during
the measurement of respiratory rate.
195

Definitions
There is a variety of recognised breathing patterns that have clinical
significance and should be noted if present.
•
Apnoea is a loss of all respiration,1 therefore it is an indication of
critical illness or injury and death.
•
Hypopnoea is a severe reduction of respiratory rate and depth that
differs from bradypnoea due to the severity.
•
Biot’s
breathing
is
an
irregular
breathing
pattern
that
is
differentiated from Cheynes–Stokes breathing (below) by the equal
depth of respiration. It is commonly a result of central nervous
system disorders.6
•
Cheyne–Stokes breathing is a periodic breathing pattern in which
there is a gradual increase in depth of breathing, followed by
diminished respiratory effort, often associated with a brief period of
apnoea.13 This is often seen in patients with severe illness and most
noticeably
seen
in
cardiac
failure,
narcotic
poisoning
and
neurological disorders.
•
Kussmauls breathing is described as an increase in the depth and
rate of breathing often resulting in a sighing pattern. This is
commonly a result of metabolic acidosis secondary to conditions
such
as
renal
failure,
salicylate
poisoning
and
diabetic
ketoacidosis.14
Kussmauls
breathing
is
a
variation
of
hyperventilation that is also an increase in respiratory rate and
depth.1
Measuring respiratory rhythm
There are no set guidelines or evidence for the observation of respiratory
patterns; however consensus of opinion suggests that observing breathing
for a period of one minute is best practice to allow for any changes to be
noted and evaluated.6,13
196

Oxygen saturation/pulse
oximetry
Oxygen is transported to the tissues in the blood, with approximately 3%
transported in the blood plasma and 97% transported on haemoglobin
creating oxyhaemoglobin.1,15 Oxygen saturation is defined as the ratio of
oxyhaemoglobin to the total concentration of haemoglobin.15 Disease and
injury processes can alter the ability of blood to carry or receive oxygen.
Therefore the ability to measure oxygen levels in the blood can be a useful
indicator of respiratory function. Oxygen saturations can be measured
invasively via arterial blood gases (SaO2) and non-invasively via pulse
oximetry (SpO2). Prior to the introduction of methods such as pulse
oximetry detection of hypoxaemia (lack of oxygen in the blood) was
reliant upon observation methods such as cyanosis at the lips (circumoral
cyanosis). However this is considered to be a late sign with high levels of
subjectivity due to eyesight differences and experience of the examiner.16
The ability to undertake arterial blood gas sampling for SaO2 levels is
impractical in the prehospital; setting, therefore pulse oximetry is the
routinely utilised method.
Pulse oximetry
The pulse oximeter measures the pulse rate and the saturation of
haemoglobin in arterial blood. Through the use of two light sources (red
and infrared) and a sensor, light absorption is measured. Pulse oximeters
utilise the physiological difference in light absorption between oxygenated
haemoglobin and reduced (deoxygenated) haemoglobin to provide a ratio
reading displayed as a percentage of total haemoglobin.
There are a wide variety of products available within healthcare settings,
providing pulse oximetry probes that are designed for differing areas of
the body including the finger, forehead and the ear-lobe. Each practice
area will have a preferred pulse oximeter manufacturer and probe
configuration, however the principles remain the same regardless of make
and model.
197

Indications for pulse oximetry
There are numerous reasons for the undertaking of pulse oximetry;
examples of these are shown below:
•
To assess respiratory function in respiratory illness or injury.
•
To review the efficacy of respiratory interventions such as oxygen
therapy.
•
To gain a baseline measurement of oxygen saturation prior to
interventions such as sedation and anaesthesia.
Limitations of pulse oximetry
The use of a pulse oximeter is not without limitations and sources of error.
A variety of potential limitations have been identified and call into
question measurements achieved through pulse oximetry:
•
Nail polish – there has been growing concern over the validity of
SpO2 measurements achieved in patients who are wearing nail
polish. Common practice as a result has been to remove nail polish
prior to measurement17 which obviously has time and expense
implications. However recent large-scale studies have noted that
whilst small differences (<1.6%) occur with dark colour nail
polishes (brown and blue), that these changes are not clinically
significant.17,18
However
it
is
noted
that
a
difference
in
measurement can be caused by nail polish.
•
Carbon monoxide poisoning – due to the affinity of carbon
monoxide (CO) and haemoglobin, the presence of CO will result in
the formation of carboxyhaemoglobin. However pulse oximeters
are unable to detect the difference between oxyhaemoglobin and
carboxyhaemoglobin, therefore in the presence of carbon monoxide
(for example in smoke inhalation) pulse oximeters can provide a
falsely elevated reading. In these situations SpO2 should not be
relied upon.2,16,19
•
Poor peripheral circulation – as the pulse oximeter is reliant upon
pulse waves, poor perfusion due to conditions such as cold or
hypotension can result in inadequate readings.16 Pulse oximetry has
been found to be reliable with systolic blood pressures of > 80
mmHg; however blood pressure readings below this level can lead
198

to inaccurate or unreliable detection of the pulse waves and
subsequent erroneous readings.20,21 This is supported by findings
in critically ill patients in two studies reviewing centrally sited
SpO2 probes (ear lobe/forehead) versus peripheral fingertip probes,
with greater reliability and sensitivity found in more centrally sited
probes.22,23
•
Motion artefact – the excessive motion of digits from tremor,
seizure
or
shivering
can
interfere
with
signal
detection
or
interpretation. Therefore the placement of the probe is vital,
alongside calming of the patient wherever possible.16,24
•
High intensity lighting – this can lead to false readings due to the
infiltration of light into the probe. This can be limited by correct
application of the probe and by reducing bright light sources.16
•
Age, sex and dark skin have not been shown to interfere with SpO2
monitoring in previous studies25 however a recent study suggests
that dark skin can decrease the accuracy of pulse oximetry at low
levels of oxygen saturation (<80%). Further research is required to
clarify this situation before practice can be changed.
•
High bilirubin levels in hepatitis and cirrhosis of the liver and some
blood dyes used in angiography may reduce the accuracy of
monitoring as they alter the colour of the blood.26
•
Oximeters require a steady pulse signal, therefore conditions that
affect the consistency of a pulse may reduce accuracy. One
common example is the presence of cardiac arrhythmias such as
atrial fibrillation.
Technique of pulse oximetry
A standardised approach to pulse oximetry can aid accuracy of results, and
a step-by-step procedure is given below.
A step-by-step approach to pulse oximetry
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent from the patient
and explain the procedure.
This should be gained in all
procedures as it is a legal
requirement in any patient who
can consent
199

2. Ensure that the patient is warm and
relaxed.
To reduce muscular artefact and
anxiety related movement. Also
consider bright lighting and
rectify if safe and practical to do
so.
3. Ensure that the equipment is clean and in
good working order.
To minimise cross infection risk
and ensure an accurate reading.
4. Select a suitable site for the probe,
avoiding cold or shaking extremities, this is
usually a finger tip. If there is nail varnish on
the finger nail this may be removed to aid
accuracy.
Shaking or cold extremities can
affect the reading.
5. Turn on the pulse oximeter.
Naturally this is essential; turning
on the probe prior to the
procedure can cause noise alarms
on the probe to be activated
which may increase patient
anxiety.
6. Ensure that the pulse oximeter is
registering the pulse, and ensure that the pulse
registered matches the patient pulse.
Artefact may alter the pulse
reading and result in erroneous
readings.
7. Take the reading. Some pulse oximeters
can take a few seconds to register a true level
so do not rush the procedure. It is
recommended that an oximeter is given five
minutes to ‘settle’ prior to taking a reading.26
Taking the reading too early may
produce a false result and alter
the clinical impression or
management plan.
8. Consider external factors and limitations
of pulse oximetry when interpreting readings.
A variety of factors may
influence readings, therefore
place the reading in context with
other examination findings.
THINK
There are limitations in the accuracy of oximetry. What other factors should you
assess when considering the oxygen saturation levels in any patient?
Key Point
200

Pulse oximetry has a number of potential flaws and limitations, therefore reliance
upon such measures should be avoided and oxygen saturations used to
compliment a full patient assessment.
Peak flow measurement
Peak expiratory flow rate measurement (PEFR) or peak flow is a simple
and commonly used test of lung function. It is defined as the highest flow
achieved from a maximal forced expiration started without hesitation from
a maximal inhalation.27 PEFR is measured in litres per minute, occurring
early in forced expiration, within the first tenth of a second.28 PEFR can
be used as an indicator of airflow obstruction and restriction. It is a single
measure of lung function and therefore should be utilised alongside other
measures.
Measurements obtained should be considered against a set of norm values which
can be acquired from a variety of sources such as:
The British Thoracic Society: www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/
Asthma UK: www.asthma.org.uk
A PEFR measurement is commonly obtained with a mini Wright peak
flow meter. This device is a plastic tube with a plastic mouthpiece leading
to the tube, along the barrel of the meter runs a scale that allows for the
measurement. At the far end of the device is an air exhaust that allows
exhaled air to be vented.
Indications for the use of PEFR
The PEFR reading is commonly used for the monitoring and assessment
of asthma and COPD,29 however it can be used in any respiratory
condition. The common indications for PEFR assessment are:
•
Confirmation of diagnosis of asthma.
•
Measurement of severity of respiratory illness.
•
Monitoring of treatment for respiratory conditions.
201

Whilst the British Thoracic Society (2007)10 suggest that PEFR can be a
useful tool in the assessment of severity of illness, further studies question
the reliability of PEFR as a single indicator for illness severity.30,31
However these studies are not without flaws suggesting that further
research is required to fully evaluate the use of PEFR for indication of
severity.
Technique of PEFR measurement
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent from the
patient and explain the procedure.
This should be gained in all
procedures as it is a legal
requirement in any patient who can
consent.
2. Establish patient’s best known PEFR
or Norm value.
Whilst standardised charts are useful,
patients with a respiratory illness
history will have different normal
value based upon their previous
attempts.
3. Ensure that the equipment is clean and
in good working order.
To minimise cross-infection risk and
ensure an accurate reading.
4. Instruct the patient on the procedure
and the flowing steps that must be taken.
A prior understanding of what is
expected from the patient will
provide a more fluent and accurate
attempt.
5. Ask the patient to take a deep breath
(maximum inhalation).
The reading is based upon maximal
exhalation, therefore maximal
inhalation is required first.
6. Immediately place the mouthpiece of
the meter between the teeth so that the
teeth and tongue do not obstruct the
mouthpiece.
Obstructing the mouthpiece will
reduce the acquired measurement.
7. The patient is then required to
undertake a maximal exhalation without
delay. This should be described as a short
sharp ‘huff’.
The first tenth of a second is key in
PEFR measurement, delay in
exhalation will reduce the maximal
flow produced.
202

8. Note the reading on the meter and
document.
Changes over time are important in
assessing condition and eficacy of
treatment.
9. This process should be undertaken
three times to provide a best of three
recording. However it important that
sufficient recovery time is given between
attempts.
More than five efforts are not likely
to be beneficial as exhaustion and
fatigue can occur.27
PEFR measurements in asthma can induce bronchoconstriction, therefore
if repeated measurements produce lowering results testing should be
ceased to prevent deterioration.27 Consideration should also be given as to
whether the patient is able to undertake testing, as severe reduction of
respiratory function may inhibit the ability to record a PEFR reading.
Factors affecting PEFR measurement
As with any measurement technique in health assessment there is always
potential for error in measurement. Common errors noted in PEFR
measurement include:
•
Failure to take a maximal inhalation – this will result in a
sub-maximal exhalation.
•
Holding the breath at the point at maximal inhalation – thus
reducing the ability to provide a maximal exhalation.
•
Blocking the mouthpiece with the tongue or the teeth – thus
reducing the airflow through the meter.
•
Failure to make a maximal exhalation – thus providing a falsely
low reading.
•
Leaks within the PEFR meter – thus reducing airflow through the
device resulting in a falsely low reading.
•
Blocking of the pointer – thus stopping an accurate reading.
Adapted from Booker (2007).28
There are no studies that investigate the extent of these sources of error;
however a consensus of opinion suggests that they do commonly
occur.6,28
203

Chest percussion
Percussion is a technique of physical examination that allows for the
recognition of differing sounds resulting from vibrations through differing
types of tissue potentially differentiating between air filled, fluid filled or
solid areas beneath. It can be undertaken on either the chest for respiratory
percussion or the abdomen to assess intra-abdominal injury and illness.
Percussion of the chest will only penetrate tissues approximately 5–7 cm
into the chest; therefore not all lesions and respiratory disorders can be
recognised using this technique,32 but in the absence of chest X-ray
facilities in the field percussion is still a major tool within prehospital
care.5
The aim of chest percussion is to compare the percussion note of the right
and left sides of the chest. There are five typical percussion sounds that
can be heard, as seen in Table 6.2. These can be simply examined and
recognised (even on your own chest) using the technique explained later.
Table 6.2 Percussion note characteristics. Adapted from Bates’ Guide to
Physical Examination and History Taking32 Bickley and Szilagyi (2003)
Indications for chest percussion
The percussion of the chest should be performed as an aid to diagnosis
when there is suspicion of an underlying respiratory illness or injury, such
as those listed below:
•
Pneumothoraces and haemothoraces
•
Pneumonia and chest infections
•
Pleural effusion
204

•
Lung lesions
•
Asthma, emphysema and chronic bronchitis.
The technique of chest percussion
A step-by-step guide to chest percussion
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent from the
patient and explain the procedure.
This should be gained in all procedures
as it is a legal requirement in any
patient who can consent.
2. Place your left hand palm down
firmly against the chest, ensuring that
the middle finger is aligned between the
ribs and the fingers are spread slightly
apart (Figure 6.3 below).
Sound conduction through bone can be
reduced.
3. Press the left middle finger firmly
against the chest wall.
To allow for transmission of the
pressure wave when the finger is
struck.
4. Flex the right hand at the wrist with
the middle metacarpophalangeal joint
slightly flexed.
This will ensure that a fluid motion is
used and the force applied is
appropriate.
5. Hyperextend the wrist further then
briskly flex the wrist using the pad of
the middle finger of the right hand to
strike the middle phalanx or distal
interphalangeal joint of the left middle
finger (see Figure 6.4 below).
6. Immediately remove the percussing
finger (the right hand).
Maintaining the percussion finger on
the struck finger will dull the sound
wave produced.
7. This procedure can be repeated
swiftly to provide a second sound.
This is only necessary if you wish to
confirm the first sound.
8. As you strike the two fingers listen
and feel the percussion note.
Try to identify the quality of the
percussion note.
205

9. Percussion should be undertaken
upon a minimum of four areas on each
side (left and right) of the anterior chest
– including over the clavicles; the
axillae should also be percussed at this
time.
A thorough examination should be
undertaken to ensure no areas of lung
are omitted.
10. Further percussion should be
undertaken on a minimum of four sites
on each side of the posterior chest,
excluding over the scapulae.
The thickness of muscle and bone
alters the percussion note from the
tissue This is to ensure that all lung
fields are percussed for findings. An
example pattern of percussion can be
seen in Figures 6.5–6.7 below.
11. If the upper posterior chest is
percussed the patient should be
encouraged to fold their arms.
This will move the scapulae laterally
for ease of percussion.
Scenario
You are called to a patient in severe respiratory distress following being struck in the
chest by a piece of machinery. You notice that the patient has severe bruising to the left
side of his chest and has poor oxygenation (SpO2 = 82%) recorded, alongside a marked
tachycardia (140 bpm). On auscultation and percussion you are unable to hear any sounds
due to the noisy environment. What are the likely diagnoses for this patient? How can
you assess the patient further? What actions may you need to take in treating this patient?
Figure 6.3 The initial hand position for chest percussion.
Figure 6.4 Strike the middle phalanx or distal interphalangeal joint of the
left middle finger.
206

Figure 6.5 Anterior chest percussion points.
Figure 6.6 Posterior chest percussion points.
207

Figure 6.7 Axilla percussion points.
208

If a difference in percussion tone is noted between sides the area should be
re-percussed to confirm findings. The skill of percussion does take some
practice to attain competence therefore practice is necessary. This
technique can be practiced on both yourself, colleagues and even on
inanimate objects such as walls.
You can use surfaces such as walls or boxes to practice. Each surface will produce
a different sound. Percussing the right side of the abdomen will also produce
differing sounds ranging from resonance over the lung to a dull note over the liver.
Practise on willing colleagues or friends to get used to identifying differing notes.
209

Tactile vocal fremitus
Tactile vocal fremitus is a vibration test felt upon the chest when the
patient speaks. It is a technique that is seldom used by practitioners
due to lack of sensitivity, however this test can be useful in the
assessment of suspected effusion and consolidation. Human speech is
generally at a low frequency that can be detected as vibration upon the
chest wall. At times of consolidation vibrations will increase due to
transmission of sound waves through thicker tissue. However in cases
such as lung collapse, pneumothorax and pleural effusion vibrations
are reduced.
Technique of tactile vocal fremitus
A step-by-step guide to tactile vocal fremitus
assessment
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent from the patient
and explain the procedure.
This should be gained in all
procedures as it is a legal
requirement in any patient who can
consent.
2. Place the ulna border of the hand
horizontally against the chest.
This side of the hand is sensitive to
movement beneath.
3. Ask the patient to say ‘ninety nine’,
whilst the patient is speaking concentrate
upon the vibrations felt in the hand.
The vibration caused by saying
‘ninety nine’ is accentuated by
effusion and consolidation in the
lung.
4. This should be repeated in all fields of
the anterior/posterior chest and the axilla in
the areas highlighted in Figures 6.5–6.7.
A thorough examination should be
undertaken to ensure no areas of
lung are omitted.
This is a test that requires skill and experience to utilise fully therefore
practice is highly recommended. As an uncommonly used skill this is not
expected to be used frequently but can be a useful addition in the
assessment of respiratory disorders.
210

Chest auscultation
Auscultation of the lungs is the most important assessment of airflow
through the trachea-bronchial tree. It allows the practitioner to assess the
quality of airflow to the lungs and the condition of the lungs. Auscultation
is the technique of listening to the sounds generated by airflow in
breathing; in addition the examiner should listen for added (adventitious)
sounds produced during the respiratory cycle. Despite the frequency of
auscultation in patient assessment there is little evidence to support current
techniques therefore a general consensus of expert opinion is most
commonly considered.
Most sounds that reach the chest wall are low frequency and are
theoretically more easily heard by using the bell of the stethoscope despite
little consensus over this, the diaphragm is most commonly used in
clinical practice.5,14,31 The use of the diaphragm can lead to the stretching
of the skin and trapping of hairs beneath, thus producing sounds similar to
crackles (an adventitious sound); it may also be difficult in the thin patient
to achieve full contact between the diaphragm and the chest wall.
Breath sounds
Breath sounds are differentiated by their intensity, pitch and duration of
their inspiratory and expiratory phases.
•
Normal breath sounds: These are described as vesicular and are
produced by airflow in the large airways and larynx and altered by
passing through the smaller airways. The sounds are soft and low
pitched; described as a rustling sound. They start at the beginning
of inspiration and continue through until about one third of the way
through expiration where they fade away.
•
Bronchial breath sounds: This is caused by increased density of
matter in the peripheral lung fields allowing for the transmission of
sound unchanged from the larger airways. These sounds are louder
and higher in pitch, often described as hollow and blowing, often
having a pause between inspiration and expiration, the expiratory
phases tends to last longer than the inspiratory phase. These sounds
211

are commonly heard in conditions such as pneumonia where air
filled tissue is filled with fluid or solid lung tissue.
•
Bronchovesicular: These sounds have an inspiratory and expiratory
phase of an even length, there may be a pause between inspiration
and expiration. These sounds are again found in conditions that
alters the air filled lung tissue by fluid, fibrosis or collapse.
•
Reduced breath sounds: The intensity of breath sounds relates to
the airflow through the tissues, therefore reductions in airflow will
from
causes
such
as
obesity,
pleural
effusion,
fibrosis,
pneumothorax and asthma to name a few can result in reduced
ability of air to flow into the tissues. A silent or quiet chest is not a
sign that the lung fields are clear. In some cases asking the patient
to cough can ease a bronchial obstruction and make breath sounds
easier to hear.14
Added sounds (adventitious)
There are a variety of additional breath sounds that can have a clinical
significance, therefore practitioners should be able to recognise and
describe adventitious sounds. A selection of common additional sounds
can be seen below:
•
Wheeze: These are musical sounds and should be timed with the
respiratory cycle. They are caused by narrowing of the airways. A
wheeze tends to be louder on expiration as the airways naturally
dilate on inspiration and narrow on expiration. High pitch wheezes
emanate from the smaller airways such as the bronchioles, whereas
lower pitch wheezes come from larger airways such as the bronchi.
A wheeze however is a poor discriminator of airway narrowing as
severely restricted airways will produce a quieter wheeze due to
limited air flow. Wheezes are commonly seen in asthma and
COPD.
•
Crackles (rales/crepitations): Crackles are usually a result of
collapsed airways and alveoli being filled with air at high pressure
causing an opening ‘snap’. It is important to note when the crackles
occur within the respiratory cycle as this can aid diagnosis. Early
inspiratory crackles are indicative of small airway disease such as
bronchiolitis.
In
pulmonary
oedema
crackles
occur
in
mid
inspiration. Late phase inspiratory fine crackles are suggestive of
212

conditions such as pulmonary fibrosis and bronchial secretions in
COPD, these sounds are commonly described as like rubbing hair
between your fingers. Crackles may also be heard when air passes
through
secretions
in
the
larger
airways,
these
sounds
are
commonly more coarse and have a gurgling quality.
•
Pleural rub: These sounds are produced by the inflammation of the
parietal and visceral pleura that surround the lungs. The sound is
likened to creaking such as bending a new leather belt or the sound
of a footstep in fresh snow. It is best heard with the diaphragm of
the stethoscope due to the high pitched nature of the sound and is
commonly heard at the end of inspiration and the beginning of
expiration. Pleural rub is often difficult to hear unless the patient is
breathing deeply, so is therefore normally sought when a pleuritic
type pain is presented.
Examples of breath sounds can be found on-line at sites such as:
http://www.merck.com/
http://www.rale.ca
http://www.emsvillage.com
They may also be found on CD at most medical libraries.
Technique of Auscultation
A step-by-step guide to chest auscultation
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent from the patient and explain
the procedure.
This should be gained
in all procedures as it
is a legal requirement
in any patient who
can consent.
2. Ask the patient to take deep breaths in and out through
the mouth.
This increases the
turbulent airflow to
allow for easier
recognition of
sounds.
213

3. Place the diaphragm of the stethoscope (or bell if the
patient is very slim or has a hairy chest) over the chest,
commencing above the clavicle.
The apex of the lung
can be heard in the
supra-clavicular
notch.
4. Listen to both inspiration and expiration.
Adventitious sounds
may be heard on both
inspiration and
exhalation.
5. After each breath move the stethoscope from side to
side covering all lung fields both anteriorly, posteriorly
and in the axillae. It is suggested that for a thorough
assessment the sites shown in earlier in the chapter for
percussion sites should be used.
A thorough
examination should
be undertaken to
ensure no areas of
lung are omitted.
6. It may be useful to coach the patient’s breathing by
saying ‘in ….and out’.
This will allow you
to control the
procedure.
7. Be aware of the patient’s physical condition as long
periods of deep breathing may cause dizziness or not be
achievable in the dyspnoeic patient.31
It may be necessary
to stop and allow the
patient to breathe
normally.
8. Take note of the breath sounds and presence of
adventitious sounds in each lung field auscultated. If
abnormality is noted then listen for longer over each lung
field.
To ensure that the
quality of the sound
is fully assessed.
Vocal resonance
Also referred to as transmitted voice sounds, this is an assessment tool not
commonly used in prehospital care; however it has a significant diagnostic
benefit when combined with other examination techniques. Vocal
resonance is the auscultatory equivalent of tactile fremitus, whereby
sounds are transmitted through the chest wall when the patient speaks.
Normally when auscultation is performed, whilst the patient is speaking,
muffled indistinct sounds will be heard. However over an area of
consolidation sound transmission is increased so sounds become more
distinct or more resonant. In cases such as pleural effusion, lung collapse
214

and pneumothoraces, sound transmission is reduced thus making sounds
less intelligible.
Technique of vocal resonance
A step-by-step guide to vocal resonance
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent from the patient and
explain the procedure.
This should be gained in
all procedures as it is a
legal requirement in any
patient who can consent.
2. Place the diaphragm of the stethoscope upon the
chest, it is suggested that the same areas are used as
with auscultation (Figures 6.5–6.7).
To ensure that all lung
fields are examined.
3. Ask the patient to say ‘ninety nine’. Normally the
sound will be muffled and indistinct.
These procedures will
elicit differing sounds
that are required to
assess for consolidation
or effusion.
4. Ask the patient to say ‘ee’. Normally a muffled
long ‘ee’ will be heard. If ‘ee’ is heard as ‘ay’ this is
known as egophony and can indicate consolidation
within the affected area.
5. Ask the patient to whisper ‘ninety-nine’, the voice
is normally faint and indistinct if heard at all.
However in the consolidated lung the whispered voice
may be heard. This is known as whispering
pectoriloquy.
Due to the complexity of this examination skill, it is not routinely
recommended or required.
Chapter Key Points
1. Respiratory examination requires experience and knowledge of signs and
symptoms present in differing conditions.
215

2. There are a number of steps in undertaking a full respiratory assessment;
these procedures form only the core of assessment and are part of a fuller
holistic assessment. Physical assessment must be considered alongside careful
history taking and visual assessment.
References and Further reading
1 Marieb E, Hoehn, K. Human Anatomy and physiology, 7th edn. San
Francisco: Pearson Education, 2007.
2
Moore
T.
Respiratory
assessment
in
adults.
Nurs
Stand
2007;21(49):48–56.
3 Department of Health. Comprehensive Critical Care: A Review of
Adult Critical Care Services. London: The Stationary Office, 2000.
4 Torrance C, Elley K. Respiration technique and observation. Nurs Times
1997;93(43)(Suppl):1–2.
5 Cox N, Roper T. Clinical Skills. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
6 Dougherty L, Lister S. (Eds) The Royal Marsden Hospital Manual of
Clinical Nursing Procedures, 6th edn. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing,
2006.
7 Moore T. Respiratory assessment. In: Moore T, Woodrow P (Eds) High
Dependency Nursing Care: Observation, Intervention and Support.
London: Routledge, 2004.
8 European Resuscitation Council. European Paediatric Life Support
Course. London: Resuscitation Council, 2006.
9 Boon N, Colledge N, Walker B. (Eds) Davidson’s Principles and
Practice of Medicine, 20th edn. London: Churchill-Livingstone, 2006.
10 British Thoracic Society. British Guideline on the Management of
Asthma. London: British Thoracic Society, 2007.
11 Jevon P, Ewens B. Assessment of the breathless patient. Nurs Stand
2001;15(16):48–53.
12 Breakell A, Townsend-Rose C. The clinical evaluation of the
Respi-Check mask: a new oxygen mask incorporating a breathing
indicator. Emerg Med J 2001;18:366–369.
216

13 Swash M. (Ed) Hutchinson’s Clinical Methods. Edinburgh: W.B.
Saunders, 2002.
14 Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. MacLeod’s Clinical Examination.
London: Elsevier, 2005.
15 Barker S. Motion Resistant pulse oximetry: a comparison of new and
old models. Anaesthet Analges 2002;95(4):967–972.
16 DeMeulenaere S. Pulse oximetry: uses and limitations. J Nurse Pract
2007;May:312–317.
17 Rodden A, Spicer L, Diaz V, Steyer T. Does fingernail polish affect
pulse oximeter readings? Intens Crit Care Nurs 2007;23:51–55.
18 Hinkelbein J, Genzwuerker H, Sogl R, Fiedler F. Effect of nail polish
on oxygen saturation as determined by pulse oximetry in critically ill
patients. Resuscitation 2007;72:81–91.
19 Moyle J. Pulse Oximetry. London: British Medical Journal Books,
2002.
20 Hakemi A, Bender J. Understanding pulse oximetry, advantages and
limitations. Home-Health Care Manage Pract 2005;15(5):416–418.
21 Hill E, Stoneham M. Practical applications of pulse oximetry. Update
Anaesthes 2000;11:4.
22 Lindholm P, Blogg S, Gennser M. Pulse oximetry to detect hypoxemia
during apnea: comparison of finger and ear probes. Aviation, Space
Environment Med 2007;78(8):770–773.
23 Schallom L, Sona C, McSweeney M, Mazuski J. Comparison of
forehead and digit oximetry in surgical/trauma patients at risk for
decreased peripheral perfusion. Heart Lung 2007;36(3):188–194.
24 Petterson M, Begnoche V, Graybeal J. The effect of motion on pulse
oximetry
and
its
clinical
significance.
Anaesthes
Analges
2007;105(6)Suppl:S78–S84.
25 Louw A, Cracco Cerf C et al. Accuracy of pulse oximetry in the
intensive care unit. Intens Care Med 2001;27(10):1606–1613.
26 Booker R. Pulse Oximetry. Nurs Stand 2008;22(30);39–41.
217

27 Miller MR, Hankinson J, Brusasco V et al. ATS/ERS Task force:
standardisation of spirometry. Eur Resp J 2005;26(2):319–338.
28
Booker
R.
Peak
expiratory
flow
measurement.
Nurs
Stand
2007;21(39):42–43.
29 Ruffin R. Peak expiratory flow monitoring. Thorax 2004;59:913–914.
30 Sly P, Cahill P, Willet K, Burton P. Accuracy of mini peak flow meters
in indicating changes in lung function in children with asthma. BMJ
1994;308:572–574.
31 Emerman C, Cydulka R. Use of peak expiratory flow rate in
emergency department evaluation of acute exacerbation of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Ann Emerg Med 1996;27(2):159–163.
32 Bickley L, Szilagyi P. Bates’ Guide to Physical Examination and
History Taking. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2003.
218

Chapter 7
Neurological observations
and examination techniques
Content
Definitions
Level of consciousness assessment
Pupillary assessment
Assessing motor function
Assessment of reflexes
Assessment of movement and power
Assessment of co-ordination
Assessment of abnormal movements
Sensory function assessment
FAST
Vital signs
Blood glucose testing
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
219

The importance of undertaking a reliable and timely neurological
assessment of acutely ill patients cannot be overestimated. However
evidence suggests that the neurological assessments undertaken by
healthcare professionals may not always be consistent and appropriate.1
There are numerous presentations that the practitioner may experience
which require neurological assessment to establish treatment or diagnosis;
these can include conditions such as hypoglycaemia, cerebro-vascular
accident (or stroke) and the head injured patient. It is the intention of this
chapter to provide the practitioner with an evidence based approach to
standardised neurological observations that can be utilised in dealing with
such patient groups.
Definitions
Neurological observations are those investigations and examination that
relate to the assessment of the nervous system. These commonly focus
upon six key areas:
•
Level of consciousness
•
Pupillary activity
•
Motor function
•
Sensory function
•
FAST (stroke recognition)
•
Vital signs.
One observation that is commonly part of a neurological assessment
(although primarily an endocrine function) is blood sugar analysis. This
will also be discussed as a part of this chapter.
Indications
There are a variety of indications for neurological assessment and
observations that relate to any condition or presentation that could or does
exhibit altered neurological status. Neurological observations should be
aimed at:
•
Detecting abnormality
•
Detecting deterioration
220

•
Detecting improvement.
A systematic approach to neurological assessment can assist in the
detection of changes over time.
Level of consciousness
assessment
Consciousness
encompasses
a
conscious
perception
of
sensations,
voluntary initiation and control of movement, and capabilities associated
with higher mental function (such as memory, logic or judgement).2
Clinically, consciousness is graded upon a four-point scale relating to
response to stimuli running on a continuum from the highest level of
awareness to the most depressed, as seen below:
1. Alertness
2. Drowsiness or lethargy
3. Stupor
4. Coma.
From Marieb E, Hoehn K. (2007) Human Anatomy and Physiology.2
There are two common methods used in the assessment of levels of
consciousness by healthcare professionals, the AVPU score and Glasgow
Coma Scale.
AVPU score
The AVPU score is a brief examination of responsiveness that is initiated
in the primary survey.3 The scale was introduced as a method for rapid
neurological assessment in the trauma patient4 with the use of scoring
based upon a grading of initial response upon the following stimuli:
A Alert (no stimulus required).
V Verbal stimulus required to elicit a response.
P Painful stimulus required to elicit response.
221

U Unresponsive to all stimuli.
The method for eliciting pain response will be discussed later (see GCS
section). Anecdotal evidence suggests that AVPU is simpler and quicker
to use than the Glasgow coma score,5 however studies have suggested that
the AVPU score may not provide the sensitivity to detect subtle changes
in neurological status that result from non traumatic causes of neurological
derangement.5,6
The Glasgow Coma Scale
This scale was introduced in 1974 by Teasdale and Jennett7 as a
standardised tool to aid physicians in the assessment and comparison of
patients with altered levels of consciousness. This scale, following
modifications, has been in use by healthcare professionals ever since.8
Whilst this method is commonly accepted as the technique of choice
within health services, studies have suggested that the scale may not
always be reliably used in comparison to other methods such as
AVPU.9,10
The Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) evaluates three key categories of
behaviour that closely reflect activity in the higher centres of the brain;
eye opening, verbal response and motor response.11 Within each category
a score is given for the level of response, with the lower the score the
greater the deterioration of neurological function. The lowest score a
patient can receive is 3 and the highest value is 15 (indicating a fully alert
state). The GCS chart for adults can be seen in Box 7.1.
The GCS table is applicable for adolescents and has been adapted for
paediatrics as seen in Box 7.2; however the use in children under the age
of 3 is questionable due to developmental issues.13
Best eye response
Eye opening is closely linked with being awake and alert and as such is
easily identified. Eye opening mechanisms are controlled by a collection
of neurones located in the brain stem, hypothalamus and thalamus known
as the reticular activating system that is stimulated by sensory input.2 The
222

patient is considered to have spontaneous eye opening when the eyes are
opened without any stimulation. If either a verbal or painful stimulus is
required then this must be recorded, a guide to undertaking eye response
testing is seen in Table 7.1.
Box 7.1 The Glasgow Coma Scale table for adults.12
Best eye response (4)
1. No eye opening.
2. Eye opening to pain.
3. Eye opening to verbal command.
4. Eyes open spontaneously.
Best verbal response (5)
1. No verbal response
2. Incomprehensible sounds.
3. Inappropriate words.
4. Confused
5. Orientated
Best motor response (6)
1. No motor response.
2. Extension to pain.
3. Abnormal flexion to pain.
4. Normal flexion to pain.
5. Localising pain.
6. Obeys commands.
Best verbal response
The best verbal response assesses two aspects of cerebral function:
•
Comprehension or understanding of what has been said.
•
Ability to express thoughts into words or expression.
This can be achieved by speaking to the patient in a normal voice. It is
best practice not to ask yes or no questions as they can lead to missed
information. The best verbal response also assesses the patient’s
awareness of themselves in relation to time and space. An element of
223

consideration is required when assessing a best verbal response, many
authors suggest that the patient must be able to state the day and date to be
considered orientated.7 However thought must be given to the patient’s
status, as many patients who have been hospitalised for a long time for
example will have little need to know the date. A guide to undertaking a
best verbal response can be seen in Table 7.2.
Discrepancies can occur in the assessment of verbal response; therefore it
is imperative that the practitioner uses language that the patient can
understand to reduce the likelihood of misunderstanding.
Box 7.2 Paediatric version of the Glosgow Coma
Scale.14
Best eye response (4)
1. No eye opening.
2. Eye opening to pain.
3. Eye opening to verbal command.
4. Eyes open spontaneously.
Best verbal response (5)
1. No vocal response.
2. Occasionally whimpers and/or moans.
3. Cries inappropriately.
4. Less than usual ability and/or spontaneous irritable cry.
5. Alert, babbles, coos, words or sentences to usual ability.
Communication with the infant or child’s caregivers is required to establish the
best usual verbal response. A ‘grimace’ alternative to verbal responses should be
used in pre-verbal or intubated patients.
Best grimace response (5)
1. No response to pain.
2. Mild grimace to pain.
3. Vigorous grimace to pain.
4. Less than usual spontaneous ability or only response to touch stimuli.
5. Spontaneous normal facial/oro-motor activity.
Best motor response (6)
1. No motor response to pain.
2. Abnormal extension to pain (decerebrate).
224

3. Abnormal flexion to pain (decorticate).
4. Withdrawal to painful stimuli.
5. Localises to painful stimuli or withdraws to touch.
6. Obeys commands or performs normal spontaneous movements.
THINK
What difficulties can arise in assessing a verbal response? What can you do to
improve or assist in these situations?
Table 7.1 Best eye response18
Observation
Score
Method
Eye response: If the patient is unable to open their eyes as a result of trauma or
surgery the letter ‘c’ indicating closed should be recorded. This will ensure that
false recordings are reduced.
This score
indicates the
level of
arousal/
consciousness
4 –
Spontaneously
The patient’s eyes should open as you approach.
If the patient is asleep wake them first as the
assessment is based upon best response.
3 – To speech
The patient will respond to your voice. The
simplest way is to use their name. If there is no
response consider using a raised voice as the
patient may be hearing impaired.
2 – To pain
The patient should open their eyes to painful
stimulus (discussed below)
1 – No
response
The patient’s eyes remain closed despite painful
stimuli.
Table 7.2 Best verbal response19
Observation Score
Method
Verbal response: The patient may have difficulty in speaking (dysphasia). If this
is the case ‘D’ should be indicated in the chart, if the patient is intubated then the
letter ‘T’ should be used.
This score
indicates the
level of
5–Orientated
The patient must be able to state their name,
who they are, where they are and what the
225

orientation
to time,
place and
self.
month is (or time of day – morning, evening,
night).
4 – Confused
If the patient is able to hold a conversation but
unable to answer the previous questions
correctly they should be considered confused.
Correct any wrongly answered questions and
re-ask them later in the assessment using a
different order to avoid copying.
3 – Inappropriate
words
The patient will use random words that make
little sense or are out of context. This typically
consists of swearing and shouting. A painful
stimuli may be required to gain a response.
2 –
Incomprehensible
sounds
The patient will only respond with moaning
and groaning. Painful stimuli may be required
to gain a response.
1 – No response
There is no verbal response despite painful
stimuli.
Best Motor Response
The best motor response is used to test how well the brain is functioning
as a whole by testing the identification of sensory input and the
subsequent motor response. The best possible motor response is the ability
to understand simple commands and respond.11 A guide to undertaking an
assessment of best motor response can be seen below in Table 7.3.
It is not recommended to use the command of ‘squeeze my fingers’ as an
obeyed
command
as
this
is
a
primitive
reflex
and
may
occur
involuntarily.16 It is recommended that a central response is used to test a
response to pain as a peripheral stimulus may provoke a spinal reflex and
therefore not assess cerebral functioning.11 Spinal reflexes may cause
limbs to flex briskly and can even be elicited in patients who have been
certified as brainstem dead.15 It can also be very difficult to differentiate
flexion from pain and withdrawal from pain if using a peripheral pain
stimuli.
226

Painful stimuli
A response to painful stimulus is a very contentious issue and should only
be applied if the patient does not respond to other stimuli.8 There are
numerous legal and ethical issues that should be considered on each
occasion, therefore it is recommended that explanation is given to any
onlookers to save confusion and later complications.11 There are two
overarching approaches to painful response, both having inherent flaws
and benefits that must be considered; these approaches are central and
peripheral stimuli.16
Table 7.3 Best motor response11,19
Observation Score
Method
Motor response: If the patient is receiving paralytic drugs as Glasgow coma scale
cannot be assessed.
This
indicates
brain
function.
6 – Obeys
commands
Ask the patient to perform a series of different
movements such as sticking out their tongue or
raising their arms.
5 –
Localises
to pain
Apply a central painful stimulus (as described later in
Table 7.4). The patient should purposefully move the
arm towards the site of pain to remove the cause.
4 –
Withdraws
from pain
The patient will flex their arms in response to a
painful stimulus but will not move towards the source
of the pain.
3 –
Flexion to
pain
Also referred to as decorticate positioning. It occurs
when there is a block in the motor pathway between
the cerebral cortex and brain stem. It is a slower
response to a painful stimulus. It is recognised by a
flexion of the upper arm and rotation of the wrist. It
may also result in the thumb flexing across the
fingers.
2 –
Extension
to pain
Also known as decerebrate positioning. This is the
result of a blocked or damaged motor pathway within
the brainstem. This is characterised by straightening
of the elbow and internal rotation of the shoulder. The
legs may also straighten with the toes pointing
downwards.
227

1 –
There is no physical response despite painful stimuli.
Table 7.4 Eliciting painful stimuli18,19
Stimulus
Procedure
Rationale
Trapezium
squeeze
1. This is achieved by using the thumb
and two fingers as ‘pincers’. Feel for
the large muscle mass of the trapezius
(located at the angle where the neck
and shoulders meet) and twist or
squeeze.
A gentle pinch of
approximately half an inch
hurts but does not cause
real pain.
Supraorbital
pressure
2. Pain is achieved by applying
pressure over a branch of the facial
nerve. This can be found upon the
inner aspect of the eyebrow in a small
notch. Place the hand upon the patients
head and the flat of the thumb or
knuckle is placed over the notch.
Pressure should gradually be applied
for a maximum of thirty seconds.
Pressure applied here
causes pain in the form of
a headache. This method
should not be used in
facial trauma or glaucoma
as it may further injury.34
Caution is also required as
orbital pressure may also
cause bradycardia.
Jaw
pressure
3. Apply pressure to the angle of the
jaw just in front of the ear lobe using
the thumb.
This method should not be
used in cases of facial
trauma.
Sternal rub
4. This involves grinding the knuckles
or palm upon the centre of the
sternum.
This method can cause
bruising over time and is
considered to be an
outdated and should only
be used with extreme
caution.16
Central stimuli
There are four commonly used distinct methods of providing a central
painful stimulus: trapezium squeeze, supraorbital pressure, jaw pressure
and sternal rub as described in Table 7.4.
The use of the centralised pain response to elicit eye opening response can
be difficult as it may cause grimacing or eye closure as a natural response
therefore making it counter-productive when assessing for eye opening.8
However central stimuli are perceived to be more reliable as they can
228

produce an overall body response thus making a centralised stimulus more
reliable when assessing motor function.17 Whilst there are little data to
suggest a recommended method of centralised painful stimuli, anecdotal
evidence suggests that the sternal rub technique should be discontinued
due to concerns over potential patient injury including bruising and skin
breakdown.11 In addition the use of supra-orbital pressure should only be
undertaken by those who are competent in its’ use due to concerns of
potential injury or adverse reaction.
Peripheral stimuli
A peripheral stimulus is interpreted by the peripheral nervous system and
communicated to the central nervous system via the spinal cord to the
brain. However a peripheral response may also elicit a spinal reflex
making the use of peripheral stimuli limited in terms of motor assessment.
Due to reasons stated earlier a peripheral stimulus is more suited to best
eye opening response.2,8 Table 7.5 describes the common techniques in
applying a peripheral pain stimulus.
Table 7.5 Peripheral pain stimulation
Stimulus Procedure
Rationale
Lateral
finger or
toe
pressure
Using a pen or similar object (consider
infection control) apply pressure to the
lateral aspect of a finger or toe, avoid
the nail bed. Rotate the object around
the finger/toes away from the nail.
This should be performed for no
longer than 10 seconds.
It is advisable to avoid the
nail bed as beneath the bed
are a number of structures
such as tendons, nerves and
blood vessels.2 These can be
damaged by the use of
extreme pressure upon the
nail.
By avoiding pressure over the nail short term pain can be applied with a
reduced likelihood of longer term damage to underlying structures.
229

Pupillary assessment
Careful examination of the pupils is an important part of a neurological
assessment and is often the only way to assess the neurological status of a
sedated patient. Pupils should be assessed for size, shape, and response to
a light stimulus. Any change of pupil response may be an indication of
raised intracranial pressure or lesion.19
Pupil size and shape
Pupil size will vary for a variety of reasons such as light, anxiety, drug use
and pain, as a result of sympathetic and parasympathetic responses to
stimuli,2 suggested causes of pupil size abnormality can be found in Table
7.6. Pupil size is measured in millimetres (diameter) with a normal pupil
size ranging from 2–6 mm.19 Each pupil should be assessed individually
and documented, this should be undertaken prior to any light being shone
in them – it is important to note that levels of ambient light may affect
pupil size. Many forms of documentation and some pen torches have a
guideline scale for the measurement of pupils, these should be used to
ensure objectivity of measurement. In the average patient the pupils will
be of equal size, however it is estimated that up to 20% of patients will
have unexplained unequal pupils (anisocoria).20 A difference of up to 1
mm is acceptable and may be physiological, especially if this is
maintained in both light and dark conditions.21
Table 7.6 Abnormal pupil sizes – Common causes. Adapted from Cox
and Roper (2006).21
Pupil size
Common causes
Pin point pupils
Opiate overdose, brainstem CVA (pontine), miotic eye
drops, Horner’s syndrome.
Dilated pupils
Fear, anxiety, anti-cholinergic drug overdose, brainstem
CVA (mid brain), pain, mydriatic eye drops.
Unequal dilated
pupils (unreactive)
IIIrd nerve palsy, mydriatic eye drops.
Unequal constricted
pupils (unreactive)
Miotic eye drops, Horner’s syndrome.
230

There are numerous causes of abnormal pupil size, these are just some of
the common causes that may be found.
Pupils are generally round in shape and equal. However certain conditions
such as glaucoma (oval pupil) and ocular trauma (grossly irregular pupil)
can alter the shape of both or an individual pupil. It is therefore important
in the presence of an abnormal pupil size or shape to ask the patient or
relative whether this is new to the patient.
Pupil response
In the presence of a bright light the pupils should constrict to reduce the
amount of light that enters the eye.2 However in the presence of an insult
the sensory (afferent) or motor (efferent) pathways may be damaged and
reduce or eliminate pupil response. With a light stimulus to one eye there
should be experienced a direct response (constriction of the pupil) and
consensual light reflex (constriction of the other pupil).2 For this to take
place an intact sensory and motor pathway is required. This response
should occur in both light and dark conditions, although the response may
be more difficult to spot in very light conditions. Pupil response to a light
source should be relatively swift, therefore sluggish or slow responses
should be noted, as should exceptionally brisk response as they can
suggest neurological injury.21
A guide for the examination of direct and consensual light reflex can be
seen below.
Assessing light response21
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent from the patient to undertake
the procedure.
This will help to
reduce anxiety and
make the patient easier
to examine. It is also a
basic requirement for
professional practice.
2. Reduce the light from ambient sources wherever
possible.
This enables a better
view of the pupil and
231

makes any response
easier to view.
3. Wash the hands thoroughly.
As manual opening of
the eye may be
required this can
reduce cross infection.
4. With the eyes open review the size and shape of the
pupil.
See section upon pupil
size and shape.
5. Using a bright pen torch move a light source from the
outer aspect of the eye toward the pupil. This should
cause pupil constriction (direct light reflex). The light
only needs to be shone into the pupil for a very brief
period to elicit a response. Assess the level of
constriction and the speed of response.
This will assess the
sensory and motor
pathways.
6. Repeat the process, this time watch the other eye to
assess consensual light reflex.
This will assess the
motor pathway for the
opposing eye.
7. Repeat the previous two steps shining the light into
the opposing eye.
This will assess the
sensory and motor
pathways of the
opposing eye.
Assessing motor function
Damage to the nervous system may result in changes in the patient’s
ability to move. To assess patient motor function an evaluation of the
following areas should be undertaken:
•
Inspection and palpation of muscle mass
•
Assessment of tone
•
Assessment of reflexes
•
Assessment of movement and power
•
Assessment of co-ordination
•
Assessment of abnormal movements.
232

Inspection and palpation of muscle
mass
Long standing motor neurone lesions/damage may result in the loss of
muscle bulk due to atrophy and lack of muscle use. Diseases such as
motor neurone or stroke are common causes of such signs.22
Assessment of tone
This involves the assessment of the resistance to passive movement of the
limbs. Increased resistance suggests increased tone whereas decreased
resistance
suggests
decreased
tone.
These
tests
are
not
routinely
undertaken in prehospital care.
Assessment of reflexes
There are a variety of reflexes that can be tested. Typically these require
great skill and experience to undertake and are not commonly used in
prehospital care, examples include the deep tendon reflexes such as the
knee jerk. However there are some reflexes that may be assessed within
the community environment. These include the blink, gag, swallow,
oculocephalic and plantar reflexes.
•
Blink reflex: This is a protective reflex that can be affected by
damage to the trigeminal and facial cranial nerves. These may be
noted by a lack of blinking to stimulation of the cornea.
•
Gag and swallow reflex: These are not routinely tested however
history and clinical examination may suggest a loss of gag or
swallow function. For example aspiration of foodstuffs. Altered
responses suggest damage to the glossopharyngeal or vagus cranial
nerves.
•
Oculocephalic: This reflex is an eye movement that occurs in
patients with severely decreased level of consciousness. When the
reflex is present if the head is moved to one side the eyes will move
233

in the opposite direction. However in patients with absent brain
stem reflexes the eyes will appear to remain stationary in the centre.
•
Plantar reflexes: An abnormal plantar reflex is evident upon the
stimulation upon the lateral border of the underside of the foot. A
normal response is the flexion of the great toe and adduction of the
other toes. An abnormal response is noted when the great toe
extends (or dorsiflexes) and the other toes abduct. This is a sign of
upper motor neurone damage, however may be normal in babies
under the age of one year.23
Assessment of movement
and power
This involves the assessment of the patients muscle power and movement
against resistance. If the patient is unable to generate any power against
resistance then gravity should be used. These tests are not commonly used
in prehospital care.
Assessment of co-ordination
Any disease or injury that affects the cerebellum or basal ganglia can
affect co-ordination. The ability to perform complex movement smoothly
and efficiently requires intact sensory and motor pathways. This can be
simply tested with tasks such as asking the patient to run their heel up and
down the shin of the opposite leg or by asking the patient repeatedly and
rapidly pat the palm of one hand with the palm of the other hand and then
with the back of the hand. This should be performed as quickly and
regularly as possible.
234

Assessment of abnormal
movements
When carrying out a neurological examination the patient should be
observed for any abnormal movements such as jerks, tremor, tics, seizures
or fasciculation (ripples or twitches underlying the skin in muscles at rest).
These are all suggestive of neurological deficiency.
Sensory function assessment
Sensory functions and input allows the individual to respond to input from
the external environment. When injury or illness damages the sensory
pathways the ability to respond is decreased. This occurs in conditions
such as spinal injury and stroke.22 Assessment of sensory function should
include:
•
Central and peripheral vision: this can be achieved briefly by
asking the patient about their vision or the use of standardised
visual acuity charts.
•
Hearing and ability to understand verbal communication: This can
be briefly achieved by asking the patient about their hearing or
asking them respond to simple commands such as tested in the
Glasgow Coma Scale.
•
Superficial sensations: This can be tested by applying a light
stimulus to the skin (light touch or pain). Areas that can be tested
are linked to sensory areas known as dermatomes that relate to
specific nerve routes as seen below.
•
Deep sensations: This relates to sensations of muscle and joint pain
and the ability to recognise joint position. This can be briefly
assessed by asking the patient to identify the position a joint is
placed in when the patient has their eyes shut.
235

FAST
The FAST test is the acronym for the face, arm, speech test. This
procedure is the current recommended technique for pre-hospital care staff
in the recognition of stroke to allow for prompt management and
referral.24 Limited studies have been undertaken upon this technique;
however initial findings suggest that there is a high level of diagnostic
accuracy in the use by pre-hospital care personnel.24
The FAST approach is a simplified approach to a rapid assessment of a
suspected stroke patient. Through the assessment of three specific areas of
neurological functioning a level of suspicion of stroke can be gained. The
FAST approach is shown in Table 7.7.
Table 7.7 The FAST approach to stroke recognition.24
Test
Findings
Face – Does the patient have a symmetrical face
or are there any signs of a facial droop?
The presence of a facial droop
can be indicative of stroke or
facial nerve palsy.
Arm – Does the patient have equal power in
their arms? Place the patients arms straight out
in front of them, does one arm drift downwards?
The presence of an arm drift
suggests a weakness to that
limb and potential for
hemiparesis.
Speech – Is there evidence of slurred speech?
Are they able to speak normally?
Slurring of speech may
indicate stroke due to
weakness of facial muscles.
Figure 7.1 The dermatomes – sensory areas related to spinal nerves.
Reproduced from Faiz, O. and Moffat, D., Anatomy at a Glance,
copyright 2006, with permission of Blackwell Publishing.
236

Vital Signs
There are a variety of vital signs that should be undertaken as a routine
part of neurological assessment, these include:
•
Respirations
•
Temperature
•
Pulse
•
Blood pressure
•
Blood sugar.
The assessment of these key areas can offer vital information into the
functioning of the neurological system. See chapters upon Respiratory
237

Observations and Assessment and Cardiovascular Observations and
Assessment for further information. The assessment of blood sugar is
often taken as a part of the neurological examination and will therefore be
discussed in this chapter.
Blood glucose testing
The body regulates blood glucose levels through the production of insulin
and glucagon by the pancreas. These hormones are responsible for the
metabolism and release of glucose from body stores respectively,
alongside other functions.2 Blood glucose levels are normally maintained
within relatively narrow limits of about 5–7 mmol/L (millimoles per
litre).25 However conditions such as diabetes affect the body’s ability to
produce insulin and subsequently control blood sugar. In the diabetic
patient the normal blood sugar level may vary between individuals
therefore trends over time and norm values for the individual are
paramount in the identification of abnormal blood sugar values.26
Abnormal blood sugar values
There are two broad categories of abnormal blood sugar; hypoglycaemia
(low blood sugar) and hyperglycaemia (high blood sugar). Hypoglycaemia
occurs when the blood sugar falls below 4.0 mmol/L and causes
subsequent changes in neurological functioning such as confusion.27 This
can be caused by issues such insulin overdose, insufficient food intake,
exercise or alcohol. Hyperglycaemia is often caused by current illnesses
such as infections that lead to a raise in blood sugar beyond normal limits
(>7 mmol/L or relative value for the patient).
Capillary blood glucose testing
Within the prehospital setting the common technique for blood glucose
testing involves the use of capillary blood glucose monitors (glucometer)
with blood samples taken by pin prick from the finger. Whilst this is a
simple measurement previous research suggests that serious errors have
238

occurred that have led to inappropriate decisions being made,28 this has
led to recommendations for the training of staff and the use of testing
devices as seen below:
•
Staff must be aware of what results to expect in normal and
abnormal situations.
•
Staff must be aware of the correct use of equipment and the
consequences of incorrect use.
•
Staff must be educated in the collection of blood samples including
the gaining of consent and health and safety issues.
•
Staff must be aware of the standards of documentation of such
results.
•
Staff must understand the limitations of equipment and when use is
contraindicated.
•
Staff must have an in-depth knowledge of the equipment including
error codes and calibration.
What site should be used?
There is little evidence to support a specific location for capillary blood
testing, typically the finger tip is used,29 however sites such as the earlobe
and heel may also be used30. Initial studies suggest that the earlobe may
provide a less painful site for testing.30 There have been no demonstrated
differences in accuracy between these sites therefore no specific
recommendations can be made.
THINK
How would you choose which site to use? What factors might influence you
choice? Would you use the same site in a baby as in an adult? If not why?
Skin preparation
Again there is little evidence to provide a recommendation for the use
cessation or use of skin swabbing prior to capillary blood glucose testing.
Some authors suggest that the use of alcohol skin swabs could cause
erroneous results,31 however small scale research suggests that no
difference in readings are obtained following the use of an alcohol swab.32
General advice provided by The National Library for Health33 and the
239

Royal College of Nursing34 suggests that there is little need to clean
healthy skin for routine injections outside of a hospital. The advice states
that if chemical disinfection is used that it must be allowed to dry prior to
injection. Manufacturers of glucometers suggest that the skin should be
physically cleaned using soap and water.32 This has the dual benefit of
warming the digit to increase blood flow and subsequently make testing
easier.
Which drop to test?
There has been anecdotal evidence to suggest that the initial drop of blood
gained from a pin prick should be removed and a second drop tested to
reduce the risk of inaccurate results. This is based upon the concept that
the initial drop may contain excess tissue fluid and potentially alcohol
from any swab that is used;35 whilst there is little published evidence to
dispute or support this notion, until proven otherwise it is suggested that
the second drop be tested.
Capillary blood glucose testing: procedure
A step-by-step approach to capillary blood glucose testing is provided
below.
Procedure
Rationale
1. Check and prepare the
equipment for use-including
functionality, use by date,
calibration. Equipment
required: glucometers, test
strips, finger pricking device,
cotton wool, sharps disposal
container, gloves.
To ensure maximum efficiency, comfort and
safety.
2. Prepare the patient – gain
informed consent, if possible
wash the digit (especially if
physically dirty) and ensure
the patient is comfortable.
This will reduce anxiety and make the testing
process easier. Consent is also a legal
requirement for practice.
3. Wash your hands and put
on gloves.
Please refer to infection control chapter.
240

4. Take the blood sample –
Using a single use retractable
lancet take a sample from the
side of the finger (or ear lobe
or heel). If the site does not
bleed then milk the site until
enough blood is obtained.
A single use retractable lancet is recommended
as this will reduce the risk of needle-stick injury
and cross-infection. The side of the finger is
generally less sensitive than the tip and
sensitivity in tips of fingers may be lost if used
regularly. Rotation of sites is advised to avoid
over use of one site as the skin may become hard
and painful.
5. Apply blood to the test
strip.
Most strips are hydrophilic and draw blood up
when applied. However some strips still require a
drop of blood to be dropped onto them, this will
vary between manufacturer and strip type.
6. Dispose of the lancet in a
sharps disposal container and
any contaminated non sharps
material into a clinical waste
container.
This conforms with infection control and sharps
disposal policies and will reduce the risk of
needlestick injury and/or contamination.
Document the findings
appropriately.
To ensure accurate documentation of findings
and to determine management.
7. Report or act upon any
abnormal or unexpected
findings.
It is important to recognise any abnormal or
unexpected finding as this may influence care or
priorities of management.
Scenario
You are called to a 25-year-old patient who suffers with diabetes (insulin controlled), he
is suffering from acute confusion and is behaving irrationally. You test the blood sugar
which is recorded as 6.8 mmol/L. What are your differential diagnoses? How could you
further assess this patient to form a diagnosis?
Chapter Key Points
1. The assessment of neurological function is both complex and requires
experience to gain competence.
2. The understanding of the concepts and interpretation of neurological
assessments
is
a
major
facet
in
patient
assessment
and
subsequent
management.
3. Neurological assessment incorporates a number of potential examinations
and vital signs therefore a thorough assessment may well be required to
identify abnormal findings.
References and Further reading
241

1 Teasdale G, Murray L. Revisiting the Glasgow coma scale and coma
score. Intens Care Med 2000;26:153–154.
2 Marieb, E. & Hoehn, K. Human Anatomy and Physiology, 7th edn. San
Francisco: Pearson International, 2007.
3 Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee and Ambulance
Service Association. UK Ambulance Service Clinical Practice Guidelines.
London: JRCALC/ASA, 2006.
4 American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma. Advanced Life
Support Course for Physicians. Chicago, Illinois: American College of
Surgeons, 1993.
5 McNarry A, Goldhill D. Simple bedside assessment of level of
consciousness: comparison of two simple assessment scales with the
Glasgow coma scale. Anaesthesia 2004;59:34–37.
6 Gill M, Martens K, Lynch E, Salih A, Green S. Interrater reliability of 3
simplified neurologic scales applied to adults presenting to the emergency
department with altered level of consciousness. Ann Emerg Med
2007;49(4):403–407.
7 Teasdale G, Jennett B. Assessment of coma and impaired consciousness:
a practical scale. Lancet 1974;2:81–84.
8 Palmer R, Knight J. Assessment of altered conscious level in clinical
practice. Br J Nurs 2006;15(22):1255–1258.
9 Gill MR, Reiley DG, Green SM. Interratter reliability of Glasgow Coma
Scales in the Emergency Department. Ann Emerg Med 2004;43:215–223.
10 Gill MR, Windemuth R, Steele R et al. A comparison of the Glasgow
Coma Scale score to simplified alternative scores for the prediction of
traumatic brain injury outcomes. Ann Emerg Med 2005;45:37–42.
11 Waterhouse, C. The Glasgow Coma Scale and other neurological
observations. Nurs Stand 2005;19(33) 56-64.
12 National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Head Injury: Triage,
assessment, investigation and early management of head injury in infants,
children and adults. London: NICE, 2007.
242

13 Fischer, J, Mathiesthon C. The history of the Glasgow Coma Scale:
implications for practice. Crit Care Nurs 2001;23(4):52–58.
14 National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Head Injury: Triage,
assessment, investigation and early management of head injury in infants,
children and adults. London :NICE, 2007.
15
Stewart
N.
Neurological
observations.
Profess
Nurse
1996;11(6):377–378.
16
Edwards
S.
Using
the
Glasgow
Coma
Scale.
Br
J
Nurs
2001;10(2):92–101.
17 Barker E. Neuroscience Nursing: A Spectrum of Care, 2nd edn. St
Louis: Mosby, 2002.
18
National
Neuroscience
Benchmarking
Group.
Neurological
Assessment. London:NNBG, 2006.
19 Dawes E, Lloyd H, Durham L. Monitoring and recording patients’
neurological observations. Nurs Stand 2007;22(10):40–45.
20 Littlejohns L. Ask the experts. Crit Care Nurse 2007;27(1);62–64.
21 Cox N, Roper T. Clinical Skills. Oxford:Oxford University Press,
2006.
22 McCance K, Heuther S. Pathophysiology: The Biologic Basis for
Disease in Adults and children. St. Louis: Elsevier, 2006.
23 Dougherty L, Lister S. The Royal Marsden Hospital Manual of
Clinical Nursing Procedures, 6th edn. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing,
2006.
24 National Institute for Clinical Excellence. Stroke: Diagnosis and initial
management of acute stroke and transient ischaemic attack (TIA).
National Clinical Guideline for Chronic Conditions. London: NICE,
2008.
25 Williams G, Pickup J (Eds) Handbook of Diabetes, 3rd edn.
Oxford:Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
26 National Institute of Clinical Excellence. Management of Type 2
Diabetes. London: NICE, 2002.
243

27 Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. UK Ambulance
Service Clinical Practice Guidelines. Warwick: JRCALC, 2006.
28 Medical Devices Agency. Management and Use of IVD Point of Care
Test Devices. London: The Stationary Office, 2002.
29 Wallymahmed M. Capillary blood glucose monitoring. Nurs Stand
2007;21(38):35–38.
30 Toledo F, Taylor A. Alternative site testing at the earlobe tip. Diabetes
Care 2004; 27(2): 616.
31
Burden
M.
Diabetes:
Blood
glucose
monitoring.
Nurs
Times
2001;97(8):36–39.
32 Cave L. Effects of skin preparation on blood glucose monitoring
results. J Diabetes Nurs 2002; March–April.
33 National Library for Health. Primary Care Question Answering
Service,
2005.
[on-line:
www.clinicalanswers.nhs.uk/
index.cfm?question=1386].
34 Royal College of Nursing. Position Statement on Injection Technique.
London: RCN, 2002.
35 Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Capillary Blood Glucose Testing.
Albert Einstein College of Medicine Research & Training Centre, 1997.
244

Chapter 8
History taking and
communication
Content
Definitions
Key communication skills
Communication models
The practitioner–patient relationship
A standardised history framework
Questioning techniques
Consent
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
The taking of a medical history is a vast area that is acquired with both
experience and knowledge. It is not the intention of this chapter to explain
the full history taking requirements of all presentations of patients but to
introduce key components and skills involved in the history taking
process. There is little evidence to support specific approaches to history
taking, however it is universally agreed that history taking is of paramount
importance.
245

Definitions
History taking is the process of gaining a patient’s account of their illness
or injury and the eliciting of further information that is required to lead to
a diagnosis, prioritise care and evaluate the impact of a patient’s
symptoms upon their lives. A medical history can be viewed as a
conversation with a purpose, that of gaining information about a patient,
their life and their condition. Taking a history is not a passive process; the
practitioner needs to guide the patient so that a comprehensive history can
be obtained. The importance of taking a history cannot be overestimated
in the assessment and treatment of any patient.
To gain a comprehensive history the practitioner needs to understand the
principles of communication with a wide variety of client groups and the
importance of a structured yet flexible approach to history taking. There is
an undoubted need for effective history taking and communication in the
assessment of any patient group and professional role, therefore the
underlying skills of gaining a medical history are a core competency for
any health professional.1,2,3
Key communication skills
The patient–carer relationship should be based upon openness, trust and
good communication.1,2 It is therefore essential to have a good
understanding of effective communication skills. Whilst there are no set
rules for what is effective communication, there are some key skills that
are of undoubted value:
•
Be honest.
•
Avoid medical jargon as it may confuse or mislead patients.
•
Speak clearly and use unambiguous language.
•
Actively listen to the patient, ask for and respect their views. This
means encouraging the patient to talk by looking interested and
consider encouraging comments such as, ‘Tell me more about…’
•
Try to develop a rapport, history taking requires honesty from both
yourself and the patient, they must feel able to communicate any
concerns they may have.
246

•
Provide positive support and empathy, this may enhance health
outcomes and the practitioner relationship.
•
Consider verbal and non-verbal communication skills (see Table
8.1).
THINK
Are there any situations where communication can be especially difficult? Think
of your own practice, what groups of patients are more difficult to communicate
with and what can you do to improve this?
Table 8.1 Key examples of verbal and non-verbal communication skills.
Adapted from Mehrabian (1981)3
Non-verbal skills
Verbal skills
• Eye contact
• Appropriate language
• Interested posture
• Avoid jargon and technical language
• Hand gestures
• Consider the pitch and tone of your voice
• Nodding of the head
(provides a positive
emphasis of listening)
• Speak at a pace that can be easily understood
• Facial gestures
• Speak at a volume that can be easily heard but
not overpowering of lacking consideration for
confidentiality
Communication models
There are a variety of communication models that are used and have been
used in healthcare over many years. However the use of these models is a
blend of personal preference and adaptation to specific situations. There
are currently two main models that are commonly seen in practice. Each
has inevitable benefits and flaws. The most commonly used models are:
•
The biomedical model – This is a practitioner-led model, whereby
the focus is upon the disease and subsequent management.
•
The patient-centred model – This model seeks to holistically assess
the patient and shares the decision making and power between the
practitioner and the patient.
247

The biomedical model has recently fallen out of favour amongst the
medical profession due to the rigid focus and lack of consideration for the
patient experience and subjective effects of the disease process.4 The
patient-centred model seeks to understand the patient’s experience of the
disease whilst considering the whole person and agree a management plan
in conjunction with the patient’s wishes. There is no evidence to suggest
that either model is more effective or desirable; however consensus of
opinion suggests that the patient should be treated as a whole person as
opposed to a disease or injury.1–3
The practitioner–patient
relationship
This should not be mistaken for having a relationship with a patient! Any
health or medical assessment and history should be considered as a
partnership with the patient whereby the two parties work together toward
a set goal (often a cure or appropriate treatment). The broad role of the
practitioner in this relationship is to:
•
Be polite, considerate and honest.
•
To treat patients with dignity.
•
Treat each patient as an individual.
•
Respect patients’ privacy and rights of confidentiality.
•
To empower the patient in caring for themselves.
A standardised history
framework
This is a structured approach to history taking that complements
documentation skills as discussed within this book. It is generally
accepted that it is important to have a logical and systematic approach to
history taking to ensure quality and adequacy in a health history. As an
element of this, consent must be sought prior to any assessment process
248

including physical assessment and questioning. A standardised history
taking structure can be seen below.
•
Introductions
•
The presenting complaint
•
The history of the presenting complaint
•
Past medical history
•
Medication history
•
Allergies
•
Family history
•
Social history
•
Sexual history
•
Mental health
•
Occupational history
•
Systematic enquiry
•
Further information from a third party
•
Summary.
Adapted from Thomas and Monaghan (2006)4; Douglas G, Nicol F,
Robertson C. (2005).5
This outline above is just a guide as it will not always be appropriate or
relevant to include all areas, for example in the critically ill patient such a
history could detract from more pressing issues such as treatment. Each
section of the history process will now be broken down and discussed
individually.
Introductions
This is a key element in establishing a rapport with the patient and can
provide information vital to the assessment of the patient. Greeting the
patient with a simple hello is often an adequate verbal approach, as
comments such as ‘good morning’ may not always be appropriate for a
patient who may receive bad news. The shaking of hands can provide vital
information about a patient such as their peripheral circulation (i.e. cold
hands) and their neurological status (loss of power). However this may not
always be appropriate. Take each consultation upon its own merits. It is
vital to gain the name of the patient at the commencement of the history as
reliance upon terms such as ‘my dear’ or ‘sweetheart’ may be
misconstrued. The use of first names or surnames can also be problematic,
249

as some patients may prefer to be called ‘Mr or Mrs Smith’; however
some patients would rather be called by their first name. It is simplest just
to ask the patient what they would like to be called, as there are no strict
rules. Don’t forget to introduce yourself; this can be either just your name
or may include your title (i.e. Paramedic/Technician/Emergency Care
Assistant).
The presenting complaint
It is essential to define the problem that has caused the patient to seek
medical assistance. This can often be a difficult to ask question as terms
such as ‘What are you complaining of?’ or ‘Why have you called for an
ambulance?’ may be misinterpreted as implying they should not have
called or they are ‘complainers’. As with many areas of history taking it is
important to choose a technique suited to each individual. Open questions
such as ‘What would you say your main problem is?’ or ‘How can I help
you today?’ may be more appropriate.
The history of the presenting
complaint
To evaluate the presenting complaint further, questions need to be asked
that are aimed at working out the cause of the complaint. The required
questions to achieve this can vary widely and are dependent upon
experience and knowledge in terms of depth of questioning. Key
components of the history of the presenting complaint are:
•
Location of the symptom
•
Duration of symptoms
•
Onset of symptoms (i.e. provocation and worsening of symptoms)
•
Aggravating and alleviating factors
•
Any attributable causes
•
Previous episodes
•
Severity of symptoms (i.e. pain score)
•
Nature of the symptoms (i.e. are the pains continuous)
•
Any medication use to relieve symptoms.
250

Past medical history
The previous medical history of a patient is often key in understanding
current medical conditions. There is often a strong probability that new
symptoms may be caused by long-standing medical conditions. Also
consideration of medical history is paramount for safety in treatment
regimes as contra-indicated treatments must be avoided. It is important to
remember that many patients may not consider conditions such as asthma
or hypertension (amongst others) to be significant. It is therefore
important to ask not only a generalised open question such as, ‘Do you
have any medical conditions?’ but to consider asking about specific
conditions such as, ‘Do you have or have you had asthma, diabetes, heart
attacks, epilepsy, strokes, high blood pressure?’. This list is not exhaustive
so please consider ruling out any history that could relate to the presenting
complaint. Do not forget to ask about any previous surgery as this may
highlight further medical complications.
Medication history
This can be very important for a number of reasons that may relate to a
current complaint, including:
•
Contra-indication of treatments
•
Side effects of current medications
•
Identification of current medical conditions.
It
is
important
to
consider
both
prescribed
and
non-prescribed
medications, alongside any herbal remedies as they often have a medicinal
quality that may affect treatment. Therefore it is useful to ask, ‘Do you
take any medicines from your doctor/pharmacist/or any herbal remedies?’.
It may also be useful to expand this to enquire, ‘Do you take any tablets,
inhalers, or drops for anything?’. This may elicit further information.
Ideally the patient will have their medication with them; this allows for
you to review them thoroughly paying attention to dates, dosages,
compliance with medications and frequency.
251

Allergies
Consideration of allergies is not only key to the safe administration of
medications and treatments, but it may also provide clues to underlying
causes of symptoms. Prior to any medication provision the checking of
allergies is vital. Ask the patient if they ‘have any allergies or medications
that they cannot take?’ this will allow for identification of not only
allergies but often medications that they do not perceive as allergies but
have been informed not to take by their GP or other healthcare
professional. If any allergies or other medications are raised it is useful to
clarify what reasons underlie the stated problem. This may give rise to
further medical history not already stated.
Family history
With a prevalence of genetic inheritance in certain conditions such as
heart disease or cancer among others, the consideration of family medical
history may be important. Consider asking:
•
Has anyone in your family had a similar problem?
•
Do any diseases run in the family?
•
Have any of your family members died at a young age? And if so
how?
Social history
This can help to build a general picture of the patient and how the illness/
injury
is affecting
their
life.
It is important
to consider
family
commitments, occupation, where they live, quality of life at the present
time and hand dominance (in the case of upper limb injury). All of these
factors may influence either the establishment of a diagnosis or treatment
regimen. For example it would be inappropriate to leave an elderly patient
at home following a fall if they were unable to cope with the stairs to a
flat. It may also be of relevance to enquire about smoking and alcohol
consumption as it may relate to the current illness or treatment for the
presenting complaint. Areas that should be considered as a part of a
holistic social assessment include:
252

•
The ability to cook or provide nutrition for self.
•
The ability to undertake personal hygiene activities (i.e. washing).
•
Social conditions such as heating and ability to maintain a healthy
living environment.
•
The ability to dress themselves.
•
The availability of social support such as friends, family or carers.
•
Access to healthcare should the need re-arise.
Sexual history
This is not commonly an area for enquiry in the prehospital field and if
required should be undertaken sensitively. It may be of relevance in any
patient however based upon presenting symptoms (such as vaginal
discharge) or history provided.
Mental health
A mental health history is not commonly undertaken in the prehospital
setting, however in cases such as deliberate self-harm it may be of utmost
importance. It is important to recognise any mental health concerns. The
patient should be assessed for issues such a low mood, anxiety, depression
and risk of self-harm. Elements of the history that may indicate mental
health concerns include; alcohol use, drug use (prescribed or illicit),
previous use of mental health services or abnormal behaviour. Tools such
as the SADPERSONS risk assessment chart may be of use when assessing
the risk of deliberate self-harm as is now commonly in use in both nursing
and pre-hospital environments (see Table 8.2). However it should be
noted that there is limited evidence to support the use of such scales due to
the complex nature of the assessment of suicide risk.6,7
Systematic enquiry
The purpose of the systematic enquiry is to uncover symptoms that the
patient may have forgotten to mention or not have considered a symptom.
The systematic enquiry involves questioning on a variety of body systems
and symptoms to exclude or diagnose conditions. If positive answers are
253

elicited then more focused examination of body systems and symptoms
can be undertaken. Some key examples of systematic enquiry symptoms
can be seen in Table 8.3.
Table 8.2 SADPERSONS risk assessment.8
SADPERSONS assessment
Sex
Female Male
Age
19–45
< 19 >45
Depression or hopelessness
No
Yes
Previous attempts
No
Yes
Excessive alcohol or drugs
No
Yes
Rational thinking
Yes
No
Separated/divorced/widowed
No
Yes
Organised or serious attempts
No
Yes
Social support
Yes
No
Stated future suicide intent
No
Yes
Number of ticks in right hand column indicates score
<3 low risk
3–6 medium risk
>6 high risk
Table 8.3 Systematic Review: Key points. Adapted from Douglas G,
Nicol F, Robertson C. (2005).5
General health
• Well-being: Energy
• Appetite (loss or increased): Sleep patterns
• Weight loss/gain: Mood
Cardiovascular system
• Chest pain: Breathlessness
• Orthopnoea: Palpitations
• Ankle/sacral oedema: Dizziness
Respiratory system
• Shortness of breath: Cough
• Phlegm/sputum: Wheeze
• Haemoptysis: Chest pain
• Exercise tolerance
254

Gastrointestinal system • Nausea and vomiting: Haematemesis
• Indigestion: Heartburn
• Abdominal pain: Change in colour of stools
• Difficulty swallowing: Change in bowel habit
Genitourinary system
• Pain passing urine: Frequency passing urine
• Discharge: Blood in urine
• Last menstrual period: Unprotected sexual intercourse
Nervous system
• Headaches: Visual disturbances
• Fits: Altered sensation
• Weakness: Dizziness or faints
Musculoskeletal
• Joint pain or stiffness: Mobility
• Falls: Joint swelling
Endocrine
• Excessive thirst: Heat or cold intolerance
• Change in sweating
Other
• Bleeding or bruising: Skin rashes
THINK
Are these questions always needed? In what situations might you alter these
questions and how? For example would all of these enquiries be useful in a patient
with cardiac chest pain?
Further information from a third
party
It may be pertinent to gain further information from a third party,
especially in cases where the patient is unable to provide a valid or
reliable history, for example young children or unconscious patients. If
such information is used remember to document this and consider the
reliability of third party data at all times, as it may not always be correct.
Third party information can be a vital tool in assessing the effects of an
illness or injury upon the life of a patient, or may provide sensitive
information that the patient may not have mentioned.
255

Summary
Upon completing history taking it may be useful to clarify the main points
with the patient to ensure that you have understood and recorded them
correctly. This also allows the patient to add any further information that
they may wish.
Questioning techniques
There are a variety of questioning techniques that can be utilised in the
assessment and history taking process. These are commonly grouped into
five main areas; open, closed, limiting, leading and comparative questions.
Each style of question has its own benefits and flaws, therefore it is not
recommended to use a single style but to adapt the questioning process to
gain maximal information. Open questions are broad questions such as,
‘Tell me about your health problems?’ that allow for the recipient to
respond with a wide array of information. It is important that if these
questions are used that time is taken to listen to the responses. Whilst open
questions can provide a great breadth of information, there is often little
structure to the answers, therefore listening is essential. These questions
can also be time-consuming and are not always suited to a time-critical
environment.
Closed questions are narrowly focused and typically provide the option of
yes or no answers. These questions are often used to clarify issues and can
provide key information in a brief period of time. However these
questions may limit answers to such a narrow field that key information
may not be gained. Examples of closed questions are: ‘Do you have any
allergies?’ or ‘Does breathing affect your chest pain?’. It is important to
note that if a closed question is asked, such as ‘Are you allergic to
aspirin?’, that the patient will only provide the information requested
despite the fact that they may be allergic to other medications or
substances.
Limiting questions are often utilised to gain clarity and focus as they are
designed to limit the answers to one key area or subject, for example ‘Do
you have any heart problems?’. This again can be useful in clarifying
256

issues or gaining specific information, but can limit the amount of
information provided in response. Leading questions are the use of
questions that suggest the answer within the question. These questions
should be avoided wherever possible as they do not provide the patient
with the freedom to answer truthfully. A common example of such a
question is, ‘You don’t want to go to hospital do you?’; whilst this
provides the patient the opportunity to respond, it is clear from the
question that the patient is being encouraged to say no.
Comparative questions can be useful in the assessment process. A
comparative question allows the patient to compare two things, for
example ‘Is the pain worse than your normal pain?’. This can provide vital
information into how the current situation is perceived against a prior
experience. Whilst there is no evidence to suggest that one technique is
superior to another, review of questioning skills suggests that the use of
differing methods can be used dependant upon each individual situation.
THINK
Think of different types of patient; are there any types that may suit a particular
style of questioning and why?
Consent
Prior to undertaking any healthcare intervention or action including the
collection of a history it is imperative that informed consent is gained.9,10
Patients can only provide valid consent if they are able to act under their
own free will, understand what they are agreeing to and have enough
information upon which to base a decision. Consent can be verbal, written
or implied. Often consent for history taking and assessment will be
implied as the patient will willingly pass on information after seeking
help. However it is best practice to enquire whether the patient is happy
for you to ask pertinent questions.
Scenario
You are called to an 80-year-old patient who has fallen in her own home; she is
complaining of hip pain and is unable to mobilise. She appears confused and is unable to
recall the day, date and where she is. You decide that she has a potential neck of femur
257

fracture and wish to convey her to the hospital for further assessment. Unfortunately the
patient refuses to attend the hospital and her husband tells you that you must take her to
hospital as he cannot cope with caring for her. What consent issues does this raise? What
actions could you take to assist this patient?
Further useful information upon consent and capacity can be found in the
Mental Capacity Act (2005).11
Chapter Key Points
1. There are a variety of formats for history taking and each individual practi
tioner should base their approach around each individual situation.
2.
The
importance
of
a
thorough
and
objective
history
cannot
be
underestimated.
3. It is essential to consider both verbal and non-verbal communication
techniques to ensure that a thorough history is gained.
References and Further reading
1 General Medical Council. Good Medical Practice. London: GMC, 2006.
2 Health Professions Council. Standards of Proficiency: Paramedics.
London: HPC, 2007.
3 Mehrabian A. Silent messages: Implicit Communication of Emotions
and Attitudes, 2nd edn. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1981.
4 Thomas J, Monaghan T. The Oxford Handbook of Clinical Examination
and Practical Skills. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
5 Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. MacLeod’s Clinical Examination.
London: Elsevier, 2005.
6 Khan S. SADPERSONS Scale in the Assessment of Self-harm Risk.
BestBets Review, 2008. Accessed on-line at: http://www.bestbets.org/
cgi-bin/bets.pl?record=01556
7 Department of Health. Best Practice in Managing Risk. London:
HMSO, 2007.
8 Patterson et al. Evaluation of suicidal patients: The SADPERSONS
scale. Psychosomatics 1983;24(4):343–349.
258

9 Department of Health. Good Practice in Consent Implementation Guide:
Consent to Examination or Treatment. London: The Stationary Office,
2001.
10 Health Professions Council. Code of Conduct, Performance and Ethics.
London: HPC, 2007.
11 Her Majesty’s Government. Mental Capacity Act. London: HMSO,
2005.
259

Chapter 9
Documentation and record
keeping
Content
Definitions
Why keep healthcare records?
What constitutes good medical records?
Models of record keeping
Abbreviations
Key documents in record keeping and documentation
The Caldicott Guardian
Electronic patient records
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Record keeping is a professional duty of care for all healthcare
practitioners; therefore failure to maintain reasonable standards can have
both professional and legal implications. High quality record keeping and
documentation is linked to quality patient care, as such this chapter will
provide guidance upon standards of record keeping, identifying key
legislative documents and professional requirements.
260

Definitions
The Data Protection Act 19981 defines a health record as:
‘any information relating to the physical or mental health or condition of
an individual that has been made by or on the behalf of a health
professional in connection with the care of that individual. This includes a
variety of materials including case report forms, printouts from electronic
measuring devices, photographs and computerised records.’2,3
In the year 2004–05, the ambulance services in England alone received
more than 5.6 million emergency calls and undertook more than 12.8
million planned patient journeys4 this resulting in a vast quantity of
healthcare records.
Whilst there are a variety of forms that health records can take, the focus
of this chapter will be upon note taking and manual/electronic patient case
notes. It is important to note that each individual workplace will have a
differing set of documentation requirements however adherence to these
general principles is widely accepted.
Why keep healthcare
records?
There is considered opinion that good record keeping is a mark of a
skilled and safe practitioner.2,3,5 However, beyond this opinion there are
many functions served by healthcare records and these reasons can be split
into primary and secondary functions (see Box 9.1).
The primary purpose of healthcare records is to support quality patient
care and maximise safety for all parties.6,9 The ability to utilise
documentation as an aide memoire can assist in the provision of timely
and effective patient care. Within a multidisciplinary healthcare system
the ability to communicate is key, with both written and verbal
communications commonplace. To ensure this continuity and quality of
care, professional standards and expectations are set by the registering
261

bodies of all healthcare professions.5,7,8 Records are a valuable resource
because of the information they can and should contain. High-quality
information underpins the delivery of high-quality evidence based
healthcare and other key service deliverables. Information has most value
when it is accurate, up to date and accessible when it is needed.8,11
A secondary function of health records as a medico-legal document is a
core function in an ever-increasing litigation aware society. With
increased public awareness of litigation and complaints policies, accurate
and comprehensive records are essential in safeguarding the healthcare
practitioner.10 This is perhaps best emphasised by the Nursing and
Midwifery Council (2002)5 who state that, ‘If it is not recorded, it has not
been done’. The value of high quality accurate records is key in any
complaint or claim that may arise; as such resources are a key piece of
evidence.12
Box 9.1 Primary and Secondary functions of
healthcare records. Adapted from Mann and
Williams (2003)6 and Department of Health
(2006)11
Primary functions: Supporting direct patient care
•
Aide memoire
•
Communication
Secondary functions: Medico-legal record
Source of information for:
•
Clinical audit and research
•
Resource allocation
•
Epidemiology
•
Service planning
•
Performance monitoring
•
Evidence based clinical care
•
To meet legal requirements, including requests from patients under subject
access provisions of the Data Protection Act or the Freedom of Information
Act
As well as enabling high quality care for patients, good medical and health
records are of value in improving standards of care. The continued audit
of records plays an important part of the clinical governance process.
Clinical governance was introduced in 1998, at the centre of the NHS
262

drive to create a modern, patient-led health service, with the fundamental
aim being the provision of responsive, consistent, high-quality and safe
patient care. Clinical governance was born out of the need for
accountability for the safe delivery of health services. This was due partly
to the public’s and professionals’ perception of systemic failings within
the NHS. Clinical governance was defined in the 1998 consultation
document ‘A First Class Service: Quality in the New NHS’ (p.33)13 as ‘A
framework through which NHS organisations are accountable for
continuously improving the quality of their services and safeguarding high
standards of care by creating an environment in which excellence in
clinical care will flourish’. Through high quality documentation and
record keeping the health service is able to monitor a variety of areas such
as epidemiology of disease and the effectiveness of current treatments.
Within this culture high quality care is proposed to flourish.
What constitutes good
medical records?
Whilst the need to keep accurate patient, client and user records is
recognised by the bodies that govern healthcare practice including the
Health Professions Council (HPC),7 General Medical Council (GMC)8
and the Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC),5 there is currently very
little evidence to support a specific standard of record keeping. Current
guidelines are based upon expert opinion of what should constitute good
medical records and documentation.
Recommendations
•
Records should be clear, accurate and legible, reporting the relevant
clinical findings, the decisions made, the information given to
patients, and any drugs prescribed or other investigation or
treatment.8
•
Record any important negative findings that occur. For example the
absence of a non-blanching rash in a sick child.2,3
263

•
Records should be made at the same time as the events you are
recording or as soon as possible afterwards.8
•
You must keep notes for any patient that is treated or who asks you
for professional advice or services.7
•
Any records should be objective – opinions should be based upon
facts that you have recorded not speculation. Remember the patient
has a right to view their records, therefore any unjustified
statements may be disputed.2,3
•
First hand – if the information has been passed to you by anyone
other than the patient, record that person’s name and position.2,3
For example are they a friend or a relative?
•
Records should be tamper proof – any attempt to amend records
should be apparent. For example write in pen, not pencil.
•
Records should be the original documentation; any alterations
should be dated, timed and signed. This is to make it clear that it is
not an attempt to tamper with the document but to make a
correction or addition.2,3,7
•
If you make a correction to any health record the data should not be
erased or made difficult to read; instead it should be made clear that
it has been superseded.7 For example place a single line through it.
Again any change must be signed, timed and dated.
•
Involve the client and/or carers in the documentation process.18
•
Ensure that records are kept confidential and secure.18
•
Only use accepted terminology in health records.19
Models of record keeping
Whilst there is no evidence to support a single method of documenting
clinical findings the principle of a consistent, organised and structured
approach is vital. Below you will find a suggested model for the free text
documentation of any patient (Box 9.2); this is by no means the only
model available and each individual practitioner should consider what
model is best suited to their own and organisational needs. The described
format provides basis for documenting any clinical episode.
Whilst this model encourages a thorough and comprehensive examination,
it may not always be the most suited to a critically ill patient, therefore it
264

can be modified with irrelevant sections being minimised. The use of a
single structure will allow for continued standards of documentation to be
adhered to.
Box 9.2 Documenting the findings adapted from
Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. (2005) Macleod’s
Clinical Examination22 and Bickley L. (2003) Bates’
Guide to Physical Examination and History
Taking23
Demographic Details – Always ensure that there is a record of the patients name,
age, date of birth, address, source of referral (i.e. 999 call), GP, source of the
history and the date/time of the examination.
Presenting Complaint (PC) – State the major problem in the patients own words.
Medical terminology is not required.
History of Presenting Complaint (HPC) – Describe the onset, nature and course
of each symptom. You may have to paraphrase the patients’ words. Consider
highlighting key facts by underlining.
Past Medical History (PMH) – Provide all details of the patients’ current and
past medical problems including medical and surgical history. Include important
negatives also, for example exclude previous myocardial infarction or angina in
patients presenting with chest pain.
Drug History (DH) – Record all current prescribed and over the counter
medications. Also consider herbal remedies that the patient may be taking.
Allergies – Document any allergies the patient states they have.
Family History (FH) – Consider any health issues within the patients close
family, for example early death due to cardiac disease in a parent.
Social History (SH) – Consider and document any relevant social issues, for
example occupation, family/social care support, smoking or illicit drug use, or
even hand dominance (especially in hand or arm injury).
On examination (O/E) – Provide a general examination of the patient, for
example are they alert? Orientated? Pale? What is their mental and physical
status?
Respiratory System (RS) – Document all respiratory information, for example
chest sounds, use of accessory muscles and percussion.
Cardiovascular System (CVS) – Document all relevant cardiovascular
investigations and observations, for example pulse, blood pressure and
electrocardiograph.
Central Nervous System (CNS) – Include all relevant neurological examinations,
for example Glasgow Coma Score, pupil reaction and Face, arm speech test
(FAST).
265

Abdominal System (AS) – Consider any relevant examination or observations,
for example pulsatile masses, scars, guarding and bowel sounds.
Musculoskeletal System (MSS) – Document any relevant musculoskeletal
examinations. Consider gait, pain swelling, deformities and ranges of movement
for joints.
Clinical Diagnosis or Impression – Record any potential diagnoses.
Plan – Document treatments, investigations and any information given to the
patient.
THINK
Review your own documentation. Do you keep to these suggested guidelines?
Would you be happy for the patient or the coroner to view your documentation?
Abbreviations
The use of abbreviations in health records remains controversial, the use
of abbreviations can save time however they can also lead to problems.
Any abbreviation used should be unambiguous and be universally
understandable,3
for
example
the
use
of
PID
can
mean
pelvic
inflammatory disease or prolapsed intervertebral disc. The use of
humorous or sarcastic abbreviations are definitely not recommended and
have no place in health records. Remember the patient has the right of
access to their records.
Key documents in record
keeping and documentation
There have been numerous key documents and legislation that have
impacts upon standards of record keeping and documentation for the
individual practitioner and organisation; these include:
266

Access to Health Records Act (1990)
Department of Health14
The Access to Health Records Act (1990)14 was published to establish a
right of access to health records by the individuals to whom they relate
and for others to allow for the correction of inaccuracies, the avoidance of
contractual obligations and any related purposes. Whilst this act allows for
access it does require written application for approval.
The Patient’s Charter (1991)
Department of Health15
In the following year the Patient’s Charter (1991)15 empowered patients
and their relatives in the provision of their healthcare, allowing them
access to standards of care and increased patient choice. This was replaced
in 2001 by ‘Your Guide to the NHS: getting the most from your National
Health Service’18 a guide to all standards and services within the National
Health Service.
The Data Protection Act (1998)
Department of Health1
In 1998 the Data Protection Act1 was revised to encompass advances in
healthcare records and technology, updating the previous act in 1984. This
act sought to make new provision for the regulation of the processing of
information relating to individuals, including the obtaining, holding, use
or disclosure of such information.
Freedom of Information Act (2000)
Department of Health17
The Freedom of Information Act (2000)17 superseded previous legislation
and was fully implemented in 2005. The Act gives a general right of
267

access to all types of recorded information held by public authorities; the
Act does however set out exemptions to this right. Any request that falls
within the bounds of the exemptions must be considered using a ‘public
interest’ test prior to access.
Essence of Care (2003) National
Health Service16
This document
was published
as a toolkit
for benchmarking
of
fundamental aspects of care including record keeping. Collaboratively
written by patients, carers and professionals Essence of Care set out
standards of care and best practice throughout the NHS. This document
proposed seven key factors in record keeping that were considered best
practice including:
•
Access to current health care records.
•
Integration – patient and professional partnership.
•
Integration of records – across professional and organisational
boundaries.
•
Holding lifelong records.
•
High quality practice – evidence based guidance.
•
High quality practice – Records should demonstrate that care
follows evidence based guidance.
•
Security and confidentiality – Records should be safeguarded
through explicit measures.
Records Management: NHS Code of
Practice (2006)11
The Records Management: NHS Code of Practice was published by the
Department of Health as a guide to the required standards of practice in
the management of records for those who work within or under contract to
NHS organisations in England. It is based on current legal requirements
and professional best practice as agreed by a committee of professional
representatives from all areas of the NHS. The Code provides a key
component of information governance arrangements for the NHS; as such
268

it is subject to continual review as best practice and records management
evolve. This Code of Practice relates to all forms of record that may be
required in practice, setting one key standard for the individual
practitioner, stating ‘Under the Public Records Act all NHS employees are
responsible for any records that they create or use in the course of their
duties. Thus any records created by an employee of the NHS are public
records and may be subject to both legal and professional obligations’.
In addition a variety of professional standards have been introduced by the
professional bodies that govern healthcare practitioners in the United
Kingdom, these include:
•
Guidelines for Records and Record Keeping (2005) Nursing and
Midwifery Council.5
•
Code
of
Conduct,
Performance
and
Ethics
(2007)
Health
Professions Council.7
•
Standards of Proficiency – Paramedics (2007) Health Professions
Council.19
•
Good Medical Practice (2006) General Medical Council.8
These standards offer key overarching guidance upon record keeping in
each specific profession, therefore paramedics will be governed by the
standards of the Health Professions Council,7,19 nurses by the Nursing and
Midwifery Council5 and doctors by the General Medical Council.8 A
review of these documents suggests that the expectations of each
governing body differ very little, with only generic standards as set out
earlier in this chapter.
The Caldicott Guardian
In 1997 a report on the review of patient identifiable information (The
Caldicott Report) put forward a series of recommendations for the
regulation of the use and transfer of patient identifiable information within
the NHS and to non-NHS bodies.20 The aim of these recommendations
was to ensure that information was only shared for justified purposes and
only the minimum information required was shared. Central to these
requirements was the appointment of a ‘Guardian’ in each trust or
organisation to oversee the sharing of information within these regulations
269

(The Caldicott Guardian). The appointed guardian must ensure that any
patient identifiable information released must meet a set of agreed
principles.20
Electronic patient records
In recent years there have been moves to modernise the record keeping
infrastructure within the NHS by the evolution of the electronic patient
record.21 The Governmental organisation Connecting for Health has
sought to introduce a central electronic record spine within the NHS to
allow for 24/7 access to patient records. This had had increasing influence
upon the Ambulance Service and Acute Care Services with the intended
introduction of an Electronic Patient Report Form (EPRF) in 2008. Whilst
the final format of these care records are yet to be published an
implemented the standards of record keeping required will undoubtedly
remain.
Whilst this is a new initiative standards for documentation and record
keeping will continue to be set by previous guidance.
Scenario
You have been called to a patient who has been assaulted in the street and suffered limb
and facial injuries. You are not concerned that the patient has been knocked out, but feel
the wounds need assessment and closure at the local hospital. The patient refuses to
attend the emergency department. What details do you need to document upon this case?
Consider both clinical and non-clinical issues.
Chapter Key Points
1. The recording of patient and clinical information is paramount in a quality
healthcare system.
2. There is a wide range of guidance provided for documentation standards to
ensure that any documentation and care is logical, well-structured and
demonstrates adherence to key principles.
3. It is essential to review your own documentation and compare how you
document episodes according to these standards. If you do not meet these
standards you may place yourself or the patient at risk.
References and Further reading
270

1 Department of Health. Data Protection Act. London: HMSO, 1998.
2 Medical Protection Society. Keeping Medical Records: A Guide for
Medical Students. London: Medical Protection Society, 2005.
3 Medical Protection Society. Keeping Medical Records: A Complete
Guide for GPs. London: Medical Protection Society, 2005.
4 National Statistics Office–Health and Social Care Information Centre.
Ambulance Service Bulletin 2005/01/HSCIC. London: HMSO, 2005.
5 Nursing and Midwifery Council. Guidelines for Records and Record
Keeping. London: NMC, 2005.
6 Mann R, Williams J. Standards in medical record keeping. Clin Med
2003;3(4):329–332.
7 Health Professions Council. Standards of Conduct, Performance and
Ethics. London: HPC, 2007.
8 General Medical Council. Good Medical Practice. London: GMC, 2006.
9 Royal College of Physicians. Generic Medical Record Keeping
Standards. London: RCP, 2007.
10
Owen
K.
Documentation
in
nursing
practice.
Nurs
Stand
2005;19(32):48–49.
11 Department of Health. Records Management: NHS Codes of Practice.
London: HMSO, 2006.
12 National Health Service Litigation Authority. Clinical Negligence
Litigation: A Guide for Clinicians. London: NHSLA, 2003.
13 National Health Service. A First Class Service: Quality in the New
NHS. London: NHS, 1998.
14 Department of Health. Access to Health Records Act 1990. London:
HMSO, 1990.
15 Department of Health. The Patient’s Charter. London: HMSO, 1991.
16 Department of Health. Essence of Care. London: HMSO, 2003.
271

17 Department of Health. Freedom of Information Act. London: TSO,
2000.
18 Department of Health. Your Guide to the NHS: Getting the Most from
your National Health Service, 2001.
19 Health Professions Council. Paramedics–Standards of Proficiency.
London: HPC, 2007.
20 Department of Health. The Caldicott Guardian Manual. London:
HMSO, 2006.
21 Department of Health. Delivering 21st Century IT Support for the
NHS: National Strategic Programme. London: HMSO, 2002.
22
Douglas
G,
Nicol
F,
Robertson
C
(Eds)
Macleod’s
Clinical
Examination. London: Elsevier, 2005.
23 Bickley L. Bates’ Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking.
London: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2003.
272

Chapter 10
Drug administration
Content
Definitions
Legislation related to paramedic administration of drugs
Drug formulations
Drug documentation
Storage of drugs
Routes of administration
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
The paramedic has access to an increasing number of drugs and has a
legal and ethical responsibility to deliver the correct dose of the correct
drug to the correct patient at the correct time. An understanding of
pharmacology and the associated subjects is essential if drugs are to be
delivered safely and legally.
Definitions
The definition of a drug is complex and depends to a certain extent upon
who is being asked to define the term. In medicine, the World Health
Organization suggest that the term refers to a substance with the potential
273

to prevent or cure disease or enhance physical or mental welfare, and in
pharmacology
to
any
chemical
agent
that
alters
the
biochemical
physiological processes of tissues or organisms.1
Legislation related to
paramedic administration of
drugs
Medicines approved for use in the UK are categorised in one of three
ways:2
•
General Sales List (GSL) medicines can be bought in places such as
supermarkets and do not require the supervision of a pharmacist.
•
Pharmacy (P) medicines can only be bought at a pharmacy and are
sold under the supervision of a pharmacist.
•
Prescription only medicines (POM) must be prescribed by a doctor,
dentist, or exceptionally, another qualified health professional.
There is a range of exemptions from these restrictions which allow certain
groups of health professionals, including paramedics, to sell, supply and
administer particular medicines directly to patients. The exemptions are
distinct from prescribing, which requires the involvement of a pharmacist
in the sale or supply of the medicine. They also differ from the
arrangements for Patient Group Directions (PGDs) as the latter must
comply with specific legal criteria, be signed by a doctor or dentist and a
pharmacist and authorised by an appropriate body. The exemptions that
allow suitably trained ambulance paramedics to administer these drugs in
specified circumstances exist under Part III of Schedule 5 to the
Prescription Only Medicines (Human Use) Order 1997. For this purpose, a
Paramedic is defined as being on the register of Paramedics maintained by
the Health Professions Council pursuant to paragraph 11 of Schedule 2 to
the Health Professions Order 2001.3
Diazepam and morphine are both controlled drugs regulated under the
Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. This Act and its Regulations control the
availability of drugs that are considered sufficiently ‘dangerous or
274

otherwise harmful’, with the potential for diversion and misuse.4 The
drugs which are subject to the control of the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 are
listed in Schedule 2 of the Act and are termed CDs. The Act establishes a
series of criminal offences for their unauthorised, and therefore unlawful,
possession, possession with intent to supply, supply, importation and
unlawful production.
As many CDs have legitimate medical purpose, the Regulations made
under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, authorise and govern certain
activities that would otherwise be illegal under the Act. The Regulations
identify those health care professionals who may legitimately possess and
supply CDs. They also establish a regime of control around prescribing,
administrating, safe custody, dispensing, record keeping and destruction
or disposal.4
Ambulance paramedics serving at any approved ambulance station are
able to administer diazepam and/or morphine sulphate injection (to a
maximum of 20mg) for immediate necessary treatment of sick or injured
persons. Currently there is wide variation in how CDs are obtained, stored
and recorded by qualified paramedics working in the ambulance service.4
THINK
Do you know your policies for the handling, storage and administration of
controlled drugs? Have you inadvertently broken the law related to controlled
drugs?
A list of medicines which may only be administered by ambulance
paramedics on their own initiative for immediate, necessary treatment of
sick or injured persons can be found on the Medicines and Healthcare
Products Regulatory Agency website at www.mhra.gov.uk.
Drug formulations
Drugs can be delivered in a variety of forms including tablets, capsules,
solutions, inhalers, and by a variety of different routes – e.g. oral, rectal,
intravenous, and intramuscular. A drug formulation may allow for
selective targeting of specific tissues or may prevent systemic absorption.
275

The formulation of the drug and the route administered determine the
absorption and distribution of the drug.
Formulations for oral administration
Tablets
e.g. Aspirin.
Tablets are presented in a variety of different sizes, colours, shapes and
types. The formulation of the tablet will be based upon the requirements
of the drug, e.g. modified release tablets control the rate of release of a
drug as it passes through the gastrointestinal tract. Tablets may be
formulated to be chewed, held under the tongue (sublingual) or between
the gum and the inside of the mouth (buccal), swallowed or to dissolve
readily in liquid (soluble or effervescent).
Sprays
e.g. Glyceryl trinitrate (GTN).
Sprays such as GTN are designed to be taken sublingually because the
first-pass mechanism destroys the majority of any drug that is swallowed.
THINK
What is meant by ‘first-pass mechanism’?
Liquids
Liquids, such as Calpol, are usually sweet, syrup-like solutions often
designed to be taken by children where a tablet may be inappropriate.
Formulations for rectal administration
There are many different drug formulations that use the rectal route
including enemas and suppositories; these are not commonly used in
276

prehospital emergency care. Most commonly used is the rectal tube for
delivery of diazepam. Rectal diazepam is formulated to be absorbed via
the rectal mucosa and is highly effective.
Formulations for nebulisation
Nebulisation involves the passage of a gas (usually oxygen in paramedic
care) through a solution of drug to create a fine mist to be inhaled by the
patient. The drugs most commonly administered via this route in
emergency prehospital care are bronchodilators. Studies have shown that
only between 10% and 30% of an inhaled drug is actually deposited in the
lungs, the rest is generally swallowed and passes into the gastrointestinal
tract.5
Formulations for injection
Injections are sterile solutions, emulsions or suspensions where an active
ingredient is either dissolved or requires to be dissolved in an appropriate
solution. The injection may come in a pre-filled syringe, Mini-Jet, powder
with solute to be mixed, an ampoule or a vial.
Most preparations are single-dose formulations that provide the correct
volume to allow withdrawal and administration of the appropriate dose
using standard techniques. However, initial doses of certain drugs may
require the administration of less than is in the delivery system. An
example is morphine, which has a typical presentation of 10mg in 1mL,
although the initial adult dose is usually between 2.5 and 5mg.
Drug documentation
Documentation of drugs is a legal requirement and also essential for
patient safety. Good practice related to documentation will minimise the
risk of misunderstandings and ensure that there is some uniformity of
practice across different health disciplines.
The following points should be noted:6
277

•
Unnecessary use of decimal points should be avoided, e.g. 2mg not
2.0mg.
•
Quantities of 1 gram or more should be written as 1g etc.
•
Quantities less than 1 gram should be written in milligrams, e.g.
500mg not 0.5g.
•
Quantities less than 1mg should be written in micrograms, e.g. 100
micrograms not 0.1mg.
•
When decimals are unavoidable a zero should be written in front of
the decimal point where there is no other figure, e.g. 0.5 mL not. 5
mL.
•
Use of the decimal point is acceptable to express a range, e.g. 0.5 to
1g.
•
‘Micrograms’ and ‘nanograms’ should not be abbreviated nor
should ‘units’.
•
In medicine and pharmacy the term ‘millilitre’ (ml or mL) is used;
cubic centimetre, (cc, or cm3) should not be used.
•
Unit abbreviations are not followed by a full stop (mL, not m.L. or
mL.).
•
A single space is left between the quantity and the symbol (24kg
not 24kg).
•
Unit abbreviations are not pluralised (kg not kgs).
•
As a rule, fractions are not used, only decimal notation (0.25kg not
¼kg).
Storage of drugs
General guidelines
Whilst in the possession of the ambulance service the responsibility for
the safekeeping of the medicines rests with the Chief Executive. The
security of medicines in specialist kits (e.g. paramedic bags) should be
checked by pharmacy staff periodically, normally every 3 months, in
accordance with locally agreed procedures. They should carry out
inspections of medicines in specialist kits with reconciliation, where
necessary. Prescription only medicines may only be issued by non-clinical
278

staff for whom training and Standard Operational Procedures are agreed
and in place.7
Security
Security should be of prime concern to the paramedic, especially when
carrying and administering CDs. The Misuse of Drugs (Safe Custody)
Regulations 1973 imposes controls on the storage of Schedule 1, 2 and
Schedule 3 CDs.8
On station
Drugs should be kept in a locked storage area where general access is not
possible; this helps to minimise the risk of unauthorised access and to
deter abuse or misuse. Each service should have written procedures
surrounding the signing in and out of medicines.
On vehicles
Where drugs are left on an unattended vehicle, the vehicle should be
closed and locked – this alone is not adequate where CDs are involved.
‘Doctor’s bag’
A ‘doctor’s bag’ is a locked bag, box or case for home visits, etc. which
should be kept locked at all times, except when in immediate use. The
person in lawful possession of this bag, or an individual authorised by
them, must always retain the keys. Legal precedent holds that such a bag
is regarded, once locked, as a suitable receptacle for storing CDs, but a
locked vehicle is not.4
Stability
Medicines should be stored where they will not be subject to substantial
variations in temperature. It is important that medicines are not stored
close to heaters in ambulance vehicles as some may be damaged by heat.
279

Some medicines require storage under well-defined conditions, such as in
a refrigerator. If ambulance services carry such medicines, provision
should be made to meet these requirements.
Stock control
Stock rotation must be in operation to prevent the accumulation of ‘old’
stocks; this applies to vehicle or personal drug issue and drug supplies on
station. It is the responsibility of the attending paramedic to ensure that all
personal/vehicle drugs are checked and replenished, where necessary, on a
day-to-day basis. Normally a supervisor will be responsible for monitoring
the rotation of drugs held in station stores.
Routes of administration
Oral administration
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
1. Perform hand hygiene.
Minimises risk of infection.
2. Explain the reasons for
administration of the drug to include
potential side effects; gain consent
from the patient.
Informed consent necessitates
explanation of a procedure or medicine.
3. Prepare the medication for
administration:
• Confirm drug
• Confirm dosage
• Expiry date
• Integrity of package.
To ensure that the patient receives the
correct dose of the correct drug using the
appropriate diluent and via the correct
route.
To protect the patient from harm.
4. Empty the required dose into a
medicine container; avoid touching
the medicine.
Reduces the risk of cross-infection.
5. Offer water if permitted.
Facilitate swallowing of medication.
280

6. Document administration of the
drug as per Trust guidelines.
Legal requirement and patient safety.
Other health professionals need
documentation of interven-tions to guide
further treatment.
7. Do not break a tablet unless it is
scored.
Breaking may cause incorrect dosing.
8. Do not interfere with enteric
coated or delayed release capsules;
ensure that patients swallow them
whole and do not chew them.
Changing the formulation of the
medicine can affect rates of absorption
and the amount of drug that is destroyed
by the first pass mechanism.
9. Sublingual tablets should be placed
under the tongue; buccal tablets
should be placed between gum and
cheek.
Allows for correct absorption.
Note – Chewing aspirin is not a pleasant experience and current
prehospital guidance suggests that it may be swallowed with water or
chewed.9 The American Heart Association recommends that the tablet is
chewed for speed of effect despite the unpleasant taste.10
Administration of Inhaled drugs
(nebulised)
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
1. Perform hand hygiene.
Minimise risk of infection.
2. Explain the reasons for
administration of the drug to
include potential side effects; gain
consent from the patient.
Informed consent necessitates explanation
of a procedure or medicine.
3. Prepare the medication for
administration:
• Confirm drug
• Confirm dosage
• Expiry date
• Integrity of package.
To ensure that the patient receives the
correct dose of the correct drug using the
appropriate diluent and via the correct route.
To protect the patient from harm.
281

4. Administer only one drug at a
time unless specifically indicated
to the contrary.
Several drugs used together may produce
adverse side-effects.
5. Empty contents of nebule into
the nebuliser.
6. If the prescribed dose does not
require the entire contents of the
nebule to be administered, measure
the appropriate amount with a
syringe.
Ensures the correct dose.
7. Connect nebuliser and mask to
appropriate gas supply (oxygen or
air) and turn to between 6 and 8
L/min. A fine mist should be
apparent.
If the flow is too low there will be
insufficient pressure to aerosolise the
medication. If the pressure is too high, the
oxygen tubing or nebuliser may become
damaged at their weakest points.
8. Place the mask over the
patient’s face and pull the elastic to
create a comfortable seal.
Ensures that the drug does not escape
through a poorly fitted mask.
9. Coach the patient’s breathing.
Advise them to inhale slowly and
as deeply as possible and to hold
the medication for a short period
before exhaling.
This maximises the deposition of the drug in
the bronchial tree and improves absorption.
10. Document administration of
the drug as per Trust guidelines.
Legal requirement and patient safety. Other
health professionals need documentation of
interventions to guide further treatment.
It is possible to nebulise bronchodilators in an intubated patient – the
nebuliser should be connected to the oxygen supply as normal and then
connected via a ‘T’ piece to the catheter mount immediately after the
bag-valve ventilator or mechanical ventilator. It is essential that the
nebuliser is maintained in an upright position to ensure that sufficient gas
passes through the drug to aerosolise it.
Subcutaneous Injection
A subcutaneous (SC) injection is given beneath the skin into the
connective tissue or fat immediately beneath the dermis. This route is
282

generally used for small volumes of drugs (0.5 mL or less) that do not
irritate tissue. The maximum volume that should be used for this route is
2mL.11 It is not commonly used in the emergency situation due to the
slow absorption rates although there may be benefit from the prolonged
effects when given via this route.
Traditionally, SC injections have been given at a 45° angle into a raised
skin
fold.12
However,
there
is
a
recommendation
that
with
the
introduction of shorter needles (5, 6 or 8mm), the injection is now
administered at an angle of 90°.13,14 The skin should be pinched up to lift
the adipose tissue away from the underlying muscle, especially in thin
patients. When injecting at 45° or into the buttock areas, which have the
densest fat layer, lifting up of the skin fold is not required.15 Traditional
teaching has suggested that an attempt be made to aspirate once the needle
is inserted in order to confirm that the needle is not in a blood vessel. This
is no longer considered necessary as piercing of a blood vessel in a SC
injection has been shown to be very rare.16
Suitable sites include the lateral aspects of the upper arm, lower abdomen
(umbilical region), and the upper outer quadrant of the buttocks.11 The
lower back may also be used if necessary.
Procedure
Select the correct equipment:
•
Appropriate sized syringe
•
25-gauge needle
•
Filter needle
•
Cleansing swab
•
Drug to be administered.
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
1. Explain the procedure and gain
consent from the patient.
Legal requirement
2. Perform hand hygiene and put
on clean gloves.
Minimises risk of cross-infection.
3. Check and prepare all
equipment.
Check that none is damaged, if so, discard.
283

4. Prepare the medication for
injection:
• Confirm drug
• Confirm dosage/concentration
• Expiry date
• Diluent as appropriate
• Integrity of package.
To ensure that the patient receives the
correct dose of the correct drug using the
appropriate diluent and via the correct route
To protect the patient from harm.
5. Confirm with colleague.
Minimise risk of error.
6. Draw up the drug using a filter
needle and then change for the
appropriate administration needle.
This ensures that the needle used for
administration is clean, sharp and the right
length.
7. Use a two-finger ‘pinch-up’
technique to lift the skin fold away
from the underlying muscle.
Helps to ensure SC administration.
8. Using a 90° angle of entry,
pierce the skin and advance needle
into the subcutaneous region.
9. Administer the drug and
withdraw the needle – the skin fold
should be held until the needle has
been removed.
10. Dispose of sharps safely.
Drop sharps into container do not push.
Colleagues should NOT hold the sharps
container so as to avoid risk of accidental
needlestick injury.
11. Document the administration
and any untoward events at the site
of injection.
Legal requirement and allows hospital staff
to monitor any untoward occurrences.
Intramuscular Injection
Intramuscular injections deliver medication into well perfused muscle,
providing rapid systemic action and absorbing relatively large doses –
from 1mL in the deltoid site to 5mL elsewhere in adults (these values
should be halved for children).11 Administration of an IM injection is a
complex psychomotor task that requires considerable dexterity and
underpinning knowledge.17 It is a two-handed procedure requiring the
284

practitioner to use one hand to stabilise the injection site, and the other to
administer the injection.
Site selection is of vital importance as the effect of the medication can be
enhanced or diminished depending upon the selected site; complications
are
also
associated
with
the
chosen
site.17
The
most
common
complications are muscle contracture and nerve injury.18,19 Site selection
should take into consideration the patient’s general physical status and
age, and the amount of drug to be given. The proposed site for injection
should be inspected for signs of inflammation, swelling, and infection, and
any skin lesions should be avoided.
Older and emaciated patients are likely to have less muscle than younger,
more active patients. The proposed sites should be assessed for suficient
muscle mass and where there is reduced muscle mass it is helpful to
‘bunch up’ the muscle before injecting.11
There are five sites considered to be useful for IM injections although
paramedics tend to use only two of these:
•
The deltoid muscle of the upper arm.
•
The dorsogluteal site using the gluteus maximus muscle, the
traditional site in the UK.20 Complications are associated with this
site as there is a possibility of damaging the sciatic nerve or the
superior gluteal artery if the needle is misplaced. Several studies
show that even in mildly obese patients, injections into the
dorsogluteal area are more likely to be into adipose tissue rather
than muscle, and consequently slow the absorption rate of the
drug.21
•
The ventrogluteal site is a safer option which accesses the gluteus
medius muscle. This site is recommended as the primary location
for IM injections as it avoids all major nerves and blood vessels and
there have been no reported complications.21 In addition, the
thickness of adipose tissue over the ventrogluteal site is relatively
consistent at 3.75 cm as compared to 1–9 cm in the dorsogluteal
site. This ensures that a standard size 21-gauge needle will usually
penetrate the gluteus medius muscle area.11
285

Techniques
The angle of needle entry may contribute to the pain of the injection. For
many years it has been stated that intramuscular injections should be given
at a 90° angle to ensure the needle reaches the muscle and to reduce pain;
most of the literature tends to support this contention.22 One study seems
to indicate that the 90° angle is less important in terms of the depth of
injection as an angle of 72° penetrates to 95% of the depth of a needle
angled at 90°.23 Based on this, the practitioner should endeavour to give
the injection with the needle perpendicular to the patient’s body, which
should ensure that it falls within the range of 72–90°.17
Fewer needlestick injuries and improved site accuracy have been reported
when the hands are positioned near the intended entry site.11 To ensure
entry at the correct angle, the heel of the dominant palm should rest on the
thumb of the non-dominant hand. It is suggested that by holding the
syringe between the thumb and forefinger, a firm and accurate thrust of
the needle at the correct angle can be achieved.11
The traditional method of giving an intramuscular injection has been to
stretch the skin over the site to reduce the sensitivity of nerve endings and
to insert the needle in a dart like action at 90° to the skin.24 Two different
techniques are also available, the Z track technique and the air bubble
technique.
Z-track technique
The Z-track technique is believed to reduce pain, as well as the incidence
of leakage.25 It involves pulling the skin downwards or to one side at the
intended site, which moves the cutaneous and subcutaneous tissues by
1–2cm. The needle is inserted and the injection given. Ten seconds should
be allowed before removing the needle to facilitate diffusion of the
medication into the muscle. On removal, the retracted skin is released so
that the tissues close over the deposit of medication thus preventing
leakage from the site. Exercising the limb afterwards is believed to assist
absorption of the drug by increasing blood flow to the area.21
Aspiration should be practised in IM injections. If a needle is mistakenly
placed in a blood vessel, the drug may be given intravenously.
286

Air bubble technique
This technique arose historically from the use of glass syringes which
required an added air bubble to ensure an accurate dose was given. It is no
longer necessary to allow for the dead space in the syringe and needle, as
plastic syringes are calibrated more accurately than glass ones, and it is no
longer
recommended
by
manufacturers.21
Studies
comparing
this
technique with the Z-track technique have been inconclusive with one
suggesting that the air bubble technique is more successful at preventing
leakage than the Z-track technique,26 whilst the findings of the other were
inconclusive.27 There are issues related to the accuracy of the dose when
using this technique – it may significantly increase the dose.28 Further
research needs to be undertaken on this method as it is relatively new to
the UK; it is recommended that the Z-track technique be used in
preference.29
Procedure (Z-track)29
Procedure
Additional
information/
rationale
1. Explain the procedure and gain consent from the
patient.
Legal requirement
2. Perform hand hygiene and put on clean gloves.
Minimises risk of
cross-infection.
3. Check and prepare all equipment.
Check that none is
damaged, if so,
discard.
4. Prepare the medication for injection:
• Confirm drug
• Confirm dosage/concentration
• Expiry date
• Diluent as appropriate
• Integrity of package.
To ensure that the
patient receives the
correct dose of the
correct drug using the
appropriate diluent
and via the correct
route
To protect the patient
from harm.
5. Confirm with colleague.
Minimise risk of
error.
287

6. Determine the appropriate injection site (see
preceding information).
7. Position the patient and identify the injection site by
using body landmarks. Make sure the area is intact and
free from abnormalities such as infection, bruising, or
tenderness.
8. Clean the skin as per guidelines.
Minimise risk of
infection.
9. Using the subdominant hand, displace the skin and
subcutaneous tissue by pulling the skin laterally or
downward from the injection site. Holding it taut,
quickly and smoothly insert the needle into the muscle at
a 90-degree angle.
Displaces cutaneous
and subcutaneous
layers. Needle is
inserted at 90° to
ensure that the needle
reaches muscle tissue,
and it also reduces
pain.
10. Continue to hold the skin taut with the subdominant
hand. With the dominant hand, aspirate for
approximately 5 seconds. If no blood returns with
aspiration, slowly inject the medication (10 seconds/
mL). If blood is seen in the syringe, withdraw the needle,
discard both the medication and syringe properly, and
prepare another dose for injection.
Prevents inadvertent
intravenous
administration.
11. Wait 10 seconds to withdraw the needle Withdraw it
slowly and smoothly at a 90-degree angle.
Allows the medication
to disperse evenly in
the muscle tissue.
12. Release the skin to create a zigzag path.
Minimises seepage of
the drug.
13. Apply gentle pressure at the injection site with a
sterile pad but DO NOT massage the site as this can
cause irritation.
14. Discard all equipment properly, remove gloves, and
perform hand hygiene.
Reduces risk of
cross-infection.
15. Document the date and time of administration, the
drug name and dose, the injection route and site, and the
patient’s response.
Legal requirement.
288

Rectal administration
The rectal route is not frequently used by paramedics, but it is suitable for
patients who are having seizures where it may not be possible to
cannulate. The drug is absorbed rapidly through the rectal mucosa.
Equipment required
•
Clean, non-sterile gloves
•
Lubricating jelly
•
Rectal tube.
Procedure
Additional Information/
rationale
1. Explain the procedure and gain consent
from the patient (if possible).
Legal requirement.
2. Perform hand hygiene and put on clean
gloves.
Minimises risk of
cross-infection.
3. Check and prepare all equipment.
Check that none is damaged, if
so, discard.
4. Prepare the medication:
• Confirm drug
• Confirm dosage/concentration
• Expiry date
• Integrity of package.
To ensure that the patient
receives correct dose of the
correct drug and the correct
route.
To protect the patient from
harm.
5. Confirm with colleague.
Minimises risk of error.
6. Remove the cap of the rectal tube and
lubricate with lubricating jelly.
Reduces trauma on insertion.
7. Position the patient on the abdomen or side
with a cushion under the hip. A small child can
lie across the practitioner’s knees.
Allows ease of passage of the
tube into the rectum.
8. Insert the nozzle into the anus.
Most rectal tubes have a mark
to indicate depth of insertion
for young children.
9. Keep the tube with the nozzle pointing
downwards during administration.
289

10. Squeeze the tube between thumb and
finger to deliver drug.
11. Keep pressing the tube whilst withdrawing.
Hold the buttocks together for a few moments.
Prevents aspiration of drug
back into tube and prevents
seepage.
12. A small amount of fluid left in the tube will
not affect the dose administered.
13. Discard all equipment properly, remove
gloves, and perform hand hygiene.
Reduces risk of cross-infection.
14. Document the date and time of
administration, the drug name and dose, the
injection route and site, and the patient’s
response.
Legal requirement.
Chapter Key Points
1. Medicines approved for use in the UK are categorised as either General
Sales List (GSL); Pharmacy (P) or Prescription Only Medicine (POM).
2. There are a range of exemptions from legal restrictions that allow
paramedics to supply and administer particular medicines directly to patients.
3. Paramedics are responsible legally and ethically for the safe administration
of drugs; the law is clear on how drugs should be stored and administered.
4. Clear, accurate documentation is essential.
5. Drugs can be delivered in a variety of forms including tablets, capsules,
solutions, inhalers, and by a variety of different routes. They may be
administered via a number of different routes.
6. The paramedic needs to know which drugs can be administered via which
route and the procedures for using any given route.
References and Further reading
1 World Health Organization. Lexicon of alcohol and drug terms
published by the World Health Organization. Available online at
http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/terminology/who_lexicon/en/
[accessed 04 Dec 2008].
2 Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. Availability of
Medicines. Available online at http://www.mhra.gov.uk/Howweregulate/
Medicines/Availabilityprescribingsellingandsupplyingofmedicines/
Availabilityofmedicines/index.htm [accessed 03 April 2008].
290

3 Statutory Instrument 2002 No. 880. The Health Professions Order 2001
(Consequential Amendments) Order 2002. London: HMSO, 2002.
4 National Prescribing Centre. A Guide to Good Practice in the
Management of Controlled Drugs in Primary Care (England), 2nd edn.
Liverpool: The National Prescribing Centre, 2007.
5 New Zealand Medicines and Medical Devices Safety Authority
Ipratropium
Steri-neb
Data
Sheet.
2005.
Available
online
at
http://www.medsafe.govt.nz/Profs/Datasheet/i/Ipratropiuminh.htm
[accessed 23 Nov 2008].
6 British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great
Britain. British National Formulary 53. March 2007. available online at
http://www.bnf.org.uk/bnf/ [accessed 03 April 2008].
7 Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain. The Safe and Secure
Handling
of
Medicines:
A
Team
Approach.
London:
Royal
Pharmaceutical Society, 2005.
8 Home Office – Action Against Drugs Unit. Misuse of Drugs (Safe
Custody) Regulations 1973. London, UK: Home Office.
9 Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. UK Ambulance
Service Clinical Practice Guidelines v4. London: IHCD, 2006.
10
ACC/AHA
Guidelines
for
the
Management
of
Patients
With
ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction – Executive Summary: A Report of
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise the 1999
Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Acute Myocardial
Infarction). Circulation 2004;110;588–636.
11 Workman B. Safe injection techniques. Nurs Stand 1999;13(39):47–52.
12
Thow
J,
Home
P.
Insulin
injection
technique.
Br
Med
J
1990;301(7):3–4.
13 Burden M. A practical guide to insulin injections. Nurs Stand
1994;8(29):25–29.
14 Nicol M, Bavin C, Bedford-Turner S, Cronin P, Rawlings-Anderson K.
Essential Nursing Skills, 2dn edn. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2004.
291

15 Wood L, Wilbourne J. Kyne-Grzebalski D. Administration of insulin
by injection. Pract Diabetes Internat 2002;19(2)(Suppl):S1–S4.
16 Peragallo-Dittko V. Rethinking subcutaneous injection technique. Am J
Nurs 1997;97(5):71–72.
17 Nicoll LH, Hesby A. Intramuscular injection: an integrative research
review and guideline for evidence-based practice. Appl Nurs Res
2002;16(2):149–162.
18 Beecroft PC, Redick SA. Possible complications of intramuscular
injections on the pediatric unit. Pediat Nurs 1989;15(4):333–336, 376.
19 Bergeson PS, Singer SA, Kaplan AM. Intramuscular injections in
children. Pediatrics 1982;70(6):944–948.
20 Campbell J. Injections. Profess Nurse 1995;10(7):455–458.
21 Beyea SC, Nicholl LH. Administration of medications via the
intramuscular
route:
an
integrative
review
of
the
literature
and
research-based
protocol
for
the
procedure.
Appl
Nurs
Res
1995;5(1):23–33.
22 Warren BL. Intramuscular injection angle: evidence for practice? Nurs
Prax NZ 2002;18(2):52–53.
23
Katsma
DL,
Katsma
R.
The
myth
of
the
90
degrees-angle
intramuscular injection. Nurse Educ 2000;25(1):34–37.
24 Stilwell B. Skills Update. London: MacMillan Magazines, 1992.
25 Keen MF. Comparison of Intramuscular injection techniques to reduce
site discomfort and lesions. Nurs Res 1986;35(4):207–210.
26 Quartermaine S, Taylor R. A comparative study of depot injection
techniques. Nurs Times 1995;91(30):36–39.
27 MacGabhann L. A comparison of two injection techniques. Nurs Stand
1998;12(37):39–41.
28 Chaplin G et al. How safe is the air bubble technique for IM
injections? Not very say these experts. Nursing 1985;15(9):59.
292

29 Pullen R. Administering medication by the Z-track method. Nursing
2005;35(7):24.
293

Chapter 11
Medical gases
Content
Definition and indications for the use of Entonox
Advantages of Entonox
Contraindications to the use of Entonox
Equipment
Principles of administration of Entonox
Procedure for administering Entonox
Troubleshooting
Definition of oxygen therapy
Indications for use
Cautions and contraindications to the use of oxygen
Equipment
Procedure for administering oxygen
Use of cylinders and cylinder safety
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Entonox and oxygen have been available to ambulance personnel for
many years and at one time were the only medicines available in the
294

ambulance service. When given appropriately, both drugs have proven
beneficial effects for patients; however, there is disquiet surrounding the
amount of oxygen that is administered by ambulance staff in the
prehospital environment.
Definition and indications
for the use of Entonox
Entonox is an inhaled analgesic gas comprising of 50% nitrous oxide and
50% oxygen that is indicated in the management of moderate pain and
also for labour pain.1 Entonox is rapidly absorbed into the blood stream of
the pulmonary vasculature, but does not combine with haemoglobin or
with any other body tissues. Its low solubility in blood produces the rapid
onset and offset of effect.2 Nitrous oxide (the anaesthetic agent within
Entonox) has very few side-effects and no incompatibility with other
drugs has ever been demonstrated.2 It has been noted that the nitrous
oxide constituent of Entonox inactivates vitamin B12.3 The mixture of
nitrous oxide and oxygen remains stable at temperatures above –6oC.
There are different theories as to the exact mechanism of action of
Entonox.
It
has
been
suggested
that
Entonox
interacts
with
the
endogenous opioid system,4 and it has been shown to act preferentially on
areas of the brain and spinal cord that are rich in morphine sensitive cells.5
BOC suggest that it also has an effect on gamma aminobutyric acid
(GABA), which increases inhibition of nerves cells, causing drowsiness
and sleep.6
Advantages of Entonox
Entonox offers the practitioner and patient several advantages:
•
Analgesic effect is rapid and side-effects are minimal.
•
It confers no cardiac or respiratory depression.
•
It can be self-administered.
295

•
It has a very short half-life so the effects wear off rapidly once
inhalation has ceased. This may be useful for short-term relief when
carrying out painful procedures such as wound dressings or
applying traction to fractures. In addition, Entonox may be
administered as a temporary analgesic agent whilst preparing the
patient for the administration of intravenous analgesia.
•
The oxygen content may confer benefit to patients with certain
medical or trauma conditions.
Contraindications to the use
of Entonox
According to the Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee
(JRCALC), Entonox is contraindicated in the following circumstances:1
•
Severe head injuries with impaired consciousness.
•
Decompression sickness (anybody who has been diving in the
previous 24 hours should be considered at risk).
•
Violently disturbed psychiatric patients.
Caution should be applied when administering Entonox to a chest injured
patient when a pneumothorax is suspected as it may expand the
pneumothorax.
THINK
Why is Entonox contraindicated in the circumstances outlined above?
There
appears
to
be
some
conflict
between
JRCALC
and
the
contraindications listed by the BOC datasheet, which includes any patient:
•
Where air is entrapped within a body and where its expansion
might be dangerous.
•
Artificial, traumatic or spontaneous pneumothorax.
•
Air embolism.
•
Gross abdominal distension.
•
Intoxication.
•
Maxillofacial injuries.
296

Essentially N2O is contraindicated where there is trapped air, which
covers the first four in the BOC list. Dr Tom Clarke of JRCALC states
that intoxication is not defined by BOC but would appear to indicate a
state where the ‘balance of the mind is disturbed’ due to alcohol, drugs or
psychosis.7 Maxillofacial injuries are contraindicated due to the possible
access of Entonox to the sinuses and also due to the difficulty of
administration.
It has been suggested that Entonox should not be given during the first
trimester
of
pregnancy
due
to
the
risk
of
skeletal
teratogenic
complications; however no increased incidence of foetal malformation has
been discovered in 8 epidemiological studies and case reports in human
beings. There is no published material showing that nitrous oxide is toxic
to the human foetus, therefore, there is no absolute contra-indication to its
use in the first 16 weeks of pregnancy.3
Recommendations
•
Entonox should be contraindicated to patients where air is
entrapped within a body and where its expansion might be
dangerous,
those
with
severe
head
injuries
with
impaired
consciousness,
decompression
sickness,
and
intoxication
or
psychiatric patients where the balance of the mind is disturbed.
Equipment
•
Entonox cylinder
•
Regulator
•
Face mask or mouthpiece.
The neck on an Entonox cylinder is blue and white segmented, which is a
UK norm; colours may vary in other Countries. The newer CD (440 L)
and HX (2200 L) cylinders feature a valve with built in regulator, an
Entonox Schrader outlet connection, and a permanently live contents
gauge. The cylinders are 25% lighter than conventional steel, which
makes them ideal for prehospital use. The traditional 500 L, D sized
297

cylinder is still in use and requires the application of a pin-index pressure
regulator.
Use of cylinders and general safety for both Entonox and Oxygen are
covered at the end of this chapter.
THINK
Why might the delivery of Entonox through a mouthpiece be a less effective
means of delivery than a mask?
Principles of administration
of Entonox
Entonox is self-administered by the use of a face mask or mouthpiece
connected through a demand valve to the Entonox cylinder. Gas is drawn
from the cylinder by the negative pressure created during the patient’s
inhalation; as soon as the face mask or mouthpiece is removed, delivery
stops. For this reason, the face mask must be held firmly over the face or
the mouthpiece to the lips to produce an airtight seal.
Doses are regulated by the patient and the risk of overdose is low. Since
pain is usually relieved by a concentration of 25% nitrous oxide,
continued inhalation does not occur. However, should inhalation continue,
light anaesthesia supervenes and the mask drops away as the patient
relaxes.3
Mouthpiece or face mask?
Searches revealed no studies investigating the relative effectiveness of
delivering Entonox via a mouthpiece or mask. One study evaluated patient
preferences and the efficacy of pre-oxygenation using face mask or
mouthpiece with or without nose clip, which may provide some insight
into the best method of administering Entonox.8 Most conscious patients
tolerated a mask well but a significant minority (12%) refused it. The
298

mouthpiece on its own was insufficient to attain full preoxygenation
owing to nose breathing of room air, which may explain why anecdotally,
Entonox does not always provide analgesia. The mouthpiece with nose
clip produced comparable results to the face mask but was less popular
amongst patients.
Recommendation
Entonox should preferentially be delivered via face mask or mouthpiece
with nose clip to maximise the effect of the drug.
Complications
Inappropriate,
unwitting
or
deliberate
inhalation
of
Entonox
will
ultimately result in unconsciousness, passing through stages of increasing
light-headedness and intoxication. The treatment is removal to fresh air
and resuscitation as appropriate.3
Procedure for administering
Entonox
Procedure
Rationale/further
information
1. Ensure that the patient is in a comfortable position
prior to administration.
2. Check the patient has no contraindications for the
administration of Entonox.
Avoids exacerbating
underlying conditions.
3. Explain the procedure and effects of the
medication to the patient and gain informed consent.
Aids patient compliance
and is a legal
requirement.
4. Ensure that the cylinder is turned on; check the
gauge to determine how much Entonox is in the
cylinder.
Avoids risk of running
out of medication.
299

5. Demonstrate how to obtain a seal with the face
mask or mouthpiece. Explain that when the patient is
breathing in and out regularly and deeply a hissing
sound will be heard.
Maximises inhalation of
the gas and indicates that
the gas is being inhaled.
6. Encourage the patient to breathe deeply for at
least two minutes before attempting any painful
procedures.
Allows time for the
analgesic effect to take
place.
7. Coach the patient’s respirations as necessary.
To ensure maximum
inhalation of the gas.
8. Evaluate the effectiveness of Entonox by using
verbal or visual pain scoring tools.
Identifies if further
measures are required.
9. Evaluate the effect during and after painful
procedures, and throughout the duration of use.
10. Turn off Entonox supply on completion.
Avoids inadvertent
leakage..
11. Dispose of mask/mouthpiece as per Trust
guidelines, or clean in accordance with guidelines if
using reusable items.
12. Record the administration, effects and side
effects of Entonox on the case report form. Any
adverse effects should also be recorded.
A legal requirement and
provides information for
those caring for the
patient afterwards
Troubleshooting
Procedure
Problem
Possible
explanation
Suggestion
1. Patient not
achieving
adequate
analgesia.
Cylinder empty.
Check prior to administration, change if
necessary.
300

Patient not inhaling
deeply enough.
Coach respirations. Reassess suitability of
Entonox for the patient and find
alternative analgesia if necessary.
2. Patient
refuses or can’t
tolerate a
mask.
Feeling of
claustrophobia or
dislike of the smell
of the mask.
Use mouthpiece with nose clip as an
alternative.
3. Feelings of
nausea,
drowsiness or
giddiness.
Effect of nitrous
oxide
accumulation.
Discontinue therapy and effects will wear
of rapidly.
4. Patient
afraid to use
Entonox.
Possible
associations with
previous
experiences.
Reassure patient about the benefits of
receiving Entonox and the short-term
effects. Reiterate the procedure for
administration.
Definition of oxygen therapy
Oxygen (O2) is a colourless, odourless gas that supports combustion and
is essential to human life. It is provided in compressed form in a cylinder
that is typically colour coded white. Modern cylinders are lightweight and
feature a valve with built in regulator, an Oxygen Schrader outlet
connection, and a permanently live contents gauge. The sizes most
commonly used in prehospital care are the CD size (460 L) and the HX
size (2300 L).
Oxygen is the most frequently used drug in prehospital emergency care
and may be lifesaving when given correctly. However, it is often
administered without careful consideration of its potential benefits and
side-effects.9
Indications for use
JRCALC revised the oxygen guidelines in April 2009 to reflect concerns
surrounding inappropriate administration of oxygen by practitioners in
301

prehospital care.1 The new guideline challenges many of the traditional
practices, such as the routine administration of high concentration
supplemental oxygen to all patients suffering a suspected or confirmed
acute myocardial infarction. It also advocates the more widespread use of
pulse oximetry to guide supplemental oxygen therapy and the use of
alternative methods of delivery, such as nasal cannulae.
It is imperative that the practitioner is aware of the updated guidelines and
also understands the physiology of respiration and tissue oxygenation. It is
recommended that this be reviewed in a suitable physiology textbook.
Scenario
You are called to attend a case where a 65-year-old known COPD patient is suffering
from cardiac related central chest pain. His 12-lead ECG is showing signs of a new
inferior myocardial infarction whilst his oxygen saturations are 92%. Will you administer
oxygen to the patient? If so, how much and why? If not, why not?
Cautions and
contraindications to the use
of oxygen
Paraquat poisoning
Paraquat is a bipyridyl herbicide which if ingested causes irreversible
pulmonary fibrosis by generation of superoxide radicals. Treatment is by
immediate
gastric
lavage
and
gastric
decontamination.
As
high
concentrations of oxygen worsen the lung damage, supplementary oxygen
should be withheld for as long as practicable, then used at the lowest
concentration that will maintain tissue oxygenation.10
302

Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD)
There remains much discussion surrounding what constitutes appropriate
oxygen therapy in the emergency management of acute exacerbation of
COPD. A number of studies11 have concluded that oxygen therapy may
lead to hypercapnia and acidosis, so it is imperative that patients with
COPD do not receive excessive concentrations of oxygen.
Current guidelines recommend that:11
•
The oxygen saturation should be measured in patients with an
exacerbation of COPD, if there are no facilities to measure arterial
blood gases.
•
If necessary, oxygen should be given to keep the SaO2 within range
of 88–92% or pre-specified range detailed on patient’s alert card.
During the transfer to hospital the following points should be considered:
•
It is not desirable to exceed an oxygen saturation of 93%. Oxygen
therapy should be commenced titrated upwards if saturation falls
below 90% and downwards if the patient becomes drowsy or if the
saturation exceeds 93–94%.
•
Patients with known type II respiratory failure need special care,
especially if they require a long ambulance journey or if they are
given oxygen at home for a prolonged period before the ambulance
arrives.
Oxygen should be given to all patients with an exacerbation of COPD who
are breathless, if the oxygen saturations are not known.
JRCALC suggests that where the primary illness in a patient with COPD
requires a high concentration of oxygen (e.g. serious trauma) then oxygen
should not be withheld.1 However, the patient should be continuously
monitored and oxygen therapy amended if the patient deteriorates. For a
further and fuller explanation of the most recent guidelines surrounding
the indications and use of oxygen in emergency care, refer to the British
Thoracic Society Guideline for emergency oxygen use in adult patients.12
NOTE – COPD is not a contraindication to the administration of oxygen.
303

Defibrillation and explosive
environments
Oxygen supports combustion so should not be used during defibrillation
or in an explosive environment.
Equipment
•
Oxygen cylinder
•
Regulator
•
Flowmeter
•
Disposable tubing
•
Disposable oxygen mask or nasal cannula.
Oxygen cylinder
The neck on an oxygen cylinder is white, which is a UK norm; colours
may vary in other Countries. Newer oxygen cylinders feature a valve with
built
in
regulator,
an
oxygen
Schrader
outlet
connection,
and
a
permanently live contents gauge. Older cylinders have a black body with
white neck and require the application of a pressure regulator to the valve.
These cylinders will either have a ‘bull-nose’ valve or a pin-index valve.
Sizes typically used in prehospital care include the CD size (460 L) and
the HX size (2300 L).
Regulator
The pressure contained within gas cylinders is initially very high and falls
as the contents are used. The function of the regulator, or reducing valve,
is to convert this variable, high-pressure gas supply to a constant,
low-pressure gas supply. Ensure that only the appropriate regulator is
fitted to the cylinder.
304

Flowmeter
The flowmeter allows the practitioner to select an appropriate flow of gas
to the patient. The flow meter may be a glass tube with a ball that floats on
the stream of gas or a twist-knob dial. The flow selected will depend up
the requirements of the patient.
Oxygen tubing
Oxygen tubing may be packaged with the chosen mask or may be
separate. Tubing is single-use and should be disposed of following patient
treatment.
Oxygen masks and nasal cannulae
Nasal cannulae
See Figure 11.1.
Nasal cannulae are rarely used in prehospital care mainly because a
constant oxygen concentration is not possible since the nasal catheter
delivers a constant oxygen flow, and the resulting partial pressure received
by the patient depends on the minute ventilation. In addition, the design is
uncomfortable, there is a need for frequent replacement due to obstruction,
and damage to the nasal mucosa.13
Figure 11.1 Nasal cannula.
Figure 11.2 Oxygen mask – standard.
305

Simple face mask
See Figure 11.2.
The simple face mask has side-ports that allow the entrainment of ambient
air, which dilutes the concentration of oxygen delivered to the patient and
restricts oxygen concentrations. With flow rates of between 6 and 10
L/min, concentrations of between 40% and 60% can be attained. These
masks are suitable for patients requiring moderate to high concentrations
of oxygen.
Non-rebreather mask
See Figure 11.3.
These masks have one-way side ports that allow air to escape on
exhalation but restrict entrainment of air during inspiration. The mask also
has a reservoir bag to hold oxygen ready for inhalation. At a flow rate of
15 L/min, oxygen concentrations of 80% – 95% can be achieved. These
masks should be reserved for those patients who have adequate ventilation
but who require high concentrations of supplementary oxygen.
Venturi mask
See Figure 11.4.
Figure 11.3 Non-rebreathe oxygen mask.
306

Figure 11.4 Venturi oxygen mask.
Venturi masks are not commonly used in UK prehospital practice even
though they are capable of delivering a relatively constant concentration
of oxygen irrespective of the patient’s rate and depth of breathing. Masks
generally deliver 24%, 28%, 35% or 40% oxygen, and may be particularly
useful for COPD patients.
Oxygen passes into the mask through a jet orifice where it entrains room
air. This mixture is then delivered to the patient. In order to change the
concentration it may be necessary to change the cap on the mask.
Procedure for administering
oxygen14
Procedure
Rationale/further information
1. Ensure that the patient is in a
comfortable position prior to
administration.
2. Explain the procedure and effects
of the medication to the patient and
gain informed consent.
Aids patient compliance and is a legal
requirement.
307

3. Ensure that the cylinder is turned
on; check the gauge to determine how
much oxygen is in the cylinder.
Avoids risk of running out of medication.
4. Select the most appropriate mask
for the needs of the patient and
remove from packaging.
Ensures appropriate concentration of
oxygen is delivered. Do not remove
oxygen masks from package until just
before use to avoid contamination
5. Connect the oxygen tubing to the
flowmeter and select the correct flow
rate for the desired concentration
The flow required to attain a given
concentration is normally provided with
the mask.
6. Place the mask over the patient’s
nose and mouth and tighten the strap
until the mask is firmly held in place.
7. Coach the patient’s respirations as
necessary.
Maximises inhalation of the gas.
8. Evaluate the effectiveness of
oxygen by reassessing observations;
adjust flow rate as required.
Determines the need to amend
concentration delivered.
9. Dispose of face mask and tubing
on completion.
10. Record the administration, effects
and side-effects of oxygen on the case
report form. Any adverse effects
should also be recorded.
Legal requirement and provides
information for those caring for the
patient afterwards.
Use of cylinders and cylinder
safety14
The following section is taken from BOC Medical guidelines and
demonstrates best practice.
308

Storage of cylinders
Compressed medical oxygen cylinders should be:
•
Stored under cover, preferably inside, kept dry and clean and not
subjected to extremes of heat or cold, and away from stocks of
combustible material.
•
Stored separately from industrial and other non-medical cylinders.
•
Stored to maintain separation between full and empty cylinders.
•
Used in strict rotation so that cylinders with the earliest filling date
are used first.
•
Stored separately from other medical cylinders within the store.
•
F size cylinders and larger should be stored vertically. E size
cylinders and smaller should be stored horizontally.
Preparation for use14
•
Remove the tamper evident seal and the valve outlet protection cap.
Ensure the cap is retained so that it can be refitted after use.
•
Do not remove and discard any batch labels fitted to the cylinder.
•
Ensure that an appropriate compressed medical oxygen regulator is
selected for connection to the cylinder.
•
Ensure the connecting face on the regulator is clean and the sealing
washer fitted is in good condition.
•
Connect the regulator, using moderate force only and connect the
tubing to the regulator/flowmeter outlet.
•
Only the appropriate regulator should be used for the particular gas
concerned.
•
Open the cylinder valve slowly and check for any leak.
•
Cylinder valves and any associated equipment must never be
lubricated and must be kept free from oil and grease.
Leaks14
Cylinders used with a pressure regulator
•
Having connected the regulator or manifold yoke to the cylinder
check the connections for leaks.
309

•
Should leaks occur this will usually be evident by a hissing noise.
•
Should a leak occur between the valve outlet and the regulator or
manifold yoke, depressurise and remove the fitting and fit an
approved sealing washer.
•
Reconnect the fitting to the valve with moderate force only, fitting
a replacement regulator or manifold tailpipe as required.
•
Sealing or jointing compounds must never be used to cure a leak.
•
Never use excessive force when connecting equipment to cylinders.
•
If leak persists, label cylinder and return to supplier.
Cylinders with an integral regulated valve
•
Should leaks occur this will usually be evident by a hissing noise.
•
Close valve, remove connection, check and refit.
•
If leak persists, label cylinder and return to supplier.
Cylinder safety14
When compressed medical oxygen cylinders are in use, ensure that they
are:
•
Only used for medicinal purposes.
•
Turned off, when not in use, using only moderate force to close the
valve.
•
Only moved with the appropriate size and type of trolley or
handling device.
•
Handled with care and not knocked violently or allowed to fall.
•
Firmly secured to a suitable cylinder support when in use.
•
Not allowed to have any markings, labels or batch labels obscured
or removed.
•
Not used in the vicinity of persons smoking or near naked lights.
When the compressed medical oxygen cylinder is empty ensure that the:
•
Cylinder valve is closed using moderate force only and the pressure
in the regulator or tailpipe released.
•
Valve outlet cap, where fitted, is replaced.
•
Empty cylinders are immediately returned to the empty cylinder
store for return to supplier.
310

Chapter Key Points
1. Entonox is an inhaled analgesic gas comprising of 50% nitrous oxide and
50% oxygen that is indicated in the management of moderate pain and also for
labour pain.
2. Entonox has a rapid onset of action and the side-effects are minimal; it
confers no cardiac or respiratory depression, can be self-administered, and has
a very short half-life so the effects wear off rapidly.
3. Contraindications
to
the
use
of
Entonox
and
the
difficulty
of
self-administration encountered by some patient groups may mean that an
alternative analgesic is required.
4. Entonox should preferentially be delivered via face mask or mouthpiece
with nose clip to maximise the effect of the drug.
5. Oxygen (O 2) is a colourless, odourless gas that supports combustion and is
essential to human life.
6. Oxygen is the most commonly administered medicine in prehospital care,
but caution should be exercised in its use. Oxygen should only be administered
to those patients presenting with an indication for its use.
7. The most appropriate equipment should be used when administering
oxygen. The choice between masks and nasal cannulae will be dependent upon
patient needs.
8. It is essential that cylinders are stored and handled with care in order to
minimise the risk of unwanted and dangerous occurrences.
References and Further reading
Tortora GJ, Derrickson B. Principles of Anatomy and Physiology, 11th
edn. USA: Wiley, 2006. National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence. CG12, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease.
2004.
available
online
at
http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
index.jsp?action=download&o=29303 [accessed 08-03-2008].
1 Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. UK Ambulance
Service Clinical Practice Guidelines version 4, Oxygen Update. April
2009,
available
online
at
http://jrcalc.org.uk/newjrcalcguidance/
oxygenguidelinecombined220409.pdf [29-08-2009]
2 O’ Sullivan I. Benger J. Nitrous oxide in emergency medicine. EMJ
2003;20:214–217.
3 BOC Medical. Data Sheet: Entonox. Manchester: BOC Medical Gases,
1995.
311

4 Gillman MA. Analgesic (sub anaesthetic) nitrous oxide interacts with
the endogenous opioid system. Life Sci 1986;39:1209–1211.
5 Haugen FP, Melzack R. The effects of nitrous oxide on responses
evoked
in
the
brain
stem
by
tooth
stimulation.
Anaesthesiology
1957;18:183–195.
6
BOC
Medical.
Entonox.
1995
Available
online
at
http://www.bocmedical.co.uk/product_information/entonox.asp [accessed
05-03-2008].
7 Clarke T. Entonox contraindications [Email to P. Gregory] [10 March
2008].
8 Everatt J, Ng WS. Pre-oxygenation using face mask or mouthpiece with
and without nose clip: patient preferences and efficacy. Anaesthesia
1998;53:387–389.
9 Bateman NT, Leach RM. ABC of oxygen: acute oxygen therapy. BMJ
1998;317:798–801.
10 Haddad LM. Acute poisoning. In: Bennett JC, Plum F (Eds) Cecil
Textbook of Medicine.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1996, pp. 509–510.
11 The National Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions. Chronic
obstructive
pulmonary
disease;
National
Clinical
Guideline
on
Management of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease In Adults in
Primary and Secondary Care. 8, Management of Exacerbations of COPD.
Thorax 2004;59:131–156.
12 British Thoracic Society. Guideline for emergency oxygen use in adult
patients. Thorax 2008; 63 (Suppl VI): vi69–vi73 available online at:
http://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/
13 Domingo C. Home oxygen therapy for the 21st century. Curr Resp
Med Rev 2006;2:237–251.
14 BOC Medical. Medical Gas Data Sheet: Medical Oxygen. Manchester:
BOC Medical, 2006.
312

Chapter 12
Infection control
Content
Definitions
Indications for infection control
Hand hygiene
Personal protective equipment
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Infection control and aseptic techniques are vital tools in the battle to
reduce infection acquired as a direct result of health care provision.
Paramedics often work in environments that are unclean and unhygienic,
and the risk of infection is unsurprisingly high. It is imperative that the
paramedic optimises infection control techniques to minimise the risk of
infection.
Definitions
Infection control is the application of standard principles to prevent
health-care associated infections (HCAI) and is essential in the reduction
of HCAI. Asepsis is described as the state of being free from living
pathogenic organisms1 and aseptic technique as the effort taken to keep a
patient as free from micro-organisms as possible.2 The incidence of HCAI
313

in the United Kingdom is estimated to be 9%;3 statistics specific to the
ambulance service are not readily available.
Aseptic technique is used to minimise the risk of infection when managing
wounds, or when carrying out invasive procedures such as intravenous
cannulation. Asepsis in the out-of-hospital environment is classed as
medical asepsis and aims to reduce the number and spread of organisms
during patient contact with the ambulance service; this differs from
surgical asepsis, which is undertaken in operating theatres.
The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) divides
the standard principles into three broad categories:4
•
Hand hygiene
•
Use of personal protective equipment (PPE)
•
Safe use and disposal of sharps
•
Education of patients, their carers, and healthcare personnel.
Scenario
You are called to transport a patient with diarrhoea and vomiting. What extra precautions
need to be taken and what cleaning actions should be taken on completion of the case?
Indications for infection
control
Patients have a right to clean and safe treatment wherever and whenever
they are treated by the National Health Service (NHS).5 Around 320,000
healthcare-associated infections occur every year (almost 3 million during
the decade from 1993). These infections add an average of 11 days of
hospitalisation for each person infected and cost the NHS an estimated £1
billion annually. Around a third of these infections could probably have
been prevented.6 The application of evidence-based infection prevention
and control into every day practice is believed to be important in reducing
preventable infections and could reduce the human and financial costs.7
Health-care professionals should routinely apply the principles of
infection control to the management of every patient/client.
314

Hand hygiene
Several studies have demonstrated a clear link between handwashing and
a reduction in infection8-11 and, although these studies are hospital based,
it is useful and reasonable to extrapolate the findings and apply them to
the community setting. Expert opinion is consistent in asserting that
effective handwashing reduces the number of pathogens carried on the
hands and that this will logically decrease the incidence of preventable
HCAI.12-14
Currently there is no compelling evidence to favour the general use of
antimicrobial handwashing agents over soap, or one antimicrobial agent
over another.4 The acceptability of any preparation used in the community
setting will need to be based upon ease of use and their dermatological
effect; in most cases this will be determined by the employing Trust.
The latest recommendations from NICE4 state that hands that are visibly
soiled or potentially grossly contaminated with dirt or organic material
must
be
washed
with
liquid
soap
and
water.
Hands
must
be
decontaminated, preferably with an alcohol-based hand rub unless hands
are visibly soiled, between caring for different patients or between
different care activities for the same patient.
There is little high level evidence to support any given handwashing
technique in terms of duration of washing and hand drying. Current
guidelines are based on expert opinion that suggest that the time taken to
decontaminate the hands, the exposure of all aspects of the hands and
wrists to the decontaminant, the use of vigorous rubbing, thorough rinsing
(in the case of handwashing), and drying are all key factors in the process
of effective hand hygiene.12,15
Recommendations4
1. All wrist and hand jewellery should be removed prior to
hand-cleansing.
Cuts
and
abrasions
must
be
covered
with
waterproof dressings. Finger nails should be kept short and free
from nail polish.
315

2. Handwashing
techniques
involve
three
phases–preparation,
washing and rinsing, and drying:
a. Wet the hands under running tepid water BEFORE applying
cleaning preparations.
b. Hand wash solution MUST come into contact with ALL of
the surfaces of the hand.
c. The hands must be RUBBED together for between 10 and 15
seconds paying particular attention to the tips of the fingers, the
thumbs and the areas between the fingers.
d. Hands should be rinsed thoroughly before drying.
3. When decontaminating hands using an alcohol hand-rub, hands
should be free of dirt and organic material. The hand-rub solution
must come into contact with all surfaces of the hand. The hands
must be rubbed together vigorously, paying particular attention to
the tips of the fingers, the thumbs and the areas between the fingers,
until the solution has evaporated and the hands are dry.
Areas that are commonly missed in handwashing are shown in Figure
12.1.
The handwashing technique that remains in vogue within the health
service was first described by Ayliffe, Babb and Quoraishi in 197816 and
is still the procedure recommended by the Ambulance Service Association
(Figure 12.2).17
Figure 12.1 Areas missed during handwashing. Based on work by Taylor
L (1978) An Evaluation of Handwashing Techniques, Nursing Times Jan
12, 1978 pp 54-55. Original material supplied by Health Protection
Scotland. Responsibility for the editing and use of these materials lies with
the individual and not Health Protection Scotland or Healthcare A2Z.
Copyright
2006,
original
content
developed
by
Healthcare
A2Z,
www.healthcareA2Z.org. Reproduced with permission.
316

Personal protective
equipment
Most expert opinion regarding the use of personal protective equipment
(PPE) has been based on studies in the hospital environment; however, it
is safe to extrapolate the general findings and apply them to the
community setting. This section discusses gloves, aprons, visors/eye
protection, and face masks. The purpose of PPE is to protect both patients
and staff, and to reduce the risk of transmission of microorganisms.18,19
The decision to use PPE and the level of PPE is based upon an assessment
of the anticipated risk of transmission of micro-organisms to the patient,
and the risk of exposure to body fluid during patient management.
The guidelines in Figure 12.3 may be helpful in determining the level of
PPE required.
Gloves
The use of gloves as a primary defence against infection has become
common practice for health professionals in the hospital and community
settings. There is expert agreement that gloves play a role in protecting the
hands from contamination, and reducing the risk of transmission of
micro-organisms to both patient and practitioner,20–22 but they should not
be worn unnecessarily as prolonged and indiscriminate use may cause skin
sensitivity and adverse reactions.23 The guidance given above should be
used to decide when it is appropriate to wear gloves.
Figure 12.2 Hand-washing technique.
317

Figure 12.3 Adapted from ASA, 2004.17
Gloves must be discarded after every care activity for which they were
worn in order to minimise the potential transmission of microorganisms to
another site on the patient, or to a different patient.4 The practicalities of
this may be difficult in the emergency situation but every effort should be
made to adhere to the guidelines where possible. Washing gloves rather
than changing them is not safe so therefore, not recommended.23,24
It is also worth noting that the integrity of gloves cannot be taken for
granted and there is evidence that hand contamination may occur when the
gloves are removed.20,23,24 The use of gloves reduces the risk of
contamination but does not eliminate it and it cannot be presumed that
hands are clean just because gloves have been worn. The practitioner
should always wash hands in accordance with standard procedures after
gloves have been removed.
THINK
Your colleague drives to hospital still wearing the gloves that were used on scene.
Make a list of every item that now needs to be cleaned!
Recommendations4
•
Gloves must be worn for:
•
Invasive procedures (e.g. intravenous cannulation).
•
Contact
with
sterile
sites
and
non-intact
skin
or
mucous
membranes.
•
All activities that have been assessed as carrying a risk of exposure
to blood, body fluids, secretions or excretions, or sharp or
contaminated instruments.
•
Gloves must be worn as single-use items. They must be put on
immediately before an episode of patient contact or treatment and
removed as soon as the activity is completed. Gloves must be
changed between caring for different patients, and between
different care or treatment activities for the same patient.
318

•
Gloves
must
be
disposed
of
as
clinical
waste
and
hands
decontaminated after the gloves have been removed.
Disposable a prons
Several
studies
show
the
potential
for
uniforms
to
become
contaminated.25-27 None of these studies were undertaken in the
community setting but it is reasonable to suggest that the risk of
contamination in the out-of-hospital setting is likely to be no lower than
the in-hospital setting. Two of these studies25,26 suggest the need for a
clean uniform to be worn each shift, which may not be achievable in the
community setting given that jackets and fleeces are frequently worn in
cooler weather.
The routine use of aprons is not advocated,15 but plastic aprons are
recommended for use when there is a likelihood of contamination with
blood, body fluids, excretions or secretions (excluding sweat), or when
close contact with the patient, equipment or materials may lead to
contamination of clothing.23,24 Care should be taken to store disposable
aprons away from potential sources of contamination prior to use and
should be used once only. Full body gowns need only be worn where there
is a risk of extensive splashing of body fluids, blood, secretions and
excretions; e.g. serious trauma.23,24
Recommendations4
•
Disposable plastic aprons should be worn when there is a risk that
clothing may become exposed to blood, body fluids, excretions or
secretions, with the exception of sweat.
•
Plastic aprons should be worn for only one procedure or episode of
patient care; they should then be disposed of as clinical waste.
•
Full-body, fluid-repellent gowns should be worn where there is a
risk of extensive splashing of body fluids, blood, secretions or
excretions onto the skin or clothing of a healthcare practitioner.
319

Eye, mouth and nose protection
There is no robust evidence to support the use of surgical face-masks to
protect
the
patient
during
routine
procedures
such
as
wound
dressings.15,23 In situations where protection is required, e.g., HIV-related
or multiple drug-resistant tuberculosis, standard surgical masks do not
provide effective protection and specialised equipment such as a
particulate filter respiratory mask should be worn.15,23,28
Recommendations4
•
Face masks and eye protection must be worn where there is a risk
of splashing of body fluids, blood, secretions or excretions into the
face and eyes.
•
When clinically indicated, respiratory protective equipment must be
used.
Environmental cleanliness
Maintaining a clean ambulance and equipment is essential, not only for
reducing the risk of exposing patients to healthcare acquired infections,
but also because it engenders confidence in the patients being conveyed
by the ambulance service. In 2006 the Department of Health introduced
the Standards for Better Health,30 which states the following:
Healthcare organisations keep patients, staff and visitors safe by having
systems to ensure that:
•
The risk of health care acquired infection to patients is reduced,
with particular emphasis on high standards of hygiene and
cleanliness, achieving year-on-year reductions in MRSA.
•
All risks associated with the acquisition and use of medical devices
are minimised.
•
All reusable medical devices are properly decontaminated prior to
use and that the risks associated with decontamination facilities and
processes are well managed.
•
Medicines are handled safely and securely.
•
The prevention, segregation, handling, transport and disposal of
waste is properly managed so as to minimise the risks to the health
320

and safety of staff, patients, the public and the safety of the
environment.
Keeping the vehicle clean is everybody’s responsibility.
This section does not endeavour to set policies for Ambulance Trusts, as
these policies should be developed by managers utilising the National
Patient Safety Agency Framework for setting and measuring performance
outcomes in ambulance trusts.29 Written local policies should be available
for cleaning,
decontamination,
disinfection
and sterilisation
of all
equipment and vehicles,31 and should be followed rigorously by
ambulance crews.
Recommendations31
•
Ambulance interiors should be thoroughly cleaned on a weekly
basis.
•
All equipment used for patient treatment should be cleaned using
detergent wipes or soap and water then either air dried or wiped
with clean paper towels after EVERY patient.
•
Extra attention must be given to items soiled with blood and/or
body fluids; these should be decontaminated with detergent after
cleaning.
•
Additional cleaning is required following transportation of a patient
suffering from diarrhoea as the infection status may be unknown.
The vehicle interior, including walls and floors, and all equipment
used to treat the patient must first be cleaned with soap and water
and then disinfected with a chlorine-based fluid. Clostridium
difficile is only removed when both soap and water and disinfectant
are used in the above order.
•
Ambulance stretcher beds should have linen changed after EVERY
patient and the stretcher should be wiped down with detergent
wipes or soap and water then air-dried or wiped dry with clean
paper towels after EVERY patient.
•
Where
contaminated
with
blood
and/or
body
fluids,
a
chlorine-based detergent should be used after it has been cleaned
with soap and water or detergent wipes.
•
Pillows should have a plastic cover, which should be wiped with a
detergent wipe before a clean pillowcase is fitted. Pillowcases must
be changed after EVERY patient.
321

Chapter Key Points
1. Effective handwashing reduces the number of pathogens present on the
hands.
2. There is no compelling evidence to favour one handwashing agent over
another – in the prehospital environment ease of use may be the over-riding
factor.
3. The thumbs and finger tips are the most commonly missed areas during
hand-washing.
4. There is expert agreement that gloves play a role in protecting the hands
from contamination, and reducing the risk of transmission of micro-organisms
to both patient and practitioner.
5. The decision to use PPE and the level of PPE is based upon an assessment
of the anticipated risk of transmission of micro-organisms to the patient, and
the risk of exposure to body fluid during patient management.
6. Vehicle cleaning is the responsibility of everybody, not just of cleaning
staff.
7. Written local policies should be available for cleaning, decontamination,
disinfection and sterilisation of all equipment and vehicles.
References and Further reading
See Chapter 13 for management of sharps and needlestick injuries, and for
swabbing prior to injection or intravenous cannulation.
Perry C. Infection Prevention and Control. Oxford: Blackwell, 2007.
Ambulance Service Association. National Guidance and Procedures for
Infection
Prevention
and
Control.
London:
Ambulance
Service
Association, 2004.
National
Patient
Safety
Agency.
The
national
specifications
for
cleanliness in the NHS: A framework for setting and measuring
performance outcomes in ambulance trusts. London: NPSA, 2008.
1 Hart S. Using an aseptic technique to reduce the risk of infection. Nurs
Stand 2007;21(47):43–48.
2 Crow S. Asepsis: an indispensible part of the patient’s care plan. Crit
Care Nurse Quest 1989;11(4):11–15.
3 Department of Health. Saving Lives: the Delivery Programme to Reduce
Healthcare Associated Infections (HCAI) Including MRSA. London: The
Stationery Office, 2005.
322

4 National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE). Infection
control Prevention of healthcare-associated infection in primary and
community care. London: NICE, 2003.
5 Department of Health. Clean, Safe Care: Reducing Infections and
Saving Lives. London: Department of Health Publications, 2008.
6 Sutcliffe A. Press release: NICE launches new clinical guideline on
prevention of healthcare associated infections in primary and community
care. London: NICE, 2003.
7 Haley RW, Culver DH, White JW, Morgan WM, Grace TG, Munn VP,
Hooton TM. The Efficacy of Infection Surveillance and Control Programs
in Preventing Nosocomial Infections in US Hospitals. Am J Epidemiol
1985;121(2):182–205.
8 Ryan MAK, Christian RS, Wohlrabe J. Handwashing and respiratory
illness among young adults in military training. Am J Prevent Med
2001;21(2):79–83.
9 Fendler EJ, Ali Y, Hammond BS, Lyons MK, Kelley MB, Vowell NA.
The impact of alcohol hand sanitizer use on infection rates in an extended
care facility. Am J Infect Control 2002;30(4):226–233.
10 Gould D, Gammon J, Donnelly M, Batiste L, Ball E, De Melo AMSC
et al. Improving hand hygiene in community healthcare settings: the
impact
of
research
and
clinical
collaboration.
J
Clin
Nurs
2000;9(1):95–102.
11 Pittet D, Dharan S, Touveneau S, Sauvan V, Perneger T. Bacterial
contamination of the hands of hospital staff during routine patient care.
Arch Intern Med 1999;159(8):821–826.
12 Boyce JM, Pittet D. Guideline for Hand Hygiene in Healthcare
Settings: Recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control Practice
Advisory Committee and the HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hygiene Task
Force, 2002, 58 pp.
13 Canada Communicable Disease Report Supplement. Infection Control
Guidelines: Hand washing, cleaning, disinfection and sterilization in
health care. December 1998;24(S8).
323

14 Infection Control Nurses Association. Guidelines for Hand Hygiene,
2002.
15 Pratt RJ, Pellowe C, Loveday HP, Robinson N, Smith GW, and the
guideline development team. The epic project: Developing national
evidence based guidelines for preventing healthcare-associated infections.
Phase 1: Guidelines for preventing hospital-acquired infections. J Hosp
Infect 2001;47 (Supplement): S1–S82.
16 Ayliffe GA, Babb JR, Quoraishi AH. A test for ‘hygienic’ hand
disinfection. J Clin Pathol 1978;31:923–928.
17 Ambulance Service Association. National Guidance and Procedures
for Infection Prevention and Control. London: Ambulance Service
Association, 2004.
18 Garner JS. The Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee: Guidelines for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17(1):53–80.
19 Wilson J. Infection Control in Clinical Practice. London: Baillière
Tindall, 1995:161–162.
20 Expert Advisory Group on AIDS and the Advisory Group on Hepatitis.
Guidance for Clinical Health Care Workers: Protection Against Infection
with Blood-Borne Viruses. London: Department of Health, 1998, 46 pp.
21 Centers for Disease Control Update. Recommendations for prevention
of HIV transmission in health care settings. Morb Mort Week Rep
1987;37:24.
22 Garner JS. The Hospital Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee: Guidelines for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals. Infect Cont
Hosp Epidemiol 1996;17(1):53–80.
23 Pratt RJ, Pellowe C, Loveday HP, Robinson N, Smith G W, and the
guideline development team. The epic project: Developing national
evidence based guidelines for preventing healthcare-associated infections.
Phase 1: Guidelines for preventing hospital-acquired infections. J Hosp
Infect 2001;47 (Supplement): S1–S82.
24 Clark L, Smith W, Young L. Protective Clothing; Principles and
Guidance. London: ICNA, 2002.
324

25 Callaghan I. Bacterial contamination of nurses’ uniforms: a study. Nurs
Stand 2002;13(1):37–42.
26 Perry C, Marshall R, Jones E. Bacterial contamination of uniforms. J
Hosp Infect 2001;48:238–241.
27 Huntley DE, Campbell J. Bacterial contamination of scrub jackets
during dental hygiene procedures. J Dent Hyg 1998;72(3):19–23.
28 Health and Safety Commission. Control of Substances Hazardous to
Health Regulations 1999. Approved Codes of Practice. London: HSE
Books, 1999.
29 National Patient Safety Agency. The National Specifications for
Cleanliness in The NHS: A Framework for Setting and Measuring
Performance Outcomes in Ambulance Trusts. London: NPSA.
30
Department
of
Health.
Standards
for
Better
Health.
London:
Department of Health, 2006.
31 Department of Health. Ambulance Guidelines: Reducing Infection
Through Effective Practice in the Pre-Hospital Environment. London:
Department of Health, 2008.
325

Chapter 13
Vascular access devices
Content
Definition of a vascular access device
Anatomy of veins
Peripheral cannulas
Indications for peripheral cannulation
Selection of device for peripheral cannulation
Selection of vein
Techniques of venodilatation
Complications of peripheral venous cannulation
Procedure for peripheral intravenous cannulation
Intraosseous infusion
Anatomy of bones
Indications for intraosseous access
Contraindications to intraosseous access
Equipment for intraosseous access
Complications of intraosseous access
Location sites for intraosseous access
326

Procedures for intraosseous access
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Vascular access and injections are tasks that are carried out quite
commonly by ambulance paramedics. Intravenous cannulation is perhaps
the most frequently used route of vascular access with the intraosseous
route normally reserved for young children. The development of new
devices may lead to an increase in the use of the intraosseous route in the
emergency
management
of
adults
where
intravenous
access
is
unattainable.
The skills are fundamental for the administration of many drugs and fluids
but have inherent risks attached to them; the paramedic should be aware of
the
options
available
and
select
the
most
appropriate
for
the
circumstances.
Definition of a vascular
access device
For the purposes of prehospital care, a vascular access device is a device
that is inserted into a peripheral or central vein (intravenous), or into the
marrow cavity of selected bones (intraosseous). The devices may be used
to administer drugs or fluids, or as a prophylactic measure. They may be
used for sampling blood for diagnostic tests although this is not currently
within the remit of UK paramedics.
There is a variety of vascular access devices available and each has its
own requirements; however, there are certain principles that are applicable
to all devices.
327

Anatomy of veins
The superficial veins of the upper limbs are normally selected for siting a
peripheral cannula in prehospital care. Use of the lower limbs may be
indicated in very small children and where injury prevents the use of the
upper limbs but cannulation of the lower limbs is associated with an
increased risk of venous thromboembolism.1
Veins consist of three layers:2
•
Tunica adventitia – the outer layer of fibrous connective tissue.
•
Tunica media – the middle layer comprising of smooth muscle and
elastic fibres.
•
Tunica intima – the thin inner layer of endothelium.
The skin consists of two layers:2
•
Epidermis – the superficial thinner layer of the skin composed of
keratinised stratified squamous epithelium.
•
Dermis – a layer of dense, irregular connective tissue lying deep to
the epidermis. Blood vessels, nerves, glands and hair follicles are
embedded in dermal tissue.
The structure and appearance of the skin alters with age as the dermal
layers become thinner and elasticity is lost. The number of cells producing
collagen and elastic fibres decrease leading to the development of
wrinkles. The veins of older people may be easier to see as a result of
these changes but they are more mobile, more fragile, and often tortuous
and thrombosed.3 It is perhaps best to avoid the dorsum of the hand in
older people due to their fragile nature.5
Peripheral cannulas
There are two commonly used peripheral cannulas; a peripheral cannula,
and a hollow-needle infusion device, often called a ‘butterfly’ (see Figures
13.1 and 13.2). The peripheral cannula is usually a catheter-over-needle
design; the needle is withdrawn after the venepuncture whilst the flexible
plastic catheter remains in the vascular compartment. The needle of the
328

butterfly remains in the vein thereby causing increased risk of damage to
the vein.4
Peripheral cannulas are available to paramedics in various sizes ranging
from 22 gauge (smallest) through to 14 gauge (largest). Each device is
colour-coded and information regarding flow rates and catheter diameters
can be found on the device packaging. Modern catheters tend to be made
from polyurethane, which is more flexible, less traumatic and less
irritating on the intimal layer of the vein than earlier polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) models.5,6
Figure 13.1 Intravenous cannulas.
Figure 13.2 Butterfly cannula.
Indications for peripheral
cannulation
Peripheral cannulas are indicated for:
•
Drug therapy
•
Fluid therapy
•
Prophylaxis.
There are potential complications associated with intravenous cannulation
so care should be taken to perform cannulation only on patients who are
329

likely
to
benefit
from
the
procedure.
The
risks
associated
with
prophylactic cannulation probably outweigh the benefits so cannulation
for this purpose is to be discouraged.
Selection of device for
peripheral cannulation
The choice of cannula will be dependent upon several factors:
•
Purpose of cannulation. A larger bore cannula will be required for
rapid infusion of fluids whilst a smaller gauge will be adequate for
drugs or for prophylactic purposes.
•
Size of veins. Smaller veins will only tolerate a small cannula so
irrespective of the purpose of cannulation, a small cannula may be
required.
•
Shocked patients. Shock leads to peripheral shutdown and may
restrict the size of cannula that can be inserted.
•
Practitioner skill and confidence. A newly qualified practitioner
may be less confident at placing a large bore cannula so may take a
pragmatic view that something is better than nothing.
Selection of vein
An advantage of peripheral venous cannulation is that the veins are
normally visible; however, there may be occasions where this is not the
case so palpation and familiarity with venous topography are useful.
Figures 13.3 and 13.4 illustrate venous anatomy in the hand and forearm.
The vein should be selected before the device so that only an appropriate
device is selected. The vein should be straight, free of valves and should
feel ‘bouncy’ when palpated. It is best to avoid joints as there is increased
risk of mechanical phlebitis and intermittent flow of fluids or drugs
created by the patient’ s movements.
330

Vein selection will be dependent upon a number of factors including the
reason for the cannulation, accessibility of the veins, injuries to the
patient, and previous cannulation attempts. The initial attempt should be
undertaken at the distal end of the limb as an unsuccessful attempt hinders
the use of veins distal to the original site. A cannula should not be placed
in areas of localised oedema, dermatitis, cellulitis, arteriovenous fistulae,
wounds, skin grafts, fractures, stroke, planned limb surgery and previous
cannulation.5 It may also be beneficial to patient independence if the
cannula is placed in the non-dominant limb.
Figure 13.3 Veins of the hand. Reprinted from Jenkins, Kemnitz and
Totora, Anatomy and Physiology; From Science to Life, copyright 2006,
with permission of John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Figure 13.4 Veins of arm. Reprinted from Jenkins, Kemnitz and Totora,
Anatomy and Physiology; From Science to Life, copyright 2006, with
permission of John Wiley & Sons Inc.
331

Techniques of venodilatation
Tourniquet and Gravity
Apply venous tourniquet to limb and tightened to between the patient’ s
systolic and diastolic pressures. If veins are not readily apparent or appear
small in calibre, place the limb below the level of the heart.8 Gravity
serves to slow venous return, leading to increased venous volume and
distention of veins of the upper extremity.11
Fist clenching
Opening and closing of the fist augments venous return by virtue of
muscular compressive forces exerted on vessels to enhance arterial blood
flow,7 which results in local venous distention.8 Increased blood velocity
from fist clenching also increases venous flow to the basilic and cephalic
veins.9 Research has shown that this form of isometric activity also results
in vasodilatation.10
Vein ‘tap’ and ‘milking’
Tapping a superficial vein once or twice augments vein distention11
although the mechanism by which this occurs is unclear.8 Applying a
mild, sliding pressure (‘milking’) along a short length of vein, from
proximal to distal, displaces blood distally resulting in vein distention.8
Care must be taken not to apply overly vigorous stimuli, especially to
those with fragile superficial veins (e.g., elderly, those chronically on
steroids) so as not to injure the veins or to result in pain related reflex
vasoconstriction. 8 ‘Slapping’ the vein is painful and causes the release of
histamine – this technique should not be used.
332

Local warmth
Blood flow in human skin increases greatly in response to direct heating12
although care has to be taken not to induce thermal damage to the
extremity. Applying local warmth in the prehospital environment may be
difficult but consideration may be made to immersing the upper extremity
in warm water for a few minutes, or applying a warm, moist compress.13
Dilatation of the external jugular vein
(EJV)
The Valsalva manoeuvre (forced expiration through a closed glottis) for
30 sec (at a pressure of 40 mmHg) has been shown to result in an 86%
increase in the area and 41% increase in the circumference of the right
EJV.14 Similarly, use of the Trendelenburg position augments venous
return towards the right atrium and can result in EJV distention.15,16
Complications of peripheral
venous cannulation
No clinical intervention is risk free but the benefits of appropriate
intravenous
cannulation
are
normally
considered
to
outweigh
the
complications. One of the key concerns in prehospital care is the time
delay
for
undertaking
the
task.
Studies
suggest
that
intravenous
cannulation with no therapeutic treatment can increase on-scene times by
an average of between 8 and 13 minutes,17,18 this needs to be considered
when making the clinical decision to cannulate as should the number of
attempts that should be made.
Intravenous cannulation provides a direct portal of entry for infectious
pathogens and is a considerable source of morbidity and mortality in
hospital.19,20 The incidence of infection secondary to intravenous
cannulation by paramedics is not known but the nature of the work and the
practice environment mean that it could be even higher. An increased risk
333

of infection during emergency insertion has been noted as strict adherence
to aseptic techniques may be less rigorous.21 Places, people and
equipment can all serve as reservoirs for infection.22 For this reason
infection prevention and control should consider not only patients, but
also staff and bystanders as well as the environment and any equipment in
use.23
Whilst
the
paramedic
may
have
limited
control
over
the
environment, they can minimise the risk of infection from equipment by
ensuring that any packaging is intact and in date. When opening
packaging, aseptic techniques should be employed. Compliance with hand
hygiene and personal protective equipment policies is imperative in order
to minimise the risks of contamination through this portal and, although
there is debate regarding the efficacy of skin cleansing prior to insertion,
current recommendations advocate the use of 2% chlorhexidine gluconate
in 70% isopropyl alcohol, which should be allowed to dry.24
The incidence of vascular complications increases as the ratio of the
external diameter of the cannula to vessel lumen increases;25 therefore the
smallest cannula for the prescribed therapy should be used.5,26,27 Phlebitis
related
to
intravenous
cannulation
has
three
underlying
factors;
mechanical (caused by friction and movement of the device within the
vein), chemical (relating to infusates), and physical (related to the
properties of the cannula).28
THINK
Identify common sources of contamination during intravenous cannulation and
describe how to minimise these risks.
Other potential complications and their solutions are presented in Table
13.1
Management in situ
Once sited, the peripheral cannula should be flushed with 0.9% sodium
chloride or a heparin solution. The exact volume of fluid required to
maintain patency is unclear but between 2 and 5 mL is adequate providing
correct technique is used; i.e. a pulsatile flush ending with positive
pressure.25
334

Once the cannula is in situ it should be taped into place for security.
Non-sterile tape should not cover the site; it should be treated as an open
wound. Specific cannula dressings are supplied and should be used as they
are
sterile
and
allow
vision
of
the
site
during
fluid/medication
administration.
Table 13.1 Insertion and devices: complications and solutions
Risks with
insertion
of devices
Impact
Management
Failed
technique
Delay in treatment and
unable to use vein
Review technique, vein and
equipment selection. Attempt again
only if necessary and chances of
success are high
Poor
technique
Pain, nerve hit, overshot
vein, bruising, increased
risk of infection, patient
anxiety, failed attempt
Refer to more experienced colleague;
work to improve technique under
supervision
Patient
anxiety
Vein may be constricted,
muscles may be tense so
risk of pain
Reassure patient, select smallest
suitable device, consider local
anaesthetic, consider necessity of
procedure in prehospital environment
Incorrect
device
Device performs poorly,
flow rate inadequate or
fluid overload, causes
mechanical phlebitis
Remove device and perform full
assessment
Sharps
disposal
Needlestick injury for staff
or patient
Wash wound in running water and
follow local policy
Plastic/air
embolus
Risk of pulmonary
embolism
Remove device and treat any
symptoms, report on arrival at hospital
and document incident
Patient
compliance
Device removed or
tampered with
Assess patient, ensure appropriate site
selection and secure device
Haematoma Bruising, pain, reduced
access to vein
Remove device and apply pressure
Occluded
cannula
Fails to allow fluid or
medication delivery
Remove device and re-site
335

Adapted from Lavery and Smith 2007.6
Procedure for peripheral
intravenous cannulation
Equipment required
•
Gloves
•
Selection of peripheral venous cannulas (select smallest for the
intended purpose)
•
Venous tourniquet
•
2% chlorhexidine gluconate in 70% isopropyl alcohol
•
Sterile
occlusive
transparent
semi-permeable
membrane
(e.g.
Vecafix, Niko-Gard)
•
Intravenous administration set or 0.9% sodium chloride flush
•
Sharps box.
Procedure (Figures 13.5–13.13)
Additional information/
rationale
Preparation
1. Explain the procedure and gain consent.
Legal requirement.
2. Select site for cannula placement.
Straight, wide veins;
‘bouncy’ on palpation;
avoid joints and valves.
3. Prepare equipment. Check date and integrity of
package.
Check all component
parts are present.
Technique
1. Use a non-touch insertion technique29
Minimises risk of
infection.
2. Apply tourniquet.
To engorge veins the
tourniquet should be
tightened to between the
336

patient’ s systolic and
diastolic pressures.
3. Perform hand hygiene and, wearing gloves,
disinfect the selected venepuncture site, allowing at
least 30 seconds for the site to dry.27
Minimises the risk of
infection.
4. Inspect the chosen cannula to ensure product
integrity. To avoid contamination do not touch the
cannula shaft.
Ensure the package is
intact and the expiry date
has not been exceeded.
5. Hold the cannula in line with the vein at a 10–30°
angle to the skin and insert the cannula through the
skin.
6. As the cannula enters the vein, blood will be seen
in the flashback chamber.
Return of blood into the
cannula is required to
confirm correct
placement of cannula in
the vein.30
7. Lower the angle of the cannula slightly to ensure
it enters the lumen of the vein and does not puncture
the posterior wall of the vessel; advance the needle a
little further.
The needle sits ahead of
the catheter so the
cannula may need to be
advanced a little further
to ensure that the catheter
is in the vein.
8. Withdraw the stylet slightly and blood should be
seen to enter the cannula. Slowly advance the cannula
into the vein, ensuring that the vein remains anchored
throughout the procedure. NB: The stylet must not be
re-inserted as this can damage the cannula, resulting
in plastic embolus.
Confirms the position in
the vein.
9. Release the tourniquet Allows free flow of fluids/
drugs and relieves pressure from patient’ s arm.
Prevents flow of blood
out of the distal end of
the cannula as the needle
is removed.
10. Place pressure distal to the end of the catheter
and remove needle; immediately place needle into
sharps bin then replace bung onto the end of the
cannula or connect giving set.
Drop sharps into
container; do not push.
Colleagues should NOT
hold the sharps container
so as to avoid risk of
accidental needlestick
injury.
337

11. Connect cannula to pre-prepared infusion giving
set or flush with 0.9% sodium chloride (or heparin
solution).
Confirms patency and
ensures easy
administration without
pain, resistance or
localised swelling.
12. Apply a sterile dressing.
13. Secure administration set tubing if an infusion is
started.
14. Remove gloves and perform hand hygiene.
Post-procedure
1. Note the date and time of insertion on the case
report form. Some cannula dressings may also have
facility for documenting this information.
It is recommended that
cannulas inserted in
emergency conditions are
replaced within 24 hours
of insertion21,32
2. Document the number of attempts and any other
complications.
Allows hospital staff to
monitor any untoward
occurrences.
3. Splints should only be used when the cannula is
placed in an area of flexion or is at risk of
dislodgment.31
If a splint is used,
removal to allow
assessment of the
circulatory status of the
limb is required at
established intervals.31
Figure 13.5 Disinfect chosen site.
Figure 13.6 Insert needle at angle of between 10 and 30 degrees.
338

Figure 13.7 Blood in flashback chamber.
Figure 13.8 Blood enters the catheter as the needle is withdrawn.
Figure 13.9 Advance cannula whilst anchoring the vein.
Figure 13.10 Remove needle whilst applying distal pressure
Figure 13.11 Safe disposal of sharps.
339

Figure 13.12 Replace bung onto the end of the cannula.
Figure 13.13 Secure cannula and document time.
Hollow needle device (butterfly)
These devices are suited for use on children or other patients with small,
delicate veins. They do not have a polyurethane catheter; rather, the metal
stylet is inserted into the vein and secured there. There is a risk of damage
to the vein with the metal needle so care is needed when inserting and
securing
the
device.
A
similar
technique
to
standard
peripheral
cannulation is used except that there will be no flashback of blood and the
needle remains in situ.
External jugular cannulation
The external jugular vein (EJV) crosses the sternomastoid muscle and then
traverses the posterior triangle of the neck superficially. It is easily
distended by a simple Valsalva manoeuvre. The EJV is superficial when it
340

crosses the posterior triangle so it is safe for venepuncture. No important
structures lie so superficially in the neck and therefore inadvertent muscle,
arterial or nerve injury is avoided.33
The close proximity of the external jugular vein to the central venous
system offers many of the benefits conferred by central venous
cannulation; fluids and medications rapidly reach the core of the body
from the EJV. Access to the EJV should only be considered where other
means of peripheral access have been exhausted, so it will most likely be
reserved for the cardiac arrest situation.
Cannulation of the EJV requires largely the same equipment as for
cannulation at other peripheral sites although a 10 mL syringe is also
required to aspirate blood to help confirm entry; a venous tourniquet is not
required.
Complications
There are several complications in addition to those of other sites of
peripheral intravenous cannulation:
•
Puncture of the airway
•
Damage to nearby arterial vessels
•
The technique should not be used in suspected cervical spine injury
•
Only one attempt may be used in prehospital care.
Procedure for external jugular
cannulation
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
Preparation
1. Explain the procedure and gain consent
(where applicable).
2. Prepare equipment.
Check date and integrity of
package. Check all component
parts are present. Draw 3-5 mL of
saline into the 10 mL syringe and
connect the syringe to the
341

flashback chamber of a large-bore
catheter over needle cannula.
3. Position the patient supine with feet
elevated or use Trendelenburg position.
Increases blood flow to the chest
and neck and decreases the chance
of air entering the circulatory
system during cannulation.34
4. Turn the patient’ s head in the direction
away from the site to be cannulated.
Helps to expose the vein to be
cannulated.
Technique
1. Perform hand hygiene and, wearing
gloves, disinfect the selected venepuncture
site, allowing at least 30 seconds for the site
to dry.27 Start swabbing at the site of
intended puncture and work outward 2.5–5
cm in increasing circles.
Minimises the risk of infection.
2. Engorge vein: Occlude venous return by
placing a finger on the EJV just above the
clavicle; this also anchors the vein.
Engorges vein prior to
cannulation. Never apply a
tourniquet around the patient’ s
neck.
3. Point the cannula at the medial third of
the clavicle and insert it at an angle of
between 10° and 30°. The bevel of the
needle should be up.
4. As the cannula enters the vein, gently
ease back on the plunger; if blood enters the
syringe, proceed with insertion. Advance the
entire cannula a further 0.5 cm so that the
catheter has entered the vein; slide the
catheter into the vein and remove the needle
as previously described.
Return of blood into the syringe is
required to confirm correct
placement of cannula in the
vein.35
5. Dispose of needle safely.
Drop sharps into container do not
push. Colleagues should NOT
hold the sharps container so as to
avoid risk of accidental
needlestick injury.
6. Connect cannula to pre-prepared infusion
giving set and allow to run free for several
seconds.
Ensures correct insertion.
342

7. Once position confirmed, set flow to
appropriate rate.
8. Apply a sterile dressing.
9. Secure administration set tubing if an
infusion is started.
10. Remove gloves and perform hand
hygiene.
Post-procedure
1. Note the date and time of insertion on the
case report form.
It is recommended that cannulas
inserted in emergency conditions
are replaced within 24 hours of
insertion. 21,36
2. Document the number of attempts and
any other complications on case report form.
Some cannula dressings may also have
facility for documenting this information.
Legal requirement and allows
hospital staff to monitor any
untoward occurrences.
Intraosseousinfusion
Intraosseous infusion (IOI) is an excellent alternative route for providing
vascular access to administer fluids, blood products, and medications
where alternative methods are not available or attempts have failed. IOI is
particularly useful in children and studies have demonstrated that the use
of IOI can decrease the time needed to obtain vascular access in paediatric
patients in cardiac arrest.37,38
In addition, the rate of vascular access in paediatric cardiac arrest patients
is higher for IOI (83%) than for all other forms of IV access,39 and a
recent study suggests that the IO route provides vascular access and fluid
more quickly under HazMat conditions.40 IO has been widely used in the
United States for a number of years41 and there is evidence that IO
devices can be easily placed compared with intravenous access by combat
medics.42
343

Anatomy of bones
Bone is made up of a dense outer layer surrounding a spongy inner layer
that forms a meshwork occupied by bone marrow, blood vessels, nerves,
and fat tissue.43 Bone marrow consists of developing blood cells and a
network of fibres that support the vascular complex in the medulla. The
purposes of the medullary complex include production of red blood cells
and provision of a blood supply to the bone itself. The medullary cavity of
long bones provides a ‘non-collapsible vein’ for intraosseous access.
Indications for intraosseous
access
The basic indication for IOI is the need for emergent vascular access when
conventional methods have failed.44 The Resuscitation Council state that
the IO route should be considered for both adults and children where
intravenous access is difficult or impossible.45 IOI has also been
recommended for conditions such as cardiopulmonary arrest, profound
shock, status epilepticus, overwhelming sepsis, and major burns.46,47
THINK
You are about to administer an IOI to a young child–consider how you will gain
consent from the parents and how you will reassure them during the procedure
Contraindications to
intraosseous access
The only universally accepted absolute contraindication to IOI is a
fracture of the bone near the access site.48 Relative contraindications to
344

IOI include cellulitis over the insertion site and inferior vena caval
injury.48
Equipment for intraosseous
access
Several devices are now available for use although most ambulance Trusts
in the UK retain the traditional ‘Cook’ style device. The EZ-IO (a drill
device), the Bone Injection Gun (BIG) (an automatic intraosseous device)
and the FAST IO introducer are available and have met with varying
reviews. The new devices will be discussed along with the traditional
device in order to cover all of those used in UK practice.
Complications of
intraosseous access
Very few complications have been reported in association with IO
access.49 In more than 4200 cases of IO access in children, osteomyelitis
occurred in only 0.6%, and usually only if the infusion continued for a
prolonged period or if the patient had bacteraemia at the time of
insertion.50 In a prospective, 250-patient, multi-centre study of the
powered drill device, no observed cases of osteomyelitis, fat embolism,
fracture, infection, extravasation, or compartment syndrome were found.51
Pain during insertion and infusion under pressure are likely to be of
concern. One study showed average pain ratings of 5 on a 1–10 severity
scale during IO infusion in conscious patients.51 A separate study using
the drill device in 125 conscious patients, recorded an average pain score
of 1.2 on a five-point scale, 1 being lowest and 5 being greatest.52 The use
of 1% lidocaine injected into the marrow space over 60 seconds has been
shown to be effective in reducing pain during infusion.53
345

Location sites for
intraosseous access
The conventional site for IOI is the proximal tibia.54 The tibial tuberosity
can be located by palpation just below the patella. The usual insertion site
is the relatively flat area 2 cm distal and 2 cm medial to the tibial
tuberosity. Although this site is usually distal to the growth plate, it is still
recommended that the needle be angled 10–15 degrees caudally to avoid
injury to the growth plate.44
There are several alternative sites including the distal tibia in children. To
avoid the saphenous vein, the distal tibia may be entered 1–2 cm superior
to the medial malleolus. It is recommended that the needle be angled
(10–15 degrees) away from the growth plate (i.e., cephalad in this
instance).44
The sternum carries a number of problems: it may interfere with chest
compressions and carries a risk of mediastinal injury, pneumothorax, great
vessel injury, and death.55 However, new devices such as the FAST have
improved the safety of sternal access, and may now provide an option for
prehospital providers.
Procedures for intraosseous
access
Traditional IO device
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
1. Explain the procedure and
gain consent of patient or
relative.
Legal requirement.
346

2. Restrain the patient’ s leg and
place padding under the knee.
Brings leg into best position for insertion and
prevents accidental misplacement if patient
moves during insertion.
3. Identify the chosen
site-usually the tibia. The
landmark on the tibia for all age
groups can be found by:
• Identifying the tibial tuberosity.
• Find a point 2 cm inferior to
the tibial tuberosity and then 2
cm medial to that point.
4. Clean the skin.
There is no set method for doing this but the
risk of infection and the problems associated
with managing bone infections suggest that a
rigorous technique be used.
5. If approved for use,
administer local anaesthetic to
the conscious patient (1%
lidocaine injected
subcutaneously and over the
periosteum).
Reduces pain during procedure.
6. Insert IO needle through the
skin and subcutaneous tissues
until bone is felt. Using a
twisting motion, insert the trocar
into the bone until a loss of
resistance or ‘pop’ is felt, do not
insert any further.
Indicates entry into the marrow.
7. Remove the trocar from the
needle dispose of safely.
Health and safety of sharps.
8. Attach a saline filled syringe;
pull back on the plunger to
attempt aspiration into the
syringe.
Confirms correct placement.
9. If marrow is not aspirated,
push a 5 to 10 mL bolus of
isotonic sodium chloride
solution through the syringe.
Correct medullary placement can be
confirmed when bone marrow and blood can
be easily aspirated.
347

10. If flow is good and
extravasation is not evident,
connect an intravenous line with
a 3-way stopcock, and secure the
needle with gauze pads and tape.
Resistance to flow should be minimal, and
extravasation should not be evident.
Observing the calf area for acute swelling or
discoloration is important.
11. Fluids may infuse by gravity
but the unpredictability of bone
marrow blood flow by this
method alone has been
demonstrated56 so it is usually
necessary to use pressure to
augment flow in IOI.
Flow rates can be dramatically increased by
the use of pressure bags and infusion pumps.
Flow rates of 10 mL/min by gravity can be
increased to 41 mL/min by using pressurized
bags.58 An alternative method for rapid
infusion is to manually infuse 30–60 mL
boluses via a stopcock.
12. Only one IO attempt should
be made in each bone. However,
if the needle becomes plugged
with soft tissue, it may be
removed, and a new needle may
be inserted through the same
cannulation site.57
Multiple punctures in the periosteum may
result in extravasation of fluid into the soft
tissues.
13. Complete documentation.
Virtually all drugs that can be administered via the IV route can be
administered by IOI.59 There is no need to adjust drug dosages when
using the IO route because it has been demonstrated that different IOI sites
(humerus, femur, malleolar, and tibia) are pharmacokinetically equivalent
with regard to transit times and serum concentrations.60
EZ-ΙΟ
The EZ-IO® Intraosseous Infusion system is a system that allows for
immediate vascular access in all patients larger than 3 kg. It comprises of
a power driver that provides a minimum of 1000 insertions and has a shelf
life of up to 10 years, and needle sets of varying sizes to match the needs
of the patient. There is little research available at the moment, but the
small scale studies that have been completed suggest that it is a useful
tool. One study has shown that vascular access using the EZ-IO is
achieved significantly more frequently at first attempt than a manual IO
348

system (Cook),61 whilst there has also been successful use by the
military.62 However, pain has been observed in conscious patients and in
one study, insertion of the EZ-IO proved to be more painful than the
original injury.63 A small study investigated the use of the EZ-IO for
humeral and tibial insertion and found that both sites had high-insertion
success rates and there was no significant difference in tibial or humeral
flow rates.63 This may open up an alternative site for when tibial insertion
is not an option.
Procedure ΕΖ-IO64
See Figure 13.14.
•
Follow first 5 steps above.
•
Prepare infusion system.
•
Ensure that the driver and needle set are securely seated.
•
Remove and discard the needle set safety cap from the IO needle
set installed on the EZ-IO power driver.
•
Position driver at insertion site with needle set at a 90-degree angle
to the bone. Gently power or press needle set until needle set tip
touches bone.
•
Ensure at least 5 mm of the catheter is visible.
•
Penetrate bone cortex by squeezing the driver’ s trigger and
applying gentle, steady downward pressure.
•
Release driver’ s trigger and stop insertion process when:
•
A sudden ‘give’ or ‘pop’ is felt upon entry into the medullary
space.
•
A desired depth is obtained.
•
Remove power driver and stylet.
•
Confirm catheter stability.
•
Attach primed EZ-Connect® extension set to catheter hub’ s Luer
lock and confirm position; proceed as before.
Figure 13.14 EZ-IO. Reproduced with permission of Vidacare (UK) Ltd.
349

FAST
The FAST™is a sternal intraosseous infusion device that delivers
life-saving drugs and fluids to the heart in under a minute. It is specifically
designed for safe and effective use of IO under emergency conditions and
features speedy access, a protected infusion site, and a depth-control
mechanism. The tool allows IO infusion to be used as a standard protocol
in adults. The FAST is only designed to be used in patients aged 12 years
or older and is intended to be inserted only in the midline of the
manubrium 1.5 cm inferior to the suprasternal notch. A second generation
device, the ‘FAST X’, is being developed but was not available at time of
writing; the information given here relates specifically to the FAST 1
(Figure 13.15).
Studies suggest that the FAST has considerable potential in prehospital
care65–67 although more work is probably required.
Figure 13.15 FAST 1. Reproduced with permission of Pyng Medical
Corporation.
Procedure for FAST
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
1. Explain the procedure and gain consent of
patient or relative.
Legal requirement.
2. Expose the sternum and clean the
infusion site. Clean the skin.
There is no set method for
cleaning the site but the risk of
infection and the problems
associated with managing bone
350

infections suggest that a rigorous
technique be used.
3. Remove top half of patch backing
(labelled ‘Remove 1’). Locate sternal notch
with index finger held perpendicular to
manubrium.
This point is needed to correctly
place the ‘target zone’ of the
patch.
4. Using index finger, align notch in patch
with the patient’ s sternal notch ensuring that
the target zone (circular hole in Patch) is
over the patient’ s midline.
Ensures that the correct point on
the manubrium will be entered by
the device.
5. Remove the bottom half of the Patch
backing (labelled ‘Remove 2’) and press
Patch firmly to secure it to the patient.
6. Verify that the target zone is over the
patient’ s midline; adjust the Patch if the
error is greater than about 1 cm.
Errors of greater than 1 cm may
cause misplacement of the device
and may cause injury.
7. Remove the sharps cap from the
introducer.
8. Place bone probe cluster (series of
needles) in the target zone ensuring that the
introducer axis is perpendicular (90°) to the
skin at the insertion site. Ensure that the
entire bone probe cluster is within the target
zone.
The introducer must remain
perpendicular in order that the
insertion tube is correctly sited.
9. Pressing straight along the introducer
axis, with hand and elbow in line, push with
firm increasing pressure until a distinct
release is heard and felt. The introducer must
remain perpendicular to the skin during
insertion.
10. After release, pull straight back on the
introducer to expose the infusion tube.
11. Push the used bone probe cluster into the
foam-filled sharps plug. Replace the original
sharps cap over the sharps cover if desired.
Enables safe disposal of sharps.
351

12. Attach the elbow female connector (blue
cap) on the patch to the infusion tube male
Luer.
13. Attach a syringe with 2–3 mL of sodium
chloride to the infusion tube and push
through quickly – NOTE: this will be very
painful if the patient is conscious.
Required to create a clear
passageway for fluid
administration.
14. Attach the straight female connector on
the patch to the IV set.
15. If fluid does not flow or extravasation
occurs, the infusion should be discontinued
and an alternative vascular access method
should be used.
16. Complete documentation.
Bone injection gun (BIG)
See Figure 13.16.
The bone injection gun was perhaps the first automatic IO device and was
introduced into emergency medicine in 2000. There have been mixed
reviews when compared with standard IO techniques or alternative
powered/automatic devices. A Best Evidence Topic report from 200568
concluded that the bone injection gun appears to be equivalent in terms of
success and possibly (but not clinically significantly) faster to use than
standard IO needles at achieving IO access, whilst a prospective study
suggested that the bone injection gun provides an effective alternative IV
access for critical patients in whom a peripheral IV line cannot be readily
obtained in the prehospital setting.69 There have also been case reports of
high failure rates when using the BIG device caused mainly by the
inability to control the path of the catheter.70 As with other recent
automatic IO devices it is likely that more work needs to be done with the
B.I.G before its effectiveness can be fully established.
Figure 13.16 Bone injection gun.
352

Procedure for bone injection gun
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
1. Explain the procedure and gain consent of
patient or relative.
Legal requirement.
2. Locate a suitable penetration site.
Primary site in adults is the
proximal tibia, secondary sites
include the medial malleolus,
distal radius and anterior head of
the humerus.
3. Clean the infusion site.
There is no set method for
cleaning the site but the risk of
infection and the problems
associated with managing bone
infections suggest that a rigorous
technique be used.
4. Choose BIG with desired depth of
penetration.
5. With one hand holding firmly, position the
BIG at a 90 degree angle to the surface of the
skin.
Ensures that the correct point will
be
entered by the device.
6. With one hand holding the BIG firmly,
pull out the safety latch by squeezing its two
sides together.
Do not dispose of safety latch, it
will be used later.
7. While continuing to hold the bottom part
firmly against the leg, place 2 fingers of the
other hand under the ‘winged portion’ and the
palm of that hand on the top. Leaning on the
No extra force is required.
353

device with straight elbows will activate the
BIG.
8. Trigger the BIG by gently pressing down.
9. Pull out the stylet trocar to leave the
cannula in the bone.
10. The safety latch can now be used to
provide extra stability to the cannula.
Helps to prevent instability in the
cannula and reduces the risk of
displacement.
11. Proceed as for conventional IOI.
Chapter Key Points
1. A vascular access device is a device that is inserted into a peripheral or
central vein (intravenous), or into the marrow cavity of selected bones
(intraosseous).
2. The structure and appearance of the skin alters with age as the dermal layers
become thinner and elasticity is lost. The veins of older people may be easier
to see as a result of these changes but they are more mobile, more fragile, and
often tortuous and thrombosed.
3. There are two commonly used peripheral cannulas; a peripheral cannula,
and a hollow-needle infusion device, often called a ‘butterfly’.
4. The choice of cannula will be dependent upon several factors such as the
purpose of cannulation, the size of veins, peripheral shutdown in shocked
patients, and the practitioner’ s skill and confidence.
5. Appropriate techniques should be used to encourage venodilatation.
6. The benefits of appropriate venous cannulation normally outweigh the risks
but the practitioner needs to be aware of the risks and minimise any dangers.
7. Intraosseous infusion is an excellent alternative route for providing vascular
access to administer fluids, blood products, and medications where alternative
methods are not available or attempts have failed.
8. New devices for obtaining intraosseous access mean that this route may
become more widely used in the future.
9. The only universally accepted absolute contraindication to intraosseous
infusion is a fracture of the bone near the access site.
10. Virtually all drugs that can be administered via the IV route can be
administered by intraosseous infusion. There is no need to adjust drug dosages
when using the IO route.
References and Further reading
354

1 Scales K. Vascular access in the acute care setting, in Dougherty L,
Lamb J (Eds) Intravenous Therapy in Nursing Practice. London:
Churchill Livingstone, 1999, pp. 261–299.
2 Tortora GJ, Derrikson B. Principles of Anatomy and Physiology, 11th
edn. New Jersey: Wiley, 2006.
3 Dougherty L. Obtaining peripheral venous access. In: Dougherty L,
Lamb J. (Eds) Intravenous Therapy in Nursing Practice. London:
Churchill Livingstone, 1999.
4 Dougherty L. Obtaining peripheral venous access. In: Dougherty L,
Lamb J. (Eds) Intravenous Therapy in Nursing Practice. London:
Harcourt, 1999.
5 Scales K. Vascular access: a guide to peripheral venous cannulation.
Nurs Stand 2005;19(49):4,8–52.
6 Lavery I, Smith E. Peripheral vascular access devices: risk prevention
and management. Br J Nurs 2007;16(22):1378–1383.
7 Campbell J. Making sense of the technique of venepuncture. Nurs Times
1995;91:29–31.
8 Mbamalu D, Banerjee A. Methods of obtaining peripheral venous access
in difficult situations. Postgrad Med J 1999;75:459–462.
9 Simons P, Coleridge Smith P, Lees WR, McGrouther DA. Venous
pumps of the hand. Their clinical importance. J Hand Surg [Br]
1996;21:595–599.
10 Torok T, Bari F, Kardos A, Paprika D, Rudas L. Isometric handgrip
exercise-induced
muscarinic
vasodilation
in
the
human
skin
microvasculature. Acta Physiol Hung 1997–98;85:193–198.
11 Millam DA. Tips for improving your venipuncture techniques. Nursing
1987;17:46–49.
12 Savage MV, Brengelmann GL. Reproducibility of the vascular
response to heating in human skin. J Appl Physiol 1994;76:1759–1763.
13 Lenhardt R, Seybold T, Kimberger O, Stoiser B, Sessler DI. Local
warming and insertion of peripheral venous cannulas: single blinded
355

prospective randomized controlled trial and single blinded randomised
crossover trial. BMJ 2002;325:409–410.
14 Attubato MJ, Katz ES, Feit F, Bernstein N, Schwartzman D, Kronzon
I. Venous changes occurring during the Valsalva maneuver: evaluation by
intravascular ultrasound. Am J Cardiol 1994;74:408–410.
15 Verghese ST, Nath A, Zenger D, Patel RI, Kaplan RF, Patel KM. The
effects of the simulated Valsalva maneuver, liver compression, and/or
Trendelenberg position on the cross-sectional area of the internal jugular
vein in infants and young children. Anesth Analg 2002;94:250–254.
16 Lobato EB, Florete OG Jr, Paige GB, Morey TE. Cross-sectional area
and intravascular pressure of the right internal jugular vein during
anesthesia: effects of Trendelenburg position, positive intrathoracic
pressure, and hepatic compression. J Clin Anesth 1998;10:1–5.
17 Sukumaran S, Henry JM, Beard D, Lawrenson R, Gordon MWG, O’
Donnell JJ, Gray AJ. Pre-hospital trauma management: a national study of
paramedic activities Emerg Med J 2005;22:60–63.
18 Johnson GS, Guly H. The effect of pre-hospital administration of
intravenous nalbuphine on on-scene times. Emerg Med J 12(1):20–22.
19 Parker I. Management of intravascular devices to prevent infection. Br
J Nurs 11(4):240–246.
20 Pinkowish M. Bloodstream infections and intravascular devices. Am J
Nurs 106(12):72CC–72DD.
21 Tagalakis V, Kahn SR, Libman M, Blostein M. The epidemiology of
peripheral vein infusion thrombophlebitis: a critical review. Am J Med
2002;113(2):146–151.
22 Chalmers C, Straub M. Standard principles for preventing and
controlling infection. Nurs Stand 2006;20(23):57–65.
23 Damani NN. Manual of Infection Control Procedures, 2nd edn.
London: Greenwich Medical Media, 2003.
24 Department of Health. High Impact Intervention No 2. Peripheral
intravenous
cannula
care
bundle.
2007
available
online
at
www.clean-safe-care.nhs.uk [accessed 24–04–2008].
356

25 Mallet J, Dougherty L. Manual of Clinical Nursing Procedures, 5th
edn. Oxford: Blackwell Science, 2000.
26 Fuller A, Winn C. Selecting equipment for peripheral intravenous
cannulation. Profess Nurse 1999;14(4):233–236.
27 Royal College of Nursing. Infusion equipment. In: Standards for
Infusion Therapy, 2nd edn. London: RCN;2006, pp. 18–24.
28 Workman B. Peripheral intravenous therapy management. Nurs Stand
14(4):53–60.
29 Centre for Disease Control. Guidelines for the Prevention of
Intravascular
Catheter-Related
Infections.
Morb
Mort
Week
Rep
2002;51(RR10).
30 Royal College of Nursing. Site selection and placement. In: Standards
for Infusion Therapy, 2nd edn. London: RCN, 2005, pp. 25–32.
31 Royal College of Nursing. Infusion equipment. In: Standards for
Infusion Therapy, 2nd edn. London: RCN, 2006, pp. 18–24.
32 NHS Lothian University Hospitals Division. Venepuncture and/or
Peripheral IV Cannulation Clinical Skills Education Pack. Edinburgh:
NHS LUHD, 2005.
33 Mason S, Watts A, Shiels S, Koorey D. Improving access to HCV
treatment: external jugular venepuncture can overcome problems with
difficult venous access. Internat J Drug Policy 2007;18(5):433–436.
34 Bledsoe B, Porter RS, Cherry RA. Essentials of Paramedic Care. New
Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2003.
35 Royal College of Nursing. Site selection and placement. In: Standards
for Infusion Therapy, 2nd edn. London: RCN, 2005, pp. 25–32.
36 NHS Lothian University Hospitals Division. Venepuncture and/or
Peripheral IV Cannulation Clinical Skills Education Pack. Edinburgh:
NHS LUHD, 2005.
37 Glaeser PW, Losek JD, Nelson DB et al. Pediatric intraosseous
infusions:
impact
on
vascular
access
time.
Am
J
Emerg
Med
1988;6:330–332.
357

38 Kanter RK, Zimmerman JJ, Strauss RH, Stoeckel KA. Pediatric
emergency intravenous access: evaluation of a protocol. Am J Dis Child
1986;140:132–134.
39 Brunette DD, Fischer R. Intravenous access in pediatric cardiac arrest.
Am J Emerg Med 1988;6:577–579.
40 Suyama J, Knutsen CC, Northington WE, Hahn M, Hostler D. IO
versus IV access while wearing personal protective equipment in a
HazMat scenario. Prehosp Emerg Care 2007;11:467–472.
41 Miner WF, Corneli HM, Bolte RG, Lehnhof D, Clawson JJ.
Prehospital use of intraosseous infusion by paramedics. Pediatr Emerg
Care 1989;5(1):5–7.
42 Calkins MD, Fitzgerald G, Bentley TB, Burris D. Intraosseous infusion
devices: a comparison for potential use in special operations. J Trauma
2000;48(6):1068–1074.
43 Ross MH, Romrell LJ, Kaye GI. Histology: A Text and Atlas, 3rd edn.
Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins, 1995, pp. 150–153.
44 LaRocco BG, Wang HE. Intraosseous Infusion. Prehosp Emerg Care
2003;7:280–285.
45 Resuscitation Council UK. Adult advanced life support. 2005 available
online at http://www.resus.org.uk/pages/als.pdf [accessed 04–05–2008].
46 Hurren JS, Dunn KW. Intraosseous infusion for burn resuscitation.
Burns 1995;21:285–287.
47 Goldstein B, Doody D, Briggs S. Emergency intraosseous infusion in
severely burned children. Pediatr Emerg Care. 1990;6:1995–1997.
48 Miner WF, Corneli HM, Bolte RG, Lehnhof D, Clawson JJ.
Prehospital use of intraosseous infusion by paramedics. Pediatr Emerg
Care 1989;5(1):5–7.
49 Fowler R, Gallagher JV, Isaacs SM, Ossman E, Pepe P, Wayne M. The
role of intraosseous vascular access in the out-of-hospital environment
(resource document to NAEMSP position statement). Prehosp Emerg
Care 2007;11:63–66.
358

50 Rosetti VA, Thompson BM, Miller J, Mateer JR, Aprahamian C.
Intraosseous infusion: an alternative route of pediatric intravascular
access. Ann Emerg Med 1985;14(9):885–888.
51 Davidoff J, Fowler R, Gordon D, Klein G, Kovar J et al. Clinical
evaluation of a novel intraosseous device for adults: prospective,
250-patient, multi-center trial. JEMS 2005;30(10) (suppl):20–23.
52 Gillum L, Kovar J. Powered intraosseous access in the out-of-hospital
setting. JEMS 2005;30(10)(suppl):24–26.
53 Waisman M, Waisman D. Bone marrow infusion in adults. J Trauma
1997;(2):288–293.
54 American College of Surgeons (Eds) ATLS, Advanced Trauma Life
Support for Doctors, Student Manual. Chicago IL: American College of
Surgeons, 1997, pp. 12, 97.
55 Fiser DH. Intraosseous infusion. N Engl J Med 1990;322:1579–1581.
56 Voelckel WG, Lurie KG, McKnite S et al. Comparison of epinephrine
with vasopressin on bone marrow blood flow in an animal model of
hypovolemic shock and subsequent cardiac arrest. Crit Care Med
2001;29:1587–1592.
57 Neal CJ, McKinley DF. Intraosseous infusion in pediatric patients. J
Am Osteopath Assoc 1994;94(1):63–66.
58 Shoor PM, Berryhill RE, Benumof JL. Intraosseous infusion:
pressure–flow
relationships
and
pharmacokinetics.
J
Trauma
1979;19:772–774.
59 Hazinski MF, Cummins RO, Field JM. (Eds) Basic life support for
health care providers. In: Handbook of Emergency Cardiovascular Care
for Healthcare Providers. Dallas TX: American Heart Association, 2002,
pp. 1–2, 96.
60 Warren DW, Kissoon N, Mattar A, Morrissey G, Gravelle D, Rieder
MJ.
Pharmacokinetics
from
multiple
intraosseous
and
peripheral
intravenous site injections in normovolemic and hypovolemic pigs. Crit
Care Med 1994;22:838–843.
359

61 Brennera T, Bernharda M, Helmb M, Doll S, V ö lkl A, Ganiona N,
Friedmanna C, Sikingera M, Knappa J, Martina E, Gries A. Comparison
of two intraosseous infusion systems for adult emergency medical use.
Resuscitation 2008;78:314–319.
62 Cooper BR. Intra-osseous access EZ-IO for resuscitation: UK military
combat experience. J Royal Army Med Corps 2007;153(4):314–316.
63 Ong ME, Chan YH, Oh JJ, Su-Yin Ngo N. An observational,
prospective study comparing tibial and humeral intraosseous access using
the EZ-IO. Am J Emerg Med 2009;27(1):8–15.
64 Vidacare. EZ-IO intraosseous infusion system directions for use. 2006
available
online
at
http://www.vidacare.com/reports/
VDAA168EZ-IODFU051707.pdf [accessed 06–05–2008].
65 Tiffany BR, Horwood BT, Pollack CV et al. Sternal intraosseous
infusion: flow rates and utility. Ann Emerg Med 1999;34(4).
66 Tiffany BR, Adams J, Pollack CV et al. Prehospital use of a sternal
intraosseous infusion device. Ann Emerg Med 1999;34(4).
67 Johnson DL, Findlay LM, Stair TO, Robinson DJ. Device for fast field
intraosseous
infusion via the adult manubrium.
Ann Emerg Med
1998;32(3).
68 Curran A, Sen A. Bone injection gun placement of intraosseous
needles. Emerg Med J 2005;22:366.
69 Schwartz D, Amir L, Dichter R, Figenberg Z. The use of a powered
device for intraosseous drug and fluid administration in a national EMS: A
4-year
experience.
J
Trauma
Injury
Infect
Critic
Care
2008;64(3);650–655.
70 David J-S, Dubien P-Y, Capel O, Peguet O, Gueugniaud P-Y.
Intraosseous infusion using the bone injection gun in the prehospital
setting. Resuscitation 2009;80:384.
360

Chapter 14
Needle thoracocentesis
Content
Definitions
The literature surrounding needle thoracocentesis
Equipment
Indications for use
Contraindications for use
Potential problems of use
Procedures for needle thoracocentesis
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Needle thoracocentesis is a life-saving procedure that will rarely be used
in prehospital care, but it may prove of significant value when it is
indicated. The technique is only a temporary measure but it may ‘buy’
extra time to convey the patient to more definitive care or bring the
definitive care to the patient.
361

Definitions
Needle thoracocentesis involves placing a wide-bore cannula into the
mid-clavicular line of the second intercostal space, just above the third rib,
in order to decompress a tension pneumothorax.1 Normally, the pleural
cavity is a potential space that is free from air and contains only a thin
layer of fluid. When air enters the pleural cavity it is termed a
pneumothorax.2 Tension pneumothorax is a life-threatening condition that
occurs when the intrapleural pressure exceeds atmospheric pressure. It is
created when injury to the chest or respiratory structures allows air to
enter but not to leave the pleural space, resulting in a rapid increase in
pressure on the affected side. This causes collapse of the affected lung,
compression atelactasis of the unaffected lung, mediastinal shift towards
the opposite side of the chest, and compression of the vena cava.2
Resuscitation and trauma usually illustrate a patient in extremis and
suggest that the clinical diagnosis is straightforward and that needle chest
decompression always produces a rapid and reliable response.3,4 This may
be far removed from the real life situation, where the classically taught
signs are not often present. Table 14.1 summarises the symptoms and
signs that may be useful for diagnosing tension pneumothorax in awake
and ventilated patients.5
THINK
You are at the scene of a Road Traffic Collision along with the police and fire
service. How will you manage the noise at the scene to maximize your chances of
identifying a life-threatening thoracic injury?
Table 14.1 Symptoms and signs of tension pneumothorax, adapted from
Leigh-Smith and Harris (2005)5
Diagnosis of tension pneumothorax
in awake patients
Diagnosis of tension pneumothorax in
ventilated patients
Reliable and early
Rapid disease progression Reliable
and early
•Pleuritic chest pain
•Decrease in SpO2-immediate
•Air hunger
•Decrease in BP
•Respiratory distress
•Tachycardia
362

•Tachypnoea
•Tachycardia
•Falling SpO 2
Others
•Agitation
•Increased ventilation pressure
Disease lateralisation-ipsilateral
•Surgical emphysema
•Hyper-expansion
Disease lateralisation
•Hypo-mobility
•Ipsilateral
•Hyper-resonance
•Hyper-resonance
•Decreased breath sounds
•Decreased breath sounds
•Added sounds–crackles/wheeze
•Chest hyper-expansion
Disease lateralisation-contralateral
•Chest hypo-mobility
•Hyper-mobility
•Added sounds
Pre-terminal
Inconsistent
•Decreasing respiratory rate
•Cyanosis
•Hypotension
•Distended neck veins
•Decreasing SpO2
•Tracheal deviation
•Decreasing level consciousness
Inconsistent
•Tracheal deviation
•Distended neck veins
The literature surrounding
needle thoracocentesis
The actual incidence of tension pneumothorax is not known, but it is more
common in ventilated than awake patients and possibly most common in
ventilated patients with visceral pleural injury from chest trauma.4
Emergency needle decompression is widely advocated for use in the
emergency management of tension pneumothorax6,7,8 but there needs to
363

be an appreciation of the potential problems associated with the technique;
these will be discussed later.
Needle thoracocentesis is often ineffective on its own and requires
subsequent tube thoracostomy,9–14 hence why it should be seen as a
temporary measure at best. There are also a number of factors that could
cause needle decompression to fail; these include:
Needle too short15,16,17
The recommended point for insertion of a needle is between the 2nd and
3rd intercostal space in the mid-clavicular line. Whilst this is easy to
access, it does entail penetration of pectoral muscles and a variable
quantity of subcutaneous tissue, which may be increased by oedema and
subcutaneous emphysema. It has previously been recommended that the
minimum length should be 4.5 cm (standard length 14-gauge cannula);17
although up to one third of trauma patients have a chest wall thickness
greater than 5 cm at the normal insertion point.18,19
A potential option is to use the 4th or 5th intercostal space in the
midaxillary line and this has been recommended by ATLS as it contains
less fat and avoids large muscles.4 Unfortunately this site may have an
increased risk of lung damage in the supine patient, as gas collects at the
highest point and adhesions are most likely in more dependent parts of the
lung.20
Obstruction5,11
•
Kinking of the catheter
•
Blood
•
Pleural fluid
•
Tissue.
Malposition
•
Incorrect identification of landmarks; could lead to cardiac
tamponade
•
Inadvertent removal by patient
364

•
Catheter too small to drain a large area5
•
Missing a localised tension pneumothorax.
Despite these problems, needle decompression is a technique that has
proved safe and therapeutic in the prehospital environment,12,22-23and
leads to shorter on-scene times compared with tube thoracostomy.23
Equipment
•
14-gauge cannula
•
10 mL syringe (consider filling with sterile saline)
•
Alcohol swab
•
Asherman seal or other method of stabilising and securing the
cannula.
Indications for use
When there are convincing signs of a tension pneumothorax Table 14.1.
Contraindications for use
None in the emergency management of tension pneumothorax.
Potential problems of use
Box 14.1 Potential problems of needle thoracocentesis
Problem
Solution
365

1. Obstruction
of catheter:
blood, fluid or
tissue, or
kinked
catheter.
Try to aspirate, if unsuccessful, insert second needle close
to original site.
2. Needle too
short.
Consider using 4th or 5th intercostal space in the
midaxillary line if authorised to do so.
3. Malposition Leave in situ and secure. A small pneumothorax may be
created by incorrect thoracocentesis, but this is unlikely to
be a significant problem. However, if surgery and
ventilation are required under anaesthesia, this can be
expanded to a tension pneumothorax. If cannula has been
removed, cover wound with sterile dressing and notify
receiving hospital.
4. Displaced
cannula
Insert a second cannula and secure well.
There are a number of other potential problems associated with needle
thoracocentesis, most of which the paramedic can do little about in the
field (Box 14.2).
Box 14.2 Morbidity associated with needle decompression5
Unnecessary pain/discomfort for the patient if procedure was not required
Pneumothorax with potential to tension later – especially if ventilated
Cardiac tamponade
Life threatening haemorrhage
Intrapleural haematoma
Atelactasis
Pneumonia
366

Procedures for needle
thoracocentesis
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
1. Ensure a patent airway and adequate
oxygenation.
Maintains oxygenation
2. Ensure adequate ventilation
Ensures adequacy of ventilation.
3. Expose the chest.
Necessary to identify landmarks and
perform technique.
4. Identify landmarks (Figure 14.1):
• Locate suprasternal notch and move
fingers down manubrium to the angle
of Louis (this sits level with the second
rib).
• From angle of Louis, identify second
intercostal space in the mid-clavicular
line on the affected side.
The mid-clavicular line avoids the
internal mammary arteries.
• Insertion should be on the superior
border of the third rib.
Nerves, arteries and veins pass just
below each rib so insertion point
should be the superior margin of the
third rib.
5. Clean the skin using alcohol wipe.
Reduces the risk of infection.
6. Remove the flashback chamber
from a 10–16 g cannula and attach a
10–20 mL syringe.
7. Insert needle fully at 90° to the skin.
Withdraw on the plunger of the syringe
until a free flow of air enters the
syringe.
Free flow of air demonstrates that
lung tissue has been reached.
8. Advance cannula and remove needle
and syringe to allow a rush of air out of
the syringe.
A rush of air signifies that the
diagnosis was correct.
367

9. Secure cannula in place to prevent
dislodgement.
Improper placement or movement
may cause damage to other organs or
structures.
10. There is no need to re-fit the
cannula cap and time should not be
wasted in applying a one-way valve.
11. Complete documentation
Chapter Key Points
1. Needle thoracocentesis is a potentially life-saving technique.
2. Diagnosis of tension pneumothorax may be difficult in the prehospital
environment.
3. Many of the commonly taught signs and symptoms may not be present or
may be unreliable indicators.
4. There are a number of potential problems related to needle thoracocentesis,
some of which the paramedic may be able to manage, some may not be
manageable in the field.
Figure 14.1 Sternal landmarks for needle thoracocentesis. Reproduced
from Faiz O, Moffat D. Anatomy at a Glance, 2nd edn, copyright 2006,
with permission of Blackwell Publishing.
References and Further reading
1 Ferrie EP, Collum N, McGovern S. The right place in the right space?
Awareness
of
site
for
needle
thoracocentesis.
Emerg
Med
J
2005;22:788–789.
2 Porth CM. Pathophysiology, Concepts of Altered Health States, 7th edn.
Philadelphia: LWW, 2005.
368

3 ALSG. Advanced Life Support Manual, 4th edn. London: Resuscitation
Council (UK), 2001.
4 ATLS. Advanced Trauma Life Support. 6th edn. Chicago: American
College of Surgeons, 1997.
5 Leigh-Smith S, Harris T. Tension pneumothorax–time for a re-think?
Emerg Med J 2005;22; 8–16.
6 Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. UK Ambulance
Service Clinical Practice Guidelines version 4. London: IHCD, 2006.
7
National
Association
of
Emergency
Medical
Technicians
in
Co-operation with the Committee on Trauma of the American College of
Surgeons. PHTLS Prehospital Trauma Life Support, 6th edn. Missouri:
Mosby/JEMS, 2006.Costal cartilage Costal margin Floating ribs
8 Sanders M. Mosby’ s Paramedic Textbook. Missouri: Mosby, 2006.
9 Britten S, Palmer SH. Chest wall thickness may limit adequate drainage
of tension pneumothorax by needle thoracocentesis. J Accid Emerg Med
1996;13:426–427.
10 Britten S, Palmer SH, Snow TM. Needle thoracocentesis in tension
pneumothorax: insufficient cannula length and potential failure. Injury
1996;27:321–322.
11
Conces
DJ
Jr,
Tarver
RD,
Gray
WC
et
al.
Treatment
of
pneumothoraces utilizing small caliber chest tubes. Chest 1988;94:55–57.
12 Cullinane DC, Morris JA Jr, Bass JG et al. Needle thoracostomy may
not be indicated in the trauma patient. Injury 2001;32:749–752.
13 Jenkins C, Sudheer PS. Needle thoracocentesis fails to diagnose a large
pneumothorax. Anaesthesia 2000;55:925–926.
14 Jones R, Hollingsworth J. Tension pneumothoraces not responding to
needle thoracocentesis. Emerg Med J 2002;19:176–177.
15 American College of Surgeons, Committee on Trauma. Advanced
Trauma Life Support Course Manual. Washington DC: ACS, 1997.
369

16 Britten S, Palmer SH. Chest wall thickness may limit adequate
drainage of a tension pneumothorax by needle thoracocentesis. J Accid
Emerg Med 1996;13:426–427.
17 Britten S, Palmer SH, Snow TM. Needle thoracocentesis in tension
pneumothorax: insufficient cannula length and potential failure. Injury
1996;27 (5): 321–322.
18 Marinaro J, Kenny C, Smith S et al. Needle thoracostomy in trauma
patients: what catheter length is adequate? Acad Emerg Med 2003;10:495.
19 Zengerink I, Brink P, Laupland K. Needle thoracostomy in the
treatment of a tension pneumothorax in trauma patients: what size needle?
J Trauma 2008;64:111–114.
20 Goodman L, Putman C. Intensive Care Radiology Imaging of the
Critically Ill, 2nd edn. Philadephia: W B Saunders, 1982:99–100.
21 Coats TJ, Wilson AW, Xeropotamous N. Pre-hospital management of
patients with severe thoracic injury. Injury 1995;2:581–585.
22 Cameron PA, Flett K, Kaan E et al. Helicopter retrieval of primary
trauma patients by a paramedic helicopter service. Aust NZ J Surg
1993;63:790–797.
23 Barton ED, Epperson M, Hoyt DB et al. Prehospital needle aspiration
and tube thoracostomy in trauma victims: a six-year experience with
aeromedical crews. J Emerg Med 1995;13:155–163.
370

Chapter 15
Pain assessment and
management
Content
Definitions
Acute pain v chronic pain
Assessing pain
Assessing pain in cognitively impaired patients
Overview of pain management techniques
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Pain is one of the most frequent symptoms presented by patients in the
emergency care setting,1–3 with a 2004 patient survey suggesting that 80%
of patients experienced pain whilst in the ambulance.4
The ability to manage pain in emergency care is a key skill that provides
comfort, minimises the stress associated with sudden illness or injury, and
reduces the detrimental psychological and physiological effects associated
with pain. Despite this, numerous studies have shown that pain is
managed sub-optimally in emergency care.5–9 A UK survey found that 1
in 5 patients were not satisfied with the way their pain was managed in the
prehospital environment;4 this is likely to be an underestimation as
patients often report high levels of satisfaction even though their pain
level has actually increased.10
371

Definitions
A widely used definition of pain is:
‘… an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with
actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such
damage’.11
This definition does not address the autonomic responses associated with
obnoxious stimuli, which is a key feature of pain in the emergency setting.
A second definition proposed by Margo McCaffery as long ago as 1968
has become widely used by healthcare professionals. She states that pain
is:
‘… whatever the experiencing person says it is, existing whenever the
experiencing person says it does’.12
Pain is a complex phenomenon that comprises both physical and
emotional elements; it is a subjective experience and should rely heavily
on the patient’s self-report whenever possible. A significant problem for
the practitioner is related to this subjectivity. Paramedics interviewed by
researchers expressed doubts as to the validity of some patients’ pain
descriptions, suggesting that patients may feel they need to increase their
explanation of pain to be believed and to be taken seriously by the
paramedics. Others felt that pain descriptions were exaggerated by
patients with minor ailments so that they can justify calling an ambulance,
also thinking that they will be seen more promptly at hospital.13 The
paramedics also believed that the cultural background of the patient had a
major impact on their pain experience. They recognised a cultural
difference to exist in the way that pain was expressed, with some cultures
thought to be more vocal and emotional in expressing their pain. It was
also held that older people may perceive pain differently to younger
people and would be less likely to ask for help.13 All of this indicates just
how difficult assessment of pain can be, especially acute pain in the
emergency setting.
372

Acute pain v chronic pain
Acute pain
Acute pain has been defined in a number of different ways but a common
feature in definitions is that is a symptom with a discernible cause and
usually subsides when injured tissues heal. Acute pain has a protective
function.
Chronic pain
Chronic pain is, by definition, pain that has persisted beyond the time of
healing; a classification based purely on causal agent is not achievable.
Some patients become extremely disabled and suffer intractable pain even
though their identifiable pathology appears to be relatively mild; other
individuals with similar pathologies may report pain but do not present
with the same level of disability.14 Good evidence exists to show that
quality of life for patients with chronic pain is more associated with
beliefs about pain than the severity itself.15 Although emergency care is
often associated with acute pain, it is likely that those suffering from
chronic pain (e.g., cancer, lower back pain, multiple pain localisations)
will also access the emergency services.
The cornerstone of pain management is the assessment of the pain. A
variety of pain assessment tools are available to assist in determining the
level of pain and evaluating the effectiveness of interventions. These tools
should be used in conjunction with a thorough history of the pain to help
diagnose the most likely cause of the pain as well as the severity.
Assessing pain
•
Look at the patient
•
Taking the history of the pain
•
Pain assessment tools.
373

Initial observations
It is worth noting the patient’s position, any guarding of the site of pain
and how well they mobilise. Significant information can also be obtained
by watching the patient’s face, especially during mobilisation. This is
covered later in the chapter as a checklist of non-verbal indicators.
History of the pain
The history is vital to help make a differential diagnosis and several
mnemonics have been suggested to help practitioners. Whether or not to
use a mnemonic is for the individual practitioner to decide; two different
ones will be presented here. It is important to remember that questions are
only relevant if the practitioner understands the answers, so it is essential
to have a sound understanding of the pathophysiology behind the clinical
manifestations.
OPQRST mnemonic
This is probably one of the most commonly taught mnemonics in
emergency care although some texts do not mention the ‘O’ element.
O Onset
P Provocation/palliation
Q Quality
R Region/radiation
S Severity
T Timing
O Onset
Did the problem develop suddenly or more gradually?
What was the patient doing when the pain came on?
Was the patient exercising or exerting themselves?
Was the patient eating or drinking, if so, what?
P Provocation/palliation
What provokes the pain (makes it worse)?
What palliates the pain (makes it better?)
Were there any precipitating factors e.g., did this come on after
exercise?
374

Q Quality
What does it feel like, e.g., sharp, dull, stabbing, burning or crushing?
Allow the patient to describe their pain otherwise they may say what
they think you want them to say. Use their descriptors on the case
report form.
R Region/radiation
Where is the pain?
Does the pain stay in one place?
Does it go anywhere else?
Ask the patient to point to the pain – can it be localised or is it
diffuse?
If the pain radiates, where does it go?
Did the pain start elsewhere but become localised in one place?
S Severity/associated symptoms
How bad is the pain? (See section below on pain assessment
tools)
Are there any associated symptoms – e.g., nausea, vomiting,
dizziness?
T Time/temporal relations
When did the pain start?
How long did it last?
Is it constant or intermittent?
How long has it been affecting your patient for? (It may
have been going on for some time)
Table 15.1 CHESTPAIN mnemonic
C Commenced
when?
When did the pain start? Was onset associated with anything
specific? Exertion? Activity? Emotional upset?
H History/risk
factors
Do you have a history of heart disease? Is there a primary
relative (parent/sibling) with early onset and/or early death
related to heart disease? Do you have other risk factors, e.g.,
diabetes, smoking, hypertension, or obesity?
E Extra
symptoms
What else are you feeling with the pain? Are you nervous?
Sweating? Is your heart racing? Are you short of breath? Do
you feel nauseous? Dizzy? Weak?
S
Stays/
radiates
Does the pain stay in one place? Does it radiate or go anywhere
else in the body? Where?
375

T Timing
How long does the pain last? How long has this episode lasted?
How many minutes? Is the pain continuous or does it come and
go? When did it become continuous?
P Place
Where is your pain? Check for point tenderness with palpation.
A Alleviates
What makes the pain better? Rest? Changing position? Deep
breathing?
Aggravates
What makes the pain worse? Exercise? Deep breathing?
Changing positions?
I
Intensity
How intense is the pain?
N Nature
Describe the pain (do not suggest descriptors)
Adapted from Newberry, Barnett and Ballard (2003).16
A recent mnemonic has been proposed specifically for the evaluation of
chest pain (Table 15.1) and incorporates risk factors for cardiac problems.
The mnemonic is CHESTPAIN.
THINK
Using the mnemonics – what answers would help you to differentiate acute
myocardial infarction from acute angina?
Pain assessment tools
The tools that will be covered in this section include:
•
Numerical Rating Scale
•
Visual Analogue Scale
•
Verbal Rating Scale
•
Wong–Baker FACES Pain Scale
•
Checklist of non-verbal indicators.
Numerical Rating Scale (NRS)
The numerical rating scale is probably the most commonly used tool in
prehospital emergency care and generally encompasses an 11 point scale
ranging from 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst pain). It is simple to administer and
requires no specific equipment. The NRS is often administered verbally in
376

the prehospital setting but it could easily be completed as a paper exercise
(see Figure 15.1), which may be helpful to those patients who have
difficulty in allocating a pain score verbally. A study showed the NRS to
have poor reproducibility17 and highlighted the importance of consistency
of terminology to ensure that confusion does not arise. A study in the
emergency department has shown a verbally administered NRS to be a
suitable substitute for the VAS, see below in the assessment of acute
pain.18
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
1. Establish that the patient is able to use
numbers to quantify their pain.
Improves likelihood of answers
being accurate.
2. Explain the parameters of the scale and
use descriptors at each end of the scale.
Patient needs to know which end of
the scale represents severe pain for
accuracy of measurement.
3. Ask the patient one of the following
questions:
• What number would you give your pain
right now?
• What number on a 0 to 10 scale would
you give your pain when it is the worst that
it gets and when it is the best that it gets?
• At what number is the pain at an
acceptable level for you?
4. Record pain score and repeat at frequent
intervals.
Allows evaluation of effectiveness
of pain management strategies and
whether more needs to be done.
5. For written NRS, follow the above but
ask patient to circle the number that
describes how much pain they are having.
Figure 15.1 Numerical Rating Scale.
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)
The VAS is presented as a 10 cm line, anchored by verbal descriptors,
usually ‘no pain’ and ‘worst imaginable pain’ (Figure 15.2). The patient is
asked to mark a 100 mm line to indicate pain intensity and the score is
377

measured from the zero anchor to the patient’s mark. A millimetre scale
can be used to measure the patient’s score and will provide 101 levels of
pain intensity.
One of the limitations of the VAS is that it must be administered on paper
or electronically.19 Caution is required when photocopying the scale as
this can lead to significant changes in its length.20
THINK
You ask your patient to score their pain on a scale of 0–10, they reply 11. How
would you feel and how would this impact on your management of their pain?
Figure 15.2 Visual Analogue Scale (VAS).
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
1. Explain procedure to patient.
2. Ask patient to mark on the
line how bad they feel their pain
is.
3. Measure pain score and
repeat at frequent intervals
using new VAS.
Allows evaluation of effectiveness of pain
management strategies and whether more
needs to be done.
Verbal Rating Scale (VRS)
The verbal rating scale employs a list of adjectives to denote increasing
pain intensities. The most common words used being: no pain; mild pain;
moderate pain; and severe or intense pain. For ease of recording these
adjectives are assigned numbers.
0 no pain
1 mild pain
2 moderate pain
3 severe or intense pain
378

Sensitivity of pain scales
The sensitivity of a pain rating scale is the ability of that scale to detect
change. The more levels a tool has the more sensitive it will be. A small
change in pain is noticeable using a VAS but the small number of
categories in the VRS demands that a much larger change in pain is
required before the change shows up on the scale.21 This lack of
sensitivity can lead to over or under-estimation of pain changes.22 Both
the VAS and the NRS have increased sensitivity to change compared with
the VRS 23,24 and should be used in preference.
There is compelling evidence that 11 or 21 point scales are more than
adequate for the assessment of pain. 101 point scales (such as the VAS
and 101 point NRS) have more levels of discrimination than most patients
use.22
Wong–Baker FACES Pain Scale
The Wong–Baker smiley faces were originally designed for use in
children although they have also been used with varied success with older
people.25,26 Stuppy27 used an adapted version depicting older faces, and
subsequently suggested that whenever practitioners suspect accuracy of
pain measurement to be affected by fatigue, depleted physical or mental
state, literacy or command of English, they should consider the use of this
scale. A limitation of this system is that it cannot be administered verbally
so is of limited use if patients have visual impairment.
Instructions
Explain to the person that each face is for a person who feels happy
because he has no pain (hurt) or sad because he has some or a lot of pain.
Face 0 is very happy because he doesn’t hurt at all. Face 1 hurts just a
little bit. Face 2 hurts a little more. Face 3 hurts even more. Face 4 hurts a
whole lot. Face 5 hurts as much as you can imagine, although you don’t
have to be crying to feel this bad. Ask the person to choose the face that
best describes how s/he is feeling.
Figure 15.3 Wong–Baker FACES Pain Scale. From Hockenberry MJ,
Wilson D, Winkelstein ML. Wong’s Essentials of Pediatric Nursing, 7th
379

edn. St. Louis: Mosby, 2005, p. 1259. Used with permission. Copyright,
Mosby.
THINK
How could you asses the pain of a patient who is unable to express themselves
verbally; for example, a patient with dementia?
Assessing pain in cognitively
impaired patients
Assessing pain in those with cognitive impairment may present particular
difficulties and may lead to patient’s being managed with sub-optimal
analgesia. The degree of impairment will impact upon the ability of the
patient to use the standard assessment tools so it will be useful for the
paramedic to have alternative methods to supplement conventional tools.
Several tools are available to measure pain in older adults with dementia
but few have been comprehensively evaluated; each has strengths and
limitations that need to be acknowledged.28 The Pain Assessment in
Advanced Dementia (PAINAD) has been shown to be a valid, and reliable
instrument for measurement of pain in non-communicative patients29 but
may be a little over-complex for use in the prehospital environment. A
simple checklist of non-verbal indicators was developed in 2000 (Table
15.2), which may be of some assistance in the acute setting. It should be
noted that the low frequencies of observed behaviours at rest indicate that
the tool is less useful during rest and may be more useful for observing
activities such as transfers, standing, or ambulation.30
Recommendations28
Ask older adults with dementia about their pain. Even older adults with
mild to moderate dementia can respond to simple questions about their
pain.31
380

•
Use a standardised tool to assess pain intensity, such as the
numerical rating scale (NRS) (0–10) or a verbal descriptor scale
(VDS). The VDS asks participants to select a word that best
describes their present pain (e.g., no pain to worst pain imaginable)
and may be more reliable than the NRS in older adults with
dementia.
•
Use an observational tool (e.g., Checklist of non-verbal indicators)
to measure the presence of pain in older adults with dementia.
•
Ask family or usual caregivers as to whether the patient’s current
behaviour (e.g., crying out, restlessness) is different from their
customary behaviour. This change in behaviour may signal pain.
Table 15.2 Checklist of non-verbal indicators.30 Reprinted from Pain
Management Nursing 1(1), Karen S. Feldt, ‘The checklist of nonverbal
pain indicators (CNPI)’, pp. 13–21, copyright 2000, with permission from
Elsevier
With
movement
At
rest
Vocal complaints – non-verbal expression of pain
demonstrated by moans, groans, grunts, cries, gasps, sighs)
Facial grimaces and winces – furrowed brow, narrowed eyes,
tightened lips, dropped jaw, clenched teeth, distorted
expression
Bracing – clutching or holding onto side rails, bed, tray table,
or affected area during movement
Restlessness – constant or intermittent shifting of position,
rocking, intermittent or constant hand motions, inability to
keep still
Rubbing – massaging affected area
Vocal complaints – verbal expression of pain using words,
e.g., ‘ouch’ or ‘that hurts;’ cursing during movement, or
exclamations of protest, e.g., ‘stop’ or ‘that’s enough.’
TOTAL SCORE
Indications:
381

Behavioural Health adults who are unable to validate the presence of or
quantify the severity of pain using either the Numerical Rating Scale or
the Wong–Baker Faces Pain Rating Scale.
Instructions:
1. Write a 0 if the behaviour was not apparent
2. Write a 1 if the behaviour occurred even briefly during activity
or rest
3. Results in a total score between 0 and 6.
This has not been validated for prehospital use, but may at least give the
practitioner an indication of likely severity and appropriate interventions.
Overview of pain
management techniques
Non-pharmacological Interventions
Non-pharmacological methods for managing pain include splinting (see
Chapter 16), distraction, patient positioning, reassurance, elevation,
dressings
(e.g.
burn
dressings)
and
psychological
approaches.
Non-pharmacological
methods
should
be
used
to
complement
pharmacological treatments as opposed to replacing them.
Distraction
Distraction techniques have particular relevance for children and have
been shown to be an effective adjunct to analgesia for children with
musculoskeletal pain in the emergency department.32 Small-scale studies
related
to
intravenous
cannulation
also
suggest
that
parental
positioning-distraction interventions have the potential to enhance positive
clinical outcomes with a primary benefit of decreased fear.33 It should be
noted that distraction involves a variety of techniques, such as guided
imagery, music therapy, reading or being read to, blowing bubbles,
382

playing with toys, tapping a rhythm, and watching TV or videos.34 Whilst
some
distraction
techniques
are
not
suitable
for
the
prehospital
environment or on the back of an ambulance, many simple techniques are.
Paramedics could consider distraction through talking to children, reading
to them, or letting them play with things on the ambulance that don’t pose
a health and safety hazard. It is also important to keep parents involved.
There is little literature available for distraction techniques in adults in the
acute
setting
although
distraction
therapy
is
advocated
in
pain
management for both chronic pain and post-surgery pain. It is likely that
adults will also benefit from distraction in the acute setting, but be aware
that patients distracted from their pain may not look like they are in pain,
which could lead to an incorrect judgment. It is important to be aware that
after the distraction is over, the pain may be increased and other pain relief
measures may be needed.35
Patient positioning
Patient positioning may confer significant relief to patients and effort
should be made to help the patient achieve a comfortable position. The
paramedic should be guided by the patient’s own preference but may be
able to offer advice regarding movement of people with back pain for
example. It is worth noting that ischaemic cardiac pain tends to be the
same regardless of position, which may help with a provisional diagnosis.
Reassurance
Patients should be provided with ongoing reassurance, information and
support from all involved in the prehospital care of a patient in pain. It has
been known for over 30 years that information before surgery about
procedures and expected
discomforts
help to minimise
anxiety;36
practitioners should provide information about what may happen to the
patient in the next phase of care to help reduce anxieties. It has been
suggested that is important that the patient chooses how much information
they wish to have.37
383

Pharmacological Interventions
A number of drugs are available for paramedic administration and the
decision as to the most appropriate medicine will be based upon
guidelines and clinical judgement. Drugs available include opioid
analgesics,
non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory
drugs, paracetamol,
and
Entonox. The pharmacology behind the drugs is beyond the scope of this
text; however, a discussion surrounding the principles guiding the
appropriateness of analgesic drugs is warranted. The Joint Royal Colleges
Ambulance Liaison Committee state that analgesia should normally be
introduced in an incremental way, considering timeliness, effectiveness
and potential adverse events.38 This is very much in keeping with the
‘Three
Step
Analgesic
Ladder’
espoused
by
the
World
Health
Organization (WHO) in 1986.39 The WHO philosophy was designed to
improve pharmacological interventions in patients with cancer pain but
has been adapted for use in cases of acute pain. The underlying objective
is to provide adequate pain relief without necessarily exposing the patient
to more potent analgesic agents. There are inherent problems with this in
emergency care in the out-of-hospital environment, but the philosophy
should help to guide initial thought processes when deciding upon
analgesic medicines. Essentially, the paramedic should start at the most
appropriate level for the patient’s presenting pain and only step up to the
next level if the pain is not controlled after a suitable trial period – i.e. the
time in which the drug would be expected to have an effect. Orally
administered paracetamol starts to have an analgesic effect at around 11
minutes but doesn’t reach maximum effect until 37 minutes40 so it could
be argued that no step up should be taken until after that time. This may
not be practical or desirable and the paramedic will need to make a
clinical decision based upon the patient’s needs.
The poor array of analgesics available to paramedics means that it is not
really possible to create a three-step analgesic ladder in the manner
proposed by WHO. Generally paracetamol and ibuprofen are indicated for
mild to moderate pain and opiate-based analgesics are indicated for
moderate to severe pain. Entonox (see Chapter 11) can feasibly be used
for any severity of pain that warrants pharmacological intervention and is
particularly useful as its short onset and duration of action mean that it can
be used as a primary analgesic whilst other pain relief is administered.
384

Entonox may also be used in conjunction with morphine during painful
treatments such as splinting.38
Some patients with chronic pain may experience ‘breakthrough’ pain
despite their usual regime of medicines. In situations like this it is likely
that the patient will require large doses of analgesics in order to derive
benefit; it is advisable to contact the patient’s pain management team for
advice and support.
Chapter Key Points
1. Pain is one of the most frequent symptoms presented by patients in the
emergency care setting; it is a complex phenomenon that comprises both
physical and emotional elements. Pain is a subjective experience and should
rely heavily on the patient’s self-report whenever possible.
2. Acute pain is a symptom with a discernible cause and usually subsides
when injured tissues heal. Acute pain has a protective function.
3. Chronic pain is pain that has persisted beyond the time of healing; a
classification based purely on causal agent is not achievable.
4. The history of the pain is very important when making a differential
primary diagnosis.
5. Tools are available for the assessment of pain severity; the paramedic
should be prepared to use more than one tool when required.
6. The use of non-verbal indicators may be helpful in those patients who have
difficulty expressing themselves verbally.
7. Numerous non-pharmacological techniques can be used to alleviate pain;
there is evidence to support their use.
8. Pharmacological interventions should be introduced in an incremental way
bearing in mind the constraints of prehospital care and the needs of the patient.
9. The starting point for analgesia is a clinical decision.
10. Entonox is particularly useful as its short onset and duration of action
mean that it can be used as a primary analgesic whilst other pain relief is
administered.
References and Further reading
1 Cordell WH, Keene KK, Giles BK, Jones JB, Jones JH, Brizendine EJ.
The high prevalence of pain in emergency medical care. Am J Emerg Med
2002;20(3):165–169.
2 Tuturro M. Pain, priorities and prehospital care. Prehosp Emerg Care
2002;6(4):486–488.
385

3 McLean SA, Maio RF, Domeier RM. The epidemiology of pain in the
prehospital setting. Prehosp Emerg Care 2002;6(4):402–405.
4 Healthcare Commission. Patient survey report 2004 – Emergency
Department key findings. London: Healthcare Commission, 2004.
5 Gray A, Johnson G, Goodacre S. Paramedic use of Nalbuphine in major
injury. Eur J Emerg Med 1997;4:136–139.
6 LJ, Cooper JD, Chamber RM, Gradiesk RE. Prehospital use of analgesia
for
suspected
extremity
fractures.
Prehosp
Emerg
Care
2000;4(3):205–208.
7 Vassiliadis J, Hitos K, Hill C. Factors influencing prehospital and
emergency department analgesia administration to patients with femoral
neck fractures. Emerg Med 2002;14:261–266.
8 McEachin CC, McDermott JT, Swor R. Few emergency medical
services patients with lower-extremity fractures receive prehospital
analgesia. Prehosp Emerg Care 2002;6(4):406–410.
9 Lord BA, Parsell B. Measurement of pain in the prehospital setting
using a visual analogue scale. Prehosp Disaster Med 2003;18(4):353–358.
10 Kelly AM. Setting the benchmark for research in the management of
acute pain in emergency departments. Emerg Med 2001;13(1):57–60.
11 Merskey H, Bogduk N (Eds) International Association for the Study of
Pain Task Force on Taxonomy, Classification of Chronic Pain, 2nd edn.
Seattle: IASP Press, 1994.
12 McCaffery M. Nursing Practice Theories Related to Cognition, Bodily
Pain and Non-Environmental Interactions. Los Angeles: University of
California, 1968.
13
Jones
GE,
Machen
I.
Pre-hospital
pain
management:
the
paramedics’perspective. Accid Emerg Nurs 2003;11:166–172.
14 Mann E, Carr E. Pain Management. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing,
2006.
15 Lamé IE, Peters ML, Vlaeyn JW, Kleef M, Patijn J. Quality of life in
chronic pain is more associated with beliefs about pain, than with pain
intensity. Eur J Pain 2005;9:15–24.
386

16 Newberry L, Barnett GK, Ballard N. A new mnemonic for chest pain
assessment. J Emerg Nurs 2005;31:84–85.
17 Van Tubergen A, Debats I, Ryser L, Londono J, Burgos-Vargas R,
Cardiel MH, Landewe R, Stucki G, Van Der HD. Use of a numerical
rating scale as an answer modality in ankylosing spondylitis–specific
questionnaires. Arthrit Rheumat (Arthrit Care Res) 2002;47:242–248.
18 Bijur PE, Latimer CT, Gallagher J. Validation of a verbally
administered numerical rating scale of acute pain for use in the emergency
department. Acad Emerg Med 2003;10(4):390.
19 Guyatt GH, Townsend M, Berman LB, Keller JL. A comparison of
Likert and visual analogue scales for measuring change in function. J
Chron Dis 1987;40:1129–1133.
20 Snow S, Kirwan JR. Visual analogue scales: a source of error. Ann
Rheumat Dis 1988;47:526.
21 Williamson A, Hoggart B. Pain: a review of three commonly used pain
rating scales. J Clin Nurs 2005;14:798–804.
22 Jensen MP, Turner JA, Romano JM. What is the maximum number of
levels needed in pain intensity measurement? Pain 1994;58:387–392.
23 Jamison RN, Gracely RH, Raymond SA, Levine JG, Marino B,
Herrmann TJ, Daly M, Fram D, Katz NP. Comparative study of electronic
vs. paper VAS ratings: a randomized, crossover trial using healthy
volunteers. Pain 2002;99:341–347.
24 Jensen MP, Karoly P, Braver S. The measurement of clinical pain
intensity: a comparison of six methods. Pain 1986;27:117–126.
25 Carey SJ, Turpin C, Smith J, Whatley J, Haddox D. Improving pain
management in an acute care setting: The Crawford Long Hospital of
Emory University experience. Orthopaed Nurs 1997;16(4):29–36.
26 Krulewitch H, London MR, Skakel VJ, Lundstedt GJ, Thomason H,
Brummel-Smith K. Assessment of pain in cognitively impaired older
adults: A comparison of pain assessment tools and their use by
nonprofessional caregivers. J Am Geriat Soc 2000;48:1607–1611.
387

27 Stuppy D. The Faces Pain Scale: reliability and validity with mature
adults. Appl Nurs Res 1998;11(2);84–89.
28 Herr, K., Bjoro, K., & Decker, S. Tools for assessment of pain in
nonverbal older adults with dementia: A state-of-the-science review. J
Pain Symptom Manage 2006;31(2):170–192.
29 Warden Va, Hurley AC, Volicer L. Development and Psychometric
Evaluation of the Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia (PAINAD)
Scale. J Am Med Direct Ass 2003;4(1):9–15.
30 Feldt KS. The Checklist of Nonverbal Pain Indicators (CNPI). Pain
Manage Nurs 2000;1(1):13–21.
31 American Geriatrics Society Panel on Persistent Pain in Older Persons.
Clinical practice guidelines: The management of persistent pain in older
persons. J Am Geriat Soc 2002;50: S205–S224.
32 Tanabe P, Ferket K, Thomas R, Paice J, Marcantonio R. The effect of
standard care, ibuprofen, and distraction on pain relief and patient
satisfaction in children with musculoskeletal trauma. J Emerg Nurs
2002;28:118–125.
33 Cavender K, Goff MD; Hollon EC, Guzzetta CE. Parents’ positioning
and distracting children during venipuncture. Effects on children’s pain,
fear, and distress. J Holist Nurs 2004;22(1):32–56.
34 Joseph MH, Brill J, Zeltzer LK. Pediatric pain relief in trauma. Pediatr
Rev 1999;20:75–83.
35 McCaffery M, Pasero C. Pain: Clinical Manual for Nursing Practice,
2nd edn. St. Louis: Mosby, 1999.
36 Hayward J. Information, A Prescription Against Pain, The Study of
Nursing Care. Research project, series 2(5). London: RCN, 1975.
37 Mitchell M. Patients’ perceptions of pre-operative preparation for day
surgery. J Adv Nurs 1997;26(2):356–363.
38 Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. UK Ambulance
Service Clinical Practice Guidelines version 4. London: IHCD, 2006.
39 World Health Organization. Cancer Pain Relief. Geneva: WHO, 1986.
388

40 Moller PL, Sindet-Pedersen S, Petersen CT, Juhl GI, Dillenschneider
A, Skoglund LA. Onset of acetaminophen analgesia: comparison of oral
and
intravenous
routes
after
third
molar
surgery.
Br
J
Anaesth
2005;94(5):642–648.
389

Chapter 16
Fracture and soft tissue
injury management
Content
Definitions: What are fractures, sprains, strains and dislocations?
General principles of musculoskeletal injury management
Principles of splinting
Slings and support bandages
Box splints
Vacuum splints
Neighbour strapping
Traction splints
SAM splints
Pelvic fractures
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Despite the natural resilience of the human body extremes of force or
weakening of structures can result in injury to bone, ligament and tendon.
Whilst these conditions may vary markedly in their severity and aetiology,
the similarity of the signs and symptoms of any injury to bone, ligament or
390

tendon makes these conditions difficult to differentiate. As such a
structured approach to the management of traumatic injury (and suspected
non-traumatic injury such as pathological fractures) has core underlying
principles that may be applied in any situation regardless of the eventual
diagnosis. This chapter will set out generic guidance for the management
of fractures, sprains, strains and dislocations in the acute emergency
setting using current evidence where available.
Definitions: What are
fractures, sprains, strains
and dislocations?
A fracture is described as a break in the continuity of a bone; this can be
the result of excessive force, repetitive load bearing activity (stress
fracture) or abnormal bone structure (pathological fracture such as
osteoporosis).1 A sprain is defined as a stretching or tearing of a ligament,
a ligament is a fibrous attachment that joins bone to bone and stabilises a
joint.2 A strain is a term used to describe the stretching and tearing of a
muscle or tendon, a tendon being a fibrous continuation of the muscle that
attaches muscle to bone and is essential for the leverage mechanisms of
human movement.2
In a dislocation the bone is entirely displaced from the joint causing the
articulating surfaces to no longer be intact. If the joint is only partially
dislocated this is known as subluxation, this causes the articulating
surfaces to only be in partial contact. In the event that the ligaments
supporting a joint are disrupted causing an increased gap between the
articulating surfaces, this is referred to as diastasis.3 It is important to note
that these conditions may not be present in isolation, the forces required to
cause one type of injury may well cause a further injury.
391

General principles of
musculoskeletal injury
management
In the prehospital setting there are five key elements that underpin the
management of musculoskeletal injury:
•
Reduce pain
•
Prevent further injury
•
Ensure neurological and vascular supply distal to the injury
•
Reduce the risk of fat embolism
•
Promote recovery.
Pain control
Pain control in the acute management of musculoskeletal injury may take
many forms ranging from simple reassurance, immobilisation of the limb
(discussed later), pharmacological management (see Chapter 15, Pain
Assessment and management) and the use of cold compresses. The use of
reassurance as a method of pain relief is not based upon evidence;
however reassuring patients is undoubtedly a major facet in the role of any
prehospital and acute care practitioner.
The use of cold treatment for musculoskeletal injury has long been
documented as a method of reducing pain and swelling at the site of an
injury. There is little high level evidence to support this notion; however
the application of a cold compress to an area will reduce the blood flow by
vasoconstriction thus reducing inflammatory mediators and inflammation.
The reduction in local body temperature will also slow nerve conduction,
thus inhibiting pain sensation experienced. Care should be taken if using a
cold compress as this may cause thermal burns to the site of application.
392

Immobilisation of the limb
The immobilisation of an injured limb is based upon the principles of
general musculoskeletal injury management stated previously in this
chapter. Through the application of splinting there are a number of
benefits to the patient that are based upon sound pathophysiological
reasoning. Splinting is applied as a method of reducing the movement of
broken bone ends and to support the fracture site. Through the movement
of broken bone ends pain is commonly experienced alongside an increased
risk of damage to nerves, blood vessels, muscles and overlying skin. This
can potentiate the injury increasing both mortality and morbidity;
therefore the reduction in movement of the injured limb can reduce this
risk. Immobilisation may reduce the occurrence of bleeding through
allowing the formation of clots in damaged blood vessels and reduce the
likelihood of potentially fatal fat emboli.
The placing of a limb in a splint of any form should reduce the pain for the
patient and increase their comfort, thus subsequently reducing anxiety and
the
circulation
of
catecholamines
which
may
cause
peripheral
vasoconstriction and reduced peripheral tissue oxygenation.2,4
Principles of splinting
The principles of splinting are a core element for any prehospital care
provider ranging from the first aider to the advanced trauma specialist.
The failure to effectively splint a musculoskeletal injury may result in
increased pain and further injury, alongside the potential for increased
damage to the injured area due to improper handling. The following
principles of splinting should be considered whenever splinting is required
(see Procedure below).
Procedure
Rationale
1. The injured area
should be carefully
visualised prior to
splinting the limb.
It is imperative that the practitioner is aware of what
potential injuries are present. Foreign bodies within the
wound or severe bleeding from an open fracture should be
considered prior to splint application as they are difficult
to manage after a splint is applied.
393

2. Ensure that
splinting is required.
Splinting as with all procedures is not without risk, the
time taken to apply splinting may be detrimental in the
multisystem trauma patient who requires rapid evacuation
to an appropriate facility. The use of splints also limits the
ability to visualise the patient, therefore the risks and
benefits of splinting must be considered.
3. Prior to splinting
assess the
neurovascular status
distal to the site of
the injury and repeat
after splinting.
A pre- and post-treatment assessment should always be
considered to ensure that no harm is caused by your
actions.
4. Manage wounds
on the immobilized
part prior to
splinting.
Once the splint is applied it may be difficult to gain
access to the wound to manage bleeding effectively.
5. The splint should
immobilise the joint
above and below the
suspected injury site.
This will reduce the movement of the limb or injured part.
6. Pad the splint
well.
This will reduce movement of the injured limb, increase
comfort and reduce the likelihood of pressure injury.
7. Support the
injured part
proximally and distal
to the injury whilst
applying the splint.
This will provide manual stabilisation of the injured part
whilst the splint is applied, this will reduce the pain
experienced during the procedure.
8. If the injured limb
is grossly deformed
consider applying
traction and
straightening the
limb.
This should only be considered if there is suspicion that
the limb is being threatened by the injury. Signs include
the loss of distal neurovascular supply and taut skin over
the site of the suspected fracture (and suspicion that the
bone fragment may pierce the skin).5
9. If it is not
possible to straighten
the limb to a near
anatomical position,
it should be splinted
in the position of
deformity.
Resistance or severe pain when attempting to re-align the
limb should indicate that re-location is unlikely to be
successful at that time therefore attempts should be
ceased.
394

10. Splint firmly but
not too tight.
Excessive tension may inhibit distal blood flow thus
potentiating injury.
11. Try to avoid
covering the finger
or the toes of the
patient when
splinting (unless not
feasible).
The fingers and toes are useful areas to check for distal
neurovascular status following the application of a splint.
Types of splinting
Any device that is utilised to immobilise an injury can be considered a
splint. There are a variety of widely used splinting devices within
emergency care settings; this chapter will discuss the most commonly
used; providing guidance on the benefits and limitations of each.
Slings and support bandages
A sling is commonly used for the splinting of a shoulder or arm injury,
they may be used in isolation or as an adjunct to support additional
devices such as a rigid splint (discussed later). A sling formed from a
triangular bandage holds the injured limb to the body and takes some of
the weight from the injured limb, potentially reducing pain caused by limb
movement. Slings should be avoided in patients with a neck injury due to
additional pressure being placed upon the neck. There are commonly two
applications of a sling to the upper extremity, a broad arm sling and a high
arm sling (or elevated sling). These differ in application however provide
similar benefits to the patient. A broad arm sling is most commonly used
for injuries at the elbow or below, whereas a high arm sling is used for
injuries above the elbow; however there is little evidence to support either
technique over the other therefore a sling should be applied to the comfort
of the patient. A step-by-step guide to the application of a broad arm sling
technique and high arm sling technique can be seen below. With the
application of a sling the support to the limb can be enhanced by the use
of an additional support bandage around the torso. This will serve to
395

further immobilise the limb and is particularly useful in shoulder
dislocations and clavicle injuries.
The application of a broad arm sling
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent and explain the
procedure to the patient. Provide any
required analgesia for the procedure to be
undertaken.
A pain free and less anxious patient
is easier to treat. Informed consent
is essential in providing care for
patients who are able to consent.
2. Ensure that the triangular bandage is
clean and in good condition prior to use.
To reduce the risk of cross
infection and ensure that the sling
will not fail resulting in pain.
3. Lay the long side of the triangular
bandage vertically down the uninjured side
of the patient with the injured arm flexed at
the elbow to 90° (if possible), the bandage
should pass behind the injured arm (Figure
16.1).
A broad arm sling requires the
injured arm to be flexed to
approximately 90° for it to be
effective, this will allow the arm to
rest upon the sling. reducing
pressure on the injury site.
4. Bring the bottom edge up and over the
arm.
This will cradle the injured arm
within the sling.
5. Tie the two ends together behind the
patient’s neck using a simple reef knot.
Consider applying a pad beneath the knot
(Figure 16.2). Pin or tie the point at the
elbow to form a cradle.
A reef knot allows the knot to be
easily undone, padding beneath the
knot may reduce pain from friction
or pressure from the knot upon the
neck.
6. Re-check the distal neurovascular status
of the limb.
This should be checked after any
intervention to ensure that no harm
is done.
Figure 16.1 Broad arm sling step 1.
396

Figure 16.2 Broad arm sling step 2.
The application of a high arm sling
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent and explain the
procedure to the patient. Provide any required
analgesia for the procedure to be undertaken.
Ensure the triangular bandage is clean and
undamaged.
A pain free and less anxious
patient is easier to treat.
Informed consent is essential in
providing care for patients who
are able to consent. All
equipment should be checked to
ensure it does not fail.
2. Place the sling over the injured arm with
the arm elevated towards the opposing
shoulder. The longest side of the triangular
The sling must be carefully
applied to ensure it works as an
397

bandage should run from the shoulder of the
uninjured arm towards the elbow of the
injured arm.
effective cradle for the injured
limb.
3. Pass the point of the longest side of the
triangular bandage under the injured arm and
behind the back of the patient. The end is then
tied with the opposite end of the longest side
behind the patient’s neck using a reef knot
(Figure 16.3). Consider padding beneath the
knot.
A reef knot allows the knot to be
easily undone, padding beneath
the knot may reduce pain from
friction or pressure from the
knot upon the neck.
4. Ensure that the arm is comfortable and
securely supported. Re-check the distal
neurovascular status of the injured limb.
Always check that any
interventions are effective, if not
then re-consider your actions or
remedy and problems.
Box splints
Box splints are a commonly carried by emergency care personnel, yet are
often overlooked due to the simplicity of their use and due to the
favourability of other devices. A box splint is most commonly used for
lower leg injuries; however they may be used for knee and arm injuries
also. These splints consist of three long padded sides and a foot piece
(Figure 16.4) which is designed to place the foot at a 90° angle
(anatomical position).
The splint forms a ‘box’ around the injured limb with one side exposed to
allow for ease of application and review of the limb once it has been
splinted. Box splints are effective in immobilising a straight limb,
especially when combined with additional padding. However box splints
are of limited use in a deformed limb due to their rigid structure which
will not conform to the shape of the limb. A step by step guide to using a
box splint is shown below.
Figure 16.3 High arm sling step 2.
398

Figure 16.4 A box splint.
Application of a box splint
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent and
explain the procedure to the patient.
Provide any required analgesia for
the procedure to be undertaken.
Ensure the equipment is clean and
undamaged.
A pain free and less anxious patient is
easier to treat. Informed consent is
essential in providing care for patients
who are able to consent. All equipment
should be checked to ensure it does not
fail or provide an infection risk.
2. The injured limb (leg) should be
exposed and footwear removed if
possible.
This is desirable for both examination and
post immobilisation checks.
3. The leg should be supported
manually and carefully raised, the
splint should be passed under the
leg.
Support is required to ensure that the
injury is not worsened by the movement
and also to reduce pain.
399

4. The two sides of the splint should
be folded up against the leg to form a
box around the limb, the foot piece
should be placed against the sole of
the foot at 90° or in a position that is
comfortable.
This will box in the leg and provide
stability, it may be necessary to add
additional padding at this point to support
the limb.
5. The Velcro straps should be
carefully placed over the leg
avoiding the area of injury, the foot
strap should be passed over the top
of the foot (Figure 16.5)
This provides firm support for the limb,
passing the straps tightly over the injured
area may worsen the pain or injury and
should be avoided.
6. Re-check the distal neurovascular
status of the limb.
This should be checked after any
intervention to ensure that no harm is
done.
Figure 16.5 Application of a box splint.
THINK
You are called to see a patient with an extremely deformed lower leg; will a box
splint be appropriate? If not what can you do to immobilise the limb?
Vacuum splints
A vacuum splint consists of a sealed vinyl coated polyester mattress filled
with polystyrene beads that is normally pliable; however when air is
removed from within the mattress by a pump the splint becomes rigid and
conforms to the set position. There are a variety of vacuum splint products
used by emergency and voluntary services; therefore this section will
discuss the general principles of use. Vacuum splints are particularly
popular within the emergency services due to the versatility of the product
400

and ability to conform to even the most deformed limb. The vacuum splint
has the additional benefit of being suitable for spinal immobilisation on
small children.
A step-by-step guide to the basic use of a vacuum splint upon an injured
limb is given below.
Application of a vacuum splint
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent and
explain the procedure to the patient.
Provide any required analgesia for
the procedure to be undertaken.
Ensure the equipment is clean,
undamaged and in good working
order.
A pain-free and less anxious patient is
easier to treat. Informed consent is
essential in providing care for patients
who are able to consent. All equipment
should be checked to ensure it does not
fail or provide an infection risk.
2. Applying a vacuum splint
requires a minimum of two
operators.
This ensures that the injury site is
stabilised during the splinting process.
3. Choose the correct splint size.
The splint should be large enough to
extend beyond the joints above and
below the injury, if the injury is a
dislocation the splint should be large
enough to extend beyond both sides of
the dislocated joint.
4. One operator should stabilise the
injury at all times, the other operator
should lay the splint flat on the floor
and smooth the splint to a uniform
thickness.
The polystyrene balls are essential in
making the splint rigid, therefore they
are required to be uniformly spread;
failure to do this may result in some
areas of the splint remaining pliable.
5. Place the splint (pump valve on
the outside) around the injury.
Access to the valve is essential or else
the air cannot be removed.
6. Secure the splint in place using
the Velcro straps (or equivalent)
(Figure 16.6).
This supports the limb within the splint.
7. Connect the vacuum pump to the
valve and gently withdraw the air, as
this occurs the other operator should
Continual support is required until the
splint application is fully completed.
401

continue to support the injury and
gently mould the splint if required.
8. Continue until the splint is as
rigid as required, disconnect the
pump and re-tighten the straps if
necessary (Figure 16.7).
As the splint becomes more rigid the
straps may become loose, therefore it
may be necessary to re-apply the
strapping.
9. Re-check the distal neurovascular
status of the limb.
This should be checked after any
intervention to ensure that no harm is
done.
from Ferno-Washington 2000.6
Figure 16.6 Vac splint wrap around leg.
Neighbour strapping
Neighbour strapping is a simple first aid principle that requires the
strapping of an injured part to the neighbouring part, commonly used in
finger or toe injuries the injured digit will be strapped to the one next to it
to provide support. This concept may also be utilised in other injuries such
as neck of femur fractures. These injuries are difficult to immobilise any
other way in the prehospital setting therefore the strapping to another limb
provides a quick and simple method of applying immobilisation
principles. A number of methods of neighbour strapping can be used
including the use of adhesive tape in finger or toe injury, however in the
acute setting consideration must be given to the pain caused by the
removal of adhesive tape. The more commonly used method of neighbour
strapping is the use of either fracture straps (elasticated Velcro straps that
stretch around the injured and non injured limb) or the use of broadly
folded triangular bandages. These are commonly used in the management
of neck of femur fractures as other forms of splinting are not ideally suited
402

to this injury. These straps can simply be placed around the injured limb
securing it to the non-injured limb for support. Padding should be placed
between the limbs to aid comfort and reduce pressure over bony
processes. The straps should not be placed tightly over the injury site as
this may cause increased pain and movement of bone ends.
Figure 16.7 Vac splint around leg secure straps (completed).
Traction splints
Traction is a method commonly utilised in fracture management
(especially that of femoral shaft fractures), through the application of
distal traction to a deformed fractured limb there are a number of potential
benefits. Firstly traction will act to reduce a deformed limb back towards
its’ anatomical shape, secondly applied traction will act to ‘pull’ apart the
fractured bone ends to reduce the likelihood of neurovascular damage
through impingement by bony fragments and reduce pain. A third benefit
is the reduction of bleeding through re-shaping of the muscle mass
surrounding the injury. In the event of shaft of femur fractures the strong
muscles of the thigh will shorten the limb causing the bone ends to
overlap causing an increased risk of neurovascular injury, pain and
bleeding. When the normally cylindrical muscles of the thigh are
shortened by a fracture they become more spherical in shape, this will
increase the internal volume of the muscle and subsequently increase the
potential space for accumulating blood. Through the application of
traction bone ends are separated and the normal shape of the thigh muscles
is restored thus reducing the likelihood of excessive bleeding.4,7
Traction may be applied using either manual means (by gentle pulling on
the limb) or with the use of traction devices such as the Sager or Donway
splint (which are used in mid-shaft of femur fractures only). Whichever
403

means of traction is used careful consideration must be given as to the
correct recognition of the need for traction and any detrimental effects that
may be caused by such actions.
There are a number of potential contraindications to the application of
traction splints; these can be seen below:
•
Fractures around the knee
•
Dislocation of the hip
•
Fracture dislocation of the knee
•
Ankle injuries
•
Simple fractures of the lower third of the tibia and fibula
•
Fractures of the pelvis
•
Fractured neck of femur.
From Greaves et al. (2006)4; Lee & Porter (2005).8
These general principles of contraindications to traction are based upon
the potential to potentiate injury to joints through applied force and
therefore any potential joint injury should be considered prior to any
traction. It is also essential to refer to manufacturer and local guidelines
for contraindications for traction use as they may differ markedly.
Whilst traction splints are currently widely available in prehospital care
there is little evidence to suggest that their use of benefit over traditional
immobilisation methods, therefore the use must currently be based upon
pathophysiological considerations.9,10
The Donway splint
The Donway splint is a device that cradles the injured limb with the ankle
of the limb securely strapped by an ankle support and applied around the
thigh to maintain stability. Using a pump, the upper and lower halves of
the splint are pushed apart by increasing air pressure. Once the pressure
reaches an effective level and the patient is comfortable securing screws
are tightened to maintain the position of both ends of the splint and the
pressure is released through a release valve.
A step-by-step guide to the application of the Donway splint can be seen
below.
404

Application of the Donway splint
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent and
explain the procedure to the
patient. Provide any required
analgesia for the procedure to be
undertaken. Ensure the equipment
is clean, undamaged and in good
working order.
A pain-free and less anxious patient is
easier to treat. Informed consent is essential
in providing care for patients who are able
to consent. All equipment should be
checked to ensure it does not fail or provide
an infection risk.
2. Applying a splint requires a
minimum of two operators, this
allows for support of the limb and
for manual traction to be applied if
required.
This ensures that the injury site is stabilized
during the splinting process.
3. Feed the ischial ring under the
knee and adjusted around the thigh
with the buckle fastened loosely.
The natural hollow of the knee provides a
useful point of access around the leg with
minimal movement.
4. Depress the air valve to ensure
that there is no pressure retained
within the system.
Excess pressure in the system can cause the
equipment to be problematic to use and has
a potential to cause injury.
5. Unlock the collets (securing
screws), raise the footplate into the
upright position and place the
splint over the leg.
The foot must be securely strapped around
the ankle to ensure adequate traction is
applied.
6. Adjust the side arms to the
desired length and attach to the
ischial ring pegs (twist the side
arms to lock in place).
If the side arms are to short there will be
excessive movement of the splint when
pressure is applied.
7. Open the ankle strap and
carefully place the patient’s heel in
the padded portion of the strap
with the heel against the footplate.
The placement of the ankle strap and
footplate are of paramount importance as
they are designed to ensure traction is along
the axis of the limb and pressure is applied
equally across the surface of the foot.
Misplacement can cause maligned traction
of the limb resulting I potentiating the
injury.
8. Maintaining the foot against the
footplate adjust the lower Velcro
405

attachment to ensure that the
padded support is positioned high
on the ankle.
9. Criss-cross the straps tightly
over the instep starting with the
longest strap. Tighten the straps
around the footplate and secure
with Velcro (Figure 16.8).
10. Apply pneumatic pressure to
the desired level using the pump,
upon completion tighten the ischial
strap to secure the ring in the
ischial load position.
The recommended operating range of the
splint is 10-40lbs of traction; excessive
force will cause safety valves to release
pressure. Pressure below this range will
potentially be ineffective.
11. Align the leg supports with the
calf and thigh and apply by passing
the strap under the leg, passing
back over the frame and back
under the leg to form a cradle
(Figure 16.9).
This will cradle the injured limb thus
reducing movement.
12. Apply the knee strap by
passing under the knee passing
around the frame and fastening
above the knee (Figure 16.9).
This will stop knee flexion and subsequent
limb movement that may cause pain and
mal-alignment of the limb.
13. The leg is now supported and
in traction so the heel stand can be
raised.
This will elevate the limb slightly to reduce
pressure on the limb and reduce swelling.
14. Turn the securing screws
(collets) until hand tight and apply
a further quarter turn to secure the
side arms, this will allow the
pressure to be released from the
system by pressing the release
valve until the gauge shows zero
pressure.
Releasing the pressure following locking
the side arms will reduce the likelihood of
further injury to the patient in the event of
pressure loss within the system.
15. Re-check the distal
neurovascular status of the limb.
This should be checked after any
intervention to ensure that no harm is done.
16. The Donway splint should
remain on the limb until definitive
The splint should only be removed if there
are signs that the application is worsening
406

care is provided (usually surgical
intervention).
the patient condition, premature release of
the traction will result in pain and may
potentiate injury.
From Thomas Biomedical.11
Figure 16.8 Strapping the ankle to the footplate.
Figure 16.9 Completing the splinting process.
Whilst the Donway splint is carried by a number of prehospital care
agencies, it is not without flaws and limitations. One major difficulty of
the Donway splint is the size of the device that makes not only carriage of
the device problematic but subsequent transfer of the patient difficult
especially in small vehicles or air transport. Another reported issue with
systems such as the Donway splint is that only one limb can be splinted
using the device; devices such as the Sager splint (below) offer the ability
to splint both legs (in the presence of bilateral femur fractures) and are
smaller in size therefore easier to transport.
The Sager splint
The Sager splint is a traction splint that is lightweight and has the
advantage of being smaller than other commercially available splint such
as the Donway; this has the benefit of being easier for transport purposes
and manual handling. An additional benefit of the Sager splint is the
ability to splint and apply traction to either one or two legs using the same
407

device. A step-by-step guide to the application of a Sager splint is
provided below; as with all devices referral to manufacturer’s guidelines is
recommended:
The application of the Sager splint
Procedure
Rationale
1. Gain informed consent and explain the
procedure to the patient. Provide any
required analgesia for the procedure to be
undertaken. Ensure the equipment is clean,
undamaged and in good working order.
A pain-free and less anxious
patient is easier to treat. Informed
consent is essential in providing
care for patients who are able to
consent. All equipment should be
checked to ensure it does not fail
or provide an infection risk.
2. Applying a splint requires a minimum of
two operators, this allows for support of the
limb and for manual traction to be applied if
required.
This ensures that the injury site is
stabilized during the splinting
process.
3. Position the splint between the patient’s
legs, resting the ischial/perineal cushion
against the ischial tuberosity (midway
between the femur and the symphysis
pubis). Ensure that the scrotum is clear of
the cushion. The shortest end of the ischial
pad should be toward the ground.
The ischial tuberosity rests in the
same plane as the femur, this will
align the traction along the axis of
the femur. Compression of the
scrotum beneath the cushion will
result in pain and injury.
4. Apply the securing bridle around the
upper thigh of the injured limb.
This stabilises the splint around the
limb, care is required if applying
the bridle over the fracture site.
5. Lift the button latch and extend the inner
shaft until the crossbar rests adjacent to the
patient’s heels.
Unnecessary extension of the inner
shaft beyond the feet makes the
device more difficult to use and
transport.
6. Position and secure the ankle harnesses
by passing beneath the heel and securing
above the medial and lateral malleoli of the
ankle, ensure that the harness is snugly
fitted to the crossbar (Figure 16.10).This
should be applied to both ankles.
Secure fitting of the harness to the
ankle and the crossbar is essential
to reduce the risk of slippage of the
limbs and loss of traction.
408

7. Grasp the splint shaft with one hand and
the traction bar with the other and gently
extend the inner shaft until the desired
amount of traction is reached (this is
generally 10% of the patients body weight
to a maximum of 15 lb).
It is important to stabilise the splint
whilst applying traction so that
control is maintained. Excessive
pressure may cause further damage
to the limb, therefore should be
avoided.
8. Slide the elastic cravats beneath the
hollow of the knee and firmly secure in
position around both legs (large cravat to
the thigh, smaller cravat around the calves).
This can be seen in Figure 16.11.
This maintains limb stability and
reduce movement.
9. Apply the figure of eight around the feet
This maintains foot stability and
reduces movement.
10. Re-check the distal neurovascular status
of the limb.
This should be checked after any
intervention to ensure that no harm
is done.
11. The Sager splint should remain on the
limb until definitive care is provided
(usually surgical intervention). If traction
removal is required this can be achieved by
lifting the pressure release spring (with
support on the shaft to release pressure
gently).
The splint should only be removed
if there are signs that the
application is worsening the
patient condition, premature
release of the traction will result in
pain and may potentiate injury.
From Sager (2004).12
Figure 16.10 Sager splint.
SAM splints
SAM splints are formed from a thin layer of aluminium alloy sandwiched
between two layers of closed cell foam. These splints are pliable and
409

flexible when unrolled, however when bent into a curve become rigid and
strong. The SAM splint has the benefit of exceptional diversity of usage
and can potentially be used on any bone of the body (depending upon the
size of the splint).13 The Sam splint is designed for use as a rigid splint
that can be conformed to any limb or bone, the splint can immobilise and
provide compression of an injury site to potentially reduce haemorrhage.
Figure 16.11 Sager splint.
Scenario
You are a spectator at a motorcross event that has no medical cover; a rider has come off
of their bike and has a suspected fractured forearm and lower leg. You are called to assist
but you have no equipment. What methods could you use to assist in immobilising the
patient’s injuries? What are the risks involved in this to both yourself and the patient?
Pelvic fractures
Despite being a relatively rare occurrence pelvic fractures are noteworthy
due the specific needs for their management and the likelihood of severe
haemodynamic instability from internal haemorrhage.14 Pelvic fractures
are estimated to occur in between 5 and 11.9% of patients with severe
blunt trauma, with mortality rates ranging between 7.6 and 25%.14–16
Pelvic stabilisation in the acute phases of management in pelvic fractures
has been demonstrated as effective in reducing this severe haemorrhage.17
There are a number of methods that may be utilised for the reduction of
pelvic fractures, including circumferential wrapping by a sheet, belt or
pelvic circumferential compression device (PCCD), such as the SAM
sling.17,18 These methods seek to control haemorrhage by stabilising
fracture sites to promote clot formation and through the reduction of
potential pelvic volume for blood accumulation.19 Whilst the use of sheets
or belts are recommended by the American College of Surgeons
410

Committee on Trauma20 for advanced trauma life support, there is
contention as to the efficacy of such methods with little research to
support their use. Recent studies into the use of circumferential
compression by the use of PCCD has demonstrated that the use of such
devices is timely and may reduce pelvic width and subsequent potential
for bleeding.17,18,19,21
The SAM sling
The SAM sling is a recent commercially available pelvic compression
device that has been proven in a number of studies to provide stability and
compression of pelvic fractures.17,18,19,21 The SAM sling (from SAM
Medical, 2007)22 can be seen in Figure 16.12.
The SAM sling is scientifically and clinically proven to provide safe and
effective force; stabilising pelvic fractures. The standard sling size fits
95% of population without cutting or trimming which facilitates ease of
use in the prehospital setting. The sling has been designed to allow for
application by a single user rapidly (usually less than one minute) and
does not require fine touch to operate; it provides clear feedback by sound
(‘click’) and feel to confirm correct application. The sling is also designed
to comply with infection control procedures by cleansing with standard
detergents or antimicrobial solutions.
The procedure for the application of a SAM sling can be seen below.
Figure 16.12 The SAM sling. Reproduced with permission of SAM
Medical Products.
The application of the SAM sling
Procedure
Rationale
411

1. Unfold sling with the white surface facing up.
This allows for the easy to
slide surface to be in contact
with the ground thus
facilitating sliding of the
sling under the patient.
2. Place white side of Sling beneath patient at
level of buttocks (greater trochanters/symphysis
pubis). This can be achieved by sliding under the
natural hollow of the back or under the knees and
sliding to the correct position.
This is the ideal area to
provide compression of the
pelvis.
3. Firmly close Sling by placing black Velcro®
side of flap down on the black Velcro® strip.
Fold back material as needed. Try to place buckle
close to midline (Figure 16.13).
Central placement of the
buckle aids the application of
tension equally across the
pelvis.
4. Grab orange free handle on outer surface of
flap and release from flap by pulling upward.
With or without assistance, firmly pull both
orange handles in opposite directions to tighten
sling.
The compression of the sling
applies pressure to the pelvis
thus stabilising potential
pelvic fractures.
5. Keep pulling free handle until you feel or hear
the buckle lock or click. As soon as the buckle
clicks, maintain tension and firmly press orange
handle onto the black Velcro® strip. Note: Do not
be concerned if you hear a second ‘click’ after the
sling is secured.
The sling is designed to
apply a preset level of
pressure across the pelvis
excessive or inadequate force
has the potential to be
ineffective or potentiate
injury.
6. To remove sling, lift orange free handle away
from flap by pulling upward. Maintain tension
and slowly allow sling to loosen.
The sling should ideally
remain in place until
definitive care is provided
(i.e. surgery). Removal of the
sling prematurely may cause
subsequent bleeding.
From SAM Medical (2007).22
There are a number of alternative pelvic slings and compression devices,
therefore please refer to individual policies and procedures for the devices
available in your work area.
Figure 16.13 Application of the SAM sling. Reproduced with permission
of SAM Medical Products.
412

Chapter Key Points
1. The management of sprains, strains, fractures and dislocations follows a
number of core principles that should be followed to reduce pain and prevent
further injury.
2. Any potential injury should be assessed before and after any intervention to
ensure that no further damage is caused by healthcare staff.
3. Ensure that you are familiar with the immobilisation devices within your
work area and that you are able to follow manufacturer’s instructions.
4. Remember to consider appropriate analgesia prior to any immobilisation as
the act itself may cause pain to the patient.
References and Further reading
1 Douglas G, Nicol F, Robertson C. Macleod’s Clinical Examination, 11th
edn. Edinburgh: Elsevier, 2005.
2 Marieb E, Hoehn K. Human Anatomy and Physiology, 7th edn. London:
Pearson International, 2007.
3 Caroline N. Emergency Care in the Streets, 6th edn. London: Bartlett
Publishers, 2008.
4 Greaves I, Porter K, Hodgetts T, Woollard M. Emergency Care: A
Textbook for Paramedics. London: Elsevier, 2006.
5 Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. UK Ambulance
Service Clinical Practice Guidelines. London: JRCALC, 2006.
6 Ferno-Washington. Vacuum Splints Kit: User’s Manual: 234-2124-00.
Ohio: Ferno-Washington Inc, 2000.
7 Borschneck A. Why traction? JEMS. 1985;44–45.
8 Lee C, Porter K. Prehospital management of lower limb fractures.
Emerg Med J 2005;22:660–663.
413

9 Wood S, Vrahas M, Wedel S. Femur fracture immobilization with
traction splints in multisystem trauma patients. Pre-Hosp Emerg Care
2003;7(2): 241–243.
10 Chu R, Browne G, Lam L. Traction splinting of femoral shaft fractures
in a paediatric emergency department: Time is of the essence? Emerg Med
2003;15:447–452.
11 Thomas Biomedical. Donway Traction Splint: Instructions for Use.
Herefordshire: Thomas Biomedical, 2000.
12 Sager. Instructors’ Manual: The Science of Traction Splinting.
Accessed on-line: www.sagersplints.com. [21/06/08]. California: Sager.
13 SAM Medical. SAM Splint: The Pocket Cast. Accessed on-line at:
www.sammedical.com. [21/06/08]. Portland: SAMMEDICAL ,
14 Lee C, Porter K. The prehospital management of pelvic fractures.
Emerg Med J 2007;24:130–133.
15 Poole G, Ward E. Causes of mortality in patients with pelvic fracture.
Orthopaedics 1994;17:691–696.
16 Alonso J, Lee J, Burgess A, Browner B. The management of
complicated orthopaedic injuries. Surg Clin North Am 1996;76:879–903.
17 Krieg J, Mohr M, Mirza A, Bottlang M. Pelvic circumferential
compression in the presence of soft tissue injuries: A case report. J
Trauma 2005;59:470–472.
18 Bottlang M et al. Noninvasive reduction of open-book pelvic fractures
by circumferential compression. J Orth Trauma 2002;16 (6): 367–373.
19 Krieg J et al. Emergent stabilisation of pelvic ring injuries by
controlled
circumferential
compression:
A
clinical
trial.
Trauma
2005;59:659–664.
20 American College of Surgeons. Advanced Trauma Life Support for
Doctors: Instructor Course Manual. 1997;24:206–209.
21 Bottlang M. et al. Emergent management of pelvic ring fractures with
the use of circumferential compression. J Bone Joint Surg 2002;84 (suppl
2).
414

22 SAM Medical. SAM Pelvic Sling: Powerpoint Presentation. Portland:
SAMMEDICAL, 2007.
415

Chapter 17
Spinal management
Content
Relevant gross anatomy
Evidence on how to immobilise the spine
Hazards and complications associated with spinal immobilisation
Indications for spinal immobilisation
Equipment and procedures
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
Spinal cord injury (SCI) most commonly affects young, fit people and
generally leads to long-term disability that can seriously impact on a
person’s quality of life. In rare cases where the cord is damaged in the
upper cervical regions, paralysis of the diaphragm and respiratory muscles
can lead to immediate death. Increasingly, there are cases where the
damage to the cord is only partial and considerable recovery is possible.
Partial cord damage may affect individual sensory or motor nerve tracts,
thereby producing varying long-term disability. Recovery is dependent
upon recognition of the condition and application of the appropriate
management.
Early data suggest that 3% to 25% of spinal cord injuries occur after the
initial injury,1 although the actual effect of spinal immobilisation on
mortality, neurological injury, spinal stability and adverse effects in
trauma patients remains uncertain. What is known and is of particular
416

interest is that airway obstruction is a major cause of preventable death in
trauma patients, and spinal immobilisation, particularly of the cervical
spine, can contribute to airway compromise. This leads to the conclusion
that immobilisation may potentially increase mortality and morbidity.2
Relevant gross anatomy
Please also refer to an appropriate anatomy textbook (see reference 3).
The spinal cord is approximately 42–45 cm in length and extends from the
foramen magnum to the superior border of the second lumbar vertebra. Its
diameter is approximately 2 cm at the mid-thoracic point, a little larger in
both the inferior cervical and mid-lumbar enlargements, and narrowest at
the inferior tip.3 This means that there is more space for the cord in the
superior cervical regions so that SCI may be ameliorated with adequate
immobilisation. In the cervical and lumbar enlargements, the cord tends to
be wide and the spinal canal relatively narrow and injury in these areas is
likely to cause SCI.4
Evidence on how to
immobilise the spine
The literature
There are no randomised controlled trials evaluating the various
out-of-hospital spinal immobilisation techniques2 so it is not possible to
state categorically which method(s) should and shouldn’t be used.
However, certain known facts suggest that some methods may be better
than others for immobilising the spine.
The UK ambulance services do not tend to use soft collars and with good
reason. Soft collars do not limit movement5,6 so are of no benefit where
the risk of cervical spine injury is high. There are variances between
417

different types of semi-rigid collars, but small studies have not
demonstrated any clear reduction of movement,7 suggesting that the
application is more important than the actual device. What has been
shown on healthy volunteers is that semi-rigid cervical collars when used
alone only reduce movement by between 31% and 45%,8 which clearly
shows that a collar on its own is insufficient to protect the cervical spine.
In the same study it was found that head blocks and straps produced a
reduction of between 58-64% but when head blocks and straps were in
place the addition of a collar was not beneficial. This is important when
considering the impact of cervical collars on intracranial pressure (ICP),
which is discussed later.
There has been a tendency for paramedics to routinely use long boards for
the immobilisation of patients, but there may be alternatives to this
approach. Long boards have been shown to be inferior to devices such as
the vacuum mattress in terms of reduction of movement and patient
comfort,9,10 although the vacuum mattress is not suitable for extrication.
Extrication devices such as the Kendrick extrication device (KED) have
also proven to be better than long boards at reducing rotational movement
and, where time is not critical, the use of such a device may be
warranted.11,12
What is essential when using a rigid long board is to minimise the time a
patient is on the board. It is suggested that a patient should be on an
unpadded long board for no more than 45 minutes.13,14 The problems
related to pressure ulceration are discussed later in this chapter.
A further consideration is the method used to place the patient onto the
immobilisation equipment and none are without their risks. There will
inevitably be a small amount of spinal movement when transferring a
patient to immobilisation equipment but there appears to be little
consensus as to which method should be used.
Log rolling has been shown to cause significant motion of the head and
thoracolumbar spine,15,16 although it is not known if the range of
movement would actually exacerbate the clinical condition. There is a
suggestion that the variation in the amount of flexion and extension
between different techniques is not clinically significant17 although axial
rotation appears to be more pronounced in the log-roll method than when
using a 6-person lift or a lift-and-slide technique.18 Log-rolling should not
418

be used where there is suspicion of a pelvic fracture as it may disrupt clots
and promote further blood loss.19
JRCALC4 are suggesting that use of a scoop stretcher may be safer for
lifting patients onto a long board. This is supported by research that has
shown that the scoop stretcher causes significantly less movement on
application
compared
with
the
long
board.20
It
may
be
worth
immobilising the patient on the scoop stretcher rather than transferring to
a long board as this reduces the need for secondary transfers and a log-roll
manoeuvre to remove the patient from the device. It has also been shown
that immobilisation on the scoop provided increased comfort levels
compared with the long spinal-board.20
The optimum positioning for cervical immobilisation cannot be achieved
without some form of padding between the back of the head and the long
board. In healthy adults, a slight degree of flexion equivalent to 2 cm of
occiput elevation produces a favourable increase in spinal canal/spinal
cord ratio at levels C5 and C6, a region of frequent unstable spine
injuries.21
Hazards and complications
associated with spinal
immobilisation
There are numerous potential complications associated with spinal
immobilisation,
particularly
cervical
spine
immobilisation
using
a
semi-rigid collar. These include:
•
Airway problems (including increased risk of aspiration)
•
Increased intracranial pressure
•
Restricted respiration
•
Dysphagia
•
Skin ulceration
•
Pain.
419

THINK
Before reading the next section, make a list of how spinal immobilisation may
cause airway problems and the strategies you have for managing them.
Airway problems
Airway management is made more difficult in patients with suspected
spinal injury by the need to maintain in-line immobilisation of the
patient’s head and neck. This restricts access to the airway and also makes
it more difficult to clear vomit or blood because the usual postural
drainage manoeuvres may be contraindicated. Application of a semi-rigid
cervical collar exacerbates the problem by significantly reducing mouth
opening, which could hinder definitive airway placement.22 Loosening the
cervical collar or removing the anterior portion of the collar before
attempts at tracheal intubation may improve the view that can be attained
during laryngoscopy.22 The flexible bougie is the preferred option for
first-line use in all cases to maximise rates of intubation on first attempt.23
The risk of aspiration is increased for the supine trauma patient. Because
trauma is unexpected, the patient is likely to have a full stomach and
injury may reduce their ability to protect the airway.24 In the supine
position, passive regurgitation or vomiting may result in aspiration of
gastric contents and impaired oxygenation.24 There is debate about
whether the long board helps to protect against aspiration, a belief borne
out by the idea that it facilitates turning a vomiting patient onto their side.
It has been suggested that rapid log-rolling is considered a more
appropriate strategy to turn the trauma patient that is vomiting,25 but this
requires four people to carry out the manoeuvre and one person to suction
the patient. One person holds the head and coordinates the roll, while three
others roll the chest, pelvis, and limbs so that the head, neck, body and
limbs move in an aligned manner. The fifth person carefully suctions the
oral
cavity
and
avoids
inducing
further
gagging
or
vomiting.26
Consideration may need to be given to administration of a suitable
antiemetic and gastric decompression (where trained to do so).
420

The use of an extrication device such as the KED may help to alleviate
some of these problems by allowing the patient to be managed in a
position other than supine.
Increased intracranial pressure
Correctly
fitted
cervical
collars
cause
an
increase
in
intracranial
pressure,27-31 most likely because they reduce venous return from the
head. Evidence suggests that in patients with head injury, loosening of the
cervical collar once the patient is securely on the board may prevent
compromise of venous return and exacerbation of raised intracranial
pressure.32
Restricted respiration
Studies have shown clinically significant effects on respiration using both
the long board and the vacuum mattress.33 This is significant because
restricted chest expansion can result in low tidal volumes and exacerbate
the physiological effects of the supine position on respiratory function.34
The supine position leads to a reduced functional residual capacity and
means that fewer alveoli are available for external respiration. Given that
trauma leads to an increased metabolic rate and oxygen demand, it is
likely that high-concentration supplemental oxygen will be needed to help
meet the patient’s oxygen requirements. These physiological effects are of
particular concern where patients have associated thoracic injuries that
further compromise respiratory function; it is possible that these patients
will require ventilator support.
Dysphagia
Dysphagia (difficulty swallowing) has been linked to the application of a
semi-rigid cervical collar but this problem has been noted specifically in
patients with unusual neck anatomy following neurosurgical procedures.35
It is unclear whether this may also be a problem in prehospital emergency
immobilisation but it is worth bearing in mind given the potential airway
obstruction that may occur as a result of dysphagia.
421

Skin ulceration
Cutaneous pressure ulceration is of significant concern for the spinally
injured patient and every effort should be made to minimise the amount of
time a patient spends on high-pressure surfaces such as the long board and
scoop. The duration of contact and high interface pressure are predictors
of cutaneous pressure ulceration in the trauma patient.36 Ischaemia occurs
when the pressure between the immobilisation device and the skin exceeds
or approaches capillary pressure. At 32 mmHg of pressure, capillary blood
flow becomes compromised causing hypoxia, necrosis and ulceration.37
The intensity of pressure is proportional to the time necessary to cause
tissue damage so that the higher the pressure, the shorter the contact time
required to cause irreversible tissue damage. It is suggested that a
sustained interface pressure of 35 mmHg for 2 hours and 60 mmHg for 1
hour is sufficient to cause irreversible tissue damage.37 Studies on healthy
subjects have recorded interface pressures of 233.5 mmHg and 82.9
mmHg at the sacrum and thorax on a rigid spine board.34,38
Pain
Spinal immobilisation devices can induce pain, even in those with no
injuries. Various studies have shown that healthy volunteers immobilised
with rigid neck collars and long boards complain of pain and discomfort
after approximately 30 minutes.39,34,40 The pain is most often located at
the heels, sacrum, thoracic spine, elbows, occipital region and chin where
the interface pressures are at their highest.2,34,40 It has been suggested that
after 30 minutes it becomes difficult to differentiate the pain generated by
the immobilisation devices from the pain caused by the initial trauma.34,40
This will make it more difficult to assess the patient’s condition and may
also lead to unnecessary clinical imaging where physicians believe the
pain is related to the initial trauma.34,40
THINK
How might you deal with the pain that can be created by immobilising the patient?
422

Indications for spinal
immobilisation
Penetrating trauma
Until recently there has been no discrimination between blunt and
penetrating trauma when considering the need for spinal immobilisation.
Most books and journals have recommended that all patients with such
injuries should be immobilised, or merely state that such is the practice in
their emergency department and prehospital trauma care.41 However, a
semi-rigid collar applied over a penetrating injury, such as high velocity
bullets or projectiles, may conceal findings such as continuous oozing,
subcutaneous emphysema and especially expanding haematoma.41
The recommendations from a study carried out in Israel suggest the
following:41
•
In penetrating injury to the neck without a clear neurological
deficit, there is no place for using a collar or any other device for
neck stabilisation.
•
Neck stabilisation devices may be used when there is overt
neurological
deficit
or
the
diagnosis
cannot
be
made
(i.e.
unconscious victim). However, in this case it is obligatory to
expose the neck by removing the anterior portion of the device
every few minutes, at least in the initial phase of treatment.
•
Neck stabilisation devices may be used for the unusual occurrence
of a penetrating injury which is combined with blunt trauma. The
stabilisation is then for the blunt mechanism only and not for the
penetrating one.
JRCALC state that those with isolated penetrating injuries to limbs or the
head do not require immobilisation. Those with truncal or neck trauma
should be immobilised if the trajectory of the penetrating wound could
pass near or through the spinal column.4
423

Blunt trauma
In blunt trauma, manual immobilisation should be commenced at the
earliest time for any patient where the mechanism of injury suggests the
possibility of SCI. The immobilisation can be released once the
practitioner has ascertained that ALL of the following criteria are
present:4
•
No alteration in consciousness or mental state and patient is able to
fully co-operate with examination
•
No evidence of intoxication
•
No complaint of spinal pain
•
No vertebral tenderness
•
No neurological deficit or complaint
•
No significant distracting injury.
Note: Spinal pain does not include tenderness isolated to the muscles of
the side of the neck.
THINK
How will you differentiate between a distracting injury and a non-distracting
injury? This is important if you are to use the guidelines to good effect.
Equipment and procedures
•
Cervical (semi-rigid) collars
•
Extrication devices
•
Long board and straps
•
Vacuum mattress.
Cervical collars
There are numerous semi-rigid collars on the market and each has its own
specific requirements. It is not possible to give guidance on all individual
cervical collars so the practitioner should ensure that they are familiar
with the techniques specific to the device being used.
424

A cervical spine collar needs to sit on the chest, posterior thoracic spine
and clavicle, and trapezius muscle to be effective.42 The head is
immobilised by the collar beneath the mandible and at the occiput. The
spine is not fully immobilised by a collar but its application aids in
reducing head movement. The sizing of the collar is also of great
importance; if the collar is too small it won’t restrict the flexion motion of
the neck, if too long it may cause hyperextension or allow for greater
motion if the chin slips inside the front piece of the collar. In addition to
sizing, it is also important to ensure that the collar is fastened correctly -
too loose and it will not restrict motion of the head and neck, too tight and
it may compromise the veins of the neck leading to a rise in ICP.
The collar should be applied only when the patient’s head has been
brought into neutral alignment. If the head cannot be brought into neutral
alignment it will be very difficult and possibly dangerous to apply a
semi-rigid collar. In those instances, improvisation with blankets or towels
may be required.
Key Points
Cervical collars
1. Do not immobilise the head and neck on their own.
2. Must be sized correctly as per manufacturer guidelines.
3. Should be correctly fitted to ensure optimum support without obstructing
venous return.
4. Should be applied only when the patient’s head and neck have been brought
into neutral alignment.
5. Should not hinder the ability of the patient to open their mouth or the
practitioner to open the patient’s mouth.
6. Should not hinder the patient’s respiration.
Figure 17.1 Ferno Kendrick Extrication Device® (KED).
425

Extrication devices
For the purposes of this section, the Ferno Kendrick Extrication Device®
(KED) (Figure 17.1) will be discussed. Other extrication devices are
available but tend to follow similar principles to the KED; the practitioner
needs to be aware of any differences between the KED and the device that
they use. The KED is used when spinal immobilisation is indicated for a
sitting patient with non-time critical injuries.
The KED is constructed from vertically aligned slats which provide the
rigidity required to help minimise the risk of further injury during
extrication. It has wrap-around head and chest flaps to allow for
immobilisation of the cervical, thoracic and part of the lumbar regions to
help prevent rotation or angulation of the spine. The device is secured by
means of a colour coded sequence of straps and the patient’s head is held
in place by adjustable head and chin straps. An adjustable neck pad is
provided to help fill the gaps caused by the natural curvature of the spine.
The chest flaps fold back to allow the KED to be used with heart
monitoring equipment, pregnant patients and younger adolescents.
Procedure
Additional information/
rationale
1. Discuss the procedure and gain consent from the
patient (where appropriate).
Consent is a legal
requirement. Explanation
of the procedure helps to
gain cooperation from the
patient.
2. Practitioner One should be positioned behind the
patient to hold the head (where possible).
This stabilises the head
and neck.
3. Practitioner Two checks neurological and vascular
response of all extremities and then measures and
applies the cervical collar.
Assesses neurological
status prior to movement
and as a baseline for
further observations. The
collar helps to restrict
movement of the head
and neck.
4. The KED is slid into position behind the patient
and wrapped around. The side flaps should be
touching the patient’s armpits.
426

5. The torso straps should be positioned and fastened
in the following order:
(i) Middle chest strap
(ii) Lower chest strap.
6. The upper chest strap is optional at this time but
should not be secured too tightly if used. It should be
fastened just before the patient is moved.
If over-tightened, the top
chest strap can impede
respiration.
7. The groin straps should be positioned and fastened
taking care not to trap the patient’s genitalia. This can
be achieved by working the strap in a
backwards-and-forwards motion under the patient’s
thigh and buttock until it sits comfortably in the
intergluteal fold. Once in place, the straps are
tightened.
8. It may be necessary to reappraise the torso straps
and adjust as necessary.
9. Use the padding behind the patient’s head to
maintain neutral alignment. Position the head flaps
and, using the head straps, secure the patient’s head.
Care needs to be taken
when placing the head
flaps as the practitioner
holding the head will
need to change their hand
positions to facilitate this.
10. Recheck all straps before moving and ensure that
the top chest strap has been connected.
Ensures security.
11. If possible, the ambulance cot should be placed
close to the patient with either a long board or
vacuum mattress placed upon it.
Minimises lifting and
handling.
12. The best option is to place the long board
beneath the patient’s buttocks with the foot end
securely placed on the patient’s seat (i.e. car seat),
and the head end on the ambulance cot. If this cannot
be achieved, the patient may need to be lifted into
position.
13. Rotate the patient so that their back is towards
the long board. The legs will need to be lifted as the
patient is extricated.
14. Once square to the board, the patient can be
lowered to the board whilst keeping the legs elevated.
427

The two groin straps need to be released at this point
and the patient’s legs can be lowered.
15. The patient should be positioned appropriately
on the board and secured for transportation.
16. The practitioner should consider releasing the top
chest strap at this point.
To assist with respiration
Key Points
Extrication devices
1. Extrication devices are useful for immobilising a patient from a sitting
position.
2. These devices do not fully immobilise the spine so full immobilisation
using a long board or other suitable device is recommended.
3. They should NOT be used in time-critical patients.
4. Strapping should be attached and adjusted in the correct order according to
the manufacturer.
Long board
The long board is made of either wood or plastic and is designed to be
used to provide rigid support whilst moving a patient with suspected
spinal, hip, pelvic or lower extremity injuries. Despite the limitations
discussed earlier, long boards are useful for extrication from vehicles, full
body immobilisation where SCI is a possibility or for victims of multiple
trauma, an emergency stretcher during cardiopulmonary resuscitation or
multiple casualty incidents, or for water rescue.
The board should be supplied with a complete head immobiliser and four
body straps; it should never be used without the head immobiliser and at
least three body straps.43 Any void between the sides of the patient and
the sides of the long board need to be filled with padding to help prevent
lateral movement of the body on the board.42 Securing of the patient can
be accomplished in a number of different ways; the techniques may need
to be adapted depending on any other injuries that may have been
sustained. The overriding aim is to prevent movement in any direction but
care needs to be exercised to ensure that strapping does not impair the
428

patient’s ability to breathe. It will be necessary to immobilise both the
upper torso (shoulders and chest) and lower torso (around the pelvis) to
achieve effective immobilisation.
The Prehospital Trauma Life Support Manual suggests two alternatives
for thoracic strapping.42
Either:
•
Two straps (one going from each side of the board over the
shoulder, then across the upper chest and through the opposite
armpit to lock into place on the armpit side) produce an X, which
stops lateral movement and upward movement of the torso.
Or:
•
Fasten one strap to the board by the armpit, pass it under the armpit,
over the upper chest and then under the opposite armpit, to fasten to
the board on the second side of the board. A second strap is then
attached to each side of the board and passed over the shoulders to
fasten it to the armpit strap.
The lower torso should be secured by passing a single strap across the
iliac crests and tightening them.42
If the patient needs to be upended it is useful to use a figure of 8 around
the feet and ankles to prevent the patient from sliding down the board.
When strapping the patient, care needs to be taken not to exacerbate any
other injuries such as pelvic or clavicular fractures.
If a patient is not trapped and is supine on the floor they should not be
log-rolled onto the long board; instead they should be lifted using the
orthopaedic scoop stretcher and either placed onto the long board or
immobilised on the scoop stretcher. When using the long board as an
extrication device it is important to slide the patient up the board rather
than lifting them. This minimises the movement in all areas of the spinal
column and reduces the risk of exacerbating an SCI.
429

Use
of
the
long
board
for
women
in
late
pregnancy
The use of the supine position for a woman in the late stages of pregnancy
can seriously compromise maternal cardiac output.44 This is caused by the
gravid uterus completely occluding the inferior vena cava45 and laterally
displacing the subrenal aorta.46 It is necessary to either manually displace
the uterus or to tilt the long board to the left. It is suggested that a 30° tilt
is required to displace the uterus4 although the full left lateral position has
been shown to produce the best cardiac output in late pregnancy.47 There
are inherent difficulties in achieving this tilt in a spinally injured patient as
there is a tendency for the patient to slip laterally on the board so causing
spinal bending. This can best be managed by filling the voids between the
sides of the patient and sides of the board but it is likely that some
movement will still occur. It is unlikely that a 30° tilt will be accurately
measured by the paramedic in the field, so constant observations of
cardiac adequacy will be required and adjustments made as necessary. A
better option may be to use a vacuum mattress loaded onto a long board
and then tilted the requisite angle.
Procedure
Additional information/rationale
1. Explain procedure and gain consent
from patient (where appropriate).
Consent is a legal requirement.
Explanation of the procedure helps to
gain cooperation from the patient.
2. Apply any appropriate cervical collar
or extrication device.
Provides additional head and neck
support until the patient is fully
immobilised on long board.
3. Prepare the board. Head pad should
be in place and straps connected to their
respective clip pins but the buckles
should be unfastened.
4. Use appropriate technique to place
patient on long board. The patient should
be located centrally on the board with the
head on the head pad to maintain neutral
alignment.
Sliding techniques should be used
rather than lifting when extricating a
patient. If lifting an untrapped patient
from supine, the orthopaedic scoop
should be used.
5. Use blanket rolls to fill the voids
between the sides of the patient and the
sides of the board.
Reduces lateral movement of the
patient’s body on the board.
430

6. Apply body straps in the following
order:
(i) Chest
(ii) Pelvis
(iii) Thighs
(iv) Ankles
(v) Head immobiliser and straps.
Immobilises area of greatest mass
first.
Consider figure of 8 around the feet
and ankles to prevent downward
movement.
7. Lift patient onto a suitable ambulance
cot using the side lifting handles of the
long board.
An end-to-end lift should not be
performed as the board may be
flexible, which will cause curvature of
the spine.
8. Loosen the cervical collar.
Helps to prevent compromise of
venous circulation and reduces risk of
increasing ICP.
9. Document the time the patient was
placed on the board.
Key Points
Long board
1. The long board is designed to be used to provide rigid support whilst
moving a patient with suspected spinal, hip, pelvic or lower extremity injuries.
2. The board should be supplied with a complete head immobiliser and four
body straps.
3. It should never be used without the head immobiliser and at least three body
straps.
4. Log rolling should NOT be used for any patient who is untrapped and lying
supine on the floor.
5. Log rolling should not be used for patients with possible pelvic fractures as
it may dislodge clots and worsen bleeding.
6. Women in late pregnancy should not lie supine on the board in order to
prevent aortocaval compression.
7. The time the patient is on the board should be kept to a minimum and
application time should be recorded on the patient report form.
431

Vacuum mattress
The vacuum mattress is a lightweight but tough device used to provide
rigid support whilst moving a patient with suspected spinal, hip, pelvic or
lower extremity injuries. The device is filled with high density beads that
conform to the patient when air is removed by means of a pump. This
serves to cocoon the patient and reduce movement during transportation.
It has advantages over the long board:
•
Good insulation from the surroundings.
•
It can be used in whatever position is appropriate for the patient, for
example, it can be used for patients in a semi-reclined position.
•
It provides comparable spinal immobilisation to the long board with
increased comfort.48
•
The patient is likely to be more secure if a lateral tilt is required.
The main disadvantages of the vacuum mattress are that it doesn’t lend
itself well to extrication and there is the risk of failure due to puncture and
a leak of air back into the mattress once the patient has been secured.
Typically, transferring a patient onto a vacuum mattress will require the
use of an intermediate-stage immobilisation device such as a KED, and a
device for lifting the patient.
The exact method required for immobilising a patient on a vacuum
mattress will vary upon the device being used and the strapping system
employed. The following guidelines are generic and the manufacturer’s
own instructions or employer guidelines should be followed where
differences exist.
Procedure
Additional
information/
rationale
1. Explain procedure and gain consent from patient (where
appropriate).
Consent is a legal
requirement.
Explanation of the
procedure helps to
gain cooperation
from the patient.
2. Apply any appropriate cervical collar or extrication
device.
Provides additional
head and neck
support until the
432

patient is fully
immobilised on
long board.
3. Prepare the mattress. Smooth out the beads in the
mattress and undo the straps and lay by the side.
4. Using appropriate technique, place the patient on the
vacuum mattress (an orthopaedic scoop stretcher may be
used to achieve this). There is often an appropriate point for
location of the patient’s shoulders on the mattress; the
practitioner should ensure that the patient is correctly
aligned with this point.
5. Conform the vacuum mattress around the contour of the
patient, starting at the head
6. Apply body straps in the following order:
(i) Chest
(ii) Pelvis
(iii) Thighs
(iv) Ankles.
7. Evacuate air from the vacuum mattress until it becomes
rigid; ensure that the mattress remains rigid.
8. Disconnect the vacuum pump and ensure that the valve
is closed or secured.
9. Reassess and adjusts the straps around the chest, hips,
and legs.
10. Stabilise the head in a neutral position and secure to the
vacuum mattress LAST.
11. Reassess patient’s baseline observations.
Helps to prevent
compromise of
venous circulation
and reduces risk of
increasing ICP.
12. Lift patient onto a suitable ambulance cot using the side
lifting handles of the vacuum mattress.
13. Loosen the cervical collar.
14. Document the time the patient was placed on the
device.
433

Key Points
Vacuum mattress
1. The vacuum mattress provides comparable immobilisation to the long board
but with greater comfort It is not suitable to be used as an extrication device.
2. Although it is more comfortable than a rigid board, it still produces high
interface pressures and the time the patient spends immobilised on the device
should be kept to a minimum.
Summary
Spinal immobilisation is a necessary part of the management of many
trauma patients but it is not without its complications. The practitioner
needs to be aware of the problems associated with spinal immobilisation
and ensure that only those patients with an indication for immobilisation
are immobilised.
Each
of
the
spinal
immobilisation
devices
has
advantages
and
disadvantages; the practitioner needs to be cognisant of this and use the
most appropriate equipment available for the circumstances.
Chapter Key Points
There are numerous potential complications associated with spinal immobilization
Knowledge of the benefits and limitations of immobilisation equipment is
essential
Manual immobilisation should be commenced at the earliest time for any patient
where the mechanism of injury suggests the possibility of SCI
Immobilisation can only be released once the practitioner has ascertained that
ALL criteria from the selective immobilisation algorithm have been satisfied
References and Further reading
1 Chi CH, Wu FG, Tsai SH, Wang CH, Stern SA. Effect of hair and
clothing on neck immobilization using a cervical collar. Am J Emerg Med
2005;23(3):386–390.
434

2 Kwan I, Bunn F, Roberts I, on behalf of the WHO Pre-Hospital Trauma
Care Steering Committee. Spinal Immobilisation for Trauma Patients. The
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Date of Most Recent
Substantive Amendment: 22 January 2001.
3 Tortora GJ, Derrikson B. Principles of Anatomy and Physiology, 11th
edn. New Jersey: Wiley, 2006.
4 Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. UK Ambulance
Service Clinical Practice Guidelines version 4. London: IHCD, 2006.
5 Podolsky S, Baraff LJ, Simon RR, Hoffman JR, Larmon B, Ablon W.
Efficacy
of
cervical
spine
immobilization
methods.
J
Trauma
1983;23(6):461–465.
6 Huerta C, Griffith R, Joyce SM. Cervical spine stabilization in pediatric
patients:
Evaluation
of
current
techniques.
Ann
Emerg
Med
1987;16(10):1121–1126.
7 Del Rossi G, Heffernan TP, Horodyski M, Rechtine GR, The
effectiveness of extrication collars tested during the execution of
spine-board transfer techniques. Spine J 2004;4:619–623.
8 Houghton L, Driscoll P. Cervical immobilization – are we achieving it?
Prehosp Immed Care 1999;3:17–21.
9 Luscombe MD, Williams JL. Comparison of a long spinal board and
vacuum
mattress
for
spinal
immobilisation.
Emerg
Med
J
2003;20:476–478.
10 Hamilton RS, Pons PT. The efficacy and comfort of full-body vacuum
splints
for
cervical-spine
immobilization.
J
Emerg
Med
1996;14(5):553–559.
11 Howell JM, Burrow R, Dumontier C, Hillyard A. A practical
radiographic
comparison
of
short
board
technique
and
Kendrick
extrication device. Ann Emerg Med 1989;18(9):943–946.
12 Graziano AF, Scheidel EA, Cline JR, Baer LJ. A radiographic
comparison of prehospital cervical immobilization methods. Ann Emerg
Med 1987;16(10):1127–1131.
435

13 Cordell WH, Hollingsworth JC, Olinger ML, Stroman SJ, Nelson DR.
Pain and tissue-interface pressures during spine-board immobilization.
Ann Emerg Med 1995;26(1):31–36.
14 Chan D, Goldberg R, Tascone A, Harmon S, Chan L. The effect of
spinal
immobilization
on
healthy
volunteers.
Ann
Emerg
Med
1994;23(1):48–51.
15 McGuire RA, Neville S, Green BA, Watts C. Spinal instability and the
log-rolling maneuver. J Trauma 1987;27(5):525–531.
16 Swartz EE, Nowak J, Shirley C, Decoster LC. A comparison of head
movement during back boarding by motorized spine-board and log-roll
techniques. J Athlet Train 2005;40(3):162–168.
17 Del Rossi G, Horodyski M, Heffernan TP, Powers ME, Siders R, Brunt
D, Rechtine GR. Spine - board transfer techniques and the unstable
cervical spine. Spine 2004;29(7):E134–138.
18 Del Rossi G, Horodyski MH, Conrad BP, Di Paola CP, Di Paola MJ,
Rechtine GR. The 6-plus-person lift transfer technique compared with
other methods of spine boarding. J Athlet Train 2008;43(1):6–13.
19 Lee C, Porter K. The prehospital management of pelvic fractures.
Emerg Med J 2007;24:130–133.
20 Krell JM, McCoy MS, Sparto PJ, Gretchen L. Fisher, Stoy WA,
Hostler DP. Comparison of the Ferno Scoop Stretcher with the Long
Backboard
for
Spinal
Immobilization.
Prehosp
Emerg
Care
2006;10:46–51.
21 De Lorenzo RA, Olson JE, Boska M, Johnston R, Hamilton GC,
Augustine J, Barton R: Optimal positioning for cervical immobilization.
Ann Emerg Med 1996;28:301–308.
22 Goutcher CM, Lochhead V. Reduction in mouth opening with
semi-rigid cervical collars. Br J Anaesth 2005;95(3):344–348.
23 Ollerton JE, Parr MJA, Harrison K, Hanrahan B, Sugrue M. Potential
cervical spine injury and difficult airway management for emergency
intubation of trauma adults in the emergency department – a systematic
review. Emerg Med J 2006;23:3–11.
436

24 Braude D, Domeier R, Prehospital care for road traffic casualties:
Spinal
immobilisation
should
be
done
selectively.
Br
Med
J
2002;325(7358):279.
25 Lerner B, Moscati R. Duration of patient immobilization in the ED. Am
J Emerg Med 2000;18(1):28–30.
26 Emergency Nurses Association. Spinal Immobilisation, 5th edn.
Trauma nursing core course. 2000;377:81.
27 Craig GR, Nielsen MS. Rigid cervical collars and intracranial pressure.
Int Care Med 1991;17:504–505.
28 Raphael JH, Chotai R. Effects of the cervical collar on cerebrospinal
fluid pressure. Anaesthesia 1994;49:437–439.
29 Davies G, Deakin C, Wilson A. The effect of a rigid collar on
intracranial pressure. Injury 1996;27:647–649.
30 Kolb JC, Summers RL, Galli RL. Cervical collar induced changes in
intracranial pressure. Am J Emerg Med 1999;17:135–137.
31 Ferguson J, Mardel SN, Beattie TF, Wytch R. Cervical collars – a
potential risk to the head-injured patient. Injury Internat J Care Injured
1993;24(7):454–456.
32 Porter KP, Allison KM. The UK emergency department practice for
spinal
board
unloading.
Is
there
conformity?
Resuscitation
2003;58(1):117–120.
33
Totten
VY,
Sugarman
DB.
Respiratory
effects
of
spinal
immobilization. Prehosp Emerg Care 1999;3(4):347–352.
34 Vickery D, The use of the spinal board after the pre-hospital phase of
trauma management. Emerg Med J 2001;18:51–54.
35 Houghton DJ. Dysphagia caused by a hard cervical collar. Br J
Neurosurg 1996;10(5):501–502.
36 Brownlee AE. Managing spinal immobilisation devices in the
emergency department. Australas Emerg Nurs J 2005;8(3):79–83.
37
Hampton
S,
Preventable
pressure
sores.
Care
Crit
III
1997;(13):193–197.
437

38 Boitano M, Tait D, Petrovic R, Nicosia S. The spine board: peak
pressure assessment design implications for wound prevention. J Trauma
Injury Infect Crit Care 2004;57(2):460.
39 Chan D, Goldberg RM, Mason J, Chan L. Backboard versus mattress
splint immobilization: a comparison of symptoms generated. J Emerg Med
1996;14(3):293–298.
40 Lerner B, Moscati R. Duration of patient immobilization in the ED. Am
J Emerg Med 2000;18(1):28–30.
41 Barkana Y, Stein M, Scope A, Maor R, Abramovich Y, Friedman Z et
al. Prehospital stabilization of the cervical spine for penetrating injuries of
the neck – is it necessary? Injury 2000;31(5):305–309.
42 Association of Emergency Medical Technicians. Prehospital Trauma
Life Support, 6th edn. Missouri: Elsevier, 2007.
43 Joint Royal Colleges Ambulance Liaison Committee. UK Ambulance
Service Clinical Practice Guidelines version 3. London: IHCD, 2004.
44 Clark SL, Cotton DB, Pivarnik JM et al. Position change and central
hemodynamic
profile
during normal
third-trimester
pregnancy
and
post-partum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164: 883–887.
45 Kerr MG, Scott DB, Samuel E. Studies of the inferior vena cava in late
pregnancy. Br Med J 1964;1: 532–533.
46 Bieniarz J, Crottogini JJ, Curuchet E et al. Aortocaval compression by
the uterus in late human pregnancy: an arteriographic study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 1968; 100:203–217.
47 Bamber JH, Dresner M. Aortocaval compression in pregnancy: the
effect of changing the degree and direction of lateral tilt on maternal
cardiac output. Anesth Analg 2003;97:256–258.
48 Ahmad M, Butler J. Spinal boards or vacuum mattresses for
immobilisation. Emerg Med J 2001;18:379–380.
438

Chapter 18
Assessment and
management of wounds and
burns
Content
Definitions
Classification of wounds
Wound healing
Principles of wound management
The use of tourniquets and haemostatic dressings
Burns assessment
Burn management principles
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
The assessment and management of wounds and burns is an important
area of prehospital care and first aid. Many of the principles that underlie
the techniques discussed are based upon many years of first aid
intervention, as such little evidence surrounds the area. Where appropriate
and available, evidence will be provided to support or dispute intervention
or management options. Where no evidence is available guidance will
provided based upon perceived best practice.
439

The circulatory system is a closed network of vessels including arteries,
veins and capillaries that carry blood to all parts of the body.1 If this
network suffers any damage or break in its’ continuity then haemorrhage
occurs, this can be either internal (occult) or external bleeding. If this
bleeding is not controlled either by the body’ s own physiological
processes or by external influence (i.e. first aid measures or surgery) then
hypovolaemic shock and ultimately death can occur.
Definitions
A wound is defined as a break in an organ or tissue caused by an external
agent; this can be divided into seven broad categories2 that will be
discussed later.
Sources of bleeding
Internal bleeding
Normally concealed within the body, internal bleeding can be difficult to
detect and may only be suspected due to mechanism of injury and the
presence of signs of shock in the absence of external haemorrhage. There
are no first aid or wound management techniques that can be used to
control such bleeding; therefore definitive care is required at a suitable
receiving hospital.
External bleeding
External bleeding is bleeding that is exhibited on the outside of the body
and should be rapidly detected during the primary or secondary surveys.
The seriousness and severity of an injury is dependent upon the source of
the haemorrhage (arterial, venous, capillary), the degree of vascular
disruption and the amount of bleeding that the patient can compensate for.
In most cases of bleeding the practitioner should be able to stem the flow
of blood loss.
440

Arterial bleeding
Arteries are the thick walled blood vessels that carry blood away from the
heart. This blood is typically oxygen rich (aside from the pulmonary
arteries).1 Blood within these vessels is under the highest pressure of the
vascular circuit and therefore damage to arteries results in potential high
volumes of blood loss. Arterial bleeding is characterised by bright red
spurting of blood with each heart beat (oxygenated blood is brighter than
deoxygenated blood). Due to the high pressure blood volume losses can be
great unless controlled urgently.
Venous bleeding
Veins are blood vessels that carry blood back to the heart; typically this is
deoxygenated blood (aside from the pulmonary veins). The blood within
the veins is described as dark red/blue in colour as oxygen has been
removed. The venous system is a lower pressure circuit than that of the
arterial. There is a loss of pulsatile movement of blood, with blood
flowing more freely. This causes venous bleeding to typically be free
flowing rather than spurting, however blood loss from venous injury can
be severe, especially in the leg and the neck where large wide veins are
present.
Capillary bleeding
Capillaries are the smallest blood vessels in the body and are found
throughout the body as they provide a rich circulation supply to most of
the tissues of the body.1 Capillaries generally have exceedingly thin walls
which may pass very near to the surface of the skin and are easily
damaged. As blood volumes are small in individual capillaries and under
low pressure blood will typically ooze from the wound. Capillary blood
may be a mix of oxygenated or deoxygenated blood therefore the colour
may vary.
441

Classification of wounds
Wounds are classified by mechanism and physiological disturbance.
Whilst differing classifications are used they commonly fit into seven
broad categories (excluding burns – discussed later in this chapter). It is
important that the practitioner can describe a wound for documentation
and referral purposes, especially in today’s increasingly litigious society.
Incised wound
An injury to the skin that may be superficial or deep. Incisions are caused
by sharp objects such as a knife or broken glass. Incisions are typically
clean wounds (unless the object is dirty), with neat edges.
Lacerations
Lacerations are a tearing or splitting of the skin caused by blunt trauma.
Commonly lacerations are caused by either direct or indirect blow to the
skin by a heavy or fixed object such as furniture or the floor.
Puncture/penetrating wounds
These wounds have a small opening where the object has penetrated the
skin causing potential underlying damage. It can be very difficult to assess
these wounds as the damage may not be indicated by the entry wound.
Careful assessment of the wound is required in a controlled environment
by a competent and experienced practitioner; this is usually undertaken in
an operating theatre or Emergency Department. The investigation of depth
and
underlying
damage
is
not
recommended
in
the
prehospital
environment. A concise history is paramount in providing a level of
suspicion of underlying injury. Common causes of these wounds range
from stab wounds to standing on a nail.
442

Abrasion
An abrasion (often referred to as a graze) is a superficial removal of the
skin by rubbing or friction. This can be painful due to the exposed nerve
endings and may have embedded dirt in the skin. These wounds may
range from carpet burns from a fall to severe ‘gravel rash’ following a fall
from a moving motorcycle.
Crush Injury
These are caused by severe crushing pressures causing the skin to split.
Crush wounds are often associated with underlying injury to bone or
organs due to the forces involved.
Bite wounds
These wounds are naturally caused by the teeth which may be human or
animal. Bite wounds are often ragged edged and involve bruising from the
crushing forces involved. Bite wounds are associated with a high risk of
infection due to the natural bacteria in the mouth of the human or animal.
Contusions
Also referred to as bruising, a contusion is bleeding from damaged blood
vessels beneath the skin that result in a bluish/purple discoloration beneath
the skin. These are typically caused by blunt trauma, although contusions
may form around the site of other wounds.
Other wounds
These include amputation which is the complete detachment of a part of
the body that may be cut or torn away. This may result in significant
bleeding due to the damage to arteries, veins and bone. If tissue still
connects the amputated body part then it is termed as partial amputation.
Avulsion injuries are a flap of skin and underlying tissue that is partially
443

torn or cut away, one such injury is the tearing away of the scalp in blunt
head trauma.
Wound healing
Wound healing is a dynamic process involving physiological processes in
a series of stages whereby damaged or destroyed tissues are restored to
normal function.3
Phases of wound healing
Wound healing is a complex process that occur s in a predictable order.
The processes of wound healing are generally described in four stages 4:
•
Haemostasis
•
Inflammatory stage
•
Proliferation or reconstructive stage
•
Maturation or re-modelling stage.
Whilst these stages are not distinct and may overlap, for simplicity they
will be discussed individually, due to the complex nature of wound
healing only brief discussion will be provided, further reading suggestions
are provided at the end of this chapter that will provide more information.
Haemostasis
This occurs within seconds and minutes of injury. Blood vessels constrict
to reduce blood loss. When platelets come into contact with collagen from
damaged blood vessels chemical mediators are released that promote
coagulation.4 Platelets adhere to vessel walls and damaged edges where
they are stabilised by fibrin threads to form a clot.
Inflammatory stage
Neutrophils, monocytes and keratinocytes (white blood cells) migrate to
the damaged area over the first 2–3 days following injury. Histamine
444

release causes vasodilatation and increased permeability of capillary walls
to cause leucocytes, antibodies, proteins and electrolytes to exude into the
surrounding tissues. This causes the wound to be red, swollen and hot.4
White blood cells (neutrophils and macrophages) begin the process of
repair by destroying and ingesting bacteria and devitalised tissue. This
increases the oxygen demand in the tissues through the increase in cellular
activity; therefore hypoxic wounds are more susceptible to infection and
poor healing.
Proliferation or reconstructive stage
This stage lasts from about 3–24 days. As macrophages accumulate at the
site of injury chemical mediators are released that attract fibroblasts to the
site. Fibroblasts produce proteins such as collagen and elastin that leads to
the formation of new connective tissue that increases the strength of the
wound.5 New blood vessel formation is also stimulated and will begin to
grow in the matrix of connective tissue. The new tissue at the site of injury
is referred to as granulation tissue; this is generally pink/red in appearance
and is very fragile. Wound contraction also occurs, with specialised
fibroblasts pulling the wound edges together to reduce the surface area of
the wound. During this time re-epithelialisation occurs as epithelial tissue
migrates across the surface of the wound to eventually cover the wound.
Maturation or re-modelling stage
This stage commences at about 21 days after the injury and may continue
for over a year. There is a gradual reduction in the vascularity of the
wound and collagen fibres are re-modelled to a more organised structure
that strengthens the wound. During this time stronger avascular tissue may
replace the highly vascular granulation tissue, this may lead to scarring.4
Complications in wound healing
There are a variety of complications that can affect wound healing; this
section will briefly discuss some of the key issues that may affect wound
healing.
445

Factors that affect wound healing
Table 18.1 Factors that affect wound healing. From Timmons (2003)6 and
Dougherty and Lister (2006)4
Factor
Complication(s)
Nutrition
There is a clear correlation between sub clinical nutrition and poor
wound healing. The process of wound healing requires a number of
nutritional factors to be present to meet demand. For example fats
and proteins are required and cannot always be synthesised by the
body.
Diabetes
Diabetes mellitus is linked to a number of issues that can influence
wound healing, for example reduction in vascular supply to wound
sites and a pre-disposition to infection in raised blood glucose
levels. These can lead to poor or delayed wound healing.
Renal
disease
Renal disease comprises of a variety of key pathophysiological
changes that may affect wound healing. For example fluid and
electrolyte imbalance may result in reduced cellular efficiency and
subsequent healing processes. Also the presence of anaemia due to
decreased erythropoietin production may lead to reduced oxygen
supply to the wound site.
Steroid use
and other
medications
Steroids have been linked to poor wound healing by inhibition of
collagen synthesis and a reduction in the tensile strength of
collagen. Other drugs noted to delay wound healing include
alcohol, penicillin, nicotine and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs.
Other
factors
Complications include; foreign body in the wound, infection,
obesity, stress, location of the wound (e.g. highly mobile areas).
Age
The aging process presents a number of factors that may influence
wound healing. These include reduced cardiovascular functioning
resulting in poor tissue perfusion; poor nutritional status; reduced
glucose tolerance and potential decrease in hygiene standards and
self-care.
446

Principles of wound
management
Whilst wounds may present in a variety of forms as previously discussed
the principles of wound management can be generalised to deal with each
situation with little adaptation.
Control of bleeding (no foreign body)
Procedure
Rationale
1. Ensure the area is safe.
This is a key objective in any primary
survey.
2. Protect yourself and the patient
with appropriate infection control
measures such as gloves, eye wear and
apron.
To reduce the risk of cross infection and
blood borne virus exposure.
3. Reassure the patient.
An anxious patient is more difficult to
manage and anxiety will increase
cardiac output and potentially bleeding.
4. Elevate and support the wounded
part above the height of the heart.
This will allow for postural reduction in
blood flow to the injured part, thus
reducing potential blood loss.
5. Expose the wound to identify the
wound type and site.
This will aid describing of the wound
and identification of any debris in the
wound. If there is a foreign body within
the wound – refer to later in this chapter.
6. Apply direct pressure to the wound. Direct pressure to a wound site will
reduce blood flow/loss and encourage
coagulation.
7. Apply a sterile or clean dressing
pad and bandage over the wound; this
should be tight enough to stem the
flow of the bleeding but not tight
enough to restrict circulation distal to
the injury.
If circulation is disrupted beyond the site
of bandaging there is a risk of tissue
necrosis.
447

8. Check the distal circulation (pulses
or capillary refill time).
To ensure distal blood flow.
9. If the bleeding is not controlled by
the first dressing apply a further
dressing over the top.
This will add further pressure to the
wound.
10. If the initial dressings do not stem
the bleeding:
•
Maintain elevation and
pressure upon the wound and
remove the dressings
•
Re-position the dressings to
apply the best pressure
possible
•
Re-check distal circulation.
The re-positioning of the dressings may
apply pressure more directly over the
wound. After any intervention the effect
of the treatment should be checked to
ensure efficacy and detriment to the
patient.
11. If the bleeding is severe and not
controlled by these initial methods
then consider indirect pressure.
See later in chapter.
Control of bleeding (foreign body
present)
In the presence of a retained foreign body in a wound, it is important that
the object is not removed from the wound as this may cause further tissue
damage, dislodge blood clots or unseal blood vessels causing an increase
of bleeding. The following principles apply to the management of
bleeding with a retained foreign body:
•
Do not remove the object, unless small and sitting on top of the
wound as opposed as embedded in the wound. If debris is sitting
upon the wound it may be brushed away gently using a sterile pad.
•
Do not apply pressure upon the object as this may cause further
damage.
•
Pressure should be applied to the sides of the wound, holding the
wound together.
•
Pad around the object to apply pressure to the sides of the wound
and to ensure the object is not dislodged. When padded a bandage
can be applied over the top to secure the padding.
448

•
Consider primary principles of wound management, such as
elevation.
•
In the event of failure to stem bleeding then indirect pressure may
be required.
THINK
You are called to a patient who is impaled on a fence post. How will you deal with
a wound and such a large embedded object? How will this change your
management and transportation?
Indirect pressure
If bleeding is not controlled by initial first aid measures then application
of indirect pressure should be considered. This requires pressure to be
placed upon the artery that supplies the area of bleeding. Applying
pressure will reduce blood flow to the area and subsequent blood loss
during which time more substantial or definitive bandaging can be
applied.
Common sites for indirect pressure include:
•
The brachial artery for arm wounds
•
The femoral artery for leg wounds
•
The temporal artery for scalp wounds.
The carotid artery should not be compressed when dealing with head or
scalp wounds.
The use of tourniquets and
haemostatic dressings
In the presence of severe haemorrhage that is uncontrolled by direct and
indirect pressure (for example amputation) there are few options available
for wound control; in such occasions it is suggested that a tourniquet could
be used. The tourniquet was initially used by battlefield surgeons in
449

ancient Rome to control bleeding during amputations; subsequently the
use of the tourniquet has undergone fluctuations in popularity with a
recent resurgence in military settings.7 Arterial tourniquets work by
compressing muscle and other tissues surrounding extremity arteries,
therefore compressing the lumen of the artery and reducing distal blood
flow.7 The tension required to achieve this is dependent upon the size of
the extremity8 and the width of the tourniquet.9 Wider tourniquets are
more effective at stopping arterial flow at a given tension than a narrow
tourniquet due to an increased area of vasculature being compressed.9
Complications of tourniquet use
There are a variety of potential complications associated with the
application of a tourniquet. The time a tourniquet is applied for has often
been a concern over its’ use, even application for a matter of minutes leads
to changes in muscle and nerve physiology. In an early study by
Heppenstall et al. (1979)10 found that after 1 hour there was no evidence
of muscle damage, however at 2 hours of ischaemia elevated levels of
lactic acid and creatinine phosphokinase were found (these are linked to
skeletal muscle damage or injury). Surgical guidelines and studies support
no more than 60–90 minutes of use, with a suggested upper limit of 2
hours.11 However these studies are not prehospital based, so there is little
guidance upon a safe duration of application.
There has been documented evidence of post-tourniquet complications
known
as
post-tourniquet
syndrome
(weakness/parasthesia/pallor/
stiffness) in the distal limb. This has been related to the damage caused to
muscle, nerves and blood vessels during tourniquet use of over 1.5 hours
in surgical intervention. This syndrome appears common but the effects
are limited to approximately 3 weeks.12 There are further concerns over
issues such as worsened venous bleeding with an incorrectly applied
tourniquet that allows for arterial flow to continue but venous return to be
stemmed.7 Compartment syndrome is a further complication that may
occur with prolonged use, however little evidence surrounds this area and
it is suggested the it may be the injury itself, not the tourniquet, which
causes the presence of compartment syndrome.13 Whilst there are
numerous concerns and potential complications of tourniquet use the
evidence surrounding these issues is unclear.14,15
450

Can they be used safely?
Recent military experience supports the safety of short-term tourniquet
use in prehospital care16,17,18 with a small-scale study finding limb
salvage with arterial injury in 11 of 14 patients despite tourniquet times
averaging 2 hours.19
Figure 18.1 A stepwise approach to haemorrhage control.20
Indications for use
Whilst little evidence surrounds the use of tourniquets in the civilian
setting, systematic reviews of haemorrhage control suggest that there may
well be a role in a stepwise approach7,20 as shown below. Whilst it is
recognised that there limitations and complications associated with the use
of a tourniquet, the ability to stem severe bleeding in the event of all other
methods failing or in the presence of multiple casualties with other
priorities of care, evidence suggests that tourniquet use may be
appropriate (Figure 18.1).7,20
Doyle et al. (2008)7 and Lee et al. (2007)20 propose indications for
tourniquet use in the prehospital care setting that allows for the technique
to be used when the benefits will outweigh the complications, these can be
seen below:
•
Failure to stop bleeding using pressure dressings.
•
Injury does not allow for the use of pressure dressings.
•
Significant extremity bleeding in the face of any of the following:
•
Need for airway management
•
Need for breathing support
•
Circulatory shock
451

•
Need for other emergency interventions or assessment
•
Bleeding from multiple sites.
•
Impaled foreign body with ongoing extremity bleeding.
•
Benefits of preventing death from hypovolaemic shock by cessation
of ongoing external haemorrhage are greater than the risk of limb
damage or loss from ischaemia caused by tourniquet use.
•
Dangerous situations for the caregiver or adverse environmental
factors (i.e. darkness).
•
Mass casualty events whereby priorities of care are inhibited by the
number and/or severity of injuries.
Whilst the use of tourniquet application looks set to return it is important
that any practitioners that use such techniques are adequately prepared and
understand the underlying concepts of such an intervention. If applied it is
imperative that the tourniquet is not covered as it may remain unseen for a
long period of time and it is essential that the time of application is
recorded to ensure that prolonged usage is avoided.
Haemostatic dressings
Haemostatic
dressings
are
topical
agents
that
use
a
variety
of
physiological mechanisms to stem bleeding. The method of action is
determined by the nature of each product, current haemostatic dressings
include:
•
Fibrin glues and sealants
•
Microporous Polysaccharide Hemosphere® (MPH)
•
Mineral zeolite
•
Poly-N-acetylglucosamine.
Fibrin glues and sealants
These contain high concentrations of fibrinogen and thrombin (and
sometimes other clotting factors) that work by mimicking the latter stages
of the clotting process. This will produce more rapid clot formation.21
Multiple animal studies have proven that these bandages decrease blood
loss and maintain blood pressure significantly better than a standard
dressing and direct pressure.22,23
452

Microporous
Polysaccharide
Hemosphere®
(MPH)
This is a powder that is poured into open wounds and absorbs water and
low molecular weight products from blood thus allowing clotting factors
and platelets to become more concentrated (therefore active).24 Studies
suggest that this powder is effective in accelerating haemostasis time in
human and animal subjects.25 However further studies have questioned
the efficacy in severe haemorrhage with no improvements in mortality in
animal subjects.26
Mineral zeolite
These products work by adsorbing water and concentrating clotting
factors. This encourages and enhances the natural clotting process. In an
animal study by Alam et al.26 this substance was found to significantly
reduce mortality in comparison to no interventions and the use of
absorbent pad and elastic bandage, and also had the lowest blood loss
volume (not statistically significant). There are concerns that the
temperature rise that occurs from this exothermic reaction may result in
burns; however this risk appears minimal in terms of potential benefit
from the haemorrhage control.27
Poly-N-acetylglucosamine
These dressings are fabricated from chitosan, a naturally occurring
polysaccharide. This has a positive electrical charge and attracts
negatively charged red blood cells that become woven into the bandage to
form a seal. In addition this dressing forms an antibacterial barrier.
Positive results have been found with these products in simulated combat
wounds and animal studies, with reduced blood loss and improved
mortality rates.28
Scenario
You are called to a patient as a solo responder.
The patient is unresponsive and has a noisy airway that requires intervention. The patient
also has a significant arterial bleed from the femoral artery and has lost a large amount of
his blood volume. What are your priorities for this patient? What actions would you take?
453

Burns assessment
In the UK burns patients account for approximately 175,000 emergency
department attendances and 15,000 hospital admissions each year.29 As
such the care and assessment of this large group of patients is of great
importance. The following guidance for the assessment and management
of the burns injured patient is taken from current international literature
and meta-analytical reviews including The National Burn Care Review
(2000);29 Management of Burns and Scalds In Primary Care – New
Zealand Guideline Group (2007)30 and further research as indicated.
This guidance will look at burns specific management and will not
therefore look at the full assessment and management of a patient.
Definition
A burn is defined as tissue damage caused by such agents as heat,
chemicals, electricity, sunlight or nuclear radiation.2
Assessment of burns
There are three key areas for the assessment of a burn, these are the type
of burn; the size of the burn and burn depth. Whilst the majority of
evidence supporting burns assessment is based upon a consensus of expert
opinion there are an increasing number (often small) of studies into this
area.30
Type of burn
Burn type is the defined by the source of the energy that causes the tissue
damage, this includes:
•
Thermal burn – this is caused by exposure to extreme heat and may
include wet (scalds) or dry (i.e. flame) sources. These are direct
burns that are directly related to the level of heat and duration of
contact with the heat source.
454

•
Chemical burn – These are caused by the chemical properties of
acids and alkalis. The severity is dependent upon the time of
contact and the concentration of the substance.
•
Electrical burn – Electrical burns are caused by contact with
electrical sources such as exposed cables; these injuries commonly
produce an entry and exit burn as the charge passes through the
body. There may well be underlying damage on the path between
the entry and exit points.
•
Radiation burns – Radiation burns are most commonly caused by
radiation from the sun (sunburn); however they may be caused by
exposure to other radioactive isotopes.
•
Friction burns – This is the result of friction between the body and
another object resulting in heat production. This mechanism may
also result in abrasion injuries.
•
Cold burns – This is caused by contact with extremely cold objects/
gases/liquids. The extreme temperature causes damage to the
tissues.
Assessment of burn area
There are a variety of methods for the estimation of total burn surface area
(TBSA) currently in use, these commonly include:
•
Palmar surface method
•
The rule of nines
•
Lund and Browder charts
•
Serial halving.
Palmar surface method
This method is based upon the supposition that the palmar surface of the
patient’s hand (including the fingers) represents approximately 1% of the
total body surface area and can therefore be used as a guide for estimating
burn size. However this technique is poorly validated31 and should be
used with caution especially in children and obese patients, as the method
does not allow for age changes and variations in individual body weight.30
Recent studies suggest that a value of approximately 0.8% should be used
as it may provide a more accurate assessment.30,32 The palmar surface
455

method is more commonly used in small or irregular burns (<15%) or
relatively large burns (>85% where the unburnt tissue can be estimated).33
Figure 18.2 The rule of nines burns assessment chart.
The rule of nines
This estimation method (Figure 18.2) is based upon the principle that the
adult body can be split into areas that equate to 9% and subsequently
calculated. The rule of nines has been demonstrated to be swift method of
burn surface area estimation however there are suggestions that it may
overestimate burn surface area34 and can potentially be inaccurate in
children despite an adapted child model.30 However it is accepted that the
rule of nines method can provide a reasonable estimate of burn area.
Lund and Browder charts
The Lund and Browder chart is a burn area assessment chart that has been
derived from a set of norm data for the body surface areas in children and
adults. The model (Figure 18.3) is suggested to be more accurate than the
rule of nines but however takes longer to use than other methods.30 As the
model provides differing age ranges it can compensate for variations in
body size with age for a more accurate measurement.
Figure 18.3 The Lund and Browder chart.
456

Differing models have been proposed for large breasted women as this can
lead to underestimation of burn size by up to 5%35 and for use in obese
patients.30 However these models are not essential and commonplace as
the focus is often upon other clinical priorities.
Serial halving
This is a relatively new method of burns area assessment proposed by the
Royal College of Surgeons Edinburgh – Faculty of Prehospital Care36 that
aims to provide a swift ‘ball park’ estimate. There has been little research
undertaken to validate the use of such a model but has an appeal as a swift
approach to estimation. This approach is split into three stages:
•
Does the burn cover more than half of the body? For example if the
back of the patient is completely without burns then it must be less
than or equal to 50% of the body. This will distinguish between
greater or less than 50% total burn surface area. If the answer is no
then stage two is undertaken.
•
Does the burn cover more than half of the remaining half of the
body? If it does then the burn size is greater than 25% of total body
surface area. If the answer is no then the burn must cover less than
25% of the body and stage three is undertaken.
•
Does the burn cover more than or is equal to half of the remaining
body surface area? If the answer is yes the then burn surface area is
greater than 12.5% of the body surface area, if the answer is no then
the burn must be less than 12.5%.
457

As can be seen this is a rough estimation tool but can be undertaken
quickly with a brief visual inspection. In a small scale study serial halving
has been found to be as reliable as the rule of nines in burn size estimation
and much simpler to follow.37
THINK
Which method of burn surface area is used in your work area? Which method do
you feel is most appropriate or does it differ in each patient or situation?
Assessment of Burn Depth
There is no agreed methods for the assessment of burn depth with
suggested techniques including capillary refill time (as dermal circulation
will be lost in deeper burns) and the use of pin prick testing.30 However
these tests are not reliable within the first 24 to 48 hours following an
injury due to oedema and inflammatory response.30 Burn depth is
generally assessed in the prehospital or emergency environment by
appearance and the presence of pain. The classification of burn depth can
be seen in Table 18.2.
Table 18.2 Burn depth assessment From New Zealand Guideline Group
(2007)30
Classification Superficial (epidermal)
Example
UV light (sun burn), very brief flash burns
Appearance
Dry and red, will blanch with pressure, no blistering present
Sensation
May be painful
Healing time
7 days
Scarring
No scarring
Classification Superficial dermal (superficial partial thickness)
Example
Scalds, short flash burns
Appearance
Pale pink, with fine blistering, blanches to pressure
Sensation
Usually extremely painful
Healing time
Up to 14 days
Scarring
May be some colour mismatch in healed tissue
458

Classification Mid-dermal (partial thickness)
Example
Scald, flame, oil or grease burns
Appearance
Dark pink with large blisters, capillary refill time may be
prolonged
Sensation
May be painful
Healing time
Up to 21 days
Scarring
Scarring may be present (moderate risk)
Classification Deep dermal (deep partial thickness)
Example
Scalds, flame burns
Appearance
Blotchy red, may blister, no capillary refill due to damaged
capillaries
Sensation
No sensation present due to damaged nerves
Healing time
Over 21 days
Scarring
Scarring is likely
Classification Full thickness
Example
Scald (prolonged exposure), high voltage electricity, chemical
Appearance
White, waxy or charred, no capillary refill due to vessel damage,
no blistering. It may be lobster red and mottled in children
Sensation
No sensation due to nerve damage
Healing time
Will not heal without grafting
Scarring
Definite scarring
It is important to note that burn depth will vary in each patient and a burn
may consist of a variety of depths.
Burn management principles
There is limited research into the initial management of burn injuries
therefore many principles of management are based upon a consensus of
opinion and common sense approaches. The management of a burn has
three general stages:
459

•
Remove the source of the burn
•
Cool the burn
•
Dress/cover the burn.
One area that may differ in terms of first aid measures in the management
of chemical burns, as such this will be discussed separately.
Remove the source of the burn
The evidence for stopping the burning process is derived from expert
opinion and common sense. As burn depth and size often relates to the
length of exposure to the source of the burn removal of the source can
undoubtedly reduce the severity of burn injury. Common steps include:
•
Douse any flames using an appropriate medium (i.e. water).
•
If electrical ensure the power source is turned off.
•
Consider the use of a fire blanket or techniques such as stop, drop
and roll.
•
Remove any burnt clothing (unless adhering to the wounds) as this
may retain heat.
•
In tar burns do not remove the tar as this may seriously damage the
underlying tissue. The burn should be cooled instead.
Cool the burn
There is good evidence that suggests the immediate cooling of a burn can
reduce the severity of tissue damage.30 In a series of studies into the use
of cool water to cool a burn site it was found that such first aid measures
significantly reduced the depth of the burn and reduced subsequent need
for skin grafting and hospital admission times.38–40 The use of ice or iced
water is not recommended as it may lead to intense vasoconstriction and
subsequent burn progression.41 In a small animal study it was found that
the application of ice for 10 minutes following a burn injury that burn
depth was increased in comparison to a wound that had no treatment at all.
The presence of large burn surface area and subsequent cooling of the skin
as a first aid measure may lead to hypothermia; this is especially evident
in children and may be exacerbated by the use of ice or iced water.42 It is
therefore recommended that when cooling a burn that consideration is
460

given to keeping the patient warm. Whilst there is limited evidence to
provide an ideal temperature for water in cooling a burn, 15° C is
suggested as ideal as it provides adequate cooling and reduction in tissue
damage without the associated risks of cooling at lower temperatures.30
There is little evidence to support a specific or minimum duration of
cooling for a burn; however a single animal study sought to investigate
this, proposing that 30 minutes of cooling provided the most effective
treatment.43 Due to the lack of data it is suggested that cooling be
continued for approximately 30 minutes, although the patient condition
(i.e. pain level) may dictate that this is prolonged or reduced. Cooling
should be commenced as soon as is practicably possible following injury
as early cooling of a burn is significantly linked with improved wound
healing.44
Whilst water is considered the medium of choice for burns cooling it is
recognised that this may not always be available and expert opinion
suggests that in the absence of running or clean water, other liquids such
as milk or soft drinks may be used.30 Over recent years products known as
hydrogels have been introduced into UK ambulance services and first aid
equipment. These products are a gel-like material that due to its chemical
properties is able to hold large quantities of water (up to 90%). These
products have the benefit of being portable and simple to use and act as
both a cooling agent and a protective barrier from infection/debris.
However there is still limited evidence comparing the use of such products
versus running water.30 When compared to air cooling or no treatment,
small-scale studies have found these products to significantly reduce
cooling times45 and have a reduced risk of inducing hypothermia.46
Whilst there is little evidence to support such products at present, the
availability and simplicity of the product is likely to make them a
mainstay of treatment in prehospital care, especially in the absence of
running water.
Covering the burn
There are a variety of materials that may be used to cover burns; however
these generally have the following qualities:
•
Clean (preferably sterile) material
•
Non-adhesive
461

•
Pliable.
Current practice for burn covering includes the use of clear plastic bags
for hand burns (this allows for movement of the limb), hydrogel dressings,
non-adherent dressings and polyvinyl chloride film (cling film). There has
been little research into what constitutes an optimal burns dressing and
current practice is limited by availability of products for use. The general
principles of burn covering are to reduce the risk of infection, reduce pain
(by covering exposed nerve endings) and to continue the cooling process.
When applying a burn dressing it is important that the dressing is not
‘wrapped’ around the limb as this may lead to a tourniquet effect in the
presence of swelling and oedema47, instead the dressing should be layered
upon the burn to allow for expansion of damaged tissues. The use of cling
film for a burn dressing is common in first aid practice as it is cheap,
easily available and may provide a transparent covering to allow for
inspection, whilst also reducing pain.30 In addition PVC film has the
benefit of being essentially sterile after the first few centimetres upon the
roll. There is little evidence to support or dispute the use of this technique,
however a dated microbiology study48 suggests that PVC film is effective
in reducing bacterial infection in wounds. In the absence of any of these
dressings or coverings it is suggested that a clean, dry cotton sheet may be
used.30 Overall there is little consensus on a ‘gold standard’ burn dressing,
with considered opinion suggesting that any one of a variety of products
may be used in the initial setting. Within the secondary stages of care
there are a large number of coverings that may be used; however the
expense and nature of these products makes their use limited in first aid or
emergency care.
Chemical burns
Burn injury due to chemicals usually occurs in the workplace, although
they may occur in the domestic environment. There are currently over
25,000 products capable of causing chemical injury, therefore the
potential for injury is high.49 Chemical burns differ from thermal burns as
they do not actually burn but cause tissues to liquefy or coagulate due to
damage to proteins. Chemical injuries are often classified as either acid or
alkali burns; however there are a wider range of classifications that
include:
462

•
Acid burns
•
Alkali burns
•
Organic hydrocarbon burns
•
Miscellaneous burns (i.e. phosphorous)
•
Extravasation injury
•
Chemical warfare agents
From Seth, Chester and Moiemen (2007).49
This classification demonstrates that chemical injury can be caused by a
broader range of substance than just acids or alkali, as some agents do not
fit well into broad categories.
Management of chemical burns
The general management of any chemical burn has three steps:
•
Remove the source of the burn – remove contaminated clothing.
•
Irrigate the area thoroughly using running water.
•
Provide supportive measures (i.e. analgesia).
The majority of chemicals are treated with copious irrigation with water as
opposed to the neutralisation of the chemical with a specific agent. This is
due to two factors; the availability of neutralising agents and the potential
for exothermic (heat producing) reactions when the agent is neutralised
which can result in increased tissue damage.30,49 It is recommended that
chemical burns are irrigated for a minimum of one hour;30,49 however
alkali burns may require as long as 8–24 hours of irrigation.50 The use of
copious irrigation without delay after initial injury has been demonstrated
to significantly reduce the severity of a burn and the length of hospital
admission.30,51,52 However not all chemicals can be treated simply using
this generic principle, as shown below.
463

Specific chemical burns
Lime (cement)
Cement or lime burns can be irrigated; however it is recommended that
any dry cement is brushed off prior to irrigation as combining calcium
oxide
(lime)
and
water
may
cause
an
exothermic
reaction
and
subsequently worsen a burn injury.
Phenol
Phenol is a carbolic acid that is commonly used in industry. It is
recommended that the affected area is wiped prior to irrigation with water,
as this may will lead to dilution and allow more rapid penetration into the
skin.49
Elemental sodium/potassium and lithium burns
These agents are rare, however they are used in industry today. Burns
from these materials should not be treated with irrigation with water as
this may cause the compounds to spontaneously ignite,53 as the metals
react with water to form a very strong alkali.
Phosphorous
This is found in many products and may also be seen in military situations
as phosphorous is a component of many hand grenades, mortar rounds and
artillery rounds. Phosphorous spontaneously ignites upon contact with air,
therefore management should be aimed at removing the source (brushing
off the agent and removal of contaminated clothes) and at reducing air
contact with the chemical. Recommended management for phosphorous
burns is immersion in water or continuous irrigation with water or saline,
in the absence of such irrigation fluid saline or water soaked dressings
should be applied.30,49
THINK
464

What actions can you take to determine the likely source of a burn? What actions
would you take if confronted with a chemical burn from an unknown source?
Think about both patient safety and your own.
Chapter Key Points
1. The assessment and management of wounds and burns follows a set of core
principles that can generally be followed to provide safe and effective patient
care.
2. However there are chemical burns that require specific management
strategies; it is therefore of great importance to identify the agent that has
caused the injury so that damage is not potentiated.
3. Patients with lime, phenol, elemental sodium/potassium and lithium burns
should not have their burns treated with water as this may worsen the injury.
4. Whilst tourniquets have been out of favour in previous years, current
evidence suggests that they may have a role in the management of severe
uncontrolled haemorrhage.
References and Further reading
1 Marieb E, Hoehn K. Human Anatomy and Physiology, 7th edn. San
Francisco: Pearson Education, 2007.
2 Martin A. (Ed) Oxford Concise Medical Dictionary. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2003.
3 Morison M, Ovington L, Wilkie K. Chronic Wound Care: A Problem
Based Learning Approach. Edinburgh: Mosby, 2004.
4 Dougherty L, Lister S. (Eds) The Royal Marsden Hospital Manual of
Clinical Nursing Procedures, 6th edn. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing,
2006.
5 Johnstone C, Farley A, Hendry C. The physiological basis of wound
healing. Nurs Stand 2005;19(43):59–65.
6 Timmons J. Factors that compromise wound healing. Primary Health
Care 2003;13(5):43–49.
7 Doyle G, Taillac P. Tourniquets: A review of current use with proposals
for expanded pre-hospital use. Prehosp Emerg Care 2008;12(2):241–256.
465

8 Shaw JA, Murray DG. The relationship between tourniquet pressure and
underlying soft-tissue pressure in the thigh. J Bone Joint Surg Am
1982;64(8):1148–1152.
9 Crenshaw AG, Hargens AR, Gershuni DH, Rydevik B. Wide tourniquet
cuffs more effective at lower inflation pressures. Acta Orhtop Scand
1988;59(4):447–451.
10 Heppenstall RB, Balderston R, Goodwin C. Pathophysiologic effects
distal to a tourniquet in the dog. J Trauma 1979;19(4):234–238.
11 Wakai A, Winter DC, Street JT, Redmond PH. Pneumatic tourniquets
in extremity surgery. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2001;9(5):345–351.
12
Kam
PC,
Kavanagh
R,
Yoong
FF.
The
arterial
tourniquet:
pathophysiological
consequences
and
anaesthetic
implications.
Anaesthesia 2001;56(6):534–545.
13 Angus PD, Nakielny R, Goodrum DT. The pneumatic tourniquet and
deep venous thrombosis. J Bone Joint Surg Br 1983;65(3):336–339.
14 Townsend HS, GoodmanSB, Schurman DJ, Hackel A, Brock-Utne JG.
Tourniquet release: systemic and metabolic effects. Acta Anaesthesiol
Scand 1996;40(10):1234–1237.
15 Naimer SA, Chemla F. Elastic adhesive dressing treatment of bleeding
wounds in trauma victims. Am J Emerg Med 2000;18(7):816–819.
16 Lakstein D, Blumenfeld A, Sokolov T, Lin G, Bssorai R, Lynn M,
Abraham R. Tourniquets for hemorrhage control on the battlefield: a
4-year accumulated experience. J Trauma 2003;54(5-Suppl): S221–S225.
17 Beekley A, Sebesta J, Blackbourne L, Holcomb J. Prehospital
Tourniquet Use in Operation Iraqi Freedom: Effect on Hemorrhage
Control and Outcomes. Paper no. 27. Presented at Western Trauma
Association Annual Meeting, Big Sky, MT, March 2, 2006.
18 Chambers LW, Green DJ, Sample K, Gillingham BL, Rhee P, Brown
C, Narine N, Uecker JM, Bohman HR. Tactical surgical intervention with
temporary shunting of peripheral vascular trauma sustained during
Operation
Iraqi
Freedom:
one
unit’
s
experience.
J
Trauma
2006;61(4):824–830.
466

19 Walker A, Kershaw C, Nicholas S. Home Office Statistical Bulletin.
Crime in England and Wales 2005/06. London: Home Office, 2006.
20 Lee C, Porter K, Hodgetts T. Tourniquet use in the civilian prehospital
setting. Emerg Med J 2007;24:584–587.
21 Sierra D. Fibrin sealant adhesive systems: a review of their chemistry,
material
properties
and
clinical
applications.
J
Biomat
Appl
1993;7:309–352.
22 Jackson Mr, Gillespie DL, Longnecker EG, Goff JM, Fiala LA, O’
Donnell SD, Gomperts ED, Navalta LA, Hestlow T, Alving BM.
Hemostatic
efficacy
of
fibrin
sealant
(human)
on
expanded
poly-tetrafluoroethylene carotid patch angioplasty: a randomized clinical
trial. J Vasc Surg 1999;30(3):461–466.
23 Larsen MJ, Bowersox JC, Lim RC. Efficacy of a fibrin hemostatic
bandage in controlling hemorrhage from experimental injuries. Arch Surg
1995;130:420–422.
24 Gilbert DJ. New bandage stops hemorrhaging. Journal American
Forces Press Service. NNMC The Journal January 22 1999. Available at
www.dcmilitary.com/navy/journal/archives/jan22/j_c12299.html
25 Medafor Hemostatic Polymer Technologies homepage, MPH research.
Available at http://medafor.com//research.html. Accessed 12/04/2008.
26 Alam HB, Uy GB, Miller D, Koustova E et al. Comparative analysis of
hemostatic agents in a swine model of lethal groin injury. J Trauma
2003;54:1077–1082.
27 Rhee P, Brown C, Martin M, Salim A, Plurad D, Green D, Chambers
L, Demetriades D, Velma-hos G, Alam H. QuikClot use in trauma for
hemorrhage control: case series of 103 documented uses. J Trauma
2008;64(4):1093–1099.
28 Pusateri AE, McCarthy SJ, Gregory KW et al. Effect of chitosan based
hemostatic dressing on blood loss and survival in a model of severe
venous
haemorrhage
and
hepatic
injury
in
swine.
J
Trauma
2003;54:177–182.
29 National Burn Care Review. National Burn Care Review, 2000.
Http://www.baps.co.uk/documents/ncbr.pdf.
467

30 New Zealand Guideline Group. Management of Burns and Scalds in
Primary Care. New Zealand: Accident Compensation Corporation, 2007.
31 Amirsheybani HR, Creccelius GM, Timothy NH et al. The natural
history of the growth of the hand: 1. Hand area as a percentage of body
surface area. Plat Reconstr Surg 2001;107(3):726–733.
32 Blackhurst H. Estimation of burn surface area using the hand. Bestbets:
Best
Evidence
Topics.
[On-line]
www.bestbets.org/cgi-bin/
bets.pl?record-01516.
33 Hettiaratchy S, Papini R. Initial management of a major burn: II –
Assessment and resuscitation. Emerg Med. 2004;329:101–103.
34 Wachtel, TL. Berry, CC, Frank, HA. The inter-rater reliability of
estimating the size of burns from various burn area chart drawings. Burns
2000;26:156–170.
35 Hidvegi N, Nduka C, Myers C et al. Estimation of breast burn size.
Plast Reconstr Surg 2004;113(6);1591–1597.
36 Allison K, Porter K. Consensus on the prehospital approach to burns
patient management. Emerg Med J 21;112–114.
37 Smith JJ, Malyon AD, Scerri GV, Burge TS. A comparison of serial
halving and the rule of nines as a prehospital assessment tool in burns. Br
J Plast Surg 2005;58:957–967.
38 New Zealand Guideline Group. Management of Burns and Scalds in
Primary Care. New Zealand: Accident Compensation Corporation, 2007.
39 Nguyen NL, Gun RT, Sparnon AL et al. The importance of initial
management: A case series of childhood burns in Vietnam. Burns
2002;28(2):167–172.
40 Tung K, Chen M, Wang H et al. A seven-year epidemiology study of
12,381 admitted burn patients in Taiwan – using the internet system of the
childhood burn foundation. Burns 2005;31S:S12–S17.
41 British Burn Association. Prehospital Approach to Burns Patient
Management.
Manchester:
British
Burn
Association,
2002.
http://www.britishburnassociation.org/Downloads/prehosp.pdf
[accessed
August 2006].
468

42
Australian
and
New
Zealand
Burn
Association.
Emergency
Management of Severe Burns: Course Manual, 8th edn. Australian and
New Zealand Burn Association Limited, 2004.
43 Blomgren I, Eriksson E, Bagge U. Effect of cold water immersion on
oedema formation in the scalded mouse ear. Burns 1982;9(1):17–20.
44 Raine TJ, Heggers JP, Robson MC et al. Cooling the burn wound to
maintain microcirculation. J Trauma 1981;21(5):394–397.
45 Mertz PM, Davis SC, Cazzaniga AL et al. To assess second-degree
burn wound treatment with water-jel. Carlstadt NJ: Trilling Medical
Technologies Inc, 1990.
46 Castner T, Harz C, Schlor J. Cooling out of the bag. Water-jel burn
dressings. Markdorf, Germany: Institute for Emergency Medicine, 2000.
47 PRODIGY Knowledge. Burns and Scalds. Revised November 2004.
Sowerby Centre for Health Informatics at Newcastle Limited. (SCHIN),
1998.
http://www.prodigy.nhs.uk/burns_and_scalds
[accessed
August
2005].
48 Milner RH, Hudson SJ, Reid CA. Plasticized polyvinyl chloride film as
a primary burns dressing: A microbiological study. Burns Incl Therm Inj
1988;14(1):62–65.
49 Seth, R. Chester, D, Moiemen, N. A review of chemical burns. Trauma
2008;9:81–94.
50 Yano K, Hata Y, Matsuka O et al. Experimental study on alkaline skin
injuries – periodic changes in subcutaneous tissue. Burns 1993;4:320–323.
51 Singer A, Sagi A, Ben Meir P et al. Chemical burns: Our 10-year
experience. Burns 1992;18(3):250–252.
52 Sykes RA, Mani MM, Hiebert JM. Chemical burns: Retrospective
review. J Burn Care Rehabil 1986;7(4):343–347.
53 Clare RA, Krenzelok EP. Clinical burns secondary to elemental metal
exposure; 2 case reports. Ann Emerg Med 1988;6:355–357.
469

Chapter 19
Moving and handling
procedures
Content
Definitions
Why is moving and handling important?
Key legislation
Manual handling and no lift policies
Risk assessment in moving and handling
Biomechanical principles
Principles of manual handling
Additional principles
Lifting aids
Chapter key points
References and Further reading
The moving and handling of patients is an area of great risk to both staff
and patients within the prehospital and in hospital environment, as such
this chapter will provide a theoretical underpinning of the legal, ethical
and technical aspects of patient moving and handling. This chapter is not
intended to provide information on how to use all manual handling aids in
current use within the health service at this time, but to provide an
470

overview for all healthcare professionals to ensure appropriate risk
management and health and safety legislation is complied with. There is
little evidence to support many principles of manual handling, therefore a
consensus opinion is provided in many cases. Prehospital and emergency
care staff are often exposed to patients who are in positions where patient
handling or movement are restricted by a number of factors such as the
number of personnel, the space available and underlying medical
conditions. All of these may hamper manual handling processes; therefore
the adherence to core principles are key in minimising injury and
maximising efficacy of movement.
Definitions
The risks associated with manual handling have been recognised by the
Ambulance Service Association and the Health and Safety Executive who
state:
‘Any work activity that involves lifting, pushing, pulling, carrying or
moving can be considered as a moving and handling risk. Also, any work
activity that could lead to musculoskeletal strain or injury needs to be
considered, for example activities that include potentially long periods of
static position, regular stooping or bending. Often musculoskeletal
disorders are the result of a cumulative effect and therefore may not be
easily attributable to one particular incident or accident’.
Ambulance Service Association and Health and Safety Executive (2003).1
Why is moving and handling
important?
More than one-third of all injuries lasting over three days reported to the
Health and Safety Executive (HSE) and Local Health Authorities are a
result of manual handling.2 In a survey in 2001/2002 it was found that
over 1.1 million staff suffered musculoskeletal injury or disorder as a
471

result of their work or previous work duties.2 Epidemiological studies into
ambulance staff and healthcare workers suggest that these groups
represent a high risk area of musculoskeletal injury.3,4 A recent survey of
accident and incident data collated from six UK ambulance Trusts showed
that between 30 and 51% of all recorded incidents resulting in injury were
a result of the moving and handling of loads; the mean incidence rate was
178 per 1000 staff members.5 Where data were available it was noted the
Emergency Medical Services had an increased prevalence of manual
handling related incidents compared with patient transport services, with
90% of the cases from EMS personnel. Analysis of the incidents found
three root causes: the use of the carry chair; the use of stretchers; and
patient transfers (from bed to chair, floor to bed). These accident statistics
represent a worrying picture for ambulance staff and highlight the need to
introduce appropriate measures to reduce manual handling injury.
THINK
Think about your area of practice, what issues do you have in terms of manual
handling? Are all the activities you undertake safe?
Key legislation
There are numerous pieces of key legislation that relate to manual
handling policy and procedure. These are explained briefly below:
Health and Safety at Work etc Act
[HSAWA] (1974) 6
The overall objective of this act was to:
‘make further provision for securing the health, safety and welfare of
persons at work, for protecting others against risks to health or safety in
connection with the activities of persons at work.’
The act established two bodies: The Health and Safety Commission and
the HSE, to promote the objectives of the act and ensure the
472

implementation of its provisions. This act set out a series of duties for
employers, employees and designers, manufacturers and suppliers of
equipment. HSAWA set out that the employer has an overall objective and
responsibility to employees to:
‘ensure, so far is reasonably practicable, the health, safety and welfare at
work of all of their employees.’
These responsibilities include:
•
Provision and maintenance of plant and safe systems of work.
•
Safety in the collection, use, storage and transport of loads and
substances.
•
Provision of information, instruction, training and supervision of
employees.
•
Maintaining a safe workplace, access and egress.
•
Maintaining a safe and healthy working environment including
providing adequate welfare facilities.
The HASAWA, whilst implementing duties for the employer also set out a
series of duties for the employee which requires any employee to take
reasonable care for their own and others health and safety in the
workplace. This includes taking positive steps to ensure that hazards in the
workplace are understood and to comply with policy and guidance. Any
failure to comply with these duties can make the employer of the
employee liable for prosecution.
Manual Handling Operations
Regulations [MHOR] (1992 – a
mended 2002)7
These regulations resulted from the 1990 ‘Manual Handling of Loads –
European Directive8 which legally obliged each member of the European
Community to introduce legislation which would harmonise standards.
These regulations placed a duty upon employers to:
•
So far as is reasonably practicable to avoid the need for employees
to undertake any manual handling operations at work which involve
a risk of their being injured.
473

•
Assess any hazardous manual handling operations that cannot be
avoided.
•
Reduce the risk of injury from manual handling operations so far as
is reasonably practicable.
•
To regularly review any assessment if there is reason to believe the
previous assessment is no longer valid or there has been a
significant change in the operations to which it relates.
From HSE (1992) MHOR – Regulation 4.3
In addition the MHOR placed a duty upon the employee to ensure that
they make full and proper use of any system of work provided for his/her
use by his employer in compliance with regulation 4.
Management of Health and Safety at
Work Regulations [MHSAW] (1999)
These regulations set out a range of responsibilities for the employer with
a primary focus upon risk assessment in the workplace. MHSAW set out
regulations that ensured that each employer must undertake a risk
assessment
of any activity
or environment
that
an employee
or
non-employee may experience. In the occurrence of any risks being
identified, these must be reduced and those affected informed of their
presence. Reduction of risk may be through the avoidance of such tasks if
practicable to do so, through the provision of equipment (i.e. hoists) or
training to those undertaking the activity. Again the individual is also
given a duty to ensure the health and safety of themselves and others in
the workplace.
Lifting Operations and Lifting
Equipment Regulations [LOLER]
(1998)9
These regulations apply to the use of lifting equipment in all industries
and work activities. The regulations aim to reduce risks to people’s health
and safety from lifting equipment provided for use at work. In addition to
474

the requirements of LOLER, lifting equipment is also subject to the
requirements of the Provision and Use of Work Equipment Regulations
1998 (PUWER); see below. The regulations apply to any piece of
equipment that is designed to lift or lower any load. LOLER requires that
any equipment meets the following standards:
•
Strong and stable enough for the particular use and marked to
indicate safe working loads.
•
Positioned and installed to minimise any risks.
•
Used safely, i.e. the work is planned, organised and performed by
competent people.
•
Subject to ongoing thorough examination and, where appropriate,
inspection by competent people.
Whilst these regulations do not directly apply to employees, all staff have
a responsibility to ensure equipment meets the required standard under
previous regulations such as HSAWA.2
Provision and Use of Work Equipment
Regulations [PUWER] (1998)10
These regulations cover all equipment used at work including manual
handling equipment. The act places a responsibility upon the employer to
ensure that the correct equipment is available, is well maintained and used
in situations where it is suitable. The regulations also state that the
employer has a duty to ensure that staff are adequately trained in the use
of any such equipment.
Manual handling and no lift
policies
This is always a contentious area for prehospital care staff with many calls
to areas in which a ‘no lift’ policy appears to exist. A duty of care exists
under professional registration11 and under the Human Rights Act12 that
contradicts the guidance of the earlier regulations and policy that suggest
475

that manual handling tasks should only be undertaken if the risk is deemed
low. The Human Rights Act8 states that no one should be subjected to
inhuman or degrading treatment and has the right to liberty and security of
person. This means that the patient has the right to refuse to be handled in
a certain way and the practitioner has the right to refuse to endanger
themselves with a manual handling procedure.
In a high profile legal case surrounding no lift policies the High Court
Judge ruled that a blanket no lift policy may be unlawful.13 This case went
on to highlight that under the Human Rights Act the refusal to undertake
manual handling (in the event that mechanical aids cause great distress)
could be considered an unlawful breach. This is an area in which there is
no specific guidance other than to undertake a risk assessment and act
accordingly in each individual case.
Risk assessment and manual
handling
Risk assessment is the first step in the manual handling and risk
management process. Assessment involves five steps as shown below:
•
Identify the hazards.
•
Identify who may be harmed and how.
•
Evaluate the risks and decide upon precautions.
•
Record the findings and implement them.
•
Review the assessment and update accordingly.
From The HSE (2006) Five Steps to Risk Assessment.14
Table 19.1 A systematic method of risk assessment7
Environment Are there: Constraints on posture? Poor flooring? Variation in
floor level? Hot/cold/wet environment? Poor lighting conditions?
Noise?
Load
Is the load: Heavy? Difficult to grasp? Unstable? Unpredictable?
Harmful (i.e. hot)? Are there handles?
Individual
capability
Does the lift require: Special training or information? Present a
hazard? Are you capable of performing the lift?
476

Task
Does the lift involve: Holding the load away from the body?
Covering large distances? Strenuous effort? Twisting? Insufficient
rest? A new or unusual task? Large amounts of movement?
Equipment/
other factors
Is the equipment: Available? Maintained? Suitable? Clean? Are
you competent to use the equipment?
These steps provide a basis for employers to review any manual handling
tasks that may be undertaken in the course of work duties. However they
do not provide an active risk assessment for the practitioner at the time of
the manual handling process, for this element the Manual Handling
Operations Regulations (1992)7 recommend the use of a systematic
approach as shown in Table 19.1.
This list is not exhaustive; however each element should be considered
prior to undertaking any manual handling task.
THINK
Using the ELITE stages above undertake a risk assessment of a common manual
handling scenario in your workplace. What risks are there? What can you do to
reduce these?
Biomechanical principles
Biomechanics are the study of mechanical laws relating to the movement
or structure of the body (or living organisms).15 When a person stands
erect gravity applies forces to the spine from the head and the trunk, these
forces are applied directly down the spine (compressive forces) using very
little muscle activity to maintain the stable upright position.16 However if
the trunk is moved forwards or laterally the forces acting upon the spine
change according to the lever principle, therefore the further away from
the upright position a person is the greater the shearing forces that are
exerted upon the spine. The change from compressive forces to shearing,
twisting or torsional can be damaging upon the spine and intervertebral
discs.16
477

There are three key biomechanical principles that underlie manual
handling procedures: centre of gravity; a stable base; and external levers.
The will be discussed briefly below.
Principle 1: Using the centre of gravity
Everything has a centre of gravity; this is the point where total body mass
is concentrated. With uniform objects such as boxes and cylinders the
centre of gravity will always be in the middle.15 Humans however are not
uniform as the body shape and dimensions can change rapidly; this can
cause the centre of gravity to move even to points outside of the body.
In the upright standing position the centre of gravity commonly lies within
the pelvis. This makes the pelvic control paramount in manual handling
procedures both for the handler and the patient.
Principle 2: A Stable base
A base is the area of contact with a supporting surface (i.e. the floor),15
therefore in the common manual handling position it is the feet of the
handler and the area in between. If the line of gravity (a vertical line
running from the centre of gravity to the supporting surface) falls within
the area of the base then the object (person) is considered stable. However
if the line of gravity falls outside of the base the object is unstable and
therefore likely to fall or require additional forces to maintain stability.
Using this principle a wider base is more likely to be stable than a small
base. Typically in a human being the most stable base is with the feet
apart (shoulder width or slightly wider) with one foot in front of the
other.17
Principle 3: External levers
A lever is a solid object that is used to transfer force over its distance. If
the external levers (i.e. the arms) are long (outstretched) then the centre
and line of gravity are shifted to give an unstable base and apply greater
pressure upon the muscles and ligaments of the spine and limbs to
maintain balance. However if the levers are short, then the line and centre
478

of gravity are within the area of the base thus reducing forces upon the
spine. In addition this will allow power to be provided by the major
muscle groups.
Principles of manual
handling
1. Stop and think (plan the lift)
2. Place the feet
•
Have the feet apart, giving a balanced and stable base for
lifting.
•
Have the leading leg as far forward as is comfortable.
3. Adopt a good posture
•
Bend the knees so that the hands when grasping the load are
as nearly level with the waist as possible; but do not kneel or
over-flex the knees.
•
Keep the back straight, maintaining its natural curves
(tucking in the chin while gripping the load helps).
•
Lean forward a little over the load if necessary to get a good
grip.
•
Keep the shoulders level and facing in the same direction as
the hips.
4. Get a firm and secure grip
•
Try to keep the arms within the boundary formed by the legs.
•
The optimum grip may vary, but it should be secure.
•
If you vary the grip while lifting, do this as smoothly as
possible.
5. Don’t jerk
•
Carry out the lifting movement smoothly, raising the chin as
the lift begins, keeping control of the load.
6. Move the feet
•
Don’t twist the trunk when turning to the side.
7. Keep close to the load
479

•
Keep the load close to the trunk for as long as possible.
•
Keep the heaviest side of the load next to the trunk.
•
Slide the load towards you before attempting to lift it.
8. Put the load down, then adjust its position.
When handling at or near floor level, preferably use handling techniques
which make use of the relatively strong leg muscles rather than those of
the back, provided the load is small enough to be held close to the trunk.
Bear in mind however that such techniques impose heavy forces on the
knees and hip joints which must carry the weight of the load and the
weight of the rest of the body.
1. Place feet beneath or adjacent to the load.
2. Move close to the load before beginning the manual handling
operation.
3. Hold the load (as) close to the body (as possible) during the
manual handling operation.
4. Address the load squarely before beginning the manual handling
operation.
5. Preferably face the intended direction of movement before
beginning the manual handling operation.
6. If possible, avoid lifting loads from the floor when seated.
7. If possible, avoid twisting, stooping or stretching when handling.
8. Where a load is bulky rather than heavy it may be easier to carry
it at the side of the body if it has suitable handholds, or if slings or
other devices can be provided.
From HSE (2003) The Principles of Good Manual Handling: Achieving a
Consensus.17
There is no such thing as a completely safe lift; therefore general
principles should be adhered to, to reduce the potential for injury. Figure
19.1 suggests the safe recommended limits for weight in manual handling
operations. It can be seen that the weight significantly reduces at extremes
of height and distance from the body as this is when injuries are most
likely to occur.
Figure 19.1 Guideline weights for safe lifting and handling. From HSE
(2007) Getting to Grips with Manual Handling: A Short Guide.17
480

Additional principles
There are certain situations in which the basic principles cannot and do not
apply, for example one-handed lifting; lifting large bulky loads and lifting
in confined spaces. Under these circumstances the risks involved and the
principles required may alter, therefore these are discussed individually
below.
One-handed lifting
Early studies suggest that the biomechanical requirements and demands of
one-handed lifting can significantly increase the likelihood of injuries
such as intervertebral disc prolapse.18 In a study of data upon one-handed
lifting techniques the HSE (2003)17 recommend that if the load is in front
of the body and it is practicable to do so, that two hands should be used.
However if the load is to the side of the body a one-handed lift should be
used to reduce the lateral twisting of the spine. If possible support should
be provided by the free hand as this can reduce the forces involved.
Lifting large bulky loads
In lifting large, bulky loads from lower heights, the bulk of the load
prevents it from being brought between the knees. Even with a ‘correct’
foot posture, the centre of gravity of the load is beyond the knees and
therefore at or around arm’s length away from the body, this will increase
the forces acting upon the spine and increase the risk of injury. The HSE17
state in their analysis of data from numerous studies that there appears
little evidence to support a specific technique in the lifting of large loads;
481

however it is suggested that the key factor is to keep the load as close to
the body as possible.
Lifting in confined spaces
The difficulty in lifting in confined spaces, for example in limited
headroom, is often the need to move with the load during the lift. Lifting
in limited headroom does place additional stress upon the operator with
maximum safe weight limits being reduced by up to 60% in a reduction of
headroom of only 10%.17 There is very limited research into this area with
studies reporting conflicting evidence over the use of kneeling or stooping
as the preferred method in compensating for a lack of headroom. The HSE
suggest that a stooping posture may be utilised as it allows for the load to
be moved, whereas kneeling does not allow for any movement; however
there is a caveat that the other principles of safe manual handling should
be observed.17
Lifting aids
MHOR7, LOLER9 and PUWER10 set out regulations that require
employers to provide aids to manual handling to reduce risk and reduce
the requirements for manual handling. Since these regulations a variety of
aids to manual handling have been introduced into the health and social
care arena. These include:
•
Patient handling slings: These are available in a variety of forms
and sizes. They are commonly used to assist the patient in sitting
forward, slide up a bed or lifting, they are used in combination with
other manual handling equipment.
•
Handling belts: These are used to aid the handler in assisting the
patient to stand and to aid the patient in walking. They are designed
to allow the handler to maintain good posture whilst assisting.
•
Slide sheets: These are made of a slippery material that allows a
patient to be ‘slid’ removing the need to manually lift a patient.
•
Transfer boards/banana boards: These are hard plastic boards that
allow for a patient to be slid from one point to another; this is
commonly chair to chair or chair to bed.
482

•
Turntables: These are discs that are placed under the feet that are
used to pivot or swivel patients.
•
Hoists: These can be mobile or static devices that are used in
combination with a sling to lift and move patients. They can be
electric or hydraulic.
For more information upon these aids see Further reading or refer to
manufacturer guidelines.
Scenario
You are called to a patient who is unconscious and unrousable; the patient is in an
upstairs bathroom and is profoundly hypotensive. There is poor access to the property
and the stairs are narrow with a number of turns involved. What methods would you use
to get the patient out of the property? What risks are there both to you and the patient?
Does the patient’s condition affect the methods that you would use?
Chapter Key Points
1. Moving and handling operations are not without risk. It is essential that a
thorough risk assessment is carried out and key principles adhered to reduce
the likelihood of injury or incident.
2. It is recognised that moving and handling in emergency situations may not
always be ideal and suited to all principles; however risk must be kept as low
as is practically possible and lifting aids considered in each individual
occasion.
3. Keep external levers short and maintain a stable base.
References and Further reading
1 Ambulance Service Association and Health and Safety Executive.
National Policy and Strategy Framework for NHS Ambulance Services –
Safer Handling. London: ASA, 2003.
2 Health and Safety Executive. Getting to Grips with Manual Handling.
London: HSE, 2003.
3 Health and Safety Executive. Musculoskeletal Disorders in Health and
Social
Care.
London:
HSE,
2007.
Accessed
on-line@
http://www.hse.gov.uk/healthservices/msd/index.htm [accessed 25/3/08].
4 Rodgers LM. A five-year study comparing early retirements on medical
grounds in ambulance personnel with those in other groups of health staff.
Part II: Causes of retirement. Occupat Med 1998;48:119–132.
483

5 Health and Safety Executive. Evaluation of Manual Handling Tasks
Involving the Use of Carry Chairs by UK Ambulance Personnel. London:
HSE, 2005.
6 United Kingdom Government. The Health and Safety at Work etc Act.
London: HMSO, 1974.
7 Health and Safety Executive. Manual Handling Operations Regulations.
London: HSE, 1992.
8 The Council of the European Communities. Council Directive 90/269/
EEC of 29 May 1990 on the minimum health and safety requirements for
the manual handling of loads where there is a risk particularly of back
injury to workers. Office for Official Publications of the European
Communities, 1990.
9 Health and Safety Executive. Lifting Operations and Lifting Equipment
Regulations. London: HSE, 1998.
10 Health and Safety Executive. Provision and Use of Work Equipment
Regulations. London: HSE, 1998.
11 Health Professions Council. Code of Conduct, performance and ethics.
London: HPC, 2007.
12 United Kingdom Government. The Human Rights Act. London: OPSI,
1998.
13 R (on the application of A & others) v East Sussex County Council and
Another. EWHC 167 (Admin) CO/4843/2001, 2003.
14 Health and Safety Executive. Five Steps to Risk Assessment. London:
HSE, 2006.
15 Smith J. (Ed) The Guide to the Handling of People. Middlesex:
Backcare, 2005.
16 Dougherty L, Lister S. The Royal Marsden Hospital Manual of
Clinical Nursing Procedures, 6th edn. London: Blackwell Publishing,
2006.
17 Health and Safety Executive. The Principles of Good Manual
Handling: Achieving a Consensuso. London: HSE, 2003.
484

18 Allread W, Marras W, Parnianpour M. Trunk kinematics of one handed
lifting and the effects of asymmetry and load weight. Ergonomics
1996;39:322–334.
485

Index
3-lead ECG
12-lead ECG
abdominal thrusts
access to health records Act
added sounds
air-bubble technique
airtraq laryngoscope
procedure
airway anatomy
airway management
cervical spine
definition
stepwise approach
airway obstruction see foreign body airway obstruction
analgesic ladder
apnoea
aprons
assisted ventilation
definition
indications
literature and complications
augmented limb leads
auscultation
added sounds
breath sounds
definition
procedure
486

stethoscope
automated external defibrillation
AVPU see level of consciousness
back blows
backwards, upwards, right, pressure (BURP)
bag-valve-ventilator
procedure
basic life support see also cardiopulmonary resuscitation
adult
chest compression technique
compression to ventilation ratio
sequence of adult BLS
newborn
compression to ventilation ratio
sequence of newborn BLS
paediatric
age definitions
chest compression technique
compression to ventilation ratio
sequence of paediatric BLS
pregnancy
bimanual laryngoscopy
Biot’s breathing
bipolar leads
blood glucose testing
abnormal blood sugar values
capillary blood glucose testing
procedure
sites for blood glucose testing
skin preparation
which drop to text
blood pressure measurement (BP)
487

arm position
auscultation of blood pressure
BP measurement in special situations
choice of limb
choosing the correct cuff
common sources of error
definition
estimating by palpation
factors influencing BP
hypertension
hypotension
indications for measuring BP
location for measuring BP
mean arterial pressure
methods of measuring BP
normotension
palpatory estimation
patient posture
procedures
sphygmomanometers
blood sugar testing see blood glucose testing
BM test see blood glucose testing
bone, anatomy of
Bone Injection Gun (BIG)
bougie
box splints
bradycardia
bradypnoea
bronchial breath sounds
bronchiovesicular breath sounds
burns assessment
assessment of burn area
488

assessment of burn depth
Lund and Browder charts
palmar surface method
rule of nines
serial halving
definition
types of burn
burn management principals
cooling the burn
covering the burn
removing the source of the burn
butterfly device
BVM – see bag-valve-ventilator
Caldicott guardian
capillary bed refill see capillary refill time
capillary refill time (CRT)
accuracy of CRT measurement
definition
factors influencing CRT
locations for measuring CRT
procedure
capnometry
capture
cardiac arrest definition
cardiac auscultation
general principles of cardiac auscultation
indications for cardiac auscultation
murmurs
pericardial rub
procedure
technique
489

cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
chain of survival
definition
importance of CPR
lay rescuer v healthcare provider
before defibrillation
cervical collars
airway management
literature on cervical collars
airway problems, cause of
intracranial pressure
dysphagia
for immobilisation
cervical spine see spinal management
checklist of non-verbal indicators of pain
chemical burns
management of chemical burns
specific chemical burns
Elemental sodium/potassium and lithium burns
lime
phenol
phosphorous
chest auscultation see auscultation
chest leads see precordial leads
chest percussion
chest percussion points
definition
indication for chest percussion
percussion note characteristics
procedure
chest thrusts
Cheyne-Stokes breathing
490

choking see foreign body airway obstruction
communication see history taking and communication
compression only CPR
condensation in endotracheal tube
controlled drugs (CD)
CPR see cardiopulmonary resuscitation
crackles
crepitations see crackles
cricothyroidotomy
complications
equipment
indications
procedure
cricoid pressure
data protection Act
defibrillation
definition
pads/paddles
energy levels
procedure
defibrillation waveform
demand pacing
diastole
diastolic
distraction, pain management
‘doctor’s bag’
documentation and record keeping
491

abbreviations
definitions
documentation of drugs
electronic patient records
key documents
models of record keeping
what constitutes good medical records?
why keep healthcare records?
Donway splint see traction splints
drug administration
definitions
documentation
drug formulations
legislation
procedures, inhaled (nebulised)
procedures, intramuscular injection
procedures, oral administration
procedures, rectal administration
procedures, subcutaneous injection
storage
ECG see electrocardiogram
Einthoven’s triangle
electrocardiogram (ECG)
basic principals of electrocardiography
ECG settings
electrode positioning
indications for recording and ECG
patient preparation
recording the ECG
types of ECG
endotracheal tube
recommended sizes for children
endotracheal intubation
airway positioning and manipulation
492

confirming tube placement
equipment
number of attempts
preoxygenation
preparation of equipment
procedure
Entonox
administration
advantages of Entonox
contraindications
definition and indications
equipment
troubleshooting
environmental cleanliness
essence of care, NHS
external jugular cannulation
complications
introduction
procedure
extra heart sounds
extra systole
extrication devices
procedure
eye, mouth and nose protection
EZ-IO
FAST test
FAST intraosseous device
fist pacing
fixed-rate pacing
foreign body airway obstruction
493

adult choking sequence
aftercare
definition
literature
paediatric choking sequence
fracture management
box splints
definitions
general principles
neighbour strapping
pelvic fractures
principles of splinting
slings and support bandages
traction splints
vacuum splints
freedom of information Act,
Glasgow Coma Scale see level of consciousness gloves
hand-hygiene (see also infection control)
haemorrhage control
foreign body present
no foreign body
haemostatic dressings
fibrin glues and sealants
microporous polysaccharide hemosphere
mineral zeolite
Poly-N-acetylglucosamine
head tilt and chin lift
Health and Safety at Work Act
heart murmurs see murmurs
history taking and communication
allergies
communication models
494

consent
definitions
family history
history of presenting complaint
introductions
key communication skills
medication history
mental health
past medical history
practitioner-patient relationship
presenting complaint
questioning techniques
SADPERSONS assessment
sexual history
social history
standardised history framework
systematic enquiry
hypertension
hypopnoea
hypotension
hypothermia
indirect pressure
infection control
definitions
environmental cleanliness
hand hygiene
indications for infection control
personal protective equipment
intramuscular injection
intraosseous infusion
Bone Injection Gun (BIG)
complications
contraindications
equipment
495

EZ-IO
FAST
indications
location sites
procedure (Cook cannula)
intravenous access see vascular access devices
intubation see endotracheal intubation
jaw thrust
Kendrick extrication device (KED)
Korotkoff’s sounds
Kussmaul’s breathing
laryngeal mask airway (LMA)
complications
contraindications
equipment
procedure
sizing
laryngoscope handle and blades
level of consciousness
AVPU
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
paediatric GCS
lifting operations and lifting equipment regulations,
limb leads
log rolling
long board
description
procedure
women in late pregnancy and
lubricant (for endotracheal intubation)
496

magill forceps
management of health and safety at work regulations,
manual displacement of the uterus
manual handling operations regulation
mean arterial pressure
mechanical chest compression devices
mechanical heart valves
mechanical ventilator
Functional check and procedure
motor function, assessment of
assessment of abnormal movements
assessment of co-ordination
assessment of movement and power
assessment of muscle tone
assessment of reflexes
inspection and palpation of muscle mass
moving and handling
additional principles
biomechanical principles
definitions
importance of safe moving and handling
key legislation
lifting aids
no lift policies
principles of manual handling
risk assessment
murmurs see cardiac auscultation
nasal cannulae
nasopharyngeal airway (NPA)
complications
contraindications
497

equipment required
procedure
sizing
nebulised drugs
procedure for administration
needle thoracocentesis
contraindications
definitions
equipment
indications
landmarks
literature
problems and solutions
procedure
neurologic observations and examination techniques
definitions
indications for neurological observations
normal breath sounds
normothermia
oesophageal detector device (ODD)
oropharyngeal airway (OPA)
contraindications
equipment
procedure
sizing
orthopaedic scoop stretcher
oxygen cylinders
safety
oxygen masks
non-rebreather mask
simple face mask
venturi mask
498

oxygen saturation see pulse oximetry
oxygen therapy
cautions and contraindications
definition
equipment
indications for use
procedure
pain assessment and management
acute v chronic pain
assessing pain
definitions
pain assessment tools
Checklist of non-verbal indicators
Numerical Rating Scale
sensitivity of pain scales
Verbal Rating Scale
Visual Analogue Scale
Wong–Baker FACES Pain Scale
pain assessment in the cognitively impaired
pain management, overview
painful stimuli
central
peripheral
patient’s charter
patient group directions
peak flow measurement (PEFR)
definition
indications for the use of PEFR
procedure
factors affecting PEFR measurement
percussion see chest percussion
percussion pacing see fist pacing
499

pericardial rub see cardiac auscultation
personal protective equipment see infection control
pleural rub
pleuritic
PneuPac/ParaPac®see mechanical ventilator
precordial leads
precordial thump
pressure points see indirect pressure
provision and use of work equipment regulations
pulmonary artery catheterisation (temperature)
pulse
indications for measuring a pulse
locating the artery
procedure
pulse rate
pulse rhythm
pulse symmetry
pulse volume/character
pulse oximetry
description of pulse oximetry
indications for pulse oximetry
limitations of pulse oximetry
procedure
pulse rate in children
pupillary assessment
procedures
pupil response
pupil size and shape
pyrexia
500

rales see crackles
records management: NHS code of practice
recovery position
rectal drug administration
reduced breath sounds
rescue breaths
rescuer danger
respiratory system
respiratory assessment
chest and respiratory inspection
chest compliance
indications for respiratory assessment
measuring respiratory rate
measuring respiratory rhythm
respiratory depth
respiratory pattern and rhythm assessment
respiratory rate
SADPERSONS assessment
Sager splint see traction splints
SAM splints
SAM sling
scoop stretcher see orthopaedic scoop strether
sensory function assessment
slings
‘sniffing’ position
sphygmomanometer
spinal board see long board
501

spinal management
complications associated with spinal immobilisation,
equipment and procedures
evidence on how to immobilise the spine
indications
pain
relevant gross anatomy
skin ulceration
subcutaneous injection
systole
systolic
tachycardia
tachypnoea
tactile vocal fremitus
temperature measurement
extremes of temperature
indications for temperature measurement
methods of temperature measurement
procedures
which thermometer and site is most accurate?
tension pneumothorax
thoracocentesis see needle thoracocentesis
threshold
traction splints
Donway splint
Sager splint
transcutaneous cardiac pacing (TCP)
definition
electrodes
indications
literature
502

pad positioning
procedure
skin preparation
terminology
transthoracic impedance
ventilation status
thermometry
chemical thermometry
digital analogue probe thermometers
mercury thermometers
temporal artery thermometers
tympanic
tourniquets
can they be used safely
complications
description
indications for use
vacuum mattress
vacuum splints
vascular access devices
complications
definitions
device selection
external jugular cannulation see external jugular cannulation
indications for peripheral cannulation
intraosseous infusion see intraosseous infusion
management in situ
peripheral cannulas
procedure, peripheral cannulation
vein selection
venodilatation
veins
anatomy of
selection for cannulation
503

ventricular ectopic beat
ventricular fibrillation
ventricular tachycardia
venturi mask see oxygen masks
vocal resonance
definition
procedure
wheeze
white coat hypertension
wound healing
factors affecting wound healing
phases of wound healing
complications in wound healing
wound management
classification of wounds
definitions
haemostatic dressings
principles of wound management
sources/types of bleeding
tourniquets
wound healing
z-track technique
504

