
Manual of Forensic Science


Manual of Forensic Science: An 
International Survey
Edited by
Anna Barbaro

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2018 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-6630-2 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable eﬀorts have been made to publish reliable data and information, 
but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have 
attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has 
not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microﬁlming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval 
system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-proﬁt organization that provides licenses 
and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation without intent 
to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Barbaro, Anna, editor.
Title: Manual of forensic science : an international survey / edited by Anna Barbaro.
Description: 1 Edition. | Boca Raton : CRC Press, [2018] | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2017015348| ISBN 9781498766302 (hardback : alk. paper) | 
ISBN 9781315181424 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Forensic sciences—Handbooks, manuals, etc. | Criminal investigation—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
Classiﬁcation: LCC HV8073 .M25545 2017 | DDC 363.25—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017015348
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

v
Contents
Editor 
vii
Contributors       
ix
Chapter 1 
Crime Scene Investigation 
1
Anita Zannin and Linda Huber
Chapter 2 
Crime Scene Investigation in the Underwater Environment: Underwater Forensics 
21
Mack S. House, Jr.
Chapter 3 
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
35
Anita Zannin
Chapter 4 
Latent Print Examination 
59
Andrew R. Reitnauer
Chapter 5 
Forensic Biology 
79
Samar Ahmed and Amarnath Mishra
Chapter 6 
Forensic Genetics 
89
Anna Barbaro
Chapter 7 
Forensic Facial Recognition 
111
Shelina Khalid Jilani and Stephen Driver
Chapter 8 
Forensic Odontology 
135
Alan Diego Briem Stamm, and María Cecilia Pastor Carson
Chapter 9 
An Introduction to Digital Audio Forensics 
159
Michael Dixon
Chapter 10 
Forensic Toxicology 
167
Amarnath Mishra and Nino Nardareshvili
Chapter 11 
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse 
179
Dalia M. Al-Saif and Lori D. Frasier
Chapter 12 
Forensic Entomology 
211
Adrienne Brundage, Jason Byrd, and Lerah Sutton
Chapter 13 
Forensic Veterinary Science and Medicine  
235
Víctor Toledo González and Francisco Carvallo Chaigneau

vi
Contents
Chapter 14 
Ethics in Forensics 
255
Ghada Hasabo
Chapter 15 
Forensic Digital Imaging 
263
Michael Dixon, Mark Wood, and Stephen Cole
Appendix 
Ethical, Legal, and Professional Aspects: The Art of Cross-Examination 
279
Filomena Paciello and Kay Michiels
Index 
283

vii
Editor
Anna Barbaro  earned a PhD in forensic genetics from 
the University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain, a 
post-degree diploma from the School of Specialization 
in Applied Genetics (University La Sapienza in Rome) 
and a master diploma in Psychological and Behavioral 
Techniques of the Criminal Investigation (Msc) from 
the University La Sapienza in Rome (Italy). She also 
has a diploma of Expert in Criminal Investigation and 
a diploma of Superior Expert in Criminal Profiling. 
She is the Chief of the Forensic Genetics Department at 
Studio Indagini Mediche E Forensi (SIMEF) in Reggio 
Calabria, Italy. She teaches forensic genetics at the sec-
ond master level in forensic sciences at the University 
of Rome La Sapienza, Italy along with several other 
courses. She is an expert consultant for the Italian 
Court of Justice and is the author of more than 100 
papers on forensic DNA analysis. She serves as the 
founder and president of the Wordwide Association 
of Women Forensic Experts (WAWFE), she is the 
Honor Dean of the Superior School of Criminalistics 
and Criminology (Spain), and Honor Member of sev-
eral international scientific associations. She is also a 
member of the editorial board for various international 
scientific journals and serves as an expert reviewer for 
some forensic journals; and is a speaker at national and 
international conferences.


ix
Contributors
Samar Ahmed  is an associate professor in the Department 
of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, Ain Shams 
University, Cairo, Egypt. She is education oriented and is a 
leading educationist by training. She is also responsible for 
program development and evaluation as well as interna-
tional projects. She graduated from Ain Shams University 
and after earning her doctorate degree attained a master’s 
degree in health professions education from Maastricht 
University and a fellowship in health professions educa-
tion from the FAIMER Institute in Philadelphia.
She has experience in forensic curricula development 
and has taken many initiatives in the development of the 
learning of forensic science at various stages of education. 
She is a reviewer for many journals in the area of medical 
education and is an expert in the area with a large body 
of international publications in the field. Dr. Ahmed has 
an interest in forensic psychiatry and has been involved 
in many initiatives to work with patient offenders funded 
by the European Union. She is currently creating a Center 
of Excellence in Forensic Psychiatric Research.
Dalia M. Al-Saif, MD,  is a consultant Forensic Medical 
Examiner and Head of the Education and Training 
Section, Center of Forensic and Legal Medicine, Eastern 
Province, Saudi Arabia. She is board certified in forensic 
medicine and works as an expert witness in medicolegal 
cases including child abuse. She is a lecturer and pro-
vides training on the evaluation of sexual abuse victims. 
Al-Saif is a member of many local and international asso-
ciations related to forensic medicine and child abuse, and 
has published many scientific papers related to this field.
Adrienne Brundage, MD, is a forensic entomologist and 
lec-turer at Texas A&M University, and an adjunct pro-
fessor at the University of Florida. She has been consult-
ing on casework for nearly 20 years, and is a member of 
the American Board of Forensic Entomologists.
Jason H. Byrd, MD,  is an associate professor and asso-
ciate director of the William R. Maples Center for 
Forensic Medicine at the University of Florida’s College 
of Medicine, Gainesville. He is a board certified forensic 
entomologist and diplomate of the American Board of 
Forensic Entomology. He was twice-elected President of 
the American Board of Forensic Entomology, and is both 
a past and the current President of the North American 
Forensic Entomology Association. He served for over a 
decade as a faculty member of the Virginia Institute of 
Forensic Science and Medicine and currently serves as an 
executive manager for the International Veterinary Forensic 
Sciences Association and as the Director of Education for 
the ASPCA Veterinary Forensic Sciences Program. Dr. 
Byrd has combined his formal academic training in ento-
mology and forensic science to serve as a consultant and 
educator in both criminal and civil–legal investigations 
throughout the United States and internationally.
Maria Cecilia Pastor Carson graduated with a DDS in 
Odontology from the Faculty of Odontology, Catholic 
University Santa Maria, Arequipa, Peru. She specialized 
in orthodontics (UAP University, Lima, Peru); expertise 
dentistry from col. number 018 (Col Lima, Peru); and 
forensic odontology (University Cientifica del Sur, Lima). 
She serves as the WAWFE coordinator of Peru and is the 
vice president of the Peruvian Association of Forensic 
Dentistry (APOFOR). She is a member of the Peruvian 
Society of Legal and Forensic Dentistry and Criminology, 
the Argentina Society of Legal Odontology (SADOL), the 
Iberoamerican Society of Odontoestomatology (SOFIA), 
the South American Association of Forensic Dentistry 
(AOFS), the American Association for Orthodontics 
(United States), the Paulista Society of Orthodontics 
(Brazil), and the Society of Six Elements (Peru). She is 
also a speaker at national and international conferences.
Francisco R. Carvallo Chaigneau, DVM, DSc, DACVP, 
 obtained his DVM from the Universidad Austral de Chile, 
Valdivia (2001), a doctor of science from the Universidad 
Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico City (2007), 
and completed a 3-year veterinary pathology residency 
at the University of Connecticut, Storrs, and received 
Diplomate status from the American College of Veterinary 
Pathologists in 2011. He then moved to the Universidad de 
Chile, Department of Animal Pathology where he served 

x
Contributors
as an assistant professor. He joined the California Animal 
Health and Food Safety Laboratory System (CAHFS), 
at San Bernardino, as an assistant professor of Clinical 
Diagnostic Veterinary Pathology in 2014. Dr. Carvallo has 
had numerous presentations in international conferences 
and publications in peer-reviewed journals.
Stephen Cole  works with Acumé Forensics, Ltd.
Michael Dixon  is a technical director at Acumé Forensics 
(West Yorkshire, United Kingdom), with a first class hon-
ors degree and is a professional member of the Chartered 
Society of Forensic Sciences. An expert in digital media 
and how it can be used in the field of forensics and law 
enforcement, he works in television, producing recon-
structions and technical graphics.
Stephen Driver  is a facial imaging expert and forensic 
artist.
Lori D. Frasier, MD,  is a professor of pediatrics and 
director of the Center for the Protection of Children at 
Penn State Health Children’s Hospital and Penn State 
Hershey College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania. 
She is board certified in pediatrics and child abuse pedi-
atrics. Dr. Frasier has written extensively and lectured 
internationally on topics in child abuse and child sex-
ual abuse. She has been a part of many committees and 
expert panels which have developed the guidelines and 
current medical approaches to sexually abused children 
and adolescents.
Ghada Hasabo, MD, is a lecturer of Forensic Medicine 
and Clinical Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, Cairo 
University, Egypt. She is also an International Certified 
Professional Trainer at the Management Development 
Institute, Missouri State; and an anesthesiology, pain 
management, and postsurgical ICU specialist. Dr. 
Hasabo has been published and serves as a reviewer and 
editor for a number of international publications in the 
field of forensic and toxicology sciences. She is also a 
member of many international organizations for women 
rights and refugee aid.
Mack S. House, Jr.,  is a crime scene investigator diver tech-
nologist (CSIDT), published author, and internationally 
reputed expert in underwater forensics crime scene inves-
tigation. He invented the CSIDT International Weapons 
and Body Containment Devices and is an active member 
of the International Crime Scene Investigators Association 
(www.icsia.org), Forensic Experts Incorporated (www.
feinc.net), the International Association of Coroners and 
Medical Examiners, and the Evidence Partnership Ltd. 
of Forensic and Policing Service Association and Global 
Forensic Directory.
Linda Huber  graduated from the University of 
California, Los Angeles and is a forensic scientist at the 
Orange County Sheriff’s Department in Los Angeles, 
California. She also serves as an adjunct professor at 
Citrus Community College, Glendora, California.
Shelina Khalid Jilani  is a forensic expert specializ-
ing in facial mapping at Acumé Forensics. As a foren-
sic and medical science graduate from the University of 
Bradford, she is currently pursuing a PhD at the Centre 
of Visual Computing, University of Bradford, West 
Yorkshire, United Kingdom. She is a professional mem-
ber of the Chartered Society of Forensic Science and 
British Association of Human Identification (BAHID). 
Her research interests include ethnic classification of 
faces and human verification from photographic images.
Kay Michiels,  LLM, teaches law and forensics at Avans 
University of Applied Sciences, the Netherlands. She is 
the coordinator of the minor Chain of Evidence and proj-
ect member of the EFEN network.
Amarnath Mishra, PhD,  is an assistant professor at the 
Amity Institute of Forensic Sciences, Amity University, 
Noida, India. Dr. Mishra has worked as an associate 
professor in the Department of Forensic Medicine of 
Tribhuvan University, National Medical College, Nepal. 
He received an MSc in forensic science with a special-
ization in DNA forensic and toxicology from Allahabad 
Agricultural Institute–Deemed University, Allahabad, 
India in collaboration with the Central Forensic Science 
Laboratory, Hyderabad, India; and an MSc in biochem-
istry from UPRTOU, Allahabad, India. He received an 
MPhil with a specialization in DNA forensic and toxi-
cology from Vinayaka Missions University, Salem, Tamil 
Nadu, India. He received a PhD in forensic science with a 
specialization in forensic and analytical toxicology from 
Sam Higginbottom Institute of Agriculture, Technology 
and Sciences, Deemed University, Allahabad in col-
laboration with Central Forensic Science Laboratory, 
Chandigarh, India. He has published 2 books and more 
than 15 research articles in reputed peer-reviewed inter-
national and national journals. He has also participated 
in various oral and poster presentations during interna-
tional and national conferences and seminars. He serves 
as editor, guest editor, reviewer, and editorial board 
member with various international and national journals 
of concerned specialization and subjects. He is a member 
of various international and national professional bod-
ies. He is also a visiting/guest faculty at various colleges 
and universities.
Nino Nardareshvili  serves with the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs of Georgia—Forensic Criminalistics Main 
Division, Tbilisi, Georgia.

xi
Contributors
Filomena Paciello  has a law degree from the University 
of Perugia, and a master’s in forensic science—crimi-
nology, investigation, security, and intelligence—from 
the University of Rome “La Sapienza,” Italy Stage at 
SIMEF Study Medical and Forensic Investigations Study 
in Reggio Calabria, School in Ethics and Techniques of 
Criminal Law at Criminal Chamber of Rome. She is also 
an Expert Criminologist and Expert in Civil–Military 
Cooperation.
Andrew R. Reitnauer is a Certified Senior Crime 
Scene Analyst (CSCSA) through the International 
Association for Identification. For the past 12 years, he 
has been an active Latent Print Examiner, Senior Crime 
Scene Responder, Forensic Photographer, and Section 
Supervisor. In addition to casework duties, he has also 
served as a primary trainer for new examiners and out-
side agencies, and is the owner of Delta Forensics, LLC, 
where he performs case consultations and offers training 
classes to members of the professional community. He is 
a Past-President and current Chairman of the Board of 
Directors for the New York Division of the IAI and is an 
active member of three IAI Divisions. He was an initial 
member of the OSAC Friction Ridge Subcommittee and 
was the Chairman of the Latent Print Technical Working 
Group for the State of New York.
Alan Diego Briem Stamm, graduated Odontology DDS 
from the Faculty of Odontology of the University National 
of Northeast, Corrientes, Argentina. He is a Diploma 
school graduate specializing in legal dentistry (University 
of Rosario, Argentina); a Diploma school graduate spe-
cializing in Forensic Medicine (University of Corrientes, 
Argentina); and a Diploma school postgraduate level 
1 and 2 course in Forensic Odontology (University of 
Córdoba, Argentina). He is currently pursuing a doctor-
ate in dentistry, 3rd cohort at the University of Corrientes. 
He is a professor of legal dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, 
University of Buenos Aires (UBA), Argentina; a subdi-
rector specializing in forensic odontology, Faculty of 
Dentistry, University of Buenos Aires; a professor foren-
sic odontology, Licenciature in Criminalistic, University 
Institute of Federal Police (IUPFA); a subdirector of 
Forensic Science International Management, Worldwide 
Group Police; a professor of forensic odontology at level 
1 and 2 Multidisciplinary Course International Forensic 
Science and Criminalistic, Fiep Foundation, Worldwide 
Group Police; a dentist expert in the Forensic Medicine 
Division of the National Gendarmerie Argentina; the 
and the coordinator in Argentina for the Worldwide 
Association of Women Forensic Experts (WAWFE). 
He is a member of the Peruvian Society of the Forensic 
Dentistry and Criminalistic (SPOLFOC) and of the South 
American Association of Forensic Dentistry (AOFS). He 
is the past treasurer of the Argentinian Society of Legal 
Dentistry (SADOL); past chairman of the Iberoamerican 
Society of Forensic Odontoestomatology (SOFIA). In 
addition, he is the author of articles in scientific journals 
and a speaker at national and international conferences.
Lerah Sutton  is a doctoral candidate in forensic anthropol-
ogy at the University of Florida (UF), Gainsville, specializ-
ing in decomposition, forensic taphonomy, and comparative 
osteology. She works as a graduate assistant at the William 
R. Maples Center for Forensic Medicine and a research 
fellow at the UF-ASPCA Veterinary Forensic Sciences 
Program. She is also a teaching assistant for the forensic 
science master’s degree program, UF, the nationally rec-
ognized Hume Honors College, and the UF-ASPCA vet-
erinary forensic sciences master’s degree program. In her 
positions, she responds to death investigation scenes, speaks 
at workshops and conferences, consults and offers hands-
on field exercises and trainings for law enforcement, con-
ducts original research, and interacts with students seeking 
higher education in the forensic sciences. Sutton earned a 
master’s degree in forensic science from the University of 
Florida after earning a bachelor’s degree in anthropology 
with the highest honors, also from the University of Florida. 
She has been employed by the UF Maples Center through-
out her higher education. Sutton previously worked at the 
Florida District 7 & 24, Office of the Medical Examiner, 
where she provided administrative support and assisted in 
the morgue. After completing her PhD in 2017, she plans 
to obtain a faculty position teaching forensic science and 
medicine, conducting research, and working as a consultant 
to law enforcement agencies. She is also currently working 
on developing a new master’s degree program in forensic 
medicine to be offered at the University of Florida.
Víctor Toledo González  obtained his veterinary sci-
ence degree in 1999 and master’s degree in 2009 from 
the Universidad de Chile. He developed his professional 
career as an assistant professor in the Anatomy Unit in 
the Department of Biological Sciences and then in the 
Animal Pathology Department (last 4 years) in Santiago, 
Chile. He is currently pursuing a doctorate in forensic 
sciences at the University of Alcalá de Henares, Henares, 
Spain. Dr. Toledo is the creator, founder, and president of 
the Iberoamerican Association of Medicine and Forensic 
Veterinary Sciences AG. In addition, he is the General 
Secretary and Director of the Department of Veterinary 
Forensic Veterinary Medicine in Chilean Criminalists 
Association AG (COLCRIM). He has participated as a 
monitor in activities related with crime scene investiga-
tion of wildlife animals in technical programs of collabo-
ration between Chile and the United States. He has given 
numerous presentations at national and international 
conferences related with forensic veterinary science.

xii
Contributors
Mark Wood  is a graphic designer and photographer, 
with more than 20 years of experience as a creative pro-
fessional and educator. He has developed professional 
training classes and taught both undergraduate and 
postgraduate courses. In addition, he has delivered train-
the-trainer courses for the Apple Authorized Training 
Program. Wood is the author of the only Apple autho-
rized book on Pages, Numbers, and Keynote, and writes 
on a broad range of digital imaging topics.
Anita Zannin, MSFS,  holds two bachelor of science 
degrees, one in forensic chemistry and a second in crim-
inal justice, and a master of science degree in forensic 
science. She taught both graduate and undergraduate 
courses at Syracuse University, taught as faculty and 
a lab instructor at more than 10 Bloodstain Evidence 
Institutes, a 40-hour basic bloodstain pattern interpre-
tation course, and is a visiting professor at Francisco 
Marroquin Law School in Guatemala where she pri-
marily teaches crime scene and homicide investigation. 
Prior to entering the forensics field, Zannin worked and 
studied in the medical field for many years. Zannin is a 
member of several professional organizations and is an 
internationally recognized expert in bloodstain pattern 
analysis and has been accepted as an expert in both fed-
eral and state courts. She has worked on criminal and 
civil cases in the United States, Canada, Australia, and 
the United Kingdom.

1
C H A P T E R  1
Crime Scene Investigation
Anita Zannin and Linda Huber
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Crime scene investigation may occur as a result of rela-
tively minor offenses such as property crimes or thefts 
to very violent crimes such as rape, torture, and murder. 
The crime scene investigator (CSI) is the “gatekeeper” 
to the criminal justice system. The evidence that is col-
lected, the procedures that are followed, and a thor-
ough understanding of the potential value of different 
kinds of evidence can make the difference between a 
successful prosecution (the right person being pros-
ecuted for the right crime) or the exoneration of an 
innocent individual, and an unsuccessful prosecution 
(either that charges cannot be brought, or an innocent 
person is wrongly prosecuted). The old cliché “garbage 
in, garbage out” was never as appropriate as in this 
context! If the CSI fails to recognize evidence, or the 
potential probative value of a piece of evidence, crimes 
may remain unsolved or unprosecutable, or the wrong 
person is charged.
CONTENTS
1.1 Introduction 
1
1.2 Classification of the Crime Scene 
2
1.3 General Crime Scene Procedures 
2
1.3.1 First Responder 
3
1.3.2 Crime Scene Security 
3
1.3.3 Crime Scene Investigator(s) 
4
1.3.4 Security and Safety 
4
1.3.5 Initial Walk-Through 
4
1.3.6 Final Walk-Through 
5
1.3.7 Post-Scene Communication with Investigators 
5
1.3.8 Submission of Evidence 
6
1.4 Documentation 
6
1.4.1 Photography 
6
1.4.2 Videography 
8
1.4.3 Note-Taking 
8
1.4.4 Sketching 
8
1.5 Search Methods 
9
1.6 Evidence Collection and Packaging 
10
1.6.1 Fingerprinting 
10
1.6.1.1 Physical 
11
1.6.1.2 Chemical 
12
1.6.2 Trace Evidence Collection 
12
1.6.3 DNA and Blood Evidence Collection 
16
1.6.4 Firearms and Related Collection 
16
1.6.5 Miscellaneous Evidence Collection 
18
1.6.6 Comparison Samples 
18
1.6.7 Presumptive Field Tests 
18
1.7 Chain of Custody 
19
1.8 Reconstruction 
19
1.9 Conclusion 
19
Bibliography 
20

2
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
The goal of a crime scene investigation is to recog-
nize, collect, preserve, and test physical evidence in an 
effort to reconstruct the events that occurred. Physical 
evidence can link suspects to victims, individuals to 
objects, and crime scenes, and vice versa. This concept is 
represented in Figure 1.1.
The tenet that physical evidence can provide link-
age to people, places, or things is based upon Locard’s 
exchange principle, which states:
Whenever two objects come into contact, there is 
always a transfer of material. The methods of detec-
tion may not be sensitive enough to detect this, or the 
decay rate may be so rapid that all evidence of trans-
fer has vanished after a given time. Nevertheless, the 
transfer has taken place.
—Edmond Locard (1877–1966)
Crime scene investigation can be defined as a legal, 
purposeful, planned, and systematic process, conducted by 
competent investigators who possess the requisite knowl-
edge, skills and abilities to search for, discover, protect, 
document, collect, package, label, preserve, and trans-
mit physical evidence associated with a suspected crimi-
nal event to a forensic science facility for safekeeping and 
eventual scientific examination and analysis (Rini, n.d.).
1.2 CLASSIFICATION OF  
THE CRIME SCENE
Crime scenes may be classified in several ways:
Type of crime: Homicide, suicide, sexual assault, 
robbery, and so on, are examples of defining a scene by 
the type of alleged crime or incident.
Location: A scene may be described by its physical loca-
tion, such as indoor, outdoor, vehicle, aquatic, and so forth.
Behavioral: A crime scene may be defined by the 
apparent behavior associated with the scene, such as 
organized, disorganized, passive, or active.
Size: Less commonly, a scene may be defined as mac-
roscopic or microscopic. An example of a macroscopic 
scene might be a stabbing victim, stabbed in a house, 
who is transported in a car, and the body dumped in 
a creek. All the associated scenes would be considered 
to be under the heading of macroscopic. A microscopic 
scene is more related to the physical and trace evidence 
associated within the macroscopic scene and body itself. 
Using the previous example, this could include hairs and 
fibers in the vehicle used to transport the body or on the 
knife, tire tracks or footwear impressions located near 
the body, and bloodstains located on the victim, in the 
house or in the car utilized for transporting the body.
Site of first alleged criminal activity: More commonly, 
when there are multiple scenes related to a particular 
event, they may be referred to as primary, secondary, and 
tertiary. The primary scene is the site of the first criminal 
activity. This is not necessarily where the body is located. In 
the stabbing example from the previous Size category, the 
house where the stabbing occurred would be the primary 
scene. Some agencies utilize only primary and secondary 
classifications, where secondary refers to any subsequent 
scenes as secondary. Therefore, in the above example, both 
the car and dump site would be secondary scenes. Other 
agencies utilize secondary and tertiary designations, where 
secondary scenes include any subsequent scenes, such as 
dump sites, paths to/from, and so on and tertiary refers 
to any vehicles utilized in the crime. Referring again to 
the above example, the primary scene would be the house 
where the stabbing occurred, the secondary scene would 
be the body dump site, and the car would be the tertiary 
scene. Suppose that the body was transferred from a car to 
a van that then took the body to the dump site; both the 
car and the van would be tertiary scenes using this clas-
sification method.
It is important to note that the designations of 
primary, secondary, and tertiary in no way signify the 
importance or priority of scenes, rather, simply a sequence 
of events. Scenes may also be referred to as dynamic 
or static. A scene and the evidence contained therein is 
always undergoing change and/or degradation, even if not 
visible to the naked eye, including during the investigative 
process, until the evidence is collected. With this under-
standing, an unprocessed scene is considered dynamic. 
After a scene has been processed, it is considered static.
1.3 GENERAL CRIME  
SCENE PROCEDURES
The first person to arrive at a scene is referred to as the 
first responder. Depending on how a call comes in, this 
may be police officers, fire department, or emergency 
Object
Crime scene
Physical
evidence
Suspect
Victim
FIGURE 1.1 The interrelationships between people, 
places, and things within a crime scene.

3
Crime Scene Investigation
medical personnel. For the purposes of this writing, 
when referring to the “first responder,” this will refer to 
the first responding police officer.
1.3.1 First Responder
The first responder(s) will be the only individual(s) to 
observe a scene in its most pristine state, and their obser-
vations are critical. There are a number of duties that the 
first responder must carry out: most importantly, he/she 
must ensure safety of the scene and the people associated 
with it, including him/herself and the victim(s).
• If the victim is alive, the first responder should 
assist the victim until appropriate medical 
personnel arrive to take over. If the victim is 
deceased, the first responder should take mea-
sures to prevent any changes to the body.
• If the suspect is still on scene, search for and 
arrest, as appropriate.
• Detain witnesses—If possible, witnesses should 
be separated both from each other and from 
the scene in order to preserve their objectivity. 
For the same reason, witnesses should not be 
returned to the scene. This is not to say that an 
individual would deliberately mislead (although 
some will); however, if they are returned to the 
scene, the possibility exists that their minds will 
subconsciously attempt to “fill in the blanks” 
and/or explain why certain pieces of evidence 
appear as they do (e.g., “Well, he must have 
fallen backward to have blood in that location—
I thought I saw him fall to the side”). It is well 
documented that the majority of wrongful con-
victions are based on erroneous eyewitness testi-
mony. Most people are not expecting to witness 
a violent crime, and therefore are not prepared 
to “record” every detail. Knowing that witness 
statements may vary, conflict, and/or contain 
inaccuracies, every effort should be taken to 
avoid additional “contamination.”
• Establish scene security—How this is accom-
plished will depend on the location of a crime 
scene and can include official vehicles to block 
off streets, barrier tape, or other means available 
until additional assistance arrives. A crime scene 
log should be initiated, documenting the name, 
date, in/out times, and duty or agency of those 
individuals with access to the crime scene. This 
helps prevent unauthorized individuals or offi-
cials from entering the scene. No eating, drink-
ing, smoking, restroom use, and so on, should be 
allowed within the secured area.
• Document and communicate to the investigator 
all movements, actions, and any alterations within 
the scene. For instance, if, upon arrival, a victim 
is found prone in a small space between the sink 
and bathtub, and the first responder had to pull 
the victim out and turn him over to check for signs 
of life, this is critical for the investigators to know, 
as it is no longer a pristine scene and will have 
undoubtedly created some artifactual evidence.
1.3.2 Crime Scene Security
Because crime scene investigation procedures are based  
upon Locard’s exchange principle, it is of utmost impor-
tance to establish scene security so as to avoid unneces-
sary contamination by nonessential personnel. This can 
be accomplished by using multiple layers of security, for 
example:
• Zone (or Level) 1—Is the immediate crime scene, 
where the highest level of restriction is in force. 
Only essential personnel (those processing the 
scene) should be in this area. For example, if a 
crime occurred in the gymnasium of a school, only 
essential personnel should be in the gymnasium.
• Zone (or Level) 2—Is a wider perimeter around 
Zone 1, where access should be restricted to only 
individuals performing official duties. This is the 
zone in which incident command or a command 
center would be located. Using the above exam-
ple, Zone 2 could be the entire school building.
• Zone (or Level) 3—Is an even wider perimeter 
than Zone 2, where members of the media can 
be located, while excluding the general public. 
Again using the school example, Zone 3 could 
be the entire school property.
Figure 1.2 illustrates this concept using the school 
example above.
Zone 1—
Highest restriction
(Gymnasium)
Zone 3—General public restriction (School grounds)
Zone 2—Restricted to those performing
official duties
(entire school building)
Command
center
Media
FIGURE 1.2 Example of multilevel scene security.

4
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
It is important to note that the perimeter(s) initially 
established may have to be adjusted once the crime scene 
personnel arrive and evaluate the scene.
1.3.3 Crime Scene Investigator(s)
Upon arrival to the scene, the CSI(s) should sign in on 
the previously established crime scene log. If one has 
not yet been initiated, the CSI should initiate the crime 
scene attendance log and obtain as much information as 
possible regarding other undocumented individuals who 
may have been at the scene. After signing in, the CSI 
should have a conference with the first responder and/or 
on-scene detective (if arrived) to understand the circum-
stances of the scene as known at that time. This does not 
mean the CSI’s “theory” of what occurred and should 
include only facts known.
CSIs must also ensure that they will be conducting 
a legal search. In the United States, searches can be con-
ducted in the following circumstances:
• Consent—The person who owns or has the legal 
ability to consent can give permission to conduct 
a search of an area of interest.
• Exigent circumstances—Exigent circumstances 
are those situations where evidence will be dam-
aged or lost if it is not collected immediately, or 
if there is an immediate risk of serious injury or 
death. An example of an exigent circumstance 
could be that, upon police arrival, a suspect runs 
to the bathroom to attempt to flush drugs, and 
the drugs were recovered. This would not give 
permission to search the rest of the bathroom 
or house for drugs. With the drugs and suspect 
secured, a search warrant should be obtained to 
search the remainder of the residence.
• Search warrant—A legal, thorough search war-
rant is the best way to gain access to the area of 
interest, as this reduces the likelihood of evidence 
later being deemed inadmissible for various rea-
sons, such as the individual from whom consent 
was obtained didn’t have the legal authority to 
do so or the judge disagrees that exigent circum-
stances existed.
1.3.4 Security and Safety
During the initial conference, potential safety issues, 
both situational and infectious, should be considered 
and discussed. For example, if there has been a multiple 
shooting, the scene must be cleared by police prior to 
entry of the crime scene team. If there is apparent unrest, 
suspect(s) still at large, or it is a high-profile case, a plan 
to protect the CSI(s) while they are processing the scene 
should be dealt with. Additionally, the description of 
the scene from the first responder will help the CSI to 
assess potential hazards and determine what personal 
protective equipment (PPE) is likely to be needed or if 
additional assistance from specialty teams like hazmat 
or bomb squad is required before beginning scene pro-
cessing. The CSI(s) must evaluate the scene and use their 
judgment and training to determine the safety of a situa-
tion. CSI personnel should not feel pressured to process 
a scene or perform a procedure if they reasonably believe 
their personal safety will be compromised.
1.3.5 Initial Walk-Through
The initial walk-through is also referred to as the primary 
survey. The only individuals who should be included in 
the walk-through are the first responder, CSI, and case 
detective (if on scene). This orients the CSI and detective 
to the scene, and the first responder should describe his/
her paths within the scene in addition to any item that 
was changed, removed, or otherwise altered. This infor-
mation is critical, especially in scenes where there was 
a great deal of activity prior to the CSI arrival, when it 
comes time to reconstruct the scene. It can be helpful to 
take some initial “establishing” photographs during the 
walk-through, as this is the most pristine state that the 
CSI will observe the scene. The CSI should:
• Be aware of current and upcoming weather and 
environmental conditions that might alter or 
destroy evidence. Precautions should be taken 
to protect and collect any evidence that might 
be affected by adverse weather or environmental 
conditions. For example, strong winds or rain 
could potentially alter or destroy evidence. If this 
situation occurs, the evidence should be photo-
graphed, documented with measurements, and 
collected as soon as possible.
• Make note of transient and/or conditional evi-
dence that will require immediate processing, 
collection or protection. Transient evidence is tem-
porary evidence, such as odors or hair/fiber evi-
dence that is not adhered to something, such that 
it might be lost with normal actions performed 
during scene processing. Conditional evidence is 
evidence that is the result of an action, such as 
entries and exits (transferred evidence), lights (did 
first responder turn on/off?), or moved furniture 
(occurred during incident or to create access for 
first responder?). Evidence may be both transient 
and conditional, for example, a cigarette burn-
ing in an ashtray. The burning cigarette is tran-
sient because it will stop burning at some point 

5
Crime Scene Investigation
and conditional because someone had to light the 
cigarette to cause it to burn (this may also give 
information as to when the incident occurred).
• Identify points of entry and exit and note con-
tamination caused by first responder(s). Also 
identify paths of movement within the scene. 
Ideally, there should be only one point of entry 
and exit, and a path through the scene for per-
sonnel and equipment.
• Brief initial observations should be recorded. 
This is not the detailed narrative that will be 
completed at a later time, but rather a “snap-
shot” that deals with the nuts-and-bolts infor-
mation of who, what, where, when, and how.
• Determine needs in terms of personnel, equip-
ment, PPE, and specialists (if applicable and 
available). Notify appropriate parties, as per 
 policy, as to necessary additional personnel, 
equipment, or specialists that are needed.
• Determine the extent of your search area. As 
mentioned above, this may result in the expan-
sion of your initial crime scene perimeter.
• If there is a decedent present, coordinate pro-
cessing with the coroner/medical examiner 
personnel.
• Determine the need for barriers to reduce obser-
vation by the public and press photographers. 
Situations may also arise that require CSI per-
sonnel to process an area of the scene in order to 
create a pathway to the decedent.
• Conduct the walk-through slowly, being very 
cognizant of where personnel are stepping and 
anything that is touched. Take extreme care not 
to disturb the scene in any way during this initial 
walk-through.
• Take in the big picture and do not mark or move 
anything.
• Look for evidence mentioned by the briefing 
officer and investigator. Does what is seen fit the 
information provided? Try and think through 
the actions of the perpetrator. Does the evidence 
observed fit the hypothesis? Or, does it reveal a 
different scenario? Note that it may not always be 
possible to accurately reconstruct the actions of 
the perpetrator due to lack of sufficient evidence.
Once the walk-through is complete, the lead CSI 
(team leader) will determine the best approach to the 
scene that will result in the most efficient, but thorough 
search for and collection of evidence, and determine the 
roles of each team member. In the most ideal circum-
stance, the following roles should be assigned:
• Team leader
• Photographer/videographer
• Note-taker
• Sketcher
• Evidence collector(s)
• Evidence custodian
Many departments are too small to have a differ-
ent individual assigned to each role, and one person may 
have to fill two or more roles, so this requires a bit more 
attention when planning the scene approach, to ensure 
an efficient work-flow that maintains the integrity and 
thoroughness of the search and collection of evidence. 
CSI personnel should not be rushed or allow themselves 
to be rushed by others, should take control, and be firm 
if necessary. Ultimately, the CSI personnel are the ones 
responsible for the integrity of the evidence collected and 
presented in court.
After the approach is decided and roles are assigned, 
a search for evidence is conducted, documented, and col-
lected (to be described in greater detail below).
1.3.6 Final Walk-Through
Prior to releasing the scene, a final walk-through is con-
ducted to ensure that no evidence was inadvertently 
overlooked and all equipment has been retrieved. The 
possibility of returning to a scene once it has been released 
is highly unlikely; therefore, this is a good time to review 
your notes to ensure that all measurements and obser-
vations have been documented. Discuss the scene search 
and evidence recovered with relevant personnel. This is a 
good time to photograph the scene in its final condition if 
damage was done during processing (e.g., demolition of 
walls to recover bullets). All death investigations should 
be conducted as homicide investigations, until the evi-
dence proves otherwise. There is only one opportunity to 
collect the evidence, and this mind-set will help prevent 
overlooking evidence that may be important later as the 
investigation develops.
1.3.7 Post-Scene Communication with Investigators
After the evidence associated with the crime scene inves-
tigation has been submitted to the crime laboratory, the 
crime scene investigator becomes the case manager or 
liaison between the crime lab and the investigators.
Once evidence is transported back to the CSI office/
lab, follow-up examinations can be performed. This 
can include things like processing certain pieces of evi-
dence for fingerprints that could not be performed at the 
scene, photographing pieces of evidence in more detail, 
or examining clothing for the presences of gunpowder 
particles that requires the use of illuminated magnifiers 
and microscopes. Additionally, the detective’s ongoing 

6
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
investigation of the case may lead to additional infor-
mation that may require another search and/or collec-
tion of evidence.
1.3.8 Submission of Evidence
It is not practical or financially feasible to submit every 
piece of evidence to the laboratory for testing. Therefore, 
based on the particular case circumstances, evidence 
selected for testing should be those which will, regardless 
of results, provide the most useful information in deter-
mining the essential facts of the case. Similarly, not all 
pieces can be utilized for all types of testing. One may 
have to choose which testing will yield the most proba-
tive information. For example, consider a pistol with a 
textured grip. Should it be submitted for fingerprint pro-
cessing or DNA to attempt to establish possession? In 
this case, since it is difficult to obtain latent prints from 
this type of surface, submitting it for low copy number 
(sometimes called “touch”) DNA may be more probative. 
If the subject was not wearing gloves, it is more likely 
that skin cell and/or sweat (especially in the context of 
committing a crime) can be recovered than fingerprints 
from the grip of the pistol.
1.4 DOCUMENTATION
1.4.1 Photography
Proper scene photography is critical to thoroughly doc-
umenting a scene for proper case disposition at a later 
time. The goal of photo-documenting the scene is to 
provide a true and accurate representation of the scene 
when it is reviewed by others at a later time and/or use 
in court proceedings. The photographs should provide 
the viewer with a “snapshot” of the scene, as seen by the 
photographer, and reveal the different stages of the scene 
investigation. Typically, photography is done after the 
initial walk-through or after videography. An organized, 
systematic method should be utilized, with the general 
flow of:
• Overall photographs (Figure 1.3)—These pic-
tures are also known as “establishing” pictures 
and include interior and exterior photographs. 
These are typically done prior to any movement 
of evidence or placement of evidence markers 
as a way of documenting the scene in its initial 
state. Exterior views should include outbuildings, 
surroundings, street signs, address placards and/
or mailbox showing address, and paths to/from 
the scene. Interior views should be overlapping 
in order to be able to “stitch” the photographs 
together for a panoramic depiction of the room(s). 
A convenient way to achieve this is to utilize the 
corners of the room as your focal point, or uti-
lize the four compass points: north, south, east 
and west. These should also include doors/door-
ways into and out of the scene, and windows 
and routes leading to and away from the scene. 
Overall photographs provide context and show 
relationships between pieces of evidence.
• Mid-range photographs (Figure 1.4)—As the 
title suggests, these photographs are taken at a 
distance between overall and close-up, and the 
focus is individual pieces of evidence in relation-
ship to one another and other items within the 
scene. The number of photographs taken in this 
range will vary based on the specifics of the par-
ticular scene, and should progress in a step-wise 
manner. Different lenses, f-stops, or lighting 
may need to be utilized to achieve good-quality 
results.
• Close-up photographs (Figure 1.5)—These pho-
tographs again feature the individual pieces of 
evidence, but at a much closer range to show 
greater detail and should be examination qual-
ity. The photograph of a 1 millimeter bloodstain 
is going to require a different technique than a 
bloodstained shoe. Generally, the flash will need 
to be detached from the camera body, or a ring 
flash utilized. Different lighting techniques may 
1
FIGURE 1.3 Overall photograph. (From the authors’ files.)

7
Crime Scene Investigation
need to be utilized to capture sufficient detail. 
These photographs should be both with and with-
out scales. Therefore, there should be a progres-
sion of overall, mid-range, close-up without scale, 
close-up with scale, photograph area underneath, 
behind, and so on, after the item is collected to 
show there is or is not additional evidence covered 
by the object, for example, a cartridge case found 
on the ground after the gun is collected.
It is good practice, after the overall or mid-range 
photographs are taken, to place the evidence markers 
and re-photograph from at least the overall perspective. 
This is of great assistance to individuals who have to 
examine the photographs at a later time. Camera settings 
that provide the best depth of focus should be utilized. It 
is also good practice to start the photograph series with 
a placard that contains the name of the case, date, time, 
photographer name, and a gray scale.
Given the prevalence of digital cameras today, there 
is debate as to whether photography logs are necessary, 
since all the camera information and settings are con-
tained within the metadata. Some are of the thought that 
“the picture should speak for itself.” While that is true, 
realistically, some scenes are more difficult to photo-
graph than others, and optimal views may not be able to 
be obtained, and the photograph’s context is unclear. In 
these types of situations, a photo log that includes, at the 
very least, the picture number and description would be 
invaluable. Therefore, a log should be created as part of 
standard procedure so the photographer doesn’t have to 
decide whether the scene warrants one or not.
Whenever possible, photographs should be taken 90 
degrees from the subject of interest in order to minimize 
distortion. This is a necessity if the photograph is going 
to be considered examination quality. The photograph 
should be free of distortion, correctly exposed, and in 
sharp focus. This may require stools, stepladders, tri-
pods, and bubble levels to accomplish. Efforts should 
be made not to capture personnel, hands, feet, or other 
extraneous objects.
Last, the camera should be set to “continuous” num-
bering mode so that each photograph has its own unique 
number and numbering doesn’t reset to zero when the 
camera is turned off or the SIM card is replaced. Once 
photographing a scene is finished, the pictures should be 
downloaded to a “master” file that is never altered. Make 
three CDs—one for the unit, one for the prosecutor, and 
one for the defense—and seal them in an evidence bag. 
Once these steps are taken, a copy of the master folder 
can be made, to which corrections can be made (bright-
ness, contrast, hue, etc.). Some departments have soft-
ware through which the photos must be imported, and 
the software assigns its own number to the photograph. 
Photographs should never be deleted, even if they are of 
poor quality or captured inadvertently. The SIM card 
can be forensically wiped and reused, or, some depart-
ments use a new card for each scene.
The digital camera has made it much easier to take 
many photographs and allows an immediate review of 
quality so additional photographs can be taken if one or 
more are not of acceptable quality. Therefore, photogra-
phers should not go into a scene with a predetermined 
number of photographs that they will take, or be con-
servative in their photography—if in doubt, photograph 
it! And remember the axiom if it wasn’t photographed, 
it wasn’t seen.
4
FIGURE 1.4 Mid-range photograph. (From the authors’ files.)
FIGURE 1.5 Close-up photograph. (From the authors’ files.)

8
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
There are several “special” photography scenarios that 
may need to be utilized, including, but not limited to, low 
light photography, aerial photography, and photographing 
the scene post evidence retrieval that documents changes 
or damage that occurred as a result of evidence collection 
activities (e.g., wall damage after projectile retrieval). Every 
potential scenario cannot be described in detail here due 
to space requirements. However, there are many resources 
that describe and instruct in great detail how best to deal 
with a variety of photography situations/challenges.
1.4.2 Videography
Many agencies routinely videotape crime scenes. This 
gives the viewer a much better sense of spatial orienta-
tion that cannot be achieved with still photography. 
Videography should be completed after the initial walk-
through, prior to still photography.
Audio should be turned off, and the video should 
not be narrated. As with still photography, personnel and 
equipment should not be seen in the video. Additionally, 
as with still photography, the approach should be planned 
and systematic, and the video should begin with a placard 
with the case name, date, time, location and videographer’s 
name. The video should start from the outside of the struc-
ture, surroundings, and route to the scene. Once in the 
scene, the goal should be to provide a general orientation 
of the scene. Remembering to cover all four compass points 
should assist in thorough video documentation. Also very 
useful is to record video from the victim’s viewpoint; get 
as close as possible to the victim without compromising 
evidence, and again, cover the four compass points.
Transitions should be smooth, movement slow and 
even, and not jump from area to area. If the scene is dark 
or there are a large amount of shadows, extra lighting 
should be utilized. Review the tape on-scene after com-
pletion, and re-shoot if needed. Videos should never be 
edited or erased and, in most situations, must be in their 
original condition to be admissible as evidence. This 
recording is now evidence and should be handled in a 
manner similar to the still photographs.
1.4.3 Note-Taking
Note-taking is an activity that is completed as an on-
going activity at the time the tasks are performed, so 
that there is a contemporaneous written record of crime 
scene activities that is not affected by memory loss at a 
later time. Notes should be taken in chronological order, 
detailed and legible. Sloppy notes or vague statements 
can later be misinterpreted in court. Notes should never 
be discarded or erased. Errors are corrected according to 
each agency’s policy and procedures.
Fulsome note-taking will be invaluable if and when 
the case goes to court, as many cases do not go to court 
for a year or longer, and will assist in giving a complete 
“picture” to the reader. Cryptic notes tend to cause more 
questions and skepticism.
The following information should be included in 
crime scene notes:
• Case Information
• Date, time and method of notification, and 
what information was received.
• Date, time of arrival, transportation method, 
individuals present upon arrival, and any 
notifications that may need to be made.
• Description of Scene
• Location type and condition, weather (and 
impending weather, if applicable), major 
structures, and any transient or conditional 
evidence identified.
• Victim description (note that in most areas, 
the body cannot be moved without the per-
mission of the medical examiner or coroner), 
position, clothing, obvious wounds, lividity, 
jewelry (also important to document a lack 
of jewelry), and presence or absence of any 
identification.
• CSI team: personnel names and roles, initial 
and final walk-through times, beginning and 
ending times of activity and any variations 
from procedure, unusual circumstances, or, 
if evidence was moved or somehow altered, 
why and how that occurred.
• Location of Evidence
• Where the individual items of evidence were 
discovered. Measurement from two fixed 
points allows for accurate reconstruction.
• Designate pieces of evidence or groupings of 
evidence with numbered or lettered evidence 
markers.
• Evidence List
• Both a general statement of evidence col-
lected (e.g., “45 pieces of evidence were 
recovered from the kitchen and bedroom”) 
in addition to a detailed evidence log that 
describes the piece of evidence, any visible 
manufacturer information (e.g., brand name, 
serial numbers, headstamps), time collected, 
and who collected it.
1.4.4 Sketching
Sketching is a very important task to complete, as this 
is what depicts the scene and the relationships among 
evidence items with accurate measurements, at a glance. 

9
Crime Scene Investigation
Sketches are useful in depicting the overall layout of the 
scene and allow for selectivity by including only details 
that are important to the case. The two most popular 
sketching perspectives are the bird’s-eye view (overhead, 
as seen from above, looking straight down) and the ele-
vation (side view). The overhead view depicts items in a 
scene on a single horizontal plane, while the side view 
is useful when a vertical plane is necessary (e.g., blood-
stains present on a wall). The two basic types of sketches 
are the rough sketch (an example can be seen at: http://
www.tpub.com/maa/12740_files/image608.jpg), which 
is done at the scene and is not usually to scale, and the 
finished sketch (an example can be seen here: http://www.
creatiline.com/tag/finished-sketch-crime-scene). Keep in 
mind that the information obtained for the rough sketch 
will be utilized to create the finished sketch for presenta-
tion in court. If you are unsure about whether or not to 
take a measurement, or include an item, it is better to 
obtain more information than necessary than to need it 
and not have it. The finished sketch is completed from 
the information from the rough sketch, but “cleaned up” 
(in the sense that it is neater) and done with the presence 
of relevant measurements, scale, orientation, and legend.
Three-dimensional laser scanning systems are cur-
rently being adopted by an increasing number of law 
enforcement agencies. These scanners can be quickly 
deployed to measure and map indoor and outdoor scenes. 
This mobile laser device has the capability of collecting 
thousands of measurements per second while an embed-
ded high-resolution digital camera takes photographs. 
Once the information is scanned and photographed, 
computer software can generate diagrams, perform scene 
reconstruction, and provide accurate measurements.
There are templates available of commonly encoun-
tered items that can be easily used in the field that allow 
the preparer to create a rough sketch more neatly and 
easily. An example is shown in Figure 1.6.
What to include in the sketch:
• Case identifier, date, CSI personnel drawing 
sketch
• A scale or designated “not to scale” note some-
where on the sketch
• Legends that are used to designate important 
features in the sketch (e.g., color red for blood).
• Directionality (i.e., compass or indication of 
north direction)
• All significant objects, structures, and items of 
evidence with measurements
Three methods for obtaining measurements for a 
crime scene sketch:
• Triangulation—Two fixed points (things that are 
not easily changed, such as corners in a room, 
door frames, trees) are selected and the distance 
from each point to the piece of evidence is noted. 
If, for example, there is a body on the floor, and 
the legs are spread apart, measurements from 
each fixed point to the top of the head and to 
the bottoms of the right foot and left foot should 
be recorded. These measurements would allow a 
body to be positioned in the most accurate posi-
tion possible, rather than if measurements were 
taken only from the fixed points to the head (this 
would allow the rest of the body to be placed 
anywhere in a 360-degree circumference).
• Polar coordinates—This method also uses two 
fixed points, but also uses angles. For example, 
evidence #1 is located 2´3˝ from a wall and 20 
degrees southeast. Angles can be measured with 
a compass or transit.
• Baseline—Again, two fixed points are utilized, 
such that a straight line is drawn between the 
points. The evidence is measured by its distance 
down the line and perpendicular to the line.
Computer software is available to assist in finished 
sketches and/or create professional, scaled renderings.
1.5 SEARCH METHODS
A variety of search methods exist, as there are many 
different types of scenes. This allows investigators to 
select the most appropriate method(s) for their specific 
scene. The choice of method may be dictated by the loca-
tion, size, or circumstances of the scene. Once the search 
method has been selected, conduct a cautious search of 
all the visible areas, focusing on avoiding loss of evidence 
or evidence contamination. After this search has been 
conducted and the evidence has been photographed and 
FIGURE 1.6 Arrowhead Forensics master crime scene 
sketching kit (http://www.crimescene.com/store/A-6340 
CSK.Shtml). Variously themed templates are available 
for purchase individually to customize as needed.

10
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
documented, a more vigorous search can be conducted of 
those areas that are concealed (e.g., moving furniture to 
look for cartridge cases). This general-to-specific approach 
ensures a thorough search of the scene. Figure 1.7 is a 
graphic summarizing the methods described.
Link—Very common, based upon the linkage the-
ory: once a piece of evidence leads to another (e.g., 
a fingerprint on a murder weapon is identified to a 
known individual, individual’s house and vehicle 
searched and reveals bloody clothing, DNA test-
ing of those clothes is consistent with victim), 
experiential, logical, and systematic. Works with 
all scenes: small, large, indoor or outdoor.
Line—Often used for large, outdoor scenes. A 
coordinator is needed and searchers are often 
volunteer and need instruction.
Grid—Similar to line; essentially two line searches 
that are 90 degrees from one another. This 
method can be quite productive, but is more 
time-consuming.
Zone—Best for defined zones, such as houses or 
buildings with rooms. Often combined with 
other methods; good for search warrants. Teams 
are assigned small zones for searching.
Wheel or Ray—Used in special circumstances, lim-
ited applications: small, circular scenes.
Spiral—Best used on scenes without physical bar-
riers (e.g., open water), limited applications, spi-
rals may be inward or outward, must be able to 
trace a regular pattern with fixed diameters.
1.6 EVIDENCE COLLECTION 
AND PACKAGING
Evidence collection begins after the scene has been 
searched, evidence has been located and marked, pho-
tography has taken place, and sketches have been 
drawn. Evidence should be collected in such a manner 
as to protect it from breakage, contamination, and loss. 
Packaging will be evidence dependent and CSI personnel 
should determine what type is appropriate (e.g., paper 
bags, envelopes, cans, jars, boxes). Each package of evi-
dence should be sealed at the closure in a way that access 
into the package would be obvious. This can be done by 
using tamper-evident evidence tape or other nonremov-
able tape marked with the date and initials of CSI per-
sonnel who collected the item.
The outer packaging (there should be at least two 
layers to protect the integrity of the evidence in the event 
that the outer packaging is damaged or otherwise com-
promised) should be marked with the following informa-
tion: case identifiers, item descriptions, date and time of 
collection, and who collected the evidence. This initiates 
the evidence trail or chain of custody. This is the most 
commonly accepted method for authentication of evi-
dence. It documents the transfer of custody of evidence 
from one person to another starting with its collection at 
the crime scene, through various analysts at the crime lab 
conducting examinations of the evidence, and its possible 
presentation in court. This ensures that what it presented 
in court is the same item collected. Each transfer is docu-
mented with a signature, date, and time. A record of the 
chain of custody protects against the possibility of evi-
dence being adulterated or tampered with. Therefore, a 
break in the chain of custody can result in evidence being 
inadmissible in court.
As noted previously, proper packaging is key to evi-
dence preservation and is specific to the type of evidence 
collected. The following are examples of the different 
types of evidence that may be encountered at a crime 
scene and how they should be properly packaged.
1.6.1 Fingerprinting
Fingerprints fall in the category of pattern evidence, and 
because no two people (to date) have been found to have 
identical fingerprints, including identical twins, it is evi-
dence that can be used to identify (or exclude) individu-
als. The two main features upon which the discipline of 
fingerprint analysis are (1) uniqueness—as previously 
mentioned, each individual’s fingerprints are unique; 
and (2) persistence—fingerprints do not change over an 
individual’s lifetime, provided there is no damage to the 
dermal layer. This discipline is concerned with identify-
ing friction ridge characteristics, composed of ridges and 
furrows on the skin, and can be found on the fingers, 
palms, and soles of the feet.
The three types of fingerprints generally found at 
crime scenes and/or on pieces of evidence are as follows:
1. Patent—A patent print is visible to the naked 
eye and does not require additional processing 
in order to identify it as a fingerprint. It may even 
FIGURE 1.7 Search methods.

11
Crime Scene Investigation
be suitable for comparison without additional 
processing. These fingerprints can be made of 
several kinds of substances such as dirt, blood, 
grease, etc.
2. Latent—Is not visible to the naked eye and 
requires additional processing or enhancement 
in order to visualize and possibly make a com-
parison. These are typically composed of sweat, 
lipids, and/or proteins secreted from the pores 
on the skin. There are many contaminants from 
the environment that may also be present within 
the chemical composition of the fingerprint.
3. Plastic—More correctly referred to as an 
“impression” because it is a recognizable fin-
gerprint indentation in a soft substrate, such as 
putty, tar, wax, soap, etc. These fingerprints are 
three-dimensional and may not require addi-
tional processing in order to visualize.
Occasionally, a latent print can be enhanced suffi-
ciently and photographed simply with oblique lighting or 
use of an alternate light source. The processing of latent 
prints will be largely dependent upon the surface on 
which the print is located. This is accomplished by two 
general categories, described below.
1.6.1.1 Physical
Physical processing does not involve utilizing chemicals 
or chemical reactions to increase visibility. Dusting with 
powder is a common and economical method. When a 
print is gently dusted, with brushes composed of fine 
fibers, fine particles of the dust adhere to the residue that 
created the print, providing enhanced contrast and vis-
ibility. There are several powder colors available, with 
different formulations (e.g., carbon, aluminum) in order 
to create optimal contrast, since prints may be found on 
a wide variety of substrates (see Table 1.1).
The MagnaBrushTM was the first magnetic fingerprint 
“brush” available, and this is a variant on the standard 
brush-and-powder approach. There is no actual brush in 
a magnetic device. Rather, there is a magnet within the 
device that creates a “brush” out of metal-based, mag-
netic powder. Because there is no actual brush, and the 
wand can remove excess powder from the substrate, this 
is a less abrasive method; therefore, it has less chance of 
inadvertently damaging a print. See Table 1.1 for a sum-
mary of methods.
Tape lifting is another physical method of process-
ing fingerprints, where the print (either processed or pat-
ent) is physically removed from the surface by means of 
transparent lifting tape. The tape is then adhered to a 
backing that provides optimal contrast. There are a vari-
ety of products that provide both the lifting tape and the 
background on which to mount it (e.g., hinge-lifters). 
Figure 1.8 is an example of scaled hinge lifts available at 
Arrowhead Forensics.
TABLE 1.1 Fingerprint Processing Method Examples 
Method
Composition
Best Surfaces
Application
Powder
Carbon, aluminum, lycopodium based
Nonporous, select porous
Fiberglass, camel hair, or 
feather brushes*
Magnetic
Iron oxide (may be mixed with black carbon and 
silicon dioxide, aluminum, titanium dioxide, 
lycopodium, etc.) for colored and dual contrast 
formulations
Nonporous, porous
Magnetic wand
Lifting
Transparent adhesive tape and backing cards
Nonporous, select porous
Transparent adhesive tape, 
manual pressure
Small Particle 
Reagent
Various compositions and colors ex, molybdenum 
disulfide, zinc carbonate, crystal violet, etc.
Wet or previously wet 
surfaces
Fine mist spray
* Due to the increased sensitivity of DNA testing, some agencies use disposable, one-use-only brushes to avoid cross contamination 
of surfaces and of the powders (re-dipping into a powder jar). Additionally, powder can be dispensed in smaller amounts from its 
original container to a separate “working” container, for use only on the scene at hand and any remaining powder in the “work-
ing” container discarded upon completion of the scene processing in order to avoid contamination of the stock powder.
FIGURE 1.8 Arrowhead Forensics scaled hinge lifts 
(http://www.crimescene.com/store/A-2801KC.shtml).

12
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Small particle reagent (SPR) is also considered a 
physical method, although it is liquid and sprayed onto 
the surface. It is essentially a liquid fingerprint powder 
for use on wet or previously wet items. SPR will adhere 
to the print residues and the excess SPR is removed with 
a spray bottle of water.
1.6.1.2 Chemical
There are a number of chemical reagents and processes 
available for processing latent prints, so that it is not fea-
sible to discuss every available option here. Some of the 
most commonly used at crime scenes (as opposed to in 
the laboratory) will be addressed.
Ninhydrin—reacts with the amino acids in the fin-
gerprint residue and turns a purplish color. It may be 
applied via spraying, dipping, or painting and is very 
useful on porous substances. The reaction process may 
be somewhat slow and may be accelerated by heat and 
humidity. It can be used alone, or as part of a multistep 
process. There are also derivatives, or analogues that 
assist with better visualization in conjunction with lasers 
and/or special illumination methods.
Iodine fuming—Elemental iodine is a substance that 
sublimes. In other words, it can pass from solid to gas 
form without turning into a liquid. It is applied via a 
fuming gun, or in a cabinet that then becomes filled with 
iodine fumes. This is a good method for items that may 
be valuable, as without also using a “fixing” component, 
the iodine enhanced print does not last indefinitely.
Cyanoacrylate—Also known as “super glue fum-
ing.” This method is also somewhat slow and requires 
a cabinet or chamber (portable chambers are available, 
or can be created easily, but care should be taken to 
ensure scientific protocols and controls are utilized) in 
which the fuming can occur. Heating can accelerate the 
process. The cyanoacrylate is heated to induce fuming, 
and a moisture source is needed to create optimal relative 
humidity. Alternatively, a vacuum method is also avail-
able. A “test” latent print of the individual performing 
the enhancement can be added to the chamber in a loca-
tion that is viewable from the outside of the chamber in 
order to monitor the progress of development. If a print 
is not fumed enough, it can be subjected to another fum-
ing session. However, overfuming a print may render it 
unusable. A cyanoacrylate processed print will be a whit-
ish color. At this point, the print may be enhanced suf-
ficiently to allow comparison, but is often followed by 
dusting or another processing, like dye staining. This 
method is useful on a variety of surfaces.
Amido Black—Used to enhance bloody prints. 
Therefore, these prints are not strictly latent, as there is 
usually some visualization of at least a partial pattern in 
order to prompt the use of the amido black. Although 
not specific for blood, this reagent also reacts with the 
proteins found in blood and turns a dark blue/black.
These are just a very few of the methods available, 
and further research is recommended. The processing 
method(s) chosen are most often based upon the sur-
face to be developed, with the two biggest categories of 
porous or nonporous. It is not uncommon to find tape, 
duct or otherwise, that has been used during the com-
mission of a crime. Dry ice, sub-zero freezers, or liquid 
nitrogen may be used to separate layers of tape with-
out damaging latent prints that may be present on the 
adhesive side. Dye-type stains have often been used, and 
there is also a product called “sticky side powder” that 
is now available, specifically for this situation. Various 
methods and combination of methods have been utilized 
to attempt to develop latent prints on human skin, with 
greater or lesser levels of success. Because human skin 
conditions (alive, deceased, submerged in water, decom-
posing, etc.) and the conditions in which they are found 
will vary significantly, there is no standardized method(s) 
for developing latent prints on human skin.
The Chesapeake Bay Division of the International 
Association for Identification (2013) website provides 
an excellent reference list with clickable links that 
detail composition of reagent/method, how to utilize 
the method, the most appropriate materials on which 
the method should be used, along with the positive and 
potentially problematic issues associated with each. This 
reference can be accessed here: http://www.cbdiai.org/
Reagents/main.html.
Photography should always be performed prior to 
any processing or lifting. After an establishing photo-
graph, to show context, a macro lens or setting should 
be used, the print should fill the frame, and the camera 
should be perpendicular to the surface being photo-
graphed. Locations such as light switches, door handles, 
and so on, that may need to be used by crime scene per-
sonnel should be processed and preserved immediately. 
Items that can be removed should be packaged so as to 
prevent any alteration of potential fingerprint evidence 
and submitted to the crime laboratory for processing.
Documentation should include the name or initials 
of the individual collecting the evidence, date/time/loca-
tion of collection, and the case number. If small items, or 
pieces removed from larger items, are submitted, infor-
mation regarding the component’s orientation should be 
submitted (up, down, front, back, compass points, etc.).
1.6.2 Trace Evidence Collection
Arson evidence—Generally comes in two different forms: 
fire debris and liquid samples. Fire debris containing 
possible ignitable liquids should be sealed in new metal 
friction lid containers (paint cans) to prevent the loss of 
vapors to the outside environment. Note that the inte-
rior of the can should be Teflon coated (to guard against 

13
Crime Scene Investigation
corrosion). Liquid samples (flammable or otherwise) 
should be collected in glass jars or vials (never plastic) 
and sealed with Teflon-coated caps. As an added precau-
tion, the jar or vial should be placed into an appropri-
ately sized paint can containing padding material. This 
ensures that in the event of breakage or leakage, the liq-
uid remains contained and avoids possible contamina-
tion of other evidence.
The evidence submitted for explosives analysis con-
sists of pre-blast or post-blast materials. Pre-blast sam-
ples are often small in quantity, and post-blast samples 
typically consist of the remnants of an exploded device. 
Often, explosive residue may exist on the post-blast mate-
rials. The amount of sample that is available will dictate 
the method of collection. Glassine bindles and 1 dram 
vials are ideal for collecting small amounts of powder. 
Larger samples, usually involving post-blast materials, 
can be packaged in metal friction lid containers (paint 
cans).
Glass—There are several different types of glass: 
soda-lime glass is the type most commonly found in 
windows and bottles. PyrexTM is borosilicate glass and 
is more resistant to shock, and heat changes and resists 
alteration by nearly every chemical except hydroflu-
oric acid. Tempered glass is also sometimes referred to 
as “safety glass.” Tempered glass is stronger than typi-
cal window glass and, when broken, “dices” into small 
pieces without sharp edges as opposed to breaking into 
shards with sharp pieces and edges. This glass is com-
monly used in vehicle side and rear windows but may 
also be found in large commercial windows, doors, and 
even shower doors and some home windows, depend-
ing on their location. Laminated glass is what is usually 
found in vehicle windshields and is usually composed of 
two layers of tempered glass, with a high-strength sheet 
of plastic sandwiched in between the layers. This sand-
wich construction increases the strength of the glass, and 
the plastic can hold on to broken pieces upon breaking, 
among other capabilities. What is referred to as “bul-
letproof glass” is usually composed of multiple layers of 
laminated glass.
Glass evidence may be found in a variety of incidents 
such as burglaries, hit and run accidents, and homicides.
Glass evidence may be evaluated for fracture match 
comparison (fitting pieces together, as in a jigsaw puzzle), 
to determine the sequence of events (such as gunshots, as 
a fracture pattern can assist with determining the order 
of shots) or the direction of force or, by their optical and 
chemical properties, comparing fragments found at the 
scene to fragments found on victims or suspects.
Glass evidence should be meticulously documented, 
both photographically, in notes, and sketches. Orientation 
documentation (ex. inside/outside surfaces), in addition to 
documenting whether the fragments were collected from 
the inside or outside and should be packaged separately, 
is extremely important if a direction-of-force determina-
tion will be required. All glass fragments present should 
be collected, as even very small pieces may be able to be 
used in fracture match comparisons (and other testing).
Glass evidence should not be packaged in glass con-
tainers. Container selection will be at the investigator’s 
discretion, depending on the nature and size of fragments 
in addition to the examinations that will be required. Paper 
bindles, coin envelopes, small plastic vials, and puncture-
proof plastic containers are examples that may be used. 
Fragments should be packaged, sealed, and labeled sepa-
rately. Textiles and tools (such as clothing, shoes, bats, 
rocks, etc.) that may contain microscopic glass fragments 
should be handled minimally (wet or bloodstained items 
should be allowed to air-dry first) and then wrapped com-
pletely in paper, sealed, and labeled. More than one layer 
of packaging may be prudent. If size prevents collection of 
all the glass, samples should be collected near the point(s) 
of impact and from distant corners, then packaged, sealed 
and labeled separately. The investigator should also be 
cognizant of other potential evidence that may be pres-
ent, such as blood, hair, or fibers that may be present on 
the glass, and prioritize collection and processing of the 
various types of evidence.
Hair and fibers—Can be valuable in many differ-
ent types of cases, including, but not limited to, rape, 
assault, burglary, hit-and-run, and homicide. Hair and 
fiber evidence can be useful in linking suspects with vic-
tims, places, and/or items.
When hairs or fibers are visible and firmly attached 
to an object:
• They should be left intact and in place.
• Diagram and note the number of hair/fibers and 
exact location of each fiber on each item, in addi-
tion to photography.
• After documentation is complete, label and pack-
age separately and securely to prevent the hair/
fibers from becoming dislodged during trans-
portation, but such that they will be contained 
within the packaging in the event that they do 
become separated from the item.
• Packaging selection should be appropriate for the 
type of item to which the hair/fibers are adhered.
• Labeling should be referenced in notes.
If hair/fibers are visible but loosely attached, or if 
firmly attached to an item that cannot be sent to the labo-
ratory (e.g., due to size):
• Diagram and note the number of hair/fibers and 
exact location of each fiber on each item, in addi-
tion to photography.
• Carefully remove hair/fibers with clean tweezers. 
It would be appropriate to utilize more than one 

14
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
set of tweezers such that one can be wiped with 
disinfectant and allowed to dry while other hair/
fibers are being collected. The exact procedure will 
involve judgment based on number and types of 
fibers being collected, but should always be done 
in a manner that eliminates or reduces potential 
cross-contamination as much as possible, and in 
accordance with departmental procedures.
• Hair/fibers can be packaged in a variety of con-
tainers including but not limited to paper bin-
dles, coin envelopes, and plastic or glass vials 
(that seal tightly). Care should be taken to ensure 
that the hair/fibers do not come into adhesive 
during collection or packaging.
• Label (case, description, location/source, item 
number, date/time, and name of collector) and 
reference in notes.
• Other circumstances may exist where an alternate 
method can/should be employed. For instance, 
if the investigator arrives at a site where a body 
has been dumped, actions like moving the body 
or removing clothing to be sent to the lab can 
cause the loss of hair and fiber evidence. Further, 
perhaps it is a night scene and with limited light-
ing available. The best solution is to tape lift the 
body (or clothing on the body) in situ. If the situ-
ation does not permit the immediate tape lifting 
to occur, then the body is placed in the body bag 
clothed and the body is tape-lifted back at the 
coroner’s office prior to autopsy and the body 
bag is collected for trace evidence examination. 
Tape lifts are labeled according to area (i.e., front 
of shirt, back of shirt, etc.). Tape lifts may also 
be appropriate when there is a large number of 
hairs/fibers, or item is covered in hairs/fibers.
If the victim or suspect clothing may has hair/fiber 
evidence:
• Each item should be diligently kept separate. 
Victim and suspect clothing should be examined 
in different rooms or areas.
• Identification marks should be placed on the 
garment in an easily accessible place that does 
not damage or obscure potential evidence on 
the item. Garment labels are a good location for 
these marks.
• Examine for and avoid disturbing other types 
of evidence that may be present on the clothing, 
such as blood or other biological fluids, soil/dirt, 
dust or other material adhering to the item. If 
other types of evidence are present on the item, 
prioritize what should be enhanced/collected/
sampled prior to packaging using established 
protocols.
• Fold and wrap (dry) articles separately in new 
paper bags or butcher/craft-type paper wrap-
ping. At least two labeled layers are advisable.
To collect hairs/fibers that may be present in the hair 
of victims or suspects, hair should be combed with a new, 
fine-toothed comb over a new piece of clean (preferably 
white) paper. Using care, fold the paper, together with 
the comb, into a bindle, to avoid loss of trace evidence. 
The secure bindle can then be placed into a labeled outer 
wrapping or bag.
Control samples—Should be submitted, as these are 
comparative analyses. For example, if fibers are found on 
the socks or shoes of a victim who alleges being raped in 
a car, samples of the car’s floor mats should be obtained.
Hair control samples—Head, pubic, and animal hair 
control samples may need to be collected, and should 
include the roots. This means that the hairs have to be 
pulled out:
Head: Approximately 50 representative pulled 
head hairs should be obtained optimally includ-
ing hairs from both temple areas, crown, and 
the base of the neck. If there are multiple col-
ors/lengths, samples from each color and length 
should be obtained, and each area, color, and 
length should be packaged and labeled sepa-
rately. Documentation should include the indi-
vidual’s age and overall hair color in addition to 
any signs of hair treatment.
Pubic: Approximately 30 representative pulled pubic 
hairs should be obtained from different parts of 
the pubic area, packaged, and labeled separately 
to include the individual’s name, case number, 
and area from which the hairs were collected, 
along with the CSI’s name/initials and date/time.
Note: If the individual is not deceased, he/she can 
be asked to pull both head and pubic hairs them-
selves in the presence of the investigator.
Animal: Both combed and pulled should be col-
lected, packaged, and labeled separately. Pulled 
hairs should be collected from the head, back, 
tail, and belly areas and include both the coarse 
outer hair and the finer fur hair as well as sam-
ples from all major color areas (if multicolored 
or striped). Each area should be packaged and 
labeled separately to include CSI name/initials, 
date/time, case and item numbers, body area from 
where the sample was obtained, species (cat, dog, 
rodent, etc.), and other available ID information 
for the animal that will distinguish it from other 
animals that may be involved in the case.
Investigators should always exercise extreme dili-
gence and caution when handling suspect and victim 

15
Crime Scene Investigation
items to prevent cross-contamination, as it may not be 
known until sometime later in the investigation if hairs 
or fibers are contained within submitted evidence.
Paint—Paint-chip evidence may be present and useful 
in cases such as hit-and-run incidents, motor vehicle acci-
dents, burglaries, or other incidents involving forced entry 
or the forcing open of safes, cash registers, and so on.
Automobile: Samples should be obtained from 
any areas exhibiting fresh damage on pertinent 
vehicles, collecting all layers down to the metal 
substrate. Although the outer color of the vehicle 
may appear to be the same, there may be dif-
ferent types or compositions in different areas 
on the same vehicle. This is especially true if the 
vehicle is repainted. Optimally, if full-thickness 
chips can be recovered by slightly bending the 
metal and flaking off the sample chips, this is 
preferable. If not, a clean knife blade can be uti-
lized to scrape off a full thickness sample. The 
blade should be thoroughly wiped off, or a new 
blade used between different areas of the vehicle 
to prevent cross-contamination. Samples from 
different areas should be packaged and labeled 
separately.
If cross-transfer is suspected (for example, a hit-and-
run involving more than one vehicle), control 
samples should be taken from areas immediately 
adjacent to each area of transfer collected. This will 
assist in distinguishing the paint that was originally 
on the vehicle from paint that was transferred.
Clothing: Paint transfers on clothing may be very 
small or even microscopic. If the clothing is wet, 
it should be dried (air-dried or drying cabinet) 
before packaging. Avoiding excessive handling, 
carefully fold or roll in paper or place into a new, 
clean paper bag. Again, a second outer wrap is 
advised to prevent loss or contamination if the 
packaging should get damaged or otherwise com-
promised. Loose chips may be collected, packaged 
in paper bindles, and submitted with the clothing 
in order to prevent damage/breakage of the chip. 
Prior to collection, documentation (sketch, notes, 
photography) should be done in order to identify 
the location of the chip on the clothing.
Loose chips: May be located on clothing (as above) 
or on the ground near impact points and should 
be collected and packaged in paper bindles. 
Documentation should include the location from 
where the chips were collected.
Forced entry/burglary: Tools used to gain entry may 
contain paint evidence, in addition to other mate-
rials like drywall, plaster, safe insulation, etc. The 
ends of the tools suspected to have been utilized 
should be wrapped in a paper bag, sealed with tape 
to prevent loss. Consideration should be given to 
other types of evidence that may be present (e.g., 
fingerprints, DNA) and processing prioritized 
accordingly. Samples from all areas that the tool 
is suspected to have been in contact with should 
be obtained and should again be full thickness. 
The tool may also have transferred material onto 
the areas it was utilized; therefore, tool marks 
should be carefully examined for this type of evi-
dence. Never attempt to “fit” the tool into marks 
or impressions at the scene, as this can result in 
additional transfer of materials, rendering subse-
quent analysis useless in terms of significance of 
presence/absence of a particular substance.
If the entire item can be submitted to the lab, this 
will ensure that all layers are present, and is especially 
useful if the specimen is small or difficult to remove.
Paper bindles, small glass or plastic vials with secure 
lids are good choices for packaging this type of evidence. 
Envelopes (bindles may be placed in envelopes) are not 
optimal unless the specimen is of a larger size; however, 
personnel must ensure that all edges are sealed. Likewise, 
plastic bags are not the best choice for this type of evi-
dence, as it can be difficult to remove small chips.
Labeling should include CSI name/initials, date/
time, case numbers, and source information.
Insects—Entomological evidence can be useful for 
several aspects of an investigation, such as postmortem 
interval (PMI), especially in deaths that occurred long 
enough prior where rigor mortis, algor mortis, and livor 
mortis are not very useful in assisting with PMI, if a body 
has been moved/disturbed after death, presence and/or 
position of wound sites, drugs/poisons (entomotoxicol-
ogy), length of neglect or abuse in living victims and in 
wildlife crimes.
Of the major insect groups associated with cadavers, 
blowflies, flesh flies, and house flies are among the insects 
that arrive in the early stages of decomposition. Carrion 
beetles are early to mid-range arrivals, and cheese skip-
pers and dermestids arrive later in the process. The life 
cycle of the fly is the most reliable to assist in determining 
an approximate time of death.
Collect both live and fixed specimens—Several of 
the largest larvae should be collected in various areas of 
the body, in addition to the “wandering” larvae that are 
moving away from the body (can be a radius of several 
feet) to locate an appropriate place to generate pupal cas-
ings. Use anatomical drawings in your notes to document 
where specimens were collected.
Approximately half the larvae should be kept alive 
by placing them into a cardboard container with air holes 
and a small amount of wet cat food or other raw meat. 
Live larvae can be raised/hatched to determine the length 
of the life cycle and speciation determined.

16
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
The other half should be fixed by first immersing in 
water brought to boiling and then heat turned off for 1 
to 5 minutes immediately after collection (hours should 
not elapse from collection to fixing). Then the larvae are 
removed from the hot water and preserved in 70%—80% 
alcohol (ethanol is preferential, but can be difficult to 
obtain, 50% isopropyl alcohol can also be utilized). This 
provides a “snapshot” in the larval growth cycle at the 
time of collection.
Adult flies can also be collected; however, without 
proper equipment (nylon nets), this may be difficult for 
a typical crime scene unit. Adult blowflies can be kept 
alive in a vial with the lid screwed on—no air is required. 
Consultation with an entomologist may be the best 
course of action for this, and advice regarding collection 
and fixation of other insects that may be present, as the 
types of insects found will be unique to the geographical 
area. Likewise, if a qualified entomologist can attend the 
scene, he/she will be able to rapidly discern the most use-
ful specimens.
1.6.3 DNA and Blood Evidence Collection
DNA can be found in all cells of the body that contain 
a nucleus. This includes the cells in blood, saliva (from 
buccal cells and white blood cells carried within saliva, 
as saliva is 99.5% water), hair, semen, vaginal secre-
tions, skin, and sweat. The majority of DNA evidence 
is collected using sterile cotton-tipped swabs, often with 
“ultra-pure” water (distilled/sterile), if the evidence has 
dried on the collection surface. The swabs are then air-
dried and stored frozen prior to analysis.
Fingernail and knuckle swabs are generally collected 
when the decedent appears to have been involved in a 
struggle or altercation. Sexual assault swabs are collected 
from six locations for women and four locations for men. 
Peri-anal, anal, oral, and exterior penile swabs are col-
lected from men. Peri-anal, anal, peri-vaginal, vaginal, 
oral, and breast swabs are collected from women. Buccal 
swabs are generally collected from suspects to analyze as 
a DNA standard.
Current DNA technology has become much more 
sophisticated than the methods originally established 
in this field. Sensitivity levels in the detection of DNA 
have increased to the point the “touch DNA” is being 
collected and analyzed as evidence. These are situations 
where DNA has been successfully recovered from objects 
or victims that have had skin contact with the suspect. 
Other situations where DNA has been identified from 
individuals that have simply spoken while positioned 
over the evidence has led to increased precautions involv-
ing contamination. Individuals in close proximity to 
objects or victims with potential touch DNA are advised 
to wear masks.
With the potential for touch (low copy number) DNA 
to be present on a body for collection, it is important for 
CSI personnel to understand where touch DNA might 
be present for various situations. Collecting knuckle, 
hand, and facial swabs from a decedent who may have 
been in a physical altercation with the suspect prior to 
his death can yield touch DNA. Other potential avenues 
can include swabbing the neck of a victim who has been 
manually strangled or swabbing the clothing of a victim 
who has been moved or dragged. Each case and situation 
is unique. Understanding touch DNA and how it may 
relate to certain situations is a valuable tool when deter-
mining where evidence can be found.
1.6.4 Firearms and Related Collection
Firearms should be unloaded and packaged in an 
 appropriate-sized cardboard box (special crime scene col-
lection boxes designed to package various-sized firearms 
are available for purchase, and examples of Arrowhead 
Forensics tie-down boxes are shown in Figure 1.9) and 
secured in a way to ensure safety and prevent the loss 
of fingerprints, trace evidence, and DNA evidence. Cable 
ties can be used to secure the firearm to the interior of 
the box. In the event that a firearm cannot be unloaded 
(due to damage), precautions must be taken to ensure the 
safety of all personnel involved in the collection, trans-
port and examination of this piece of evidence. Magazines 
FIGURE 1.9 Arrowhead Forensics tie-down weapon 
 storage boxes (http://www.crime-scene.com/store/a-
1070-weapons-storge-box.shtml).

17
Crime Scene Investigation
associated with the firearm should be securely packaged 
with the firearm.
Cartridge cases, cartridges, shot shells, bullets, and 
other firearms-related evidence should be packaged 
separately into individual coin envelopes to ensure that 
potential evidence such as fingerprints, trace, DNA, and 
markings are not lost or obliterated. These coin enve-
lopes can then be consolidated and placed into a master 
envelope for submission.
Gunpowder particles may be difficult to observe due to 
their size. The use of oblique lighting can help in detecting 
their presence. Once located they can be taped or hand-
picked (with gloves on) and transferred into paper bindles.
It is becoming increasingly common that agencies do 
not collect gunshot residue (GSR) from the hands of pos-
sible “shooters.” This is because the probative value is 
not what it once was believed to be, as merely being pres-
ent in the vicinity during the discharge of a firearm may 
result in the deposition of GSR on the clothing or bodies 
of individuals nearby.
TASER devices should also be rendered safe prior 
to collection and packaging by ensuring that the safety 
switch in engaged. Package the TASER with the battery in 
place and secured with cable ties inside an appropriately 
sized cardboard box. Removal of the battery could result 
in the loss or contamination of data recorded during its 
use. Treat the probes as biological sharps evidence and 
packaged in a puncture-proof container. TASER doors 
and AFID (anti-felon identification) tags can be packaged 
in a coin envelope. TASER components can be submitted 
in a master envelope separate from the TASER device.
A tool, as defined by the Association of Firearms and 
Tool Mark Examiners (AFTE) (n.d.) is, “An object used 
to gain mechanical advantage. Also thought of as the 
harder of two objects which when brought into contact 
with each other, results in the softer one being marked”.
Toolmark items are generally separated into two 
broad categories, impressed marks and striated marks, 
along with several subcategories. While the discipline of 
firearm examination is a part of the toolmarks umbrella, 
firearms will be discussed separately, and this section 
will concentrate more on toolmarks such as those created 
by screwdrivers, pry bars, chisels, and so on.
According to the Indianapolis–Marion County 
Forensic Services Agency (2008), Evidence Submission 
Guideline #11:
Impressed or compression marks are produced 
when a tool is placed against an object and 
enough pressure is applied to the tool that 
it leaves an impression in the object. The 
class characteristics (shape) can suggest the 
type of tool used to produce the mark. The 
individual characteristics, if present, can be 
used to identify the tool with the mark.
Striated toolmarks are produced when a tool 
is placed against an object softer than itself 
and with pressure applied, the tool is moved 
across the object producing a scrape. The 
parallel surface irregularities produced by 
this scraping action are known as a striated 
toolmark. These are also referred to as friction 
marks, abrasion marks and scratch marks.
Some toolmarks are a combination of both 
features. Laboratory examinations and 
comparisons of toolmarks recovered from a 
crime scene, with tools from a suspect, can 
often provide conclusive evidence to link a 
specific tool to a specific crime scene. This 
evidence combined with the investigators 
information can sometimes produce 
invaluable links to suspects in a crime.
At a crime scene, toolmark evidence may be found 
in various areas, most commonly entries/exits, windows, 
safes, and so on, where a tool was used to pry something 
open. Additionally, if a tool was used in an assault, there 
may be marks on surrounding objects if the assailant 
missed his/her target.
The CSI should not move doors, windows, and so on, 
where there are toolmarks in a manner that could com-
promise latent fingerprint evidence. The area should be 
documented fully in notes, sketches (to include distance 
from a fixed point and distance above the floor) and pho-
tographs, overall, to show its placement within the scene, 
and close up, with and without scale.
Comparisons cannot be made solely from photo-
graphs, but they may assist an examiner when submitted 
with the evidence.
If the pattern is on a small item, the entire item 
should be submitted to the laboratory, packaged care-
fully to avoid alteration and/or loss of trace evidence that 
may be adhered to the tool.
If the pattern is on an item that cannot readily be 
transported, it may be possible to cut out the section of 
interest. A large enough section above and below the pat-
tern should be included to minimize risk of unintention-
ally altering the pattern.
If the surface containing the mark(s) is painted, paint 
scrapings should be recovered and submitted to the lab-
oratory, as there may be particles that are visible only 
microscopically on the working surface of the tool.
If neither of the above options are viable, a 
MIKROSIL cast may be made (after thorough documen-
tation) and submitted to the laboratory. If there is loosely 
adherent material within the pattern, this should be carefully 
recovered and the pattern processed for latent prints before 
the casting takes place. If more than one cast is made, they 
should be packaged separately, with different item numbers.

18
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
A suspected tool should never attempt to be “fit” 
into the pattern, as this can alter both the pattern and 
tool surface and could result in the loss of trace evidence. 
Likewise, evidence tape should never be applied to a 
tool’s working surface.
Toolmark evidence packaging information should 
include, at a minimum, the orientation of the item (top, 
bottom, front, back etc.), the name or initials of the indi-
vidual who recovered the evidence, date/time of collec-
tion and case number.
1.6.5 Miscellaneous Evidence Collection
When the scene is that of a death, it is important to 
remember that the scene itself is under the purview/
control of the police department, and the body is under 
the purview/control of the medical examiner’s (ME’s) or 
coroner’s office. As a result, evidence collection from the 
body or clothing of the decedent will have to be coor-
dinated between the agencies. The body should not be 
moved or otherwise altered until the ME or coroner 
office permits such movement.
All packaging of evidence should be completed at the 
time of collection during the crime scene investigation. 
However, exceptions are made when dealing with cloth-
ing or bedding that has been saturated with blood, water, 
or other biological fluids. To avoid possible contamina-
tion due to mold and microbial growth, these items of 
evidence should be thoroughly dried before being stored 
frozen. The best method for drying is by hanging indi-
vidual pieces that have been covered on both sides by 
a continuous piece of butcher paper and secured at the 
ends and sides with staples, as shown in Figure 1.10. 
This enables proper airflow while protecting the evidence 
against contamination. Any loose trace evidence material 
will be retained at the bottom paper fold. Plastic trays 
can be placed beneath to collect any excess drippings that 
may occur during the drying process.
Clothing or bedding that is not saturated should be 
packaged individually. An ideal method is to individually 
package each article of clothing for one individual (victim 
or suspect) and then combine these individual packages 
into a master bag for that individual. Victim and suspect 
clothing is always packaged separately. If the article of 
clothing has significant bloodstain patterns that will be 
documented to a larger extent at the laboratory, the arti-
cle of clothing can be laid flat on a piece of butcher paper 
and sandwiched by another piece of butcher paper. The 
article of clothing can then be carefully folded and pack-
aged for transport. The presence of butcher paper ensures 
that the article does not fold onto itself, thus eliminating 
the possibility of the pattern being obliterated.
Footwear and tire-tread evidence can be important in 
many different types of crimes to establish an individual’s 
presence (more accurately, his or her footwear’s presence, 
as it may not be possible to prove that the footwear wasn’t 
used by someone other than its owner) or their vehicle’s 
presence at a scene. Somewhat similar to fingerprint evi-
dence, these can exist in two- or three-dimensional con-
figurations. Two-dimensional patterns are those found on 
solid-type surfaces, such as tile, wood, linoleum, paper 
carpet, clothing, and so on. For example, dirt or blood 
on the bottom of a shoe can be transferred to the floor 
when the individual subsequently walks across it, leaving 
a print of the shoe tread. Three-dimensional patterns are 
those made on softer types of surfaces that deform the 
surface, such as snow, mud, sand, and so on.
A great deal of information may be able to be ascer-
tained from footwear evidence. Some examples include 
identification or elimination of footwear, number of par-
ticipants, confirm or refute statements.
1.6.6 Comparison Samples
Comparison or “known” samples should always be col-
lected and packaged separately from questioned samples.
1.6.7 Presumptive Field Tests
The most common presumptive testing performed in 
the field is for bloodstains; please refer to the Bloodstain 
Pattern Analysis (BSPA) chapter for a review of some of 
the presumptive methods. The appropriate dictionary 
definition (as noted in the BSPA chapter) that applies to 
presumptive field tests is “giving grounds for reasonable 
belief or opinion” (http://www.merriam-webster.com/dic-
tionary/presumptive). This is important to keep in mind 
when conducting presumptive tests and determining their 
significance. A presumptive test does not confirm the pres-
ence of blood, for example. A positive presumptive test 
gives the investigator reasonable belief that the questioned 
substance is, in fact, blood, in order to determine the appro-
priate next step in evidence processing and/or collection. 
FIGURE 1.10 Example of drying technique for wet items 
of evidence.

19
Crime Scene Investigation
Presumptive tests are available in a variety of sensitivities 
and specificities. A very sensitive test means that it can 
detect a very small amount of the questioned substance. 
Continuing with blood as an example, a test with high 
specificity increases the likelihood that the questioned sub-
stance is, in fact, blood. In other words, a specific test does 
not give a positive reaction with many substances other 
than the one for which it is designed (false positives). Tests 
may be sensitive, but not specific, meaning that they can 
detect a small amount of blood, but can cause a positive 
reaction with substances other than blood. Alternatively, 
again continuing with the blood example, tests may be 
very specific, but not very sensitive, meaning that a posi-
tive reaction indicates that the substance is more likely 
blood, but it cannot detect very small amounts of blood. 
The best situation is to have a test that is both very sensi-
tive and specific. The tests utilized will be determined by 
department policy and/or the nature of the investigation.
Presumptive tests for fluids such as semen, saliva, 
urine, and so on, are usually performed in the labora-
tory. However, the CSI may search for and collect sam-
ples of suspected biological stains in the field using an 
alternate light source (ALS). The following link provides 
a convenient resource for the wavelength, eye protection 
and camera filters suggested for various items for which 
the CSI may search: http://www.horiba.com/fileadmin/
uploads/Scientific/Documents/Forensics/fls.pdf.
Additionally, there are some tests for lead or other 
trace metals, hairs/fibers, and drugs that are utilized in 
the field by some agencies. Please refer to the appropriate 
sections.
1.7 CHAIN OF CUSTODY
A properly documented chain of custody, from the 
moment an item of evidence is collected until its presence 
in the courtroom, is critical for successful case resolution. 
One break in the chain of custody can result in critical 
evidence being excluded for use in court at a later time.
A chain of custody form, an example of which can be 
seen at http://www.apd.army.mil/jw2/xmldemo/r195_5/
r195-5f2-2b.png, is utilized whenever an item of evidence 
is transferred, or retrieved for tests/examination/analy-
sis. Documented information should include:
• Name of individual handling/transferring the 
item
• Date and time item was retrieved, transferred or 
otherwise handled
• Reason(s) for handling of item
• Any changes made to the evidence
For items removed for additional photography, for 
example, the package should be opened in an area away 
from the original evidence seal, thereby leaving it intact. 
The item being photographed should be laid out on clean 
wrapping paper for the duration of the examination. 
Then, both the wrapping paper and the original packag-
ing should be included when the item is repackaged. This 
minimizes the potential for loss of trace evidence and 
keeps the original packaging available for inspection, if 
necessary.
1.8 RECONSTRUCTION
If the ultimate goal of crime scene investigation, to be 
able to reconstruct the events that gave rise to the physi-
cal evidence, is kept in mind, it is clear why meticulous 
documentation and attention to detail is critical.
Also important to remember is that not all scenes 
can be reconstructed to the point that an exact sequence 
of events can be determined, as often there may be more 
than one action that could give rise to a given piece or 
set of evidence. The same is true for sequencing events— 
while it is sometimes possible to determine certain parts 
of the overall sequence (e.g., the glass was broken first, 
then the footwear pattern occurred on the broken glass), 
the investigator must be cognizant of the limitations 
of the various disciplines and render only defensible 
opinions.
1.9 CONCLUSION
The material contained in this chapter is meant to be a 
brief overview for guidance rather than a comprehensive 
manual. Each section could be a chapter in and of itself! 
Investigators should always adhere to their agency’s spe-
cific standard operating procedures (SOPs). If deviation 
from established procedures is necessary, the rationale 
for the deviation and approval sought should be well 
documented. Some material is repeated, as it contains 
critical points that bear repeating.
It is always better to take the time to consult with a 
subject matter expert when needed, or contact the labo-
ratory with unusual or complex situations instead of 
improperly or incompletely recovering or documenting 
necessary evidence.
The role of the crime scene investigator is to locate, 
collect, and preserve physical evidence, not to “prove” a 
case. The CSI should remain open-minded and objective 
in order to assure that scenes are processed objectively 
and not lean toward proving the theory that was pre-
sented upon arrival.
Figure 1.11 shows the “Dynamic Evidence Funnel” 
(Rini, 2005), which very concisely shows the overall flow 
of physical evidence from scene to court and the person-
nel involved at each stage of the process.

20
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
A successful crime scene investigation will discover 
sufficient physical evidence to establish the fact that a 
crime has occurred, and that the suspected criminal event 
occurred at a specific place and with certain limitations, 
within a specific time frame. In addition, the physical 
evidence should serve as a means to include or exclude 
individuals who have been implicated or associated with 
the criminal event (Rini, n.d.).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Association of Firearms and Tool Mark Examiners. (n.d.) 
Accessed 3/15/15. http://afte.org/.
Chesapeake Bay Division of the International Association 
of Identification. 2013.  Latent Fingerprint Processing 
Techniques—Selection & Sequencing Guide. Accessed 
2/13/15. http://www.cbdiai.org/Reagents/main.html.
Fisher, Barry A. J. 1993. Techniques in Crime Scene 
Investigation. Fifth Edition. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press.
Indianapolis–Marion County Forensic Services Agency. 
2008. Evidence Submission Guideline #11. Accessed 
2/15/15. http://www.indy.gov/egov/county/fsa/docu-
ments/toolmark.pdf.
James, S. and Nordby, J. 2009. Forensic Science an 
Introduction 
to 
Scientific 
and 
Investigative 
Techniques. Third Edition. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press.
Quality Documents Program. 2006. Accessed 4/15/15. 
http://www.nfstc.org/download/65.
Rini, Gary A. n.d. Crime Scene Investigation Definition. 
Handout.
Rini, Gary A. 2005. Dynamic Evidence Funnel. Handout.
U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 
Laboratory Division. 2001. Processing Guide for 
Developing Latent Prints. Accessed 2/01/15. http://
www.fbi.gov/about-us/lab/forensic-science-commu-
nications/fsc/jan2001/lpu.pdf.
FIGURE 1.11 Dynamic Evidence Funnel. (Courtesy of 
Gary A. Rini, MFS, Gary Rini & Associates.)

21
C H A P T E R  2
Crime Scene Investigation 
in the Underwater Environment
Underwater Forensics
Mack S. House, Jr.
A crime scene is first a medical concern and then a 
legal one.
The recovery of human remains or submerged vic-
tim is no different than any other crime scene inves-
tigation. You still have a crime scene, a victim and a 
suspect.
—Hayden Baldwin, Retired Illinois State Police 
(www.icsia.org)
2.1 CRIME SCENES PROCESSES
When an individual submits an application for the posi-
tion of crime scene technician, there are usually variations 
in the so-called minimum requirements. Depending on 
the geographical location, which plays an important role 
in the talents needed, requirements vary. The applicant 
may be required to have an associate’s degree in crimi-
nal justice or a similar subject; however, the applicant 
CONTENTS
2.1 Crime Scenes Processes 
21
 2.1.1 Plumb and Level 
22
 2.1.2 The Creation of the Human Model 
23
 2.1.3 Prepares Evidence 
23
 2.1.4 Maintains Fingerprint Records 
23
 2.1.5 Conducts Latent Fingerprint Examinations 
23
 2.1.6 Attends Training 
23
 2.1.7 Conducts Training 
24
 2.1.8 Knowledge and Abilities 
24
 2.1.9 Special Requirements 
24
2.1.10 Nature and Scope of Working Conditions 
24
2.1.11 Summary 
25
2.2 Processes Crime Scenes 
25
2.2.1 Maintains Issued Equipment 
25
2.2.2 Prepares Evidence 
26
2.2.3 Maintains Fingerprint Records 
26
2.2.4 Conducts Latent Fingerprint Examinations 
26
2.2.5 Attends Training 
26
2.3 Psychological Considerations 
26
2.3.1 Avoidance 
30
2.3.2 Re-Experiencing 
30
2.3.3 Anxiety 
30
2.4 Processing the Crime Scene 
32
2.4.1 Classification of Evidence 
32
2.4.2 Training 
32
2.4.3 General Course of Study 
33
2.4.3.1 Section I 
33
2.4.4 CSIDT Diver Logbook 
34

22
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
may have enough experience in the field to bypass this 
requirement, provided he or she demonstrates a compe-
tency level equivalent to the degree applicant.
The typical duty description will include the ability 
to process a crime scene in a competent manner. This 
includes the ability to search and recover latent palm and 
fingerprints. Crime scenes will also include trace evi-
dence such as DNA.
Many of the postings for crime scene technicians, 
also known as crime scene investigators (CSIs), found on 
various search engines are vague in their job descriptions.
Again, it comes down to geographical locations and 
size of the department posting the position, for example, 
coastal locations, mountain locations or resort locations.
When one considers discussions involving forensics, 
as it relates to crime scene investigations, one must also 
understand the underlying principles that provide the 
foundation of each element.
When discussing the roles of those involved in crime 
scene investigations, first understand the importance of 
formal education and the subjects required. There must 
be a broad base knowledge that includes both theoreti-
cal and practical problems that must be solved. It is in 
no way teaching the student what to think, or what to 
expect, but rather teaching the student how to think and 
realize that the only constant found in crime scene inves-
tigations is predictable unpredictability.
Protocols and recovery are, in many ways, one 
and the same. However, one must understand several 
principles directly involved with the recovery of the 
submerged victim. Contamination and cross contami-
nation must be understood at all levels. When one con-
siders the “contaminants” found in most rivers, lakes, 
and streams, one must also include variations in human 
disease processes.
What effect does a chemically contaminated under-
water environment have on a particular victim? If the 
victim is taking a prescribed antibiotic, such as metro-
nidazole, a synthetic antiprotozoal antibacterial agent, 
then the “normal” biodegradation or stages of decompo-
sition will change.
The recovery and preservation of an underwater 
crime scene occur simultaneously.
The victim must be handled in such a manner that 
precision and methodology must be thoroughly and 
completely understood. It is true that once an object is 
moved, it can never be placed exactly as it was originally 
found. The same goes for the moving of the victim, and 
postmortem wounding must remain a concern.
Documentation, photographic, video, sketches, 
GPS, the “Take Slate,” and other means of completing 
the process must be done thoroughly, methodically, and 
completely. There are no reasons suitable that could jus-
tify the failure or incomplete documentation of the scene 
completely.
The crime scene diagram, or sketching, is a methodi-
cal process, which should follow the same sequence in 
every crime scene investigation. Typically, the rough 
sketch begins with the outer perimeter of the scene, usu-
ally from an above viewpoint, as if the roof of the build-
ing were absent. Once the outer perimeter is drawn, it 
can then be subdivided into rooms, hallways, and so on. 
Then windows, wall openings and partitions can be 
added. Large furniture and bodies can be added to the 
diagram once each room has been reviewed. A separate 
diagram of each room may be necessary to document 
smaller items.
Measurements should be consistent in each crime 
scene. If an outer wall is used as a beginning point, then 
the outer walls should be the starting point throughout 
the documentation process. In the process of measuring 
distances, it is best to use a retractable tape measure. 
I would discourage using any measuring device that is 
nonporous, such as wood, most plastics, and rubber-
encased measuring tapes. It is important that the measur-
ing device used be thoroughly decontaminated as soon as 
practical. The decontaminant should contain SD alcohol 
as its primary ingredient and be applied a minimum of 
two times. The measuring device should not be retracted 
until the exposed area is thoroughly decontaminated.
If approved by your particular department, generic 
“blueprints” of typical residences, including mobile 
homes and apartments, are always a good source of 
sketching. Rooms, hallways, closets, windows, entry-
ways, and related areas need only have their dimensions 
added. There is an advantage in having the various layout 
styles of blueprints on hand for reference.
Scale is sometimes referred to as measurements; 
however, a scale is a reference to the size of an object 
compared to a known object, for example, a dollar bill 
compared to a handgun. In using a scale, it is best to 
use the same scale or something as close to it as possible 
in every case. If you opt to use a common 25 cent coin 
(quarter) as a scale, then it is easier for you to relate to 
size when questioned on the witness stand. Remember to 
decontaminate the scale you use prior to placing it back 
where you keep it.
2.1.1 Plumb and Level
The plumb and level are additional methods used to show 
elevation and angle of a substance or object. This infor-
mation is needed in situations where gravitational pool-
ing is in question or the splatter patterns of a particular 
substance need clarification. This information is used in 
court as well as the lab to establish the facts of the case 
or methods used to determine or clarify a specific fact 
or question that may be presented. For example, there 
may be a question regarding the position of a victim 

23
Crime Scene Investigation in the Underwater Environment
leaning out of the driver side of a vehicle, if it is unclear 
to the court that the driver side of the vehicle is actu-
ally leaning 27 degrees lower than the passenger side. 
Clarification must be made that further explains that the 
vehicle is in this position because of the vehicle being on 
an embankment. Photographs may not clarify this posi-
tion by themselves regardless of the amount of photos 
taken. A photograph or sequence of photographs, show-
ing a plumb and level in the foreground, which shows a 
view of the vehicle from behind or from the front, will 
clarify the circumstances in which the vehicle was found. 
This in turn gives an explanation as to the position of the 
victim. The plumb and level is a valuable tool since very 
few crime scenes occur on flat land or surfaces.
Every department that I have researched requires the 
ability to sketch a crime scene thoroughly and completely. 
As you may have guessed, documentation is required as 
well. This does not mean that you have a laptop com-
puter with spell check to accomplish your tasks. Your 
ability to take good notes will be an invaluable asset. You 
will always find that the hiring agency requires the ability 
of the applicant to prepare detailed reports using proper 
grammar and punctuation. Of course, you should have 
the ability to communicate verbally and be as articulate 
in written form as well.
2.1.2 The Creation of the Human Model
The human model is a measurement of the victim and 
suspect regarding pant, shirt, shoe sizes, height, weight, 
and so on. This is in addition to full-body photographs, 
verified measurements received from the medical exam-
iner. Weight and stature often play an important role in 
the evaluation process of what took place at the crime 
scene. All the information, including photographs, pro-
vides clarification to the court and jurors regarding the 
actual events that took place. It is the sequence in which 
the events actually took place (when, where, how) and 
precipitating events that bring clarity.
The Human Model procedure may or may not be 
acceptable to your department or lab procedure and 
protocol.
2.1.3 Prepares Evidence
In the process of preparing evidence, the first consider-
ation is to ensure that the crime scene has been thoroughly 
documented, including photographs. Documentation 
should always indicate the location of each piece of evi-
dence, and then the collection and preparation process 
can begin. To be methodical in both collection and prep-
aration, the collection of the most fragile or smallest evi-
dence will usually be the starting point. As long as there 
is an established method, the collection and preparation 
process should go smoothly and completely. Always be 
prepared to photograph evidence that is located under 
the initial evidence. Sometimes this is referred to as 
stacked or layered evidence photography. As long as the 
disassembly or removal is well documented in written 
and photographic form, the technician or technologist is 
doing his or her job.
Always keep in mind that there are no suitable cir-
cumstances in which evidence that may contain moisture 
be packaged in paper or plastic for a period lasting more 
than two hours. Moisture, absence of light and warm 
environment contribute to bacterial growth, which can 
alter and destroy the existing evidence. Packaging evi-
dence that may cross-contaminate each other must be 
placed in separate containers or packages. The prepara-
tion of evidence is dependent on the type of evidence, its 
location, its condition, and the existing circumstances at 
the time of its discovery. Again, it is important to keep in 
mind the potential for contamination of equipment and 
personnel.
2.1.4 Maintains Fingerprint Records
The responsibility of maintaining fingerprint records dif-
fers from one department to another. Each department 
has their own protocols for record keeping, thereby suit-
ing their individual needs.
It is understood by crime scene investigators (CSIs) 
that fingerprint records include fingerprints, palm prints 
and bare footprints. In some cases, ear prints are included 
in this list, and they should be. After all, the outer rim 
(helix) of the human ear is unique from one individual to 
another. Do not forget that each of these prints contain 
oil from the skin which may contain additional evidence.
2.1.5 Conducts Latent Fingerprint Examinations
Fingerprint examination has become so automated that 
it is almost an exception rather than a rule for a tech-
nician to examine latent prints. With so many advance-
ments in the field of forensic science, it seems as though 
technicians’ involvement is not necessary; however, it is 
beneficial for the technician to understand and be able 
to apply the principles of fingerprint identification and 
examination.
2.1.6 Attends Training
In many instances, technicians limit their training to 
the requirements of the department. Most consider 
these training sessions to be the minimum standards for 

24
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
maintaining the required continuing education points; 
however, this mind-set does not benefit the technician 
and his or her ability to excel. In selection and attendance 
of various training topics available, one cannot restrict 
oneself to the minimum requirements of the department 
and expect to be a proficient professional in one’s field. 
In support of this opinion, I offer the obvious differences 
as well as the similarities of the submerged victim and 
the land-based (including shallow-grave) victim. These 
are two completely different environments and circum-
stances, yet there are many commonalities that both 
exhibit.
2.1.7 Conducts Training
For the technician who is selected or required to conduct 
training, he or she must carefully outline the subjects 
to be covered and thoroughly cover the subjects within 
the outline. The subject matter may or may not include 
topics that the attendee is familiar with, and even if the 
subject is known, the training should go well beyond 
the attendee’s current knowledge. The technician that 
is selected to conduct a training session will, or at least 
should, research the subject matter in order to expand 
the current knowledge base. When I was attending 
Anesthesia Technology School, we were required to con-
duct training sessions on a weekly basis, and the attend-
ees included anesthesiologists, anesthetists, and related 
professionals.
Now that is what you might call a bit of peer pres-
sure, but it most certainly prompted us to become pro-
ficient in our knowledge base, training, and speaking 
ability. In the field of anesthesiology, you either know 
and understand what you are doing or you are not in the 
field of anesthesia; it’s just that simple.
2.1.8 Knowledge and Abilities
For the CSI, knowledge and abilities are two separate 
issues. Understanding the abilities of the experts in the 
lab and established protocols regarding evidence does 
not imply that the CSI has the same abilities as the labo-
ratory expert. It is important that the CSI understand the 
lab professionals’ needs and the best methods to achieve 
those needs. It is equally important for the CSI to have 
the ability to investigate the crime scene with the needs of 
the lab in mind. So, the knowledge of what is needed and 
why promotes the abilities and insight of the CSI. For 
example, the CSI knows that the evidence (a handgun) 
should, per lab protocol, not be exposed to sunlight and 
should be kept chilled equal to, or lower than, the tem-
perature in which the evidence was found. Because the 
CSI is knowledgeable regarding lab protocols, he or she 
performs CSI duties in a more conscientious, deliberate 
and methodical fashion.
2.1.9 Special Requirements
In most instances, the special requirements include 
required successful completion of a thorough back-
ground check, physical examination (which may vary 
from department to department), psychological evalu-
ation and of course the dreaded polygraph. This (the 
polygraph) brings to mind what Marcus Aurelius must 
have been thinking when he wrote that the “Character is 
determined more by the lack of certain experiences than 
by those one has had.”
2.1.10 Nature and Scope of Working Conditions
When discussing the working conditions the CSI is 
required to cope with, the list can, from a realistic 
standpoint, be endless. To say that the CSI oversees a 
variety of complex crime scenes is indeed an understate-
ment. The working conditions that the CSI must cope 
with would devastate and sicken most people in today’s 
society. Think of the incomprehensible variables the 
CSI faces in the “typical” homicide investigation. Now, 
let’s add just a bit more to the “list” of working con-
ditions: sexual assaults, home invasions, armed robber-
ies, domestic violence, infant-child and pregnant female 
homicides, death by vehicle investigations, dismember-
ment and burnings, dumping bodies in a river or lake, 
and so on. The variations in each of these examples are 
almost as endless as the examples themselves. In a typical 
8-hour shift, 5.5 hours is spent processing crime scenes. 
In a typical week of 40 hours, 28 hours will be dedicated 
to crime scene investigations. The remaining 12 hours of 
this 40-hour week are spent maintaining equipment, pre-
paring reports, testifying in court, continuing education, 
and reviewing laboratory protocol updates.
CSIs are required to perform their task regardless of 
the circumstances. Crime scene searches often require 
extensive stooping, climbing, reaching, and kneeling 
regardless of the existing weather conditions. The CSI 
is also required to carry, pick up, and handle a variety 
of objects, which will vary in weight, shape, and size. In 
the performance of the CSI duties, the required physical 
and mental challenges that he or she will be exposed to 
are unpredictable and often difficult to manage. Physical 
endurance is important in order to be able to manage 
these requirements; however, one cannot dismiss the 
importance of one’s mental strength and stability. In dis-
cussing the mental strength of the CSI, one must consider 
the advantage and importance of critical incident stress 
management or debriefing.

25
Crime Scene Investigation in the Underwater Environment
2.1.11 Summary
It is obvious that there is a lack of universal standard-
ization, other than the basics, regarding requirements 
for the crime scene technician. Geographical location, 
department size, and crime rate have an impact on the 
criteria necessary to become a non-degree CSI. This does 
not imply that the professional ethics associated with the 
CSI have been compromised; it simply means that a CSI 
in a Midwestern state (population of 650) is not under 
the same pressure as a CSI in New York City. I think it 
would be rather difficult for the New York City CSI to 
transfer to a Midwestern city that has a population of 
650 and perhaps even more so for the Midwestern CSI 
to transfer to New York City. The difference in require-
ments is obvious; never mind the differences in stress 
levels.
From the beginning of processing a crime scene, one 
must not forget the advances in crime scene investigative 
techniques and the technology supporting these advances 
and the crime scene investigative results.
Technology comes twofold for the CSI. The foun-
dation, considered by many, is advancements in medi-
cal research. Next is the support and availability of 
advanced technology in design, capabilities, and selec-
tion of tools that are available to the CSI. Keeping pace 
with these advancements will not be an easy task for 
the CSI because suitability is an integral part of the tool 
selection process.
2.2 PROCESSES CRIME SCENES
The primary difference in the job description between 
the land-based CSI and the CSIDT (crime scene inves-
tigator diver technologist) is the environment in which 
the crime scene exists. There are considerable differences 
between the “liquid” environment and “gas” environ-
ment. The preparation requirements are as different as 
the environments, and the time elements are not the 
same. For the CSIDT, processing the crime scene begins 
at the conclusion, usually at the water’s edge, of the land-
based CSI processing protocols. In other words, once 
CSIs have completed their evaluation and processing 
protocol, the CSIDT begins their processing protocol. 
For example, CSIs stop processing at the water’s edge, 
and CSIDTs begin their processing at the water’s edge. 
Communication between the two teams is imperative 
in order to ensure that the crime scene is thoroughly 
processed.
The search, location, and verification of evidence 
and victim are considerably more complicated, hazard-
ous and time-consuming for the CSIDT than for the CSI. 
For the CSIDT, processing the crime scene is not simply 
recovering the evidence and/or victim, which is nothing 
more than a salvage job. Processing the crime scene is a 
methodical process, just as it is for the CSI.
The location and documentation of all evidence, 
including photographic documentation, is not much dif-
ferent from CSI protocol. The CSIDT does not have to 
contend with the weather to the degree that the CSI does; 
however, the variables that exist in the underwater envi-
ronment can be far more challenging.
The photographic documentation process includes, 
to a degree, the same process that the CSI follows. The 
main differences between the two are that the CSIDT 
may not be able to photograph the overhead view in the 
same fashion as the CSI. The CSIDT photographs the 
victim, making the head of the victim magnetic north for 
diagram reference. He or she will then photograph the 
victim by referencing the eight points of the compass for 
each photograph taken, all of which is done on the hori-
zontal plane. The CSIDT will then photograph the victim 
from above using a protractor-style format, which pro-
vides 0-, 30-, 60-, 90-, 120-, 150-, and 180-degree views 
of the victim. This procedure is repeated, from different 
long axis points, as needed, while maintaining approxi-
mately the same distance from the victim. Evidence, such 
as a handgun, is photographed in like fashion. Unlike the 
CSI, the CSIDT is required to document the depth, water 
temperature, and current where the victim is located. In 
addition to this documentation, water and soil samples 
are taken proximate to the location of the victim. These 
samples are classified as evidence and are processed in 
the same manner as any other evidence. The only excep-
tion to this protocol is that these samples are chilled 
(packaged on ice) to the same or lower temperature in 
which they were located. They may not be exposed to 
sunlight or any heat source while in the possession of the 
CSIDT. The chain of custody, for the CSIDT, is strictly 
adhered to, and release forms, an intricate part of his or 
her CSIDT logbook—a court-ready document—must be 
completed.
2.2.1 Maintains Issued Equipment
There are considerable differences in the equipment 
issued to the CSIDT. The CSIDT does not require items 
like fingerprint powder, swabs, luminal, and so on. 
Conversely, the CSI does not require a diving cylinder, 
EXO-26, “halo” light source, and so on. Other than the 
CSIDT diving equipment, there may be considerable like-
ness in equipment used or needed by the CSIDT and CSI. 
Depending on geographical location and department 
requirements, the equipment may be identical, espe-
cially if the CSIDT serves both land-based and the water 
environment investigations. The decontamination pro-
cedures are also quite different because of the environ-
mental exposure. When one takes into consideration the 

26
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
condition of the victim and the unknown medical condi-
tion in which the victim may be, there is little difficulty 
in understanding the biological concerns. For example, 
if the victim is in the advanced stages of decomposition, 
the CSIDT must process the crime scene per protocol, 
regardless. Since the CSIDT is required to photograph, 
measure, and so on, in great detail, which requires close 
proximity to the victim and being in the same column of 
water, is that not virtually the same as being in the same 
bathtub as the victim? The decontamination process is 
rather extensive and methodical.
In maintaining equipment, the CSIDT follows the 
guidelines as set forth by the manufacturer of each piece. 
This includes but is not limited to life-support systems, 
communication and umbilical lines, environmental pro-
tection, camera, video and closed-circuit TV systems, 
halo lighting systems, and so on. Additional maintenance 
includes DOT (Department of Transportation) hydro-
static testing of diving cylinders as set forth by DOT and 
team protocols.
2.2.2 Prepares Evidence
In the process of preparing evidence, the CSIDT must 
use discretion in many areas. It is not a simple task to 
prepare evidence in a liquid environment. The CSIDT 
must contend with water currents and limited visibility 
but with the slow and deliberate movements necessary to 
prepare the evidence in a responsible manner. Aside from 
the documentation process, the CSIDT must make sure 
that measurements are accurate and that all evidence 
has been photographed. Movement cannot disturb the 
“crime scene,” and since the CSIDT does not use fins, 
as associated with the recreational diver, hand and foot 
movement must be done carefully. The preparation of the 
victim may require bagging the hands (preservation of 
unseen evidence) of the victim and photographing each 
step of the process. The victim is always placed in the 
face-up position prior to taking the victim to the surface. 
It is the discretion of the CSIDT as to whether or not 
the victim is to be placed in containment prior to being 
brought to the surface. Handguns, knives, and like kinds 
of evidence are always contained prior to transporting 
to the surface. All firearms are put into a “SAFE” sta-
tus prior to closing the containment device. Either a CSI 
supervisor or police department supervisor confirms this 
via observation on closed-circuit TV.
2.2.3 Maintains Fingerprint Records
Since the CSIDT is not involved in fingerprinting the 
victim underwater, he or she will supplement this art by 
assisting the land-based CSI as permitted by department 
policy. In maintaining records, the CSIDT will assist the 
CSI in his or her protocol and procedures as established 
by department policy.
2.2.4 Conducts Latent Fingerprint Examinations
The participation of the CSIDT in latent fingerprint 
examination can be either on his or her own or under 
the supervision of a qualified CSI. This largely depends 
on the department protocol and the active position of the 
CSIDT as being employed as both a CSI and a CSIDT.
2.2.5 Attends Training
The CSIDT is responsible for maintaining a minimum 
number of continued education points in both land-based 
and water-based categories. He or she must attend train-
ing classes and or seminars required by their certification 
as a CSIDT as well as the required points as a CSI. As 
a CSIDT, the training requirements include land-based 
training as well as the practical application of training in 
the water environment, for example, mock homicide and 
boating incidents, respectively. In addition to this train-
ing, the CSIDT is required to attend classes on boating 
safety as well as safe diving standards and safe diving 
operations as they apply to the surface support vessel-
diving platform.
Training records are an important part of the CSIDT 
logbook.
2.3 PSYCHOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Although there may be some degree of controversy as to 
the “most practical approach” in dealing with the psy-
chological issues that an individual may encounter in this 
field of study, in my opinion, the following information 
should assist CSI and CSIDT teams in their understand-
ing of just what the heck PTSD (posttraumatic stress dis-
order) and the “Critical Incident Stress Debriefing” is all 
about.
The psychological issues that are associated with 
the CSI’s job description are not a concern that has just 
recently become known. CSI psychological issues are 
often related to those of war veterans, which have been 
studied for many years. When one considers the differ-
ences between the CSI’s circumstances and his or her 
degree of exposure and the CSIDT’s circumstances and 
degree of exposure, one realizes that there are consid-
erable differences between the two. For example, when 
the CSI approaches the crime scene, the crime scene is, 
more often than not, in plain view. When the CSIDT 
approaches the crime scene, he or she is subjected to an 

27
Crime Scene Investigation in the Underwater Environment
environment that has little to no visibility at all. The CSI 
sees the victim from a distance and can view the body 
either continuously or intermittently, whereas the CSIDT 
may not see the victim until he or she is within a few 
inches of the victim and with considerable variations in 
available light or lighting. There is considerable differ-
ence in viewing a victim who is floating on the surface 
and seeing the victim for the first time a few inches away 
in a deep dark and often cold lake or river.
For those who are not aware of the personality 
changes that take place in this line of work, I would 
ask this question: Have you ever noticed how “naive” 
the “newbie” is when he or she first comes on board 
as the new CSI? If he or she is on your team, then you 
will observe, firsthand, the changes this person goes 
through, whether they be gradual or accelerated and 
depending on caseload and circumstance. How often, in 
your observation of a colleague’s newness, have you gone 
back in time, remembering how you were when you first 
started as a CSI or CSIDT? Everything was so new and 
different, and you could not understand how the “veter-
ans” could be so cold or indifferent during the investiga-
tion process. Remember the first time you thought you 
would never stop throwing up? Do you remember your 
first “burned victim”? I am quite sure that you remem-
ber your first infant or child investigation. Do you recall 
the unbelievable odor that your uniform had when you 
picked it up to put it in the laundry right after taking a 
rather lengthy shower? I bet you made sure it smelled 
nice when it was all done, not that you would have taken 
a “sniff” before you placed it in the dryer and again 
when you took it out to hang up. But after all that wash-
ing, drying and sniffing, didn’t it have just a little bit of 
odor remaining?
Better wash it a second time just to make sure. After 
all, you would not want to go to work and have some-
one say that you smelled like a morgue or some sort of 
body fluid. Did you find it easy to freak out the newbie 
by sending him or her on a wild goose chase or having 
him or her do things you figured you had done too many 
times already? Perhaps a victim who was in the advanced 
stages of “decomp” was too much to let pass by for the 
newbie.
The newbie seems so innocent and so trusting with 
good intentions, yet there is something about him or her 
that makes you wonder about yourself. You try to hide 
these thoughts by making jokes, poking fun at someone, 
complaining about your next assignment, and being on 
guard with every question the newbie asks.
You may even find yourself doing something wrong 
that the newbie points out, but, by gosh, that doesn’t 
make any difference at that point, because you are the 
senior CSI or CSIDT and it’s done your way. Then you 
begin to sort things out, desperately trying to figure out 
a way to correct the mistake by weaving it into some new 
protocol or procedure that you decided to use on this 
particular investigation.
Each of us can “remember when,” but how much, 
within our own personality, has changed since the 
“when?” Sometimes in looking back, it is difficult to 
imagine how you did some of the things you did, and 
how many times you could have been hurt or even killed. 
Between the changes in protocol and the advances that 
have been made in the past 5 years technologically, it is 
a bit scary to think about all the diseases you have been 
exposed to, not counting the ones you are not aware of. 
Have you ever wondered why you have become such 
a critic when watching one of the CSI movies or TV 
shows? You catch things that no one else would have a 
clue about, and then they wonder how you saw it and 
they didn’t. Of course you are too critical when watching 
the show or movie, and soon you find that people would 
rather watch it without you being there or hearing your 
“big word” comments.
Depending on how seasoned you are, at some point 
in time, you have probably had days that you wish never 
started. There are as many variables and differences in 
experiences as there are people who read this book or 
any other. Everyone has their own experiences and ways 
of dealing with them. Sometimes it is a bit unnerving to 
think back on some of these experiences for many rea-
sons. One of the first lessons we learn in this line of work 
is what I call predictable unpredictability. If one keeps 
this thought in their mind when going to a crime scene, 
there will be very few, if any, surprises to be found. Some 
of them are good experiences, but some of them are very 
uncomfortable to recall or remember. For many of us, 
there are some we would rather forget entirely but, for 
some reason, they will resurface every now and then. You 
finally learn how to shrug these thoughts off, or so you 
think, only to realize that every time they reoccur they 
are different. The longer you are in this field of work, the 
more memories you accumulate. Even though some are 
good and others are “bad,” the accumulation of these 
memories can and often does have a negative effect on 
your personality and attitude. I suppose that you could 
refer to this as sort of a “CSI psychological effect.”
In the process of developing a basic understanding 
of the long-term effects, psychologically, of what the CSI 
and CSIDT have to deal with, also understand the pri-
mary difference between the CSI and the CSIDT. The 
CSI, or “land-based” crime scene investigator, is in the 
company of several people and often has many distrac-
tions to deal with, which may offer a break in their 
train of thought or documentation process: the kidding 
around, shaking hands every now and then, and idle chit-
chat, as it were, are all distractions of a sort. The CSIDT, 
on the other hand, is in an environment which offers few 
if any distractions, and he or she must document, in fine 
detail, the victim.

28
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
You cannot turn around and chat with one of the 
police officers or medics on the scene or walk up and give 
someone a big hug. The only communication the CSIDT 
has is with their communications person and their fel-
low diver or divers. The only other sounds they hear are 
their breathing and exhaust bubbles. Visibility is often 
very limited, and their environment is often very cold and 
indifferent. Under these conditions, they must search for, 
locate, evaluate, photograph, and begin their documen-
tation process. They must avoid drifting into the victim, 
which happens all too often, and at the same time try 
to avoid the body fluids that surround the victim. The 
CSIDT does not have the opportunity to observe the 
victim from a distance prior to the victim’s documenta-
tion process. More often than not, the victim may not 
come into view until the CSIDT is within 5 feet of the 
victim, and that is on a good day. CSIs are never “blind-
folded” until they are within a few feet of the victim and 
most certainly are not subjected to some animal or other 
creature exiting the body because of their presence. The 
CSIDT is in a completely different world with many dif-
ferent situations to deal with and the understanding that 
the only predictable circumstance they will encounter is 
unpredictability. The TV shows and movies that portray 
the CSI are a total departure from reality. The CSI and 
CSIDT are not in search of or interested in ratings, or 
how “hot” they look; crime scene investigations, foren-
sics, is a science that has no time or interest in such self-
centered ideology. For the CSI or CSIDT, there is one 
constant, whatever it is, it is. The circumstances are as 
they are and the job they are there to do, they do regard-
less of the circumstances. We don’t have people lined up 
for an autograph or some ridiculous photo shoot at the 
end of our day or shift, but when we have finished our 
day, there is a quiet and humble sense of accomplishment 
that “ratings” cannot buy. Autographs and photo shoots 
would actually be more of an insult than a compliment. 
The job of the CSI and CSIDT, can be very lonely and 
often you feel alone; however, each of us chose this field 
of study, and by gosh we should be proud of our indi-
vidual accomplishments.
So, what is the best way to approach or discuss the 
obvious psychological effects of being a CSI or CSIDT? 
There are as many opinions as there are books on this sub-
ject. To say or advocate one set of solutions over another 
would be unfair to the reader. Psychology is not an exact 
science and from the research I have done regarding this 
subject, there is no single or simple answer.
So, for the sake of discussion, just what exactly is 
this so-called Critical Incident Stress Debriefing?
First, a “critical incident” could be a common occur-
rence such as an officer having to shoot a suspect in 
self-defense. Although such an incident sounds rather 
“simplistic,” it is not. One must consider the psycho-
logical effect such an incident has on the officer. Almost 
any type of event that causes a distressing or profound 
change in one’s physical or psychological well-being will 
alter, to some degree, their emotional state. Sometimes 
strong emotions are attached to an event that will either 
inhibit their ability to function in a “normal” capacity 
at the time of the event, or be delayed till a later time, 
depending on the individual.
From a clinical point of view, certain traumatic events 
and the impact that they may have on an individual are 
reasonably predictable. Exposure to a critical incident, 
long term or short term, often has a considerable impact 
on that person’s ability to function in a “normal” capac-
ity. The first documented cases of traumatic stress go back 
to military personnel who had been involved in combat. 
At that time, the term used to describe the psychological 
effects was “transient situational disturbances.”
The term “short-term crisis reactions” has been used 
to identify individuals or groups who had been exposed 
to events such as domestic violence, child abuse, rape 
(male and female), violence in the workplace, floods and 
industrial fires.
As it turns out, the term “debriefing” referrers to a 
specific technique designed to help individuals in deal-
ing with psychological as well as physical symptoms that 
are associated with one’s exposure to a critical situation 
or event. Debriefing also assists the individual in recog-
nizing the proper way in which he or she vents frustra-
tions, thoughts and emotions: in other words, to assist 
the individual in the way in which they process the event 
and proper reflection on the impact that the incident has 
or is having on them. The short-term crisis reaction may 
also be referred to as a catastrophe of emotion, which 
includes denial, rage, confusion, humiliation, grief, and 
suicidal/homicidal thoughts.
Individuals and their personalities, experiences and 
predispositions they may have, psychology, is as varied 
as a group of fingerprints. Place 100,000 fingerprints on 
a billboard, and they all look the same, yet there are dis-
tinct differences in each one of them. If there is a “sup-
port group” for PTSD, critical incident stress or similar 
“disorder” that you have given thought to attending, I 
will offer this advice:
• Understand the goals of the program. This 
could include something similar to a twelve-step 
program.
• Get into an employee assistance program or find 
a counselor who specializes in this “disorder” 
and one who fits your personality and needs.
• Stick with the program and follow the advice of 
your counselor.
• Do not get involved in what is referred to as 
thirteen-stepping. “Thirteen-stepping” is a 
term used in other organizations that implies 
that a person is there for the purposes of, to be 

29
Crime Scene Investigation in the Underwater Environment
politically correct and very subtle, “pro-creative 
dating.” The “thirteen stepper” has no intent 
of following the program. This is quite preva-
lent in many programs, and these people will do 
nothing more than complicate and/or destroy 
your life.
Marcus Aurelius said it best when he wrote, 
“Through not observing what is in the mind of another, 
a man has seldom been seen to be unhappy; but those 
who do not observe the movements of their own minds 
must of necessity be unhappy.”
From this point, we will review some of the latest 
research regarding the subject of posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) and critical incident stress debriefing.
PTSD as well as Critical Incident Stress are disorders 
that can be associated with any overwhelming life expe-
rience, especially since many of the “events” we encoun-
ter are those which are unpredictable and beyond our 
control. This includes the witnesses of the event who are 
not directly involved, such as bystanders and yes, fam-
ily members as well. In every journal and study I have 
reviewed, the groups who are always included in the 
“statistical information” are law enforcement and EMS 
(emergency medical services), which includes CSI and 
support personnel.
When one considers all things, that is, the appearance 
and condition of most victims, the evidence and docu-
mentation requirements, and the time spent photograph-
ing and the detail in which all of the documentation must 
be done, they all add up! All too often, the result is the 
investigator has a bad attitude that she/he has become 
complacent or coldhearted in her or his job. Is this a real-
istic observation by peers or supervisors? No. More often 
than not, it is a sign of being, as they say, “burned out.” 
Why not refer to this condition as stressed out? “Stressed 
out” is ambiguous term and does not identify the real 
issue, which is often hidden. In other words, it is more of 
a slang term used when the real issue is unknown. Having 
a “bad day” is also a term generally used in the place of 
stressed out, depending on the circumstances.
On average, a relatively short “recoup” time is neces-
sary to alleviate this problem. The issues that brought 
about the stress are transient and have very little impact 
on any individual.
Being burned out is considered by most psycholo-
gists to be totally different. The fact that people use 
both terms to describe an individual’s “day” does not 
clarify the differences between the two. This term is 
used more metaphorically than descriptively. The best 
way to define burnout is to consider the accumula-
tion of emotional distress that is imposed on anyone 
involved in this field. Psychologists will often refer to 
the accumulation of this type of stress as posttraumatic 
stress disorder, or PTSD. Further, when afflicted with 
this disorder, one loses one’s perspective to the point 
of becoming negative and withdrawn. Think of it this 
way: the scenes that you will be exposed to, rather inti-
mately, would physically sicken the “normal” person. 
Exposure, at this level, to some of the most heinous 
crimes within the grasp of anyone’s imagination, is, in 
and of itself, psychologically damaging. The facts and 
details involved in a given case often leave the news 
media in some protected fairytale world. The grotesque 
scenes that you will be dealing with are “normal” work-
ing conditions. There is no such thing as prepping the 
victim prior to your observation. You will be observing, 
documenting, photographing, touching and  moving 
these victim(s) and/or their body parts several times 
before the next assignment! If that sounds too “matter- 
of-factly,” then include, within the documentation pro-
cess, the sight, sounds that will obviously occur, the 
smell or odors that you will encounter, the taste and the 
touch that you will have to endure, repeatedly.
Is there any wonder, then, that the families of the CSI 
and CSIDT are perhaps the most affected because of the 
nature of the job? All too often, the family winds up being 
last on the priority list instead of being first. The accu-
mulation of crime scenes becomes overwhelming and the 
effort to block out or forget what they are being subjected 
to takes quite a toll. Because there are so many issues to 
deal with  —for example, victims’ families, the separation 
between her/his family and the victim’s family—every-
thing becomes so minute that the issues often “merge.”
Any individual who is being “pessimistic,” as they 
say, can, and often does, become the victim of an “insidi-
ous infection.” The hopeless feelings and frustration that 
are all too often associated with this sort of depressive 
state of mind are almost predictable. Although it is true 
that different individuals deal with circumstances differ-
ently, the psychological pattern in this line of work has 
its own, unbiased, unique form.
Another perspective—the individual who has to 
go off to war will see, firsthand, a degree of devasta-
tion and blatant disregard for human life that is beyond 
comprehension.
More often than not, the individual had no idea 
that such horror existed in this world other than what 
he or she had seen on edited television or at the mov-
ies. For those involved in the field of forensics, which 
is reality and not some choreographed television show 
or movie, the same types, different causes, of devasta-
tion will occur, but over a longer period of time and in 
much smaller portions. Every single day that you are on 
the job brings different circumstances, different events, 
different cultures to deal with, different environments, 
different attitudes, and so on. All these issues change 
to some degree with every season and of course, the 
“full moon” nights seem to bring about weird events 
regardless.

30
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Nonetheless, there remain psychological circum-
stances, some of which are beyond one’s control. The 
important issue or question here is, what are the best 
treatment options available for those of us who are 
involved in this field of work and are required to do the 
things that our jobs require?
Studies that have been conducted over the past ten 
to fifteen years have shown that psychological debriefing 
has become popular and has been adopted by many set-
tings or groups; however, the evidence regarding its use, 
according to these studies, and the benefits derived from 
debriefing is indeed lacking. It is important to understand 
that the primary difference between those of us who go 
on to develop PTSD and those of us who do not is based 
more on how we individually “cope” with trauma.
It is important that the CSI and CSIDT understand 
that traumatic experiences will produce some degree 
of aftereffects. Since this line of work exposes an indi-
vidual to repeated experiences with varying degrees of 
psychological trauma, being diagnosed with PTSD is 
not uncommon. The team’s primary physician should 
address preventative measures and established protocol 
guidelines regarding “counseling” and alternative ther-
apy options that have proven to be effective.
I would again suggest that the team consider a hos-
pice organization for input and suggestions. Hospice is 
the best source I have found which may provide a realis-
tic solution and most certainly positive feedback regard-
ing this issue.
There are three main types or classifications of 
PTSD, and the list given here does not imply that these 
classifications appear or occur in any particular order.
Also, keep in mind that these are examples and do 
not include individual responses to PTSD, because to say 
that any particular response is “typical” or “common” 
is not true.
2.3.1 Avoidance
• Feeling emotionally “detached” or complacent 
with others
• Avoiding circumstances and feelings or activities 
that may remind you of certain circumstances or 
events
• Inability to forget or set aside particular events 
that have occurred
• Seclusion and the loss of interest in activities you 
once enjoyed and to a degree, life in general as it 
“used” to be
• An overwhelming sense of loss regarding your 
future
• Your inability to keep your job or perform in a 
“normal” capacity
2.3.2 Re-Experiencing
• Memories of a certain event, whether they are 
vague or specific.
• Scary physical responses, because they are unfa-
miliar and come without warning, to even subtle 
reminders of an event (e.g., suffocating feeling, 
pounding heart, lightheadedness, nausea or 
diarrhea, muscle tension and sometimes a burn-
ing sensation in your legs or arms, feeling cold or 
sweating for no apparent reason)
• Nightmares (waking up to a particular “sound” 
or “feeling” something next to you)
• Feelings of intense distress because of uncertain 
feelings
2.3.3 Anxiety
• Fight-or-flight mind-set, or, as some call it, 
always on “red alert”
• Inability to slow down your thoughts, which 
leads to difficulty falling asleep
• Difficulty in your ability to focus or concentrate
• Agitation and irritability which may lead to out-
bursts of anger or hostility
• Always on edge or uncontrollable, having mixed 
feelings and being easily startled
Some of the more common symptoms or complaints 
found in the posttraumatic stress disorder patient include 
the following:
• Headaches, stomach problems that may lead to 
GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disorder), non-
specific chest pain
• Hypochondria or feelings that something is 
physically wrong without a well-founded reason
• Dramatizing certain situations to an unrealistic 
level
• Overstating events or adding to an event
• Panic attacks
• Almost always short-tempered and irritable
• Shame, or blaming ones self for the outcome of 
certain events or circumstances
• Alcohol and/or drug abuse
• Different levels or degrees of depression and 
unrelenting feelings of hopelessness
• Suicidal thoughts and/or feelings which may or 
may not instill fear instead of consideration 
or intent to follow through with these thoughts 
or feelings
• Feelings of being alone or that no one cares
• Feelings of being betrayed and mistrusting others

31
Crime Scene Investigation in the Underwater Environment
Under “normal conditions” a traumatic event or series 
of events that lead a person into the posttraumatic stress 
disorder are those who have a single encounter, such as in 
the 9/11 incidents or witnessing a homicide. Both can be 
considered overwhelming and, depending on the individ-
ual, frightening. The only difference between people who 
immerse themselves in the event by continually “replay-
ing” the event and those who do not immerse themselves 
in the event, is dependent on how well they “cope” with 
the trauma. All too often, people will dwell on a given 
event to the point of either obsessing on it or allowing it to 
control their life. In any event, it is best to psychologically 
arm yourself with as much knowledge and understanding 
as possible in order to prevent or at least understand and 
be aware when something is getting the best of you.
Being aware of what may happen if certain things go 
unchecked is a positive step in the right direction, and 
one you will never regret.
It would be incorrect to say or imply that there is a 
specific “combination” or recipe that will prevent PTSD 
or like kinds of disturbances. As in almost any kind of 
therapy, your choice should be a therapist that fits you 
and your personality: someone who specializes in PTSD 
and understands you and your specific, unique needs, 
that is, investigating multiple homicide victims.
It is important that you, as an individual, understand 
that if you try to suppress your memories, they will even-
tually get the better of you. Just when you think you have 
everything under control (an illusion), the panic attack, 
depression or any of the symptoms will reemerge with 
vengeance.
The part of PTSD that will not be apparent right 
away is the harm it is causing your friends and family 
and your ability to function in your job.
Whatever you do, do not be the “suck it up” or 
“macho” kind of person who has all the control and 
does not need help. If you should ever become or feel that 
way, then it is already apparent that you need help sooner 
rather than later. When someone tells you that PTSD, 
anxiety, depression, and so on, is not a sign of some sort 
of weakness, they are telling you the truth because it most 
certainly is not. There is a method in conducting a crime 
scene investigation both on land and underwater. There 
is a sequence of events that must take place in order to 
establish a reasonable outcome. When it comes to issues 
regarding PTSD, the same circumstances apply. There is 
a method, a step-by-step process, that one should follow 
in order to alleviate the overwhelming feelings associated 
with PTSD. You had a FTO (field training officer) when 
you first began crime scene investigations, and it was he 
or she who guided you through the “hoops,” as it were. 
Well, when it comes to PTSD, the same process should 
be followed. Your therapist or physician is your FTO to 
guide you through the hoops. You have the guidance, 
support and respect of a colleague, and a light at the end 
of the tunnel.
Consider three good, sound reasons for seeking the 
help and advice of a physician and/or therapist.
• Health-Related Problems—Who hasn’t heard 
on every radio and TV about the impact that 
stress has on your heart and body as a whole? 
Exercise, good diet, and a better lifestyle will 
decrease your risk of heart disease. There have 
been studies that have shown a direct relation-
ship between PTSD and heart trouble. Anyone 
experiencing these symptoms should certainly 
understand why there is a link between the two. 
Do a little research on depression as it relates to 
the immune system, and you will begin to under-
stand that PTSD is not a simple side effect of 
your job description. In fact, there is nothing 
simple at all about PTSD.
• Early Treatment—The sooner you recognize that 
you may have a problem with PTSD, the sooner 
you should seek help. As a matter of fact, if a 
co-worker thinks you are getting stressed out, 
then be smart enough to at least consult your 
physician or therapist. The one thing that can 
be worse than being stressed out today is to be 
stressed out again tomorrow. Everyone’s treat-
ment is different, and each treatment requires 
the careful and methodical treatment of these 
unique needs by a well-qualified person, some-
one who truly understands and someone who 
shows compassion. There are some great thera-
pists who are very well qualified to help those 
who are in this line of work.
• Family Life—There should be no question 
regarding the impact that PTSD has on family 
as well as friends. Have you ever been around 
someone who is depressed or cynical more often 
than not? And how much fun was that? Did you 
stay around that person for very long periods of 
time? How about having a friend or acquain-
tance that was a wreck because of a divorce?
Always negative and complaining, never mind being 
condescending toward just about every one they see or 
meet. Having to deal with these sorts of issues, when it 
is a loved one, is entirely different and yes, it does have 
quite an impact on the family as a whole. To think that 
you can hide your PTSD issues is an illusion that you 
share with no one other than yourself.
Self-delusion is part of PTSD, and you can change that 
if you seek the right help and stick with the right program. 
Your therapist is your teacher as well as your sounding 
board, and once you establish a working relationship with 

32
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
him or her, things will change without your realizing it. It 
works; I assure you it does because no one can work in this 
field for any length of time and not be affected.
Constant exposure to dangers will breed contempt 
for them. 
—Seneca
2.4 PROCESSING THE CRIME SCENE
As most job position postings would have it, there are many 
questions involving the position requirements and duties. 
There are few, if any, postings at this point in time that 
list positions for the “Crime Scene Diver Technologist.” 
When departments or organizations begin posting these 
positions, I hope they are a bit more specific. There is just 
too much ambiguity in job position postings at this time.
I would like to take a bit of time to “review” one of 
the typical postings that anyone may come across.
Process crime scenes to include the search and recov-
ery of trace, DNA and other physical evidence. Take 
photographs and prepares sketches and reports for 
presentation in court and provide court testimony.
Five people can read the same requirement, and it is 
more than likely you will have different interpretations 
from each individual.
This is not a bad thing, mind you, but how many 
people would pick up on the key words, “presentation” 
and “testimony,” when referring to court proceedings? 
Please understand that “presentation” does not mean 
that you simply show up, take a seat on the witness 
stand, and show them what you have. Testimony is not 
simply stating the facts that you know because you are 
also going to be cross-examined and questioned regard-
ing your findings and every reference imaginable regard-
ing your evidence and chain of custody, to name a few. 
Unless you have had to testify in a court proceeding, I 
suspect that you are not aware of the true meaning of 
accountability and listening.
Always remember that a CSIDT has considerable 
accountability, especially in the presentation and expla-
nation of evidence she or he presents to the court. Part of 
that accountability is, in fact, to know and understand 
every possible aspect of each and every item of evidence 
you are accountable for before it is presented.
The process of “sketching” is different in that the use 
of a “compass rose” and topographical maps are com-
mon criteria. They afford a more descriptive format, 
which includes information not commonly used by sur-
face investigations. An example of this information is 
the topography of a given body of water, which includes 
depth indicators and shoreline parameters. Reference 
points are often included within this classification of map 
as well as scale and legend. Maritime (“marine”) “plot-
ting maps” include various information sources which are 
helpful in the documentation process. A copy of the map 
may be included with other documentation material. This 
will aid in the “reconstruction” (triangulation) of a case 
if needed in the future, that is, a case that is “reopened.” 
These elements are an intricate part of the evidence log.
2.4.1 Classification of Evidence
There are 10 primary classifications of evidence the 
CSIDT should relate to during the crime scene process. 
Understanding each one, as each applies to each individ-
ual crime scene, is an invaluable asset.
• Admissible evidence is any evidence a judge 
finds, or accepts as being useful in determining 
the facts presented.
• Circumstantial evidence is any evidence that is 
presented in a trial setting that does not origi-
nate from an “eyewitness.”
• Corroborating evidence is any form of evidence 
which confirms or strengthens existing evidence.
• Demonstrative evidence refers to an actual 
object, such as a photograph, sketch, or other 
media, which is an accurate representation of the 
facts as presented.
• Documentary evidence is any paper or document 
presented into evidence, provided it meets the 
requirements as set forth in the rules of evidence.
• Preponderance of the evidence, associated with 
civil trials, refers to the greater weight of the evi-
dence as required in a civil court case.
• Evidence Suppression is any evidence the presid-
ing disallows.
• Tainted evidence, associated with criminal 
court, is any evidence or information that has 
been obtained illegally, for example, through an 
illegal search. Tainted evidence is also referred to 
as “fruit of the poisonous tree.”
• Evidence weight verifies value and believability 
in the evidence that has been presented.
• Incontrovertible evidence is that which is so con-
clusive that there can be no other truth to the 
matter.
2.4.2 Training
The terms “diver” and “diving team” refer to the crime 
scene investigator diver technologist (CSIDT) and the 
CSIDT support personnel.

33
Crime Scene Investigation in the Underwater Environment
When most agencies address “training” issues, they 
are somewhat vague in their requirements. It is common 
to see the phrase “attends training on a variety of forensic 
topics annually,” which is open to too much interpreta-
tion by the employee. When it comes time to address this 
statement, “attends training on a variety of forensic top-
ics annually,” I will always reply by saying, “This does 
not mean that you are required to attend training once 
or twice a year. This means that for your benefit and 
knowledge base as a CSIDT, you need to attend as many 
training classes as you can on a wide variety of subjects 
that relate to your job, in what you do.”
Diversity is a good thing but you must be, out of 
necessity, a bit more job-specific. Yes, it is imperative to 
attend training classes on forensic topics, as that is part of 
your job description as a CSIDT, but equally important is 
to achieve safe diving operation protocol and standards. 
There are actually two jobs involved with the CSIDT:
• First, crime scene investigations
• Second, training as a commercial scientific diver 
specializing in crime scene investigations
Training includes but is in no way limited to the 
following:
• Diving on simulated crime scenes, multicasu-
alty boating accidents, multivictim motor vehi-
cle accidents, i.e., school bus that has run off a 
bridge or into any water environment.
• Circumstances and situations, including poten-
tial contamination, the diver may face in any 
given crime scene situation.
• Job hazard analysis or evaluation.
• Specialized diving equipment.
• Specialized crime scene equipment, specifically 
designed or modified for underwater use.
• Review of diving time table protocols, e.g., 
U.S. Navy no-decompression timetables. This 
includes RN (residual nitrogen) time tables as 
well.
It is to the benefit of all concerned to consider work-
ing with the Coast Guard Auxiliary, Wildlife Officers, 
Police Boating Enforcement, ALE and other agencies 
to advance the team concept while increasing the team 
member’s knowledge base.
For example, have you ever considered attending one 
of the classes offered by hospice organizations? Well, 
if not, I suggest you reconsider. The information and 
insight regarding the death and dying patient is invalu-
able because it affects you as a human being with feelings, 
admittedly or not. After all, is it not to your advantage 
to be well versed in this part of life? It is not uncommon 
to be approached by family members, usually when you 
are not suspecting that the people near you are part of 
the deceased’s family. Attending such classes will also 
help you to deal with the issues you face in the life/death 
process. Hospices are wonderful organizations with a 
variety of services, and they are so accommodating to 
those with questions and or concerns. Your department 
or organization should consider attending hospice train-
ing a prerequisite or at least include this course in CE 
requirements.
2.4.3 General Course of Study
The minimum requirements, as a general course of 
study, based on OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration), U.S. Coast Guard and Environmental 
Protective Agency guidelines. These guidelines are very 
specific and implemented as part of the on-site team 
safety manual. Any modification to these minimum 
guidelines is on the verifiable side of safety.
2.4.3.1 Section I
Minimum Requirements:
• Each team member must maintain a current 
certification, by an accredited agency (e.g., 
American Red Cross), in emergency first aid, 
which shall include basic life support.
• Each team member who is subject to hyperbaric 
conditions shall be required to take and satisfac-
torily complete courses in human anatomy and 
physiology.
• The team “standby diver” is required to be a 
designated CSIDT. However, in such a circum-
stance, the standby diver may not be involved in 
any crime-scene-related procedures but still be 
required to pass the CSIDT diver training.
• The surface support communications officer is 
not required to be “diver certified.” However, 
the communications officer is required to main-
tain and test all communication systems—
e.g., radios, cell phones, licenses if applicable, 
diver communication systems, all vessel light-
ing systems, and day shapes and night light-
ing (OSHA)—and be well versed in safe diving 
operations.
• The team safety officer must have and main-
tain current certification, as a minimum, as an 
Emergency Medical Technician–Intermediate 
and have on board a copy of the emergency med-
ical manual and applicable medical equipment.
• The team’s designated person in charge must 
be current in their training as a CSIDT, which 
includes having a current and up-to-date CSIDT 
Diver Log Book and being well versed in all 

34
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
aspects of assigned diving operations, safety 
protocols, vessel safety as mandated by the 
U.S. Coast Guard and established emergency 
procedures.
• The Team Surface Support Pilot must be current 
in approval for piloting as well as maintaining 
safety inspection of such vessel by the U.S. Coast 
Guard Auxiliary or other certifying agency. 
A current copy of Chapman’s Piloting and Team 
Safety Manual shall be on board the vessel at 
all times. The surface support vessel pilot is in 
charge of all vessel operations and movement, 
and responsible for maintaining a log of all 
maintenance, repairs and motor hours.
2.4.4 CSIDT Diver Logbook
The CSIDT diver logbook is considered a court-ready 
document that pertains to a particular case. The CSIDT 
diver logbook also provides a documented history of pre-
vious investigations as well as training. The CSIDT diver 
logbook contains the diver photograph, positive identi-
fication, medical history, inoculations, medication his-
tory, latest physical exam, and examining physician. As 
a court-ready document, the CSIDT logbook contains the 
incident referral number or case/complaint number, which 
identifies a particular case or investigation. There is an 
attachment to the CSI who was involved in the case by 
including the CSI’s name and identification number. The 
CSIDT logbook should be kept in a safe location, and if 
the team-training officer or medical examiner wants to 
make a copy of a particular page of the book for refer-
ence to a particular case, the copy must comply with the 
rules of evidence. All pages must be bound and all pages 
must be numbered. Three-ring binders, for example, are 
not permitted.
In conclusion, the Crime Scene Investigator Diver 
Technologist is one of the most professional and well-
trained divers in the industry. Well versed in matters of 
legal proceedings, rules of evidence, chain of custody, 
documentation, safe diving protocols, safe diving prac-
tices, OSHA and U.S. Coast Guard regulations, surface 
support vessel piloting, blood-borne pathogens, contami-
nation, decontamination, pre-contamination, job hazard 
analysis, human anatomy and physiology, pharmacol-
ogy, photography, and confidentiality.
The CSI television shows that people watch are noth-
ing like the reality of crime scene investigation. Starched 
clean lab coats, nice dresses and suits, clean neat labo-
ratories, and so on, are all for ratings and theatrics. It 
would be nice if things were so neat and relaxed, but they 
aren’t. Becoming a true CSI requires a lot of education, 
patience, and determination.

35
C H A P T E R  3
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
Anita Zannin
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Is bloodstain pattern analysis (BSPA) a science, or an 
art? That question is asked in courtrooms all across the 
country, especially after the 2006 National Academy 
of Sciences (NAS) report. The answers to this question 
have been as varied as the types of BSPA practitioners. 
Some say science, some say art, some say a little of both. 
My typical answer to this question is that it is a “disci-
pline based on scientific principles.” While BSPA is not a 
“hard” science, it is based on the principles of the hard 
sciences of physics, mathematics, biology and chemistry. 
There is an element of subjectivity, and the analysis ren-
dered is ultimately an opinion—as is the case with sev-
eral other forensic science disciplines. Reproducibility 
is an important concept in the sciences. When a fluid 
is acted upon by a force, it will behave in a predictable 
manner. This predictability and reproducibility is what 
allows BSPA to be taught over and over again. Bloodstain 
pattern analysis is not serology, or DNA; it is the analysis 
and interpretation of the size, shape, distribution, and 
location of bloodstains in order to determine the events 
which gave rise to their origin. It is the study of the static 
aftermath of a dynamic, bloodshedding event. BSPA is 
CONTENTS
 3.1 Introduction 
35
 3.2 History 
36
 3.3 Bloodstain Pattern Analysis (BSPA) Role 
37
 3.4 Biology/Physiology/Anatomy 
37
 3.5 Scene and Evidence Precautions 
38
 3.6 Categories of Bloodstains 
38
 3.6.1 Contact Patterns 
40
 3.6.2 Flow Patterns 
41
 3.6.3 Drop(s) and Free-Falling Volumes 
41
 3.6.4 Saturation/Pooling 
42
 3.6.5 Impact Spatter 
42
 3.6.6 Cast-Off—Projected 
45
 3.6.7 Expirated—Projected 
45
 3.6.8 Arterial Bleeding—Projected 
46
 3.6.9 Altered Bloodstains 
47
3.6.10 Clotted Blood 
47
3.6.11 Diluted Bloodstains 
49
3.6.12 Dried Bloodstains 
50
3.6.13 Diffused/Capillary Action 
52
3.6.14 Insects (and Other Animals) 
53
3.6.15 Sequenced Bloodstains 
54
3.6.16 Voids Patterns 
54
 3.7 Documentation 
55
 3.8 Presumptive Testing and Chemical Enhancement 
56
 3.9 Evaluating a Bloodstain Case 
57
3.10 Conclusion 
58
Bibliography 
58

36
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
used, in conjunction with other forensic disciplines, such 
as forensic pathology and DNA, to assist in reconstruct-
ing a scene to determine the most likely scenario(s).
3.2 HISTORY
Often, it is thought that bloodstain pattern analysis 
(BSPA) is a relatively new discipline in forensic science. 
However, the reality is that BSPA has a long history, dat-
ing back to the 1500s, in Europe.
1895—Dr. Eduard Piotrowski produced a book, 
complete with color plates, entitled Uber 
Entstehung, Form, Richtung und Ausbretung 
der Blutspuren nach Hiebwunden des Kopfes 
(Concerning Origin, Shape, Direction and 
Distribution of the Bloodstains Following Head 
Wounds Caused by Blows). This appears to be 
the first truly scientific study of BSPA, including 
the understanding and application of the scien-
tific method.
1939—French scientist Dr. Victor Balthazard et 
al. presented their paper, Des Gouttes De Sang 
Projete (Research on Blood Spatter) at the 22nd 
Congress of Forensic Medicine. The first page of 
this paper states, “This research paper was to 
pinpoint characteristic elements of a bloodstain 
which might give decisive hints as to its origin.” 
This original research included study of trajec-
tories, the trigonometric relationship (the ratio 
between width and length of a bloodstain), an 
awareness of target surface considerations and 
the understanding that the dynamics of a blood-
shedding event could not always be copied under 
laboratory conditions.
The first significant documentation of BSPA in the 
United States came from Dr. Paul Kirk, a professor at 
the University of California at Berkley. In 1953, Kirk 
published a book entitled Crime Investigation—Physical 
Evidence and the Police Laboratory with a section called 
“Blood: Physical Investigation,” which included exami-
nation of angular and velocity effects on bloodstains. In 
1955, Dr. Kirk authored a lengthy affidavit in the case 
of Ohio v. Sheppard (the case upon which the movie 
The Fugitive is based). In this affidavit, Kirk reviewed 
the investigation, drying times, and adopted a “whole 
scene” approach and established the relative positions of 
the victim and attacker at the time of the beating. This 
was a significant milestone for bloodstain evidence in the 
legal system. Dr. Kirk encouraged Herbert L. MacDonell 
to continue with bloodstain pattern research and to 
apply for a grant from the Law Enforcement Assistance 
Administration (LEAA). MacDonell did apply for and 
receive that grant, resulting in the 1971 publication of 
Flight Characteristics and Stain Patterns of Human 
Blood (MacDonell and Bialousz, 1973).
The parallels between Balthazard and MacDonell’s 
work truly speak to the reproducibility of this discipline. 
One should remember that, in the late ’60s and early ’70s, 
the Internet, as we know it today, did not exist, so previ-
ous research on the subject was not as easy as it is today. 
This means that the work of Balthazard and MacDonell 
were completed independently of one another.
In March of 1973, the first BSPA course (Institute 
on the Geometric Significance of Human Bloodstain 
Evidence) was taught by MacDonell. This was the begin-
ning of the development of BSPA as a recognized field in 
the legal system in the United States. Since then, many 
40-hour basic BSPA courses were taught, and many of 
those students, too numerous to name here, have gone 
on, conducted additional research and now teach the 
discipline themselves. MacDonell revised his initial 
research publication as more literature was located (by 
hand—MacDonell obtained the last known copy of 
Piotrowski’s work in Krakow, Poland), research con-
ducted, cases evaluated and court decisions rendered, 
with his last publication, Bloodstain Patterns—Second 
Revised Edition in 2005 (MacDonell, 2005). In 2004, 
MacDonell was awarded an honorary ScD for his many 
contributions to the field of forensic science. The pro-
fessional organization for bloodstain pattern analysts, 
the International Association of Bloodstain Pattern 
Analysts (IABPA) was founded in 1983 and today has 
over 900 members worldwide. Each year, there is a U.S. 
and European IABPA conference held. This is by no 
means a complete history of BSPA, but meant to give a 
brief evolution of the discipline.
Probably the earliest recorded association of blood 
with crime is in the Bible:
God asked Cain, “Where [is] Abel thy brother?” Cain 
replied, “I know not: [Am] I my brother’s keeper?”
And he said, “What hast thou done? The voice of 
thy brother’s blood crieth unto me from the ground. 
And now [art] thou cursed from the earth, which 
hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother’s blood 
from thy hand; when thou tillest the ground, it shall 
not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive 
and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.”
 —Genesis 4:10–12, n.d.
There are many popular art examples, Shakespeare’s 
MacBeth, Akseli Gallen-Kallela’s 1897 oil painting 
Fratricide, and Charlie Chan at the Racetrack all the way 
to current-day television programs such as CSI (Miami, 
New York, Las Vegas) and Dexter, a bloodstain pattern 
analyst with a police department who is also a serial 
killer.

37
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
3.3 BSPA ROLE
Some things BPA can reveal are as follows:
• What type of event occurred? (e.g., a stabbing or 
beating vs. a shooting)
• How many blows were struck? (a minimum 
number of blows)
• Did the victim move after injury?
• Position of participants
• How long did the attack continue? (can be a fac-
tor in charging the accused or at sentencing)
• Was the attacker injured?
• Which stains should be analyzed?
• Support or refute statements
• Sequencing events
It is important to understand that all of the above 
are not necessarily able to be ascertained from all scenes. 
In some cases, all of the above might be able to be deter-
mined. In other cases, perhaps only a few of these items 
can be ascertained. Still other cases may reveal none of 
the above. Sometimes there may be very complex, over-
lapping patterns, limited available information or exten-
sive alteration of the scene. In these types of scenarios, it 
may be that the most responsible opinion to have is to not 
have an opinion. It is critical for an analyst to understand 
the limitations of the discipline and not render an opin-
ion that cannot be scientifically supported.
3.4 BIOLOGY/PHYSIOLOGY/ANATOMY
Blood in an incompressible fluid. This means that blood 
doesn’t reduce in volume with an increase in pressure. 
The two main functions of human blood are transpor-
tation and defense. Transportation includes supplying 
the necessary nutrients, hormones, and so on, as well as 
waste product removal. The defense function includes 
fighting infection and clotting.
Human blood is composed of both liquid and solid 
(cellular) portions (see Figure 3.1). The liquid portion of 
the blood is called plasma and constitutes 55% of the 
total blood volume. Ninety percent of plasma is water. 
Also within the plasma is found salts, hormones, pro-
teins, lipids, ABO antibodies, glucose, fibrinogen and 
clotting factors. Once clotting has occurred, the liquid 
portion is referred to as serum. White blood cells (WBCs) 
and platelets are found in a layer called the buffy coat. 
This constitutes less than 1% of the total blood volume; 
therefore, it is included in the total cellular percentage, 
at 45%.
The bulk of the cellular component of blood is com-
prised of the red blood cells (RBCs), where hemoglobin 
and ABO antigens are located. Mature RBCs have the 
shape of a biconcave disc and do not have a nucleus. 
Because there is no nucleus, it is not the RBCs that are 
used for nuclear DNA analysis, as is sometimes misun-
derstood. Each RBC contains approximately 280 million 
hemoglobin molecules (Sears, 2002), and each hemo-
globin molecule can carry up to four oxygen molecules. 
Therefore, hemoglobin’s primary function is the trans-
portation of oxygen from the lungs to the tissues and of 
carbon dioxide to the lungs for gas exchange.
WBCs are the cells in the blood which are utilized 
for nuclear DNA analysis, as these cells are nucleated 
cells. There are several types of WBCs; however, gener-
ally speaking, their main function is fighting infection. 
WBCs are significantly larger and less plentiful than 
RBCs. RBCs are small and flexible enough to be able to 
pass through capillaries (approximately 3 to 10 microns 
in diameter) single file (Secomb, 1991).
Our bodies contain three categories of blood vessels: 
veins, arteries, and capillaries. In general, arteries carry 
blood away from the heart, while veins carry blood to 
55% Plasma (serum once
clotting has occurred)
<1% Buffy coat
45% RBCs
FIGURE 3.1 Components of blood in a blood tube after 
centrifugation.

38
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
the heart. Arteries are thick-walled vessels that contain 
smooth muscle. These vessels pulse in the same cadence 
as an individual’s heartbeat. The smooth muscle contrac-
tions are what propel the blood through arteries and 
create significant pressure in these vessels. Veins are com-
paratively thin-walled vessels that have valves within to 
prevent backflow; think of saloon doors that open in only 
one direction. Skeletal muscle movement is what propels 
the blood through veins, and they have significantly less 
internal pressure than arteries. If the valves become dys-
functional, varicosed veins may result. Capillaries are 
very small vessels that act as a sort of “bridge” between 
veins and arteries. It is in these vessels that gas and nutri-
ent exchange takes place.
The amount of blood in a human body is related to 
body weight. Blood volume is approximately 7% of an 
individual’s body weight. For example, a 150lb individu-
al’s blood volume is calculated in the following manner:
 
(
)(
)
= ∼
=
=
=
150 lbs
68 kg
68kg .07
4.76 kg
1 kgofblood
1literofblood,therefore
4.76 kg
4.76 liters of blood
There are a number of medical conditions that can 
cause bleeding, both internally and externally. This is 
important to remember when evaluating a scene—not all 
scenes are criminal in nature. Bloodstained scenes may 
be the result of homicidal or assaultive behaviors, but 
they may also be suicides, accident, or natural in nature, 
and it is imperative that the analyst approach the scene 
with an open mind.
3.5 SCENE AND EVIDENCE PRECAUTIONS
A bloodstained scene can be a dangerous environment 
for many reasons; items such as hypodermic needles, 
loaded firearms, broken glass, knives, and so on, may be 
present. This section however, will discuss dangers pre-
sented by the blood itself.
Blood can carry many infectious diseases, such as 
HIV, Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C, to mention a few. 
The HIV virus is relatively fragile outside the body, but 
Hepatitis C can remain in dried blood for several days. 
Because of this, it is important to approach each scene 
as though it is infectious and utilize the proper personal 
protective equipment (PPE). Gloves should always be 
used when dealing with blood evidence. Tyvek suits, 
or protective disposable lab coats, should be used to 
protect the analyst’s clothes from becoming contami-
nated with blood. Masks, eyewear, and hair coverings 
should be utilized when there is a chance of splashing 
or aerosolized blood and to protect from inadvertent 
contamination of the scene with the analyst’s own DNA. 
Shoe covers should always be utilized, both to protect 
footwear and to protect the scene from contamination 
by items that may be transferred from the tread of the 
analyst’s footwear.
3.6 CATEGORIES OF BLOODSTAINS
Depending on whose terminology one uses, the overall 
categories may differ. For the purposes of this writing, 
the categories used will be those outlined by James, Kish, 
and Sutton, 2005. Those categories are passive, spat-
ter, and altered, under which are several subcategories 
(see Table  3.1). Also, the Scientific Working Group on 
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis (SWGSTAIN) compiled a 
list of recommended terminology that the IABPA has 
adopted.
Generally, bloodstains included in the passive cat-
egory are those that are under the influence of only 
gravity, or transfer stains, where a blood-bearing object 
transfers liquid blood onto another surface. Examples 
include blood dripping from a finger; a victim who is 
lying on the ground whose blood is “seeping” out of 
wounds, creating an area of pooling (non-absorbent 
surface) or saturation (absorbent surface); and a bloody 
hand touching a wall. Spatter includes impact—such 
as occurs in a beating or shooting; “secondary,” also 
known as satellite spatter; and projected patterns. 
Projected patterns are those which are acted on by a 
force greater than that of gravity and occur from some-
thing other than impact, such as arterial gushing and 
expirated bloodstain patterns. Altered bloodstain pat-
terns are those that have undergone some sort of physi-
ological, physical/mechanical, or chemical change, such 
as diluted bloodstains, or patterns created by insects. 
While the word “altered” may seem to imply a negative 
or deliberate change in order to deceive connotation, 
that is not what is meant by its use in bloodstain cat-
egorization. While patterns in this category can include 
deliberate changes to the bloodstains, in this context, it 
simply means that there has been some change. These 
categories will be examined in more detail below.
TABLE 3.1 Bloodstain Categories
Passive
Spatter
Altered
Contact
Impact mechanism
Clotted
Drop(s)
Secondary mechanism
Diluted
Flow
Projection mechanism
Dried
Saturation/Pooling
–
Diffused
Free-Falling  
Volume
–
Insects
–
–
Sequenced
–
–
Voids

39
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
The volume of an “average” drop of passively falling 
blood has been reported to be .05 mL with a diameter in 
the air of 4.56 mm. There are several factors that influ-
ence the volume and diameter of a blood drop, includ-
ing the nature of the surface from which the blood falls 
(e.g., dripping from the end of a baseball bat vs. the tip 
of a knife), the rate of bleeding, the distance fallen (to a 
point), and the effect of a force (such as impact) acting on 
the blood. There are several resources available that doc-
ument many of these factors based on experimentation.
Blood exhibits cohesive forces in order to achieve 
the most stable configuration by reducing the exposed 
surface area. This creates surface tension that is resis-
tant to penetration—like “skin.” A common experience 
that most people have had is watching water bugs walk 
across the surface of the water. This is possible because 
of the water’s surface tension. The surface molecules have 
unequal molecular attractive forces acting on them—air 
on one side and other water molecules on all other sides.
A drop of blood will fall when the gravitational 
attraction, or some other force, overcomes its surface 
tension.
There are a number of potential reasons that a stain 
may exhibit certain characteristics—for example, you 
could have a small drop of blood that, size-wise, is consis-
tent with impact spatter, but may have simply dripped off 
of something with a small surface area, or dripped close 
to the surface. Blood does not spontaneously “break up”; 
something has to happen to it (e.g., an impact) for this 
to happen.
The nature of the target surface is of tremendous 
importance. Generally, when blood strikes a smooth, 
hard, nonporous surface, the drop will be smooth and 
round, as can be seen in Figure 3.2. If a drop of blood 
strikes something soft and porous, spines, satellite spat-
ter, and/or scalloping may be observed (see Figure 3.3). 
This occurs because the fibers or other microscopic 
projections penetrate the surface tension and rupture 
the drop. Blood (or any other liquid) does not fall in the 
shape of a teardrop, as is often seen in drawings, paint-
ings, advertisements, and even weather maps. Once a 
drop of blood breaks free, it organizes into the most effi-
cient possible configuration, which is that of a sphere. 
Some oscillation from spherical to “egg-shaped” may be 
observed.
Spines are fine projections that are still attached to 
the parent drop (as seen in Figure 3.3). Satellite spatter 
is disconnected from the parent drop (seen radiating cir-
cumferentially around the parent drop in Figure 3.3). 
Scalloped edges (not pictured) have a “wavy” sort of 
appearance.
When blood strikes a surface at 90 degrees, the 
resulting stain is round in appearance. As the angle of 
impact becomes more acute, the stain becomes more 
elongated, as shown in Figure 3.4.
The angle of impact is the internal angle between 
the flight path of the blood drop and the surface it 
strikes. There is a trigonometric relationship between 
the length and width of a bloodstain. To calculate the 
angle of impact, the width (at the center, widest part of 
the bloodstain) and length (“rounding” distortion at the 
terminal edge where necessary) are measured. The width 
is divided by the length, providing a ratio of 1 or less. 
This ratio is the sine of the internal angle. In order to 
find the angle, a scientific calculator is utilized to find 
the sin-1 (inverse sine). Each calculator is a little differ-
ent, but buttons labeled “inv,” “2nd,” “function,” and 
so on, and the sin key will result in the angle of impact. 
A passive 90-degree drop will have a ratio of 1 because 
its length and width are equal. A drop whose width is 
FIGURE 3.2 Glass—smooth edges, accompanying a drop 
seen to the left.
FIGURE 3.3 One drop on a paper towel, note the spines 
and satellite spatter.

40
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
half its length will result in a ratio of .5, and a 30-degree 
angle of impact. For example:
W
L
= 5mm Angle of impact = Width / Length sin 1
= 10mm Ratio: (5mm / 10mm) = .5
Angleof impact = .5 sin 1 = 30°
(
)
( )
−
−
It is impaortant to note that the units of measure-
ment must be the same for the width and length (e.g., 
both in millimeters, or both in inches) so that they cancel 
out to reveal a unitless ratio.
The area of convergence is the place, in two dimen-
sions, where the bloodshedding occurred. In other words, 
the location on the surface (wall, floor, etc.). This is deter-
mined by drawing a line, or using string on-scene, from 
the leading edge (this is where the blood drop impacts 
the surface) of the bloodstain, projecting it backward 
following the line of its long axis. This is done for several 
stains from within the pattern, to achieve a representative 
sampling. Where the lines or strings cross, is the area of 
convergence. The area of origin is the three-dimensional 
location where the bloodshed occurred. After finding the 
area of convergence and calculating the angle of impact 
as described above, each line or string is raised, with the 
use of a zero baseline protractor, to its calculated angle. 
An alternate way to determine how far off the surface 
an event occurred is the tangent method. The formula is 
as follows: Tan(angle of impact) = Z/measured distance, 
where the measured distance is the measurement from 
the leading edge of the stain to the area of convergence. 
Rearranging the formula to solve for “Z” results in the 
following: Z = Tan(angle of impact)(measured distance), 
so, the tangent of the calculated angle of impact multi-
plied by the measured distance. For example:
Calculated angle of impact = 20°
Distance from leading edge to convergence 
= 28 inches
Tan(angle of impact) = Z/measured distance
Tan(20) = Z/28
Tan(20) = .36397…
Tan(20)(28) = Z
(.36397)(28) = 10.2 inches
It is important to note that the area of origin will 
be the height/distance past which the event could not 
have occurred, because the “stringing” method does not 
take into account the effects of gravity and air resistance. 
BSPA is not a precise discipline—these methods will not 
reveal exactly where the blood source was located, but it 
can give an idea of whether the victim was lying down, 
sitting, or standing, which is then compared against the 
statements of suspects, witnesses, and victims (if living). 
For example, a wife claims that she was “just looking 
at her husband’s gun” when it “went off all of a sud-
den as he was walking in the room.” After analysis, the 
bloodstains on the floor are determined to fall between 
a 10- and 20-degree angle of impact. This would indi-
cate that her statement is not consistent with the physi-
cal evidence—the blood source was on the ground, not 
“walking into the room.” Computer software has been 
developed in order to produce “virtual” stringing known 
as directional analysis of bloodstain patterns. Programs 
such as BackTrackTM and HemospatTM are examples of 
programs that allow the user to utilize photographs and 
measurements of bloodstains from actual crime scenes 
to determine the areas of origin. Buck et. al published 
the journal article “3D Bloodstain Pattern Analysis: 
Ballistic Reconstruction of the Trajectories of Blood 
Drops and Determination of the Centres of Origin of 
the Bloodstains.” This approach utilized computer-aided 
design (CAD), photogrammetry, tachymetry, ballistics 
software, and laser scanning and rendered a true-to-scale 
3D rendering of the scene and the relevant bloodstain 
pattern information.
3.6.1 Contact Patterns
Contact patterns are generally referred to as transfer 
patterns, of which there are many types. A transfer pat-
tern requires contact between two items, at least one 
of which is wet with blood. Sometimes, a transfer pat-
tern may have recognizable features that may provide 
90°
40°
10°
FIGURE 3.4 Decreasing angle of impact.

41
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
information about the object that created it, such as a 
potential weapon shape, hair, footwear, and fabric. It is 
not uncommon to see a mirror image of the object that 
created the pattern, when blood is transferred from one 
part of the body to another, or with the folding over of 
fabrics. Fingerprints, palm prints, foot and/or footwear 
transfer patterns may be transferred with sufficient detail 
that an identification is possible, depending on the target 
surface.
Hair compression transfer patterns and hair swipes 
are often easily recognized by the fine, wispy nature of 
the pattern. Sometimes, hair may be present within the 
pattern.
Swipe patterns are included in the category of pas-
sive patterns. Swipe patterns result from the contact of 
a bloody surface with a non-bloody surface exhibiting 
relative motion between the two. As a general rule, the 
feathered end of a swipe pattern reveals the direction of 
travel as in Figure 3.5.
James et al. (2005) include wipe patterns in the pas-
sive category, but acknowledge that wipe patterns may 
also be included in the altered category. The SWGSTAIN 
definition of a wipe pattern is “an altered bloodstain 
pattern resulting from an object moving through a pre-
existing wet bloodstain.” Wipe patterns are common in 
cleanup efforts and are also seen in sequenced patterns.
Figure 3.5 reveals both swipe and wipe patterns 
on a wall. When a bloodstained object first makes con-
tact with a surface, it is generally where there will be 
the most pressure applied, and the surface may exhibit a 
non- specific stain. As the bloody object travels along and 
eventually departs from the surface, the amount of pres-
sure lessens, producing the feathered edge characteris-
tics. Therefore, the directionality in Figure 3.5 would be 
from right to left. The wipe stains are those which have 
passed through the existing spatter on the wall, removing 
the centers and altering the edge characteristics.
3.6.2 Flow Patterns
Flow patterns occur when there is a great enough vol-
ume of blood that it is unable to adhere to the target sur-
face. Gravity and object topography/contour dictate the 
direction of flow patterns. These patterns are useful in 
determining if a victim (or bloodstained item) moved or 
was moved after bleeding started. When a flow pattern is 
still wet, a flow line’s direction will change with the posi-
tion of the body/object. For instance, if flow patterns are 
identified on an individual’s leg with directionality from 
the knee to the foot, but the individual is found lying 
down on the ground, it can be determined that the victim 
was in a seated or standing position for a period of time, 
to allow the blood to dry sufficiently that no change in 
directionality is exhibited, before moving or being moved 
to the ground. Within the yellow box of Figure 3.6 are 
shown flow patterns on the victim’s thigh, knee, and calf 
that are inconsistent with the position in which she is 
photographed.
3.6.3 Drop(s) and Free-Falling Volumes
Passive drops are usually fairly easily identifiable, as seen 
earlier in Figure 3.2, on glass. Passive drops on carpet 
appear to have much smaller diameters due to their absorp-
tion into the carpet. Often seen are drip trails when the 
blood source moves between two or more places, such as 
an individual walking away with a dripping weapon, or a 
bleeding victim walking around the scene. Directionality 
is not always evident, however, with sufficient velocity; 
sometimes edge characteristics and wave cast-off can 
help determine the direction of travel. Wave cast-off is 
FIGURE 3.5 Wall exhibiting both swipe and wipe pat-
terns. Directionality is from right to left.
FIGURE 3.6 Flow patterns inconsistent with position.

42
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
a smaller blood drop thrown from the parent drop upon 
impact. Figure 3.7 shows the mechanism of wave cast-
off formation. Figure 3.8 is an example of wave cast-off. 
There is significant distance between the top parent stain 
and its wave cast-off. When there are overlapping stains, 
it may be difficult to match the parent stains with their 
wave cast-off. However, if a line is drawn through the 
long axis of the wave cast-off, similar to what is done for 
area of convergence, and projected back, it is often pos-
sible to assign the wave cast-off to the appropriate parent 
stain. The terminal end of the bloodstain at the bottom 
of Figure 3.8 shows a similar geometry to the wave cast-
off pictured above it—however, it has not broken free. A 
word of caution—if a wave cast-off is viewed without its 
parent stain, one might determine its directionality to be 
opposite its actual direction of travel due to the amount 
of blood at its “head” and thin tail. However, wave cast-
off is discernable from a parent stain in its geometry. The 
parent stain has an elliptical shape with a tapered end, 
whereas wave cast-off has a more rounded end and a 
straight “neck” (as opposed to tapering to a point).
When a passively dripping blood source does not 
move, and blood drips into itself, it creates a discern-
able drip pattern, as seen in Figure 3.9, that creates small 
(usually around 1 mm in size), round to oval satellite 
spatter in a radiating pattern around the parent stain. 
Typically, there is not a great deal of obvious directional-
ity as compared to projected patterns discussed later. The 
satellite spatter (or secondary spatter) is formed when 
drops continue to strike each other; the small stains are 
formed and are spattered into the air, out and away from 
the forming pool.
Large, free-falling volumes are those of ~1 mL or 
more falling all at once as opposed to drop by drop; this 
is also referred to as splashed blood.
3.6.4 Saturation/Pooling
As mentioned, the SWGSTAIN definitions of saturation 
and pooling are as follows:
Saturation Stain: A bloodstain resulting from the 
accumulation of liquid blood in an absorbent 
material.
Pool: A bloodstain resulting from an accumulation 
of liquid blood on a surface.
Figure 3.10 illustrates pooling on a non-absorbent 
surface resulting from the passive flowing of blood out of 
multiple gunshot wounds (GSWs). Figure 13.11 reveals 
saturation staining of absorbent bedding.
3.6.5 Impact Spatter
The old classification of bloodstains was based on the 
velocity at which the blood source was impacted and 
the size of the bloodstains that resulted. However, there 
FIGURE 3.7 Mechanism of wave cast-off formation 
by high-speed photography. (Courtesy of Herbert L. 
MacDonell, hereafter HLM.)
FIGURE 3.8 Example of a wave cast-off. (Courtesy of 
HLM.)
FIGURE 3.9 Drip pattern.

43
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
is enough overlap between the categories as they relate 
to bloodstain size, that new classification and terminol-
ogy has been proffered. The old terminology referring 
to impact spatter was low-velocity impact spatter (LVIS), 
medium-velocity impact spatter (MVIS), and high- 
velocity impact spatter (HVIS). The new method of 
referring to these categories still relies on the sizes of 
the stains; however, it focuses more on the overall size, 
shape, distribution and location in the context of specific 
case information, instead of a strict classification based 
on size alone. For instance, if a person had a bloody nose 
that gushed onto the floor and another person was stand-
ing next to him/her, we might find stains around 1 mm in 
size on the pant leg of the innocent bystander. The result-
ing pattern may be incorrectly classified as impact spat-
ter without case-specific information, instead of satellite 
spatter from a free-falling large volume of blood.
Impact spatter that is consistent with a beating or 
stabbing tends to have the preponderance of bloodstains 
with a diameter of approximately 1–3 mm. However, 
there can be a wide variation from 1 to 3 mm based on 
type of weapon, amount of exposed blood, and several 
other factors. The velocity of the force that impacts the 
blood source is generally between 5 and 25 feet/second. 
There must be blood exposed before it can be spattered. 
This means that in the absence of something like a crush-
ing head blow, it would not be surprising not to see any 
blood spatter resulting from a single blow to the head. 
Individuals who administer a beating or stabbing may or 
may not become spattered with blood themselves.
There are many factors that determine whether or 
not an assailant becomes spattered with blood, some 
of which include the length, weight, and shape of the 
weapon; the direction of force; the number of blows; 
the relative positions and movements of the victim and 
attacker, to name a few. An absence of blood spatter 
on an assailant does not prove nonparticipation for sev-
eral reasons: the factors mentioned above regarding the 
spattering of blood, that an assailant may have changed 
clothes prior to apprehension or wore an outer protec-
tive layer that was discarded, or administered the beating 
without clothes on and showered. There are, however, 
areas that assailants often overlook when cleaning up. 
Items like socks, shoe laces, and jewelry are good places 
to look for bloodstains that may have been overlooked, 
or not easily cleaned. Conclusions about bloodstains on 
clothing should be rendered cautiously, as the weave of 
the fabric may distort the shape of the original blood-
stain; where, for example, a 90-degree impact angle may 
appear more ovoid in shape, or vice versa. This phenom-
ena may also be observed on unfinished wood as the 
grain may distort the stain.
The distribution of bloodstains in a beating often 
appears in a radiating pattern around the origin, not 
unlike a sunburst, on either vertical or horizontal sur-
faces, as seen in Figure 3.12.
In many cases, calculating the angle of impact and 
stringing is not critical, as the victim’s location at the 
time of bloodshed can be ascertained by observation. 
For example, in the scene depicted in Figure 3.12, impact 
spatter is also seen on the side of the bathtub (right side 
of photograph). Additional photos show impact spatter 
on the bottom of the sink and on the right side (as viewed 
upon entering the bathroom) of the toilet. This means 
that it had to occur below the bottom of the sink and in 
FIGURE 3.10 Pooling on a non-absorbent surface.
FIGURE 3.11 Saturation staining on an absorbent surface.

44
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
between the toilet and bathtub. So, simply with observa-
tion, the area of assault can often be easily identified. 
Clearly, this may not be the case with multiple victims 
and complex, overlapping patterns.
Impact spatter consistent with gunshot wounds 
(GSWs) is generated by a force impacting the blood 
source at greater than 100 feet per second. In these 
patterns, there is also a range of spatter sizes that may 
be seen, from .01 mm to 3 mm or greater, as seen in 
Figure 3.13. The defining feature of this type of spatter is 
that the preponderance of stains are less than 1 mm and 
have been described as mist-like or aerosolized in appear-
ance, as can be seen in Figure 3.14. Two types of spat-
ter may result from a gunshot wound; forward spatter 
and back spatter. Forward spatter is what comes out of 
the exit wound with the projectile in a perforating GSW. 
Back spatter is what comes out of the entrance wound 
back toward the muzzle of the firearm and shooter. If the 
GSW is a penetrating wound, there is no exit wound, 
therefore no possibility of forward spatter. Generally, 
forward spatter is greater in volume and travels signifi-
cantly farther than back spatter, as a result of the energy 
transfer from the projectile.
Research by Dr. Martin Fackler suggests that the 
collapse of the temporary wound cavity in contact or 
close-range GSWs is responsible, at least in part, for 
spatter production. Gases, heat and a projectile exit the 
muzzle of a firearm when fired. These gases, therefore 
pressure, are transmitted to the body tissues when fired 
at contact or close range. The permanent cavity is that 
produced by the projectile. The temporary cavity is a sig-
nificantly larger cavity as a result of the transferred gases 
and energy, that is much like a balloon, surrounding the 
permanent cavity. The tissue of the temporary cavity col-
lapses after the passage of the projectile. It is this collaps-
ing that is proposed to force blood out of the entrance 
and/or exit wounds, creating spatter.
In actual casework, due to the dynamic nature of vio-
lent assaults and the proximity, color, and texture of sur-
face on which the blood lands, the mist-like stains may 
never be identified. Additionally, these very small stains 
typically travel approximately only 1 to 4 feet (with some 
exceptions) due to air resistance and dry almost imme-
diately. If there is an object close enough to the blood 
source to receive the mist-type spatter, the stains may 
be easily disturbed or destroyed with normal actions of 
FIGURE 3.12 Radiating pattern and relative void where 
the victim’s head was located at the time of a beating.
FIGURE 3.13 Impact spatter associated with a gunshot. 
Note the misting around the bullet hole.
FIGURE 3.14 Close-up of misting. (Courtesy of HLM.)

45
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
investigators, depending on the nature of the surface. To 
assist with understanding why the small stains do not 
travel very far, an analogy would be the difference in 
trying to throw a handful of flour versus a handful of 
rocks—the bigger, heavier rocks will go significantly far-
ther. The blocking effects of hair and clothing must also 
be taken into account, as they can easily block the very 
small stains from depositing on surrounding objects. 
With a single shot to the chest of a clothed victim, one 
would not expect to see spatter on surrounding objects. 
The amount of spatter depends on several factors, includ-
ing but not limited to wound location, type of ammu-
nition, caliber of firearm, muzzle to target distance, 
number of shots fired, and the presence or absence of 
clothing, hair, or other intermediate objects.
If there is nothing nearby on which the mist can 
deposit or is blocked, the only observed pattern might 
be more similar to that seen with a beating or stabbing. 
Case-specific information is always important to help 
narrow down the possible mechanisms that caused the 
pattern. The barrels of firearms should always be exam-
ined for the presence of blood. This can be especially 
important in suicide vs. homicide investigations, where 
range of fire and firearm orientation may be factors nec-
essary to discern. There is a “drawback” effect produced 
by the rapid contraction of gases within the barrel of a 
firearm that creates a partial vacuum. In contact and 
near-contact wounds, blood can be drawn into the bar-
rel, up to several inches, depending on factors like type 
of firearm, ammunition and distance from the wound as 
documented in a 1977 study by MacDonell and Brooks. 
It is important to note that the lack of blood in a bar-
rel of a firearm does not exclude its involvement in the 
shooting.
3.6.6 Cast-Off—Projected
There are two types of cast-off, not to be confused 
with wave cast-off. The first type is cessation cast-off. 
Cessation cast-off occurs when a bloody object comes 
to a sudden stop and blood is projected off the end of 
an object. Frequently, cessation cast-off is obscured by 
impact spatter and may be difficult, or impossible, to 
differentiate.
The second type of cast-off is usually simply referred 
to as “cast-off.” This type of cast-off refers to blood that 
is released from an object due to its motion. This is usu-
ally seen in beatings and stabbings on walls and ceilings 
when the bloody object is swung vertically. If the object 
is swung in a horizontal manner, as in a baseball swing, 
cast-off may be present on the walls in a horizontal con-
figuration. Cast-off is identifiable by its linear nature and 
changing directionality through the arc of the swing, 
as seen in Figure 3.15. Stains will be round at any area 
where the object swung is at a 90-degree angle from the 
target surface. For example, when a person is swinging a 
bloodied weapon in a vertical, overhead swing, you may 
see round stains (indicating a 90-degree angle of impact), 
on the ceiling directly overhead, when the weapon is per-
pendicular to the ceiling.
There are many factors that determine the con-
figuration of cast-off patterns. Some of these include 
the number of blows struck, the material of which 
the weapon is made, shape and length of weapon, the 
amount of blood available, and the force of the swings. 
The overall size can be consistent with that of impact 
spatter, but may also be larger. While the stain sizes 
often remain similar throughout a cast-off pattern; the 
“downswings” may produce somewhat smaller stains, 
as the force of the downswing can be greater than the 
upswing.
Cast-off patterns may be found on ceilings, walls 
(side swing), or even floors, depending on the relative 
positions of the assailant and victim. Cast-off patterns 
may also be seen on clothing. Sometimes, cast-off stains 
are found on the shoulder, back and/or back of the leg of 
the assailant. Cast-off patterns on the front of clothing 
should be carefully considered, as this may indicate prox-
imity to the event, even without participation.
3.6.7 Expirated—Projected
Expirated bloodstains are those which are created as a 
result of air pressure. This may be due to blood in the 
nose, mouth, or airways; air mixed with blood in the 
chest or abdominal wounds; or positioning of victim, 
such as with his/her head in and breathing breathing 
into a pool of blood. The size of such bloodstains var-
ies greatly, as it will depend on how forcefully the blood 
was expelled. As seen in impact spatter, the greater the 
force, the smaller the bloodstains. As a result, expirated 
patterns may be confused with impact  spatter—either 
that which is seen with a beating/stabbing, or what is 
seen with gunshot wounds. One must be very cautious 
FIGURE 3.15 Cast-off—note the linear configuration, 
round stains in middle, and the right to left directionality 
on the left side of the photo. (Courtesy of HLM.)

46
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
and consider all possibilities when examining cases 
where both impact spatter and expirated may be present. 
Figure  3.16 depicts electrodes with laboratory-created 
patterns that compare backspatter from a gunshot with 
expirated bloodstain patterns to show how similar the 
two types of patterns can be in terms of their overall size, 
shape, and distribution.
There may be some characteristics that allow differ-
entiation of the patterns. For instance, air bubbles may be 
present. The presence of air bubbles is essentially conclu-
sive that there is some sort of airway injury. However, the 
absence of air bubbles does not mean that the pattern can-
not be expirated. There are several variables, such as the 
origin of the expirated blood (from mouth, nose, wound), 
the nature of the injury causing the bleeding, the nature of 
the target surface, and the force with which blood is expi-
rated that may affect whether air bubbles may be present 
and/or seen. In some cases, when blood with air bubbles 
dries, there are bubble rings that remain. A bubble ring 
is the outline within a bloodstain that remains where the 
bubble had been before it ruptured and/or dried. While 
the description may sound similar to that of a perimeter 
stain (discussed in the section on altered bloodstains), 
they are visually different from one another. The outline 
of a bubble ring may be thicker, thereby creating what 
looks like little vacuoles or craters, where the perimeter 
stain is generally flat and is the outline of a stain that has 
been wiped through before it was dry.
Bilateral patterns may be identified if blood is pro-
jected from both nares, by, for example, sneezing with 
blood in the nasal cavity. Additionally, sometimes mucous 
strands are identified with blood projected from the nose 
or mouth. Expirated blood may appear lighter in color 
due to dilution from saliva when blood is expirated from 
the mouth. It is important to keep in mind that a lack of 
dilution and/or air bubbles does not eliminate a pattern 
from being expirated. Field tests for salivary amylase (an 
enzyme found in saliva) are available that may assist inves-
tigators with determining origin. Analysts must remain 
objective and open-minded when evaluating bloodstain 
patterns in a case. There will be times when it is impos-
sible to determine whether a pattern is impact spatter or 
expirated. If, for example, there is a victim who has a per-
forating GSW to the head, so both forward and backspat-
ter are possibilities, and the victim has blood coming out 
of his/her nose and mouth. Bloodstains that are approxi-
mately 1 mm in size are found on the wall near the victim, 
and salivary amylase testing is negative. The best conclu-
sion that the analyst could come to is that the pattern 
could be either impact spatter or expirated blood, because 
there are no other factors to make one or the other more 
likely. If there are factors that allow the analyst to form an 
opinion that one mechanism is more likely than another, 
they must be a scientifically defensible.
It is easy to get engrossed in the minutiae of indi-
vidual bloodstains and “not see the forest for the trees,” 
so the analyst must always remember to take into con-
sideration the overall size, shape, and distribution of 
the bloodstains when forming opinions. Bloodshedding 
events are commonly very dynamic, chaotic events, and 
it may not be possible to explain every single bloodstain 
with the available information, so a responsible analyst 
should report all possible mechanisms.
3.6.8 Arterial Bleeding—Projected
As previously mentioned, arteries have a large smooth mus-
cle layer, which contracts in the same cadence as an individ-
ual’s heart rate; this is how healthcare workers are able to 
count their patients pulses in their wrist, neck, inside of the 
elbow, foot, groin, and so on—anywhere there is a palpable 
pulse. This also makes arteries more resistant to collapsing 
than veins, as they have tension in them, somewhat like a 
taut rubber band. If an artery is completely severed, as in the 
top illustration of Figure 3.17, it is common for the ends to 
retract under the skin, subcutaneous fat, and muscle (imag-
ine cutting a taut rubber band and the ends “snap back”). 
This causes a “spraying” type of pattern, somewhat like 
what happens if you place your thumb over a garden hose. 
This spraying type of arterial bleeding is seen in Figure 3.18. 
A crushed artery may also produce this type of pattern. It is 
not uncommon to also see the overall “peaks and valleys” 
in the pattern, corresponding to the contraction and relax-
ation of the heart—much like an electrocardiogram strip 
that is also seen in Figure 3.18 for comparison purposes. As 
the individual’s blood pressure drops, the relative height of 
the “peaks” will become smaller.
If an artery is partially severed or is superficial, where 
the cut ends are exposed to the external environment, as 
Backspatter
Expirated
FIGURE 3.16 Heart monitor electrodes. Left: Exposed 
to backspatter. Right: Exposed to expirated blood.

47
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
seen in the bottom illustration of Figure 3.17, the result-
ing bloodstain patterns appear as distinct “pulses,” 
where individual heartbeats can be counted. This indi-
vidual pulsing type of arterial bleeding can be seen in 
Figure 3.19. In some cases, it is possible to see features 
of a combination of the two types of arterial bleeding 
outlined here, where distinct pulses can be seen in addi-
tion to the overall “peaks and valleys”; however, they 
may appear more rounded “hills” as opposed to sharp 
“peaks.”
3.6.9 Altered Bloodstains
An altered bloodstain, according to SWGSTAIN, is one 
with characteristics that indicate a physical change has 
occurred. These changes can be the result of usual physio-
logical phenomena, actions, insects, chemicals, and so on.
3.6.10 Clotted Blood
When an individual suffers a bloodletting injury, there 
is a complex clotting cascade that takes place in order 
to stop the bleeding and form a scab. However, blood 
will clot when it is outside the body as well. This can be 
observed rather quickly (within minutes) in a blood tube 
that does not have an anticoagulant in it when one has 
blood drawn for medical testing. When clotting occurs 
in a pool of blood, serum separation will be seen, as 
seen in Figure 3.20. Also seen in Figure 3.20 is capillary 
 diffusion—blood/serum is drawn from a higher concen-
tration to a lower concentration in defiance of gravity, on 
the shirt sleeve.
The length of time required for clotting and serum 
separation is affected by many variables. These include 
the initial volume of blood, temperature, humidity, sub-
strate on which blood is located, and source of blood. 
The source of blood is important because wounds that 
involve the head or otherwise breach the spinal canal 
may result in the mixing of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with 
the blood, which is known to significantly accelerate the 
clotting process. Figure 3.21 shows serum separation 
Severed
Partially Severed
Artery ends
Artery 
FIGURE 3.17 Top: Artery completely severed, ends 
retracted under tissue. Bottom: Partially severed, cut 
ends of artery exposed. (Courtesy of HLM.)
FIGURE 3.18 Arterial “spraying” with comparison to 
an EKG strip, illustrating the contraction/relaxation 
cycles of the heart. (Courtesy of HLM and author’s files.)

48
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
on an absorbent surface, in this case, a carpet. Note the 
darker, “thicker” appearance of the clotted area toward 
the bottom of the photo, and the lighter periphery of the 
serum. This is often how serum separation appears on 
porous surfaces.
When clotting or clotted blood continues to be 
impacted, small clots that have been spattered may be 
seen as depicted within the yellow box in Figure 3.22. 
Generally, when fresh blood is spattered, it will dry before 
a clot can form. Therefore, if clotted spatter is seen, this 
may give an indication of how long an attack continued, 
which, in some areas, may be a factor in what charges are 
sought against a defendant. The length of an attack can 
also be a significant factor in sentencing, particularly in 
areas that have the death penalty, when the prosecution 
is attempting to show the particularly heinous, atrocious 
and cruel nature of the attack.
If a time-lapse estimate is requested by investigating 
agencies or counsel associated with a case, this should be 
FIGURE 3.19 Distinct “pulses” of a victim with cut 
carotid artery crawling. (Courtesy of HLM.)
FIGURE 3.20 Clotting, serum separation, and capillary 
diffusion.
FIGURE 3.21 Clotting and serum separation on a carpet.
FIGURE 3.22 Yellow box—clotted spatter associated 
with a stabbing.

49
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
done very conservatively due to the large number of vari-
ables involved. Sometimes the best an analyst can report 
is a sequence of events, without assigning specific time 
frames.
Drying time estimates should also be addressed very 
conservatively, as many of the same variables (tempera-
ture, humidity, substrate, amount, etc.) affect drying 
time as well. Additionally, it is not uncommon for an 
attorney to ask something like “How long would it have 
taken for the victim’s hair (shirt, pants, etc.) to become 
saturated with blood?” This too should be approached 
very cautiously and conservatively if the analyst wasn’t 
at the scene when the injuries and subsequent bleeding 
occurred, which is usually the case. For example, a GSW 
to the head may cause blood to gush out of the nose like 
a faucet, whereas a similar GSW to the head in some-
one else may cause only a few drops of blood to drip 
out of the nose. Although both examples have a GSW to 
the head, the first victim’s clothing would become satu-
rated in a matter of seconds, where the second victim’s 
clothing may not become saturated at all, or would take 
many minutes. Once again, it cannot be overstressed 
that the only proffered opinions should be those that are 
defensible.
3.6.11 Diluted Bloodstains
Diluted bloodstains are those that have been altered by 
addition of a liquid. This may be environmental, such as 
snow or rain; physiological, such as tears, perspiration, 
or saliva; or deliberate, such as seen in cleanup efforts. 
Diluted blood is generally darker around the periphery. 
Figure 3.23 shows a sink with both whole blood and 
diluted stains. Especially around the drain, note that 
these stains exhibit the typical darker periphery charac-
teristic. It is important to note that bathrooms should 
always be examined, as assailants may go there to clean 
up and victims often go to the bathroom to determine the 
severity of their injuries. Figure 3.23 is from a woman 
who was attacked by a dog and went to the bathroom to 
check the severity of injuries to her face.
Figure 3.24 shows spatter and transfer bloodstains 
altered by a cleanup attempt. Figure 3.25 depicts a 
bloodstain altered by saliva. Note the glossy appearance 
(air bubbles are also present).
During an altercation, or life and death struggle, it 
is not uncommon for participants to perspire profusely. 
Figure 3.26 shows bloodstains diluted with perspiration 
on the shirt of a perpetrator in a stabbing attack.
FIGURE 3.23 Diluted bloodstains around a drain, right 
side and just left of center of photo. Note darker periphery.
FIGURE 3.24 Bloodstains altered by a cleanup attempt.
FIGURE 3.25 Bloodstains altered by saliva.

50
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Bloodstains that are found in places where the stains 
may be further altered by a change in temperature/
humidity, such as a walk-in freezer, should be dealt with 
first and thoroughly photographed (be sure photographs 
are acceptable), and presumptive testing completed, if 
necessary, prior to permitting a significant change in the 
environment (such as leaving the freezer door open for 
prolonged periods of time).
3.6.12 Dried Bloodstains
As has been discussed previously, environmental factors, 
target surface and amount of blood are important when 
considering the drying times of blood. Under “room 
temperature” conditions, small spatter stains, thin/light 
transfer stains and flow patterns with a small volume of 
blood can dry within a few minutes on non-porous sur-
faces. Larger volumes of blood will take longer to dry, 
and surfaces that can be saturated (e.g., carpet, bedding) 
usually take longer than the same volume of blood on a 
nonporous surface.
Generally, drying time is decreased with elevated 
temperature and lower humidity. Conversely, drying 
time is increased with lower temperature and increased 
humidity. Increased airflow, such as produced by fans, 
wind, and breezes from open windows, will affect drying 
times. Casework will often present features of both of the 
aforementioned generalities. For example, in areas closer 
to the equator, one may find a situation with increased 
temperature and increased humidity. Experiments may 
need to be performed in cases where drying times are 
a significant issue. In these cases, the size of the blood-
stains, temperature, humidity, target surface, and airflow 
should be replicated as closely as possible.
Bloodstains dry from the periphery toward the cen-
ter. Figure 3.27 illustrates this principle. Next to the 
number 4, a stain that has been wiped through, 4 min-
utes after it was deposited, is seen. The peripheral rim 
is intact, but the center of the stain has been removed. 
This is referred to as a skeletonized stain, or a perim-
eter stain. This drying principle holds true with all types 
of stains, pools, saturation, flow patterns, and so on. 
In some instances, the center of the stain may dry and 
begin to flake away, as seen in Figure 3.28. This is often 
seen on smooth and varnished type surfaces or on sur-
faces with a greasy film.
Dried bloodstains on different types of skin may 
appear very different from one another. Blood in a uni-
form layer that has dried relatively quickly and without 
disturbance, may have a “crazed” or cracked appearance, 
as seen in Figure 3.29. This phenomenon can be seen 
on several other types of target surfaces as well. Blood 
FIGURE 3.26 Bloodstains diluted by perspiration.
FIGURE 3.27 Bloodstain wiped through after 4  minutes, 
leaving the peripheral rim intact.

51
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
that is deposited in thicker, smaller drops or spatter can 
appear “puckered,” as seen in Figure 3.30. Still others 
may appear more, as most people without experience 
in the discipline might expect—somewhat of a “crusty” 
appearance, as shown in Figure 3.31.
It is important to note that the type of skin (ethnic-
ity, age, medical conditions, etc.) in addition to the use of 
products on the skin, along with the usual environmental 
factors, can affect the appearance of the bloodstains. 
Spatter patterns and expirated patterns exhibiting direc-
tionality may remain intact on hands, arms, or other 
body areas that may assist with positioning in recon-
struction, if needed.
FIGURE 3.28 Bloodstain on a tile floor that has begun 
to flake off, leaving the periphery intact.
FIGURE 3.29 Dried blood on skin exhibiting “crazing.”
FIGURE 3.30 Dried blood on skin with a “puckered” 
appearance.
FIGURE 3.31 Dried blood on skin with a “crusty” 
appearance.

52
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
The aging of bloodstains (meaning, when was the 
blood deposited?) has been an elusive task. There has 
recently been work published using hyperspectral imag-
ing in the aging of bloodstains that may have more prom-
ise than previous aging attempts. It is commonly thought 
that bloodstains darken, from red to a rusty type color to 
black, as they age. While bloodstains do tend to darken 
as they age, attempting to estimate age of a bloodstain 
by its color, without experimenting with replicate condi-
tions particular to that case, is not scientifically defensi-
ble. Bloodstains deposited on a piece of glass and a piece 
of wood at the same time and subsequently examined a 
week later may show surprising results. The one on the 
wood may appear much darker, while the one on glass 
may still appear red due to the light that is transmitted 
through the glass. Consider bloodstains on two identi-
cal lightbulbs in lamps with blood deposited at the same 
time. One lamp was never turned on, while the other 
remained on for an hour before being shut off. Once law 
enforcement arrives, in both instances, the bulb will be 
cold, but the stains on the two lightbulbs may look very 
different. Depending on when law enforcement arrives, 
the amount of blood deposited, temperature, and so on, 
the bloodstains on the bulb that was never turned on 
may still be “tacky” or even wet, while the bloodstains 
on the bulb that had been on may be dry, darker and 
perhaps even starting to flake off. Absent case specific 
experiments (whose estimates should still be conserva-
tive, as not every variable can be replicated), it is best to 
be conservative—if the blood was still wet upon arrival, 
then it can be concluded that it was recently deposited. 
If the blood is dry upon arrival, then it can be concluded 
that some time has passed since it was deposited. Epstein 
and Laber, in 1983, published data in Experiments and 
Practical Exercises in Bloodstain Pattern Analysis, tak-
ing into account several environmental factors, surfaces 
characteristics, and volumes of blood up to 10 mL that 
can be used as a general guide/reference.
3.6.13 Diffused/Capillary Action
Diffusion is defined as the net movement of a substance 
from an area of high concentration to an area of low 
concentration. Capillary action refers to the ability of a 
liquid to flow in small/narrow spaces in defiance of grav-
ity and without the assistance of external forces. This 
occurs when the adhesive forces, which are the forces 
between two dissimilar substances, between the liquid 
and the container, are greater than the cohesive forces 
within the liquid. Cohesive forces are forces between like 
substances. Therefore, conversely, if the cohesive forces 
are greater than the adhesive forces between the liquid 
and container, a reverse flow will occur. It is capillary 
action that is the principle at work when using paper 
towels or sponges when cleaning up a liquid. Figure 3.32 
shows diffusion and capillary action: diffusion, because 
the movement is from an area of high concentration (the 
blood pool on the floor), to low concentration; and cap-
illary action, because the liquid portion of the blood is 
being drawn up the shirt—from the floor/back of the 
body to the front of the body, in defiance of gravity. Some 
individuals may be familiar with the term “wicking,” 
which is often used to describe capillary action. The rate 
at which this phenomenon may occur is highly dependent 
on the surface, weave, or “grain” involved, in addition to 
the adhesive forces.
Capillary action is the principle at work in thin layer 
chromatography, where there is a solid and a mobile phase. 
In bloodstain cases, the mobile phase is the liquid portion 
of the blood and the solid phase is the porous material on 
which it travels. Caution should be exercised when evalu-
ating bloodstains/spatter patterns related to directional-
ity determinations, as the weave of the fabric can distort 
the shape of the stain—what was dropped at a 90-degree 
angle and should appear round, may appear somewhat 
elliptical, and vice versa, an elliptical stain may appear 
more rounded. Additionally, with some fabrics, it can 
be extremely difficult to determine on which side of the 
fabric the blood was deposited. Figure 3.33 shows blood-
stains on a microfiber type of material. The green divid-
ing line separates the stains that were deposited on one 
side from stains deposited on the opposite side. As seen in 
Figure 3.33, a simple visual examination may not be suf-
ficient to make the determination. This author has seen 
this issue in several types of material. Experimentation 
may be required on unusual or unfamiliar materials.
FIGURE 3.32 Diffusion and capillary action.

53
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
3.6.14 Insects (and Other Animals)
Not uncommonly, a victim or victims, whether by 
homicide, suicide, accidental, or natural deaths, are not 
discovered until they are significantly into the decom-
position process. Indeed, sometimes the first indication 
of a dead body may be extensive fly activity around the 
trunk of a car, for example, or vultures circling in an 
outdoor area. Maggots can ingest up to approximately 
95% of a body’s mass, who will then turn into flies. Flies 
can create very small stains that may be confusing to the 
analyst at a scene where other small stains may be pres-
ent, such as a beating or shooting. The appearance of 
these artifacts may differ from dome-shaped, as a result 
of the sucking action of their proboscis (sometimes char-
acterized as “lappers and suckers” as opposed to “bit-
ers” like a horsefly), to a swiped appearance as a result 
of defecation, or transferred from walking through liq-
uid blood.
These stains are often seen concentrated around light 
sources, windows, and ceilings and may also be found on 
a variety of surfaces, including on the deceased’s body 
and clothing. One of the defining features of these “pat-
terns” is that there is no pattern—there is no defined 
area of convergence. Figure 3.34 shows an overall view 
of bloodstains created by flies around the base of a lamp. 
Note the void between the ring of stains and the base 
of the lamp. Likewise, it is common to see bloodstains 
all around an exposed bulb, but not on the bulb itself, 
if on. Figure  3.35 shows a close-up image of some of 
the stains from the same scene, on the ceiling. Note the 
variable appearance of the stains in addition to the ran-
dom apparent “directionality.” Some additional items to 
consider when evaluating if the stains are related to the 
mechanism that caused death are as follows:
• Is there a lack of edge characteristics that would 
be expected on a given surface?
• Is there evidence of fly activity (alive or dead flies 
present)?
• Are there stains in other rooms that do not 
appear to be connected to the incident? Compare 
stains in other rooms to those near the body.
• Do they look like known fly artifacts?
FIGURE 3.33 Microfiber material, green line separating 
stains deposited on opposite sides.
FIGURE 3.34 Fly artifacts around a lamp base. 
(Courtesy of HLM.)
FIGURE 3.35 Close-up of fly artifacts on a ceiling. 
(Courtesy of HLM.)

54
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
3.6.15 Sequenced Bloodstains
It is not uncommon to find multiple and/or overlapping 
bloodstain patterns at the scene of a death or assault. 
This may occur for a variety of reasons, from an injured 
party simply moving around, to a prolonged struggle or 
assault to staging efforts. Sometimes, the sequence of 
pattern deposition can be ascertained and, therefore, can 
be utilized to help to corroborate or refute statements.
For example, at the scene of a beating as seen in 
Figure 3.36, the victim’s husband said that he found his 
wife beaten when he arrived home. However, looking 
closely at the blood stains, shows that the sequence of 
events was s follows:
• Impact spatter deposited on the wall
• Palm print, confirmed to be the husband’s, 
in blood, transferred to wall, and created the 
perimeter stains seen as his palm wiped out the 
center of the impact spatter on the wall
• Additional impact spatter deposited on top of 
the palm print
Can the husband’s statement be true? It can be con-
cluded that the person who deposited the bloody hand-
print (the husband) was present after the beating began 
and before it ended. Therefore, his statement that he 
came home and found his wife at some point later is not 
consistent with the physical evidence.
Figure 3.37 was created in a laboratory setting by 
students in a basic bloodstain pattern analysis course. 
By examining the edge characteristics of the swipes, the 
order of deposition may be able to be determined; see 
the numbering on photo for order of deposition. The 
“newest” swipe will disrupt the edges of the previously 
deposited swipe if it is still at least partially wet.
Another example to consider is a scene where a clean-
up was attempted and the body present at the scene. If 
the body does not disrupt the wiping pattern, it can be 
deduced that the body was placed there after the wiping 
occurred. Further, with a significant amount of blood, if 
no disrupted clots are present, this would indicate that 
the wiping occurred while the blood was still quite fresh, 
which may help confirm or refute suspect or witness 
statements with regard to a timeline of events.
There are several more types of sequencing stains 
that may be observed that can answer many different 
types of questions; the preceding figures are a few exam-
ples. When determining sequence from photographs, the 
analyst should be conservative, because in certain cir-
cumstances, the determination may not be as straight-
forward as the figures shown here.
3.6.16 Voids Patterns
The currently accepted definition of a void pattern is “an 
absence of blood in an otherwise continuous bloodstain 
or bloodstain pattern.” Voids can help to place object 
and/or individuals within a scene.
Recall Figure 3.12 from the impact spatter section. 
There is a relative void where the victim’s head was posi-
tioned during the administration of the beating.
Figure 3.38 depicts a laboratory-created void pat-
tern. The target paper was placed behind the right side of 
the sneaker and a blood-soaked sponge was placed on the 
left side and was subsequently shot into with a .22 caliber 
FIGURE 3.36 Sequenced impact spatter, palm transfer 
creating perimeter stains, then additional impact spatter. 
(Courtesy of HLM.)
1
3
2
4
FIGURE 3.37 Sequenced swipe patterns.

55
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
revolver. The void created by the sneaker, whose left side 
intercepted a portion of the bloodstains, can easily be 
seen on the target paper. Figure 3.39 reveals a square-
shaped void within a transfer pattern on a sock recovered 
at the scene of a stabbing.
A void may reveal a recognizable pattern, or it may 
only show that something blocked the deposition of 
blood in that particular area. Voids are commonly seen 
in between transfer patterns on the extremities of a vic-
tim, which may assist with victim positioning. Likewise, 
voids on the clothing of suspects or victims may indicate 
how it was worn (e.g., buttoned or unbuttoned), folded, 
or creased at the time of blood deposition.
3.7 DOCUMENTATION
It is not uncommon for a bloodstain pattern analysis to 
be performed “remotely” from photographs and other 
case documentation. Sometimes, the conclusions that 
they analyst can reach regarding the significance of par-
ticular bloodstains is compromised as a result of incom-
plete or not appropriately gathered documentation.
Photography is critically important. Photographs 
should be taken with the standard overall, mid-range, 
and close-up (preferably macro, where very small stains 
are involved) protocol. After initial “as found” scene 
photography is complete, markers may be placed to assist 
in showing the orientation of the pattern in a particular 
photograph. This may be accomplished in many ways, 
depending on the nature and size of the area being pho-
tographed. Photographs should be taken in a manner 
such that the close-up photographs can be easily related 
to the overall scene. Some methods utilized are grid-
ding off a large area, such as a wall, with either painter’s 
tape, stick-on scales as seen in Figure  3.40, or mark-
ers. Individual stains may be circled, as in Figure 3.41, 
FIGURE 3.38 Laboratory-created void of a sneaker.
FIGURE 3.39 Void within a transfer pattern on a sock.
FIGURE 3.40 Door and wall with a stick-on ruler grid.

56
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
to show the overall distribution from a distance. Scales 
should be utilized when photographing bloodstains, and 
they should be photographed at 90 degrees from the sur-
face whenever possible to minimize any distortion.
Bloodstains on clothing may be highlighted in differ-
ent ways as well. Some methods include ring reinforcers 
(with the paper backing still on), stick-on arrows, tri-
angles created from masking tape, and so on. Clothing 
should be photographed prior to the placement of any 
marking devices. Consideration must also be given if 
there is going to be, or is likely to be, DNA testing.
Videography is also useful in documenting the 
spatial relationships among objects and stain patterns 
that may be difficult to discern from two-dimensional 
photographs.
Written documentation should accurately describe 
the overall pattern as well as the size, shape, distribution, 
and location of individual stains. The condition of the 
blood should also be described; for example, wet, dry, 
partially dry, crazed, and so on. Areas of bloodstaining 
can also be indicated on the scaled scene diagram using 
measurements from triangulation.
Collection of items with bloodstain patterns of inter-
est, or that may be difficult or questionable should be 
collected in their entirety when possible. When consider-
ing bloodstaining on flooring, both a bloodstained sam-
ple and a control sample (without visible bloodstaining) 
should be collected. If carpeting, the carpet and padding 
should be collected and notation made as to the underly-
ing surface (e.g., hardwood, cement). Additionally, these 
samples should be labeled so as to indicate what their posi-
tions were within the carpet/flooring. Compass directions 
and measurements via triangulation may be useful in 
achieving this. The control sample(s) should be sufficient 
so that both prosecution and defense analysts have ade-
quate material on which experiments can be conducted if 
necessary. Each person maintains their floors/carpets dif-
ferently, so the best way to carry out case-specific experi-
ments as closely as possible to the actual conditions is to 
use flooring from that particular scene. If flooring cannot 
be collected for logistical or storage reasons, it should be 
described as thoroughly as possible (e.g., marble tile with 
apparently sealed grout, linoleum with a hazy appear-
ance). This will allow experts to reconstruct as closely as 
possible if the case requires a reconstruction. Swabs of wet 
or dry stains (collected with a swab wet with sterile water) 
should be collected from a representative sample of each 
discrete area of bloodstain patterns and from those stains 
which appear “out of place” (e.g., a passive stain on the 
back of a single victim found facedown) for presumptive 
and DNA testing to assist in placing participants in their 
relative positions in reconstruction efforts, if necessary.
Multiple documentation methods should be utilized 
to thoroughly document a scene. There may appear to be 
some overlap in documentation, but it is better to have 
redundancy instead of a gap that may turn out to be criti-
cal. When documenting a scene, the investigator should 
ask him- or herself, “Could someone unfamiliar with 
this scene review my documentation and reconstruct this 
scene?” If the answer is “no,” then there must be a gap in 
documentation that should be revisited.
3.8 PRESUMPTIVE TESTING 
AND CHEMICAL ENHANCEMENT
The definition of “presumptive” according to merriam-
webster.com (Presumptive, n.d.), is “giving grounds for 
reasonable opinion or belief.” Therefore, when conduct-
ing presumptive testing either on scene or in the labora-
tory, a positive result does not mean that the suspected 
stain/sample is, in fact, blood. A positive presumptive 
test gives the analyst grounds for reasonable belief that 
the substance is blood and that he or she can continue 
with the investigation as if it were blood, pending confir-
matory or DNA testing.
Historically, the chain of testing was as follows: pre-
sumptive → confirmatory → species determination → 
DNA. Today however, it is very common that the inter-
mediate steps are not performed, and a sample is sent for 
DNA testing after a positive presumptive test is obtained.
There are a number of presumptive tests available: 
catalytic color tests, such as phenolphthalein (PTH) 
(also known as Kastle-Meyer or KM), leucocrystal vio-
let (LCV), Hemastix, leucomalachite green, tetrameth-
ylbenzidine (TMB) as well as chemiluminescent and 
fluorescent preparations. Hexagon OBTI is currently the 
FIGURE 3.41 Bloodstains on a wall circled by a marker.

57
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
only presumptive test available that can make the ana-
lyst more confident that a suspected sample is, in fact, 
human blood. While false positives have occurred with 
some primate blood samples, it did not react with blood 
from common domestic and farm animals.
It is good practice to collect two swabs of a stain 
and utilize one for presumptive testing and one to submit 
for DNA testing, as many of the color tests can render 
the sample useless for DNA testing. Catalytic color tests 
are tests that function by utilizing a chromogen solution 
(color) that is oxidized, usually by a 3% hydrogen per-
oxide, which is catalyzed by the presence of hemoglobin, 
and results in a visible color change. These tests should 
be read within a few seconds of the completion of the 
application of solutions to the swabs, or the results are 
not reliable.
Examples of tests that produce light instead of color 
are chemicals such as Luminol, BlueStar Forensic, and 
Fluorescein, that are luminescent (Luminol, BlueStar) 
and fluorescent (Fluorescein), respectively. These chemi-
cals are typically used to identify areas of bloodshed after 
a cleanup or to enhance bloodstains that may be on a 
substrate where visualization of bloodstains is difficult. 
When photographing chemiluminescent or fluorescent 
reactions, it is preferable to use a technique that reveals 
both the reaction and the surrounding location. This can 
be achieved by either “painting with light” or rear-curtain 
sync techniques. Some agencies will take a photograph 
of the area in normal light conditions, followed by the 
chemical enhancement of the same area (that typically 
looks like areas of light on a black background) and then 
layer the two photographs in a photo-editing program. 
While this technique is not impermissible, there are a few 
steps that should be taken to ensure admissibility. First, 
once the image of the “normal” lighting conditions is 
obtained, a tripod must be used. Second, a scale should 
be placed for the normal light conditions, photographed 
and left in place for the chemical reaction photographs. 
The scale will serve as proof that the camera was not 
moved from its original position and provide an “anchor” 
to utilize when the photos are layered in the photo-editing 
program. Unscaled photos, or one scaled photograph 
with one unscaled photograph, should not be used for 
layering purposes. Additionally, each step in the photo-
editing process should be documented, whether within 
the software program, in writing, or both, so that the 
composite image can be deconstructed and reconstructed 
following the documented steps, by a third party.
All presumptive tests are subject to some false posi-
tive results—which is a positive reaction from a sub-
stance other than blood, such as vegetable peroxidases 
and chemical oxidants. There are several studies avail-
able that examine the specificity (how likely the test is to 
react to materials other than blood) and sensitivity (how 
low of a concentration of blood will the test detect). For 
color tests, if there is an apparent color reaction before 
the addition of the oxidizing agent, this is also considered 
a false positive.
Apparent partial prints in blood may be enhanced 
to further reveal either ridge or tread detail for poten-
tial comparison. Some commonly used chemicals for 
this purpose include amido black, Hungarian red, aque-
ous leucocrystal violet, and Coomassie Brilliant Blue. 
There are advantages and disadvantages to each, and the 
method should be chosen based on the substrate and the 
potential probative value.
Positive and negative controls should be performed 
immediately prior to use in case work to assure that the 
chemicals are functioning properly. It should be noted 
that this is a very brief overview of presumptive testing 
to acquaint the reader with some of the commonly used 
chemicals. A great deal of literature exists that covers 
additional testing and enhancement methods.
3.9 EVALUATING A BLOODSTAIN CASE
A bloodstain pattern analyst may be asked to conduct an 
analysis at various points in the criminal justice  process— 
from responding to a fresh crime scene to evaluating a 
cold case. This section will also be an overview of some 
of the most important issues to consider when evaluat-
ing a bloodstain case, regardless of where it is within the 
process, rather than a comprehensive reference manual.
When examining a crime scene, or physical evidence, 
proper personal protective equipment (PPE) should be 
utilized. All biological material should be considered 
infectious and handled accordingly. Additionally, the 
scene and evidence must be protected from contamina-
tion by the analyst. At a fresh scene, a preliminary walk-
through should be conducted, initial observations noted, 
and assessment of what PPE, equipment and personnel 
will be necessary.
The reconstruction of a bloodstained scene requires 
the input from other disciplines and information sources, 
such as the autopsy report, hospital records, witness 
statements, DNA and other laboratory testing.
Initially, patterns should be identified and described 
based solely on their size, shape, distribution, and loca-
tion, without attempting to attribute a specific event 
that created the pattern—this will be done later. For 
example, a pattern consisting of small, round stains, 
between 1 and 3 millimeters in diameter, is located on a 
wall approximately 12 inches above the floor. The “dif-
ferential diagnoses” based on this information could be 
impact spatter, satellite spatter or expirated bloodstains. 
If there is no pooling of blood nearby, nor evidence that 
one was cleaned up, or that an object onto which drip-
ping may have occurred had been removed, satellite spat-
ter may be ruled out. After review of EMS, hospital, 

58
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
autopsy reports, scene and autopsy photographs, there 
is no documentation of blood in the nose, mouth, air-
way, airway injury, or positioning of the victim such that 
an expirated pattern is possible (such as breathing into a 
pool of blood), then expirated bloodstains may be ruled 
out. This would leave impact spatter and the most likely 
pattern and would then be correlated with the injuries.
Once DNA testing results are obtained, it may be 
possible to place individuals in their respective positions. 
This is especially important when multiple victims are 
involved.
Each case will have different information available 
for review. It is important to note that the analyst may 
find him- or herself in the position of not having suffi-
cient information on which to base an opinion, or many 
overlapping, complex and/or altered patterns that make 
rendering an opinion difficult or impossible. It is critical 
that the analyst recognizes this and reports only conclu-
sions that can be supported by the available evidence.
Several examples of worksheets are available to 
ensure that examinations are systematic and thorough, 
whether it is of a scene, clothing, vehicle, or other items of 
evidence. It is not uncommon for a defense of an accused 
to be something like, “Look at all the blood at this scene. 
No blood was found on Mr. Jones’ person, clothes or 
vehicle. Mr. Jones could not have been involved in this 
crime and not gotten any blood on himself!” Research 
by MacDonell and Kish has coined the axiom in blood-
stain pattern analysis that “absence of evidence is not 
evidence of absence.” This means that simply because a 
suspect has little or no blood on his or her person or 
clothing does not mean that he/she was not involved in 
the incident. There are a number of factors that deter-
mine whether or not an assailant becomes spattered with 
blood, as mentioned earlier, including but not limited to 
the following:
• The nature of the weapon (length, mass, arc of 
swing) utilized
• Direction of the blows or sharp force trauma
• The number of wounds and if covered by cloth-
ing or hair
• Duration of assault
• The assailant discarded clothing worn during 
assault and cleaned him- or herself up
• Assailant committed the assault while naked, 
subsequently cleaned up
• Assailant utilized outer protective clothing
3.10 CONCLUSION
Bloodstain pattern analysis can be a valuable investiga-
tive tool. If crime scene investigators and homicide detec-
tives participate in a basic bloodstain pattern analysis 
course, while it will not make them instant “experts,” 
it will assist them in identifying, understanding and pre-
serving valuable bloodstain evidence for evaluation by 
an expert that might otherwise be overlooked and lost. 
Proper documentation is critical for a useful bloodstain 
pattern analysis.
It should be remembered that bloodstain pattern 
analysis should be utilized as another “tool” in the inves-
tigative toolbox. Because several stain patterns can appear 
similar to one another, although caused by different 
mechanisms, one should be critical of an analyst or expert 
who concludes that a given pattern could have occurred 
only by one particular mechanism. For instance, in the 
aforementioned example of the 1–3  millimeter-sized pat-
tern on the wall 12 inches from the floor—if blood was 
found in the nose and/or mouth of the victim, then the 
best opinion that can be rendered is that the pattern is 
either impact spatter or expirated. For this reason, blood-
stain pattern analysis is frequently better utilized in iden-
tifying what could not have happened.
It is better to be conservative in one’s opinion rather 
than reporting or testifying to opinions that cannot be 
supported by the physical evidence. The analyst may 
want to keep in mind, “Would I want to be convicted 
based on this evidence?” when forming conclusions. If 
an analyst is unable to be objective, the case should be 
referred to another analyst. Case-specific experimenta-
tion may need to be performed, and if evidence and con-
trol samples are properly collected, this will allow the 
analyst to render the best opinions.
Finally, this chapter on bloodstain pattern analysis is 
not all inclusive, but meant to assist with understanding 
some of the basic tenants, procedures and challenges that 
exist in this discipline.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Genesis 4:10–12 (King James Version). (n.d.) In Bible 
Tools. Retrieved from https://www.bibletools.org/
index.cfm/fuseaction/Bible.show/sVerseID/90/eVer-
seID/90. Accessed July 5, 2015.
James, S., Kish, P. and Sutton, T.P. 2005. Principles of 
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis, Theory and Practice. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press/ Taylor & Francis.
MacDonell, H.L. 2005. Bloodstain Patterns, Second 
Revised Edition. Elmira, NY: Golos Printing.
Presumptive. (n.d.). In Merriam Webster online. Retrieved 
from http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/
presumptive (Accessed July 5, 2015).
Sears, D.W. 2002. Overview of hemoglobin’s structure/
function relationships. Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology Education, 30(3):208.
Secomb, T.W. 1991. Red blood cell mechanics and rheol-
ogy. Cell Biophysics, 18(3):231–251.

59
C H A P T E R  4
Latent Print Examination
Andrew R. Reitnauer
4.1 INTRODUCTION
The use of fingerprints as a means of personal identifica-
tion has been used for centuries. Through centuries-old 
findings, scientists have found that a person’s fingerprints 
were used on stone carving, to leave a personal mark on 
pottery, and to sign legal documents. Throughout the 
centuries, the use of fingerprints evolved into a means of 
CONTENTS
 4.1 Introduction 
59
 4.2 History 
60
 4.3 Physiology 
61
 4.4 Latent Print Development 
62
 4.4.1 Iodine Fuming 
63
 4.4.2 Hydrochloric Acid Fuming 
63
 4.4.3 1,8-Diazafluoren-9-One (DFO) 
63
 4.4.4 1,2-Indanedione 
63
 4.4.5 Ninhydrin 
63
 4.4.6 Zinc Chloride 
64
 4.4.7 Silver Nitrate/Physical Developer 
64
 4.4.8 Cyanoacrylate 
64
 4.4.9 Ardrox/Basic Yellow/Rhodamine 6G/MBD/RAY/RAM 
65
4.4.10 Small Particle Reagent 
65
4.4.11 Gentian Violet 
65
4.4.12 Sticky Side Powder 
65
4.4.13 Sudan Black 
66
4.4.14 Powders 
66
 4.5 Blood Reagents 
66
4.5.1 
Amido Black 
67
4.5.2 
Leucocrystal Violet 
67
4.5.3 
Hungarian Red/Acid Fuschin 
67
4.5.4 
Phloxine B 
67
4.5.5 
Acid Yellow 7 
67
 4.6 Photography 
68
4.6.1 
Fundamental Principles 
68
4.6.2 
Types of Lighting 
68
4.6.3 
Macro Photography Lighting 
68
 4.7 Barrier Filters 
71
 4.8 Human Factors 
72
4.8.1 
Blind Verification 
73
 4.9 Legal Considerations and Standards 
73
4.10 Latent Print Comparisons 
73
4.10.1 Individual Characteristics 
76
4.11 Conclusion 
77
Bibliography 
78

60
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
personal identification, through the application of a sys-
tematic classifications system. The continued advancement 
of these records is still in use today and is the primary 
source of individual identification in forensic science.
The 20th century has seen the development of fin-
gerprint processing and collection techniques, allowing 
examiners and technicians to develop and preserve fin-
gerprint impressions at a crime scene for comparison to 
known exemplar records. In addition, the advent of digi-
tal photography and imaging enhancement has revolu-
tionized the capture of impression evidence beyond the 
limits of the traditional film darkroom. The International 
Association for Identification, one of the world’s oldest 
forensic science organizations, has recognized the value 
of digital imaging as the progression of photography in 
forensic science. Through the fundamental principles, 
founded in the traditional sciences of biology, physiol-
ogy, and physics, the development of fingerprint identifi-
cation has become a widely accepted means of personal 
identification.
4.2 HISTORY
Homo sapiens are a subset of the phylum Mammalia. As 
a part of the early zoological research done by Klaatsch, 
Reh, Hepburn, Whipple, and Wilder, the formation of 
volar pads in mammals, and specifically the formation 
of friction ridge skin in primates, was examined. Their 
research founded many of the original theories of the 
development of the hands and feet, and through the 
additional research of Grew and Bidloo, the anatomical 
structure of friction ridge skin began to form. In 1685, 
Marcello Malphighi published his research on the struc-
ture and formation of the layers of the skin. Following 
his research, Mayer and Purkinje continued to develop 
the theories concerning friction ridge skin, and began to 
formulate the principles of individuality in reference to a 
person’s fingerprints.
Beginning in the 19th century, researchers and police 
professionals began to apply the knowledge of their sci-
entific predecessors to the needs of the criminal justice 
system and government. Sir William Herschel began 
to use the individuality of friction ridge impressions to 
validate records and contracts in India. He continued 
this practice, and expanded the collection of fingerprint 
records as the Magistrate and Collector at Hooghly, 
applying them in their criminal court and record sys-
tem. He is also credited with some of the first research 
proving the persistency of fingerprints throughout one’s 
lifetime. Dr. Henry Faulds, who conducted medicolegal 
research, wrote a letter to Charles Darwin in 1880, citing 
the uniqueness of one’s fingerprints, publishing some of 
his findings in a letter in Nature, entitled “On the Skin-
Furrows of the Hand” (Faulds, 1880). Faulds published 
his findings prior to Herschel; however, both men are 
credited with pioneering efforts in proving fingerprints 
as a viable means of personal identification. The use of 
a fingerprint as a means of personal identification in the 
United States can be linked to a receipt from Gilbert 
Thompson to acknowledge a financial transaction in 
1882, as reported by Ashbaugh.
Perhaps the most well-known scientist in the early 
stages of fingerprint identification was Sir Francis Galton. 
He had received correspondence from Dr. Faulds regard-
ing his research, and as an anthropologist, Galton began 
to explore the unique characteristics of fingerprints and 
their potential in personal identification. His research 
led him to compare the aspects of previous systems of 
identification against the principles of fingerprints. His 
well-known publication in 1892 described many of the 
features found in the ridges and furrows of fingerprints 
(Galton, 1892). This publication went on to describe 
the features found and their degree of uniqueness when 
applied to the population, in essence applying the science 
of fingerprint identification to some population statistics, 
proving their ultimate value.
While a member of the Central Police Department 
at La Plata, Argentina, Juan Vucetich began to collect 
the fingerprints of convicted criminals. By 1891, he had 
devised a fingerprint classification system (Ashbaugh, 
2000). On June 19, 1892, two murdered children were 
found by their illegitimate mother, Francisca Rojas. Upon 
examining the scene of the crime, the inspector located 
a bloodstain, containing a fingerprint, on the bedroom 
door. The piece of the door was removed and compared 
to the fingerprint card taken from Francisca Rojas. The 
impression was identified as her right thumb, leading to 
an admission that she had killed the children. During the 
same time, Sir Edward Henry, the Inspector General of 
Police in the Bengal Province of India, was exploring the 
systems of personal identification; currently the primary 
system was anthropometry or Bertillionage, which used 
the physical measurements of the body, as designed by 
Alphonse Bertillion. Anthropometry was widely used 
and accepted until the case of Will West. In 1903, two 
inmates at Leavenworth Penitentiary named Will West 
and William West were incarcerated. Both men had a 
similar record using Bertillionage. William West was 
already incarcerated for a crime during the time Will 
West committed his offense. Their fingerprints allowed 
the two men to be distinguished with separate records 
(Will West). Henry’s exploration lead him to devise 
a classification system for fingerprints, known as the 
Henry System, which is still in use today. Following the 
presentation by Detective John Ferrier of Scotland Yard 
at the 1904 World’s Fair regarding the evolution of fin-
gerprints as reported by these scientists, the current value 
of fingerprints in the criminal justice system and forensic 
science became clear.

61
Latent Print Examination
During the 20th century, a number of advancements 
were made regarding the use of fingerprints to identify 
individuals. The use of fingerprint evidence in criminal 
proceedings became a hallmark in the investigatory pro-
cess. Detectives and crime scene responders became adept 
at the development and recovery of latent fingerprint 
evidence, with the evolution of the physical and chemi-
cal processing methods. The application of the ACE-V 
methodology, as termed by David Ashbaug, became the 
standard methodology used in the scientific examination 
of latent print evidence. The methodology has evolved 
further in today’s scientific laboratories, with the applica-
tion of human factors and quality assurance measures that 
have helped safeguard the proper application of the scien-
tific basis for conclusion during the examination process.
4.3 PHYSIOLOGY
The two fundamental principles regarding fingerprints 
as a means of personal identification, permanence and 
uniqueness, are founded on the physiological basis of skin 
formation. The skin is composed of two overall layers, 
the dermis and the epidermis. The dermis is the inner-
most layer, and the epidermis is the outer layer, which is 
where the friction ridges used in forensic examinations 
are found. As cells are developed by the body, they begin 
in the basal layers of the dermis, where they continue to 
develop and migrate outward into the epidermis, where 
the body continually sheds cells in favor of new ones. Due 
to the specific structure of these two layers, they main-
tain a specific formation due to the desmosomes present 
in the membrane found between the papillary region of 
the dermis and the basal layer of the epidermis.
The epidermis is composed of five layers, which aid 
in the development of skin cells migrating to the outer 
layer. The epidermis is composed of the stratum corneum, 
stratum lucidum, stratum granulosum, stratum spinosum, 
and stratum basale. As evident in the figures that follow, 
there is a specific structure between the epidermis and the 
dermis. These peaks and valleys continue throughout the 
entire structure, resulting in the formation of the friction 
ridges and furrows.  This anatomical structure is what 
leads to the principle of permanence. Throughout a per-
son’s lifetime, his or her fingerprints will remain the same, 
until death and decomposition. Figure 4.1 is a photograph 
of the base of the epidermis. Visible are the friction ridges, 
furrows and sweat glands. During the course of one’s life-
time, temporary damage can occur to the layers of the 
skin. If the damage is limited to the epidermal layers, the 
natural healing process of the skin will replace the dam-
aged cells, and the features of the friction ridge skin will 
remain the same. If the dermal layer of the skin is dam-
aged, the resulting effect on the epidermal friction ridge 
detail will be visible in the formation of a scar or similar 
feature. Figure 4.2 is an example of the resulting effect of 
a permanent injury of the dermal layer of the skin.
The principle of uniqueness is formed during fetal 
development. While the overall pattern types may have 
some genetic influence, the specific individual character-
istics are formed during pressure and movement in utero. 
The location of the volar pads during gestational growth 
has been shown to have a direct influence on the ultimate 
pattern type. Volar pads that develop in the center of the 
distal phalange will become a whorl. If the volar pad 
develops in a more proximal location on the distal pha-
lange, the resulting fingerprint pattern type will become 
an arch. Volar pads that develop off center of the distal 
phalange will become a loop. 
The specific ridge pathways that subsequently 
develop are dependent on the influences born by the fetus 
during gestation. These specific ridge pathways are what 
allow fingerprints to be unique to an individual. While 
FIGURE 4.1 The base of the epidermis. (Courtesy of Ioan 
Truta.)
FIGURE 4.2  Example of a permanent injury to the skin. 
(Courtesy of Ioan Truta.)

62
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
identical twins share DNA, they will not have the same 
fingerprints, which has been proven through research.
4.4 LATENT PRINT DEVELOPMENT
There are three types of fingerprints when considering their 
deposition on a surface area: latent, patent, and plastic. A 
latent print is a chance impression left by the contact of the 
palmar surface of the hands or the plantar surface of the feet 
onto a secondary surface. These types of impressions are 
generally invisible to the naked eye, and require an applica-
tion of a physical or chemical technique to make them vis-
ible. Examples of both a patent print (Figure 4.3a) and a 
plastic print (Figure 4.3b) are provided. A patent print is a 
type of impression that is readily visible to the naked eye, 
and has been deposited in ink, mud, blood, or other matrix. 
Plastic prints are a three-dimensional impression that have 
been casted into the surface that was contacted. Surfaces 
such as clay or putty may create a topographic impression 
of the print. These types of impressions may be recovered 
through photographic or casting means.
Physical evidence can be divided into two basic cat-
egories when considering the application of latent print 
development techniques: porous and nonporous. Porous 
evidence is a type of surface that is readily permeable to 
water such as paper or cardboard. Nonporous evidence is 
a type of surface that does not absorb water. These types 
of surfaces may be glass, metal, or plastic, among oth-
ers. The recognition of the type of evidence received will 
determine the sequence of development techniques used.
In discussing the various development methods, one 
must consider the potential permanent, or destructive, 
nature of the technique to the item. The most common 
form of a nondestructive development technique is light. 
Whether applied through ambient lighting, or through 
the use of an alternate light source (ALS) or forensic laser, 
the matrix of the impression may have a reaction with the 
light energy, allowing the friction ridge detail to become 
visible. The light does not have a destructive property to 
the physical evidence, with a caveat being any subsequent 
biological testing in the presence of shortwave UV light, 
as it may have a denaturing effect. Another example of a 
nondestructive technique is the use of fingerprint powders. 
In general, these particulates will adhere to the matrix of 
the impression, but may be wiped off of the surface area. 
Many of the chemical reagents that are used, and will be 
discussed further, are destructive, meaning they have a 
permanent reaction to the surface area.
When examining evidence, the examiner should 
always begin with a visual examination of the item—not 
only to observe any patent or plastic impressions, but 
to also examine the item for other forms of trace evi-
dence (e.g., hairs and fibers) for collection. At any point 
of the examination process, if any friction ridge detail 
is observed that may be suitable for examination pur-
poses, it should be either lifted or photographed follow-
ing proper collection methods. In addition to the initial 
visual examination, the examiner may also wish to 
employ an ALS examination, in order to determine if any 
impressions are present that may have a natural reaction 
to the light wavelength; in addition, certain biological 
materials may fluoresce under an ALS.
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4.3  Examples of (a) a patent print and (b) a 
plastic print. (Courtesy of Andrew Reitnauer.)

63
Latent Print Examination
4.4.1 Iodine Fuming
Iodine fuming is a technique that is used on porous items 
to develop latent impressions. The iodine is applied via a 
wand within an iodine chamber to sublimate the crystals 
into vapor. When exposed to the iodine vapors, the seba-
ceous components of the latent print matrix will react to 
form a light brown reaction. The development is a tem-
porary reaction, thus the results must be photographed 
immediately. Iodine fuming should be performed under 
conditions of adequate ventilation. This technique should 
also not be performed on a live human, due to a possible 
allergic reaction to the skin.
4.4.2 Hydrochloric Acid Fuming
Hydrochloric acid, or muriatic acid, may be used to 
develop latent impressions on porous items, especially 
thermal paper. This technique must be performed in a 
safe and ventilated area. The item being processed should 
be held over the container holding the acid. The acidic 
fumes emitted from the liquid acid will develop with the 
matrix of the latent impression, resulting in a light green 
development.
4.4.3 1,8-Diazafluoren-9-One (DFO)
DFO is a fluorescent development technique used on 
porous items. This reagent is quite sensitive to the amino 
acids present in the latent print matrix. The reagent 
is sprayed onto the surface of the item and allowed to 
air-dry. The item must then be placed into an oven at 
100°C for 20 minutes. The resulting development may 
be viewed under an ALS or forensic laser at a range of 
495 nm to 550 nm, using an orange- or red-colored fil-
ter. The resulting development must be photographed, 
as DFO cannot be physically lifted from the item. This 
technique may be employed as a part of a sequential 
method; however, it must be used prior to the application 
of  ninhydrin (Figure 4.4). 
4.4.4 1,2-Indanedione
1,2-Indanedione is a reagent with a similar applica-
tion and visualization as DFO. The exception being that 
1,2-Indanedione does not require the application of a heat 
source to develop. This reagent is also an optimal process-
ing technique for use on thermal paper, as the chemical 
carriers in DFO and ninhydrin may be detrimental to the 
examination process through a negative reaction with the 
item. 1,2-Indanedione must be given 72 hours to com-
pletely react with latent impressions on thermal paper. The 
evidence should be visually examined every 24 hours and 
impressions must be photographed upon visualization. 
1,2-Indanedione can also be used in a similar manner as 
DFO for the development of latent impressions on non-
thermal paper. It should be used in a similar method, or in 
accordance with manufacturer instructions.
4.4.5 Ninhydrin
Ninhydrin or triketohydrindene hydrate is a reagent used 
on porous items where the development of the latent 
impressions is a reaction resulting in Ruhemann’s purple. 
The reagent is applied under adequate ventilation con-
ditions, and the application of heat and humidity will 
accelerate the reaction. Like DFO and 1,2-Indanedione, 
Ninhydrin is sensitive to the amino acids present in the 
latent print matrix. While a notable part of the sequential 
process for porous items, this technique must be applied 
following the application to DFO, as it will inhibit any 
subsequent reactions by DFO. Ninhydrin does have a 
limitation when processing thermal paper, as some of the 
carriers may adversely react with the item (Figure 4.5).
Ninhydrin may also be used to develop blood impres-
sions on porous surfaces due to its sensitivity to the 
amino acids in blood. Another application for ninhydrin 
is its application to raw wood surfaces (Table of Reagents 
Program). It is recommended to allow the reaction a full 
24 hours to complete, and all developed impressions 
must be photographed.
FIGURE 4.4  A result of the DFO technique. (Courtesy 
of Andrew Reitnauer.)

64
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
4.4.6 Zinc Chloride
Zinc chloride is a fluorescent technique that is tradition-
ally applied following the development of latent impres-
sions after ninhydrin. The reagent is applied, allowed 
to air-dry and placed into an oven at 80°–100°C for 40 
minutes. This reagent is also sensitive to the components 
of 1,2-Indanedione and may be used in conjunction when 
processing evidence to enhance the reactions of these two 
techniques individually. The visualization for zinc chlo-
ride is approximately 500 nm and an orange barrier filter 
must be used. Any developed impressions must be photo-
graphed (Figure 4.6).
4.4.7 Silver Nitrate/Physical Developer
Silver nitrate and physical developer can be discussed 
together, as silver nitrate is the active reagent in the 
physical developer solution. A single-step silver nitrate 
spray reagent is available through some manufacturers; 
however, physical developer is a multistep development 
technique. The initial step is a maleic acid prewash for 
10 minutes. This prewash step regulates the pH levels 
of the item, allowing the working solution to properly 
react with the sebaceous components of the latent print 
matrix. Examiners must be aware that the application of 
any outside source of metal will impact the development 
process. Physical developer is also a preferred reagent for 
use on items that may have been wet, raw wood or on 
paper currency. Special disposal may be required due to 
the presence of silver.
4.4.8 Cyanoacrylate
Cyanoacrylate fuming, or commonly referred to as super-
glue fuming, is a commonly used technique to develop 
latent prints on nonporous evidence. In the late 1970s, 
Japanese scientists discovered the application of cyano-
acrylate fuming to the development of latent prints dur-
ing biological examinations on glass slides (Fingerprint 
Sourcebook). During this time, the primary means of 
fingerprint development had been traditional powders; 
FIGURE 4.5  Example of the ninhydrin technique. 
(Courtesy of Danielle O’Neill.)
FIGURE 4.6  Example of the zinc chloride technique. 
(Courtesy of Danielle O’Neill.)

65
Latent Print Examination
however, this discovery changed the scope of latent print 
examination. The active chemical, cyanoacrylate, binds to 
the aqueous components of the latent print matrix. The 
resulting reaction is a polymerization of the latent print 
matrix, resulting in a white residue that secures the latent 
print to the surface area. The application of heat and 
humidity will enhance the development process as well. 
Cyanoacrylate is an initial step in examining nonporous 
evidence that has a great deal of sensitivity in its develop-
ment potential. The application must be performed either 
in a chamber or in an area with adequate ventilation, as 
cyanoacrylate fumes are extremely harmful (Figure 4.7).
4.4.9 Ardrox/Basic Yellow/Rhodamine 
6G/MBD/RAY/RAM
This group of processing reagents are all post-cyano-
acrylate fluorescent dye stains. They may be composed 
of different carriers; however, in all of them the active 
chemical dye is absorbed by the residue left during the 
cyanoacrylate development process. All of them require a 
forensic light source, such as an ALS or laser, in order to 
visualize them properly. Depending on the dye stain used 
during the examination process, the wavelength used for 
excitation and the color of the barrier filter will change. 
Table 4.1 shows the various light wavelengths and barrier 
colors required for these techniques. The examiner can 
use different dye stains depending on the circumstances 
of the examination, and to achieve the desired resulting 
contrast between the latent impression and the back-
ground of the substrate.
4.4.10 Small Particle Reagent
Small particle reagent or SPR is a solution that may be 
sprayed onto a surface area. It is a suspension of powder 
in a carrier reagent, and is available in white or black. 
Small particle reagent must be applied to a surface that is 
or has been wet. The solution is sprayed onto the surface 
and allowed to run across the surface, adhering to the 
latent print matrix.
4.4.11 Gentian Violet
Gentian violet, or crystal violet, is a reagent that is used 
to develop latent impressions on the sticky side of tape. 
The active reagent is a biological stain sensitive to the 
sebaceous components of cells. This dye may also be used 
to process items that may have been contaminated by fats 
or oils. The reagent is applied by spraying or dipping, fol-
lowed by a rinse of distilled water, and may be repeated 
until the desired reaction is obtained. Once allowed to 
air-dry, developed latent impressions must be photo-
graphed. One must be mindful when photographing 
transparent tape that the photograph be taken of the side 
with the developed impression, or the resulting image 
will be laterally reversed.
4.4.12 Sticky Side Powder
Sticky side powder is a reagent for the development of latent 
prints on the sticky side on adhesive tape. The powder is 
FIGURE 4.7  Example of the cyanoacrylate technique. 
(Courtesy of Danielle O’Neill.)
TABLE 4.1 Reagent Wavelength
Reagent
Wavelength
Barrier Filter
Ardrox
350 nm–435 nm
Yellow
Basic Yellow
415 nm–485 nm
Yellow/Orange
MBD
415 nm–505 nm
Yellow/Orange
Rhodamine 6G 
(Basic Red 1)
495 nm–540 nm
Orange
RAM (R6G/
Ardrox/MBD)
Follow the wavelength and barrier for 
desired reagent reaction.
RAY (R6G/Ardrox/
Basic Yellow)

66
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
suspended in a solution containing a detergent. Upon mix-
ture to the specified proportions, the mixture is applied 
to the tape and rinsed using distilled water. The powder 
adheres to the latent print residue, resulting in a gray-
colored development. The resulting impressions must be 
photographed, following the caveat described above.
4.4.13 Sudan Black
Sudan black is a dye stain that is sensitive to oily and 
fatty compounds. This technique is applied to a surface 
by spraying or dipping and rinsed with distilled water. 
The development is a blue-black color. This technique 
is specifically applicable for the development of latent 
impressions on items that have been contaminated with 
grease or food. These results must be photographed for 
further examination
4.4.14 Powders
One of the oldest recognized methods of the development 
of latent impressions is through the use of fingerprint 
powders. The use of fingerprint powders had been well 
documented as the primary technique used both in the 
laboratory and at crime scenes for decades. The use of 
fingerprint powders has the advantage of not requiring 
the safety precautions of many of the chemical reagents, 
while one must be cognizant of any respiratory hazards. 
One of the main advantages to using fingerprint pow-
ders is the immediate result obtained once the powder 
has been applied. Any resulting impression may be pho-
tographed and/or lifted for further examination. As the 
primary objective in developing any latent impression is 
to maximize the contrast between the friction ridge detail 
and the substrate for further comparative purposes, there 
are a large number of fingerprint powders available.
There are four basic types of fingerprint powders, 
with some variations within. The first is traditional black 
powder. Typically composed of a carbon-based partic-
ulate, the powder is applied with a fiberglass brush by 
spinning the brush bristles over the area being examined. 
Any latent print detail will adhere to the particulates. 
Carbon black, silk black, and the dark components of 
bichromatic powders will develop a “black” impression 
on the lighter background. The second type of powder is 
a traditional white powder. The primary component in 
current products is titanium dioxide. This type of pow-
der is applied in the same manner as traditional black 
powder. White, silk white, gray and bichromatic pow-
ders will all develop a “white” impression on a darker 
background. The third type of powder is magnetic. This 
type of fingerprint powder is applied through the use of 
a magnetic “wand” style brush. The ferrous particles in 
the powder mixture adhere to the magnet of the brush 
and may be lightly applied to the surface of the item. 
These powders may be dark or light in color, depending 
on the color of the surface being examined.
The final type of fingerprint powders are fluores-
cent powders. These powders are available in a variety 
of colors and are visualized through the use of an ALS 
or forensic laser. These powders are often used on multi-
colored surfaces. If photographed, these impressions may 
require the use of a barrier filter on order to optimize 
contrast. All types of latent impressions developed may 
be lifted; however, to examine the lift of a fluorescent 
impression, the examiner will also require an ALS or 
laser (Figure 4.8).
4.5 BLOOD REAGENTS
When examining evidence for the presence of finger-
print or palm print impressions, patent prints in blood 
FIGURE 4.8 Fingerprint powders. (Courtesy of Danielle 
O’Neill.)

67
Latent Print Examination
may be encountered. These types of impressions will 
require specialized treatment and equipment due to the 
presence of potential biohazard conditions. An agency’s 
procedures will determine the collection order, methods 
and testing of any biological material due to the over-
all considerations of future testing. All blood impres-
sions should be photographed and documented prior 
to the application of any development reagent. While 
research has shown that the traditional application 
of cyanoacrylate fuming and dye stains has not had a 
detrimental effect on blood impressions, care must be 
exercised when treating these types of impressions (Pilla 
and Reitnauer, 2010). Blood impressions must be fixed 
to the surface prior to the application of the reagent to 
ensure proper development. Many commercially pre-
pared reagents include the fixative within the reagent 
solution.
4.5.1 Amido Black
Amido black or napthalene black is a biological stain 
sensitive to the heme protein groups found in blood. 
Amido black has been a relied-upon technique in the lab-
oratory setting; however, it may also be used at a crime 
scene. This reagent may be produced with a methanolic 
or aqueous carrier. The reagent is typically sprayed onto 
the surface area and rinsed with the appropriate rins-
ing agent. When developed, impressions that react with 
amido black are visualized with a blue-black reaction. 
Any impressions developed with amido black must be 
photographed (Figure 4.9).
4.5.2 Leucocrystal Violet
Leucocrystal violet is another type of biological stain 
sensitive to the proteins commonly found in blood. The 
reaction of leucocrystal violet (LCV) with blood impres-
sions results in a purple development. However, LCV 
also has a fluorescent property that will react under the 
presence of an ALS. Any developed impressions must be 
photographed, and when utilizing the fluorescent prop-
erty, the use of a barrier filter may be required.
4.5.3 Hungarian Red/Acid Fuschin
Hungarian red is a fluorescent biological stain that reacts 
with blood proteins. The resulting reaction yields a 
pink-colored result. In addition to this visual property, 
Hungarian red is a fluorescent reagent. Under the influ-
ence of an ALS, the resulting impression will fluoresce at 
515–560 nm. Hungarian red can also be lifted by allow-
ing the reagent to absorb into a white gelatin lifter. These 
results must be photographed for further examination, 
and if lifted, the image must be laterally reversed.
4.5.4 Phloxine B
Phloxine B is a derivative of fluorescein, a biological stain 
for epithelial cells. The reaction with blood impressions 
results in a pink-colored reaction. This reagent has a 
 secondary property to aid in visualization, where, under 
direct lighting applied at an appropriate angle, the result-
ing impression will appear silver due to a reflective prop-
erty of the reaction. Phloxine B has been shown to have 
positive results on nontextured surfaces and on surfaces 
that would benefit from its reflective property (Agarwal 
et al., 2010). This technique must also be photographed, 
and may be effectively used at a crime scene.
4.5.5 Acid Yellow 7
Acid Yellow 7 is a fluorescent technique used to develop 
blood impressions, primarily on dark-colored surfaces. 
This is a multistep process that must be performed 
under proper ventilation in laboratory conditions. The 
first step is a blood fixative, followed by the actual dye 
stain, and a glacial acid rinse. Acid Yellow 7 fluoresces 
under 495 nm with a yellow barrier filter. Unlike the 
other blood reagents discussed, Acid Yellow 7 may be 
lifted using a black gelatin lifter. After placing the lift on 
the impression, the dye will transfer to the gelatin lifter 
and may be viewed under an ALS. This impression must 
be laterally reversed due to the lifting mechanism. This 
technique has been shown to be effective on textured 
surfaces (Agarwal et al., 2010). Unlike the other blood 
reagents discussed, Acid Yellow 7 may not be used at a 
crime scene due to the nature of the chemical develop-
ment process.
FIGURE 4.9  Photograph of an amido black impression. 
(Courtesy of Danielle O’Neill.)

68
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
4.6 PHOTOGRAPHY
4.6.1 Fundamental Principles
The two basic purposes for an analyst to photograph a 
subject is to (1) document a scene or object for overall 
purposes, and (2) capture an impression for critical com-
parisons. There are legal precedents to both of these cat-
egories, and the photographer should be aware of these 
prior to conducting forensic photography within the 
scope of examinations.
The legal precedent of an overall photograph was 
first set forth in 1859, in the case of Luco et al. v. United 
States, 23 Howard 515 (1859). This was a primary exam-
ple of using flash photography to record a subject. It was 
determined that an overall photograph had to be “a fair 
and accurate representation of what was present,” in this 
instance describing a reproduction of a document.
We have ourselves been able to compare these sig-
natures by means of photographic copies and fully 
concur, from evidence oculis subjecta fidelibus, that 
the seal and the signatures of Pico [The governor of 
California who was alleged to have signed the grant. 
Author] are forgeries. 
—Luco et al. v. United States, 23 Howard 515 
(1859).
The precedent set forth is that the photographer must 
duplicate the conditions that were present at the time the 
photograph was taken, regardless of the file type. The 
lighting, objects, and color tones must be duplicated in 
the photograph. There has been photographic evidence 
excluded at trial due to a misuse of white balance, which 
can alter the colors within the image, or an image being 
out of focus. These types of errors can be prevented by 
a complete knowledge of the equipment being used, and 
the factors that can affect the image.
Impressions that are photographically captured for 
the purpose of critical comparisons follow different 
guidelines than overall images. These types of photo-
graphs must be over a threshold of resolution and clar-
ity in order for a comparison between a known and 
unknown sample to be performed.
4.6.2 Types of Lighting
When photographing a subject, there are several types 
of lighting available for use. Some types of lighting are 
designed for overall photography, and some for macro 
photography. Overall lighting types are generally more 
powerful, requiring a dispersal of light in order to illu-
minate the subject or area. Macro lighting types are 
more concerned with angles and directionality. In all 
areas of photography, the proper use of light will directly 
determine the quality, and perhaps admissibility, of the 
image.
The most basic type of lighting is the use of ambient 
light. If photographing a subject out in the natural world, 
the sunlight present may be sufficient to illuminate the 
image. If photographing indoors, the designated lighting 
of the room may also be sufficient. Note that when using 
ambient lighting, adjusting the white balance becomes a 
paramount concern. Since the light is not from a con-
trolled source, the photographer should be mindful of 
where the lighting source is, and what color temperature 
is present.
If macro photography is being performed for critical 
comparisons, all images must be captured when the cam-
era is mounted on a tripod or copy stand (Figure 4.10). 
Ambient lighting can also be utilized in this type of pho-
tography; however, most images will require the use of 
additional lighting sources.
4.6.3 Macro Photography Lighting
When performing macro photography in a controlled 
lighting environment, there are a few different techniques 
that can be used to achieve an optimal result. These tech-
niques focus on the intensity and angle of lighting, which 
can be used to eliminate glare, highlight contours, and 
increase contrast. The lighting styles of direct lighting, 
oblique lighting, bounce lighting, tented lighting, direct 
reflective lighting, and transmitted lighting can all be 
used independently or in a system to capture a proper 
image. As a general rule of thumb, when conducting 
macro photography, the camera should replace your eye. 
This means that if you are able to visualize an impres-
sion, the camera lens should replace the photographer’s 
eye, while maintaining the lighting system used.
Direct lighting is performed by the use of lighting 
positioned at approximately 45° from the subject item. 
The type of lighting source (incandescent, tungsten, flu-
orescent) can vary depending on the needs of the pho-
tographer. However, the white balance of the camera 
should reflect the color temperature of the lighting used. 
Figure 4.10 is an example of direct lighting, as performed 
on a copy stand.
Oblique lighting is similar to direct lighting except 
for the angle of the light source. While direct light-
ing is set at approximately 45°, bounce lighting is set 
at approximately 10°. This placement allows the light 
source to pass over the surface at a near-parallel direc-
tion, highlighting the contours of the item or impression. 
In instances of indented writing, plastic impressions, or 
other similar circumstances, this type of lighting can be 
very beneficial. Similar to direct lighting, any light source 
may be used, and proper white balance must be consid-
ered. Often, optimal visualization with oblique lighting 

69
Latent Print Examination
is attained by utilizing the light source from one direc-
tion. This directionality can help to visualize the high-
lights and shadows caused by the lighting of peaks and 
furrows found in the subject matter.
Oblique lighting can also be beneficial when per-
forming overall photography. The directionality of light 
can be the most useful tool a photographer can use. As 
a part of standard documentation in a case involving a 
vehicle, the photographer should include a photograph 
of the VIN. Direct lighting will almost always result in 
a “hot spot” reflection from the windshield. Using the 
remote cord to operate the flash off of the camera, a use-
able image can be attained by utilizing an oblique angle 
with the flash. The light will penetrate the windshield 
and illuminate the VIN placard.
Bounce lighting involves changing the angle of the 
light to point away from the subject by creating a “dome” 
or barrier that can either diffuse the light source, or reflect 
the light to create an overall illumination of the subject. 
By creating this type of lighting system, the object or 
impression will have an even amount of illumination, 
free from highlights and reflection. Often this type of 
lighting works positively on dark surfaces where direct 
light may change the tones present. Also, if the impres-
sion being photographed is dark in nature with a low 
amount of contrast, as compared to the substrate, this 
type of lighting will enhance the natural contrast pres-
ent. It can also be useful when photographing a reflective 
surface. The system can consist of a single piece of paper, 
or a complex photographic dome. In this example, the 
lighting system acts to evenly diffuse the light source in 
order to achieve a proper exposure (Figure 4.11).
FIGURE 4.10  An example of direct lighting, performed on a copy stand. (Courtesy of Andrew Reitnauer.)
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4.11 (a) Direct lighting and (b) bounce lighting. 
(Courtesy of Andrew Reitnauer.)

70
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Tented lighting is a lighting system similar to 
bounce lighting. The main difference is that tented 
lighting is a more ridged structure, while bounce light-
ing is an adjustable system. The tented lighting system 
is placed in a manner that will allow the light source to 
enter from the side to illuminate the surface, or if the 
tent structure is permeable, the light can be diffused 
through the tent.
Perhaps one of the most useful lighting systems is 
direct reflective lighting. The premise behind this type 
of lighting is using the light source to create a “hot spot” 
encompassing the impression area. This “hot spot” will 
eliminate any background noise from the substrate, and 
turn the impression black on white. A black-on-white 
image is one where the impression area is black and the 
background is white. In instances where the background 
has a lot of color, or patterns that can interfere with 
the question impression, this type of lighting can help 
the photographer obtain an optimal exposure. Also, 
surfaces that are reflective in nature (e.g., mirrors, CDs) 
can create shadows in the exposure due the way these 
items are created. The use of direct reflective lighting 
can eliminate these shadows, allowing the impression to 
be captured.
When setting up the camera and item to be photo-
graphed under direct reflective lighting conditions, the 
principle of replacing your eye with the camera lens 
becomes very important. The angles created between 
the light source, surface of the subject, and the camera 
must be exact. Capturing the impression is dependent 
of the creation of a “hot spot” on the surface, which 
may entail using props to change the angle of the surface 
area of the subject. Also, different light sources may be 
used to create this type of lighting system. Ambient light 
sources, incandescent lights, ALS, and fiber optic illu-
minators are all examples of lighting sources that can 
be utilized. Figure 4.12 is an illustration of the direct 
reflective lighting system, and Figure 4.13 is an example 
of a palm print photographed using the direct reflective 
lighting system.
Transmitted lighting is a system where the light 
source is behind the substrate and the light passes through 
the surface to optimize the contrast of the subject. If an 
impression is on a clear surface (e.g., glass, clear plas-
tic), this type of lighting can be beneficial. A benefit is a 
situation when direct lighting, or other type of lighting 
system, might cause a distortion between the impression 
and the area behind the impression. An example of this 
is shown in Figure 4.14. Also, if there is some sort of 
contaminant on the surface, such as scratches or dust, 
transmitted lighting can help to reduce this type of noise. 
Many different lighting sources can be used to capture 
an image under this lighting system. Sources used in a 
laboratory setting such as an ALS, incandescent lighting, 
and fiber optic illuminators as well as overall flash units 
can be used.
FIGURE 4.12  Direct reflective lighting system. (Courtesy of Andrew Reitnauer.)

71
Latent Print Examination
4.7 BARRIER FILTERS
The use of barrier filters on a camera can be beneficial 
to a photographer in two basic functions. The first is to 
optimize the visualization of fluorescent development. 
Depending on the technique used and light wavelength 
present, a specific filter system can allow certain emittance 
wavelengths to pass through, and block opposing wave-
lengths. This allows the developed impression to be visual-
ized and background light to be omitted from the image. 
The following table gives a basic classification of what 
color filters should be used for corresponding wavelengths.
The examples listed in the table to the left are general 
guidelines, not steadfast rules. As the ALS wavelengths 
used increase in length, the darker the barrier filter used 
will become. This trend is due to the longer emittance 
of the development reagent’s fluorescence, or natural 
emittance of the subject of the photograph. Typically, 
these two criteria have a systematic relationship.
All basic photography follow the principles of the 
basic six-tone color wheel. In order to optimize the image 
taken using a fluorescent technique, the ALS wavelength’s 
opposing color filter should be utilized. In considering the 
color wheel depicted in Figure 4.15, an ALS wavelength 
and filter system should result in an acceptable image 
based upon the lighting system. Following this principle, 
a UV lighting source of approximately 350 nm (blue) will 
require a yellow barrier filter, based upon the opposing 
positions of these two colors within the wheel.
The second purpose of barrier filter usage is to elim-
inate varying background colors present in the subject 
matter. The basic premise is to render the hue of the 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4.14 Transmitted lighting. (a) Footwear impres-
sion on a clear CD cover. Using transmitted lighting from 
the light table behind the CD cover, the impression is 
clear with individual characteristics present. (b) Footwear 
impression on a clear CD cover. Using direct lighting the 
impression seems blurry due to the space between the 
surface of the CD cover and the background surface. 
(Courtesy of Andrew Reitnauer.)
FIGURE 4.13 An example of a palm print photographed 
using the direct reflective lighting system.
350 nm–450 nm
Yellow
450 nm–535 nm
Orange
535 nm–585 nm
Red

72
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
entire image a single color. When the image is opened 
in a digital imaging program, such as Adobe Photoshop, 
the entire color saturation can be removed, leaving the 
photographer with a grayscale image and optimal visu-
alization of the subject matter. The use of a barrier fil-
ter, in this type of application, is in conjunction with 
one of the standard light sources, rather than an ALS. 
It also requires the photographer to think forward to an 
enhancement stage. Understanding the capabilities of the 
software can help a photographer when using barrier 
filters. The basic principles, regarding opposite colors, 
of the color wheel can be applied in using enhancement 
software. However, in this type of use, the filters will 
absorb the opposing colors. In an example of a latent fin-
gerprint developed with ninhydrin (purple), a green filter 
will absorb the purple color, rendering it black. Using a 
cyan filter will absorb blood, also rendering it black.
Another type of filter that can be useful in forensic 
photography is a polarizing filter. This type of filter is 
designed to eliminate reflections from objects by blocking 
light that has wavelengths traveling in a specific direction. 
By adjusting the filter’s position on the camera lens, the 
directionality of the light being blocked can change. This 
allows the photographer to adjust the camera in order to 
eliminate the desired light, resulting in a proper exposure.
4.8 HUMAN FACTORS
Within the current progression of the field of latent print 
examination, much attention is being given to the areas 
of human factors and their impact on the results of the 
examinations, issues such as contextual and conforma-
tional bias and the degree to which they may affect the 
latent print examination. Michele Triplett’s Fingerprint 
Dictionary defines bias as “An influence based on imper-
tinent information rather than objective data, such as 
irrelevant contextual details surrounding an event” 
(Triplett, 2010). Research done by Dror has shown that 
external influences have had an impact on the results 
reached by examiners (Dror, 2014). In addition, the 
2009 report issued by the National Academy of Science 
discussed the impact that bias may have on the forensic 
analysis process (National Academy of Science). These 
external influences must be recognized within the com-
parison process, as applied by the examiner, and steps 
should be taken to reduce the risk of bias.
Contextual bias occurs when external information 
influences the final determination made by the exam-
iner. In the latent print field, this can occur through the 
influence of department personnel outside of the analyst, 
the information received as a part of the case documen-
tation, or knowledge of a previous determination by a 
secondary analyst. In all these examples, the examiner 
has been exposed to undue influence that may preclude 
him or her from conducting an unbiased examination 
of the evidence. In many laboratories, efforts are being 
made to safeguard the examiners from contextual bias 
by removing all case documentation that is not pertinent 
to the examination, shielding the examiners from out-
side personnel throughout the examination process, and 
by implementing quality assurance measures. While all 
forms of contextual bias may not be fully removed from 
the examination process, the recognition of their influ-
ence must be a consideration of the laboratory system.
Confirmational bias occurs when the results of an 
examination are interpreted to confirm a preexisting 
theory or proclivity toward a predetermined conclusion. 
One of the primary methods of avoiding this type of bias 
is the application of the ACE-V process. Overall, while 
viewed as a linear approach to latent print examination, 
determinations are made at intervals based upon the data 
that is present. The totality of the data, as determined 
by the examiner, will allow for a proper conclusion to 
be made. While the linearity of the ACE-V examina-
tion process is not finite, the independent interpretations 
made by the examiner must be a cognitive consideration.
Laboratories may employ quality assurance mea-
sures in order to reduce the effects of bias on the ana-
lysts and the examination process. In addition to some 
of the measures mentioned above to reduce the impact of 
contextual bias, these same measures should be applied 
to the verification process of the examination. Verifying 
analysts should be allowed access to not only the exem-
plar record that was identified, but to all those involved 
in the case. This task, allows the examiner to have the 
knowledge that the latent print was identified, but not 
to which individual. Many laboratories only confirm the 
conclusions of “identification,” rather than verify the 
sufficiency determinations and resulting conclusions of 
Red
Yellow
Green
Cyan
Blue
Magenta
FIGURE 4.15 The basic six-tone color wheel used in 
basic photography. (Courtesy of Andrew Reitnauer.)

73
Latent Print Examination
“exclusion” and “inconclusive.” Laboratory policy dic-
tates the technical review methods employed during the 
examination case review; however, the implementation 
of these steps also helps safeguard against false negatives 
and non-consensus sufficiency determinations.
4.8.1 Blind Verification
One method employed by laboratories to ensure the con-
clusions reached by the independent examinations done by 
the analysts is through the implementation of blind verifi-
cation. During a reanalysis, or blind verification, a second-
ary examiner is reassigned the case to examine, without 
any prior knowledge of conclusions, or that the evidence 
had been previously examined. By implementing this type 
of quality assurance protocol, laboratories may ensure 
that a sound conclusion has been reached in a case by fol-
lowing the process of separate examiners when observing 
the same evidence. Human factors that may be present 
often affect examiners in different ways, and the usage of 
a blind verification module ensures not only the correct 
conclusions of identification, exclusion, and inconclusive, 
but also the application of the method and the sufficiency 
determinations reached as a result of the analyst.
4.9 LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS 
AND STANDARDS
In the United States there have been some landmark 
legal decisions that have determined the admissibility of 
expert witness testimony. In addition to courtroom testi-
mony, some jurisdictions have additional rules to govern 
the dissemination of case notes, images, and written doc-
umentation to all parties. In addition, there are different 
standards between the state level courts and the federal 
level in terms of expert testimony.
In 1923, the United States Supreme Court heard the 
case of Frye v. the United States. In this case, the question 
to be decided was the admissibility of evidence derived 
from a systolic blood pressure deception test, a crude pre-
cursor of the polygraph machine. The defendant was on 
trial for murder, and the test had been given to him by 
investigators. The defense argued that the physiological 
changes undergone by the defendant during the interro-
gation and questioning process would also incur similar 
changes to the defendant.
The question in this case was not the validity of the 
expert’s testimony regarding the implementation of the 
test, rather to the validity of the test itself. While the 
appeals court denied the admissibility of the polygraph 
test itself, it did state that the examination used must be 
“generally accepted” within the relevant scientific com-
munity. When admitting expert testimony in a court 
proceeding, the basis for the expert opinion now had to 
be founded in the scientific community as a valid meth-
odology that has been confirmed as an accepted practice 
of theory. The Frye Standard became the rule of admis-
sibility for the next 70 years in the United States. There 
are a number of states that currently maintain the Frye 
standard as the admissibility guideline.
In 1993, the United States Supreme Court heard 
the case of Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals. 
This landmark decision changed many of the guidelines 
regarding the admissibility of expert opinion testimony, 
as previously outlined in the Frye standard. In this case, 
the Court noted the applicability of the Federal Rules of 
Evidence to the Frye standard, and delivered four ques-
tions, which experts must satisfy under this new stan-
dard (Kiely, 2005).
1. Is there peer-reviewed materials in publication?
2. Is this methodology taught in universities or dis-
cussed in professional meetings?
3. Can the methodology be tested for accuracy, and 
does it have a known error rate?
4. Is the methodology generally accepted in the rel-
evant scientific community?
This new standard focused the admissibility of a 
scientific method from a general scope of acceptance, to 
an approach that must meet multiple criteria, including 
acceptance in the relevant community. These standards 
were also affirmed in the cases of General Electric v. 
Joiner and Kumho Tire v. Carmichael.
The federal rules of evidence are tasked with the 
guidelines regarding the admissibility of evidence. The 
rules are broken into several portions, including sections 
for civil testimony. While the individual rules specify 
the admissibility of different types of evidence, the sec-
tions specific to expert testimony are founded in rules 
702 and 703 (Babitsky et al., 2000). In rule 702, if sci-
entific or specialized knowledge will assist the trier of 
fact in understanding the evidence in question, an expert 
may form an opinion based upon his or her knowledge, 
skills, and training. Rule 703 discusses the admissibility 
of opinion testimony based upon the facts or data upon 
which the opinion was formed. This rule states that these 
facts do not need to be submitted into evidence prior to 
the formation of an opinion.
4.10 LATENT PRINT COMPARISONS
The examination of friction ridge impressions as a means 
of personal identification has been widely accepted for over 
a century. The process of latent print comparisons is a sub-
jective discipline, largely based upon the training, knowl-
edge and abilities of the examiner. The process widely 

74
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
used within the field of fingerprint identification, named 
by David Ashbaugh, is ACE-V (Ashbaugh, 2000). This 
process is a derivative of the scientific method, and stands 
for Analysis, Comparisons, Evaluation, and Verification. 
While developed as a primarily a linear approach to latent 
print examination, we have seen that this process can be 
applied in a circular method as well. Each of these steps 
requires due process and the ability to examine the data 
present to reach a conclusion. During the course of an 
examination, an examiner may be required to conduct 
an analysis of a complex latent impression, interpret fac-
tors such as distortion or multiple deposits, determine 
anatomical aspect, and make a sufficiency determination. 
Groups such as SWGFAST (Scientific Working Group on 
Friction Ridge Analysis and Terminology), the new OSAC 
(Organization of Scientific Area Committees), ENFSI 
(European Network of Forensic Science Institutes, and 
INTERPOL have been working to create standards and 
guidelines concerning the science of fingerprint identifica-
tion. Through the documentation of best practices, these 
groups have strived to ensure that the latent print examin-
ers and their laboratories have a reference concerning the 
relevant issues facing the discipline and the criteria that the 
examiners may follow.
During the initial analysis phase of a latent print 
examination, the latent print is analyzed to determine 
anatomical source, orientation, pattern type, the pres-
ence of distortion, and the sufficiency of the impression 
for further examination. Fingerprints are classified into 
three basic pattern types: loops, whorls, and arches. The 
general population is approximately 60% loops, 35% 
whorls, and 5% arches (Figure 4.16).
In considering palm prints, there are also three areas 
to consider: the interdigital, thenar, and hypothenar. The 
interdigital region is located on the upper portion of the 
palm, beneath the fingers; the thenar is located adjacent 
to the thumb; and the hypothenar is the side opposite the 
thumb. Figure 4.17 is an illustration of the areas of the palm.
In addition to the fingertips and the palms, friction 
ridge skin can also be found on the finger joints. There 
are some characteristics that are also indicative of the spe-
cific location on the hand. These orientation clues pres-
ent on all areas of friction ridge examination are a key 
part of the initial analysis process. Certain pattern types 
may be indicative of a hand, or even a specific finger. The 
location of a palmar area may lead to a determination 
of which hand left the impression. Often, impressions 
from multiple fingers are deposited in a single deposit, 
creating a simultaneous impression. The orientation of 
the individual impressions within the group can assist the 
examiner in determining the fingers present. This type of 
information can also be useful in determining the criteria 
of searching an impression in an Automated Fingerprint 
Identification System (AFIS), in order to narrow the 
scope of the search against the known exemplar samples.
In considering the overall pattern type, or level 1 
detail of the impression, some overall orientation clues 
can be used to assist the examiner. Loops may be fur-
ther classified as ulnar or radial loops, indicating which 
bone of the forearm the pattern flows toward. This type 
of classification may be considered only if the hand is 
known. More commonly, loops are referred to as “left 
slant” or “right slant” loops, based upon the direction of 
the ridge flow in the pattern area.
When examining the deposited latent print, left slant 
loops fill flow down and away to the left side of the impres-
sion, and right slant loops will flow down and away to 
the right side of the impression. Typically, left slant loops 
are found on the fingers of the left hand and right slant 
loops tend to be found on the fingers of the right hand. 
One common crossover is the presence of an opposite 
loop on the index fingers. In a similar pattern, whorls 
may have a slant to their axis. Their overall trends fol-
low those of the loop directional patterns. These overall 
trends can assist an examiner in determining a possible 
Whorl
Loop
Arch
FIGURE 4.16  Fingerprints are classified into three basic pat-
tern types: loops, whorls, and arches. (Courtesy of Ioan Truta.)
FIGURE 4.17  An illustration of the different areas of 
the palm. (Courtesy of Andrew Reitnauer.)

75
Latent Print Examination
anatomical source for the impression, and assist in nar-
rowing a search in AFIS. For example, if the impression 
is a left slant loop, a search may be conducted on the left 
hands and the right index finger.
The palm of the hand has three distinct areas: the 
interdigital, thenar, and hypothenar. These areas are also 
separated by the presence of the major creases of the palm. 
The interdigital region is above, or distal, to the distal 
transverse crease, or top crease. This area may have up to 
four deltas, and loop formations may also be found. As 
described by Ron Smith and reported in Triplett (2010), 
the delta present beneath the index finger is referred to 
as the clean delta. Directly beneath the middle and ring 
fingers are deltas referred to as “snow cone” deltas, due 
to their overall shape, and beneath the little finger is the 
“side come” delta. Beginning at the clean delta, an over-
all flow of friction ridges begins, commonly referred to as 
the waterfall, that transverses the palm, flowing down-
ward into the hypothenar region (Figure 4.18).
The hypothenar region of the palm, located on the 
opposite side of the palm from the thumb, also has some 
overall characteristics that can be used during the analysis 
of a latent impression. Situated below the top crease, the 
hypothenar has a directionality of ridges that flow down 
and out, leading toward the bottom edge of the palm. The 
hypothenar’s characteristics include the presence of lateral 
creases on the outer borders of the palm, toward what is 
classified as the writer’s edge. One of the main features of 
the hypothenar is the presence of a “funnel” formation 
within the friction ridges. The ridges tend to diverge at this 
point, with the lower, or proximal, ridges flowing down-
ward at a sharper degree than the upper, or distal ridges. 
This overall shape, resembling a funnel, is a feature spe-
cific to this region of the palm. The hypothenar may also 
contain loops, both inward- and outward-facing. Figure 
4.19 shows some examples of the features of the hypothe-
nar, with the funnel ridge flow formation in blue.
The thenar is the area of the palm near the thumb. It 
is best characterized by the arcing flow of the ridges. The 
overall flow of the thenar friction ridges begin at the wrist, 
flow inward toward the central portion of the palm, turn 
and flow out of the palm above the thumb joint. The the-
nar may contain a series of cross-hatching creases, com-
monly referred to as “cat scratches” (RON). One feature 
that may be present in the thenar is a vestige. Vestiges 
appear in approximately 10% of the population and are 
visualized as a squared-off formation of the friction ridges 
(see Figure 4.20). Also present is a crease feature caused by 
the webbing of skin at the base of the thumb, as a result of 
humans having an opposable thumb. This feature is com-
monly referred to as a starburst.
There are a number of notable creases within the 
palm of the hand. The three main creases are the dis-
tal transverse crease, proximal transverse crease, and the 
radial longitudinal crease. At the base of the thumb is a 
crease referred to as the thumb bracelet, and at the proxi-
mal end of the palm is the wrist bracelet.
Clean delta
Snow cone deltas
Side cone delta
FIGURE 4.18 Example of interdigitals with the presence 
of deltas, waterfall, and creases. (Courtesy of Andrew 
Reitnauer.)
FIGURE 4.19  Examples of the features of the hypo-
thenar, with the funnel ridge flow formation in blue. 
(Courtesy of Andrew Reitnauer.)

76
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
4.10.1 Individual Characteristics
The analysis of an impression is also focused upon the 
recognition of the individual characteristics found within 
the specific friction ridge pathways. These characteris-
tics, or minutia points, are what the examiner will use to 
formulate a determination on the potential source of the 
impression. Figure 4.21 demonstrates the type of charac-
teristics commonly found within friction ridge detail that 
may used by the analyst to further examine the impres-
sion during a comparison to a known exemplar. In addi-
tion to these details, referred to as level 2 characteristics, 
the individual friction ridges have a shape as determined 
by the presence of sweat pores. The placement of these 
pores along the ridge will result in a specific formation 
along the edges of the ridge, or the presence of a pore 
within the ridge, referred to as level 3 characteristics. 
These characteristics are also considered individual, due 
to their permanent position within the ridge. However, 
during a comparison, they may not be considered with-
out the presence of level 2 characteristics, as they may 
not always be produced in the latent impression due to 
the conditions of the skin, amount of residue, and elastic-
ity of the skin. Figure 4.22 is an example of level 3 detail, 
as found in a latent impression. Often, due to their fragile 
nature, latent impressions will have distortion that the 
examiner must also be able to interpret. Distortion may 
be rotational, lateral or pressure in nature.
The determination of sufficiency is based upon the 
culmination of data as observed by the examiner. The 
amount of levels 1, 2, and 3 detail observed during 
the analysis may result in one of three determinations: 
insufficient ridge detail for further examination, suffi-
cient ridge detail for exclusionary purposes, or sufficient 
ridge detail for identification. The difference between 
the two determinations of sufficient ridge detail may be 
founded in the overall quality and quantity of informa-
tion observed. Pattern type and limited characteristics 
may be enough to exclude a person as being the source 
of an impression, but not be enough form a conclusion of 
identity. Standards within a jurisdiction will imply any 
minimum thresholds that may be applicable. An exam-
iner’s own knowledge and experience are often the stan-
dard for decisions.
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4.20  Examples of vestiges found in the thenar. 
(Courtesy of Linda Manigault.)
Ridge ending
Enclosure
Bifurcation
Island
FIGURE 4.21  Characteristics commonly found within 
the friction ridge details. (Courtesy of Ioan Truta.)
FIGURE 4.22  An example of level 3 detail, as found in 
a latent impression. (Courtesy of Ioan Truta.)

77
Latent Print Examination
Once a determination has been made regarding the 
sufficiency of an impression to compare to a known 
exemplar record, the examiner will perform this exami-
nation. A thorough examination of all applicable friction 
ridge skin exemplars available will be performed in order 
to determine if a conclusion may be reached regarding 
identity. Once a thorough examination has been per-
formed, a conclusion will be reached at the evaluation 
phase. There are three conclusions that may be reached 
through the comparison of an impression to the exem-
plar record on an individual: identification, exclusion, 
and inconclusive.
If an impression and an exemplar record have been 
found to have a sufficient amount of corresponding infor-
mation, without the presence of an unexplainable dis-
similarity, a conclusion of identification may be reached. 
This conclusion states that the chances that another per-
son has created the unknown impression is a practical 
improbability based upon the information present. If an 
impression and an exemplar record are compared and are 
found to have dissimilarities that cannot be explained, 
then the person may be excluded as being the source of 
the impression. Level 1 detail, pattern types and ridge 
counts, may be used alone to exclude, but they may never 
be used without the presence of level 2 characteristics 
to reach a conclusion of identification. Following the 
comparison, if one of these two conclusions cannot be 
reached, due to missing exemplar information, or other 
explainable reason, the examiner may reach an incon-
clusive conclusion. The reason for this decision should 
be explained, and if applicable, new exemplar records 
requested for the required anatomical source. Figure 4.23 
is an example of a charted identification, highlighting 
several comparison points. 
4.11 CONCLUSION
For centuries, fingerprints have been used as a means of 
personal identification, from their early use in pottery, 
through the signing of legal documents, to their applica-
tions today. Over the past century, advancements have 
been made regarding the development of latent impres-
sions at crime scenes and on items of physical evidence. 
These advancements have allowed examiners the oppor-
tunity to analyze, compare, and form conclusions to the 
source of an impression. With the technological advance-
ments continuing to be made, examiners have a growing 
selection of development techniques to process evidence. 
The recognition of evidence and the features of an 
impression have allowed examiners a scientific method 
in order to reach a sound conclusion, based on the prop-
erties of the traditional scientific fields. Laboratories have 
recognized the need for quality assurance, and the iden-
tification of human factors that can influence forensic 
scientists; courts have also recognized the standards for 
admissibility of expert testimony. As the fingerprint dis-
cipline continues to evolve as a field of forensic science, 
the reliability of the examination of friction ridge skin 
will continue as a primary means of identification.
FIGURE 4.23  Example of charted identification, highlighting several comparison points. (Courtesy of Andrew 
Reitnauer.)

78
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Agarwal, M., Herlihy, R., and Reitnauer, A. A comparative 
study of the development of blood impressions on 
dark-colored substrates using phloxine B and acid 
yellow 7. Fingerprint Whorld. 36(140), pp. 98–111. 
July 2010.
Ashbaugh, D. Quantitative-Qualitative Friction Ridge 
Analysis. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 2000.
Babitsky, S., Mangraviti, J., and Todd, C. The Comprehen- 
sive Forensic Services Manual. Falmouth: SEAK. 
2000.
Dror, I.E. Practical solutions to cognitive and human fac-
tor challenges in forensic science. Forensic Sci. Policy 
Manage. 4, pp. 105–113. 2014.
Faulds, H. On the skin—furrows of the hand. Nature. 22, 
p. 605. October 1880.
Fingerprint Sourcebook. https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/fingerprint-source-book
Galton, S.F. Finger Prints. New York, NY: Macmillian 
and Company. 1892.
Hepburn, D. The papillary ridges on the hands and feet of 
monkeys and men. Sci. Trans. Royal Dublin. Soc. 5 
(Series II), pp. 525–537.
http://www.forensic-evidence.com/site/EVID/Legal 
Photog.html.
IAI Twins Study. 2007. http://www.theiai.org/twinsresearch/
twins_2007.php.
Kiely, T.F. Forensic Evidence: Science and the Criminal Law. 
Second Edition. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 2005.
Klaatsch, H. Zur Morphologie der Tastballen der 
Saugetiere. Morph. Jahrb. Bd. 14, pp. 407–435.
National Academy of Science. Strengthening the Forensic 
Sciences in the United States: A Path Forward. 
National Academy Press. 2009.
Pilla, A. and Reitnauer, A. Validation study of the recovery 
of a DNA profile following traditional latent print 
processing techniques. NEDIAI Newslett. 3. 2010.
Reh, L. Die Schuppen der Saugetiere. Jenaische Zeitschr. 
Fur Naturwiss. Bd. 29, pp. 151–220.
Resolutions & Legislative Committee. 1997. IAI Resolution 
97–9.  https://www.theiai.org/member/resolutions/1997/ 
RES97_9.PDF.
Table of Reagents Program. Chesapeake Bay Division 
of the International Association for Identification. 
www.CBDIAI.org
Triplett, M. Fingerprint Dictionary: An Examiner’s Guide 
to the Who, What, Where of Fingerprint Identification. 
Bellevue, WA: Two Rings Publishing. 2010.
Whipple, I. The ventral surface of the mammalian chirid-
ium. Z. Morphol. Anthropol.
Wilder, H.H. One the disposition of the epidermic 
folds upon the palms and soles of primates. Anat. 
Anzeiger. Bd. 13.
Will West. http://82141360.weebly.com/will-west-case.
html.

79
C H A P T E R  5
Forensic Biology
Samar Ahmed and Amarnath Mishra
CONTENTS
5.1 Blood 
80
5.1.1 Locating Bloodstains in Crime Scenes 
80
5.1.2 Collecting Bloodstains 
80
5.1.3  Collection of Bloodstains According to Form 
80
5.1.4 Liquid Blood 
80
5.1.5 Wet Stains 
81
5.1.6 Dry Stains 
81
5.1.7 Washed Blood 
81
5.2 Examination of Bloodstains 
81
5.2.1 Physical Examination 
81
5.2.2 Tetramethyl Benzidine (TMB) Test 
81
5.2.3 Reagent Preparation 
81
5.2.4  Phenolphthalein Test (Kastle-Meyer Test) 
81
5.2.5 Leucomalachite Green Reaction 
82
5.2.6 Luminol 
82
5.2.6.1 Theory 
82
5.2.6.2 Procedure 
82
5.2.7 Takayama Test 
82
5.2.8 Teichmann’s Test 
82
5.2.9 Spectrophotometric Estimation 
83
5.2.10 Precipitin Test 
83
5.3 Seminal Fluid 
83
5.3.1 Composition of Semen 
83
5.3.2 Structure of Spermatozoa 
84
5.3.3 Collection of Semen 
84
5.3.4 Examination of Semen and Seminal Stains 
84
5.3.4.1 Physical Examination 
84
5.3.5 Presumptive Test 
84
5.3.5.1  Acid Phosphatase Test (Sodium-α -Naphthyl Phosphate Test) 
84
5.3.5.2 Florence Test 
85
5.3.5.3 Barberio Test 
85
5.3.5.4 Puranen Test 
85
5.3.5.5 Thin Layer Chromatography 
85
5.3.6 Confirmatory Test 
86
5.4 Saliva Examination 
86
5.4.1 Localization of the Stain 
86
5.4.2 Stain Detection/Identification 
86
5.4.3 PCR Stain Examination 
87

80
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Body fluids include blood, semen, saliva, urine, sweat, 
nasal secretions, tears, human milk, and so on, that are 
found in various crime scenes, such as murder, rape, acci-
dents, robbery, sexual offenses, and so forth. After the 
examination, these biological fluids play an important 
role in connecting the criminal with the crime.
5.1 BLOOD
Blood is the fluid connective tissue. It consists of a fluid 
part called plasma and a cellular part consisting of red 
cells (erythrocytes), white cell (leucocytes), and thrombo-
cytes (platelets or discs) (Figure 5.1).
5.1.1 Locating Bloodstains in Crime Scenes
Locating the bloodstain in a crime scene is usually not a 
difficult task unless, as in some cases the stain may have 
changed color and thus becomes hard to identify. The 
search for the location of a stain is carried out in the fol-
lowing ways:
1. Examination under strong oblique light. This is 
done when investigating the area and any arti-
cles of clothing.
2. Use of colored lights, red, green, and yellow, 
sometimes prove useful.
3. UV rays are very useful to locate bloodstains. 
Examination is done in the dark under the rays. 
UV rays can detect stains successfully even when 
the stain has been washed.
4. Luminol: A chemical used to locate bloodstains. 
Areas suspected of carrying bloodstains are 
sprayed with luminal, and the resultant reaction 
is florescence. Areas with positive fluorescence 
are areas with bloodstains.
5.1.2 Collecting Bloodstains
When collecting bloodstains the forensic specialist 
should do the following:
1. Establish the location of the evidence and the 
position of the article with respect to other 
stationery objects at the scene. Data should 
be noted in copies, notes, sketches, and 
photographs.
2. Note the direction, size, and number of stains.
3. Note condition of stains: whether they are dry, 
sticky, wet, etc.
4. Note whether the stains are contaminated or 
exposed to natural elements or heat.
5. Write the method of collection: whether the 
stains were scraped, cut, lifted, dislodged, or col-
lected in the form in which it is being sent.
6. Pack the bloodstain from various sources sepa-
rately in suitable bottles or cellophane envelopes 
of appropriate size.
7. Preserve the continuity of the chain of posses-
sion and distinct identity of the evidence through 
proper packing, labeling, and sealing and 
through observing other legal formalities.
5.1.3  Collection of Bloodstains  
According to Form
The following techniques are used during the collection 
of bloodstains in different forms.
5.1.4 Liquid Blood
• Liquid blood is found at a scene in the form of 
blood pools: two samples, each about 5 mL, are 
collected in clean vials. In one, sodium fluoride, 
oxalate, or citrate is added, and the other is kept 
without any preservative.
• If the blood in the pool has dried, about 3 g of 
dried blood is collected.
• If the blood in the pool is a sticky mass, a piece 
of cloth is stained in the center of the pool, dried 
and packed as usual along with 3 g of dried 
blood.
5.5 Hair Examination 
87
5.5.1 Sampling 
87
5.5.2 Temporary Mount 
87
5.5.3 Permanent Mount 
87
5.5.4 Standards and Controls 
87
Bibliography 
88
H2O2
H2O
O
Pink color
Heme
KM
FIGURE 5.1 Diagrammatic representation of blood.

81
Forensic Biology
5.1.5 Wet Stains
• A clean piece of rag or filter paper is taken and 
pressed against the stains. The stains are trans-
ferred to the rag; if the stains are partially dry, 
the piece is moistened, preferably with saline 
water, and pressed against the stains.
• If the stains are on a non-absorbent surface, it 
is allowed to dry and collected; if the stain con-
tains sufficient liquid blood, it is collected in the 
same way as liquid blood.
• If the stains are on an absorbent surface, it is 
allowed to dry, and the article is collected.
5.1.6 Dry Stains
• On cloth, take possession of the cloth bearing 
the dry stain; the number, position, and sizes of 
stains are properly recorded.
• If the blood is found in the nail, it is collected 
by swabbing with the help of cotton or washing 
with saline.
• If blood is found in the hair, it is collected 
by combing the hair; if a sufficient quantity 
is not obtained, hairs are cut and collected.
• When the bloodstain is found on grass, one 
should tie the grass with a thread, cut the tuft, 
dry it, and pack it in an envelope or glass jar.
5.1.7 Washed Blood
• If the blood at the scene of a crime or on the 
cloth has been washed, it is still possible for the 
laboratory staff to detect traces of blood from 
the washed material.
5.2 EXAMINATION OF BLOODSTAINS
5.2.1 Physical Examination
In natural light examination of exhibits for brown or 
reddish-brown stains, powder or crystals of reddish-
brown color, the areas should be demarcated. In case of 
absence of clear and visible stains, washed stains should 
be examined under 230–269 nm frequency UV light.
1—Presumptive Tests
• These suspected bloodstains; contaminated 
materials should be tested for positive for blood.
5.2.2 Tetramethyl Benzidine (TMB) Test
NOTE: TMB is carcinogenic. Use of gloves is required.
5.2.3 Reagent Preparation
Acetate Buffer
Working Solution
Mix, filter, and store in brown-colored bottle in 
refrigerator.
Procedure
1. Place a cutting or swabbing of the stain on filter 
paper or spot test paper.
2. A drop of TMB solution is placed on the stain, 
followed by a drop of 3% hydrogen peroxide.
3. An immediate blue-green color is a positive test 
for peroxidase activity, indicative of hemoglo-
bin. This is not a confirmatory test for blood.
Standards and Controls: A known bloodstain and 
unstained control must be tested.
5.2.4  Phenolphthalein Test  
(Kastle-Meyer Test)
Reagent Preparation
Mix, add a few boiling chips, and boil under reflux 
for 2–3 hours or until the solution has lost its pink color. 
Cool and decant into a bottle containing some zinc to 
keep it in the reduced form.
Working Solution
Sodium acetate
5.0 g
Glacial acetic acid
43.0 mL
Deionized water
50.0 mL
TMB
0.4 g
Acetate buffer
20.0 mL
Stock Solution
Phenolphthalein
2.0 g
–
Potassium 
hydroxide
20.0 g
–
Distilled water
100 mL
–
Zinc dust
20.0 g
Solution #1:
Ethanol
10 mL
Solution #2:
Phenolphthalein 
stock
2 mL
–
Distilled water
10 mL
–
Ethanol
2 mL
Solution # 3:
3% Hydrogen 
peroxide
10 mL

82
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Procedure
1. A small cutting, swabbing, or extract of the sus-
pected bloodstain is placed on filter paper or 
spot test paper.
2. Two or three drops of ethanol are placed on the 
stain.
3. Two drops of working phenolphthalein solution 
are added to the stain.
4. After waiting to insure that no color develops at 
this stage, two or three drops of 3% hydrogen 
peroxide are added.
5. An intense pink color is a positive test for per-
oxidase activity, indicative of hemoglobin. This 
is not a confirmatory test for blood.
Standards and Controls
• A known bloodstain and unstained control must 
be tested (Figure 5.2).
5.2.5 Leucomalachite Green Reaction
Procedure
• Step 1:  Add 1–2 drops of LMG reagent. If 
there is a color change, then the test is 
inconclusive.
• Step 2:  Add 1–2 drops of H202. If a color change 
appears deep blue-green, then the test is 
positive.
Limitations
• Sensitivity is 1:1000
• Specificity: Not specific to human peroxidase 
and thus can render false positive with vegetable 
peroxidases.
5.2.6 Luminol
5.2.6.1 Theory
The iron in hemoglobin acts as a catalyst to cause a 
 reaction between luminol and H2O2. Luminol loses 
nitrogen and hydrogen and gains oxygen. The results in 
3-aminophthalate that is energized and emits light.
5.2.6.2 Procedure
Spray the luminol directly onto the stain in question in 
the dark to see the luminescent reaction that can last 
for 15 seconds. If the stain emits a light, then the test is 
positive for possible presence of blood (Mozayani et al. 
2011).
2—Confirmatory Tests
• Stains positive for the presumptive test should be 
further examined by the following tests.
5.2.7 Takayama Test
Reagent Preparation
Reagents should be made fresh daily.
Procedure
1. Place material to be tested on a microscopic slide 
and cover with a coverslip.
2. Add a drop of Takayama reagent and allow to 
flow under the coverslip.
3. Warm slide gently on a hot plate at 65°C for 
10–20 seconds.
4. Allow to cool and observe under microscope at 
100×.
5. The appearance of pink needle-shaped crystals 
of pyridine hemochromogen (pyridine ferropro-
toporphyrin) is a positive reaction for heme.
5.2.8 Teichmann’s Test
Reagent Preparation: Mix and store in stoppered bottle.
FIGURE 5.2 Illustrates a positive Kastle-Meyer test.
Standard glucose solution (100 g/100 mL)
3 mL
10% Sodium hydroxide
3 mL
Pyridine
3 mL
Distilled water
7 mL
Potassium chloride
0.1 g
Potassium bromide
0.1 g
Potassium iodine
0.1 g
Glacial acetic acid
100 mL

83
Forensic Biology
Procedure
1. Place material to be tested on a microscopic slide 
and cover with a coverslip.
2. Let the reagent flow under the coverslip.
3. Warm the slide gently on a hot plate at 65°C for 
10–20 seconds.
4. Allow to cool and observe under microscope at 
100×.
5. The appearance of brown rhombohedron-
shaped crystals of ferroprotoporphyrin chloride 
is a positive reaction for heme.
5.2.9 Spectrophotometric Estimation
Reagent Preparation
• Solution 1: →  0.2% sodium lauryl sulfate in water
• Solution 2: →  0.2% mercaptoethanol in 1% 
NH3 solution
These reagents will keep for approximately 4 days.
Procedure
• To a 1 cm long stained thread, add 10 mL of 
Solution 1.
• Incubate at 37°C for 15–20 minutes.
• Add 10 mL of Solution 2 and mix.
• Transfer liquid to a microcapillary cuvette.
• On a spectrophotometer, monitor the reaction at 
560 mm against a reaction blank until absorp-
tion reaches maximum.
• When the reaction is complete, after 5–10 minutes, 
scan the sample between 600 and 500 nm. Two 
peaks, which are clearly defined at 558 nm and 529 
nm, indicate the presence of hemoglobin derivatives.
Standards and Controls
• Known bloodstains of various ages must be tested; 
oxyhemoglobin exhibits absorption peaks at 576 
and 538 nm. The apparent shift is thought to be due 
to the formation of reduced hemoglobin derivatives.
3—Detection of Origin of Bloodstains (Human versus 
Non-Human)
5.2.10 Precipitin Test
This test is used to determine if the blood is of human 
or animal origin. The idea is that animals injected 
with human blood form antibodies against the blood. 
Animal blood collected in a beaker is used to isolate 
antigens. Blood serum is also isolated to collect the 
antibodies.
In the case of human blood, the antibodies recovered 
from the animal blood interact with the antigens in the 
human blood and clump. The most common precipitin 
test is the precipitin ring test. Human blood is layered 
on top of the animal serum containing the human blood 
antibodies. The interaction between the antibodies and 
the antigens forms a cloudy ring at the interface of the 
two liquids (Figure 5.3).
5.3 SEMINAL FLUID
Seminal fluid is an important biological fluid, which is 
ejaculated from the male reproductive organ. Human 
semen is a white or slightly yellow, thick, and viscous liq-
uid having a characteristic odor. It is slightly alkaline in 
nature (pH = 7.32–7.70); its semitransparent relative den-
sity is 1.028.
An average male releases 2.5–6 mL of seminal fluid 
during one ejaculation containing 100–200 million sper-
matozoa. After ejaculation, human semen coagulates 
immediately due to the conversion of fibrinogen into 
fibrin. After 15–20 minutes, the action of the enzyme 
fibrinolysin causes it to reliquify.
5.3.1 Composition of Semen
Chemically, semen is a complex mixture of organic and 
inorganic compounds. Important constituents of semen, 
from an identification point of view, are proteins includ-
ing enzymes (acid phosphatase), blood group factors, 
choline, fructose, citric acid, uric acid, and zinc. The 
composition varies from one individual to the other.
Precipitin test
Antigens
(soluble)
(Human blood)
Zone of
equivalence:
Visible percipitate
Antibodies
(Human antiserum
made in rabbits)
FIGURE 5.3 Diagrammatic representation of the pre-
cipitin test.

84
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Semen is composed of the following:
• Seminal plasma (90%)—Secretion of seminal 
vesicle epididymis prostate gland and Cowper’s 
gland.
• Spermatozoa (10%)—Each mL of semen contains 
about 100 million spermatozoa that are motile 
for about 45 minutes to 3 hours after ejaculation.
5.3.2 Structure of Spermatozoa
The spermatozoon has three parts: head, neck and tail.
The head contains the chromosomes. It is flat, oval, 
and flexible. The diameter of head ranges from 2.5–3.5 μ. 
The anterior aspect of the head is covered with a cytoplas-
mic sheet that is known as the acrosome.
The neck is very delicate and small, whereas the tail 
is an elongated part containing fibrin.
Seminal stain is important evidence in case of rape, 
attempted rape, sodomy, and in civil cases viz. disputed 
paternity cases (Figure 5.4).
5.3.3 Collection of Semen
In practice, a seminal stain can be presented in a number 
of forms and the collection methodology varies accord-
ing to the form; it can be presented as the following:
1. Dry stain from thigh collected by a wet cotton 
or swabbing.
2. Suspected portion of cloth where stain is col-
lected by cutting the fabric then drying and pre-
serving it.
3. Pubic hair, in which case the hair is plucked or 
cut and placed in a small container.
4. Stains on smooth surface can be collected by 
scraping with knife or any sharp instrument and 
placed into a glass container.
5.3.4 Examination of Semen and Seminal Stains
5.3.4.1 Physical Examination
Color: Thick, yellowish white, glary, opalescent 
secretion having a characteristic odor known as 
seminal odor.
Texture: On touch, seminal stains are starchy.
Appearance: Garments sent for forensic examina-
tion are usually dirty, having variety of stains; 
in natural light some stains are reddish colored, 
while others are brown, yellow, or faint gray in 
color. These are often mixed with stains of blood 
vaginal discharge, urine and semen; so as to 
restrict the investigation to seminal stains only, 
preliminary examination is done under filtered 
UV light. The fluorescence of the seminal stains 
is of a bluish-white color, and such stains should 
be selected for further examination.
5.3.5 Presumptive Test
5.3.5.1  Acid Phosphatase Test 
(Sodium-α -Naphthyl Phosphate Test)
This method is best on the presence of an enzyme acid 
phosphatase in semen. Acid phosphatase is present in 
semen and other body fluids, and in fresh vegetables, 
fungi and bacteria. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
staining with umbelliferyl phosphate reagent distin-
guishes seminal acid phosphatase from other acid phos-
phatase in other fluids. The enzyme is also present in 
semen in much higher concentration than in other body 
fluids. This is can be used as a very good screening test 
for the examination of seminal fluid.
Reagent Preparation: NaCl (230 g), glacial acetic 
acid (5 mL), sodium acetate anhydrous or trihydric 
Na acetate (20 g), Brentamine Fast Blue B salt (0.5 g), 
Ca-α -naphthyl phosphate (0.5 g), Teepol or aerosol 1% 
sol (10 mL) and distilled water (900 mL) are the con-
stituents of the reagent. A buffer is made by dissolving 
NaCl, glacial acetic acid, and Na-acetate in distilled 
water. Brentamine Fast Blue B salt is dissolved in 
a small amount of this buffer. A fine suspension of 
Ca-α -naphthyl phosphatase is prepared by grinding 
the same in Teepol or aerosol with a pestle and mortar. 
The resulting suspension is added to the remaining 
amount of buffer. The Brentamine solution is then 
added to the Ca-α -naphthyl phosphate solution, and 
the mixture is then filtered and stored in an amber-
colored bottle.
Procedure: A sheet of filter paper is thoroughly moist-
ened with normal saline and pressed over the area to be 
examined for a couple of minutes. The filter paper is lifted 
off and the reagent is spread to it in about one minute. 
Plasma membrane
Mitochondrion
(spiral shape)
Nucleus
Acrosome
Tail
Middle
piece
Neck
Head
FIGURE 5.4 Diagrammatic representation of the struc-
ture of spermatozoa.

85
Forensic Biology
The area corresponding to the seminal stain appears 
purple-red color.
5.3.5.2 Florence Test
The test is based on the formation of choline per iodide 
crystal due to the chemical reaction between choline present 
in semen and iodine in the test reagent. A florence test is a 
very delicate test; a negative test may be obtained if choline 
content is low or stain is decomposed. A positive test may be 
obtained with other body tissue extract containing choline.
Fluorescent Reagent
• The fluorescent reagent is composed of KI (1.66 
g), I2 (2.56 g) and H2O (30 mL).
Procedure
• Add stain, distilled water, and HCl.
• Put the extract on a microscopic slide and add 
fluorescent reagent.
• Dark brown crystals of choline periodide will 
appear under the microscope.
5.3.5.3 Barberio Test
A Barberio test depends upon presence of spermine in 
semen. Barberio reagent is a saturated aqueous or alco-
holic solution of picric acid. This test is based on the for-
mation of spermine picrate crystal due to the chemical 
reaction between spermine present in semen and the picric 
acid added as the reagent. The disadvantage of this test is 
the pleomorphic nature of the crystal, which sometimes 
takes the form of a deposit without any structure. This test 
renders positive results even without the presence of sper-
matozoa because of the presence of prostatic secretion, 
thus manifesting importance in cases with azoospermia.
Procedure
A small portion of stain is extracted with distilled 
water and then concentrated by evaporation on a water 
bath. A drop of concentrated extract is mixed with a 
drop of Barberio reagent on a microscopic slide and 
examined microscopically after covering with coverslip. 
Formation of spermine picrate crystal indicates the pres-
ence of semen. The spermine picrate crystals are yellow 
in color, needle-shaped rhombic, star and lens-shaped.
Stain + Barberio reagent → Crystal of spermine 
picrate
5.3.5.4 Puranen Test
A portion of stain is extracted with a little amount of 
distilled water and treated with 5% solution of naph-
thol yellow S. Characteristic yellow crystal of spermine 
flavinate are seen. These crystals are yellow and lenticu-
lar in shape.
Stain + Naphthol yellow S (5%) → Yellow lenticular 
crystal of spermine flavinate
5.3.5.5 Thin Layer Chromatography
TLC test is used to test for spermine and choline present 
in semen. This technique was developed by Yano in 1970.
• Solvent System: 100 mL of HCl solution kept 
in a developing jar for about 2 hours to make it 
fully saturated with solvent vapor.
• Developing Reagent: Two different reagents are 
needed for choline and spermine, the Dragendorff 
reagent and potassium iodoplatinate reagent.
 
1. Dragendorff reagent is composed of two 
solutions:
• Solution 1, which is composed of Bismuth subni-
trate (0.25 g), distilled water (40 mL), and glacial 
acetic acid (100 mL)
• Solution 2, which is composed of  KI (8 mL) and 
distilled water (20 mL)
• Both the solutions are stored separately in 
amber-colored bottles. Immediately before use 
one mL of the each of the two solutions is mixed 
with 4 mL of glacial acetic acid and 20 mL of 
distilled water.
 
2. Potassium iodoplatinate reagent is composed of 
KCl 10% w/v, (2 mL) KI 4 %W/V (50 mL), and 
distilled water (20 mL).
Procedure
• About 1–2 cm of stain, area is cut out and 
soaked with 0.2 mL HCl and extract is used as 
test sample.
• 0.1% w/v aqueous solution of choline chloride 
and 0.1w/v HCl solution of spermine phosphate 
are used as a control sample.
• A glass plate measuring 20 × 20 cm is layered 
with a mixture of silica gel G and water (1:2) in 
amount to make the layer 0.25 mm thick. The 
plate is air-dried and then activated at 110°C for 
90–120 minutes.
• A drop of sample is spotted on the plate, then 
the plate is placed in a developing jar and left for 
20 minutes.
• The plate is taken out dried with hair dryer and 
cooled; lower 2/3 of the plate is sprayed with 
Dragendorff reagent for the diction of choline spot 
and upper 1/3 of the plate is sprayed with potas-
sium iodoplatinate for the detection of spermine.
• The TLC method is used for the detection of 
choline and spermine, especially in the case of 
azoospermia and oligospermic.

86
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
5. Lactate Dehydrogenase Chemical (LDHC): 
Sperm-specific LDH isoenzyme can be sepa-
rated from other LDH by polyamide gel 
electrophoresis.
Advantages
• Stain is stable in tropical condition for over 4 
weeks.
• Isoenzyme pattern of human semen is differenti-
ated easily from that of commonly encountered 
animals.
5.3.6 Confirmatory Test
Microscopic Examination
• A small portion of the stained area is cut from 
fabric and moistened with a few drop of 0.01 
N-HCl and kept about for 30 minutes.
• Individual threads are then teased by the help of 
needle.
• 1 or 2 drops of liquid are then spread out on a 
microscopic slide and smear is prepared on it; 
the slide is then allowed to dry and stained by 
one of the following staining dye and examined 
under a microscope.
• Hematoxylin and eosin
• Malachite green and eosin
• Aniline blue and eosin
• Methylene blue and eosin
• The smear is slightly heated and then stained 
with methylene blue, then left for 15 minutes. 
The slide is washed in running water and then 
counterstained with eosin, again washed under 
running water and air-dried; the slide is then 
ready for microscopic examination.
• In microscopic examination 1/3 or 2/3 of head is 
observed with pinkish color but 1/3 portion (tail) 
of spermatozoa is also observed under micro-
scope without any stain (Figure 5.5).
5.4 SALIVA EXAMINATION
Saliva in a crime scene is an important trace evidence 
which is found either expectorated or in a combination of 
stains and secretion in sexual or violent activity.
Examination of saliva stains lies in two separate 
assignments:
• Localization of the stain
• Stain detection/identification
5.4.1 Localization of the Stain
Locating the saliva stain in a crime scene is problematic 
because, unlike blood, there are no internal constituents 
in saliva that are visible.
5.4.2 Stain Detection/Identification
In 1928, the German investigator B. Mueller proposed 
using alpha-amylase as a marker to validate the pres-
ence of saliva in a crime scene. The problem with 
alpha-amylase was that it is an enzyme that has not 
evolved with the human evolution and remains very 
similar in all living beings. There are also at least four 
variants in humans alone, only two of which are in 
saliva, whereas the other two are excreted by the pan-
creas. This renders testing for alpha-amylase a pre-
sumptive test rather than a sure test for the presence of 
human saliva.
Crime labs use a reagent (chemical) called Phadebas 
to conduct this presumptive test for alpha-amylase. This 
test is relatively cheap, quick, and highly sensitive to any 
alpha-amylase enzymatic activity. However, it is impor-
tant to keep in mind that this test alone cannot confirm 
the presence of human saliva, because this presumptive 
test will give a positive result if the alpha-amylase enzyme 
from any organism is present.
Laboratory tests for saliva remained presump-
tive until the late 1980s, when a group of researchers 
in Japan succeeded in developing a monoclonal anti-
body that is specific for the alpha-amylase variant that 
is present in human saliva in particular. Therefore, 
instead of testing for enzymatic activity, now we can 
detect the alpha-amylase molecule itself, and specifi-
cally, the alpha-amylase from human saliva. This ush-
ered in the development of test kits that are now being 
used in forensic laboratories around the world to screen 
for human saliva (known to many as Lateral Flow 
Immunochromatographic Strip Test or Rapid Stain 
Identification [RSID] Saliva kits).
Positive
Negative
S
C
T
S
C
T
Invalid
S
C
T
FIGURE 5.5 Represents PSA test for semen detection.

87
Forensic Biology
5.4.3 PCR Stain Examination
With the advent of innovative molecular biological 
techniques becoming the norm in the forensic labora-
tory, it is plausible to imagine the eventual replacement 
of the serological testing methods traditionally used to 
identify questioned stains with molecular biological 
techniques.
Molecular biology techniques maybe used when the 
sample is not enough or in contaminated samples. (For 
this purpose mRNA can be of use.)
After isolation of the nucleic acid, PCR assays are 
done for the detection of blood- and semen-specific genes 
then using tissue-specific transcripts for a variety of 
stains.
5.5 HAIR EXAMINATION
5.5.1 Sampling
• Spread the exhibit on a clean white surface under 
proper illumination.
• With hand magnifier, carefully locate any loose 
hair/fiber and collect.
• If any hair or fiber is found adhering to the 
exhibit, it can be either picked up using forceps 
or may be transferred to adhesive tape.
• If the exhibit happens to be a container or an 
object with crevices, a vacuum sweeper with an 
appropriate filter can be used to collect the hair/
fiber.
• Samples collected in the above manner should be 
individually packed in cellophane or paper fold-
ers and labeled; proper noting should be made 
on the worksheet for their exact location on the 
exhibit.
• Each sample should be preliminarily examined 
under a microscope to note color and texture 
and to determine whether it is a hair, fiber, or 
indistinguishable at that magnification.
• Care should be taken to note the presence of root 
bulb or sheath of cells in the hair samples. They 
should be properly preserved for determination 
of sex or serological/DNA examination.
Examination of hair can help in the determination of spe-
cies or origin, sex, site (part of the body), genetic mark-
ers, and source by comparison. Different morphological 
and histological characteristics of hair can be examined 
under microscope/stereomicroscope by temporary or 
permanent mount, scale casting, cross-sectioning, and 
micrometric analysis.
5.5.2 Temporary Mount
• Make a temporary mount of the hair sample on 
a clean slide with the distilled H2O or glycerin. 
Cover with a coverslip.
• Examine under a microscope from one end of the 
hair to the other for general appearance, length, 
color, and treatment-dye or bleach presence or 
absence of root, tip and shaft characteristic, and 
contamination, if any.
5.5.3 Permanent Mount
If the item is a hair, it may also be cleaned in xylene and 
mounted on a microscopic slide as follows:
• Place hair on slide in a drop of xylene and add 
permanent mounting medium.
• Place a coverslip on the hair, allowing the medium 
to spread under coverslip that is encasing hair.
• Label the slide appropriately and allow it to dry 
for 48 hours.
• Following permanent mounting of the hair, it 
can be examined for different morphological 
characteristics and micrometry.
5.5.4 Standards and Controls
Animal Hair: Sufficient samples of hair from differ-
ent species should be maintained in a laboratory 
for reference and comparison purposes.
Human Hair: Hairs of unknown origin may be 
compared with hairs of known origin to deter-
mine the possibility of a common source. For 
comparison purposes, an adequate number of 
standards (at least 10 strands collected at ran-
dom) should be examined (Figure 5.6).
Human hair
Sasquatch hair
50 μm
50 μm
FIGURE 5.6 Human hair and animal hair.

88
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gaensslen RE. 1983. Sourcebook in Forensic Serology, 
Immunology, and Biochemistry. Washington, DC: 
National Institute of Justice.
James SH. 1983. Bloodstain pattern interpretation. In: 
Eckert WG and James SH, eds. Interpretation of 
Bloodstain Evidence at Crime Scenes, 11–67. New 
York, NY: Elsevier Science.
Mozayani A and Noziglia C (eds.). 2011. The Forensic 
Laboratory Handbook 15 Procedures and Practice. 
New York, NY: Springer Science+Business Media, 
LLC. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60761-872-0_2.
Quarino L, Hess J, Shenouda M, Ristenbatt RR, Gold J, 
and Shaler RC. 1993. Differentiation of a-amylase 
from various sources: An approach using selective 
inhibitors. FSS, 33(2): 87–94.
TABLE 5.1 Comparison between Human Hair and Animal Hair
Feature
Human Hair
Animal Hair
Color
Relatively consistent along shaft
Often shows profound color changes and banding
Cortex
Occupying most of the width of shaft greater than 
medulla
Usually less than width of medulla
Distribution 
of pigment
Even, slightly more toward the cuticle
Central or denser towards medulla
Medulla
Less than one-third width of shaft Amorphous, mostly 
not continuous when present
Greater than one-third width of shaft Continuous, often 
varying in appearance along shaft, defined structure
Scales
Imbricate, similar along shaft from root to tip
Often showing variation in structure along shaft from 
root to tip
Source: Adapted from Gaensslen RE, Sourcebook in Forensic Serology, Immunology, and Biochemistry, National Institute of
Justice, Washington, DC, 1983.

89
C H A P T E R  6
Forensic Genetics
Anna Barbaro
6.1 INTRODUCTION
For many years, DNA analysis has been used in different 
areas, such as medical genetics, biotechnologies, micro-
biology, agriculture—and obviously in forensics, where 
it’s the most commonly used method for solving crimes 
and controversial evidential biological relationships.
In 1953, Watson and Crick from Cambridge 
University (UK) described for the first time the dou-
ble helix structure of DNA. In 1962, they received the 
Nobel Prize for their discovery, and even then they 
probably could not imagine the future great usefulness 
of their finding.
DNA is found in all nucleated cells: in human cellu-
lar nucleus there are 22 pairs of autosomal chromosomes 
and one pair of sex chromosomes (XX in female and XY 
in male). During conception each individual receives one-
half of its genetic material from its father and one-half 
from its mother.
The DNA molecule is a polymer consisting of sev-
eral nucleotides: a nucleotide is made by a phosphate 
group, a deoxyribose and a nitrogenous base bound to 
CONTENTS
6.1 Introduction 
89
6.2 History 
90
6.3 Applications of DNA Typing 
90
6.4 Analytical Procedures 
90
6.4.1 DNA Extraction 
91
6.4.2 DNA Quantification 
91
6.4.3 Polymerase Chain Reaction 
91
6.4.4 Capillary Electrophoresis 
92
6.5 Autosomal Forensic Markers 
93
6.5.1 Short Tandem Repeats (STRs) 
93
6.5.2 Mini STRs 
93
6.6 Forensic Markers in Sexual Chromosomes 
95
6.6.1 Y-Chromosome: Y STRs 
95
6.6.2 X-Chromosome: X STRs 
97
6.7 Alternative DNA Markers 
98
6.7.1 Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism 
98
6.7.2 Mitochondrial DNA 
99
6.8 New Methodologies 
100
6.8.1 Next-Generation Sequencing 
100
6.8.2 Rapid DNA Analysis 
101
6.9 Data Interpretation 
102
6.10 Biostatical Evaluations 
103
6.10.1 Criminal Caseworks 
103
6.10.1.1 Random Match Probability 
103
6.10.1.2 Likelihood Ratio 
103
6.10.1.3  Combined Probability of Exclusion/Combined Probability of Inclusion (CPE/CPI) 
104
6.10.2 Paternity Test 
104
6.11 DNA Admissibility in Court 
106
Bibliography 
107

90
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
the deoxyribose by an N-glycosidic connection. Bases 
are purines (adenine, cytosine) and pyrimidines (guanine 
and thymine).
A gene is a segment of DNA with a coding or non-
coding function, and within chromosomes there are up 
to 100,000 paired genes. The gene location on the chro-
mosome is called locus. Each diploid human cell contains 
around 6 pg DNA; hence, 1 ng DNA has around 333 
copies of each locus.
Each gene may have variants called alleles: a locus 
is polymorphic if it has many alleles, so that at least 2% 
of its population is heterozygous. This means each indi-
vidual (except those who are twins) has a unique genome 
that cannot be altered by any known treatment.
6.2 HISTORY
In 1985, Prof. Alec Jeffreys from Leicester University 
found that some regions in the human genome contain 
short DNA sequences that repeat next to each other at a 
given locus. Differing from individual to individual, these 
sequences are referred to as a variable number of tan-
dem repeats, or VNTR. Jeffreys developed a technique 
to examine length variation of VNTR regions: DNA 
is cut by restriction enzymes in order to produce some 
that are separated by electrophoresis on agarose gel and 
then transferred to a cellulose membrane for subsequent 
detection by radioactively labeled probes (Southern blot-
ting). Fragments obtained are so variable in size that it 
is extremely unlikely that unrelated individuals have the 
same VNTR pattern. Analyzing these restriction frag-
ment length polymorphisms (RFLPs), Jeffreys made pos-
sible the first human identity test, which he called DNA 
fingerprinting.
The test was first used in 1985 in an immigration 
case, where it allowed a British citizen from Ghana 
to prove his identity and avoid the expulsion from the 
United Kingdom. In 1987, DNA testing was applied to 
identify the murderer of two young girls, Lynda Mann 
and Dawn Ashworth, who were raped and killed in 
Narborough Leicestershire (UK) in 1983 and 1986, 
respectively. The test was able to exonerate 17-year-old 
Richard Buckland, a kitchen porter from a local psy-
chiatric hospital who was well known for his learning 
disabilities and history of sexual behavior, and who 
knew Dawn Ashworth and had confessed to killing her. 
DNA fingerprints were then used to identify the real 
perpetrator through a mass DNA screening: investiga-
tors analyzed biological samples taken from over 4000 
men (between 17 and 34 years old) belonging to villages 
close to the homicide areas and who at the time of the 
murders did not have any alibi. A young man named 
Colin Pitchfork was arrested in September 1987, and 
convicted of murders because his DNA matched with 
semen stains found on the girls’ bodies. He became 
the first murderer in the world to be accused due to a 
DNA test. Unfortunately, this method, while power-
ful in its ability to differentiate individuals, required 
large amounts of un-degraded DNA (not always avail-
able with forensic samples) and was laborious and time 
consuming.
In 1988, forensic DNA analysis was admitted for 
the first time in a  U.S. courtroom in a case of sexual 
assault (State of Florida v. Tommy Lee Andrews). In 
1989, the validity of the DNA was challenged during the 
trial against Joseph Castro, convicted for the murder of 
his pregnant neighbor and her infant daughter, but then 
acquitted by the court notwithstanding the unfavorable 
results of a DNA test.
The defense asserted that the testing laboratory had 
not performed the analysis according to the standards 
procedure, so incriminatory results showing that the 
blood found on the suspect’s watch was from the mother 
were ambiguous. This had a significant impact on the 
credibility of DNA testing and underlined the relevance 
of a correct analysis procedure in order to assure the reli-
ability of DNA test results and their effective usability in 
court.
6.3 APPLICATIONS OF DNA TYPING
Today, forensic laboratories conduct hundreds of DNA 
tests, since modern methods greatly expanded the 
sources of evidence that can be tested and reduced 
the amount of material necessary to obtain conclusive 
results.
The main practical applications of forensic DNA 
typing include the following:
1. Personal Identification
Except particular cases (e.g., genetic diseases), DNA 
is the same in all biological samples from an individual, 
so a DNA test is the primary method for identifying and 
distinguishing among individuals, in particular in cases 
of disaster victim identification (DVI).
2. Forensics Caseworks
DNA from evidence found at a crime scene can be 
compared with one of the victim’s/suspect’s to identify the 
donor in order to establish if a suspect is guilty or not.
3. Biological Relationship
Each person inherits DNA from parents, so DNA 
typing is commonly used to establish paternity and 
maternity as well as to reconstruct family relationships.
6.4 ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES
Forensic DNA typing is a multistep process that includes 
several phases, discussed in the following sections.

91
Forensic Genetics
6.4.1 DNA Extraction
DNA may be extracted from a wide range of forensic 
samples, such as biological fluids (e.g., blood, saliva), 
oral swabs, hairs, fluid stains, cadaveric tissues, and 
bones but also contact traces.
DNA extraction consists in DNA purification from the 
other cell components and generally involves the following:
• Cellular lysis (by chemical and physical meth-
ods) in order to release DNA
• Protein removal (by protease) and lipid removal 
(by detergents or surfactants)
• Precipitation of DNA free from the other cellular 
components
The most common procedures are as follows:
• Organic extraction is a liquid-liquid extraction 
procedure involving several steps of purifica-
tion by phenol-chloroform and final DNA pre-
cipitation by ice-cold ethanol or isopropanol 
(sometimes by increasing the ionic strength with 
sodium acetate).
• Spin columns purification relies on the nucleic 
acid binding to a solid phase (silica or other) 
under special pH and salt conditions.
• Magnetic beads DNA isolation technology 
involves polymer-coated magnetic beads that in 
the presence of chaotropic salts can bind to DNA.
The ability to maximize DNA recovery from foren-
sic samples in order to obtain a high quantity of high-
quality DNA, free of inhibitors, is relevant for further 
applications, including polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
sequencing and microarray analysis.
Different DNA extraction kits are available com-
merically, and some have been suitable for biorobot 
automation for several years now (e.g., EZ1 by Qiagen, 
Automate Express by Applied Biosystems). Automated 
procedures can reduce labor time and cost, minimizing 
contamination issues because all reagents are included in 
special prefilled, sealed cartridges that are placed on the 
instrument. After initial pre-lysis, all purification steps 
are performed, automatically eliminating human error in 
reagent/sample preparation and handling.
6.4.2 DNA Quantification
DNA quantification is an important step in forensics in 
order to confirm that samples contain enough DNA for 
further typing; this is because scarce DNA quantity may 
result in partial profiles, while too much DNA template 
may produce artifacts.
The traditional quantification method is the mea-
surement of absorbance at 260 nm by a spectropho-
tometer: a value of 1 corresponds to a concentration of 
50 μg/mL for double-stranded DNA. Proteins absorb at 
280 nm, so the absorptions ratio at 260:280 is useful 
to evaluate the sample contamination: a value of 1.8 is 
an indication of purity. This procedure is not species-
specific, because not only human DNA absorbs at the 
same wavelength.
Alternative methods have been developed over the 
years (Slot Blot, Ethidium Bromide, Picogreen), but now 
the most widely used method is real-time PCR (qPCR). 
This procedure combines PCR with fluorescence detec-
tion and involves the use of special probes targeting a 
specific region of the human DNA; it allows monitor-
ing the detection of amplification products accumulated 
cycle by cycle.
The quantity of DNA in the sample can be estimated 
by a comparison with a calibration curve produced by 
known standards. Real-time PCR involves the use of an 
internal control (IPC) to check for the presence of inhibi-
tors and for any DNA template degradation in the sam-
ple. The method is species-specific, highly sensitive, and 
allows quantification of a very small DNA quantity that 
is relevant when working with aged or degraded samples 
(Figure 6.1).
Several commercial kits for real-time quantification 
of forensic samples are available and guarantee in a short 
time reliable and accurate results. Some of them allow 
also the detection of the male component present in the 
total DNA, which is very useful when working with 
mixed samples (e.g., sexual assault cases).
6.4.3 Polymerase Chain Reaction
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was developed in 
April 1983 by Kary Mullis and some members of the 
Human Genetics group at the Cetus Corporation. For 
this invention, Mullis received the Nobel Prize in 1993. 
PCR is a sensitive and rapid procedure that permits us to 
obtain millions of copies of DNA; it consists of repeated 
cycles of heating and cooling required for the enzymatic 
replication of the DNA. Each cycle has three steps:
• Denaturation: The two complementary DNA 
strands are denatured by heat.
• Annealing: The sample is cooled to allow prim-
ers (short synthetic DNA fragments) to anneal 
to the complementary regions adjacent to DNA 
target segments.
• Extension: Temperature is raised to enable DNA 
polymerase to add nucleotides (dNTPs). This 
allows extending the primers and obtaining a 
copy of the DNA template.

92
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
The PCR result is an exponential accumulation of the 
target sequence equal to 2n (n = number of amplification 
cycles). Thus after 30 cycles, approximately a billion cop-
ies of the target DNA template is produced (Figure 6.2).
Many commercial kits containing all PCR compo-
nents (buffer, primers, Taq polymerase) and allowing 
multiplex PCR analysis of several loci are now available. 
To facilitate laser detection on automatic instruments, all 
loci with alleles overlapping in size are labeled with dif-
ferent colors of fluorescent dyes.
6.4.4 Capillary Electrophoresis (CE)
Capillary electrophoresis (CE) consists in ions separating 
according to their electrophoretic mobility within a spe-
cial medium (millimeter capillaries or micro/nanofluidic 
channels) in the presence of a high voltage. This is the 
choice method for DNA fragment detection but also for 
DNA sequencing by semiautomatic sequencers.
PCR products are injected into silica capillaries filled 
with a special polymer and then, when the voltage is 
FIGURE 6.1 Real-time amplification plot.
First cycle
PCR
DNA template
Forward primer
Reverse primer
Denaturation 
and annealing
n cycles = 2n copies
Second cycle
n
cycles
FIGURE 6.2 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) process.

93
Forensic Genetics
applied, they migrate with different speed, according to 
their size; shorter fragments move faster than longer frag-
ments. When DNA fragments amplified with fluorescent 
dye-labeled primers pass in front of the detection cell, 
the laser leads the dye to fluoresce. The fluorescence is 
captured by a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera that 
converts the fluorescence signal into electronic informa-
tion then processed by the instrument software.
An internal size standard (labeled with a dye different 
from the ones of PCR primers) is placed within each sample 
to create a calibration curve useful to normalize mobility 
differences among different injections. Alleles are finally 
designated by comparison to external allelic ladders.
6.5 AUTOSOMAL FORENSIC MARKERS
6.5.1 Short Tandem Repeats
Many repeated DNA traits are placed in almost every 
chromosome, especially close to the centromeric area. 
Minisatellites (VNTRs) have generally core repeats 
between 9 and 80 bp, while microsatellites (short tandem 
repeats, or STRs) contain 2–6 bp repeats and are typi-
cally placed in the non-coding intron region (Figure 6.3). 
STR classification is based on the length of the core 
repeat units, on the number of adjacent units, and 
obviously on the total length of the overall repeated 
region. The number of repeats is variable among indi-
viduals; this provides a wide variety of alleles (generally 
more than 10 alleles for the commonly used STRs) in a 
population and obviously a high degree of discrimina-
tion when multiple STR loci are examined. Hundreds of 
STR systems have been mapped throughout the human 
genome: they are useful in several fields such as genetic 
mapping, linkage analysis, and human identity testing.
STRs show some advantages—such as easy ampli-
fication by PCR, high heterozygosity, low mutation rate 
(10−3), and a smaller size than VNTRs—that made them 
suitable for forensic applications where sample degrada-
tion is a common problem.
In October 1993, the DNA Commission of the 
International Society of Forensic Genetics (ISFG)  
developed and recommended the STR nomenclature 
that is widely used: alleles are named by the number of 
repeats which they contain; intermediate alleles are des-
ignated by the number of complete repeat units and the 
number of base pairs of the partial repeat unit.
Many commercial multiplexes (Table 6.1), including 
primers for STR markers selected for forensics, have been 
developed over the years, allowing initially simultaneous 
amplification of a few loci to large multiplexes which are 
now commonly used in forensic laboratories (Figure 6.4).
Laboratories often require simple, rapid, and high-
throughput work flow, especially to process reference 
samples for DNA databases. To serve this purpose, some 
amplification kits that have been developed that employ 
a reaction mix optimized to enable direct amplification 
of single-source samples (e.g., saliva) on swabs or paper 
substrates. The procedure is simple and rapid because it 
does not require any DNA extraction, and a fragment 
of the sample may be added directly to the reaction mix.
This method reduces extraction and purification 
costs, minimizing the risk of errors and contamination 
during different steps.
6.5.2 Mini STRs
DNA degradation is a common problem in forensics, 
since biological evidence may remain exposed for a 
long time to harsh environmental conditions (e.g., heat, 
humidity, ultraviolet radiations) or to microorganisms, 
especially in the case of missing person investigations. 
Degradation may affect the analysis or, depending on its 
extent, may cause typing failure.
Chemical reactions affecting DNA include oxidation 
(leading to base modification), hydrolysis (leading to base 
loss), and single- and double-strand breakage. Bacterial 
enzymes (commonly from microorganisms in the gastro-
intestinal tract or from the environment) cleave DNA to 
generate a pool of small fragments, generally in the aver-
age range of 80–200 base pairs (bp) that, falling within 
most markers of primer target regions, may compromise 
PCR efficiency.
In addition, forensic samples may contain substances 
that inhibit or inactivate PCR. Inhibitors include heme 
from blood, melanin from skin and hairs, tannins from 
leather, dyes (such as the indigo dye in denim fabrics), 
and humic acid from soils. In cases where DNA is limited 
in quantity or in quality (degraded or inhibited samples), 
conventional STR analysis produces only partial DNA 
profiles because of allele or locus dropout, especially for 
the larger STR loci. The problem is more evident when 
large multiplex PCR are used due to the wide size range 
of PCR products generated.
AGTA
Short tandem repeats (STRs)
AATG
Primer
Primer
Primer
Primer
6 repeats
7 repeats
FIGURE 6.3 Example of STR structures.

94
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Partial DNA profiles generally may not provide a 
discrimination power sufficient to include or exclude a 
potential contributor to the sample. Recovery of informa-
tion from these difficult samples is often enhanced by ana-
lyzing smaller markers called mini-STRs. Reduced-size 
amplicons are created by moving the forward and reverse 
PCR primers close to the STR repeats regions in order to 
obtain small PCR products. Mini-STRs were used dur-
ing the identification of the World Trade Center victims. 
Most bone samples were analyzed by conventional STR 
analysis, but many samples were in such bad condition 
(because of heat, fire, or bacterial degradation) that scarce 
or no results were obtained. At that time, John Butler and 
Bruce McCord from the National Institute of Science and 
Technology (NIST) were developing miniaturized STRs 
primers. Their use improved the 9/11 remains analysis, 
and in fact today, they are commonly used in the identi-
fication of missing person remain (DVI) and in cold case 
analysis.
In addition, mini-STR typing is generally more sen-
sitive than traditional STR analysis. This helps obtain 
results from samples with little DNA quantity, such as 
biological traces arising from casual handling of objects 
(“touch DNA”); this implies that now it is possible to 
detect foreign DNA from officers or others who may 
have handled an item years ago.
Another relevant advantage is the mini-STRs com-
patibility with samples processed using commercial STR 
TABLE 6.1 Main Commercial Multiplexes Available for STR Detection by Sequencers
Applied Biosystems
Year
No. Loci
Promega
Year
No. Loci
AmpFlSTR Blue
1996
3
Gamma STR
1997
4
AmpFlSTR Green I
1997
3
PowerPlex 1.1
1997
8
Profiler
1997
9
PowerPlex 1.2
1998
10
Profiler Plus
1997
10
PowerPlex 2.1
1999
9
COfiler
1998
7
PowerPlex 16
2000
16
SGM Plus
1999
11
PowerPlex ES
2002
9
Identifiler
2001
16
PowerPlex Y
2003
12
Profiler Plus ID
2001
10
PowerPlex S5
2007
4
SEfiler
2002
11
PowerPlex 16 HS
2009
16
Yfiler
2004
17
PowerPlex ESX 16
2009
16
MiniFiler
2007
8
PowerPlex ESX 17
2009
17
SEfiler Plus
2007
11
PowerPlex ESI 16
2009
16
Sinofiler
2008
15
PowerPlex ESI 17
2009
17
Identifiler Direct
2009
16
PowerPlex CS7
2009
7
NGM
2009
16
PowerPlex 18D
2011
18
Identifiler Plus
2010
16
PowerPlex Y23
2012
23
NGM Select
2010
17
PowerPlex 21
2012
21
GlobalFiler
2012
24
PowerPlex Fusion
2012
24
YFiler plus
2014
27
PowerPlex ESX/ESI Fast
2014
16/17
NGM Detect
2016
18
PowerPlex Fusion 6C
2015
27
Qiagen
Year
No. Loci
Qiagen
Year
No. Loci
Nonaplex ESS
2010
9
Hexaplex ESS
2010
10
ESSplex
2010
12
HDplex kit
2010
11
ESSplex Plus
2011
12
Triplex AFS QS
2010
2
ESSplex SE QS
2010
13
Triplex DSF
2010
3
Decaplex SE
2010
10
Argus X-12
2009
12
Idplex Plus GO
2010
16
Argus Y-12
2009
12
Idplex Plus
2010
16
Argus X-12 QS
2010
12
Investigator 24plex GO
2015
24
Investigator 24plex QS
2015
24
HealthGene Technologies
Year
No. Loci
HealthGene Technologies
Year
No. Loci
SureID® 21G
2015
21
SureID® 27Y
2015
21

95
Forensic Genetics
multiplexes, included those of convicted offenders stored 
in national databases. The first commercial multiplex, 
“AmpFlSTRs Minifiler,” was introduced in 2007 by 
Applied Biosystems.
In 2009, the European DNA community recom-
mended the expansion of the European Standard Set 
(ESS), which included seven loci (TH01, vWA, FGA, 
D21S11, D3S1358, D8S1179, and D18S51), by adding 
some short amplicons (mini- and midi-STRs) that are 
more successfully amplified in compromised samples. 
This also may decrease the chance of obtaining false pos-
itive matches during cross-border DNA data exchanges, 
especially in case of partial profiles.
Thus, Europe adopted five new loci: D2S441, 
D10S1248, D22S1045, D1S1656, and D12S391. In 
2012, the FBI proposed, for profile inclusion in the 
U.S. national database CODIS (Combined DNA Index 
System), the expansion of the traditional 13 core STR 
loci (D3S1358, D5S818, D7S820, D13S317, D8S1179, 
VWA, TH01, D16S539, D18S51, D21S11, FGA, TPOX, 
and CSF1PO), internationally recognized as standard 
routine markers in human identification, by including 
more loci.
In the last few years, several multiplexes, includ-
ing the above new markers, have been commercialized, 
allowing the analysis of up to 27 markers (Schumm et al., 
2013).
A review of the multiplexes most commonly used 
over the years is shown in Table 6.1.
6.6 FORENSIC MARKERS 
IN SEXUAL CHROMOSOMES
6.6.1 Y-Chromosome: Y STRs
STRs useful for forensic DNA analysis have been found 
in human sex chromosomes (X-Y).
The Y chromosome (ChrY) contains 86 genes, which 
code for only 23 distinct proteins. It includes about 58 
million bp, consisting in approximately 2% of the total 
DNA in a male cells.
Around 300 million years ago, the X and Y chro-
mosomes were homologues and comparable in size and 
genetic content: then the Y-chromosome underwent a 
series of deletions/mutations, reducing it to its current 
size (around 50 megabase).
ChrY recombines with the ChrX only in small seg-
ments of pseudo-autosomal regions at the telomeres. 
The non-recombining region of the ChrY is named 
NRY and contains euchromatin (with functional genes) 
and heterochromatin (transcriptionally not active). 
The analysis of Y-chromosome short tandem repeats 
(Y-STRs) has become a very useful tool in evolutionary 
studies as well as in forensic caseworks. Haplotypes 
(physically linked loci) from this region are transmit-
ted unchanged through many gtenerations, except 
for occasional rare mutations. This implies ChrY is 
inherited in a paternal manner: males who are related 
through the same male lane have the same or similar 
FIGURE 6.4 Control DNA 007 analyzed by Applied Biosystems “AmpFlSTR NGM Select.”

96
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Y-STR haplotypes, while non-related males have dif-
ferent Y-STR haplotypes.
So, Y-STR typing can be used as a supplement to the 
traditional autosomal typing, but obviously alone it’s not 
enough to identify an individual.
Male-specific systems aid in cases involving the anal-
ysis of mixtures or degraded DNA samples (generally 
producing partial autosomal STR profiles) by provid-
ing additional information and statistical discriminating 
power.
Main applications of Y-STR analysis in forensics:
1. Sexual assault cases
a. In sexual mixed samples (e.g. vaginal swabs), 
the male component can be masked due to 
the high concentration of female sample: 
female DNA does not contain Y-STR, so the 
male component is easily detected without 
the need for a differential extraction.
b. To determine the number of males present in 
a mixture (e.g., in cases of multiple perpetra-
tor rape).
c. Deposition of semen by an azoospermic or 
oligospermic males.
2. Criminal paternity
a. When an alleged father is not available for 
the test, his male relatives can be used as a 
reference.
b. Y-STRs can be used as a supplement to auto-
somal STR analysis to prove paternity.
3. Disaster victim identification and/or missing 
persons 
4. A male individual can be identified by typing 
a male relative (such as a father, son, brother, 
uncle, etc.) who can be used as a reference.
5. Ancestry
6. Since Y-STRs are inherited through the paternal 
line, they are identical in all males belonging to 
the same family (except for occasional changes 
occurred through generations). Because of this, 
their analysis may be useful in genealogical tests.
7. Mixed samples 
Y-STRs are useful for the analysis of mixed 
samples from sexual or not sexual caseworks, 
especially in case of not balanced mixed samples 
where the male component is in small quan-
tity compared to the female DNA (“masking 
effect”). Y-STR typing can clearly identify the 
male donor who contributed to the evidence.
Many Y-STR loci have been described and proved to 
have utility in forensic genetics. In 1997, an international 
multicenter study recommended the use of nine core loci 
for standard forensic haplotyping (the minimal haplo-
type loci, MHL or minHt): DYS19, DYS389I, DYS389II, 
DYS390, DYS391, DYS392, DYS393, and DYS385a/b.
In January 2003, the Scientific Working Group on 
DNA Analysis Methods (SWGDAM) recommended in 
the United States the use of all MHL loci (minimal hap-
lotype loci) plus DYS438 and DYS439.
With the establishment of the core loci, manufactur-
ers started to develop several commercial multiplexes 
that allow for the analysis of a large number (23–27) of 
Y-STR loci (Table 6.1).
FIGURE 6.5 Control DNA 2800 analyzed by the Promega “PowerPlex Y23.”

97
Forensic Genetics
An example of a Y-STR haplotype obtained by a 
commercial multiplex is shown in Figure 6.5.
A Y-STR database consists of haplotype frequencies 
instead of allele frequencies. This is because Y-STR loci 
are inherited as a block of linked haplotypes; therefore, 
estimates of the multilocus frequency cannot be done 
by the product rule but by the counting method, which 
is based upon the evaluation of how many times a par-
ticular multilocus haplotype is observed in a particular 
database.
Obviously, the ability to obtain a reliable and accu-
rate estimate depends on the ethno-geographic composi-
tion of the database, the number of individuals and the 
Y-STR loci included. In 2000, an online open-access 
reference database (YHRD) was created with the aim to 
store Y haplotypes from many populations all over the 
world (www.yhrd.org).
6.6.2 X-Chromosome: X STRs
Some STRs are located on the X chromosome (ChrX). 
The X chromosome spans more than 153 million base 
pairs and include around 2000 genes, many of them not 
related to sex, others perhaps related to sexual dimor-
phisms. Females have two X chromosomes, but only one 
ChrX is active per cell; males have only one X chromo-
some, so the ChrX markers appear in hemizygosity and 
their haplotype is transferred to their daughters.
In contrast to ChrY markers, which do not recom-
bine during meiosis, the two female X chromosomes are 
prone to recombination: all ChrX markers are located 
on the same chromosome within an area of 240cM, so 
the use of these markers requires an exact knowledge 
about their genetic localization. Due to recombination, 
X markers provide a multilocus system, while the Y chro-
mosome and mtDNA are linked haplotypes.
The peculiarity of X chromosome ChrX was first 
observed in 1890 by Hermann Henking. The idea to 
apply X-chromosomal markers in forensics came from 
experiences in the field of clinical genetics during 
the second half of the 20th century, and the use of 
X markers has increased greatly in the last 10 years 
because of their usefulness in completing the analysis 
of autosomal and Y-chromosomal markers in difficult 
cases such as complex family relationships.
When testing the duo mother/daughter, X markers are 
similar to autosomal markers and they do not provide any 
advantage. However, mother/son or father/daughter kin-
ship tests are more efficiently performed using X markers.
Paternity cases involving the common trio constel-
lation of mother, offspring and alleged father are usu-
ally solved with autosomal STRs alone. On the contrary, 
X-STR markers are used in deficient paternity cases, 
where the alleged father is missed and only his close 
relatives are available (e.g., his mother) or in case of 
DNA-analysis of multiple females supposed to have the 
same father. In these cases, autosomal DNA markers can-
not exclude paternity, since two sisters can inherit differ-
ent alleles from the father even if they are full siblings. 
On the contrary, daughters of the same father inherit the 
same paternal ChrX hence the analysis of two alleged 
sisters can attribute or exclude the common paternity. In 
complex cases involving close relatives as alleged fathers, 
the analysis of X chromosome markers may give more 
information in comparison with autosomal STRs.
In addition, X-STRs have been proven to be pow-
erful for assigning pedigree members over long dis-
tances in order to rejoin families, for example in case 
of wars and mass disasters victims’ identification or 
also of worldwide migration, even if obviously they 
fail if X-chromosomal lines are interrupted by a 
father/son relationship.
Forensic laboratories have introduced the analy-
sis of X-STR markers in their routine: more than 50 
X-STRs have been found and the most informative 
selected for analysis by in-house or commercial PCR 
multiplexes (Table 6.1). An example of an X-STR hap-
lotype obtained by a commercial multiplex is shown 
in Figure 6.6.
The X-chromosome is also a good source of infor-
mation for population genetic studies; compared with 
autosomes, the ChrX has lower recombination/mutation 
rates and smaller effective population size resulting in a 
faster genetic drift.
Due to the linkage disequilibrium frequency estimate 
cannot proceed by the product rule but by the counting 
method, evaluating how many times a particular haplo-
type is observed in population samples.
This means that an X-STR database consists of hap-
lotype frequencies rather than allele frequencies. A free 
online database (www.chrx-str.org) accessible for the 
forensic community was created in order to provide a 
reference database for X-STRs and includes published 
population data from several countries.
Gender identification is routinely performed by the 
analysis of the amelogenin gene that occurs on both the 
X- and Y- chromosomes. In 1993, K. Sullivan developed 
for the first time a PCR primer set targeting a 6 bp dele-
tion on the X- chromosome. When analyzed by electro-
phoresis, female DNA amplified by these primers shows 
only one peak, while male DNA produces two peaks 
(because males are XY). The ratio between X and Y 
peaks can be helpful in mixtures interpretation in order 
to understand the ratio of the contributors.
Gender misidentification may have bad consequences 
when working with caseworks samples, thus, for some 
years, primers for the amplification of the amelogenin 
gene are commonly included in the multiplex routinely 
used by forensic laboratories.

98
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
6.7 ALTERNATIVE DNA MARKERS
6.7.1 Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism
A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is a single 
base change in a DNA sequence: it occurs when a single 
nucleotide (A, T, C, or G) in the genome is replaced by 
any of the other three bases (Figure 6.7). SNPs represent 
the most common form of natural genetic variation in 
the human genome (approximately 90%) and are consid-
ered the major genetic source of phenotypic variability: 
approximately 7 million SNPs occur with a minimum 
allele frequency (MAF) of 5% in the genome, and other 
7 million with a MAF of 1%. The rate of SNPs varies 
along human chromosomes: X-Y chromosomes have less 
genetic variation than autosomes because the number of 
chromosomes is fewer than for autosomes.
The most common type of SNPs has alleles A-G in 
a strand and T-C in the opposite strand. Even if an SNP 
could theoretically have three or four alleles, almost all 
common SNPs have only two alleles: the minor allele is 
the one showing the lowest frequency at a locus.
There are variations in SNP distribution between 
human populations, so an allele that is common in one 
geographical or ethnic group may be less frequent or rare 
in another one. Regardless, the amount of variation is 
reduced by the linkage disequilibrium between closely 
linked SNP markers; this creates haplotype blocks sepa-
rated from each other by recombination hotspots.
SNPs are initially produced by rare spontaneous 
mutations, and then they reach an appreciable population 
frequency by genetic drift and selection. The mutation 
rate is low (approximately 10−8 per base pair per genera-
tion), so the probability of a further mutation at the same 
locus are practically nonexistent. SNPs may be found 
within coding or non-coding regions of genes, or in the 
intergenic regions between genes and in both nuclear and 
mitochondrial DNA.
Only about 3%–5% of the DNA sequence codes 
for proteins, hence most SNPs are outside of the cod-
ing sequences. Due to degeneracy of the genetic code, an 
SNP within a coding sequence may not always produce 
a change in the aminoacidic sequence of a protein, but 
often the mutation is “silent” and the same polypeptide 
sequence is produced (synonymous SNP). On the contrary, 
FIGURE 6.6 Control DNA 9947A analyzed by the Investigator Argus “X-12 QS.”
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
A
T
G
T
A
T
C
T
A
C
A
T
A
T
G
T
A
T
C
G
A
C
A
T
A
T
G
T
C
G
A
T
A
C
A
T
A
T
G
T
A
G
A
T
A
C
A
T
Individual 1
Individual 2
SNP
FIGURE 6.7 SNP structures.

99
Forensic Genetics
a nonsynonymous SNP produces a variation in a polypep-
tide sequence; in particular, a missense change produces 
a different aminoacid while a nonsense change results in 
a premature stop codon. SNPs not placed in the coding 
regions may have consequences for gene splicing, transcrip-
tion factor binding or the sequence of non-coding RNA.
Variations in DNA sequence can predispose individ-
uals to diseases or influence their response to therapies, 
environmental factors (e.g., bacteria, viruses, toxins, 
or chemicals) or to drug effects. In addition, SNPs may 
affect phenotypic expression, even if it depends also on 
the presence of multiple polymorphisms and their posi-
tions within a given region.
During the last few years, many research efforts 
made in the public (Human Genome Project) and in pri-
vate (SNP Consortium) sectors allowed generation of 
high-density SNPs maps in order to provide a framework 
for further research studies and forensic applications.
SNPs exhibit many advantages, such as abundance 
in the genome, low mutation rates (10−8), reduced ampli-
con sizes, high-throughput genotyping, potential for 
phenotypic trait prediction, and ancestry studies. On 
the contrary, disadvantages include low polymorphism 
and discrimination power, a requirement to analyze 
a large number of SNPs in order to reach a significant 
discrimination power (PD) and difficulties with body 
fluid mixture detection (due to the fact they’re generally 
biallelic).
According to Budowle and van Daal (2008), SNPs 
may play a useful role in several forensic applications, 
such as the following:
1. Individual identity test: A panel of 52 SNPs 
has been developed for human identification 
(Sanchez et al., 2006). The SNP’s low polymor-
phism implies that a high number of markers 
should be analyzed in order to reach the same 
discrimination power obtained by the tradi-
tional analysis of 10–15 autosomal STRs.
2. Lineage test, family reconstruction: A set of 
linked SNPs (Y-SNPs, mt-SNPs) have been found 
useful as haplotype markers to identify persons 
by kinship analyses.
3. Ancestry study: Informative SNPs for establish-
ing high probability of a person’s geographical 
ancestry (AIMs).
4. Phenotypic identification: SNPs are selected in 
order to establish individual phenotypic char-
acteristics such as skin color, hair color or eye 
color, with the aim to produce an identikit useful 
for investigative purposes.
In 2010, S. Walsh from Erasmus University (the 
Netherlands) developed the IrisPlex system that consists 
of a highly sensitive assay able to predict, according to a 
statistical model, the blue and brown human eye color 
from DNA samples with over 90% precision. In 2014, 
she introduced the HIrisPlex system, capable of predict-
ing both eye and hair color.
DNA-based phenotypic prediction analysis is rel-
evant in all cases where there isn’t any suspect or when 
the suspect DNA does not match the evidence or any 
other profile in a DNA database. Phenotypic prediction is 
also useful in missing person cases or for analyzing old/
ancient DNA in anthropological or evolutionary studies.
Since 2014, France has allowed the analysis of phe-
notypic SNP on crime scene samples when the traditional 
STR profile does not match with samples included in the 
database.
The most commonly used method for analyzing 
SNPs is the SNaPshot® reaction. This is a primer extension-
based method that enables rapid and robust multiplexing 
of up to 10 SNPs. The reaction involves the single-base 
extension extension of an unlabeled oligonucleotide at 
the 3’ end of the base immediately adjacent to the SNP by 
dideoxynucleotides (dNTP) labeled with different fluores-
cent dyes. Unlabeled, no complementary oligonucleotide 
sequences with different lengths act as mobility modifiers, 
so extended SNaPshot primers differing by size and color 
are separated by capillary electrophoresis.
6.7.2 Mitochondrial DNA
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is a valuable tool in foren-
sic analysis; it’s placed inside mitochondria, the organelles 
in the cytoplasm that convert chemical energy from food 
into adenosine triphosphate (ATP). It is a closed circular 
molecule of 16,569 bp, containing 37 genes, 13 of them 
involved in oxidative phosphorylation; there are from 50 
up to several thousand copies of mtDNA per cell. The 
non-coding region “displacement (D)-loop” is a 1200 bp 
segment with a mutation rate 10 times higher than the 
coding regions: it contains three hypervariable regions 
called HVI, HVII, and HVIII, respectively (Figure 6.8).
The HVI (16024–16365) and HVII (73–340) regions 
are the most analyzed regions in forensics, while HVIII 
(438–574) is less studied because it has minor variability. 
The first human mitochondrial DNA sequence, called the 
Cambridge Reference Sequence (CRS), was published 
in 1981 by S. Anderson and the Sanger group while 
they were working at Cambridge University. The origi-
nal sequence unfortunately included some errors, and 
in 1999 a revised version (rCRS) was published by R. 
Andrews: luckily the most-used sequences were identical 
in the original CRS and the revised one.
The rCRS now represents the reference sequence to 
which all the other sequences obtained from tested sam-
ples are compared, and then differences are recorded, 
resulting in a specific individual mtDNA profile.

100
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
A common problem in mtDNA analysis is hetero-
plasmy, a phenomenon consisting in the existence of 
multiple mtDNA types (haplotypes) within an individ-
ual. Generally, the two types differ at only one base. This 
event may complicate the analysis and should be taken 
into consideration during data interpretation in order to 
avoid false exclusions. For years, the international foren-
sic community (i.e., ISFG) published guidelines for a cor-
rect mtDNA analysis and data interpretation.
Mitochondrial DNA is maternally inherited because 
in human sperm, mitochondria are generally placed at 
the base of the tail, which is lost during fertilization. In 
addition, mitochondria accidentally gone beyond are 
destroyed by the egg cells. This means that, excluding 
a mutation, all maternally related persons (e.g., mother, 
daughter, sister) have identical mtDNA sequences.
In this way, any maternal relative sample can be used 
as a reference sample even if the donor and the evidence 
are separated by many generations. This implies that 
mtDNA cannot be used for identification purposes, since 
different persons share the same mitochondrial haplo-
type. The ability of recovering mitochondrial DNA from 
scarce or degraded samples is greater, since the mtDNA 
is available in more copies than nuclear DNA, and it’s 
less prone to nuclease activity, due to its circular form. 
Consequently, mtDNA plays an important role in miss-
ing person investigations, mass disasters or in the analysis 
of samples containing limited/degraded biological mate-
rial and generally not giving successful results by nuclear 
DNA typing (e.g., hair shafts, bones, teeth, decomposed 
samples).
MtDNA analysis is also useful in the medical field for 
the study of human diseases caused by deleterious muta-
tions in gene-coding regions of the mtDNA; in addition, 
molecular anthropologists and evolutionary biologists 
can examine either the genetic variation in humans and 
the relatedness between different populations, rather 
than only the possible relationships between human and 
other species.
6.8 NEW METHODOLOGIES
6.8.1 Next-Generation Sequencing
DNA sequencing involves determining the order of the 
four deoxyribonucleotide bases: adenine (A), guanine 
(G), cytosine (C), and thymine (T). The most widely used 
sequencing method was developed by Frederick Sanger in 
1977, and is based on the primer-extension procedure by 
selective incorporation of dideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs) 
during DNA replication in vitro catalyzed by the DNA 
polymerase.
Since its introduction, sequencing has played an 
important role in many DNA applications such as diag-
nostics, virology, and biotechnology: in fact, it was suc-
cessfully used to complete the Human Genome Project, 
and genome projects of other species. Over the years, 
automatic sequencers used to detect sequencing products 
have improved, but unfortunately the analysis chemistry 
had remained relatively unchanged, causing some disad-
vantages as a high-cost, time-consuming, low-throughput 
procedure.
In the past few years, a new era of DNA sequenc-
ing has started: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) con-
sists in a high-throughput DNA sequencing different 
from Sanger procedure. The principle is similar to capil-
lary electrophoresis (CE) sequencing; DNA polymerase 
catalyzes the incorporation of fluorescently labeled 
deoxynucleotides (dNTPs) into a template strand; at 
the incorporation point, during each cycle, nucleotides 
are identified by the fluorophore excitation. The main 
difference between traditional and the new sequencing 
method is that NGS utilizes massively parallel sequenc-
ing to generate more than sounds of sequence informa-
tion, and the final product is directly detected without 
any electrophoresis.
The procedure relies on the preparation of NGS 
libraries in a cell-free system by two PCR steps in the 
first step, specific primers per each target sequence are 
used. The length of the target regions is relevant for 
obtaining optimal results. During the second PCR step, 
adapters are incorporated into the amplicons by either 
legating the adapters to the PCR products or by using 
PCR primers with the adapter sequences at the 5’ end of 
the base. Sequences obtained are then aligned by special 
software to the appropriate reference sequence.
D-Loop
control region
HVI
HVII
mtDNA
16,569 bp
HVI
340-73
HVII
16365-16024
FIGURE 6.8 Structure of human mitochondrial DNA.

101
Forensic Genetics
Protocols are available for whole-genome sequenc-
ing, mRNA-Seq, targeted sequencing custom-selected 
regions or protein-binding regions. The procedure 
can be applied in various fields such as disease diag-
nosis, agricultural genomics, microbiological research, 
ancient DNA analysis and obviously forensics for the 
first time.
In 2007, Applied Biosystems and Illumina intro-
duced the second-generation sequencing system based 
on the oligonucleotide ligation and a two-base encoding 
system. In 2010, Applied Biosystems started the com-
mercialization of the Ion Torrent, a low-cost and rapid 
sequencer that uses semiconductor technology instead 
of fluorescence or chemiluminescence. The Ion Torrent 
semiconductor sequencing chip contains approximately 7 
million sensors and allows the completion of a sequenc-
ing run in less than 2 hours: it translates chemically sig-
nals (A, C, G, T) into digital information (0, 1), reducing 
analysis costs and time.
Forensic DNA analysis requires accuracy and 
reproducibility, especially when analyzing difficult 
samples (low copy number, degraded or mixed sam-
ples). Generally, STR typing provides enough discrim-
ination power for forensic applications; however, it 
has, unfortunately, some limitations, such as partial 
loss of information from degraded DNA samples and 
in particular the inability to analyze in a single reac-
tion multiple different genetic polymorphisms. The 
high throughput and low cost of NGS technology may 
overcome these problems, allowing the analysis of a 
single NGS assay of multiple STR loci in autosomes 
than in sex chromosomes (X-Y), mitochondrial DNA, 
and relevant SNPs (i.e., the ones related to ancestry 
and physical traits)—even if combining either mtDNA 
or mRNA markers in multiplex PCR nuclear markers 
appears difficult due to the large variation in target 
copy numbers.
NGS technology may potentially increase efficiency, 
reducing samples consumption and the time required for 
multiple analysis. Regardless, another important advan-
tage of NGS is that DNA fragments can be designed as 
short as possible because they not need to be separated by 
CE, and this will improve the chance of typing degraded 
DNA/RNA samples.
In 2014, Thermo Fisher introduced the first 
two commercial SNP multiplexes designed for the 
Ion PGM System: the AmpliSeqIdentity Panel that 
amplifies 124 autosomal SNPs (including most of the 
SNPforID) together with individual identification 
SNPs (IISNPs) and 34 Y-chromosome SNPs, and the 
AmpliSeqAncestry Panel that includes most of the 
ancestry-informative markers (AIMs). New assays 
have been developed recently to detect the same STRs 
routinely analyzed by capillary electrophoresis allow-
ing comparison.
Even if some NGS studies and papers have been 
published in the last years, before the introduction of 
NGS as routine in forensics, more work is required 
to solve several problems concerning either technical 
aspects (i.e., low-template library preparation) than 
data processing, in order to satisfy the forensic com-
munity needs.
6.8.2 Rapid DNA Analysis
The ability to perform in a short time an accurate 
analysis of a suspect’s DNA has the potential to reduce 
crimes and to increase public safety, especially on 
country borders, allowing fast research of profiles 
against a DNA database while the suspect is still in 
custody. Toward this end, in 2006 the FBI started a 
Rapid DNA initiative and in 2010 created a Rapid 
DNA Program Office to direct the development of 
commercial instruments able to produce within 2 
hours a complete DNA profile compatible with previ-
ous CODIS profiles with the aim to integrate these new 
instruments within the DNA labs. Thus, in the few last 
years, new systems have been commercialized (e.g., 
RapidHIT, DNAscan, Rapid DNA Analysis System) 
that combine all laboratory steps (DNA purification, 
amplification, 
separation/detection) 
in 
cartridges 
containing all the reagents and materials needed to 
 perform each reaction: analysis is completed in around  
2 hours, greatly reducing time-to-results. The final 
output (autosomal DNA profile) is compatible with 
identification databases.
Initially designed only for direct oral swabs analy-
sis, these new instruments now can proceed to analyze 
some forensic samples as well, and different commer-
cial kits routinely used in forensic labs have been modi-
fied and validated for the use with rapid instruments. 
These systems are easy to use also by non-technical 
personnel and allow the operator to perform a DNA 
analysis in a mobile station or in the local police sta-
tion, helping law enforcement to reduce time and cost 
of the investigation.
Due to the high interest and expansion of 
rapid DNA analysis, in 2014, the FBI released an 
“Addendum to the Quality Assurance Standards for 
DNA Databasing Laboratories performing Rapid DNA 
Analysis and Modified Rapid DNA Analysis Using 
a Rapid DNA Instrument” as a supplement to the 
“Quality Assurance Standards for DNA Databasing 
Laboratories” (September 1, 2011).

102
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
6.9 DATA INTERPRETATION
Before using DNA results for comparison purposes, it’s 
necessary to evaluate the quality of profiles obtained in 
order to identify any potential artifact. The first step con-
sists in evaluating if a profile is single or mixed. A DNA 
profile is from a single source if there are one or two 
alleles at all loci and/or the peak height ratio for all het-
erozygous loci are within the expectation, while a sample 
is generally considered a mixture if three or more alleles 
are found in one or more loci and the peak height ratio 
for one or more loci are below the values empirically 
determined by the laboratory.
The peak height ratio is the ratio between the height 
of the lowest peak (in raw fluorescence units, or RFUs) 
and the height of the highest peak, expressed as a per-
centage. In single-source samples, at heterozygote, loci 
the value is normally ≥70%, while in the case of mixed 
samples, an allelic imbalance is commonly observed 
and the peak height ratio is significantly lowered. So, 
more peaks in one or more loci and a significant peak 
imbalance are indicative of a mixture. The minimum 
number of contributors in a mixture is evaluated on 
the locus that exhibits the main number of peaks. 
Since generally the peak area reflects the quantity of 
DNA in the sample hence in case of mixtures it will be 
possible to determine the contribution of each donor 
(e.g., 1:1, 1:3, 1:5) by assessing the ratio between the 
peak areas. Several software packages (e.g., STRMix, 
LRMix, DNAMix, Forensim, Genoproof Mixture, 
Gene Mapper IDX) may support mixture interpreta-
tion. Regarding altitude, to be accepted, peaks should 
be greater than 150 RFU, but in the case of degraded 
samples and/or low DNA amount, the minimal value 
may be lowered to 50 RFU, according to international 
scientific community suggestions. Regarding shape, 
peaks should be regular, but in case of problems such 
as they appear split or with aberrant morphology, then 
it’s difficult to recognize a true peak (Figure 6.9).
Another issue is DNA quantity; forensic evidence 
(i.e., contact traces found on objects) often contains a 
low number of cells that result in a low content of DNA. 
The term “low copy number” (LCN) indicates a DNA 
quantity less than 100 pg, while low template (LT) is gen-
erally used to indicate less than 200 pg. The amplifica-
tion of samples containing low DNA levels may result 
in partial profiles (due to allelic or locus dropout), con-
siderable allelic peak imbalance in a heterozygous locus 
(peak height ratio generally <60%), and artifact presence 
due to stochastic effects. With low DNA or in case of 
Regular peak
Shoulder peak
Peak balance
Split peak
Stutters
N–1
N+1
Peak imbalance
Non-template
 addition
+A
+A
Allele drop in
Allele drop out
FIGURE 6.9 Example of peaks.

103
Forensic Genetics
highly degraded samples, or when a high number of loci 
is examined, the possibility of artifacts is greater than in 
normal samples.
False peaks may include PCR products (e.g., stut-
ter, non-template dependent nucleotide addition, non- 
specific amplification product) as well as analytical 
artifacts (e.g., spikes, raised baseline, pull-up due to 
incomplete spectral separation, peaks due to fluores-
cence accessory). Stutters, non-template-dependent 
nucleotide additions, dissociated dyes, and incomplete 
spectral separation are reproducible; spikes and raised 
baseline are generally non-reproducible. Stutters are 
peaks that are usually one repetition (n – 1) shorter 
than the corresponding peak and in fewer cases one 
repetition longer (n + 1); a stutter peak area is gen-
erally less than 15% of the main allele. Sometimes, 
in special conditions, the peak area may increase and 
simulate a real allele. Stutters complicate the interpre-
tation of mixed DNA profiles and may become dif-
ficult to understand if a peak is or not a true allele 
coming from a minor contributor. Hence, each labo-
ratory should develop internal criteria to determine if 
instrumental data represent either a real DNA peak or 
instrument noise.
Particular care should be taken during the analysis 
of LCN; since regular procedures cannot be applied to 
low DNA samples, laboratories should develop and vali-
date internal procedures for reliable analysis and correct 
data interpretation.
Low DNA analysis analysis generally requires 
enhanced assay sensitivity obtained by increasing the 
PCR cycle number, reducing PCR reaction volume, add-
ing a post-PCR sample cleanup increasing instrumental 
sample injection time. This may produce artifacts and 
contamination. Due to stochastic variations, PCR results 
from a single analysis can be unreliable, so replicate 
PCR amplifications are required in order to develop a 
“consensus profile” (Butler, 2010). A stochastic thresh-
old must be established by a laboratory validation study 
and used during data interpretation to evaluate data 
reproducibility.
Peak sizing attribution is generally performed by 
special software (e.g., GeneMapper) including as ref-
erence specific panels and bin sets containing the size 
in bp of all alleles per each locus. Allelic peaks in the 
sample are usually compared with the corresponding 
ones in the allelic ladder, the external size standard 
containing all alleles of all loci. The software calls 
“OL” (off the ladder) all peaks not found in the cor-
responding ladder position, such as rare alleles not 
included in the ladder or, sometimes, false peaks. 
Consequently, after the evaluation of the technical 
aspects, DNA typing results must be verified also 
by review of peak designation and other software-
generated information, either in the samples or in the 
quality controls (QCs).
6.10 BIOSTATICAL EVALUATIONS
6.10.1 Criminal Caseworks
Forensic scientists are generally required to analyze 
crime scene samples in order to establish whether or 
not they are from the same donor and in particular if 
evidence DNA matches the suspect’s profile. If profiles 
don’t match, that individual did not contribute to the 
sample; if they match, the suspect may have contributed 
to the evidence sample. In some cases, the possibility 
that a suspect’s close relative (typically a brother) is the 
potential evidence contributor should be considered, 
therefore it’s relevant to analyze also a reference sample 
from that relative.
According to the SWGDAM Guideline (2010), there 
are the following typical situations:
• DNA typing results are inconclusive or not 
interpretable.
• DNA profiles from two samples are different 
(“NOT match”), so it’s possible to conclude they 
are from different sources.
• DNA profile from the samples are indistinguish-
able (they “match”), so they may have a common 
source.
Statistics should be calculated also in mixture cases 
if an individual cannot be excluded as a contributor of a 
mixture.
6.10.1.1 Random Match Probability 
The random match probability represents the chance that 
a DNA profile of a random person in a given population 
matches the evidence profile. A DNA profile frequency 
indicates how frequent is a DNA profile in a specific 
population. It’s obtained by calculating the genotype 
frequency per each locus and then multiplying the fre-
quency across all loci. RMP is given by the reciprocal of 
profile frequency. Rare genotypes provide stronger evi-
dence. Allele frequencies for different population groups 
are obtained collecting samples from anonymous donors 
belonging at least to three generations of the specific 
populations tested. Different population databases may 
sometimes produce slightly different results.
6.10.1.2 Likelihood Ratio 
A likelihood ratio (LR) is a ratio between two prob-
abilities of the same evidence under two mutually 
exclusive hypotheses: the hypothesis that the defendant 
is the source of the DNA profile (prosecutor hypoth-
esis), versus the hypothesis that an unknown unrelated 
individual from the population is the donotr (defen-
dant hypothesis). Interpretation of the strength of the 
statis-tical value can be variable, and it should be con-
sidered in a context with the other case circumstances.  

104
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
LR values of more than 100 are strong evidence to sup-
port the prosecutor hypothesis; for LR less than 1 the 
equivalent is a support for the defender hypothesis. In 
order to associate verbal predicates to LR values for pro-
viding a clearer support to the court, a qualitative ver-
bal scalesù (Table 6.2) was developed by Evett and Weir 
(1998) and Evett et al. (2000).
6.10.1.3  Combined Probability of Exclusion/Combined 
Probability of Inclusion (CPE/CPI)
CPE/CPI are used to calculate the probability that a ran-
domly selected person from a given population would 
be excluded/included as a contributor to a mixture. 
CPE can be used to conservatively interpret complex 
DNA mixtures. This gives an estimate of population 
size whose genotype shows at least one allele not found 
the DNA mixture: an individual can be excluded if he 
has an allele per each locus that is not detected in the 
mixture.
Multiple calculations may be done for the same 
mixture component when different assumptions regard-
ing the number of contributors are made. A CPE/CPI 
approach assumes that all alleles are present: so analy-
sis of low levels of DNA cannot be correctly performed 
because some alleles may be lost.
Very often forensic laboratories work with compro-
mised samples: degraded or low DNA samples produce 
partial profiles (due to allelic or locus drop out) in addi-
tion drop-in phenomena may also occur. In these cases 
DNA profile of the tested sample may not match the one 
of the alleged contributor, because the classical conserva-
tive model of statistical evaluation “match vs no-match”, 
gives respectively a value of 1 or 0.
 With the aim to overcome problems related to 
the evaluation of complex samples, in 2012 the DNA 
Commission of the International Society of Forensic 
Genetics (ISFG) published a recommendation to include 
in statistical evaluation also the probability of drop in/
drop out. This provides a probabilistic model, where the 
probability of the evidence of “match vs. no-match” can 
assume any value between 1 and 0. 
6.10.2 Paternity Test
In traditional paternity tests, DNA profiles of the trio 
(alleged father, mother and child) are compared in order 
to evaluate if the alleged father can be the true biological 
father. Paternity analysis may be performed in absence 
of the mother. Each person receives one allele from the 
mother and the other one from the father; hence, if an 
allele in the child is not of maternal origin, then it has to 
come from the biological father. This evaluation is done 
per all loci analyzed in a multilocus profile.
If the tested man (alleged father) does not exhibit the 
obliged paternal alleles, then the result of the analysis 
is an exclusion. The international scientific community 
has established three incompatibilities as a minimum 
to affirm the alleged father is not the biological father. 
Generally, 15–17 markers are enough to reach a sufficient 
number of incompatibilities; alternatively, it’s required to 
extend the analysis to additional loci, including SNPs or 
markers on sex chromosomes.
Regardless, in the case of inconsistency for 12 loci, the 
calculation of a paternity index for mutation is required. 
Some authors (Lindner et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2012; 
Jacewicz et al., 2004; Brandt-Casadevall et al., 2003) have 
described cases where three genetic incompatibilities were 
observed between the alleged father and the child, even if 
the man was the real biological father. On the contrary, 
if the tested person has per each locus the obligate pater-
nal allele, the result is an inclusion, and a paternity index 
(PI) should be calculated. PI value represents the relative 
probability that the alleged father and not an unrelated, 
random man transmitted the obligate allele to the child.
PI (sometimes indicated as L) is given by the formula 
X/Y, where X indicates the probability that the alleged 
father has the obligate allele and Y is the chance that an 
unrelated man in the population has the same allele. An X 
value is 1 if the alleged father is homozygous for the allele of 
interest, while it is 0.5 if the alleged father is heterozygous.
When analyzing many loci, the paternity index is 
calculated per each locus and all resulting values are to 
determine the total value “combined paternity index” 
(CPI), which is a measure of the strength of the genetic 
evidence (likelihood ratio, or L). The CPI value can range 
from 0 to infinity: therefore, if CPI is between 0 and 1, 
the genetic evidence is favorable to non-paternity; if CPI 
>1, it’s more consistent with the paternity hypothesis.
The likelihood ratio (L) is converted into a “prob-
ability of paternity” (“W” from the German word 
Wahrscheinlichkeit, “probability”) by the formula W = L 
/(1+L) and the contrary, L = W/(1 – W). A 100% value of 
probability is mathematically impossible, but generally, 
when analyzing multiple polymorphic markers, signifi-
cant values around 99.99% or more are obtained.
TABLE 6.2 Evett’s Verbal Predicates for Likelihood Ratios
Likelihood Ratio (LR)
Verbal Predicates
1 < LR ≤ 10
Limited evidence to support
10 < LR ≤ 100
Moderate evidence to support
100 < LR ≤ 1000
Moderately strong evidence to 
support
1000 < LR ≤ 10,000
Strong evidence to support
10,000 < LR
Very strong evidence to support

105
Forensic Genetics
Each country has established a threshold value for 
affirming that the tested man is the true biological father: 
the CPI value is generally 1000 in Europe and 100 in the 
United States. The probability of paternity calculation 
values useful to affirm paternity is “practically proven”; 
the probability is variable between countries, but all are 
generally beyond 99%. For immigration cases, the U.S. 
Department of State requires as a minimum probability 
of paternity a value of 99.5%.
Another approach throughout the United States, and 
similar to the probability of exclusion, is the “random man 
not excluded” (RMNE), which represents the part of the 
population that shows all the obligate alleles and therefore 
could not be excluded as contributors. The RMNE value 
for a single locus is given by the formula 1 − (1 − p)2.
In case of multiple loci analysis, RMNE values are 
multiplied over all loci, and the combined final value is 
the “combined random man not excluded” (CRMNE), 
which is equivalent to the CPI. CRMNE is generally less 
than 1, and it is analogous to 1 − CRMNE or power of 
exclusion (PE) that represents the probability of exclud-
ing a falsely accused man.
Statistical calculations are done by using a database 
containing allele frequencies of the relevant populations. 
Databases are created by testing unrelated people belong-
ing to a selected population for at least three generations. 
Several software packages (free in some cases) are avail-
able to forensic experts (e.g., DNA View, GenoProof, 
Familias, Pater) in order to perform paternity calcula-
tions. According to Hummel (1997), statistical values 
can be translated in verbal predicates useful for clearly 
explaining the result obtained (Table 6.3).
Identical evaluations can be done in the case of mater-
nity testing. Laws regulating private paternity or maternity 
tests differ between countries; in some cases the analysis is 
forbidden, in others it can be performed not only on living 
persons but also as a prenatal test.
Generally, a buccal swab or a blood sample can be 
collected for the paternity test. In the case of deficiency 
paternity, testing the analysis of close relatives of the 
tested person may be useful to reconstruct the family 
branch in order to verify if the person is biologically 
related to a family. In criminal cases, paternity tests are 
generally performed after sexual assaults or to identify 
human remains (i.e., mass disasters), where it is neces-
sary to compare remains to DNA profiles (reverse pater-
nity test) with those of the family members (Figure 6.10).
Parentage tests on siblings (sisters, brothers), aunts, 
uncles, or sometimes grandmothers, grandfathers, 
grandchildren are often required to test if people are 
really blood relatives. Less frequently, the reconstruc-
tion of entire family trees is required; the case of the 
Romanov family, whose remains were found in a mass 
grave in Ekaterinsburg (Russia) is well known. DNA 
identification performed in 1994 by Prof. Peter Gill from 
the Forensic Science Service (UK) allowed verification 
TABLE 6.3 Hummel’s Verbal Predicates for Paternity Tests
Probability of 
Paternity%
Verbal Predicates
>99.73
Paternity practically proven
>99–99.73
Paternity highly likely
>95–99
Paternity very likely
>90–95
Paternity likely
>80–90
Certain indication of paternity
>70–80
Indication of paternity
>20–30
Indication of potential non-paternity
>10–20
Indication of non-paternity
>5–10
Paternity unlikely
>1–5
Paternity very unlikely
>0.27–1
Paternity highly unlikely
<0.27%
Paternity practically excluded
Father
Father
Mother
Mother
Son
Use Mother’s and Child’s genotypes
in order to identify the biological Father
Use Mother’s and Father’s genotypes
in order to identify the missed person
Daughter
Typical paternity case
Missed person
Reverse paternity case
FIGURE 6.10 Examples of paternity tests.

106
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
that Anna Anderson was not the Princess Anastasia as 
previously thought.
When in a family tree, the distance between indi-
viduals increases, minor is the number of genes shared 
(Table 6.4). In these cases, the analysis of sexual chromo-
somes (Y or X) or of mtDNA can assist in the reconstruc-
tion of relationships through female or male lines. 
6.11 DNA ADMISSIBILITY IN THE COURT
Forensic DNA analysis is an area that requires care-
ful inspection; in fact, although DNA analysis in most 
courts is generally admissible in principle, in many 
cases judges found DNA evidence was not acceptable 
because analysis was not performed in accordance with 
internationally accepted principles/rules. In fact, DNA 
analysis is a multistep technical process that needs to 
be performed by a qualified expert who must have 
the scientific education, training, and experience pro-
portional with the analysis required and eventually 
the testimony provided. The international community 
(e.g., SWGDAM, DAB, ENFSI, ISFG) has developed 
guidelines and recommendations for the application of 
correct DNA typing procedures and for data interpreta-
tions; these instructions should be followed by forensic 
laboratories to ensure that accurate and reliable results 
are obtained and correctly interpreted.
One of the most important issues in forensics is the 
accidental transfer of DNA. Contamination can occur 
during any step of the process (collection, preservation, 
handling, or analysis). Common sources of contamination 
include not only investigators at the crime scene and labo-
ratory personnel but also samples, reagents, and consum-
ables. Modern new sensitive procedures, while increasing 
the ability to detect low DNA quantities, also increase the 
possibility of detecting contaminants. Forensic laborato-
ries should develop internal procedures in order to mini-
mize the risk of contamination (e.g., analysts should wear 
personal protection such as gloves and hair caps, use ster-
ile mono-use items such as tweezers and scalpels, or, when 
this is not possible, use items that are accurately sterilized); 
and also to detect and register any eventual contamination 
that may happen. Each laboratory should set up an exclu-
sionary database with all personnel DNA profiles, which 
is useful to detect/exclude any potential contamination.
According to Locard’s Exchange Principle, “every 
contact leaves a trace”; consequently, sometimes DNA 
found at crime scenes may be from a person who came 
in contact with the scene at a previous time and there-
fore has no relation to the criminal event (secondary or 
tertiary transfers). The quantity of DNA in a contact 
trace depends on the number of associated cells, hence 
it’s highly variable between individuals. Some people are 
“good shedders” and lose epithelial cells more than oth-
ers; and some factors such as sweating (that is related 
to humidity, temperature, stress), personal habits (i.e., 
washing hands several times), and personal activi-
ties can influence the quantity of DNA available in a 
trace. In addition, the touched substrate type (porous, 
not-porous, rough, smooth), the contact length (10 sec, 
1 minutes, etc.), and the contact type (repeated or single 
touch) can also affect it. 
Furthermore, the elapsed time between trace depo-
sition and DNA collection, together with the effect of 
the exposition to the environment consistently influence 
DNA persistence and may produce sample deterioration. 
(Loewe, 2002; Phipps and Petricevic, 2007; Kumar, 
2015). This means that detecting a genetic profile at a 
crime scene is not always equivalent to determining a per-
son’s guilt. Evidence may have been touched or contami-
nated with exogenous DNA from individuals not related 
to the crime, such as DNA from persons not related  to 
the criminal event. Often, problems that are related to 
data interpretation because of peak assignments or bio-
statistical interpretation may be complicated, especially 
in the presence of partial or mixed profiles.
The reliability of the results should be maintained 
by a stringent quality management program, which 
includes proficiency testing, validation studies, and 
quality control procedures. Quality control (QC) refers 
to tests performed by a laboratory to ensure that DNA-
typing results and interpretation meet data from speci-
fied known standards, while quality assurance (QA) 
involves other measures that are taken in order to mon-
itor, verify, and document the laboratory activity and 
performance.
Laboratory accreditation is crucial for high-quality 
DNA testing; in particular, the ISO/IEC 17025 Guide 
(2005) refers to a set of standards internationally estab-
lished to ensure high quality in laboratories. The Guide 
specifies the “general requirements for the competence 
of testing and calibration laboratories. It covers test-
ing and calibration performed using standard meth-
ods, non-standard methods and laboratory- developed 
methods” (par. 1.1 ISO/IEC Guide). A laboratory certi-
fied according to ISO/IEC 17025 requirements has the 
TABLE 6.4 Example of DNA% Shared in Typical Familial 
Relationships
Relationship
Shared DNA
Full Siblings
50%
Parents–Child
50%
Half Siblings
25%
Uncle/Aunt–Nephew/Niece
25%
Grandparents–Grandchildren
25%
First Cousins
12.5%
Half Cousins
6.25%

107
Forensic Genetics
technical expertise required to perform the analysis and 
quality management system that is essential to ensure 
the accuracy of analytical data and the traceability of 
measurements. This means it meets all international 
standards and produces reliable results that are inter-
preted by a qualified staff. In fact, it’s internationally 
established that only laboratories with this accredita-
tion can send their DNA profiles to a national DNA 
database.
In the past few years, DNA databases have become 
one of the most efficient tools to provide information 
about unknown criminals. Today, almost 6 million DNA 
profiles from suspects and convicted offenders are stored 
in European databases and there have been more than 
1 million hits.
DNA databases originally created for sex offenders 
have been extended to include almost any type of crimi-
nal offender, because often, crimes are committed by 
repeat offenders. With this perspective, the great value of 
a DNA database is its ability to connect crimes in order 
to identify criminals that sometimes are not directly sus-
pected and to prevent further crimes.
In April 1995, the National Criminal Intelligence 
DNA Database (NDNAD) was set up in the UK. In the 
United States, the creation of a national database was 
established in 1994 by the DNA Identification Act the 
Combined DNA Index System (CODIS) was officially 
activated in October 1998. According to FBI statistics, as 
of April 2017, CODIS has already produced more than 
373,099 matches, which has assisted investigators in 
more than 358,069 cases (www.fbi.gov).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Addendum to the Quality Assurance Standards for DNA 
Databasing Laboratories performing Rapid DNA 
Analysis and Modified Rapid DNA Analysis Using 
a Rapid DNA Instrument (12/1/2014).
Bär W., Brinkmann B., Budowle B., Carracedo A., Gill P. 
et al. (1997), DNA recommendations. Further report 
of the DNA Commission of the ISFG regarding the 
use of short tandem repeat systems, Forensic Sci Int. 
87 (3): 179–184.
Bär W., Brinkmann B., Lincoln P., Mayr W., Rossi U. 
et al. (1992), Editorial: Recommendations of the 
DNA Commission of the International Society for 
Forensic Haemogenetics relating to the use of PCR-
based polymorphisms, Forensic Sci. Int. 55: 1–3.
Bär W., Brinkmann B., Lincoln P., Mayr W., Rossi U. et al. 
(1993), Editorial: Statement by DNA Commission of 
the International Society for Forensic Haemogenetics 
concerning the National Academy of Sciences report 
on DNA Technology in Forensic Science in the USA, 
Forensic Sci. Int. 59 (1): 1–2.
Barbaro A., Fernandez-Formoso L., Phillips C., Carracedo 
A. and Lareu M.V. (2013), Casework application of 
a standalone pentaplex assay of extended-ESS STRs, 
Leg. Med. 15 (4): 217–221.
Bill M., Gill P., Curran J., Clayton T., Pinchin R. et al. 
(2005) PENDULUM-a guideline-based approach to 
the interpretation of STR mixtures, Forensic Sci. Int. 
148: 181–189.
Blanco-Verea A., Brion M., Ramos-Luis E., Lareu M.V. 
and Carracedo A. (2008), Forensic validation and 
implementation of Y-chromosome SNP multiplexes, 
Forensic Sci. Int. Genet. Suppl. Ser. 1: 181–183.
Børsting C. and Morling N. (2015), Next generation 
sequencing and its applications in forensic genetics, 
Forensic Sci. Int. Genet. 18: 78–89.
Bouakaze C., Keyser C., Amory S., Crubézy E. and Ludes 
B. (2007), First successful assay of Y-SNP typing by 
SNaPshot minisequencing on ancient DNA, Int. J. 
Legal Med. 121 (6): 493–499.
Brandt-Casadevall C., Gené M., Piqué E., Borrego N., 
Gehrig C. et al. (2003), Presence of two mutations 
between father and child in two cases of paternity 
testing, Progr. Forensic Genet. 9. 1239: 647, ICS, 
Elsevier.
Brion M., Sanchez J.J., Balogh K., Thacker C., Blanco-
Verea A. et al. (2006), Analysis of 29 Y-chromosome 
SNPs in a single multiplex useful to predict the 
geographic origin of male lineages, Int. Congr. Ser. 
1288: 13–15.
Buckleton J., Triggs C.M. and Walsh S.J. (2005), Forensic 
DNA Evidence Interpretation. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press, p. 534.
Budowle B. and van Daal A. (2008), Forensically relevant 
SNP classes, BioTechniques. 44: 603–610.
Butler J. (2005), Forensic DNA Typing–Biology, 
Technology, and Genetics of STR Markers. 
Burlington, MA: Academic Press, Elsevier.
Butler J.M. (2011), Advanced Topics in Forensic DNA 
Typing Methodology. Burlington, MA: Academic 
Press, Elsevier.
Butler JM. (2015), Advanced Topics in Forensic DNA 
Typing: Interpretation. Burlington, MA: Academic 
Press, Elsevier.
Butler J.M., Kline M.C. and Decker A.E. (2008) 
Addressing Y-chromosomes short tan dem repeat 
(Y-STR) allele nomenclature, J. Genet. Geneal. 4  
(2): 125–148.
Butler J.M. and Levin B.C. (1998), Forensic applications 
of mitochondrial DNA, Trends Biotechnol. 16 (4): 
158–162.
Chung D.T., Drabek J., Opel K.L., Butler J.M. and 
McCord B.R. (2004), A study on the effects of deg-
radation and template concentration on the ampli-
fication efficiency of the STR miniplex primer sets,  
J. Forensic Sci. 49: 733–740.

108
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Coble M.D. and Butler J.M., (2005) Characterization of 
new miniSTR loci to aid analysis of degraded DNA, 
J. Forensic. Sci. 50: 43–53.
de Knijff P., Kayser M., Caglia A., Corach D., Fretwell 
N. et al. (1997), Chromosome Y microsatellites: 
Population genetic and evolutionary aspects, Int. J. 
Legal Med. 110 (3): 134–140.
DNA Advisory Board. (2000), Quality assurance stan-
dards for forensic DNA typing laboratories, Forensic 
Sci. Commun. 2(3). Available at: https://archives.fbi.
gov/archives/about-us/lab/forensic-science-commu-
nications/fsc/july2000/quality-assurance-standards-
for-forensic-dna-testing-laboratories.
DNA-Database Management Review and Recommenda-
tion, ENFSI DNA Working Group, April (2010).
Evett I.W., Jackson G., Lambert J.A., and McCrossan S. 
(2000), The impact of the principles of evidence 
interpretation on the structure and content of state-
ments, Sci. Justice. 40(4): 233–239.
Evett I.W. and Weir B.S. (1998), Interpreting DNA 
Evidence. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, 278 
pages.
FBI Quality Assurance Standards for DNA Databasing 
Laboratories. (2011). Available at: https://www.fbi.
gov/file-repository/quality-assurance-standards-for-
dna-databasing-laboratories.pdf/view
Gill P. (1994), Identification of the remains of the 
Romanov family by DNA analysis, Nat. Genet. 6: 
130–135.
Gill P. (2001), An assessment of the utility of single nucle-
otide polymorphisms (SNPs) for forensic purposes. 
Int. J. Legal Med. 114 (4–5): 204–210.
Gill P., Brenner C., Brinkmann B., Budowle B., 
Carracedo A. et al. (2001), DNA Commission 
of the International Society of Forensic Genetics: 
Recommendations 
on 
forensic 
analysis 
using 
Y-chromosome STRs, Forensic Sci. Int. 124 (1): 5–10.
Gill P., Brenner C.H., Buckleton J.S., Carracedo A., 
Krawczak M. et al. (2006), DNA commission of 
the International Society of Forensic Genetics: 
Recommendations on the interpretation of mix-
tures, Forensic Sci. Int. 160: 90–101.
Gill P., Gusmao L., Haned H., Mayr W.R., Morling N. 
et al. (2012), DNA commission of the International 
Society of Forensic Genetics: Recommendations 
on the evaluation of STR typing results that may 
include drop-out and/or drop-in using probabilistic 
methods, Forensic Sci. Int. Genet. 6: 679–688.
Gill P., Werrett D.J., Budowle B. and Guerrieri R. (2004), 
An assessment of whether SNPs will replace STRs in 
national DNA database: Joint considerations of the 
DNA working group of the European Network of 
Forensic Science Institutes (ENFSI) and the Scientific 
Working Group on DNA Analysis Methods 
(SWGDAM), Sci. Justice. 44: 51–53.
Gjertson D.W., Brenner C.H., Baur M.P., Carracedo A., 
Guidet F. et al. (2007), ISFG: Recommendations on 
biostatistics in paternity testing, Forensic Sci. Int. 
Genet. 1 (3): 223–231.
Gusmao L., Butler J.M., Carracedo A., Gill P., Kayser 
M. et al. (2006), DNA Commission of the 
International Society of Forensic Genetics (ISFG): 
An update of the recommendations on the use of 
Y-STRs in forensic analysis, Forensic Sci. Int. 157: 
187–197.
Hares D.R. (2012), Expanding the CODIS core loci in the 
United States, Forensic Sci. Int. Genet. 6: e52–e54.
Hill C.R., Kline M.C., Coble MD. and Butler J.M. (2008), 
Characterization of 26 miniSTR loci for improved 
analysis of degraded DNA samples, J. Forensic 
Sci. 53: 1.
Houck M.M. and Siegel J.A. (2006), Fundamentals of 
Forensic Science. Burlington, MA: Academic Press, 
Elsevier.
Hummel K. (1997), Erblich-polymorphe Eigenschaften 
des Blutes zur Klärung strittiger Blutsverwandtschaft 
und fraglicher Identität—Hierzu benutzte biome-
trische—Buch neu kaufen—Kovac, Dr. Verlag.
Guide ISO/IEC 17025:2005 (2005),. General require-
ments for the competence of testing and calibration 
laboratories.
Jacewicz R., Berent J., Prosniak A. and Dobosz T. (2004), 
Non-exclusion paternity case with a triple genetic 
incompatibilities, Progr. Forensic Genet. 10. 1261: 
511–513, ICS, Elsevier.
Jeffreys A.J., Wilson V. and Thein S.W. (1984), 
Hypervariable “minisatellite” regions in human 
DNA, Nature. 314: 67–73.
Jeffreys A.J., Wilson V. and Thein S.L. (1985), 
Individual-specific “fingerprints” of human DNA, 
Nature. 316: 76.
Kayser M., Caglia A., Corach D., Fretwell N., Gehrig C. 
et al. (1997), Evaluation of Y-chromosomal STRs: A 
multicenter study, Int. J. Legal Med. 110 (3): 125–
133, 141–149.
Kayser M., de Knijff P., Dieltjes P., Krawczak M., Nagy 
M. et al. (1997), Applications of microsatellite-based 
Y chromosome haplotyping, Electrophoresis. 18: 
1602–1607.
Kayser M., Kruger C., Nagy M., Geserick G., de Knijff 
P. et al. (1998), Y-chromosomal DNA-analysis in 
paternity testing: Experiences and recommenda-
tions, Adv. Forensic Genet. 7: 494–496.
Kidd K.K., Pakstis A.J., Speed W.C., Grigorenko E.L., 
Kajuna S.L. et al. (2006), Developing a SNP panel 
for forensic identification of individuals, Forensic 
Sci. Int. 164: 20–32.
Kiely T.F. (2006), Forensic Evidence: Science and the 
Criminal Law. London: CRC Press/Taylor & 
Francis.

109
Forensic Genetics
Kumar P., Gupta R., Singh R., and Jasuja OP. (2015), 
Effects of latent fingerprint development reagents 
on subsequent forensic DNA typing: a review. J. 
Forensic Leg. Med. 32:64–69.
Lindner I., von Wurmb-Schwark N., Meier P., Fimmers R. 
and Büttner A. (2014), Usefulness of SNPs as supple-
mentary markers in a paternity case with 3 genetic 
incompatibilities at autosomal and Y chromosomal 
loci, Transfus. Med. Hemother. 41 (2): 117–121.
Lowe A., Murray C., Whitaker J., Tully G., and Gill P. 
(2002), The propensity of individuals to deposit 
DNA and secondary transfer of low level DNA from 
individuals to inert surfaces. Forensic Sci. Int. 129: 
25–34.
Morling N., Allen R.W., Carracedo A., Geada H., Guidet 
F. et al. (2002), Paternity Testing Commission of 
the International Society of Forensic Genetics: 
Recommendations on genetic investigations in 
paternity cases, Forensic Sci. Int. 129 (3): 148–157.
Mullis K. (1990), The unusual origin of the polymerase 
chain reaction, Sci Am. 262 (4): 56–61, 64–65.
Parson W., Gusmao L., Hares D.R., Irwin J.A., Mayr W.R. 
et al. (2014), DNA Commission of the International 
Society for Forensic Genetics: Revised and extended 
guidelines for mitochondrial DNA typing, Forensic 
Sci. Int. Genet. 13: 134–142.
Phipps M. and Petricevic S. (2007), The tendency of indi-
viduals to transfer DNA to handled items. Forensic 
Sci. Int. 168(2–3):162-168.
Roewer L., Krawczak M., Willuweit S., Nagy M., Alves C. 
et al. (2001), Online reference database of European 
Y-chromosomal short tandem repeat (STR) haplo-
types, Forensic Sci Int. 118: 106–113.
Sambrook J. and Russel D.W. (2001), In vitro amplifi-
cation of DNA by the polymerase chain reaction, 
Chapter 8, Sambrook J. and Russel D.W. (eds.), 
Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. New 
York, NY: Cold Spring Harbor..
Sanchez J.J., Phillips C., Børsting C., Balogh K., Bogus 
M. et al. (2006), A multiplex assay with 52 single-
nucleotide polymorphisms for human identification, 
Electrophoresis. 27: 1713–1724.
Sanders J. (2000), Forensic Casebook of Crime. London: 
True Crime Library, Forum Press. p. 229.
Schneider M., Bender K., Mayr W., Parson W., Hoste B. 
et al. (2004), STR analysis of artificially degraded 
DNA—Results of a collaborative European exercise, 
Forensic Sci. Int. 139: 123–134.
Schumm J.W., Gutierrez-Mateo C., Tan E., and Selden 
R. (2013), A 27-locus STR assay to meet all United 
States and European law enforcement agency stan-
dards. J Forensic Sci. 58 (6): 1584–1592.
Schumm J.W., Wingrove R.S. and Douglas E.K. (2004), 
Robust STR multiplexes for challenging casework 
samples, Prog. Forensic Genet. 10: 547–549.
Scientific Working Group on DNA Analysis Methods 
(SWGDAM). (2000), Short tandem repeat (STR) 
interpretation guidelines, Forensic Sci. Commun. 2, 
90 pages.
Sobrino B. and Carracedo A. (2005), SNP typing in foren-
sic genetics, Forensic DNA Typing Protoc. 297: 
1064–3745.
Southern E.M. (1975), Detection of specific sequences 
among DNA fragments separated by gel electropho-
resis, J. Mol. Biol. 98: 503–517.
Sulem P., Gudbjartsson D.F., Stacey S.N., Helgason A., 
and Rafnar T. et al. (2007), Genetic determinants 
of hair, eye and skin pigmentation, Nat. Genet. 39: 
1443–1452.
Sullivan K.M., Mannucci A., Kimpton C.P., and Gill P. 
(1993), A rapid and quantitative DNA sex test: 
Fluorescence-based PCR analysis of X-Y homol-
ogous gene amelogenin, BioTechniques. 15 (4): 
637–641.
Sun H.Y., Li H.X., Zeng X.P., Ren Z., and Chen W.J. 
(2012), A paternity case with mutations at three 
CODIS core STR loci, Forensic Sci. Int. Genet. 6 (1): 
61–62.
SWGDAM 
MtDNA 
Interpretation 
Guidelines 
for 
Mitochondrial DNA Analysis by Forensic DNA 
Testing Laboratories (2013). Available at: https://
www.swgdam.org/publications
Szibor R. (2007), X-chromosomal markers: Past, present 
and future, Forensic. Sci. Int. Genet. 1: 93–99.
Szibor R., Krawczak M., Hering S., Edelmann J., 
Kuhlisch E. et al. (2003), Use of X-linked mark-
ers for forensic purposes, Int. J. Legal Med. 117: 
67–74.
The International HapMap Consortium. (2007), A sec-
ond generation human haplotype—Map of over 3.1 
million SNPs, Nature. 449: 851–861.
Thorisson G.A. and Stein L.D. (2003), The SNP 
Consortium website: Past, present and future, 
Nucleic Acids Res. 31 (1): 124–127.
Tomas C., Sanchez J.J., Castro J.A., Børsting C., and 
Morling N. (2008), Utility of X-chromosome SNPs 
in relationship testing, Forensic Sci. Int. Genet. 
Suppl. Ser. 1: 528–530.
Walsh S, Lindenbergh A, Zuniga S.B, Sijen T, de Knijff 
P. et al. (2011), Developmental validation of the 
IrisPlex system: Determination of blue and brown 
iris colour for forensic intelligence, Forensic Sci. Int. 
Genet. 5: 464–471.
Wang N., Akey J.M., Zhang K., Chakraborty R., and Jin 
L. (2002), Distribution of recombination crossovers 
and the origin of haplotype blocks: The interplay of 
population history, recombination and mutation, 
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71: 1227–1234.
Watson J.D. and Crick F.H.C. (1953), A structure for 
deoxyribose nucleic acid, Nature. 171: 737–738.

110
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Weiner M.P. and Hudson T.J. (2002), Introduction to SNPs: 
Discovery of markers for disease, BioTechniques. 10 
(Suppl. 4–7), 12–13.
Wiegand P. and Kleiber M. (2001), Less is more—Length 
reduction of STR amplicons using redesigned prim-
ers, Int. J. Legal Med. 114: 285–287.
Willuweit S., Roewer L. (2007), Y chromosome haplo-
type reference database (YHRD): Update, Forensic 
Sci. Int. Genet. 1 (2): 83–87.
Zarrabeitia M.T., Mijares V. and Riancho J.A. (2007), 
Forensic efficiency of microsatellites and single 
nucleotide polymorphisms on the X chromosome, 
Int. J. Legal Med. 121 (6): 433–437.

111
C H A P T E R  7
Forensic Facial Recognition
Shelina Khalid Jilani and Stephen Driver
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Facial recognition is the ability to establish a suspect’s iden-
tity based upon his or her facial characteristics. Automatic 
facial recognition software and methods have been widely 
studied due to their role not only in an investigation, but 
also, for example, in visual surveillance and the duplica-
tion of government-issued identification documents such 
as drivers’ licenses and passports (Jain et al., 2007, 2011). 
Facial recognition is a form of biometrics that has 
developed into an accepted forensic tool capable of 
positively identifying an individual. It is a niche field of 
forensic science, within which constant technological 
advancements and expertise are being deployed. 
Early face recognition algorithms made use of sim-
ple geometric models; however, the process has now 
matured, using sophisticated representations and match-
ing processes.
The task of an investigating officer or forensic scien-
tist when investigating a crime is to establish the identity 
of the unknown subject or the victim.
In comparison to automated facial recognition, facial 
comparison is a far more demanding role for a forensic 
scientist, since she/he must be able to work with CCTV 
footage and captured images that are retrieved under 
nonidentical conditions. Variances in image quality, 
lighting conditions, viewpoint and camera lens all play an 
important role for digital images. They are point of con-
sideration when a scientist carries out comparative facial 
analysis. A proficient examiner must be able to help in 
the identification of an unknown individual based solely 
on the facial characteristics and features observed. The 
key factor in this process of identification is the establish-
ment of unique individual markers such as tattoos, pierc-
ing, scars as a result of trauma, or birthmarks and moles.
While algorithmic systems work by identifying a face 
under “real time” the aim of facial comparison appears 
slightly later during an investigation. The purpose of carry-
ing out facial comparisons can either be for verification of a 
known control, “is this John?” or it may be the comparison 
between an unknown subject and a known control.
The use of photographic evidence has been admis-
sable in British courts for nearly 50 years (Tolson, 1864). 
While, the use of CCTV footage was first used in the 
1980s to aid in information about a theft which took 
place in a retail store (Fowden and White, 1982).
7.2 WHY USE FACIAL RECOGNITION 
FOR IDENTIFICATION?
Biometrics is the automatic recognition of an individ-
ual using distinguishable traits. Whereas, an expan-
sive definition is any automatically measurable, robust 
CONTENTS
7.1 Introduction 
111
7.2 Why Use Facial Recognition for Identification? 
111
7.3 A Historical Insight into Facial Recognition 
112
7.4 Familiar Face Recognition 
117
7.5 Stages in Facial Recognition 
118
7.6 Facial Recognition and the Affecting Factors 
119
7.7 Facial Mapping and Forensic Imagery Analysis 
121
7.7.1 Summary  
124
7.8 Facial Composites and Electronic Facial Identification Techniques 
124
7.8.1  Historical Background to Suspect Composite Construction 
125
7.8.2  Historical Background to Holistic Composite Systems 
127
7.9 EFIT-V: Operational Procedure 
129
Bibliography 
132

112
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
and distinctive physical characteristic or personal trait 
that can be used to identify an individual or verify the 
claimed identity of the individual. Biometric-based tech-
niques have quickly emerged from the field of forensic 
science; they are one of the most promising identifying 
options in recent years. Instead of authenticating peo-
ple and allowing them access to domains via personal 
identification numbers (PINs), passwords, and security 
questions,  biometric-based techniques examine one’s 
behavioral and physiological characteristics in order 
to ascertain one’s identity (Jain et al., 2006; Jafri and 
Arabnia, 2009.) PINs and passwords are easily lost and/
or stolen, and security question answers as well as keys 
can be duplicated or misplaced; however, physiological 
characteristics cannot be lost or easily duplicated.
“Measurable” refers to a characteristic or trait that 
is easily presented, located, and converted into a quanti-
fiable digital format by a sensor of a system. Such mea-
surability allows for the process of matching to occur, 
which automates the initial process of facial recognition. 
“Robust” relates to the extent to which a characteristic 
or trait has the ability to change over time. The changes 
subject to individual characteristics and traits can be a 
result of aging, illness, or the environment, such as chem-
ical exposure and injury (Woodward et al., 2003). A bio-
metric technique which is considered to be highly robust 
will not be subject to significant change over time; how-
ever, a less robust biometric based technique will be more 
easily prone to change. “Distinctiveness” measures the 
variability and change in the biometric pattern among 
the general population. It is generally accepted that the 
higher the degree of distinctiveness, the more unique and 
specific the identifying marker. A lower score in distinc-
tiveness suggests the likelihood of the identifying marker 
being very prevalent within the general population and 
not very unique and specific.
Identification and verification are the two key goals 
of biometric techniques, particularly for facial recognition. 
Identification is the establishing of a criminal’s or a vic-
tim’s identity (Woodward et al., 2003). The technique will 
make an attempt to answer the question “Who is X?” with 
the help of previously stored data and determine if there is 
a match to allow the identification of the criminal or a vic-
tim known as “X.” Verification is a different concept than 
identification, as with verification the recognition system 
compares a newly inputted characteristic to previously col-
lected and stored data from the same person to verify the 
individual’s identity. With such a one-to-one search style, 
the technique will either verify the identity of a criminal/
victim or fail to verify the individual’s identity.
While the concept of recognizing an individual as a 
criminal or a victim based solely on their facial features, 
appears intuitive, facial recognition as a biometric tech-
nique allows for a more automated process to occur, and 
is constantly evolving with technological advancements.
Facial recognition offers a variety of advantages 
when compared to other biometric-based techniques. 
Following is a discussion of a few of the advantages 
belonging to this biometric-based technique.
Face recognition is a passive process which requires no 
participation by the user, and facial images can be gained 
with the use of a camera placed at a distance, which is par-
ticularly beneficial for security and surveillance purposes. 
Data acquisition is less challenging in comparison to the 
other biometric-based techniques, which are fraught with 
problems. For example, techniques that require the fin-
gers and the palm can be rendered useless if the epidermis 
is damaged as a result of trauma or scarred as a result 
of injury. However, with facial recognition, data can be 
gathered discreetly, and therefore facial recognition soft-
ware is a non-intrusive technique.
The application of facial recognition systems are 
extensive, and with a constant evolution in science and 
technology it is feasible to await a facial recognition sys-
tem that will be able to identify a criminal and/or a vic-
tim with minimal information. Such a system would take 
into account various situations and overcome issues such 
as image resolution and facial aging, as well as be able to 
supplement accurate identification with a forensic artist’s 
sketch of the individual. In recent years, there have been 
many uses of technology in places such as banks, super-
markets, airports, and educational institutes. In many 
cases, CCTV systems and identification systems have 
been installed for the safety and accurate identification 
of people within these establishments.
In previous years, primary users of facial recognition 
software have been computer vision researchers, academ-
ics, police officers, and forensic scientists. In recent years, 
some government agencies have now begun to use the 
biometric system for security reasons to eliminate any 
terrorist threat. The U.S. government began a program 
called U.S.-Visit (United States Visitors and Immigrant 
Status Indicator Technology), now referred to as the 
Office of Biometric Identity Management (OBIM), which 
is for foreign travelers who gain entry into the United 
States. When foreign travelers receive their visa for entry 
into the United States, they must submit a fingerprint and 
have their photograph taken. The biometric data (finger-
print and photograph) is then checked against a database 
of known criminals and suspected terrorists.
7.3 A HISTORICAL INSIGHT 
INTO FACIAL RECOGNITION
Facial recognition has always remained a major focus of 
research because of its non-invasive nature.
There are two categories of facial recognition: 
two-dimensional (2D) facial recognition and three- 
dimensional (3D) facial recognition. 2D facial recognition 

113
Forensic Facial Recognition
involves comparing a 2D picture with an image stored 
within a database (for example). However, with such a 
form of facial recognition, limitations do exist, as the 
picture in question should show the individual’s face in 
the direction of the camera. In addition, changes in light-
ing conditions and individual factors such as a change in 
hair color and/ or style may affect the ability of the com-
puter to retrieve the correct individual’s data, causing a 
failure in facial recognition.
The contemporary facial recognition category known 
as 3D facial recognition allows for images to be captured 
and produces a 3D view of the suspect (for example) with 
the aid of facial points that cannot be modified signifi-
cantly over time, including distance between the eyes and 
shape of the nose. Changes in the lighting conditions or 
deviations within the surrounding environment do not 
affect the facial points, which are seen as a great advan-
tage for 3D facial recognition systems.
It is important to mention that it is a great challenge 
to create an automated software that equals the abil-
ity of a human to recognize people and faces. Although 
humans are programmed with the ability to recognize 
faces, humans have yet to master the ability to recog-
nize an extensive number of unknown faces, and this 
is where computerized programs and software excel. A 
computer-generated software/program is almost limit-
less in its ability to generate data from “memory.” This, 
coupled with its high computational speed, means that 
computerized facial recognition software has the capac-
ity to generate results much more quickly than human 
facial recognition.
The first attempt to identify an individual by com-
paring a set of facial photographs was reported in the 
British Courts in 1864. The case of R v. Tolson (1864) 
was a case in which Mary Tolson was charged with big-
amy, and a photograph that she claimed showed a like-
ness of her first husband was admitted in order to prove 
his identity against the person referred to in the marriage 
register.
In 1882, the first known systematic method of facial 
recognition was developed and introduced by French 
criminologist and anthropologist Alphonso Bertillon 
(Bertillon, 1986, n.d.). The criminal identification system 
was a system which identified people by measurements of 
the head and body, individual marks, tattoos, scars, and 
other personal characteristics. This identification system 
was later renamed Bertillonage in honor of the French 
criminologist (Figure 7.1).
The taken measurements were made into formulas 
that referred to a single unique individual, and recorded 
on cards which also had a photographic frontal and 
side profile portrait of the suspect, currently referred 
to as a mug shot (Figure 7.2). The cards were system-
atically filed and cross indexed so they could be easily 
retrieved. In 1884, Bertillon used this method to aid in 
the identification of 241 multiple offenders. Because of 
this mass identification of multiple offenders, the sys-
tem was quickly picked up by multiple police forces in 
Great Britain, Europe, and the United States. However, 
although the Bertillonage system was widely accepted 
by multiple police forces, it later started to become dif-
ficult to implement. The measuring instruments required 
maintenance, the process was deemed too labor- intensive 
and there was the need of rigorous training for the indi-
viduals who took the measurements. Differences in mea-
surements became apparent: trained officers would take 
measurements in different ways, and when the same indi-
vidual was measured multiple times, different measure-
ments were recorded. Moreover, age was not considered 
a factor which could affect the results. Not until later 
was it discovered that measurements could alter as the 
criminal aged.
With a lack of technological advancements prior 
to the 20th century, the identification of criminals 
was potentially based only upon Alphonso Bertillon’s 
method of identification. However, as improvements 
in technology and scientific instruments occurred, the 
first research paper was published in 1966 by Woody 
Bledsoe, Helen Chan Wolf, and Charles Bisson on a sys-
tem named Man Machine, which required an operator 
to locate and extract facial features such as the nose, 
ears, mouth, and eyes from a photograph. The features 
were then put into a computer to allow it to conduct an 
automated matching process. This automated process 
calculated the distances and ratios to a common pre-
identified reference point, which were then compared to 
reference data.
As the speed of technological improvements steadily 
increased and showed substantial growth, making scien-
tific instruments more effective, a different form of facial 
recognition software was produced. The new software 
explored another dimension of utilizing morphologi-
cal features for the purpose of identification. In 1971, 
Goldstein, Harmon, and Lesk used 22 specific morpho-
logical features—“specific subjective markers” such as 
hair color, lip thickness, and eyebrows—to identify peo-
ple based on facial photographs (Goldstein et al., 1971). 
To conduct the identification task, the markers were 
given to trained individuals and were also input into a 
computer. It was concluded by Goldstein, Harmon, and 
Lesk that six various facial features are required to iden-
tify an individual in a database of 255 participants, and 
they predicted that 14 facial features are required to iden-
tify an individual in a gallery of 4 × 106 faces. Goldstein 
et al.’s facial recognition software was not recognized 
as the first fully automated facial recognition software, 
since it required an operator to function the software, 
and the measurements of the morphological features 
were taken manually. Hence, the software was classed as 
being semiautomated.

114
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
In 1987, mathematicians Larry Sirovich and Michael 
Kirby developed the first face recognition algorithms at 
Brown University. They applied principal component 
analysis (PCA), a standard linear algebra technique, to 
solve the recognition problems of their previous research-
ers’ software/techniques difficulties. This technique was 
hailed a milestone. PCA is a statistical method and one 
of the most successful techniques that has been used 
in facial recognition. The main purpose of PCA is to 
minimize the large dimensionality of the data space to 
smaller intrinsic dimensionality of feature space, which 
is required to describe the data economically. The key 
theme with utilizing PCA for face recognition is to 
express large 1D vector of pixels produced from the 2D 
facial images into compact principle components of the 
feature space, called eigenspace projection.
Eigenspace is calculated by identifying the eigen-
vectors of the covariance matrix derived from a set of 
facial images known as vectors (Sirovich and Kirby, 
1987; Delac et al., 2005). Once the eigenspace has been 
calculated, various decisions for the application of the 
results can be considered. Vectors known as eigenvec-
tors are computed by PCA and are in the direction of 
the largest variance of the training vectors, referred to 
as eigenfaces. Each eigenface can be viewed as a fea-
ture, so when a particular face is projected onto the 
“face space,” its vector within the face space describes 
the importance of each of the features within the face. 
The face is expressed in the face space courtesy of its 
eigenface coefficients. As previously stated, Kirby and 
Sirovich were among the first to apply PCA to facial 
images; they successfully demonstrated that PCA is 
an optimal compression scheme that reduces the mean 
squared error between the original images and their 
reconstructions for any given level of compression. 
Furthermore, the study demonstrated that less than 
FIGURE 7.1 Mugshot of Alphonse Bertillon with accompanied measurements for identification. (From Image of 
Bertillon system (n.d.), http://www.nlm.nih.gov/visibleproofs/media/detailed/iii_c_138.jpg.)

115
Forensic Facial Recognition
FIGURE 7.2 Photographic collection of variances in surface morphology from front and profile images. (From Alphonso 
Bertillon Biography: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/visibleproofs/galleries/biographies/bertillon.html, http://flavorwire.files.
wordpress.com/2011/11/forensic_bertillon_card.jpg.)

116
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
100 values were required to accurately code a suitable 
aligned and normalized face.
Computational models of face recognition give 
insight into theoretical understanding in addition to 
practical applications. Two-dimensional face recognition 
using eigenfaces is one of the oldest computational meth-
ods of face recognition. Turkand Pentland published the 
groundbreaking “Eigenfaces for Recognition” in 1991. 
The eigenfaces method works by analyzing face images 
and computing eigenfaces, which are faces composed of 
eigenvectors (principal components). The comparison of 
eigenfaces is used to identify the presence of a face and its 
identity (Turk and Pentland, 1991).
The method of eigenfaces is based on an informa-
tion theory approach, with a five-step process. First, the 
system needs to be prepared by inputting a set of train-
ing images of faces. The face images are made into smaller 
sets of characteristic features called eigenfaces, which 
can be considered the principal components on the initial 
training set of face images. Recognition is enabled by pro-
jecting a new image into the subspace spanned by eigen-
faces (facespace) and then classifying the face by matching 
its position in facespace with the positions of the known 
individual. Within this framework it was possible to auto-
matically learn and later recognize new faces (Turk and 
Pentland, 1991). Recognition under broadly varying con-
ditions is achieved by training on limited characteristic 
views, including a front view, a 45-degree view, and a side 
view. The approach has many advantages over its previous 
predecessors because of its speed, simplicity, and insensi-
tivity to small and/or gradual changes in face images.
Three-dimensional face recognition systems are 
expected to be robust to the types of issues that plague 
2D face recognition systems. The most crucial require-
ments in support of producing reliable face recognition 
systems are (1) large facial image databases and (2) a 
testing procedure effective enough to assess the system. 
In September 1993, the FERET (Facial Recognition 
Technology) was introduced to the field of forensic 
facial recognition, which was sponsored by the U.S. 
Department of Defense. The FERET program addressed 
both issues of providing a large database of facial images 
and establishing FERET tests (Phillips et al., 1999). The 
aim of the FERET program was to create an automatic 
face recognition database that would be competent 
enough to be able to assist intelligence and security per-
sonnel in the process and performance of their duties 
(Figure 7.3).
As research within facial recognition became an 
active area of study, the research carried out within the 
field was propelled by other educational sectors of study, 
including computer vision, psychology, and neurosci-
ence. The reason for active research and rapid progres-
sion within the field was the development of algorithms 
and the availability of large databases.
To achieve a robust assessment of performance, 
algorithms are typically evaluated against varying cat-
egories of facial images. The varying categories of facial 
images are created by separating facial images depen-
dent on different lighting conditions, presence of vision 
glasses, and the time between acquisition date of the 
image on the database and the image presented to the 
algorithm. The separation of facial images based on 
the points mentioned allows for a better understanding 
of face recognition in general as well as the associated 
strengths and weaknesses linked with each category of 
facial images.
Facial recognition algorithms consist generally of 
two parts: (1) face detection and normalization, and 
(2) face identification. Algorithms that consist of both 
“parts” are classed as being fully automatic algorithms, 
and those that have either one of the “parts” are classed 
Gallery images
(One image/person)
Gallery
image
name
Probe
image
name
0001
0002
MMMM
Face recognition
algorithm
Output
file
Scoring
code
Results
(run at
government
site)
(run at testee’s site)
0001
List of probes
0002
NNNN
FIGURE 7.3 A schematic showing the process of facial recognition carried out by the FERET system. (From Phillips, 
P.J. et al., IEEE Trans. Patt. Anal. Mach. Intelligen. 22, 1090–1104, 2000. With permission.)

117
Forensic Facial Recognition
as being partially automatic algorithms. The evaluation 
of the FERET program, called Sep 96 FERET, evaluated 
both fully and partially automatic algorithms. Partial 
algorithms are given a facial image and the coordinates 
of the center of the eyes, whereas fully automatic algo-
rithms are only given facial images.
In 1996, the FERET Verification Testing Protocol 
for face recognition algorithms was devised to provide 
an independent and accurate assessment of reliability 
and accuracy of existing facial recognition systems; it 
also served the purpose of promoting research in facial 
biometrics. A target set containing a gallery of “known 
individuals” and a probe set up of an “unknown individ-
ual” was presented to participating software programs 
in 1996.
Two versions of tests were carried out; the first 
assessed automatic facial location and the other provided 
eye coordinates to examine the recognition performance 
on manual input systems. Enrollment and test data were 
collected according to strict guidelines. A scoring proce-
dure was formulated based on ROC graphs. False match 
rate and false non-match rate were plotted on log–log 
scales.
To achieve a recognition probability rate of >90%, 
the system will exhibit a higher false alarm rate. The 
best system has a 10% false alarm rate, with others vary-
ing from 30% to 60% (Phillips et al., 1999; Rizvi et al., 
1998). Over 6 months, the >90% recognition rate using 
the same FERET protocol exhibited a reduction in gen-
eral false alarm rates. The best of the systems exhibited 
<2% false alarm rate, while others demonstrated a vari-
ety ranging between 20% and 30%. This gave the recog-
nition system an increased recognition probability with 
no significant incline in false alarm rate.
Further tests were performed until March 1997, 
when the U.S. Department of Defense published details of 
the results and the entire project. Because of the FERET 
program, specific strengths and weaknesses associated 
with each algorithm were identified. A key drawback and 
disadvantage associated with face recognition algorithms 
appeared to be sensitivity to disparities in illumination 
caused by a change in sunlight intensity throughout the 
day. Changes in illumination resulted in a significant 
drop in performance.
Furthermore, it was demonstrated that the position 
of the “target face” also played a vital role in affecting 
the performance rate of the system. A 15-degree differ-
ence in position between the query image and the stored 
database image created substantial difference in the rec-
ognition threshold, whereas a difference of 45 degrees 
rendered the system ineffective for the purpose of rec-
ognition. Despite the limitations from luminosity and 
face position, the process of identification demonstrated 
by the FERET program was proven to be successful and 
provided results which were useful to many sectors of 
study and work. With substantial improvement in the 
development of facial algorithms for computerized rec-
ognition since the FERET program, the capabilities of 
modern technology have always been tested and will con-
tinue to be verified, until a program is developed that 
is able to overcome all the issues affected by the facial 
recognition software.
7.4 FAMILIAR FACE RECOGNITION
The face is a primary source of recognition and asso-
ciation in social interactions which are carried out on 
a daily basis. The human face discloses a great deal of 
information to the perceiver and is able to recognize 
emotions, intentions, mood, and attentiveness as well as 
to determine the identity of an individual. 
As humans, we can recognize numerous faces 
throughout our lifetime. And with only a glance, upon 
seeing a familiar face after many years we are able to 
recognize the individual; this is a robust skill which is 
truly fascinating. 
In the field of forensic science, once a questioned  
facial image is obtained it is required to be assesed, for 
the purpose of identification. At times, the media is uti-
lized as a way to gain information and help law enforce-
ment agents with identifying an “unknown” facial image.
When a crime is investigated, the identity of an 
unknown suspect is sought via means such as CCTV 
analysis and witness statements. The police will often 
question witnesses who may have been onlookers to 
the crime and try and get them to assist the police in 
many ways in establishing the identity of the suspect. 
When a witness is asked to attempt the identification of 
a suspect via photographs, identification parades, and 
possibly even facial composites, the process is said to 
be prone to errors. In contrast, the majority of us man-
age to recognize the faces of people who are familiar 
to us in our everyday lives or on television, irrespective 
of variations shown between different appearances of 
the same person. Error-prone unfamiliar face memory 
is transformed to generally very reliable performances 
with known faces.
There is neuropsychological evidence to suggest that 
there are somewhat different processes which underlie 
the recognition of unfamiliar faces and the recognition 
of familiar ones. People with prosopagnosia display dif-
ficulties in facial recognition, and sometimes this is due 
to an injury to the brain. Such people say they are unable 
to recognize even their closest relative’s face. However, 
some prosopagnosia patients can manage to match 
images of unfamiliar faces, although using laborious and 
somewhat time-consuming processes.
Young et al. investigated residual deficits in face pro-
cessing among a group of 34 brain-injured war veterans. 

118
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Amid this group, Young and his research colleagues found 
one man who was impaired at familiar facial recognition 
but unimpaired at unfamiliar face matching, and another 
war veteran who was impaired in unfamiliar face match-
ing but recognized familiar faces quite normally. The pat-
tern of “double dissociation” is consistent with the idea 
that different brain areas and processes are involved in 
the task of recognizing familiar faces and matching unfa-
miliar ones. Evidence for dissociation amid familiar and 
unfamiliar face processing is the observation that familiar 
face recognition appears to be dependent upon various 
kinds of information from unfamiliar recognition.
Lander and Butcher’s (2001) research suggest that 
representations of familiar faces capture something about 
their characteristic patterns of motion as well as their static 
form. Even within the static form, there appears to be var-
ied emphases on the visual representations of familiar and 
unfamiliar faces. Research by Ellis et al. (1979) first demon-
strated that unfamiliar face recognition was subjugated by 
external features belonging to the face, such as hair.
People generally find it difficult to recognize faces 
they’ve only seen once, if the hairstyle is altered or con-
cealed in any way. However, when faces are familiar, 
their internal features are more important in facial recog-
nition. Research by O’Donnell and Bruce in 2001 dem-
onstrated that the eyes in particular seemed to be better 
represented in recently familiarized faces.
For an unfamiliar face, within Western Europe, for 
example, hair is generally visible and variable in color and 
style. Thus, it is fair to suggest that outer features of the 
face generally convey the most information that is benefi-
cial and is utilized for matching and memory. Hairstyle 
usually varies from one occasion to another, as hair is a 
transient feature. Thus, it is of no surprise that the visual 
memory system can place emphasis on internal features.
Consistent with this, a study by Megreya and 
Binderman in 2009 highlighted that when face recogni-
tion was tested in Egypt, adults showed better memory 
for internal features for unfamiliar and familiar faces 
because of the head scarf. It may be a processing pref-
erence due to culture, meaning that one’s attention will 
naturally be drawn toward the internal features (eyes, 
nose, and mouth) when external features are concealed.
Burton et al. suggested that representations of a 
familiar face are built by averaging together individual 
occurrences of seen faces (Burton et al., 2005). The dif-
ferential weighting of internal features during familiar-
ization, and for cultures where external features are not 
often viewed, will possibly arise as a result of selective 
attention, weighting areas of the face differently. The 
research carried out by Burton and his colleagues has 
demonstrated that people are faster in their ability to rec-
ognize familiar faces when shown an average of 20 dif-
ferent photographic images of them, than when shown 
an individual at a single instance.
An extension to this research was carried out by 
Jenkins and Burton in 2008, where the results showed 
that, on average, when famous facial target images were 
used as a probe to match against a database of stored 
images, specifically celebrities, performance increased 
from 51% correct matching when using individual images 
as probes, to 100% correct when the averages were used 
as probes. As a result, both Jenkins and Burton suggested 
that images should be used on identity documents such 
as passports to help improve both human and computer-
ized methods of using such images.
7.5 STAGES IN FACIAL RECOGNITION
When we meet a person we are familiar with and know 
quite well, the recognition of that individual is fairly 
effortless and does not require much processing. The 
ability for us to recognize a person we are fairly well 
acquainted with, seems effortless however involves a pro-
cess which has been studied as part of research through 
systematic recordings of everyday behavior.
Young et al. (1993) collected a large sample of infor-
mation in relation to instances of errors and difficulties 
in person recognition in a study they named, “The Faces 
That Launched a Thousand Slips.” The participants were 
asked to keep notes of any difficulties they experienced 
when recognizing people over a period of 8 weeks. A 
total of 922 recorded incidents were analyzed from the 
preset time period. According to the information pro-
vided by the study, on average almost one incident per 
day displayed difficulty in recognition.
The incidents were grouped into particular types, 
with the most common type being person misidentifi-
cation. Approximately 25% of all incidents recorded 
occurred when somebody appeared to be familiar, but 
the participant failed to remember why that person in 
particular was familiar. At such times, the issue of fail-
ure to initially recognize was resolved by a protracted 
process.
In general, there are three main stages in person 
recognition, each equally as important in the process 
as the other. Stage 1 is to match the inbound “visual 
pattern” to a previously stored visual representation 
of what the person in question looks like. If it’s pos-
sible to match the incoming visual pattern to a stored 
visual representation of what a person looks like, then 
it is acceptable to classify the recognition as “familiar” 
(Wilkinson and Rynn, 2012). Stage 2 of person rec-
ognition involves retrieving information to state why 
the person in question has been identified as familiar; 
for example, “Where do you know this person from?” 
and “How do you know them?” Stage 3 involves the 
retrieval of the name belonging to the person in ques-
tion. It has not yet been possible to identify whether 

119
Forensic Facial Recognition
in the stages of person recognition one can jump from 
Stage 1 straight to Stage 3, where the retrieval of the 
person’s name occurs. There has been research carried 
out to demonstrate that there appears to be no direct 
route from “visual pattern matching” to name recall.
In 1990, Brennen et al. conducted an experiment in 
which the participants were required to answer a series of 
questions about celebrities from definitions; for example, 
What is the name of the person who played James Bond 
in Skyfall? (Wilkinson and Rynn, 2012; Byers, n.d.). The 
research demonstrated how all three experiments reported 
that tip-of-the-tongue states (TOTSs) were induced in 
participants by reading item-specific information.
In Experiments 1 and 2, subjects participating in 
the research attempted to name famous people. Both 
Experiments 1 and 2 showed that, in a TOTS, seeing a 
picture of the face of the questioned person did not facili-
tate naming, whereas the initials of the person’s name 
did. In Experiment 3, a similar result was obtained with 
a landmark naming task.
It is a common issue that at times a person may not 
be able to accurately recognize a person and may mis-
takenly misidentify a person because the incoming visual 
pattern may get matched with the wrong stored person 
representation. In a forensic context, the issue of mistak-
enly misidentifying a person is nothing out of the norm. 
A police officer or a member of the public who becomes 
a witness to a crime can mistakenly identify a criminal 
as potentially a person whom they may know or have 
“come across,” and this may be caused by a certain 
resemblance the witness sees. Many contextual factors 
also come into play. Even if a person who seems familiar 
is correctly identified, the details of why the person in 
question is familiar may be misremembered. The ability 
to remember who is familiar can involve the use of epi-
sodic information such as “I think I saw her there,” or it 
can be a lot more general “semantic information,” such 
as “She is the person who stars in that program.”
The simple process of person recognition does not 
allow differentiating between the two kinds of informa-
tion one may have of why a face is familiar. In a forensic 
context, the differences between episodic and semantic 
information are important. For example, one might see 
a short section of CCTV footage in relation to a rob-
bery, and the person within the CCTV footage may be 
a person one may “know.” While the issue of remem-
bering information for the purpose of person identifica-
tion may or may not be present, recalling names, even 
of familiar people, can be error-prone and difficult. In 
a forensic context, when the police are investigating a 
crime, images produced from the CCTV camera or facial 
composites may potentially trigger a less specific cue to 
an identity, which should be considered as a significant 
lead even when names of the potential criminal are not 
known or recalled.
7.6 FACIAL RECOGNITION 
AND THE AFFECTING FACTORS
There is a wide variation seen in facial recognition abil-
ity: from those unable to recognize highly familiar peo-
ple, to those individuals who can recognize someone who 
they have seen only once, some years earlier.
In facial recognition there are many factors which 
can affect the ability of an individual to recognize a face. 
The key affecting factors include but are not limited to 
individual factors, contextual factors, and lighting and 
color.
Recent years have shown a renewed interest in the 
theoretical and practical implications of individual dif-
ferences in facial recognition. With any form of test, a 
reasonable sample of participants will naturally reveal a 
range of performance scores. Some researchers try and 
determine the reason for variation, putting it down to 
the person’s ability to recall a person or to a specific fac-
tor in face processing. A study carried out by Woodhead 
and Baddeley demonstrated a wide range of results in 
the participant’s ability to discriminate familiar faces 
from different faces at or near chance (d′ = 0) to perfor-
mances that were nearly perfect (d′ = 6.8). Woodhead 
and Baddeley (2009) later tested a group of participants 
who were reasonably good and relatively poor recogniz-
ers again later; they found that a significant difference in 
face recognition abilities remained, and the group of par-
ticipants also varied in their recognition memory ability 
for non-face pictures. However, there appeared to be no 
difference in the participant’s verbal memory.
When there is no memory component involved in 
the ability of an individual to face match, differences are 
observed. In 2006, Megreya and Burton (2009) carried 
out research and used a face-matching task that was ini-
tially introduced by research carried out by Bruce et al. 
in 1999, where participating individuals were asked to 
decide which, of any, of the 10 faces shown in an array 
matched a good-quality target photograph (Henderson 
et al., 2001; Bruce et al., 1999). It is feasible to state that 
the error rates on such a performance task are generally 
high, but also fairly variable, as Megreya and Burton 
found the participant’s mean performance as 82% cor-
rect with a standard deviation of 12%.
Megreya and Burton (2009) examined what factors 
correlated with performance in the array-matching task. 
It was found that there were significant positive correla-
tions between unfamiliar face matching and recognition 
memory for unfamiliar faces, in addition to the match-
ing task correlating with a number of additional tasks of 
visual memory and processing. The matching task did 
not correlate, however, with the participant’s abilities to 
recognize recently familiarized faces and famous faces— 
unless these were turned upside down. Since we know 
that when faces are inverted, participants must rely on 

120
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
analyzing faces in a more piecemeal way, rather than the 
typical configural way of processing.
Prosopagnosic people, who have difficulties in recog-
nizing familiar faces in their day-to-day life, seem to have 
specific deficits in processing configural rather than local 
facial features. Research carried out by Russell et al. in 
2009 studied volunteers who were particularly good 
at recognizing faces, and classified them as the “super 
recognizers.” They usually scored very high on the 
Cambridge Face Matching as well as the Cambridge Face 
Memory Tests, which are tests of unfamiliar face process-
ing. However, super recognizers are not mainly skilled 
at tasks of inverted face recognition. This puts forward 
that skill in recognizing familiar faces and remembering 
unfamiliar faces in some tasks relies on expertise in con-
figural processing, but that other tasks concerning faces, 
particularly matching unfamiliar faces, correspondingly 
require the ability to analyze local features well.
In relation to contextual factors, we are often sur-
prised to meet people unexpectantly and fail to recognize 
them completely. Context plays a major role in facial rec-
ognition; therefore it can help facial recognition as well 
as hindering it. It is also well researched that appropriate 
contextual information can facilitate recognition of faces 
that are familiar, in a manner that accelerates familiar-
ity decisions. Research carried out in 1986 by Bruce and 
Valentine was the first type of facial recognition research 
which demonstrated that faces from closely associated 
pairs such as Laurel and Hardy were judged familiar 
more quickly if they immediately followed an image of 
the associated partner’s face. Research of such caliber 
suggests that the representations of different people in 
memory are somewhat interconnected in some way.
Contextual factors are very important for the recog-
nition of familiar faces. In a criminal context, it can be 
deemed highly imperative that people are able to remem-
ber and recall what, where, and when they see someone. A 
witness to a crime of any sort must know that the person 
seen in an identification parade and brought forward in 
front of the witness may be one of several individuals who 
may fit the descriptive brief the witness gave to the police.
While familiar people’s identities and therefore faces 
are usually bound by places where we encounter them 
(“That’s the man who catches the same train as I do”), 
we know very little about them and ultimately know lit-
tle about how well we are able to recall specific episodes 
involving particular people.
It is feasible to conclude that we are good at famil-
iar face recognition. Anyone, including witnesses and 
the police, who claims to recognize a person in a CCTV 
image or any other form of digital imagery within any 
context, as somebody they know, should be taken very 
seriously. This is because ultimately it is the fate of a per-
son and a decision that is not taken very lightly by profes-
sionals within the law and criminal defense field.
Because of the very real and serious implications 
that are involved with facial recognition in a criminal 
context, obtaining good image quality, facial compos-
ites, and custody images and then broadcasting the 
images nationally and at times internationally (depend-
ing on the level of crime that’s been committed) is piv-
otal in any criminal case investigation. It is imperative 
that when an individual becomes a witness to a crime, 
he or she would normally know the suspect as a result 
of the crime rather than knowing them prior to the 
criminal event. We are not perfect, and it is nothing 
out of the norm that one can confuse two people and 
be unable to provide accurate names or locations or be 
easily misled by context.
Lighting conditions and color may also affect the 
ability of an individual to recall and recognize another 
individual.
A study carried out how Russell et al. in 2006 directly 
compared discrimination ability for faces that differed in 
shape, and surface appearance such as pigmentation, or 
both. Faces were created using a 3D face model; however, 
they were presented to the participants in a 2D manner. 
It was found that photographic negation had a minimal 
effect on matching performance for faces that only dif-
fered in shape; however, it created a large decrement, 
from approximately 78% down to 64%, when faces var-
ied in pigmentation.
The performance rate was better with faces that dif-
fered in shape and pigmentation in general; however, 
performance was still affected by negation. The research 
concluded that negation interrupts our ability to use pig-
mentation cues to identity. Although we may not observe 
a face in a photographic negative under “normal circum-
stances,” we may encounter a face which is subject to 
light from unusual directions.
Pigmentation cues should not be confused with color 
information. Under specific lighting conditions, includ-
ing when lighting is dim, there will be no color informa-
tion seen in a face. It is an incorrect assumption to think 
that color would aid better identification in comparison 
to monochrome colors; however, in tests carried out in 
research, the effects of color are usually either nonexis-
tent or highly informative.
Research carried out by Bruce et al. in 1999 included 
four experiments which looked into the matching of 
unfamiliar target faces taken from high-quality video 
against an array of photographs. In Experiment 1, tar-
gets were present in 50% of arrays. Accuracy was poor 
and worsened when viewpoint and expression differed 
between target and array faces. In Experiment 2, targets 
were present in every array, but performance remained 
highly error prone. In Experiment 3, short video clips 
of the targets were shown and replayed as often as nec-
essary, but performance levels were only slightly bet-
ter than in Experiment 2. Experiment 2 showed that 

121
Forensic Facial Recognition
external face features dominated matching. The results 
urge caution in the use of video images to identify people 
who have committed crimes.
While there is an advantage for CCTV in that it 
allows identification of the color of clothing simultane-
ously, it has little advantage for faces. In CCTV footage 
which is subject to dim lighting or night conditions, color 
is not present and the only difference between potential 
colors is created by the darkness or lightness among the 
tones; however, in relation to facial recognition, the lack 
of light can almost mask facial features and potentially 
unique characteristics such as moles and distinctive 
scars. Furthermore, a lack of appropriate lighting condi-
tions coupled with factors such as camera distance will 
all result in affecting accurate facial recognition. Since at 
a distance a face may appear smaller and relatively coarse 
details be visible.
7.7 FACIAL MAPPING AND FORENSIC 
IMAGERY ANALYSIS
Digital imagery, which includes photographs and CCTV 
footage, is used to help the judicial system. Facial rec-
ognition at times forms part of circumstantial evidence; 
therefore, with imagery analysis, facial recognition can 
be submitted as evidence. “Imagery” refers generically to 
“photographs” that can be custody images of a known 
suspect or surveillance images which are taken discreetly. 
Imagery typically contains wave fronts of emitted or 
reflected energy, which is captured by a camera system 
and then recorded by optical disk, film, or any other 
media source.
Lately, the use of imagery and CCTV for the purpose 
of security has led to a substantial increase in the use 
and support of digital imagery and digital forensics in the 
investigation of a crime or the prosecution of a criminal. 
Subsequently, this has led to the requirement of experts 
in forensic imagery analysis who consequently help in 
facial recognition and identification.
Facial comparison, formally known as facial map-
ping, is a manual process carried out by forensic imag-
ery analysts who analyze facial characteristics and 
features of individuals captured from digital imag-
ery. Forensic imagery analysts are able to compare 
the morphological features of a criminal or group of 
criminals captured on CCTV or other forms of digital 
imagery to the individual or group of individuals who 
are alleged to be the person/s on the captured CCTV 
footage or photograph.
Although the face is considered a key factor for iden-
tifying individuals, posture, gait, height, and build are 
also crucial factors that are required for the accurate 
identification. The expertise of a forensic imagery analyst 
is not limited to the face; clothing, footwear, and vehicle 
analysis is also possible and dependent on the crime, can 
all be used as circumstantial evidence that will assist 
the investigating team and ultimately the judicial sys-
tem. Forensic imagery analysts are able to differentiate 
between recognition and identification in the work they 
carry out. Analysts classify recognition as when there are 
observable similarities between the person on the cap-
tured CCTV and/or digital imagery and the person who 
has been identified prior to the analysis, to the extent that 
the analyst is capable of positively stating that the indi-
viduals under comparison are one and the same.
Identification leaves no room for assumption and 
occurs when there is no doubt that the individual cap-
tured on the CCTV or digital imagery is that individual 
who has been positively identified. Identification is possi-
ble due to the presence of “unique identifying markers,” 
which are features on an individual as a result of indi-
vidual differences in lifestyle, diet and possibly environ-
mental factors. Unique identifying markers can be scars, 
moles, birthmarks, and body art such as tattoos. A posi-
tive identification between the individual captured on the 
CCTV who exhibits these markers in the same location, 
position, and form as that of the previously positively 
identified individual is an accurate result.
Scars can be a result of past wounds and injuries 
which have required medical assistance, and as a result, 
a scar has been formed. Tattoos are generally very spe-
cific to an individual because they can represent one of 
many things, including affiliation with a gang in prison, 
display of love for a loved one, as well as a form of sym-
bolic gesture. The uniqueness of the type of tattoo and 
the location, all aid in positive identification.
Birthmarks are benign skin irregularities, which are 
specific and exclusive to an individual, as somebody who 
has a photograph of him/herself in their pocket. It is not 
farcical to class birthmarks as being “facial fingerprints” 
because of their distinctiveness.
It is important to mention that although facial recogni-
tion is fundamentally associated with the unique identify-
ing markers present on the face of a person, it’s important 
to keep in mind that they are not limited to the face and 
can be found anywhere on the body. Recognition may have 
some probative value but only as support to the evidence, 
whereas identification can stand as proof on its own.
Trained forensic imagery analysts are able to view 
digital imagery and CCTV free from issues of cognitive 
preconception which can’t affect the reliability of the 
results. An untrained eye will naturally anticipate that 
the person captured on the offense digital imagery and 
CCTV is the same person who has been positively identi-
fied by the police or a witness, and hence unconsciously 
will form an opinion with a strong certainty.
However, a competent practitioner will be free of 
bias and will take a very neutral stand to any proposition 
posed from either the prosecution or defense. 

122
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Many techniques have been developed in order to 
achieve safe and reliable facial mapping results. All the 
techniques have been designed to accomplish one goal, 
and that is to try and exclude the suspect individual by 
looking for significant facial differences, also referred to 
as negative (nonmatching) indicators. There are currently 
four main methods in use for facial comparison: holistic 
comparison, morphological analysis, photo anthropom-
etry and superimposition. Subject to the image quality in 
use, an appropriate selection for the type of facial com-
parison method can occur. However, the order in which 
these techniques are applied varies.
Moreover, the selection of an appropriate method 
is also dependent on the training of the forensic imag-
ery analyst, the experience of the analyst as well as the 
purpose of the examination. Irrespective of the method 
chosen for the purpose of comparison, the repeatability 
and accuracy if the conclusions that can be drawn from 
the image comparison are directly related to the quality 
of the images.
As a general rule of thumb, the lower the quality of 
the image used for the purpose, the weaker the conclu-
sion that can be drawn. Ideal images for facial compari-
son are high in resolution and have adequate focus of 
the facial features of interest inclusive of facial blemishes 
and moles. The images also have minimum image dis-
tortion, sufficient lighting and little to no obscuration of 
features. In general, optimal images are taken under the 
same lighting conditions where factors such as resolution 
and subject pose can be controlled and, more impor-
tantly, consistently repeated. However, it is also possible 
that images which are captured under non identical con-
ditions are deemed sufficient to carry out comparative 
analysis.
In facial mapping, when a comparison is made 
between two images, it’s imperative to have a minimal 
time interval between the two images. It is not always 
possible to have images that don’t have a big time inter-
val between them; this is usually the case with multiple 
robberies from one organized crime group, who possi-
bly commit a crime in a more spaced timescale. Having 
said that, facial comparison can be undertaken utilizing 
suboptimal images; however, in such circumstances the 
forensic analyst is completely trained and is able to fully 
evaluate the images accurately.
As mentioned previously, there are four main meth-
ods in use for facial comparison, which are holistic com-
parison, morphological analysis, photo anthropometry, 
and superimposition. Holistic facial comparison exploits 
a basic human ability, which is where all facial features 
are examined simultaneously and compared to another 
facial image. Holistic comparison is a common practice; 
however, it is not alarming that a forensic analyst assess-
ing facial features during a review is not able to explicitly 
explain the basis of his or her conclusions.
The advantages associated with holistic facial com-
parison include the fact that it can be attempted on any 
image and does not require an identical subject facial 
pose or orientation and angle. Another advantage is the 
fact that no contemporaneous document of the process 
is required for facial review, therefore not requiring any 
specialized equipment. The process of holistic facial com-
parison is generally quick and requires minimal training. 
A major associated disadvantage with holistic facial com-
parison is the fact that studies have highlighted that this 
process has low and variable accuracy rates.
Morphological comparison is recommended as a 
primary method for facial comparison and is based on 
the assessment and correspondence of the appearance, 
shape presence, and location of facial features. These 
features incorporate global (overall face), local (ana-
tomical structures like the nose and their components 
like the nasal bridge), and discriminating characteris-
tic facial marks such as moles and scars. The primary 
action is to study the facial features to see if there is any 
obvious difference. If a profound difference is observed 
between the nose (for example) between the unknown 
subject in the questioned imagery and the known con-
trol, then it is fair to conclude that both the people are 
not one and the same. Transient features such as hair, 
including style and color, should not be taken as a dis-
tinguishing factor. If there is no clear difference in the 
facial features, then the analyst can progress onto ana-
lyzing the facial landmarks (such as the glabella and 
nasion point) of the individual. In conjunction with the 
facial landmarks, the forensic imagery analyst must also 
consider the underlying facial muscles that are respon-
sible for expression.
Morphological comparison is performed very care-
fully, and the facial landmarks are used as guides to 
help the analyst search for significant and/or insignifi-
cant differences, which in turn can help in the establish-
ment of a suspect’s identity. The shape of the feature 
and proportionate size are all taken into consideration. 
Morphological facial comparison is a systematic method 
in which the facial features of a subject’s face, are 
described and compared. Further to this, features can 
be subdivided into additional categories. For example, a 
comparative comment can be made on components such 
as the helix, anti-helix, tragus, and the lobe. All the com-
ponents can be addressed individually or in combination. 
Conclusions drawn because of morphological compari-
son are based on subjective assessment and interpretation 
of the observations.
Morphological comparison is regarded as sensitive 
to image quality. Loss in quality caused by low resolu-
tion, distortion, or blurring can reduce if not eliminate 
the detailed feature’s visibility. As a result, the ability to 
identify similarities and dissimilarities becomes reduced 
and therefore introduces great uncertainty. The overall 

123
Forensic Facial Recognition
effect of this will be the inability to either positively iden-
tify or eliminate a suspect individual.
Among the advantages related to morphological 
comparison is that, with appropriate training, an analyst 
can obtain the best results from images that share a simi-
larity in angle, pose, and orientation. It is easy to explain 
the results to an untrained individual who is not com-
petent in the area. Another advantage of morphological 
facial comparison is that a feature list can be drawn, and 
it is considered to be a more reliable method of facial 
comparison. A disadvantage associated with this method 
of facial comparison is the fact that a limited number 
of research studies have been completed on the accuracy 
and reproducibility of this method, in addition to the fact 
that to carry out morphological analysis, one must be 
competent in the knowledge of surface anatomy and be 
trained.
The third type of facial comparison method is 
called photogrammetry, which is derived from facial 
anthropometry a study of facial measurements (FISWG 
Guidelines for Facial Comparison Method, 2012). 
Facial measurements are recorded from an image and 
then are taken from a second image; both sets of data 
are compared, and conclusions are based on subjective 
thresholds for acceptable differences between the sets of 
measurements. However, given the uncontrolled condi-
tions under which the images are taken (surveillance, 
CCTV) and depending on their quality, photogramme-
try can make it difficult to define a threshold boundary 
of similarity or dissimilarity in measurements to support 
a respective conclusion of identification or elimination of 
an individual. It is advised that to carry out photogram-
metry, one must use original imagery for the purpose of 
facial mapping. Reproductions of originals will invari-
ably be subject to a loss of detail and resolution, which in 
turn will affect the results produced.
An advantage of photogrammetry is the fact that no 
expensive specialized equipment is required, and gener-
ally an itemized facial features list is utilized. A major 
disadvantage of using photogrammetry for facial map-
ping, other than it being a method that requires advanced 
training and accuracy, is that large-scale studies on the 
use of anthropometric comparison, based on approxi-
mately 30 facial landmarks and high-resolution images, 
have demonstrated that photo-anthropometry has lim-
ited discriminating powers (FISWG; Thompson and 
Black, 2007).
However, FISWG has identified the following imag-
ing conditions that must be met in order to gain reliable 
results when using photogrammetry as a method for 
facial  comparison/ mapping:
• Same viewpoint
• Minimal distortion
• Minimal compression artifacts
• Known focal length
• Sufficient resolution and focus to resolve 
 features/landmarks of interest
• Same lighting
• Minimal obscuration
• Known lens distortion
• Known subject distance
• Known angle of head tilt (if present)
• Same image aspect ratio
• Same pose
• Short time interval between photographs
• Similar expressions
Photogrammetry is extremely sensitive to image qual-
ity: any distortion or damage to image resolution and/or 
blurring can affect the chance of getting reliable results. 
A decline in image quality will subsequently reduce the 
accuracy of the measurements recorded. Adding to this is 
the determination of a specific pose and expression of the 
subject that can be greatly reduced by the effects of the 
blurring, and so on, which further introduces error and 
uncertainty. The greater effect of this all is a reduction 
in accuracy of analysis with the potential of improperly 
including or excluding a subject individual in relation to 
a crime (Figure 7.4).
Superimposition is the last of the four methods used 
for facial comparison. Superimposition can be used in 
conjunction with morphological analysis, as it can add to 
the value of the results obtained. Superimposition is the 
process of creating two images that are aligned, and then 
comparing them visually with the assistance of video 
techniques such as fade and transitions.
As with any other method of work, a high level of care 
and training should be taken when attempting superim-
position, taking particular care with image enlargement 
and scaling. This is vital, as differences can be present 
among any two sets of images, such as orientation, pose 
and angle. A discussion of a few of the superimposition 
techniques follows.
A fade is where one image is progressively replaced 
by another image by gradually changing the trans-
parency of the image layers such that the entirety of 
both the images are observed at reduced transparency 
concurrently.
Matching is where an analyst will align two differ-
ent faces against each other to determine if there is any 
match. It is important to mention that this method of 
superimposition is able to highlight anomalies very eas-
ily, and since human faces are largely symmetrical, how-
ever, if a low-resolution set of images are being compared 
in this way, then this method can be difficult. A “wipe” 
is when a straight line passes across the screen gradually 
revealing the underlying image such that both parts of 
both the images in use at full opacity can be observed 
simultaneously.

124
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
As mentioned previously, facial features can be used 
in helping to determine the identity of an individual. There 
may be various additional factors that may be required, 
such as clothing, gait, height, and build, that can all be 
considered and examined prior to drawing a conclu-
sion. The advantages of superimposition as a method is 
outweighed by its disadvantages; for example, the condi-
tions under which one can achieve reliable results are very 
restrictive. Further, superimposition cannot be used as an 
independent comparison method. To carry out superim-
position analysis, the analyst must be highly trained, as 
there is a chance that with the use of some image transi-
tion tools an inexperienced user can be misled.
It is rare that the identification report would be used as 
a stand-alone piece of evidence in court. Forensic facial map-
ping is rarely used as a singular piece of evidence against a 
suspect; however, it is used alongside other circumstantial 
evidence with the aim to come to an accurate decision within 
the court. Although the camera does not lie, it can mislead 
an untrained eye and lead to an inaccurate conclusion.
Imagery such as photographs and CCTV footage 
is the only permanent record of events that have taken 
place, and therefore it is important to make sure the 
imagery is made available to the court when necessary. 
The camera merely records the events that are unfolding 
before it; the events that are recorded are of evidential 
value only if what is recorded is properly captured and 
accurately interpreted (Figure 7.5).
7.7.1 Summary
The use of expert evidence to assist facial identifica-
tion from CCTV can be useful to the court, however 
it is clear that research is required for the evalution of 
techniques. While experts may be employed by both 
the prosecution and defense, the opinions presented are 
subjective. As a result, research is required to further 
the neiche disiciple of facial mapping and aid the jury’s 
understanding with emperical evidence. However, 
it remains unclear at present if any facial compari-
son technique will be subject to scientific testing and 
peer review in order for any method to be conclusively 
assigned as reliable or unrelaible.
7.8 FACIAL COMPOSITES AND ELECTRONIC 
FACIAL IDENTIFICATION TECHNIQUES
A composite image is a pictorial likeness produced from a 
witness’s recall of a suspect for the purpose of achieving 
a likeness. The composite image is intended to be an aid 
to the investigation of crime alongside other corroborat-
ing evidence. The term “composite” is commonly used by 
practitioners when referring to any facial or full- bodied 
image, irrespective of the technique used to produce it. 
This is especially important to understand when dealing 
with the courts and media.
Police officers often rely on a witness to provide a 
comprehensive account of the incident. In some circum-
stances, the witness has to convey a description of the 
perpetrator based only on a brief encounter. The perti-
nent question is, “How is it possible to accurately convey 
the perpetrator’s face when the image exists only as a 
memory in the witness’s mind?” This corresponds well 
to the typical circumstances under which a trained police 
officer will subsequently work with the victim (or other 
FIGURE 7.5 Superimposition image created by Shelina 
Jilani and Stephen Cole, Acumé Forensics. (All consent 
has been given for the purpose of this superimposition.)
FIGURE 7.4 Photogrammetry image created by Shelina 
Jilani and Stephen Cole, Acumé Forensics. (All consent 
has been given for the purpose of this photogrammetry.)

125
Forensic Facial Recognition
witnesses to a crime) in an attempt to produce a facial 
likeness or facial composite of the perpetrator.
Unless the witness is a gifted artist, it is unlikely 
that he or she will be able to provide a reliable sketch 
of the offender. Typically, assuming that the attacker 
is unknown to the witness, he or she will first be asked 
to provide a detailed verbal description of the attacker 
and to recount the incident in as much detail as possible. 
When the interview is complete, an attempt is then made 
to produce a likeness under the guidance of a specially 
trained operator.
While sketch artists are still widely used in the 
United States, this process will most likely (in the United 
Kingdom, at least) use some form of computerized facial 
composite system. A facial composite system is there-
fore a tool designed to allow the expression of the facial 
appearance retained in the witness’s memory in some 
tangible form, such as a digital image or computer print-
out. The desired outcome is that the generated compos-
ite be of sufficient accuracy that subsequent display to 
members of the public will result in direct recognition 
and that the details of the suspect will be supplied to the 
police.
In many cases, a generated composite may not be 
accurate enough to produce a definite “hit” but will 
nonetheless provoke members of the public who recog-
nize basic similarities to provide the names of possible 
suspects. In most cases, it is the combination of the 
composite with other basic information such as age, 
build, and the type of crime that results in the provision 
of suspect names.
The process by which a witness and a composite 
operator arrive at a final facial composite is a complex 
interplay of computer imaging and human cognitive 
function, and the final result depends on a number of fac-
tors. The overall success of the composite process is, first 
and foremost, reliant on the witness’s ability to retain 
some memory of the face in question. Undoubtedly, 
some people are better equipped to perform this task 
than others.
Other factors such as the witness’s state of mind (i.e., 
they may be in various degrees of shock as a result of 
the crime), the period of time over which the crime took 
place, the proximity of the perpetrator to the witness 
during the crime, and the time elapsed between the 
crime and the composite construction will also affect the 
memory. From a scientific and technological perspective, 
there are critical aspects to consider in the design of an 
effective composite system. It should provide sufficient 
flexibility of use and image quality to meet the needs 
of different witnesses and operators and should be con-
structed, as much as possible, to match their normal cog-
nitive processes.
Although systematic methods for remembering 
faces have been outlined by Penry, the inventor of 
the original Photo-FIT system, it is unreasonable and 
impractical to expect that potential witnesses and vic-
tims will be well trained in these techniques. Rather, 
the emphasis must be on the design of composite sys-
tems and associated interview techniques, which allow 
the best evidence to be produced by ordinary members 
of the public. The relative weakness of human beings 
at the process of recall and description of faces, as con-
trasted with their remarkable capacity for face recog-
nition, is well documented. In simple terms, to first 
recall and then accurately describe a face, even that of 
a family member or a close relative, is cognitively dif-
ficult for many people.
Until recently, the facial composite systems used by 
international police forces were exclusively based on 
a construction process in which individual facial fea-
tures (eyes, nose, mouth, eyebrows, etc.) are selected 
one at a time from a large database and then electroni-
cally “overlaid” to produce the composite image. Such 
systems are often referred to as feature-based since 
they rely on the selection of individual features in iso-
lation. However, after a long period of research and 
development, work conducted largely within British 
universities has produced systems that are based on a 
rather different principle and are finding increasing use 
by police forces.
These systems may be broadly described as holistic 
or global in that they primarily attempt to create a like-
ness to the suspect through an evolutionary mechanism 
in which a witness’s response to groups of complete 
faces (not just features) converges toward an increas-
ingly accurate image. This section will feature a system 
which had its origins in research undertaken by Kent 
University and the Open University and is now com-
mercially established under the name E-FIT-V, which 
may best be described as a hybrid system in that it 
attempts to exploit holistic information while retaining 
some of the feature-based processing employed in most 
systems of the previous generation and which are effec-
tive under certain conditions.
7.8.1  Historical Background to Suspect 
Composite Construction
Prior to the introduction of Identi-Kit (Figure 7.6) 
in the early 1960s, police forces did not routinely 
attempt to portray a suspect’s likeness for subsequent 
release to the media. Some forces occasionally did use 
an artist’s impressions (Figure 7.7) taken from witness 
interviews to illustrate a few examples. However, the 
police artists did not receive any form of interview 
training, and resulting arrests were minimal. Sketch 
artists have been used to produce suspect composites 

126
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
since the 1950s, and continue to be used by some UK 
and overseas forces to the present day. It is acknowl-
edged that a fully trained police sketch artist who has 
been interview trained will be able to produce a good 
likeness of the suspect, dependent on the recall ability 
of the witness, and the FBI still use and train sketch 
artists in preference to the use of computer software 
systems.
Smith & Wesson, an American company most 
famous for their manufacture of firearms, created 
the Identi-Kit system, originating from an invention 
by Hugh C. Macdonald of the Los Angeles Police 
Department, who had developed sets of facial features 
on transparencies to save time sketching descriptions 
of criminals in 1940 wartime Europe. It was in use the 
United States and in the United Kingdom throughout 
the early 1960s, until the introduction of Photo-FIT in 
1970. The first recorded use of Identi-Kit in the United 
Kingdom is documented as the Cecil Court antique 
shop murder.
On March 3, 1961, Elsie Batten, a shop assistant, 
was found stabbed to death in an antique shop owned by 
Louis Meyer in Cecil Court, off London’s Charing Cross 
Road WC2. The detective sergeant assigned to the case 
was Raymond Dagg, who interviewed Louis Meyer and 
a neighboring shop assistant, who told him they had seen 
a suspicious youth of Indian appearance at the shop a few 
days earlier.
But how could the witnesses describe the suspect? 
Raymond Dagg decided to use the new Identi-Kit system 
and compiled a facial composite of the suspect from shop 
owner Louis Meyer’s recollection and then independently 
from the other witness. The two pictures were so similar 
in appearance that it was decided to publish them in the 
press.
On March 8, 1961, only a week later, a police-
man from a nearby station at West End Central saw 
Edwin Bush in Old Compton Street in Soho and rec-
ognized him from the Identi-Kit pictures. He arrested 
Bush on suspicion of being responsible for the murder 
of Elsie Batten, who was 59. Remarkably, Bush had a 
copy of the Identi-Kit pictures from the newspaper in 
his pocket. He was later picked out at an identifica-
tion parade by one of the two witnesses and then later 
confessed to the murder. Edwin Bush was convicted for 
murder and was executed on July 6, 1961 in Pentonville 
Prison. This was the first time Identi-Kit was used to 
solve a case by Scotland Yard.
Identi-Kit was a software that was replaced by 
Photo-fit, a software created by Jacques Penry, a pho-
tographer who was fascinated by facial morphological 
anatomy and published his book How to Read Character 
from the Face in 1939. Penry claimed that there was a 
link between a person’s personality and their human 
physique. He also claimed that he could deduce a per-
son’s character instantly from their facial appearance. He 
argued that using the Penry system of facial classification 
could rid the society of “criminals, mental deficits, neur-
asthenics and vocational misfits.”
In 1968, Jacques Penry presented his Photo-fit sys-
tem (Figure 7.8) to the Home Office in London. The kit 
consisted of narrow paper strips showing a photograph 
of various facial features such as eyes, nose, mouth, and 
so on, with approximately 40 of each accompanied with 
FIGURE 7.6 Identi-Kit image versus image of Edwin Bush.

127
Forensic Facial Recognition
an index and various transparent overlays for beards, 
glasses, wrinkles and so on. The various elements were 
then combined in a purpose-made frame to represent the 
suspect person’s facial appearance.
Photo-fit was first used in relation to the murder of 
James Cameron in Islington in October 1970 (Figure 7.8). 
The Photo-fit of the suspect was shown on “Police 5” on  
October 22, 1970, and the image was recognized by a 
shop assistant who remembered a man who had bought 
an umbrella from his shop in Victoria with a check that 
had bounced. He remembered the man had produced 
a firearms certificate to verify his identity. John Ernest 
Bennett was subsequently identified and arrested in 
Nottingham. He was later convicted of the murder.
Photo-fit continued to be used by police forces 
throughout the United Kingdom until the introduction 
of a computer composite software in 1988 called E-FIT, 
which allowed an operator to call on a library of photo-
graphic facial features stored in the computer’s memory 
to construct a realistic suspect’s image.
Because of this software, an early arrest was made 
of Colin Ireland, who was convicted of a series of mur-
ders of gay men in London. On July 21, 1993. Ireland 
gave himself up to the police after seeing a “Wanted” 
poster showing an E-FIT image of him. He initially 
gave a false explanation of his contact with one of the 
victims but later changed his story and confessed to his 
crimes when told his fingerprints had been found at the 
scene of another murder in the series. He was jailed for 
life for the murders in December 1993 and remained 
imprisoned until his death in February 2012, at the 
age of 57.
7.8.2  Historical Background to Holistic 
Composite Systems
Although there are many differences in details in the 
various commercial composite systems available, until 5 
years ago, all commercial systems operated with the same 
feature-based philosophy whereby the individual fea-
tures of the face are selected from databases of examples, 
which had been suitably categorized. The commercial 
systems E-FIT, Pro-FIT, Identi-Kit, COMPHOTOFIT, 
and Faces all fall into this category. One of the earliest 
innovations that aimed to partly address the limitations 
associated with a finite database of candidate features 
was the experimental system developed by Brunelli and 
Mich (1996) named Spotit!
This system relied on a PCA model for each class 
of feature, achieving a reduction in the dimensionality 
of the problem and providing a basis from which novel 
features could be constructed. The “pre-face” image or 
starting point in this system was the mean face into 
which the facial features are set/blended. Seven slid-
ers then control the appearance of each facial feature, 
where each slider corresponds to a principal component 
or mode of variation. The ranges of composites that 
can be produced using this technique are fundamen-
tally limited by the finite size of the sample used in the 
PCA.
However, Brunelli and Mich included a tool that 
allowed the operator to manually distort the shape 
of a chosen feature. In this sense, there is an unlim-
ited set of feature shapes that can be achieved. One 
of the major weaknesses would appear to be that the 
FIGURE 7.7 Three sketches taken from witness interviews of alleged offender.

128
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
sliders incorporated in the interface control changes in 
appearance defined on a mathematical premise, and as 
such do not correspond to a specific perceptual mean-
ing (e.g., “a turned-up nose”). Therefore, any prospec-
tive witness/operator will find it difficult to locate the 
optimum slider positions required for a good likeness 
of the target face.
An “intelligent” search procedure is required to 
overcome the difficulty of selecting the most appro-
priate features from an almost unlimited sample. 
Genetic algorithms (GAs) offer a conceptually pleas-
ing solution to the search problem. Evolutionary 
techniques based on Darwinian theory that simulate 
complex structures, textures, and motions for use in 
computer graphics and animation were described as 
early as 1991. DiPaolo, also working in the computer 
graphics arena, describes such an algorithm for facial 
appearance, based on an aesthetic selection process in 
which faces are represented by genotypes comprising 
25 parameters.
However, the first recorded use of a GA for generating 
facial composite imagery for police use was by Caldwell 
and Johnston. The GA is initialized with a population of 
20 faces, which are constructed from individual facial 
features in a style reminiscent of earlier systems. Faces 
are displayed to the operator, who is required to assign 
a fitness score to each face depending on its similarity to 
the target. Parent faces are chosen from the initial popu-
lation according to their associated fitness score and bred 
with each other using the standard principles of cross-
over and mutation.
Attempts have been made to incorporate informa-
tion concerning the configuration of facial features into 
feature based systems such as E-FIT, and the effective-
ness of these ad hoc “pseudo holistic” approaches have 
been examined (Caldwell and Johnston, 1991). However, 
a more elegant and possibly more effective approach is to 
model facial variation as a whole.
The earliest work in this direction was that of 
Hancock (2000), who describes a developmental system 
that utilized both global PCA face models and a GA. 
Critically, this design appears to be the first to allow 
composite images to be created by adjusting global/holis-
tic properties of facial appearance, in a way that is not 
too demanding of the witness. Unlike previous systems, 
this approach is truly global, relying on whole-face tem-
plates (the principal components) rather than a database 
of facial features. In this context, the principal compo-
nents are often referred to as eigenfaces, which had been 
explored in the computer vision literature and originated 
with the seminal work of Sirovich and Kirby in 1987. 
Hancock used two separate PCA models, one for face 
shape and another for pixel intensity values. Using two 
independent models overcomes problems associated with 
head pose and blurring that would otherwise degrade the 
composite images.
The operator was presented with a selection of 18 
faces to which fitness ratings must be assigned on a scale 
FIGURE 7.8 Photo-fit image of John E. Bennett.

129
Forensic Facial Recognition
of 0 to 10. The genetic algorithm selects faces with a 
high rating (fitness proportionate selection) as parents. 
Parameters defining an offspring’s appearance were 
selected at random from the parents (uniform crossover) 
and a mutation applied to some of the parameter values. 
This procedure was performed 18 times to form a new 
generation of faces. Hancock’s original PCA model was 
built on a limited sample of 20 female faces.
The system has been subsequently refined and devel-
oped by Frowd and Hancock in a series of publications 
and is now known as Evo-FIT. The EFIT-V system with 
which this chapter is primarily concerned was conceived 
independently (the research system operated under the 
name EigenFIT and assumed commercial form under the 
name, EFIT-V, in 2007).
This system also employs PCA model building and 
evolutionary search techniques, though it differs some-
what in basic approach and functional details. The 
EFIT-V system is built on two core elements: the con-
struction of a statistical appearance model of human 
faces and a stochastic search algorithm. In the follow-
ing section, the core elements of the EFIT-V system are 
explained (Figure 7.9).
7.9 EFIT-V: OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE
It has been outlined how EFIT-V combines stochastic 
search methods with systematic tools for altering facial 
appearance to form an essentially hybrid system. At the 
time of this writing, the EFIT-V system has been used 
by approximately 45 police forces. EFIT-V is designed 
to be flexible so that the approach to face construction 
can be adapted to witnesses and their abilities. For this 
reason, no rigid operational procedure is recommended. 
However, the following sequence of events is typical of 
an EFIT-V interview.
An initial interview is first conducted. Current ACPO 
(Association of Chief Police Officers) guidelines recom-
mend an interview based on the cognitive model initially 
devised by Geiselman and Fisher. We note in passing 
that alternative interview models are being researched 
which may better suit the methodology of systems such 
as EFIT-V.
On system start-up, a PACE-compliant form is dis-
played into which details that identify the composite 
are entered. Fields are provided for the witness’s fore-
names, surname, date of birth, and also the operator’s 
rank and number. This information is combined with 
the current date to generate a unique reference number 
that can be used to identify the composite for future 
reference.
In an attempt to accurately seed the starting point for 
the stochastic search, witnesses are asked to select from 
a sample of basic face shapes displayed on the screen. An 
“unsure” option exists in which case the first faces are 
generated as variations from the average face shape.
The witness then proceeds to select the hairstyle, 
or in the event that this was not visible, the headwear 
worn by the suspect. From a perceptual point of view, 
it is sensible to ask the witness to select an appropriate 
hairstyle first, as the external features are more salient 
in unfamiliar faces and there is evidence to suggest that 
facial features should be selected in order of decreas-
ing significance. The user can scroll through the avail-
able hairstyles using a slider, with each increment in 
the slider position displaying nine more hairstyles in 
the familiar three-by-three configurations. Hairstyles 
are mapped onto a blank head-shape so that the wit-
ness may view the hair in some context. A filter is pro-
vided to sort the hairstyles into categories describing 
the length and color.
Thus, the number of candidate hairstyles that the 
witness must examine can be greatly reduced by marking 
the appropriate checkboxes provided in the filter.
At this point, the stochastic search begins and a first 
generation of nine faces is presented. The witness is asked 
to select a face from the nine which best resembles the 
suspect. If unable to do so because none bears sufficient 
resemblance, the witness may request to see another 
group until a face appears that constitutes a satisfactory 
starting point. Virtual faces that exhibit a poor likeness 
to the target may be removed from view.
This step declutters the field of view, making it 
easier for the witness to form an opinion on the suit-
ability of the remaining visible faces. Once the witness 
has made a choice, nine more faces comprising the first 
generation then replace the initial population and the 
process of selecting a face is repeated. In this mode, the 
user has the option to lock the shape of a particular 
facial feature that exhibits a good likeness to the cor-
responding feature on the target face. This is achieved 
by choosing a region in an iconic face located on the 
right-hand side of the interface and then selecting one 
of the nine virtual faces.
Placing the cursor over a feature in the iconic face 
and using a single click of the left mouse button turns 
that region from gray to blue, indicating that the shape of 
the chosen feature will be fixed through subsequent gen-
erations. Deselecting a region of the iconic face reintro-
duces shape variation in the previously locked feature. If 
required, more than one feature may be fixed at any given 
instant. The available choices of features that can be locked 
are the eyebrows (left/right pair), eyes (left/right pair), nose, 
mouth, and face shape or any combination of these.
Typically, after a witness has selected the preferred 
face from five or six generations, he or she will be 
prompted to provide feedback on the composite image 

130
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
so far and whether there are any definite characteristics 
or features that they would like to alter. The operator 
will then respond using the array of systematic tools at 
their disposal in an attempt to “progress” the composite 
toward a better likeness.
This step is important in the use of EFIT-V since 
the operator should resist any attempt to create a 
“final” product at this stage but only use the informa-
tion provided by the witness to progress the composite 
likeness and confirm whether or not the modified com-
posite now represents a better likeness. If the witness 
confirms an improved likeness, the system immediately 
reverts to the evolutionary mode and takes this like-
ness as the starting point for the subsequent stochastic 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 7.9 Random generation of faces in EFIT-V through sampling a statistical model of facial appearance. 
(Examples are shown for each of the class models White Male, Black Male, Hispanic Male, and Oriental Male.) 
(Used with permission from Chris Solomon).

131
Forensic Facial Recognition
variations. Again, the witness is then asked to select the 
best example from a sequence of generations, three to 
six being typical.
Further systematic changes may be requested at 
this stage, including the use of paintwork using an 
associated graphics package such as Adobe Photoshop 
or Corel PaintShop. Paintwork can be added to 
EFIT-V images at any time and the system used sub-
sequently in the normal way, but it is generally advis-
able to defer certain forms of artistic enhancement 
to late in the process due to the problems of image 
registration.
An Undo function and a Load function are available. 
Typically, these are used when the witness feels that a 
poor choice of face has been made, or a face has been 
selected unintentionally and another image is preferred 
and has great likeness to the suspect. Once an acceptable 
likeness has been obtained, the current stallion image 
(best likeness) is saved both as a graphics file and as a 
file internal to EFIT-V, which can be loaded into the pro-
gram at any point in the future.
A complete audit trail is kept by EFIT-V so that the 
time, date, personnel involved, and all steps in the con-
struction process are saved to the hard disk of the com-
puter. The entire contents can also be burned directly to 
CD from within EFIT-V as an exhibit for subsequent evi-
dential procedures.
A meaningful evaluation of the effectiveness of any 
facial composite system is surprisingly complex. From a 
policing perspective, the primary goal is very simple— 
namely the provision of a correct name for the suspect. 
Secondary goals also exist, namely speed and ease of 
use, which can have direct financial implications for 
police forces.
The attempt to reach the primary goal is affected by 
many factors:
• The inherent capability of the composite sys-
tem to create good likenesses (i.e., its imaging 
capability).
• Its inherent methodology (i.e., the degree to 
which the system matches the cognitive pro-
cesses and needs of the witness and operator).
• The capability and skills of the police opera-
tor. Although standardized training courses 
exist, operator skill and experience vary 
widely.
• The capability, willingness, and emotional state 
of the witness.
• The nature of the crime or offense. There is, 
for example, some provisional evidence that 
offenses in which the witness has time or pres-
ence of mind to consciously attempt to commit 
the face to memory result in a different encod-
ing of the face compared to offenses in which 
no conscious attempt is made (e.g., a distrac-
tion burglary in which the victim will have no 
reason to consciously attempt to remember 
the face of the perpetrator at the time of the 
incident).
• The effective use of the composite once it has 
been created. In simple terms, a composite 
image may represent a good likeness to the tar-
get subject, but if the subsequent procedures do 
not result in a sufficient or appropriate cross 
section of the police or public seeing the image, 
it will fail in its basic objective. This aspect and 
its impact on success rates is often strangely 
overlooked.
The supply of relevant supplementary informa-
tion along with the composite image can affect the 
ability and willingness of someone to offer a name. 
For example, an image supplied with supplementary 
information such as “a white male aged 30–35 years, 
with a strong northern accent and scruffily dressed” 
is likely to have better chances of success than the 
image alone.
As a commercial system, the evaluation of the 
effectiveness of EFIT-V to date has largely been gauged 
by feedback from police forces using the system rou-
tinely rather than through academic studies. At the 
E-FIT user conference in 2009, West Yorkshire police 
reported a 40% naming rate over an 18-month period 
from May 2008 to November 2009 that encompassed 
more than 1000 interviews. This indicates that when 
the factors mentioned above are properly considered, 
performance can be excellent. Functional develop-
ments of the system have also been driven by the real-
life requirements of operators and witnesses and by 
advances in our understanding of facial and image 
processing as well.
Figure 7.10 shows an array of famous faces, all 
of which were created by trainees on various train-
ing courses delivered in 2010. These images were not 
produced under conditions of strict forensic validity, 
but were produced from memory and indicate EFIT-
V’s inherent ability to produce accurate likenesses of 
a subject. A novel use of EFIT-V has recently been 
reported by Cheshire police. An elderly man suffered 
a fatal cardiac arrest in Davenham, Cheshire, but the 
police were unable to identify him. The forensic ser-
vice’s postmortem photographs of the man were not 
considered suitable for public release and likely to 
cause distress.
Accordingly, EFIT-V was used to create a likeness 
to the subject, a procedure lasting only 1 hour, which 
was then printed in the local press. The man was sub-
sequently identified. Figure 7.11 highlights the process 
required to undertake EFIT-V.

132
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A. Bertillon. Signaletic Instructions Including the Theory 
and Practice of Anthropometrical Identification. 
R.W. McClaughry (Trans.). Chicago: The Werner 
Company, 1896.
A. Bertillon (n.d.) Alphonse Bertillon Biography. Available 
at: 
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/visibleproofs/galleries/
biographies/bertillon.html
W. W. Bledsoe. A Man Machine Facial Recognition 
System: Some Preliminary Results. Technical Report 
12. Panoramic Research Inc., Palo Alto, CA, 1965.
V. Bruce, Z. Henderson, K. Greenwood, P. Hancock. 
A.M. Burton and P. Miller. Verification of face iden-
tities from images captured on video. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 5(4):339–360, 
1999.
R. Brunelli and O. Mich. SpotIt! an interactive identikit 
system. Graphical Models and Image Processing: 
GMIP, 58(5):399–404, 1996.
A.M. Burton, R. Jenkins, P.J.B. Hancock and D. White. 
Robust representations of face recognition: The 
power of averages. Cognitive Psychology, 51:256– 
284, 2005.
Incident
Witness interview
Media
Arrest
FIGURE 7.11 EFIT-V Image process created by Stephen Driver and Shelina Jilani, Acumé Forensics.
FIGURE 7.10 Construction of famous faces from memory using the EFIT-V system. The images above were created 
during training of police operators. Proceeding from the top row, left to right, the target subjects are Carlos Tevez (foot-
baller), Alex Ferguson (football manager), Eric Cantina (former footballer), Gordon Brown (former Prime Minister), 
Bruce Lee (martial artist), and John Major (former Prime Minister). (Used with permission from Chris Solomon).

133
Forensic Facial Recognition
C. Caldwell and V.S. Johnston. Tracking a criminal sus-
pect through facespace with a genetic algorithm. 
In Proceeding of the 4th International Conference 
on Genetic Algorithms, Burlington, MA, Morgan 
Kaufmann, pp. 416–421, 1991.
Criminal Law Web: R. v. Tolson [1886–1890] All ER Rep 
26; [1886–90] All ER Rep 26, May 11, 1889. http://
www.law–lib.utoronto.ca/bclc/crimweb/rvtolson.
html
K. Delac, M. GrGic and P. Liatsis. Appearance based statis-
tical method for face recognition. 47th International 
Symposium ELMAR—2005, Zadar, Croatia, pp. 
151–158, June 8–10, 2005.
S. DiPaolo. Investigating face space. SIGGRAPH Presented 
Paper (sketch), 2002.
H.D. Ellis, J.W. Shepard and G.M. Davies. Identification 
of familiar and unfamiliar faces from internal and 
external features—Some implications for theories of 
face recognition. Perception, 8:431–439, 1979.
FISWG Guidelines for Facial Comparison Method. 
Section 6, Version 1.02012.02.02, 2012.
S.J. Gibson, C.J. Solomon, M.I.S. Maylin and C. Clark. 
New methodology in facial composite construction: 
From theory to practice. International Journal of 
Electronic Security and Digital Forensics, 2:156–
168, 2009.
A.J. Goldstein, L.D. Harmon and A.B. Lesk. Identification 
of human faces. Proceeding of IEEE, 59(5):748–
760, May 1971.
P.J.B. Hancock. Evolving faces from principal compo-
nents. Behaviour Research Methods, Instruments 
and Computers, 32(2):327–333, 2000.
J.B. Hancock, A.M. Burton and V. Bruce. Face processing: 
Human perception and principal components analy-
sis. Memory and Cognition, 24(1):26–40, 1996.
A.M. Harris and G.K. Aguirre. Prosopagnosia. Current 
Biology, 17: R7–R8, 2007.
Z. Henderson, V. Bruce, and A.M. Burton. Matching 
the faces of robbers captured on video. Applied 
Cognitive Psychology, 15:445–464, 2001.
J.H. Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial 
Systems. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan 
Press, 1975.
Image of Bertillon System, n.d., http://www.nlm.nih.gov/
visibleproofs/media/detailed/iii_c_138.jpg
L.D. Introna. Disclosive ethics and information technol-
ogy, disclosing facial recognition systems. Ethics and 
Information Technology, 7(2):73–86, June 2005.
R. Jafri and H.R. Arabnia. A survey of face recogni-
tion techniques. Journal of Information Processing 
Systems, 5(2):44–55, June 2009.
A. Jain, R. Bolle and S. Pakanti (eds.). Biometrics: Personal 
Identification in Networked Security. Berlin: Springer 
Science & Business Media, 2006.
A.K. Jain, P. Flynn and A. Ross (Eds.), Handbook of 
Biometrics. Springer, 2007.
A.K. Jain, B. Klare and U. Park. Face Recognition: Some 
Challenges in Forensics. 9th IEEE International 
Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture 
Recognition, Santa Barbara, CA, pp. 726–732, 2011.
R. Jenkins and A.M. Burton. 100% Accuracy in auto-
matic face recognition. Science, 319:345, 2008.
M. Kirby and L. Sirovich. Application of the Karhunen-
Loeve procedure for the characterization of human 
faces. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence, 12:103–107, 1990.
K. Lander, V. Bruce and E. Hill. Evaluating the effective-
ness of pixilation and blurring on masking the iden-
tity of familiar faces. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 
15:101–116, 2001.
I. Marques and M. Grana. Face Recognition Algorithms. 
June 16, 2010.
A.M. Megreya and M. Binderman. Revisiting the Processes 
of internal and external features of unfamiliar faces: 
The headscarf effect. Perception, 28:1831–1848, 2009.
C. O’Donnell and V. Bruce. Familiarisation with faces 
selectively enhances sensitivity to changes made to 
the eyes. Perception, 30:755–765, 2001.
P.J. Phillips, H. Moon, S.A. Rizvi and P.J. Rauss. 
The FERET Evaluation Methodology for Face-
Recognition Algorithms. Technical Report NISTIR 
6264, pp. 1–20, January 7, 1999.
P.J. Phillips, H. Moon, S.A. Rizvi and P.J. Rauss. The 
FERET evaluation methodology for face-recognition 
algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis 
and Machine Intelligence, 22(10): 1090–1104, 2000.
G. Porter and G. Doran. An anatomical and photographic 
technique for forensic facial identification. Forensic 
Science International, 114:97–100, 2000.
R v Fowden and White (1982), Crim LR 588.
R v Tolson (1864), 4 F & F 103.
S. Rizvi, P. Phillips and H. Moon. The FERET Verification 
Testing Protocol for Face Recognition Algorithms. 
National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
Technical Report 6281, 1998.
K. Sims. Artificial evolution for computer graphics. 
Computer Graphics, 25(4):319–328, 1991.
L. Sirovich and M. Kirby. Low-dimensional procedure for 
the characterization of human faces. Journal of the 
Optical Society of America A, 4(3):519–524, 1987.
C. Solomon, S. Gibson and M. Maylin. A new compu-
tational methodology for the construction of foren-
sic, facial composites. Computational Forensics, 
5718:67–77, 2009, Springer-Verlag LNCS.
T. Thompson and S. Black. Facial recognition and imag-
ery analysis. In Forensic Human Identification. An 
Introduction, Chap. 16. Boca Raton, FL: BAHID, 
CRC Press, pp. 257–270, 2007.

134
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
T. Thompson and S. Black. Osteology. In Forensic Human 
Identification. An Introduction, Chap. 11, Boca 
Raton, FL: BAHID, CRC Press, 2007.
M. Turk and A. Pentland. Eigenfaces for recognition. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 3(1):72–86, 
1991, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
C. Wilkinson and C. Rynn. Familiar face recognition. 
In Craniofacial Identification. C. Wilkinson and 
C. Rynn (Eds.), Chap. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 1–9, 2012.
D. Woodward, C. Horn, J. Gatune and A. Thomas. Bio-
metric: A Look at Facial Recognition. RAND, p. 1, 2003.
A.W. Young, F. Newcombe, E.H.F. De Haan, M. Small 
and D.C. Hay. Face perception after brain injury: 
Selective impairments affecting identity and expres-
sion. Brains, 116:941–959, 1993.

135
C H A P T E R  8
Forensic Odontology
Alan Diego Briem Stamm and María Cecilia Pastor Carson
8.1 INTRODUCTION
The forensic discipline is concerned with the applica-
tion of science and technology to detect and investigate 
crime and administration of justice, requiring the coor-
dinated efforts of a multidisciplinary team. Typically, 
this effort involves the cooperation and coordination of 
law enforcement officials, forensic pathologists, forensic 
anthropologists, forensic odontologists, criminalistics, 
and other specialists as deemed necessary. Human iden-
tification is one of the most challenging subjects that man 
has been confronted with.
Forensic odontology has become an integral part of 
forensic medicine. With the passage of time, the role of 
forensic odontology has increased, as very often teeth and 
dental restorations are the only means of identification. 
Forensic odontology has played a key role in identifying 
people in mass disasters (aviation, earthquakes, tsunamis), 
crime investigations, ethnic studies, and in identifying 
decomposed and disfigured bodies, like those of drowned 
persons, fire victims, and victims of motor vehicle acci-
dents. Other areas of application include criminalistics, in 
cases involving abuse of children and elderly. Bite marks 
also help in detection of culprits. Forensic odontology 
also renders its service in investigating dental malpractice 
and archeology. The scope of forensic dentistry is broad 
and ever-challenging. Each case is different, and even the 
seemingly routine case may test the dentist’s ingenuity in 
applying his dental knowledge.
The various methods employed in forensic odon-
tology include tooth prints, radiographs, photographic 
study, rugoscopy, cheiloscopy, and molecular methods. 
Investigative methods applied in forensic odontology 
are reasonably reliable, yet the shortcomings must be 
accounted for to make it a more meaningful and relevant 
procedure. Most dental identifications are based on res-
torations, caries, missing teeth and/or prosthetic devices, 
such as partial and full removal prostheses, which are 
compared with antemortem records. The establishment 
of forensic odontology as a unique discipline has been 
attributed to Dr. Oscar Amoedo (the father of forensic 
odontology), who identified the victims of a fire accident 
in Paris, France, in 1898.
What follows is a discussion of different topics cov-
ered by the forensic odontology specialty, promoting 
the work of dental experts in the multidisciplinary team 
identification, according to international standards and 
globalizing philosophies.
CONTENTS
 8.1  Introduction 
135
 8.2  Identification 
136
 8.3  Globalization in Forensic Sciences 
136
 8.4  Forensic Odontology 
137
 8.5  History of Forensic Odontology 
140
 8.6  The Teeth 
141
 8.7  Odontograms 
143
 8.8  Forensic Radiology 
143
 8.9  Bite-Mark Analysis 
145
8.10  Mass Disasters 
147
8.11  Identification through Soft Tissues 
149
8.11.1 Rugoscopy or Palatoscopy 
149
8.11.2 Cheiloscopy 
151
8.12  Conclusion 
153
Bibliography 
153

136
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
8.2 IDENTIFICATION
Identification of individuals is not always straightfor-
ward and easy, especially in medicolegal cases where the 
individuals are either unable to give accurate answers 
or are purposefully misleading. Living individuals for 
whom identification is required are criminals attempting 
to elude custody, amnesia victims, comatose victims, vic-
tims of disfiguring trauma, or people requiring identity 
confirmation following identity theft. Deceased individ-
uals that may require identity confirmation include the 
homeless, illegal/undocumented immigrants, burnt, or 
decomposed bodies (Figure 8.1), and disfigured, skeletal 
remains of individuals [1,2].
The most common methods for establishing a posi-
tive identification are visual, fingerprint, DNA, and dental 
comparison [1]. A corpus identification, in which a rela-
tive or close friend identifies the individual by viewing the 
body, is also accepted as positive identification. However, 
corpus identification is not beyond human error and is not 
possible when the body is in advanced stages of decompo-
sition or severely damaged by trauma such as fire or muti-
lation [3,4]. The identification process is characterized by 
the utilization of appropriate techniques and means to dis-
cover an identity, and can be developed either by skilled 
technicians (judiciary or police authorities) or by profes-
sionals with differentiated and specific knowledge in the 
area of biology (forensic medicine or dentistry), with a 
practically unlimited array of appropriate techniques and 
means to achieve human identification [4–6].
The information provided by the multidisciplinary 
team can lead police investigators to possible identities for 
the unknown individual. Comparisons between possible 
identities and the unknown individual can direct inves-
tigators to a presumptive or positive identification [7,8]. 
Presumptive identification may also be made based on 
tattoos, circumstantial evidence, personal effects, or 
facial reconstruction. This type of identification is not 
scientifically confirmed, but can be accepted as final 
when foul play is not suspected and no other reason for 
doubt exists [3,7].
Postmortem identification represents one of the great 
branches of study and research in forensic dentistry and 
medicine, considering that both sciences deal with a 
same material—the human body at different stages, such 
as ripped, lacerated, carbonized (Figure 8.2), macerated, 
putrefied, skeletonized—always with a single objective, 
that is to say, to establish human identity [1,3,7].
8.3 GLOBALIZATION IN 
FORENSIC SCIENCES
As expressed by Prof. Dr. Cyrill Wecht, “Forensic 
Science has no geographic boundaries. By its very nature 
it is global in nature.” Throughout the world, various 
groups are making great strides to develop the potential 
of forensic science [8]. The promotion of teams has been 
recommended for these procedures (disaster victim iden-
tification, or DVI), always under protocols and standards 
recognized internationally. Since the teeth and their res-
toration can resist highly unfavorable conditions, foren-
sic odontology has played a key role in the identification 
of great number of victims (Figure 8.3).
Different groups in the world are working toward 
developing forensic odontology and its standard method-
ologies, defining criteria for forensic practice, and conduct-
ing research in various aspects of forensic  science [7,9]. 
Although the application of forensic science may vary 
by political jurisdiction and laws, the science of forensic 
science needs to be universally grounded in theory, prin-
ciples, and methods [9,10]. Concepts of science, quality, 
and performance all begin with a sound, comprehensive 
education in the sciences—forensic science is no different. 
FIGURE 8.1 Putrefying corpse.
FIGURE 8.2 Carbonized corpse.

137
Forensic Odontology
Crime, especially high levels of crime, affects the health 
of the people of any country, and the more extreme this 
is, the sicker and unhealthier the people will be. The 
UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime) did 
a study, beginning with the estimate that in 2010 there 
were 468,000 intentional homicides. Traumatized survi-
vors of the victims of deaths caused by criminal incidents 
are 20 times the number of dead annually. This means that 
annually about 100 million people around the world are 
traumatized as a direct result of violent crime [9–11].
Other forms of violent death are also contributing to 
the decimation of the world’s population. Among these 
are traffic accidents, drowning, falls, fires, and deliber-
ate acts of violence against oneself or others. The World 
Health Organization (WHO) estimates that on average, 
over 1.6 million people lose their lives to random acts 
of violence worldwide. On average, 2233 people commit 
suicide around the globe every day—roughly one person 
every 40 seconds. In the last 45 years, suicide rates have 
increased by 60% worldwide. Suicide is now among the 
three leading causes of death of those aged 15–44; and 
WHO estimates that during the last two decades, sui-
cide rates have been increasing globally to a mortality 
rate of 16 per 100,000. All these fatalities usually end 
up in the jurisdiction of forensic sciences [11]. In 2013, 
there are some, but relatively few, examples of sustained 
provision over many years of forensic medicine training 
in one center for a number of medical practitioners from 
another country. And if it is true for forensic medicine, 
it is even more so for the related disciplines of odontol-
ogy, anthropology, and toxicology. It is time for exist-
ing, laudable, but ad hoc efforts to be raised to a more 
 organized level [12]. Again quoting Prof. Dr. Wecht,
Forensic scientists must be willing and prepared to 
play an important and highly sensitive role in death 
investigation that has international significance 
and far reaching political ramifications. Utilization 
of universal knowledge and skills in resolving such 
controversial matters and thereby helping to achieve 
social justice should be an acknowledged objective 
of individual forensic scientists as well as national 
and international forensic scientific professional 
 organizations. [9]
INTERPOL guidelines [13] recommend that the 
location of each body, body part, and piece of property 
is recorded with reference to a known point by experi-
enced police officers. Pathologists and odontologists may 
be included in the scene teams to identify body parts and 
dental structures, particularly where severe body frag-
mentation has occurred. In a compact well-controlled 
disaster site it is easy to manage the recovery process but 
this is not the usual occurrence, particularly in large-
scale natural disasters. More regularly in such incidents, 
the 2004 Asian tsunami being a good example, victims 
are spread over a large area and survivors begin collecting 
the deceased before authorities arrive at the scene [14,15].
8.4 FORENSIC ODONTOLOGY
Forensic odontology is often considered to be the area 
of overlap between the dental and legal professions. 
Occasionally, the forensic odontologist deals with legal 
issues on behalf of the dental profession. But, most 
often, the odontologist answers questions posed by the 
justice system and provides answers to legal authori-
ties and expert opinions in courts of law. Significantly, 
much of the odontologist’s work is on behalf of grieving 
family members who have lost a loved one and need to 
have closure to come to terms with their grief [16,17]. 
All people possess an identity during their lifetime, and 
the dignity of confirming and maintaining this iden-
tity after death is a strong, compelling societal need. 
Forensic odontology assists society in accomplishing this 
through comparison of AM (antemortem, before death) 
and PM (postmortem, after death) data to identify the 
corpse. There are also legal requirements for confirma-
tion of a deceased person’s identity, including religious 
issues, matters surrounding the estate, remarriage of 
a surviving partner, and insurance or financial affairs 
[17]. Of particular legal importance is a case in which 
a person is the victim of violent crime. Identification of 
the victim’s body becomes circumstantial evidence dur-
ing the police investigation into cause of death, and is 
later used in the prosecution of the person responsible 
for the death [16–19].
Worldwide, dentists qualified in forensic science are 
giving expert opinion in cases related to human identi-
fication, bite-mark analysis, craniofacial trauma, and 
malpractice. Human identification relies heavily on the 
quality of dental records; however, forensic odontologists 
FIGURE 8.3 Resistant tooth tissues.

138
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
can still contribute to the identity investigation in the 
absence of dental records through profiling the deceased 
person using features related to teeth. Along with other 
healthcare providers, dentists encounter cases of injuries 
which could be non-accidental [20]. Detection, interpre-
tation, and management are important from a legal and 
humanitarian point of view. Dentists should be aware of 
the legal impact these cases have, and should refer them 
to the appropriate authorities for suitable action. Dental 
identification is a comparative technique, where the PM 
dental records are analyzed and compared against AM 
records to confirm identity and establish the degree of cer-
tainty that the dental records obtained from the remains 
of a decedent and the AM dental records of a missing 
person are for the same individual [18,19]. Currently, 
the identification is carried out manually by comparing 
extracted features from a PM dental record to extracted 
fractures from a database of AM records. Several indi-
vidual teeth may be missing or filled after a decedent’s 
AM record is taken, hence, dental features need to be 
recorded based on the contour/shape of individual teeth 
rather than the contour of the whole jaw [18].
The new millennium has brought new challenges of 
terrorism, natural disasters, and a high rate of crime in 
Latin America and other places in the world have also 
had a marked increase in crimes. Dental hard tissues are 
extremely resistant to fire and are usually the only remains 
after an extended period of burial. Since the late 1890s, 
forensic dentistry has gradually established itself as impor-
tant, often indispensable, in medicolegal cases, in particu-
lar for identification of the dead [21,22]. The specialty of 
forensic dentistry generally covers three basic areas:
1. Identification of human remains
2. Litigation relating to malpractice
3. Criminal proceedings, primarily in the areas of 
bite-mark evaluation and abuse cases especially 
child abuse
The teeth and dental restorations are the strongest 
elements in the human body and survive the destructive 
influences of fire and exposure to the elements. Methods 
to identify the deceased must be reliable and accurate. 
The comparison of AM to PM dental records is a widely 
accepted and dependable method of forensic identifica-
tion. Considerable discussion in the forensic odontol-
ogy literature has addressed the validity of the concept 
of uniqueness in human dentition. Thompson observed 
in 1897: “There are so many variations of peculiari-
ties of the teeth and of artificial operations upon them, 
that there is but a remote chance of the same case ever 
being exactly supplicated. Every practicing dentist can 
testify to that fact.” While this statement reflects the 
generally accepted convention, it provides no actual evi-
dence in support of uniqueness [23]. This contention 
was not challenged scientifically for many years. Keiser-
Nielsen  [24] pointed out that no physical feature is in 
fact unique. He also correctly explained that a dental 
identification does not rely on the presence of a single 
feature, but on the presentation of the features evident 
on 32 teeth in the complete adult dentition [25,26]. He 
posited that the multiplication of combined occurrences 
allows an odontologist to be confident that duplications 
in other individuals are unlikely to occur. To highlight 
the individuality of a given dentition, he cited the case 
with four missing teeth and four restored teeth, which 
would give 736,281,000 possible combinations, leading 
him to conclude that it would be just about impossible to 
observe two identical combinations [27,28].
Dental identification is one approach to human iden-
tification. Other approaches include visual identification, 
which is known to be unreliable due to a high rate of false 
positives; comparison of medical records and data, such 
as serial numbers on prosthetic joints and breast implants; 
fingerprints, if AM data are available; and DNA analysis 
[29–31]. The contours and extensions of dental fillings and 
crowns, for example, produce unique identifying traits 
when they are depicted as two-dimensional shadows on 
radiographs. These are used in forensic comparisons. The 
decrease in caries rate and the subsequent decline in the use 
of amalgam restorations over the past few decades have 
resulted in loss of these important identifiers in some cases 
[32]. These situations create a challenge for the forensic 
odontologist [33,34]. Still, radiographs show many other 
anatomical features, such as root shape, surrounding bone 
trabeculae, root canal filling materials, retentive pins and 
posts, pulp size and shape, and periodontal and periapical 
inflammatory disease that can be of significant value in 
identification cases [33,35,36].
Dental identification assumes a primary role in the 
identification of remains when PM changes, traumatic 
tissue injury or lack of a fingerprint record invalidate 
the use of visual or fingerprint methods. The identifica-
tion of dental remains is of primary importance when 
the deceased person is skeletonized (Figure 8.4), decom-
posed, saponified (Figure 8.5), mummified (Figure 8.6), 
burned, or dismembered.
The principal advantage of dental evidence is that, like 
other hard tissues, it is often preserved after death [33,37]. 
Even the status of a person’s teeth changes throughout life 
and the combination of decayed, missing and filled teeth 
is measurable and comparable at any fixed point in time. 
The fundamental principles of dental identification are 
those of comparison and exclusion. For example, dental 
identification is used when AM records for the putative 
deceased person are available and circumstantial evidence 
suggests the identity of the decedent [35,37].
There are two types of discrepancies: those that can 
be explained and those that cannot. Explainable discrep-
ancies normally relate to the time elapsed between the 

139
Forensic Odontology
AM and PM records [38]. Examples include that teeth 
extracted or restorations placed were found in postmor-
tem records only. If a discrepancy is unexplainable—for 
example, a tooth is not present on the AM record but is 
present on the PM record—then an exclusion must be 
made [37,38]. If there are no AM dental records, a PM 
dental profile will typically provide information charac-
teristics of the victim:
• 1—Age
• In children: The patterns of tooth eruption, 
the root length, and tooth wear are assessed
• In young adults: The third molar development
• In middle-aged and older adults: Periodontal 
disease progression, excessive wear, multi-
ple restorations, extractions, bone pathosis, 
and complex restorative work are assessed; 
recently, dentine composition and cement 
deposition have been examined in relation to 
age determination
• 2—Ethnic
• Can be assessed from skull shape and form
• Other characteristics, such as cusps of 
Carabelli, shovel-shaped incisors, and multi-
cusped premolars
• 3—Gender can be assessed from the following:
• Skull shape and form (no gender differences 
regarding teeth morphology)
• Presence or absence of Y-chromatin in teeth
• DNA analysis
• Mandibular canine’s size
• 4—Socioeconomic status can be assessed through 
the quality, quantity, and presence or absence of 
dental treatment
• 5—Occupation, dietary habits, and dental or 
systemic diseases; the presence of erosion can 
suggest alcohol or an eating disorder, while 
stains can indicate smoking or use of tetracy-
cline; unusual wear patterns may result from 
pipe stems or cigarette holders; 
A range of conclusions can be drawn following a 
comparison of AM and PM records. The American 
Board of Forensic Odontology (ABFO), however, recom-
mends these to be limited by four conclusions [39]:
1. Positive identification: The AM and PM findings 
match in sufficient detail, without any unex-
plainable discrepancy, to establish that they are 
from the same individual.
2. Possible identification: The AM and PM data 
have consistent features, but, because of the qual-
ity of either the PM remains or AM evidence, it 
is not possible to establish identity positively.
FIGURE 8.4 Skeletonized corpse.
FIGURE 8.5 Saponified corpse.
FIGURE 8.6 Mummified corpse.

140
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
3. Insufficient evidence: The available information 
is insufficient to form the basis for a conclusion 
of any sort.
4. Exclusion: The AM and PM data are clearly 
inconsistent.
Natural teeth are the most durable organs in the 
bodies of vertebrates, and humankind’s understanding of 
their own past and evolution relies heavily upon remnant 
dental evidence found as fossils. Teeth can persist long 
after other skeletal structures have succumbed to organic 
decay or destruction by some other agencies, such as fire. 
Much of forensic odontologists’ expertise is based on 
clinical experience, fundamental research and advances 
in knowledge in relation to dentistry in general [40]. 
Dental identification of humans occurs for a number of 
different reasons, and in a number of different situations, 
like for the body of a victim of violent crime, fire, traffic 
accident, and workplace accident [41]. A body can be dis-
figured to such an extent that identification by a family 
member is neither reliable nor desirable. Bodies of people 
who have been deceased for some time prior to discovery 
and those found in water also present unpleasant difficul-
ties in identification. Through the specialty of forensic 
dentistry, a dentist can play a small but significant role 
in this process. By identifying the victims of crime and 
disaster through guidelines and standards, a dentist can 
assist those involved in crime investigation [42–44].
8.5 HISTORY OF FORENSIC ODONTOLOGY
Forensic odontology has been with us since the 
beginning when, according to the Old Testament, 
Adam was convinced by Eve to put a “bite mark” 
in an apple. The earliest dental identification began 
with the Agrippina and the Lollia Paulina case. 
Shortly after her marriage in the year 49 AD to 
Claudius, Emperor of Rome, Agrippina began plot-
ting to secure her position. Because she feared that 
the rich divorcee Lollia Paulina might still be a rival 
for her husband, Agrippina soon decided that it 
would be safer if Lollia Paulina was dead. To be 
safer Agrippina sent her own soldiers to kill Lollia 
Paulina; the soldiers were further instructed to bring 
back her head. Cutting off the head after inflicting 
death was not uncommon in those days, the only 
positive proof of death being visual. Agripinna 
stared at the severed head, unable to recognize the 
distorted face; she parted the lips with her fingers, 
looking for Lollia Paulina’s teeth, which were known 
to have certain distinctive  characteristics. Only then 
was she satisfied that it was Lollia Paulina. It marks 
the first use of dental identification of which there 
is record.
—Senn and Stimson, 2010
Charles the Bold in 1477 was identified by dental char-
acteristics, while Paul Revere identified General Joseph 
Warren through a fixed-wire silver bridge in 1776 [45–49]. 
Nathan Keep identified Dr. Parkman from the fit of den-
tures on study models in 1849, and Napoleon the IV in 
1879 [46,47]. In 1870, Ansil L. Robinson was charged 
with the murder of his mistress, Mary Lunsford. Evidence 
against Robinson included an attempt to match his teeth 
to the bite marks on the victim’s arm [50]. Forensic odon-
tology was used to identify victims of a fire in the Vienna 
Opera House in 1878, but the modern era of forensic odon-
tology is said to have commenced with the identification 
of the victims of the Bazar de la Charité fire that occurred 
on May 4, 1897, in Rue Jean-Goujon, Paris. Dr. Oscar 
Amoëdo returned to Cuba in 1889 after studying at New 
York Dental College. He was then sent as a delegate to the 
International Dental Congress in Paris in 1890 [51,52]:
He decided to stay in Paris and became a dental 
instructor and teacher, eventually becoming a full pro-
fessor. While in Paris, he wrote 120 scientific articles. 
A tragic fire at a charity event stimulated his interest 
in dental identification and the field of forensic odon-
tology. While he was not involved with the identifi-
cation of the victims from the fire, he knew many of 
the victims who survived and interviewed them. His 
accounts of the fire were presented in a paper at the 
International Medical Congress of Moscow and were 
published in English in 1897. Dr. Amoëdo wrote a 
thesis entitled “L’Art Dentaire en Medicine Legale,” 
which earned him a doctorate and served as the basis 
of his book by the same name published in 1898. 
The book he wrote was the first comprehensive text 
on forensic odontology, and he is considered by many to 
be the father of forensic odontology (Figure 8.7).
In 1895, Dr. Pablo Valencia recognized a corpse that 
he could demonstrate as belonging to Joseph Martí. This 
description was later found by a letter addressed to Horatio 
FIGURE 8.7 Dr. Oscar Amoëdo, father of forensic odon-
tology. (From http://www.ecured.cu/index.php/Oscar_ 
Amoedo_Vald%25C3%25A9s.)

141
Forensic Odontology
S. Rubens Gonzalo de Quesada; it says, “Bazán also con-
firms the description of the missing upper incisor expose 
at autopsy, as he extracted the tooth, therefore, seems 
almost certain that the loss of Martí is reality.” Then in 
1907, remains were analyzed in the cemetery of Santiago 
de Cuba, where the physician J. Montero Zambrano con-
ducted a study of the skull and teeth done which coincided 
with the analysis of Dr. Zayas Bazán, who was the dentist 
of José Martí; it was concluded that the body found was 
that of the caudillo José Martí [46]. Among the most prom-
inent contemporary cases is that of the Argentine pilot Lt. 
Benjamin Matienzo (1891–1919), a military and aviation 
pioneer who in Argentina on June 20, 1919, in an attempt 
to cross the Andes, fell and crashed in the mountains. His 
remains were found months later; he had survived the fall, 
but in search of help, died of cold and starvation. His posi-
tive identification was possible by comparison of his dental 
remains to his dental record [46].
In 1937 in Chantilly, a murderer was convicted on 
the evidence of the bite marks that the victim inflicted 
during her struggle for life [45,47]. Wayne Clifford 
Boden was a Canadian serial killer and rapist active 
from 1969 to 1971. He earned the nickname “the 
Vampire Rapist” because he had the penchant of biting 
the breasts of his victims, a method of operation that led 
to his conviction due to forensic odontological evidence 
[45]. Ondontological evidence has also assisted in the 
PM identification of Charles Gardel (Figure 8.8), Josef 
Mengele (Figure 8.9), and Ernest “Che” Guevara [46].
Strom (1954) and Gustafson (1962) reported on the 
identification of victims of the Second World War 
trough forensic odontology. Teare (1951) discussed 
the identification of the 28 victims of a plane crash 
in 1950, Frykholm (1956) described a Swedish ship-
ping accident in 1950 where 15 were killed and 
Mercer, Reid, and Uttley (1954) and Warren (1955) 
a rail accident in New Zealand in 1953 where 
151 perished. Bradley & Miller (1955) described the 
use of odontology in the identification of victims of 
a plane crash in Canada. The odontology aspects of 
the identification of the 118 victims of a fire aboard 
the SS Noronic in Toronto.
—Senn and Stimson, 2010
After the end of World War II, there were rumors that 
Adolf Hitler had escaped with his wife Eva Braun [19]. 
Actually they had died together in 1945; however, their 
bodies had been burned and then buried by Russian soldiers 
[19]. Due to lack of AM and PM records, it was a challenge 
to dispel the rumors they were still alive. Finally, pieces of 
Hitler’s mandible were found that revealed remnants of a 
bridge as well as unusual forms of reconstruction to the 
mandible, with evidence of periodontal disease [53]. Adolf 
Hitler’s identity was confirmed when the work matched the 
records kept by his dentist, Hugo Blaschke [53].
The fire on board the Scandinavian Star was one of 
the world’s worst ferry disasters. Dental identity could be 
established in 107 cases (68%) [54]. Forensic odontolo-
gists successfully identified tsunami victims in South-East 
Asia in December 2004; more than 92% of the non-Thai 
victims have been identified, out of which about 80% 
were identified by dental information. This high success 
rate of dental identification in Thailand was a matter of 
surprise for many forensic experts [55].
8.6 THE TEETH
Teeth are parts of the human organism that are not easily 
decayed. Located inside the mouth, they are thus more 
protected from decaying after a person’s death [56]. 
Teeth are the hardest substance in the body and this 
fact, combined with their location—relatively protected 
behind the soft tissues of the cheeks (Figure 8.10) [57], 
lips and jawbones—are the reasons why they are so use-
ful in identification, a fact that was brilliantly described 
by the forensic anthropologist from Spain, Prof. Dr. Jose 
Reverte Coma, expressing “the mouth can be considered 
as the black box of the body” [58].
FIGURE 8.8 Charles Gardel. (From www.todotango.
com/gardel/.)
FIGURE 8.9 Joseph Mengele. (From http://seuhistory.
com/etiquetas/josef-mengele.)

142
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Even in the fire that burns so hot because of avia-
tion fuel after a plane crash, a victim’s teeth can remain 
intact when other body parts are destroyed due to this 
protection by bone and swelling of the tongue during the 
intense heat. Dental work such as crowns, fixed bridges, 
and removable dentures can also survive intense physi-
cal and chemical forces and aid in identification. To aid 
in identification, the patient’s name should always be 
inserted into the acrylic of dentures and appliances at the 
time of fabrication [56,59].
Because the teeth are subject to genetic variation, 
the examination of the mouth will usually commence 
by a description of dental anomalies such as missing 
teeth, misplaced or rotated teeth, unusually shaped or 
sized teeth, and supernumerary teeth. The status of each 
tooth with respect to restorations that have been placed 
will be recorded. The exact design and style of each res-
toration may not only reveal the country in which the 
dentist was trained [60,61]. Therefore, teeth based iden-
tification is one of reliable tools for PM identification On 
average, humans have 32 teeth; each tooth has five sur-
faces, meaning that inside a mouth there are 160 tooth 
surfaces with various conditions. Tooth development 
begins during the sixth week of embryonic life with the 
formation of the primordial tooth buds. Tooth develop-
ment is slightly, but significantly, more advanced in girls 
than in boys, even before puberty. The deciduous denti-
tion begins eruption between six to nine months of age, 
starting with the anterior teeth and progressing pos-
teriorly. These 20 “baby” teeth are usually completely 
erupted by 2 to 2 1/2 years of age. The permanent denti-
tion begins emerging at 6 years of age with the four first 
molars. Between the ages of 6 and 12, the permanent 
anterior teeth emerge [60]. Around age 12, the second 
molars erupt. The final four permanent teeth to emerge, 
out of the total 32, are the third molars, also called “wis-
dom” teeth. These teeth are the most unstable. Typically, 
they erupt around age 18 to early 20s. Sometimes these 
teeth are congenitally absent or are unusual in appear-
ance (e.g., they may appear as peg teeth). The completed 
definitive tooth is naturally divided into two regions: a 
root and a crown. “The transition from crown to root 
takes place at the cervix or neck of the tooth in a sinu-
ous outline, and is called the cement enamel jun. The 
completed definitive tooth is naturally divided into two 
regions: a root and a crown. The transition from crown 
to root takes place at the cervix or neck of the tooth 
in a sinuous outline, and is called the cement enamel 
junction or the cervical line” [60]. Human teeth are 
composed of four tissues: the soft tissue of the pulp and 
three calcified tissues called dentin, enamel, and cement 
[59]. The crown consists of an outer layer of enamel and 
an inner layer of dentin. Dental enamel is the hardest 
tissue in the human body. Enamel functions as a resis-
tant outer structure, allowing the tooth to withstand 
the abrasive force of mastication (chewing). Dentin is 
slightly harder than bone but considerably softer than 
enamel. Once the enamel is destroyed, dentin is rapidly 
penetrated by dental decay. Cement covers the root and 
provides a place of attachment for connective tissue 
fibers which secure the root to the surrounding bony 
socket, known as the alveolus. Dental pulp is a con-
nective tissue located in the pulp cavity of a tooth [59]. 
There are two types of dental pulp: coronal pulp in the 
central pulp chamber of the crown and radicular pulp 
in the pulp canals of the root Forensic recording of den-
tal characteristics involves dividing each tooth into five 
surfaces; mesial (front), distal (back), lingual (toward 
the tongue), vestibular (toward the cheek), and occlusal 
(biting), and recording the status of each of these sur-
faces both graphically on an odontogram and descrip-
tively in words [62–64]. Information recorded includes 
the presence or absence of the tooth; the presence of 
anatomical variations both of the teeth and surround-
ing structures; the location and material of any restora-
tions; evidence of any habits or personal behaviors and 
other features that could contribute to the identification 
of the individual [64]. Given that an adult dentition has 
a maximum of 32 teeth, and each tooth is divided into 5 
surfaces, this provides 160 points of potential compari-
son. Comparisons are made of entire dentitions, indi-
vidual teeth and individual surfaces [62,64]. The use of 
a minimum number of concordant points to establish 
identity has been advocated as a method to guarantee 
reliability of the dental identification process. This use 
of comparative points is similar to that historically used 
in fingerprint analysis, where matches were attested by 
a predetermined number of corresponding ridge details, 
Enamel
Dentin
Pulp chamber
Cementum
Crown
Neck
Root
FIGURE 8.10 Tooth structure in cross section. (Adapted 
from McLanaghan Thesis 2003.)

143
Forensic Odontology
variously anywhere between 10 and 16 [65]. For den-
tal comparisons, Keiser-Nielsen [24] and Sognnaes [66] 
recommended a minimum of 12 points of similarity to 
increase accuracy, while Stimson [67] proposed 8. In 
these discussions, “points” referred to the matching of 
entire teeth not single surfaces [19].
8.7 ODONTOGRAMS
Odontograms (Figure 8.11) are symbolic systems graphs 
where dental variables are recorded. In dentistry, the first 
mode of nomenclature tooth was introduced in 1861 by 
Adolph Zsigmondy as a necessary “coshorthand system 
for recording fast data” [68].
The Two Digit System or the FDI system (named 
for the conference where it was first introduced, the 
Federation Dentaire Internationale in 1970) divides the 
dental arcade into four quadrants: upper right, upper left, 
lower left, and lower right. Prefix numbers are assigned to 
each quadrant: 1, 2, 3, and 4 in permanent dentition and 
5, 6, 7, and 8 in deciduous dentition, respectively. Added 
to this prefix is a number, 1 through 8 for permanent 
dentition and 1 through 5 for deciduous for the specific 
tooth. Each central incisor is assigned 1 and count-
ing each tooth, moving posteriorly, each third molar is 
assigned 8 [68]. Therefore, in this system, the upper right 
canine would be designated as 13. INTERPOL has pro-
posed, for the case of identification of disaster victims,  
the use of the FDI system designed for such an odonto-
gram, including spaces for describing treatments of all 
kinds of information both AM and PM [69].
8.8 FORENSIC RADIOLOGY
The use of radiological investigation is well accepted in 
forensic odontology practice. They provide an objective 
assessment and recording of the hard tissues of the teeth 
and jaws as well as surgical or restorative features that 
may be of interest to the examiner. Furthermore, they 
provide a visual image, that can be used to demonstrate 
intricate details to a lay audience [70–72]. A non-destruc-
tive method , radiography also plays a vital role in foren-
sic dentistry to uncover the hidden facts which cannot be 
seen by means of physical examination. Dental exami-
nation and comparison between antemortem and post-
mortem dental records and radiographs (Figure  8.12) 
produce results with a high degree of reliability and rela-
tive simplicity [73,74].
Panoramic radiographs (Figure 8.13) are also helpful 
to determine the age of the individual by assessing the 
stage of eruption [73].
X-ray equipment is a great advantage in both inter-
nal and dental examinations, particularly when an 
estimate of a victim’s age is required, and also to dis-
cover fractures or other unique identification informa-
tion. X-ray examination is also a very effective method 
of locating and identifying evidential material such as 
bullets or bomb fragments. X-ray equipment, preferably 
portable, should always be made available in the mortu-
ary [41,73,74]. The use of radiographs is characteristic 
of techniques that involve observation of morphologi-
cally distinct stages of mineralization. Age estimations 
are also based on the degree of formation of root and 
crown structures, the stage of eruption, and the inter-
mixture of primary and adult dentitions [75]. The size 
FIGURE 8.11 Odontogram.

144
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
of dental pulp cavity is reduced as a result of secondary 
dentin deposit. The measurements of this reduction can 
be used as an indicator of age [41,76]. Using radiographs, 
the pulp length and width are measured. These ratios are 
found to be significantly correlated with age. Results 
show the strongest correlation with age to be in ratio 
between the width of the pulp and the root. This indi-
cates that the rate of deposition of dentine on the mesial 
and distal walls is more closely related to age than that 
on the roof of the pulp cavity. However, the limitation of 
the technique is that the correlation between age and the 
ratios between pulp and the root length has been found 
to be significant for only maxillary cuspids and premo-
lars [41,77]. Advances in computer technology coupled 
with improvement in sensor technology over the past 25 
years have resulted in the adoption of digital radiography 
systems in dental practice. These now include the abil-
ity to image orthopanoramic, cephalographic, and com-
puted tomographic images for nearly instant delivery to 
clinical workstations [78]. This stands in marked contrast 
to film-based dental radiography, particularly in forensic 
applications, and holds many advantages for the forensic 
dentist. The dentist-investigator is able to speedily dis-
cern whether or not features that might serve to confirm 
or refute a suspected identification are visible and order 
reimaging if needed while the specimen is available. In 
addition, postmortem and antemortem images can be 
rapidly transmitted across great distances without any 
loss of fidelity, questions of orientation (left versus right 
side), or acquisition date and other provenance issues. 
In the past, film-based images were first reproduced or 
copied onto additional film substrates and then hand-
delivered (mail, courier, etc.) for comparison [41,77,79]. 
Loss of detail and possible loss of the original image were 
not uncommon [80]. Older, film-based images can, by 
the use of optical scanning hardware and software, be 
converted to an electronic image (data set) which can be 
treated similarly to original digital radiographs (trans-
mission, optimization, storage, etc.) [81,82].
Digital radiographic imaging software also allows 
the investigator to optimize or enhance the image as 
viewed onscreen, resulting in visualization of greater 
detail in the captured image—again increasing the like-
lihood of an identification or exclusion. Many inves-
tigators are working to perfect comparative systems 
(digital image subtraction, image rectification, point-
to-point analysis, etc.) to assist the forensic dentist in 
analyzing radiographic images [83]. Several sophisti-
cated computer applications are now available for use 
(a)
 
(b)
FIGURE 8.12 Comparison through radiographic study. (a) Antemortem and (b) postmortem.
FIGURE 8.13 Orthopantomography.

145
Forensic Odontology
in collating and comparing large amounts of dental 
data [84]. These applications are effective at sorting 
large numbers of antemortem records to reduce the 
number of potential matching postmortem records 
to only a few. This allows the forensic odontologist 
to complete the manual comparison of the actual 
charts and radiographs to determine if a match exists  
[83–85]. Although there are many avenues available to 
authorities to arrive at the identity of unknown human 
remains, dental identification is rapid, reliable, readily 
available in most situations, and relatively inexpensive 
in comparison. For example, DNA requires time-con-
suming testing and collection of samples. Fingerprinting 
requires that the unknown remains retain soft tissue 
suitable for lifting print exemplars as well as the avail-
ability of fingerprint records on file. Nowhere is this 
more evident than in cases involving multiple fatalities. 
DVI (disaster victim identification) or MFI (multiple 
fatality incident) situations tax the resources of the 
medical examiner. In today’s fast-paced world, rapid 
identification is expected, if not demanded, by the next 
of kin and the press. “Digital radiography coupled with 
computer-aided methods of comparing the postmortem 
dental information gathered in the morgue to ante mor-
tem dental information provided by the families of the 
missing and law enforcement allows rapid resolution 
and identification” [85]. This would require reliable 
automatic segmentation techniques that can extract 
the contour of each individual tooth for latter retrieval 
purposes to allow for retrieval based on teeth shapes.
The objective of the new perspective research is 
to automate the process of forensic odontology using 
image processing and pattern recognition techniques 
[84,85]. There are several advantages for automat-
ing this procedure. An automatic system can perform 
identification on a large-scale database while a manual 
or semiautomatic system is useful for verification on 
a small data set. Also, automating this process will 
come up with an ordered list of closest matches that 
we may refer to in order to decide the best match [86]. 
Accordingly, this will facilitate for forensic odontolo-
gists to only manually verify through this best match 
short list instead of manually searching a large num-
ber of AM records. In order to achieve this goal, we 
need to automate the process of segmenting the den-
tal radiographs and to separate each individual tooth. 
For automated identification, the dental records are 
usually available as radiographs. An automated den-
tal identification system consists of two main stages: 
feature extraction and feature matching. During fea-
ture extraction, certain salient information of the teeth 
such as contours, artificial prosthesis, number of cus-
pids, frontal sinus (Figures 8.14 and 8.15), and so on, is 
extracted from the radiographs [86,87].
8.9 BITE-MARK ANALYSIS
Bite-mark evidence recovery and analysis is the most 
complex and demanding role that the forensic dentist 
plays in the criminal justice system. Complex issues when 
bite marks are found on human skin, such as in cases 
of sexual homicide, sex assault and rape, and in domes-
tic violence cases of abuse, require a high level of train-
ing and expertise. Unfortunately, there are no areas of 
FIGURE 8.14 Obtaining X-rays through the NOMADTM 
equipment.
FIGURE 8.15 Electronic sensor positioned in the oral cav-
ity to perform radiographic imaging.

146
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
this aspect of the discipline that the dental hygienist can 
be involved in, primarily because of the urgency of the 
cases that require an almost immediate deployment of 
the odontologist. Also, there is a legal requirement that 
warrants, court orders, and legal consent for the seizure 
of evidence from suspects only include specific personnel 
possessing specialized training and skills [88].
Typically, police personnel, usually forensic identifi-
cation officers, collect bite-mark evidence from the bitten 
victims of crime [89].
This includes recording the injuries using high reso-
lution forensic photographs, making casts of the bite 
site and swabbing the skin’s surface for salivary DNA. 
Interestingly, bite marks, sucking and/or kissing can 
leave saliva behind as the suspect’s mouth comes 
in contact with the victim’s skin. This saliva can be 
a source of DNA evidence, which can be analyzed 
in conjunction with the physical comparison of the 
shapes and sizes of the teeth to the marks found on the 
victim’s skin.
—Giannelli, 2008
The photographs of the bite mark that are recovered 
by the police are submitted to specially trained forensic 
odontologists for examination and interpretation. The 
forensic significance (quality) of the injuries depicted in 
the evidence is determined according to whether there 
are sufficient details visible from the teeth marks to allow 
comparison to any suspect’s teeth (Figure 8.16).
In sex crimes, bite marks on women are characteristi-
cally seen on the nipples, breasts, thighs, neck, and legs. For 
male victims, bite marks are seen more on the arms, shoul-
ders, back, and hands [90,91]. Bite marks to the hands, 
arms, and shoulders on male suspects may be caused by 
the teeth of a victim who has bitten in self-defense [90]. 
If the marks from teeth record a large amount of detail 
and the evidence is well documented, there is a strong 
likelihood that the odontologist’s conclusions will play a 
role in the identification of the perpetrators of these crimes 
[92].
Suspects may be identified through the assessment of 
bite-mark injuries in cases of abuse (of children, spouses, 
elderly) and in women during sexual attacks. Bite marks 
can be found on the following:
• The victim (by the attacker)
• The attacker (suspect) when a victim attempts to 
defend him- or herself
• An object found at the crime scene
The first published issue of forensic bite marks hinged 
on a piece of cheese found at the crime scene. A represen-
tative human bite is described as an elliptical or circu-
lar injury that records the specific characteristics of the 
teeth. Alternatively, it may be composed of two U-shaped 
arches that are separated at their bases by an open space 
[92]. The injuries caused by teeth can range from bruises 
to scrapes and cuts or lacerations. It is possible to iden-
tify specific types of teeth by their class characteristics. 
For example, incisors produce rectangular injuries and 
canines produce triangular injuries. Other characteristics 
include fractures, rotations, attritional wear, congenital 
malformations, and so on. When these are recorded in 
the injury, it may be possible to compare them to identify 
the specific teeth (person) that caused the injury [92,93]. 
Evidence collection from the bite victim that dentists 
should be familiar with include the following:
1. Documentation: Make a descriptive record of 
the injury, including the physical appearance, 
color, size, and orientation of the injury, location 
on the body, relative contour and elasticity of the 
site, and types of injuries.
2. Photographs: Take photographs, both color and 
black-and-white films. A reference scale (ruler) 
should be placed in the same plane as the injury 
and visible in the photographs to enable subse-
quent measurements.
3. Saliva swab: (a) Saliva will have been deposited 
on the skin during biting and this should be 
collected and analyzed. (b) A buccal swab or a 
sample of whole blood must be collected from 
the victim at this time to assess the victim’s 
DNA. This will enable analysis of any mixtures 
that are found in the sample from the bite.
4. Impression: Fabricate an impression of the bitten 
surface to record any irregularities produced by 
the teeth.
FIGURE 8.16 Bite marks.

147
Forensic Odontology
The following evidence was recovered during  
examination of the bite-mark suspect:
1. Clinical examination: The extra- and intra-oral 
structures are examined and are noted on a 
dental chart. Special attention is focused on the 
status of the dental health, occlusion and man-
dibular articulation, tooth mobility, periodontal 
pocketing, dental restorations, diastemate, frac-
tures, caries, and so on, and the function of mas-
ticatory muscles.
2. Photographs: Full-facial and profile photographs 
are produced in addition to frontal and lateral 
views of the teeth in occlusion.
3. Impressions: It is necessary to produce extremely 
accurate study casts of the teeth that record all 
characteristics of the dentition.
4. Bite simple: A sample of the suspect’s bite is 
recorded in centric occlusion using a wax.
5. Salivary sample: Saliva is also taken for DNA 
testing [93].
The most common methods to determine if the sus-
pect’s teeth caused the bite mark include techniques to 
compare the following:
• The suspect’s study casts with the actual or pho-
tographs of the bite mark
• The suspect’s teeth pattern of dental cast using 
tracing with photographs of the bite mark
• The suspect’s test bites with the actual bite mark
The conclusions are often based on the expert’s level 
of personal experience.
Factors that may affect the accuracy of bite-mark 
identification include the following:
1. Time-dependent changes of the bite mark on liv-
ing bodies
2. Effects of where the bite mark was found
3. Damage on soft tissue
4. Similarities in dentition among individuals
5. Poor techniques, photography, impressions
Also, dental profiles of the suspect are subject to 
change over time, for example, loss of teeth, or teeth 
attack by dental caries.
The suspect’s DNA profile obtained from saliva or 
blood with salivary DNA surrounding the bite-mark 
area proves to be a more reliable form of identification. 
Even if the dentist cannot match the available evidence 
to someone’s existing dental records, he or she can pro-
vide important clues to identity that may help the inves-
tigators. For example, the dentist can make estimates 
about age, socioeconomic class, and history based on 
examination of the teeth. By collating this evidence with 
evidence from other forensic examiners, investigators 
can narrow down the identity possibilities [92,94].
The characteristics of human bites are superfi-
cial abrasion and/or a subsurface hemorrhage looking 
like an arch. These marks are caused by the incisors, 
canines, and premolars. The abrasions and/or hemor-
rhage caused by the canine are in the shape of points. If 
the perpetrator has dentures, additional specific marks 
can be expected [93]. These marks differ between 
bridges, crowns, and dentures. Crowns and bridges may 
have a ceramic surface and partial denture braces to fix 
at the teeth. These peculiarities can be responsible for 
specific wounds and additional markers for identifica-
tion [92,93].
Depending on the part of the body and the con-
stitution of the skin. the bite mark can be distorted. 
Frequently, this can be the reason for problems when 
analyzing bite marks. To prevent mistakes by the 
 pattern-associated comparison, it is recommended to 
simulate bites at similar body parts using the study casts 
of the suspect or using a digital technique for a step-wise 
dynamic comparison [95]. Sheasby and MacDonald [96] 
recommend a classification to emphasize the need of a 
scientific approach for the interpretation of the types 
of distortion. They introduce the terms of primary and 
secondary distortion. Primary distortion is defined by 
the dynamics of the bite. Secondary distortions have 
three categories: time-related distortion when a bite 
changes with time elapsed subsequent to the bite being 
made, posture distortion, and photographic distortion 
[92–94].
8.10 MASS DISASTERS
Forensic dental response teams provide invaluable assis-
tance in cases of mass disasters in which large num-
bers of deceased victims must be identified. Similar 
to personal identification above, but on a larger scale 
that includes additional complications, disaster victim 
identification (DVI) involves transcription of AM den-
tal records, PM examination and recording, and recon-
ciliation of these records to identify each victim to give 
back their name [97,98]. Natural or man-made disas-
ters leave behind many casualties that include not only 
the deceased victims but also the next of kin who are 
left to grieve the loss of a loved one. The forensic den-
tal response team should formulate itself in a way that 
allows for adequate training and accumulation of the 
needed resources and equipment. In fact, dealing appro-
priately with AM records is the single most challenging 
area in any DVI response, since it involves accurately 
and precisely preparing the records for potential com-
parisons [99].

148
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Standardization of the DVI forms and terminol-
ogy is required to ensure accuracy in the comparisons. 
AM records vary widely in their completeness and the 
amount of included detail, so the team faces the daunt-
ing task of summarizing all the incoming data [100]. The 
U.S.-based WinID3 (Windows Identification) program 
allows both the Universal/National System used in the 
United States and the Federation Dentaire International 
(FDI) tooth numbering. An INTERPOL-sponsored pro-
gram is called DVI System International, from PlassData 
in Denmark [13]. The latter was being beta-tested during 
INTERPOL’s tsunami response in Thailand. It has now 
developed into one of the world’s best DVI databases, 
since it can also handle data from DNA as well as most 
medical records and physical descriptors, such as scars, 
birthmarks, and tattoos [13,99,100].
The International Criminal Police Organization 
(INTERPOL) was established as the International 
Criminal Police Commission in 1923, and aims to assist 
international and cross-border criminal police coopera-
tion [14]. Global police communication services, opera-
tional data services, and databases for police, operational 
police support services and training and development 
are the commission’s core functions. Approximately 
186 of the 195 countries of the world are members of 
INTERPOL. The INTERPOL DVI guidelines and asso-
ciated forms, published originally in 1984, are recog-
nized by the vast majority of countries outside the United 
States as the best practice method for data collection in 
multiple fatality incidents to facilitate identification of 
victims [16,101,102].
These guidelines divide the DVI process into five 
phases. Phase 1 details activities at the scene; Phase 2 
is the procedures in the mortuary; Phase 3 covers AM 
information retrieval; Phase 4 involves reconciliation; 
and Phase 5, personal and incident debriefing. These 
processes are aimed at collecting data that will result in 
the maximum number and certainty of identifications in 
a timely manner but also provide information that may 
assist in any investigation into the incident [98,103,104].
Many authors have discussed problems that regularly 
arise in the dental aspects of DVI. Pretty and Sweet [21] 
summarized it well when commenting that mass disas-
ters are complex situations that are both physically and 
emotionally demanding. Many of the problems that are 
encountered are met on a daily basis by odontologists 
in their identification work but become magnified just 
by the increased number of victims [105,106]. A num-
ber of these problems are outside the direct control of 
odontologists. Brannon and Kessler [107] classified these 
as external problems, and included such things as the 
condition of the remains, the quality of the AM dental 
records, and dysfunctional administrative structures. In 
contrast, their list of internal problems—which included 
stress, inexperience, and recognition of newer dental 
materials—would appear to be influenced by the lack of 
clear procedural guidelines [104,108]. For the odontol-
ogy component in each of the phases of DVI, it is rec-
ommended that these guidelines should include roles and 
procedures, and should also address all issues that can be 
anticipated to relate to the involvement of odontologists 
in a DVI incident, including team membership criteria, 
team notification details, management structures, orga-
nizational responsibilities, logistics, team size and com-
position, and payment issues [105,108,109].
A number of authors [110,111] have commented that 
the condition of the remains critically impacts on the 
potential for successful dental identification. The nature 
of the collapse of the twin towers of the World Trade 
Center on September 11, 2001 meant that the remains 
were severely fragmented, commingled, pulverized, and 
incinerated but also that recovery had to be delayed for 
quite some time leading to additional degradation of 
remains. More than 20,000 body fragments were recov-
ered from the approximately 2800 individuals reported 
missing, highlighting the difficulty that identification 
specialists faced. This impacted the techniques that were 
able to be used and the majority of identifications that 
were able to be completed were done by DNA analysis. 
In the 4 years after the incident, only 1594 of the victims 
were formally identified and 53% of these were by DNA 
alone. “Genetic information also contributed in many 
of the other identifications” [99,112–114]. Unsolved 
cases are mostly due to insufficient AM or PM data. 
In such circumstances, forensic workers mostly have to 
rely on time- and money- consuming DNA identification 
procedures.
In order to avoid these difficult and lengthy identifi-
cation procedures, radio frequency identification (RFID) 
tags can be incorporated into the strongest and most pro-
tected human body part: the tooth. In case of absence of 
teeth, it can be incorporated into dentures also. RFID is 
a wireless electronic communication technology. RFID 
technology was first introduced in 1940, during World 
War II, and used to identify airplanes belonging to the 
Royal Air Force. During the 1980s and 1990s, with 
the advances in information technology and the possi-
bility of producing low-cost tags, the interest in RFID 
was renewed. It forms part of a technology known as 
“automatic identification and data capture” and is used 
to identify, locate, and track people, animals, and prop-
erty [115].
Positive identification of the denture is usually done 
with a tiny, discreet identification code which is embedded 
in the denture base [116]. The standard requirements for 
denture markers are that they should be biologically inert 
when incorporated into the denture, inexpensive, easy 
and quick to apply, possible to retrieve after an accident, 

149
Forensic Odontology
acid resistant, and able to survive elevated temperatures 
[116,117]. The marking must also be aesthetically accept-
able, visible (readable) and durable without jeopardizing 
the strength of the prostheses. In addition, the marking 
should be permanent and resistant to everyday cleans-
ing and disinfecting agents [118,119]. In countries where 
unique identification numbers are given to each individ-
ual, dentures may be marked with that number to enable 
positive identification. There are two main methods in 
marking dentures, namely the surface method and the 
inclusion method. In the surface method, the marks are 
located on one of the denture’s surface and can be done by 
scribing or engraving the denture itself. In this technique, 
letters or numbers are engraved with a small round dental 
bur on the fitting surface of the maxillary complete den-
ture. This engraving can cause detrimental effects, such as 
food debris getting lodged, leading to bacterial infection 
[116,119].
Another surface-marking technique, embossing, 
comprises initials of the name and the surname of the 
patient that are scratched with a dental bur on the mas-
ter cast. This technique produces embossed lettering on 
the fitting surface of the denture and has been associated 
with malignancy, possibly due to continued tissue irrita-
tion, and may not be an ideal method for denture mark-
ing. A better way is to cover the embossed marking on 
the denture framework with the denture base acrylic and 
process it to a finished state; hence, it causes no irritation 
to the tissue.
8.11 IDENTIFICATION 
THROUGH SOFT TISSUES
In some particular circumstances, often related to a 
criminal investigation, there can be other data that are 
important to the process of human identification. Some 
of these data result from soft oral and perioral tissue 
prints [120]. In fact, lips, as well as the hard palate, are 
known to have features that can lead to a person’s identi-
fication. The study of lip prints is known as cheiloscopy; 
the study of hard palate anatomy to establish someone’s 
identity is called palatoscopy [121].
8.11.1 Rugoscopy or Palatoscopy
One of the techniques used by forensic odontology in the 
hard task of identifying a person is the palatal rugoscopy, 
which refers to the study, recording, and classification 
of ridges located in the mucous of the palate or roof of 
the oral cavity. The method of identification most used is 
the visual recognition of fingerprints, but when the char-
acteristics of the body do not allow its implementation, 
such as in the case of advanced decomposition, carbon-
ization, or skeletonization, the palatal rugae can provide 
important information about the identity of the investi-
gated subject.
The use of human palatal rugae has also been sug-
gested as an alternative method of identification. It has 
been reported that even when non-odontological meth-
ods of identifying a victim are more limited, the palatal 
rugae are important evidence that can be recovered in a 
practical and simple way, playing their anatomical cost 
patterns directly from the hard palate or mucosal surface 
of prosthetic elements [120]. This method allows identifi-
cation by direct comparison of the models of the maxilla 
in which tissues are duplicates of the hard palate, AM 
and PM, so the odontological finding is essentially con-
firming subject-specific information [122].
Palatal rugoscopy is the study, recording, and classi-
fication of palatal rugae [121,122]. These rugae originate 
between the 12th and 14th weeks in intrauterine life, 
remaining unchanged throughout life. Because of their 
protected location, the rugae are elements of interest that 
constitute identificatory resistance to external agents 
(Figure 8.17).
This makes them especially valuable in identifying 
both living subjects and fresh corpses [123]. Rugae are 
not damaged from trauma due to their internal posi-
tion in the oral cavity and are insulated from heat by the 
tongue and buccal fat pads. In one study, it was reported 
that no two palates are alike in their configuration and 
that the palatal print did not change. In twins also, the 
FIGURE 8.17 Anatomy of the hard palate. (From http://
www.hpchile.cl/forense/images/stories/pals.jpg.)

150
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
studies indicated that the patterns may be similar but not 
identical. Rugae were first described by Winslow in 1732. 
The earliest illustration of palatal rugae was probably by 
Santorini in 1775, wherein he put a drawing depicting 
three wavy lines crossing the midline of palate. The first 
palatal classification system was put forth by Goria in 
1911. The first suggestion for the use of palatal rugae 
as a method of personal identification was suggested by 
Harrison Allen in 1889. The term “palatal rugoscopy” 
was proposed in 1932 by a Spanish investigator named 
Trobo Hermosa [124]. Once formed, rugae may expe-
rience changes in their size due to growth of the pal-
ate, but retain their embryological shape. Palatal rugae 
appear around the third month of intrauterine life from 
the covering of connective tissue in the palatal process of 
forming maxillary bone. Palatal rugoscopy can have a 
major role in human identification. Cast models and AM 
intraoral photographs can be found in dental records 
and serve as the first protocol to perform the identifica-
tion process [124]. Furthermore, for at-risk populations 
(for example, astronauts and firemen), this first record 
can be preventively arranged and archived for the pos-
sible need of identification. Researchers have found the 
task of classification a difficult aspect of rugae studies. 
The subjective nature of observation and interpretation 
within and between observers poses a problem. Today, 
there are several known palatal rugae classifications. 
However, according to several authors, Argentine odon-
tologist Juan Ubaldo Carrea’s classification is considered 
very practical. This author divides palatal rugae into four 
different types (Figure 8.18) [125].
Palatal rugae are classified only according to their 
form, and no formula (rugogram) is developed. Limson 
and Julian [143] compared the rugosities of university 
students by an impression with irreversible hydrocol-
loid and cast models in plaster type II. The rugae were 
highlighted with well-sharpened graphite pencils. The 
rugae were photographed and the models were scanned, 
achieving a 92%–97% success rate. The authors claimed 
that this error rate of 3%–8% can be reduced by using an 
intraoral scanner, with a direct transfer to the computer 
[126,127]. Some identification methods are available for 
edentulous victims, such as comparing the anatomy of 
the paranasal sinuses and comparing the bone patterns 
observed in radiographs. In addition to this, the victim’s 
own dentures can also be used, which are found inside 
the mouth or in their home. Among the evidence from an 
edentulous victim, the palatal rugae are considered to be 
one of the unique morphological features. Ohtani et al. 
[128] studied the possibility of identifying edentulous 
individuals by comparing the rugae in denture molds 
against models obtained from impressions taken from 
the patients. Impressions were taken from the mucosal 
surfaces of complete dentures with alginate impression 
materials, and 146 maxillary casts were made from hard 
dental plaster. They then compared the rugae patterns 
to identify the pairs (dentures and plaster models). The 
median percentage of correct matches was 94%, and 
the error rate was attributed to three factors: poorly 
demarcated eminences of rugae, change of palatal height 
in some cases, and non-complex rugae patterns. Using 
palatal rugoscopy, Castellanos et al. [129] reported the 
identification of the body of an adult woman in a city in 
Colombia.
It is often difficult to obtain dental arch impressions 
of corpses that arrive at the forensic medicine institutes 
to be compared with the AM data of the alleged victim. 
As the experts or technicians are not familiar with dental 
impression materials and there is no dental laboratory 
structure, photographs are more practical. AM models 
can be obtained from the victims’ dentists and then com-
pared with the PM photographs using free image- editing 
software. There are several ways to analyze palatal rugae. 
Intraoral inspection is probably the most used and also 
the easiest and the cheapest. However, it can create dif-
ficulties if a future comparative exam is required. A more 
detailed and exact study, as well as the need to preserve 
evidence, may justify oral photography or oral impres-
sions and [130]. Calcorrugoscopy (Figure 8.19), or the 
overlay print of palatal rugae in a maxillary cast, can be 
used in order to perform comparative analysis.
I
II
III
IV
FIGURE 8.18 Carrea’s system. (From Briem Stamm AD, 
Forensic Oral Pathol J., 3, 13–17, 2012.)
FIGURE 8.19 Calcorrugoscopy.

151
Forensic Odontology
Other more complex techniques are also available. By 
using stereoscopy, for example, one can obtain a three-
dimensional image of palatal rugae anatomy. It is based 
on the analysis of two pictures taken with the same cam-
era, from two different points, using special equipment. 
Another technique is the stereophotogrammetry, which, 
by using a special device called the Traster Marker, allows 
for an accurate determination of the length and position 
of every single palatal ruga [127,131,132]. However, due 
to its simplicity, price, and reliability, the study of maxil-
lary dental casts is the most used technique [133,134].
Palatoscopy is a technique that can be of great inter-
est in human identification. In fact, contrary to lip prints, 
it is possible to have AM data established, such as records 
found in dental practice in different forms (dental casts, 
old prosthetic maxillary devices, and intraoral photo-
graphs). However, palatoscopy might not be so useful in 
crime scene investigations in the linking of suspects to 
crime scenes. In fact, this kind of evidence is not expected 
to be found in such circumstances [125,135,136]. Another 
aspect of palatoscopy that one must consider is the pos-
sibility of rugae pattern forgery [137]. In a case report, 
Gitto et al. [138] described a method where palatal rugae 
were added to a complete denture in order to improve 
speech patterns in some patients. This process can lead 
to false identity exclusion due to misleading AM data.
8.11.2 Cheiloscopy
Cheiloscopy (from the Greek words cheilos—lips and 
skopein—to look at [120]) is the name given to lip print 
studies [139–141]. The importance of cheiloscopy is 
linked to the fact that lip prints are unique to one person, 
except in monozygotic twins [159]. Like fingerprints and 
palatal rugae, lip grooves are permanent and unchange-
able [120,143,144]. It is possible to identify lip patterns 
as early as the sixth week of intrauterine life [120]. From 
then on, lip groove patterns rarely change, resisting many 
afflictions, such as herpetic lesions. In fact, only those 
pathologies that damage the lip, like burns, seem to rule 
out cheiloscopic study [120]. Lips are two (Figure 8.20) 
[145] highly sensitive mobile folds, composed of skin, 
muscle, glands, and mucous membranes.
They surround the oral orifice and form the ante-
rior boundary of the oral cavity. Anatomically, whether 
covered with skin or mucosa, the surface that forms 
the oral sphincter is the lip area. There is an upper lip 
(from under the nose and extending laterally toward 
the cheek from the nasolabial sulcus) and a lower lip 
(bound inferiorly by a prominent groove, the labiomen-
tal sulcus); the two lips are joined at the corners of the 
mouth—the  commissures—and separated by the buccal 
frenum [120,143]. There are two different kinds of lip 
coverings: skin and mucosa. When the two meet, a white 
wavy line is formed—the labial cord—which is quite 
prominent in people of African descent. Where identi-
fication is concerned, the mucosal area holds the most 
interest. This area, also called Klein’s zone, is covered 
with wrinkles and grooves that form a characteristic pat-
tern: the lip print [120,142].
This biological feature was first described by Fisher 
in 1902 [120]; however, it was only in 1930 that Diou de 
Lille developed some studies which led to lip print use in 
criminology. In 1932, Edmond Locard, one of France’s 
greatest criminologists, acknowledged the importance 
of cheiloscopy. In 1950, Le Moyne Snyder, in his book 
Homicide Investigation, mentioned the possibility of 
using lip prints in the matter of human identification 
[146]. Sometime later, Santos in 1960, suggested that the 
fissures and the crisscross lines in the lips could be divided 
into different groups (simple and compound), and each 
group could be further divided into eight subtypes [147].
The first cheiloscopic expertise was demonstrated in 
Poland in 1966, when a lip print was revealed on window 
glass at the scene of a burglary. The examination was 
carried out and the expert concluded that the trace of lips 
revealed at the scene did not belong to the suspect [148]. 
Renaud in 1972, studied 4000 lip prints and confirmed 
the singularity of each one [149]. Two years later, Suzuki 
and Tsuchihashi developed another study which resulted 
in a new classification for lip prints. This study, conducted 
over a long period of time, enabled the researchers to con-
firm not only lip print singularity, but also lip response 
to trauma; in fact, they observed that after healing, the 
lip pattern was equal to that before the injury occurred. 
It was during the period 2000–2010, that cheiloscopic 
FIGURE 8.20 Lip anatomy. (From Atlas of Human 
Anatomy, Head and Neck Section, Netter F., Copyright 
1996, Elsevier Health Sciences.)

152
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
studies were carried out by several researchers in India 
and other countries [150–152]. Different aspects of lip 
prints like stability, sex determination [153,154] and 
various morphological lip print patterns among differ-
ent populations were studied. A study on PM changes 
of lip prints [155,156] was also carried out to find out 
the changes in anthropometric measurements of the lip 
region before and after fixation. All these studies were in 
agreement with the Japanese research and thus helped in 
concluding that cheiloscopic studies can be implemented 
as an auxiliary method of identification [155].
Fingerprints are developed by a number of methods 
which rely on the fact that sweat and body oils which 
have been transferred from the body to an object react 
with a number of reagents to become visible [120]. 
Fingerprint powders adhere to sweat and body oils, iodine 
when heated reacts with sweat, ninhydrin reacts with the 
amino acids in sweat, heated cyanoacrylate (Super Glue) 
reveals latent prints, and sweat fluoresces when illumi-
nated by a laser. Alvarez et al. [157] tested developing 
the latent lip prints using a similar method. According to 
these researchers, the vermilion borders of the lips (Figure 
8.21) have minor salivary and sebaceous glands.
These glands are associated with hair follicles, sweat 
glands in between, and secreting oils. With these secre-
tions and continual moisturizing, it makes the latent lip 
prints (Figure 8.22) [158] available at most crime scenes.
In a study by Castello et al. [159] on luminous lip 
prints, Nile Red was considered as a potential developer 
for latent lip prints. They used a property of lumines-
cence for latent lip print development. Luminescence is 
an especially useful property for the search of invisible 
evidence at the scene of a crime.
Cheiloscopy is interesting mostly in identifying the 
living, since it can be the only way to link a person to 
someone or to a specific location. However, although 
lip prints have previously been used in a court of law, 
their use is not consensual, and some authors believe 
further evidence is needed to confirm their uniqueness 
[120,154,156]. In fact, lip print use is controversial and 
rare. The FBI has used this kind of evidence only in a sin-
gle case in order to obtain a positive identification. Today, 
new research allows for cheiloscopy use in a court of law 
in the United States [160,161]. Recent studies also point 
out other possibilities, namely, DNA detection in latent 
lip prints: some researchers are trying to relate charac-
teristic lip patterns with a person’s gender [162]. Another 
aspect that might be interesting to study is the possibility 
of using identifiable lip prints obtained from the skin of 
assault and murder victims, in a similar way to what has 
already been done with latent fingerprints [161]. The lip 
print is produced by a substantially mobile portion of 
the lip. This fact alone explains the reason why the same 
person can produce different lip prints, according to the 
pressure, direction, and method used in taking the print 
[120]. If lipstick is used, the amount can also affect the 
print. This problem, however, can be solved if recordings 
are made until all the substance is used [120,151,156]. 
Manual register of the overlay is another problem, due 
to the possibility of some subjectivity [120]. Another fac-
tor to be considered is the existence of some pathologi-
cal conditions (lymphangiomas, congenital lip fistula, lip 
sclerodermia, Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome, syphi-
lis, lip cheilitis, among others). One must also consider 
the possibility of PM changes of lip prints from cadavers 
with various causes of death. Utsuno et al. [155] have 
studied these changes and concluded that a satisfactory 
identification rate was achieved. However, this study was 
carried out under a laboratory environment, and what 
happens to lip prints obtained from cadavers exposed to 
the natural environment is still not known. In Argentina, 
FIGURE 8.21 Grooves of the lips.
FIGURE 8.22 Latent lip print. (From Odontosto- 
matology Laboratory Expertise [L.P.O.] directed by 
PhD Gabriel Fonseca, Cordoba, Argentina.)

153
Forensic Odontology
Bernardoni et al. [163] conducted a study on 100 fresh 
corpses using the so-called Fraile’s method, originally 
conceived of by a senior chief of police of the province of 
Chaco (Argentina), Charles Fraile, for fingerprint analy-
sis in corpses with a high state of decomposition. The 
results allowed the confirmation of the compatibility of 
adaptation and the analysis of lip prints using Fraile’s 
method on fresh corpses, allowing crisp reproduction 
and display of labial furrows morphotypes in 95% of 
cases.
8.12 CONCLUSION
Forensic dentists may play a major role in identification 
in an increasingly globalized world. Forensic dentistry 
has varying applications that require different levels 
of readiness both technically and emotionally on the 
part of multidisciplinary team members. The applica-
tions include identification and age estimation of liv-
ing or deceased individuals from their teeth, jaws, or 
facial bones; analysis of bite marks to identify perpetra-
tors and victims of violent and sexual attacks; cases of 
family violence (marital, child, and elderly abuse and 
neglect), and last but not least, to help in archeologi-
cal and anthropological studies of populations. Recent 
tragedies and past and present situations have increased 
awareness concerning the importance of forensic den-
tistry in identification of victims. However, forensic 
dentistry is not yet fully introduced into the dental cur-
riculum as a subject.
Moreover, the likelihood of future disasters due to 
terrorism, earthquakes and other causes requires the 
world’s dental profession to prepare for an expanded 
role in bioterrorism response and criminal and civil pro-
ceedings. Dentistry has an important role in the recogni-
tion of abuse among persons of all ages. Dentists have 
a major role to play in keeping accurate dental records 
and providing all necessary information so that legal 
authorities may recognize malpractice, negligence, fraud 
or abuse, and identify unknown humans. Currently, 
there is no agreement among forensic dentists about the 
uniqueness of the dentition or behavior of human skin 
during biting, for example. Although these issues have 
never been proven scientifically, much research is needed 
to prove suspicions that human dentition is unique. 
Forensic dentistry is an important science and must be 
treated as such.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
 1. Arbenz GO. Identidade e identificação—Conceitos 
gerais. In: Medicina Legal e Antropologia Forense. 
Rio de Janeiro: Atheneu, 1998, pp. 105–127.
 2. Smith S. The development of forensic medicine and 
law-science relations. J Public Law. 1988; 3:305–6.
 3. Bernstein M. Forensic odontology. In: Eckert WG. 
(editor). Introduction to Forensic Sciences. 2nd ed. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 1997, pp. 304–51.
 4. Müller K, Saayman G. Clinical forensic medicine: 
Completing the form J88—What to do and what 
not to do. S Afr Fam Pract. 2003; 45:39–43.
 5. Curran WJ. Titles in the medicolegal field: A pro-
posal for reform. Am J Law Med. 1975; 191:1–11.
 6. Manly, RS, Shiere FR. The effect of dental defi-
ciency on mastication and food preference. Oral 
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 1950; 3:674–85.
 7. Bernitz H. The challenges and effects of globali-
sation on forensic dentistry. Int Dent J. 2009; 
59(4):222–4.
 8. Wecht CR. Relationships of the medical examiner. 
Marshall Law Rev. 1965; 14:427.
 9. Craig I. A critical look at the evidence. J R Soc Med. 
1993; 86:56–60.
 10. National Institute of Justice, Office of Justice 
Programs, U.S. Department of Justice. Mass fatality 
incidents: A guide for human forensic identification. 
June of 2005. Available from: https://www.ncjrs.gov/
pdffi les1/nij/199758.pdf (accessed April 2013).
 11. World Health Organization. Prevention of violence: 
A public health problem. World Health Assembly 
Resolution WHA49.25: WHO, 2010.
 12. World Health Organization. Prevention of violence: 
A public health problem. World Health Assembly 
Resolution WHA49.25: WHO, 2013.
 13. INTERPOL. Thailand tsunami victim identifica-
tion information management centre history. 2004. 
Available from: \\http://www.interpol.int/Public/
asiandisaster/background/TTVI_History.aspS 
(accessed February 2004).
 14. Grupo de Evaluación de INTERPOL sobre el 
Maremoto. La respuesta del equipo de identifi-
cación de víctimas sobre el maremoto del sud-
este asiático entre diciembre de 2004 y febrero 
de 006 [citado March 27, 2011]. Available from: 
http://www.interpol.int/Public/Disaster Victim/
TsunamiEvaluation20100330ES.pdf.
 15. Briem Stamm AD. Standards, protocols and global-
ization in forensic odontology. Forensic Oral Pathol 
J. 2011; 2(4):9–12.
 16. Sweet D. Interpol DVI best-practice standards—An 
overview. Forensic Sci Int. 2010; 201(1–3):18–21.
 17. John MK. Justice through forensic odontology. 
Dental Asia. Nov/Des 2006: 30–34.
 18. Avon SL. Forensic odontology: The roles and 
responsibilities of the dentist. J Can Dent Assoc. 
2004; 70:453–8.
 19. Senn DR, Stimson PG. Forensic Dentistry. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press. 2010.

154
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
 20. Chandra Shekar BR, Reddy CV. Role of dentist 
in person identification. Indian J Dent Res. 2009; 
20(3):356–60.
 21. Pretty IA, Sweet D. A look at forensic dentistry—
Part 1: The role of teeth in the determination of 
human identity. Br Dent J. 2001; 190:359–366. 
May 2001; 48(3):487–96.
 22. Leung CK. Forensic odontology. Hong Kong Med 
Diary. 2008; 13:16–20. Available from: http://
www.fmshk.org/database/articles/03db05_1.pdf 
[accessed on March 24, 2012].
 23. Borrman H, Dahlbom U, Loyola E, René N. Quality 
evaluation of 10 years patient records in forensic 
odontology. Int J Legal Med. 1995; 108:100–4.
 24. Keiser-Nielsen S. Dental identification: Certainty V 
probability. Forensic Sci. 1977; 9(2):87–97. 
 25. Adams BJ. Establishing personal identification 
based on specific patterns of missing, filled, and 
unrestored teeth. J Forensic Sci. 2003; 48:487–96
 26. Ulucam E, Alicioglu B, Cikmaz S, Yilmaz A, Sut 
N. The morphometric analysis of crista phallica 
in identification of sexes. Int J Morphol. 2009; 
27:977–80.
 27. Vale GL. Dentistry, bite marks, and the investiga-
tion of crime. J Calif Dent Assoc. 1996; 24:29–34
 28. Brannon RB, Morlang WM. Tenerife revisited: 
The critical role of dentistry. J Forensic Sci. 2001; 
43(3):722–5.
 29. McDowell JD, Kassebaum DK, Stromboe SE. 
Recognizing and reporting victims of domestic vio-
lence. J Am Dent Assoc. 1992; 123(9):44–50.
 30. Tsang A, Sweet D. Detecting child abuse and 
neglect—Are dentists doing enough? J Can Dent 
Assn. 1999; 65:387–91.
 31. Deplama AM. Gathering the forensic evidence. 
RDM. 2005; 25(2):79–103.
 32. Adams BJ. The diversity of adult dental patterns in 
the United States and the implications for personal 
identification. J Forensic Sci. 2003; 48(3):497–503.
 33. Sweet D, Di Zinno JA. Personal identification 
through dental evidence—Tooth fragments to 
DNA. J Calif Dent Assoc. 1996; 24(5):35–42.
 34. Appelbaum KL. Commentary: The art of forensic 
report writing. J Am Acad Psychiatry Law. 2010; 
38:43–5.
 35. Acharya AB. Teaching forensic odontology: An 
opinion on its content and format. Eur J Dent Educ. 
2006; 10(3):137–41.
 36. Goodman P. A universal system for identifying 
permanent and primary teeth. J Dent Child. 1967; 
34:312–5.
 37. Scott B. Forensics experts lending aid. Access. 2001: 
12–15.
 38. Bell GL. Dentistry’s role in the resolution of miss-
ing and unidentified persons cases. Dent Clin North 
Am. 2001; 45:293–308.
 39. American Board of Forensic Odontology. Guidelines 
for the use of dental information in missing person 
and unidentified body cases. 1993. Available from: 
www.abfo.org (accessed November 2013).
 40. Valenzuela A, Marques T, Exposito N, Martín-De 
Las Heras S, García G. Comparative study of effi-
ciency of dental methods for identification of burn 
victims in two bus accidents in Spain. Am J Forensic 
Med Pathol. 2002; 23:390–3.
 41. Pretty IA, Addy LD. Associated post-mortem den-
tal findings as an aid to personal identification. Sci 
Justice. 2002; 42:65–74.
 42. Merlati, G, Savio, C, Danesino, P, Fassina, G, 
Menghini, P. Further study of restored and un-
restored teeth subjected to high temperature. J 
Forensic Odontostomatol. 2004; 22:34–9.
 43. Pretty IA, Webb DA, Sweet D. The design and 
assessment of mock mass disasters for dental per-
sonnel. J Forensic Sci. 2001; 46(l):74–9.
 44. Sarode SC, Zarkar GA, Kulkarni MA. Role of foren-
sic odontology in the world’s major mass disasters: 
Facts and figures. Dent Update. 2009; 36:430–2, 
435–6.
 45. Gustafson G. Forensic Odontology. New York, 
NY: American Elsevier Publishing. 1996.
 46. Luntz LL. History of forensic dentistry. Dent Clin 
North Am. 1977; 21:7–17.
 47. Singh K, Anandani C, Bhullar RK, Agrawal A, 
Chaudhary H, Thakral A. Teeth and their secrets—
Forensic dentistry. J Forensic Res. 2012; 3:1.
 48. Forbes E. Paul Revere and the World He Lived In. 
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. 1943.
 49. Ring ME. Paul Revere—Dentist, and our country’s 
symbol of freedom. NY State Dent J. December 
1976; 42(10):598–601.
 50. Pierce LJ, Strickland DJ, Smith ES. The case of 
Ohio v. Robinson. An 1870 bite mark case. Am J 
Forensic Med Pathol. 1990; 11:171–7.
 51. Amoëdo O. The role of the dentists in the identifica-
tion of the victims of the catastrophe of the “bazar 
de la charite.” Dent Cosmos. 1897; 39:905–12.
 52. Amoëdo O. L’Art Dentaire en Medicine Legale. 
Paris: Masson et Cie. 1898.
 53. Highfield R. Dental Detective Work Gets to the Root 
of Hitler Mystery. London: Daily Telegraph. 1999.
 54. Solheim T, Lorentsen M, Sundnes PK, Bang G, 
Bremnes L. The “Scandinavian Star” ferry disas-
ter 1990—A challenge to forensic odontology. Int J 
Leg Med. 1992; 104: 339–45.
 55. Schuller-Götzburg P, Suchanek J. Forensic odontolo-
gists successfully identify tsunami victims in Phuket, 
Thailand. Forensic Sci Int. 2007; 171:204–7.
 56. Rogers SL. The Testimony of Teeth: Forensic 
Aspects of Human Dentition. Springfield, IL: 
Thomas Books. 1988.
 57. McLanaghan Thesis (2003).

155
Forensic Odontology
 58. Reverte Coma JM. Antropología Forense. Madrid: 
Ministerio de Justicia. 1999.
 59. Türp JC Alt KW. Anatomy and morphology of 
human teeth. In: Alt KW, Rösing FW, Teschler-
Nicola 
M. 
(editors). 
Dental 
Anthropology: 
Fundamentals, Limits, and Prospects. New York, 
NY: Springer-Verlag/Wien. 1998, pp. 71–91.
 60. Jurel SK. Role of dentist in forensic investigations. J 
Forensic Res. 2012; 3:148.
 61. Bowers CM. Forensic Dental Evidence an 
Investigator’s Handbook. 1st ed. San Diego, CA: 
Elsevier Academic Press. 2006.
 62. Puerini SJ. Forensic odontology and the postmor-
tem identification process. Med Health R I. 2005; 
88:308–9.
 63. Miles, AEW. The dentition in the assessment of 
individual age in skeletal material. In: Brothwell 
DR (editor). Dental Anthropology. New York, NY:  
Macmillan Company. 1963, p. 191.
 64. Hillson S. Teeth. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 1986.
 65. Molnar S. Sex, age, and tooth position as factors 
in the production of tooth wear. Am Antiq. 1971; 
36:182–7.
 66. Sognnaes RF. Dental science as evidence in court. 
Int J Forensic Dent. 1976; 3(9):14–6.
 67. Stimson PG, Mertz CA (eds.). Forensic Dentistry. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 1997.
 68. Fonseca GM, Salgado Alarcón G, Cantín M. 
Lenguaje odontológico forense e identificación: obs-
táculos por falta de estándares. Rev Esp Med Legal. 
2011; 37(4):162–8.
 69. INTERPOL. Guía para la identificación de vícti-
mas de catástrofes. 2009. Available at: http://www.
interpol.int/Public/DisasterVictim/guide/guideES.
pdf (Accessed February 12, 2014).
 70. Nomir O, Abdel-Mottaleb M. Human identifica-
tion from dental x-ray images based on the shape 
and appearance of the teeth. IEEE Trans Inform 
Forensics Sec. 2007; 2(2):188–97.
 71. Chen H. Automatic forensic identification based 
on dental radiographs. Ph thesis, Michigan State 
University, 2007.
 72. Hinchliffe J. Forensic odontology, Part 1. Dental 
identification. Br Dent J. 2011; 210:219–24.
 73. Jain AK, Chen H. Matching of dental x-ray for 
human identification. Pattern Recognit. 2004; 
37:1519–32.
 74. Lee SS, Choi JH, Yoon CL, Kim CY, Shin KJ. The 
diversity of dental patterns in the orthopantomog-
raphy and its significance in human identification. J 
Forensic Sci. 2004; 49:784–6. 
 75. Stavrianos C, Kokkas A, Anderopoulos E, Eliades 
A. Applications of forensic dentistry: Part 1. Res J 
Med Sci. 2010; 4:179–86.
 76. Yang F, Jacobs R, Willems G. Dental age estimation 
through volume matching of teeth imaged by cone-
beam CT. Forensic Sci Int. 2006; 159S:S78–S83.
 77. Lamendin H, Cambray JC. Étude de la translucidité 
et des canalicules: Intérêt en odonto-stomatolo-
gie légale. Revue d´Odonto-Stomatologie 1978; 
2:111–9.
 78. Williems G. A review of the most commonly 
used dental age estimation techniques. J Forensic 
Odontostomatol. 2001; 19:9–17.
 79. Dias PEM, Beaini TL, Melani RFH. Age estimation 
from dental cementum incremental lines and peri-
odontal disease. J Forensic Odontostomatol. 2010; 
28(1):13–21.
 80. Lichtenstein JE, Fitzpatrick JJ, Madeweel JE. The 
role of radiology in fatality investigations. Am J 
Radiol. 1988; 150:751–5.
 81. Zhou J, Abdel-Mottaled M. A content-based system 
for human identification based on bitewing dental 
x-ray images. Pattern Recognit. 2005; 2132–42.
 82. Jain K, Chen H, Minut S. Dental Biometrics 
Human Identification Using Dental Radiographs, 
Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Audio 
and Video-Based Biometric Person Authentication 
(AVBPA), Guildford. 2003, pp. 429–37.
 83. Piotrowski M, Szczepaniak PS. Active Contour 
Based Segmentation of Low-Contrast Medical 
Images, International Conference on Advances 
in Medical Signal and Information Processing-
MEDSIP’2000, Bristol. 2000, pp. 104–9.
 84. Hu S. Hoffman EA, Reinhardt M. Automatic lung 
segmentation for accurate quantization of volumet-
ric x-ray CT images. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 
June 2001; 20(6):490–8.
 85. Gonzalez R, Wood R. Digital Image Processing. 
Reading, MA: Addison Wesley. 1993.
 86. Pham D, Jonasson G, Kiliaridis S. Assessment of 
trabecular pattern on periapical and panoramic 
radiographs: A pilot study. Acta Odontol Scand. 
2010; 68:91–7.
 87. Martin-de las Heras S, Valenzuela A, Ogayar C, 
Valverde AJ, Torres JC. Computer-based produc-
tion of comparison overlays from 3D-scanned den-
tal casts for bite mark analysis. J Forensic Sci. 2005; 
50:127–33. 
 88. Francescani C, Baram M. Did ‘bite mark’ 
expert  fabricate evidence? ABC News. February 
2008. 
Available 
from: 
http://abcnews.go.com/
print?id=4311309 (accessed September 14, 2008).
 89. Giannelli P. Bite Mark Analysis, Case Research 
Paper Series in Legal Studies 08–06, Case W. Res. 
Univ. Sch. of Law. 2008. 
 90. Bowers C. Problem-based analysis of bite mark 
identifications: The role of DNA. Forensic Sci Int. 
2006; 159S:104–9.

156
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
 91. Heras S, Valenzuela S, Valverde A, Torres J, Luna-
del-Castillo J. Effectiveness of comparison overlays 
generated with dental printer software in bite mark 
analysis. J Forensic Sci. 2007; 52:151–6.
 92. Rawson R, Ommen R. Statistical evidence for the 
individuality of the human dentition. J Forensic Sci. 
1984; 29:245.
 93. De Valck E. Major incident response: Collecting 
ante-mortem 
data. 
Forensic 
Sci 
Int. 
2006; 
159S:S15–S9.
 94. Pretty I, Sweet D. Digital bitemark overlays – An 
analysis of effectiveness. J Forensic Sci. 2001; 
46:1385–9.
 95. Thali MJ, Yen K, Schweitzer W, Vock P, Boesch 
C, Ozdoba C, Schroth G, Ith M, Sonnenschein M, 
Doernhoefer T, Scheurer E, Plattner T, Dirnhofer R. 
Virtopsy, a new imaging horizon in forensic pathol-
ogy: virtual autopsy by postmortem multislice com-
puted tomography (MSCT) and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI)—A feasibility study. J Forensic Sci. 
2003; 48(2):386–403.
 96. Sheasby DR, MacDonald DG. A forensic classifica-
tion of distortion in human bite marks. Forensic Sci 
Int. 2001;122(1):75–78.
 97. Petju M, Sutterayongprasert A, Thongpud R, 
Hassuri, K. Importance of dental records for vic-
tim identification following the Indian Ocean tsu-
nami disaster in Thailand. Public Health. 2007; 
121(4):251–7.
 98. Torpet LA. DVI system international: Software 
assisting in the Thai tsunami victim identifica-
tion process. J Forensic Odontostomatol. 2005; 
23:19–25.
 99. Sweet D. Solving certain dental records problems 
with technology—The Canadian solution in the 
Thailand tsunami response. Forensic Sci Int. 2006; 
159(Suppl. 1):S20–3.
100. Hoffenblad C. DVI System International 2.3 User 
Manual. Denmark: Plass Data Software A/S. 2005.
101. James H. Thai tsunami victim identification—
Overview to date. J Forensic Odontostomatol. 2005; 
23:1–18.
102. De Valck E. Considerations 20 years after the pub-
lication of the article “The dentist as an expert in 
 disasters—Dental identification in the disaster with 
the Zeebruge Ferry.” Rev Belge Med Dent (1984). 
2009; 64(4):197–9.
103. Tan PH, Wee KP, Sahelangi P. Remembering 
the Musi–Sil-kAir Flight MI 185 crash victim 
identification. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2007; 
36(10):861–6.
104. Pachar JV, Bryan K. El sistema de apoyo internacio-
nal para la gestión forense de cadáveres en situacio-
nes de desastre. La experiencia de Haití, 2010. Cuad 
Med Forense. 2010; 16(1):81–5.
105. Facts and Details. Dead and missing from the Great 
East Japan earthquake and tsunami of March 11, 
2011.
106. Dental Health Magazine. The Dental Industry and 
Japan Catastrophe. Edición del 12 de Abril de 2011.
107. Brannon and Kessler, 1999.
108. Zohn HK, Dashkow S, Aschheim KW, Dobrin LA, 
Glazer HS, Kirschbaum M, Levitt D, Feldman CA. 
The odontology victim identification skill assess-
ment system. J Forensic Sci. 2010; 55(3):788–91.
109. Brannon RB, Kessler HP. Problems in mass-disas-
ter dental identification: A retrospective review. J 
Forensic Sci. 1999; 44(1):123–7.
110. Clark DH. Dental identification problems in the Abu 
Dhabi air accident. Am J Forensic Med Pathol. 1986; 
7 (4): 317–321.
111. Nuzzolese E, Di Vella G. Future project concerning 
mass disaster management: a forensic odontology 
prospectus. Int Dent J. 2007; 57 (4): 261-266.
112. Budimlija Z, Prinz M, Zelson-Mundorf A, Wieserma 
J, Baterlink E, Mackinnon G. World Trade Center 
human identification project: Experiences with indi-
vidual body identification cases. Croat Med J. 2003; 
44(3): 259–263.
113. Brkic H, Strinovic D, Slaus M, Skavic J, Zecevic D, 
Milicevic M. Dental identification of war victims 
from Petrinja in Croatia. Int J Legal Med. 1997; 
110:47–51.
114. Millet C, Jeannin C. Incorporation of microchips to 
facilitate denture identification by radiofrequency 
tagging. J Prosthet Dent. 2004; 92:588–90.
115. Richmond R, Pretty IA. The use of radio-frequency 
identification tags for labeling dentures—Scanning 
properties. J Forensic Sci. 2009; 54(3):664–8.
116. Borrman HI, DiZinno JA, Wasén J, René N. On den-
ture marking. J Forensic Odontostomatol. 1999; 
17:20–6.
117. Marella GL, Rossi P. An approach to person iden-
tification by means of dental prostheses in a burnt 
corpse. J Forensic Odontostomatol. 1999; 17:16–9.
118. Alexander PM, Taylor JA, Szuster FS, Brown KA. An 
assessment of attitudes to, and extent of, the practice 
of denture marking in South Australia. Aust Dent J. 
1998; 43:337–41.
119. Iqbal MK, Kim S. A review of factors influenc-
ing treatment planning decisions of single-tooth 
implants versus preserving natural teeth with 
nonsurgical endodontic therapy. J Endod. 2008; 
34:519–29.
120. Caldas IM, Magalhaes T, Alfonso A. Establishing 
identity using cheiloscopy and palatoscopy. Forensic 
Sci Int. 2007; 165(1):1–9.
121. Sharma P, Saxena S, Rathod V. Comparative reliabil-
ity of cheiloscopy and palatoscopy in human identi-
fication. Indian J Dental Res. 2009; 20(4):453–7.

157
Forensic Odontology
122. Thomas CJ, van Wyk CW. The palatal rugae in 
identification. J Forensic Odontostomatol. 1988; 
6(1):21–5.
123. Perrella M, Costa F, Vessecchi S, Moccelin E, Daruge 
E. Identificação por rugoscopia palatina e dacti-
loscopia. Available from: http://www.ibemol.com.
br/forense2000/071.asp.
124. Berketa JW, James H, Marino V. Radiographic rec-
ognition of dental implants as an aid to identifying 
the deceased. J Forensic Sci. 2010; 55(1): 66–70.
125. Briem Stamm AD. Análisis comparativo de rugas 
palatinas empleando el método de Carrea en per-
sonal de Gendarmería Nacional en Formosa, 
Argentina. FOPJ. 2012; 3(6):13–7.
126. Limson KS, Julian R. Computerized recording of 
the palatal rugae pattern and an evaluation of its 
application in forensic identification. J Forensic 
Odontostomatol. 2004; 22(1):1–4.
127. Buchtová M, Tichy F, Putnová I, Míšek I. The devel-
opment of palatal rugae in the European pine vole, 
Microtus subterraneus (Arvicolidae, Rodentia). Folia 
Zoo. 2003; 52(2):127–36.
128. Ohtani M, Nishida N, Chiba T, Fukuda M, Miyamoto 
Y, Yoshioka N. Indication and limitations of using 
palatal rugae for personal identification in edentu-
lous cases. Forensic Sci Int. 2008; 176:178–82.
129. Aparicio Castellanos DC, Henr’quez Higuera LF, 
Hurtado Avella AM, Pedraza Gutiérrez AP, Casas 
Martínez JA. Identificación positiva por medio 
del uso de la rugoscop’a en un Municipio de 
Cundinamarca (Colombia): Reporte de caso. Acta 
Odontol Venez. 2007; 45(3):e1–6.
130. Kapali S, Townsend G, Richards L, Parish T. 
Palatal rugae patterns in Australian Aborigines and 
Caucasians. Aust Dent J. 1997; 42(2):129–33.
131. Hoggan BR, Sadowsky C. The use of palatal rugae 
for the assessment of anteroposterior tooth move-
ments. Am J Ortho Dentofacial Orthop. 2001; 
119:482–8.
132. Burris BG, Harris EF. Identification of race and 
sex from palate dimensions. J Forensic Sci. 1998; 
43(5):959–63.
133. Kashima K. Comparative study of the palatal rugae 
and shape of the hard palate in Japanese and Indian 
children. Aichi Gakuin Daigaku Shigakkai Shi. 
1990; 28:295–320.
134. Hermosilla VV, San Pedro VJ, Cantín IM, Suazo 
GIC. Palatal rugae: Systematic analysis of its shape 
and dimensions for use in human identification. Int 
J Morphol. 2009; 27:819–25.
135. Gopichand PV, Kaushal S, Kaur G. Personal identifi-
cation using lip prints (cheiloscopy)—A study in 500 
Punjabi females. J Indo Pac Acad Forensic Odontol. 
2010; 1:20–2.
136. Grimaldo-Carjevschi M. Rugoscopía, Queiloscopía, 
Oclusografía y Oclusoradiografía como métodos de 
identificación en Odontología Forense: Una revisión 
de la literatura. Acta Odontol Venez. 2010; 48(2).
137. Hemanth M, Vidya M, Shetty N, Karkera BV. 
Identification of individuals using of the palatal 
rugae: Computerized method. J Forensic Dent Sci. 
2010; 2(2):86–90.
138. Gitto CA, Esposito SJ, Draper JM. A simple method 
of adding palatal rugae to a complete denture. J 
Prosthet Dent. 1999; 81(2): 237–9.
139. Negré Muñoz MC. Nuevas aportaciones al revelado 
de huellas labiales: Los lisocromos en Queiloscopia. 
Thesis Doctoral, Universitat de Valencia, 2004.
140. Suzuki K, Tsuchihashi Y. A new attempt of personal 
identification by means of lip print. J Indian Dent 
Assoc. 1970; 42(1):8–9.
141. Coward RC. The stability of lip pattern character-
istics over time. J Forensic Odontostomatol. 2007; 
25(2):40–56.
142. Suzuki K, Tsuchihashi Y. Two criminal cases of lip 
print. Acta Criminol Jpn. 1975; 41:61–4.
143. López Palafox J. Aplicaciones ignoradas en Odon-
tología forense. Interés de la Queiloscopía en la 
averiguación de delitos (1st Part). Maxillaris 2001; 529.
144. Ball J. The current status of lip prints and their use 
for identification. J Forensic Odontostomatol. 2002; 
20:436.
145. Netter F. Atlas of Human Anatomy, Head and Neck 
Section. New Jersey, NJ: Elsevier Health Sciences. 
1996.
146. Snyder LM. Homicide Investigation. Springfield, IL: 
Thomas. 1950, p. 65.
147. Santos M. Queiloscopy, A supplementary stomato-
logical means of identification. Int Microform J Leg 
Med. 1967; 2:66.
148. Kasprzak J. Possibilities of cheiloscopy. Forensic Sci 
Int. 1990; 46:145–51.
149. Renaud M. L’identification chéiloscopique en 
médicine légale [Cheiloscopic  identification  in 
forensic  medicine]. Nouv Presse Med. 1973; 2: 
2617-2620. 
150. Saraswathi TR, Gauri M, Ranganathan K. Study of 
lip prints. J Forensic Dent Sci. 2009; 1:28–31.
151. Sivapathasundharam B, Prakash PA, Sivakumar G. 
Lip prints (Cheiloscopy). Indian J Dent Res. 2001; 
12:234–7.
152. Sharma P, Saxena S, Rathod V. Cheiloscopy: The 
study of lip prints in sex identification. J Forensic 
Dent Sci. 2009; 1:24–7.
153. Patel S, Paul I, Astekar MS, Ramesh G, Sowmya GV. 
A study of lip print in relation to gender, family and 
blood group. Int J Oral Maxillofac Pathol. 2010; 
1(1):4–7.

158
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
154. Augustine J, Barpande SR, Tupkari JV. Cheiloscopy 
as an adjunct to forensic identification: A study of 
600 individuals. J Forensic Odontostomatol. 2008; 
27:44–52.
155. Utsuno H, Kanoh T, Tadokoro O, Inoue K. 
Preliminary study of post mortem identification 
using lip prints. Forensic Sci Int. 2005; 149:129–32.
156. Castello A, Alvarez M, Verdu F. Just lip prints? No: 
There could be something else. FASEB J. 2004; 
18:615–6.
157. Castelló A, Alvarez M, Miguel M, Verdú F. Long-
lasting lipsticks and latent prints. Forensic Sci 
Commun. April 2002; 4. Available from: http://
www.fbi.gov/hq/lab/fsc/backissu/Apr2002/verd 
.html.
158. Odontostomatology Laboratory Expertise (L.P.O. 
directed by PhD Gabriel Fonseca, Cordoba, 
Argentina.
159. Castello A, Alvarez M, Negre MC, Verdu FA. 
Revelado de huellas labiales invisibles con reactivos 
fluorescentes. Cuad Med Forense. 2003; 34:43–7.
160. Bowers CM, Bell GL. Manual of Forensic 
Odontology. 3rd ed. Ontario, CA: American Society 
of Forensic Odontology. 1997, pp. 16–8.
161. The People of the State of Illinois, Plaintiff-Appellant, 
vs Lavelle L. Davis, Defendant-Appellee. Appellate 
Court of Illinois, Second District, Case No. 94-CF-
76, November 20, 2007, p. 67.
162. Schulz MM, Wehner HD, Reichert W, Graw M. 
Ninhydrin-dyed latent fingerprints as a DNA 
source in a murder case. J Clin Forensic Med. 2004; 
11:202–4.
163. Bernardoni M, Sauer S, Briem Stamm A. Análisis 
experimental del comportamniento de huellas labia-
les en cadáveres frescos usando el Método Fraile. 
Gac Int Cien Forense. 2013; 3:19–24.

159
C H A P T E R  9
An Introduction to Digital Audio Forensics
Michael Dixon
CONTENTS
9.1 Overview 
160
9.2 Human Voice 
160
9.3 Audio Enhancement 
160
9.4 Authentication/Other 
160
9.5 Audio Fundamentals 
161
9.5.1 Waveform Measurements 
161
9.5.2 Sample Rate 
161
9.5.3 Nyquist-Shannon Sampling Frequency 
161
9.5.4 Bit Depth 
161
9.5.5 Audio File Formats 
161
9.5.6 Lossless Compressed File Formats 
161
9.5.7 Lossy Formats (Compressed) 
161
9.5.8 Upsampling/Downsampling 
162
9.5.9 File Formats for Forensic Work 
162
9.6 Headphone Types 
162
9.6.1 Open-Back Headphones 
162
9.6.2 Closed-Back Headphones 
162
9.6.3 Noise-Canceling Headphones 
162
9.6.4 Earbud Headphones 
162
9.6.5 Sound-Isolating Earphones 
162
9.6.6 Speakers 
162
9.7 Waveform Editors 
163
9.7.1 Overview 
163
9.7.2 Level Meters 
163
9.7.3 Clipping 
163
9.8 Filters 
164
9.8.1 Band Pass 
164
9.8.2 Low Pass 
164
9.8.3 High Pass 
164
9.8.4 Band Stop 
164
9.8.5 Graphic Equalizers 
165
9.8.6 Noise Reduction Filters 
165
9.8.7 Audit Trail 
165
9.8.8 Summary 
165
9.9 Useful Terminology 
165
9.9.1 Amplitude 
165
9.9.2 Band-Pass Filter 
165
9.9.3 Bit Depth 
165
9.9.4 Clipping 
165
9.9.5 Codec 
165
9.9.6 DAT 
165

160
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
9.1 OVERVIEW
Watching TV programs and films, it is easy to think that 
audio enhancement is a simple process where conversations 
can be easily isolated from a noisy nightclub background. 
The reality is very different, requiring specialized knowl-
edge of audio software, hardware, and legal processes.
Real-world audio enhancement usually involves record-
ings made in less than ideal conditions and with less than 
ideal equipment. Hidden omnidirectional microphones that 
pick up sound from all directions recording in lossy file for-
mats are usual. This results in quiet voices hidden within 
a broad spectrum of background noise. Enhancement can 
indeed sometimes yield dramatic improvements in the 
intelligibility of the voice in a  recording. However, the 
improvements are usually more discrete, such as balancing 
the listening volume of the two voices in a conversation, or 
the removal of mains hum or background hiss.
The history of audio forensics probably goes back to 
its use by the military as far back as World War II, when 
sound spectrographs were used to try to identify enemy 
voices in radio transmissions. In 1974, the Watergate affair 
featured an erased recording. Over 18 minutes of recorded 
material had deliberately been erased; a team of six scien-
tists were chosen to examine the recording in what was 
probably the first forensic authentication case in history.
In the past, analog, and later, digital signal process-
ing (DSP) hardware was used to process audio, to filter 
out background noise, and so on. Today, this is almost 
exclusively carried out using software.
9.2 HUMAN VOICE
Human beings have an audible frequency range of about 
20 Hz–20,000 Hz, with most of its sensitivity around 
300–10,000 HZ. The average male speaking voice has a 
fundamental frequency of between 85–155 Hz, and the 
average woman’s speaking voice is 165–255 Hz. A very 
deep male voice could be as low as 65 Hz, while a high 
female soprano singer might be 1000–1280 Hz and a 
high-pitched scream could be around 3000 Hz.
Used in telephony, the range 300–3400 Hz is the most 
important range for speech recognition. Reducing this 
range can noticeably reduce intelligibility, but increasing 
it doesn’t have much added effect. The dynamic range is 
about 96 dB; this is the quietest to loudest range.
9.3 AUDIO ENHANCEMENT
The main goal of forensic audio enhancement is to make 
the spoken voices in a recording more discernible. This 
can be done by removing unwanted background noise, 
amplifying voices, hiss removal, mains hum removal, and 
so on. The human voice has a random waveform, whereas 
the unwanted background noise in a recording can be a 
 nonrandom repeating noise pattern. This nonrandom noise 
can be removed to make the vocal part of the  recording 
clearer. It is much more difficult to remove unwanted back-
ground noise when it is random and within the voice fre-
quency range without also removing elements of the voice 
in the recording.
9.4 AUTHENTICATION/OTHER
In addition to enhancement, forensic audio analysis is also 
used to authenticate recordings as genuine. Comparing 
frequency range, background noise, and amplitude levels 
throughout a recording can, in expert hands, show if the 
recording has been edited. Forensic audio analysis has 
been used to invalidate the ostensible location of a 999 
(emergency) call made on a mobile phone. The recording 
was recreated using the same handset in the same loca-
tion and the background noises compared, proving that 
the call was not made at the alleged location.
Electrical network frequency (ENF) analysis is 
recorded simultaneously with the audio; a 49–51 Hz band-
pass filter can isolate it and compare it to a database. ENF 
9.9.7 
Decibel (dB) 
165
9.9.8 
Dynamic Range 
165
9.9.9 
Equalization (EQ) 
165
9.9.10 Frequency 
165
9.9.11 Hertz (Hz) 
165
9.9.12 Normalize 
166
9.9.13 Pulse Code Modulation (PCM) 
166
9.9.14 Phase 
166
9.9.15 Root Mean Square (RMS) 
166
9.9.16 Signal-to-Noise (S/N) Ratio 
166
9.9.17 Sample Rate 
166
9.9.18 Sound Wave 
166
9.9.19 Waveform 
166

161
An Introduction to Digital Audio Forensics
can also affect some battery-operated recorders (50 Hz in 
Europe, 60 Hz in the United States) fluctuations database.
Voiceprints, or voice spectrography, is an analysis of 
the frequencies in a voice. It is used to compare a voice 
in a recording to that of a known subject to ascertain if 
both recordings are of the same person.
9.5 AUDIO FUNDAMENTALS
9.5.1 Waveform Measurements
Several measurements describe waveforms:
Amplitude—This is the change in pressure from the 
peak of the waveform to the trough. High-amplitude 
waveforms are loud; low-amplitude waveforms are quiet. 
Peak amplitude is the maximum value in the waveform.
Cycle—Describes a single oscillation of the waveform.
Frequency—This is measured in hertz (Hz) and is the 
number of cycles per second. Higher frequencies have a 
higher musical pitch.
Phase—Measured in 360 degrees, this indicates the 
position of a waveform in a cycle. Zero degrees is the 
start point and 360 is the end point. It is used to describe 
two sound waves relative to each other; when the crests 
and troughs align the waveforms are said to be in phase.
Wavelength—Measured in units such as meters/
centimeters, it is the distance between two points with 
the same degree of phase. As frequency increases, wave-
length decreases.
9.5.2 Sample Rate
Sample rate indicates the number of samples taken of an 
audio signal each second and determines the frequency 
range of the audio file. The higher the frequency of the 
sample rate, the closer the shape of the digital waveform 
will be to that of the original analog waveform (Table 9.1).
9.5.3 Nyquist-Shannon Sampling Frequency
This is a frequency equal to half the sample rate, and it deter-
mines the highest reproducible audio frequency for that 
rate. Audio CDs use a sample rate of 44,100 Hz because 
the resulting Nyquist-Shannon frequency is 22,050 Hz—
just above the 20,000 Hz limit of human hearing.
9.5.4 Bit Depth
This determines the dynamic range of the audio. When 
sound is sampled, each sample is assigned the amplitude 
value closest to the original wave’s amplitude. A higher 
bit depth allows more possible amplitude values and 
therefore a greater dynamic range (Table 9.2).
9.5.5 Audio File Formats
Uncompressed CD quality audio at 44,100 samples per 
second and 16 bits per sample requires around 88 KB per 
second, 5 MB per minute. That figure doubles to 10 MB 
per minute if in stereo.
The main uncompressed format is PCM (pulse code 
modulation); file formats storing this are as follows:
• Waveform Audio File Format (WAV) encoding 
LPCM (linear pulse code modulation)
• Audio Interchange File Format (AIFF) encoding 
PCM
Both the above formats can use compression, however.
9.5.6 Lossless Compressed File Formats
These formats create smaller file sizes without reducing 
the audio quality. Lossless formats include the following:
• FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec): 50%–60% 
reduction in file size
• ALAC (Apple Lossless Audio Codec): 40%–60% 
reduction in file size
9.5.7 Lossy Formats (Compressed)
Lossy formats reduce file size by throwing away some 
of the audio information; they achieve much higher 
TABLE 9.1 Sample Rates
Sample 
Rate
Quality Level
Frequency 
Range
8000 Hz
Telephony
0–4000 Hz
11,025 Hz
AM radio, lower-quality 
PCM, MPEG audio
0–5512 Hz
22,050 Hz
Near FM radio
0–11,025 Hz
32,000 Hz
Above FM radio, MiniDV
0–16,000 Hz
44,100 Hz
Audio CD
0–22,050 Hz
48,000 Hz
Standard DVD, Digital TV
0–24,000 Hz
96,000 Hz
DVD-Audio, HD-DVD
0–48,000 Hz
TABLE 9.2 Bit Depth
Bit Depth
Quality 
Level
Amplitude 
Values
Dynamic 
Range
8-bit
Telephony
256
48 dB
16-bit
CD
65,536
96 dB
24-bit
DVD
16,777,216
144 dB
32-bit
Best
4,294,967,296
192 dB

162
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
compression rates than lossless formats because of this. 
The loss of information within the file is not always eas-
ily heard in music files.
• MP3—MPEG-1 Layer 3
• AAC—Advanced Audio Coding
• WMA—Windows Media Audio
9.5.8 Upsampling/Downsampling
Often audio files are recorded at low quality with low 
sample rates and bit depths. While working on audio files, 
it is required that the sample rate and bit depth be higher 
than that of the original recording. This is achieved by 
upsampling: converting the sample rate to a higher rate 
by interpolation, the audio equivalent of resizing an 
image in a photo-editing application. If the opposite is 
required—a reduction in the sample rate—this is known 
as downsampling.
9.5.9 File Formats for Forensic Work
Audio requiring any kind of forensic audio work should 
always be saved using an uncompressed file format. While 
any kind of enhancement is being conducted, a high 
bit depth should be used: 32-bit resolution, if possible. 
However, this will need to be downsampled for distribution.
9.6 HEADPHONE TYPES
9.6.1 Open-Back Headphones
Sometimes referred to as vented, this design has an open 
back to the earcup. This design gives a character to the 
sound that is often described as having an open, more 
natural sound stage. One reason for this is that there 
are fewer reflections than with a closed back (or sealed) 
design. Open-back headphones are often regarded as 
providing a more accurate sound than the closed-back 
variety—audiophile headphones are normally open-back 
design. A disadvantage of the open-back design is that 
the source sound is able to leak out and the external, 
ambient sound leak in. This lack of isolation from exter-
nal noise means open-back headphones are not suitable 
for listening in noisy environments.
9.6.2 Closed-Back Headphones
The earcup is closed in this design, which reduces the 
effect of external ambient noise. Typical applications 
for the closed-back headphone design are DJ and studio 
monitoring. Closed-back headphones are also useful in 
situations where the listener needs to prevent noise leak-
age, for example, in an office or while traveling.
Full-size closed-back designs (often called circumau-
ral) encompass the ears, providing excellent isolation from 
outside noise. A smaller earpad closed design that sits on 
top of the ear will often sound more like traditional open-
back headphones because the sound can leak in and out.
The trade-off for the benefits of isolation from exter-
nal noise with the closed-back design is that the earcups 
reflect and resonate the sound made by the headphone 
drivers. The reflection of sound waves can cause closed-
back headphones to sound boxy, with a small soundstage. 
However, this design usually has better low-frequency 
reproduction than do open-back designs.
9.6.3 Noise-Canceling Headphones
Noise-canceling headphones reduce ambient external 
noise by using small microphones located inside the ear-
piece and active electronics within the headset. The prin-
ciple is that the ambient external noise is inverted and 
then summed with a signal from the audio source. The 
result is that the ambient noise from outside is effectively 
cancelled out. Such headphones are better at canceling 
lower rather than higher frequencies. The active electron-
ics inside noise-canceling headphones require power to 
operate in noise-canceling mode, but can be run passively 
without power in a non-noise-canceling mode.
9.6.4 Earbud Headphones
Earbud headphones are small in size and are placed 
directly outside one’s ear canal, without fully sealing 
one’s ear. Probably the most popular type of headphones 
they are small, lightweight, easily transportable, and, 
normally, relatively cheap. This type of headphone is not 
very efficient and leaks ambient sound in.
9.6.5 Sound-Isolating Earphones
Also known as ear canal headphones (ECHs) or in-ear 
monitors (IEMs), these earphones are placed into the ear 
canal and effectively seal one’s ear. They are small, light-
weight and very portable. This type of earphone is usu-
ally of a higher audio quality than earbud headphones 
and is good at blocking ambient noise.
9.6.6 Speakers
Studio standard monitor speakers can be used instead 
of headphones and can make it easier to listen to 

163
An Introduction to Digital Audio Forensics
conversations and decipher words. However, loudspeak-
ers can be used only in quiet listening rooms where envi-
ronmental ambient noise is not an issue.
9.7 WAVEFORM EDITORS
9.7.1 Overview
Digital audio editing software or waveform editors are 
the main tools used in audio forensics and enhance-
ment. These both allow the amplitude or frequency 
of an audio file to be viewed graphically and provide 
tools to adjust the waveform. There are software 
packages specifically designed for audio forensics, 
with audit trails and simplified toolsets for common 
tasks. However, with user knowledge of the processes 
involved, the same results can be obtained using non-
forensic-specific software. There are many free or 
open-source audio-editing software packages that are 
suitable for most forensic audio work.
Whatever software package is used, it should at least 
have the basic features listed as in the following sections.
9.7.2 Level Meters
These are used to monitor the amplitude of audio during 
playback or recording (Figure 9.1).
Waveform display shows a waveform as amplitude 
against time. Usually, the x-axis shows time, and the 
y-axis shows amplitude. This type of display is very use-
ful for identifying where the areas of activity are within 
an audio file, such as periods of conversation. It shows 
when clipping (waveform distortion when the signal 
exceeds the maximum dynamic range) has taken place, 
the signal strength, the signal compared to the noise 
floor, and much more (Figure 9.2).
Spectral frequency display shows a waveform by its 
frequency content against time. The x-axis shows time, 
and the y-axis shows frequency. This display is useful for 
analyzing the audio frequency content for building high-
pass, low-pass and band-pass filters. Most of these types 
of displays are customizable as to color content; usually 
the lighter colors indicate a higher amplitude of the par-
ticular frequency indicated (Figure 9.3).
The ability to decrease or increase the amplitude 
(amplify) of the waveform is essential. This is one of the 
most important tools in audio forensics. Conversations 
are often recorded covertly, with the result that one side 
of the conversation is much louder than the other. One 
speaker is usually nearer to the recording device, or one 
person is on a telephone but the other speaker can still be 
heard. The ability to selectively amplify sections of the 
waveform is very useful in correcting the differences in 
amplitude in these situations (Figures 9.4 and 9.5).
9.7.3 Clipping
When a signal is recorded too loudly for the recording 
device, the signal is cut or clipped at the maximum level. 
A clipped signal can often be recovered to some extent by 
most software packages. Digital clipping occurs when a 
signal’s amplitude exceeds the bit depth maximum level 
(Figure 9.6).
FIGURE 9.1 Waveform display.
FIGURE 9.2 Spectral frequency display.
FIGURE 9.3 Amplification.
FIGURE 9.4 Original waveform.

164
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
9.8 FILTERS
9.8.1 Band Pass
A band-pass filter passes a range of frequencies through 
while removing all other frequencies. This is useful for 
removing a background noise whilst preserving the fre-
quencies containing the voice content of an audio file 
(Figure 9.7).
9.8.2 Low Pass
This filter passes low frequencies and removes high 
frequencies. A low-pass filter is useful for removing 
unwanted high-frequency noise, such as a hiss (Figure 9.8).
9.8.3 High Pass
This filter passes high frequencies and removes low 
frequencies. A high-pass filter is useful for removing 
unwanted low frequencies, such as rumbles (Figure 9.9).
9.8.4 Band Stop
A band-stop filter attenuates frequencies within a speci-
fied range. Also known as a notch filter, band stop is the 
opposite of band pass. A 49 Hz–11 Hz band stop can be 
used to remove mains hum in countries where transmis-
sion occurs at 50 Hz (Figure 9.10).
9.8.5 Graphic Equalizers
A graphic equalizer boosts or cuts specific frequencies, 
and its controls allow the audio amplitude to be adjusted 
FIGURE 9.6 A clipped waveform.
0
–20
–30
–40
–10
Decibels
FIGURE 9.7 7000 Hz to 16,000 Hz band-pass filter.
0
–20
–30
–40
–10
Decibels
FIGURE 9.8 Low-pass filter.
0
–20
–30
–40
–10
Decibels
FIGURE 9.9 High-pass filter.
FIGURE 9.5 Plus 12 DB amplification.
FIGURE 9.10 Example of typical software equalizer.

165
An Introduction to Digital Audio Forensics
at specified frequencies. More control bands allow better 
isolation of specific frequencies and are therefore more 
useful for audio forensics.
9.8.6 Noise Reduction Filters
Sound engineers will record the ambient background noise 
of a location to later add to the dialogue to create a natural 
sound to the silence. Noise reduction filters do the oppo-
site: the silence of an audio track is sampled and used to 
create a filter to remove it. The sampled area of waveform 
to be used for the noise reduction filter must not contain 
any voices; otherwise, they will be removed along with 
the unwanted ambient sounds. These filters work well 
in removing AC mains hum and its harmonics as well as 
other nonrandom noise or combinations of noise.
Adaptive noise reduction filters automatically learn the 
noise content and remove it in real time. The filters can be set 
to preserve an important bandwidth, such as voice content, 
while actively removing noise outside this range. They are 
also used remove variable background noise, such as wind.
9.8.7 Audit Trail
It is important to keep a record of each step of the enhance-
ment process if the software doesn’t do this automatically. 
If the enhanced audio file is to be used in court, it must be 
able to be recreated, process by process, from the original 
audio file. This audit trail can be simply screen grabs of 
the audio filter setting along with notes of the procedures.
9.8.8 Summary
There isn’t often a magic bullet in the real world of foren-
sic audio enhancement. Results are achieved by using a 
mix of the above filtering processes along with selective 
amplification and critical listening. Experience and tim-
escale play a large part in achieving good results.
9.9 USEFUL TERMINOLOGY
9.9.1 Amplitude
Amplitude represents the volume of an audio signal. 
There are different standards for measuring amplitude, 
but the decibel (dB) is the most common.
9.9.2 Band-Pass Filter
A filter that allows a selected range of audio frequencies 
to pass through but attenuates all other frequencies.
9.9.3 Bit Depth
The bit depth is the number of bits used to represent audio 
signals amplitude: 8-bit resolution provides 256 possible 
amplitude levels and a 48 dB dynamic range, while 16-bit 
resolution provides 65,536 levels and a 96 dB range.
9.9.4 Clipping
Clipping is when a signal is recorded too loudly for the 
recording device, the signal is cut or clipped at the maxi-
mum level. Digital clipping occurs when a signal’s ampli-
tude exceeds the bit depth maximum level.
9.9.5 Codec
Codec (compressor/decompressor) is the data compres-
sion schemes used by the audio file formats.
9.9.6 DAT
Digital audio tape (DAT) is a digital medium developed 
by Sony in the 1980s.
9.9.7 Decibel (dB)
In audio, the decibel (dB) is a logarithmic unit of mea-
surement used for amplitude.
9.9.8 Dynamic Range
Dynamic range is the audio amplitude range, from quiet-
est to loudest.
9.9.9 Equalization (EQ)
Equalization refers to increasing or decreasing the ampli-
tude of specific audio frequencies relative to the amplitude 
of other audio frequencies.
9.9.10 Frequency
Frequency is measured in hertz (Hz) and is the number 
of cycles per second. Higher frequencies have a higher 
musical pitch.
9.9.11 Hertz (Hz)
Hertz refers to cycles per second; it is a unit of measure-
ment that describes the frequency of a sound.

166
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
9.9.12 Normalize
Normalize is to adjust the highest peak of a waveform so it 
nearly reaches the digital maximum, the same amount of 
gain is used to raise or lower all other peaks accordingly. 
Typically, audio is normalized to 100% to achieve maxi-
mum volume.
9.9.13  Pulse Code Modulation (PCM)
PCM is used to digitally represent analogue signals.
9.9.14 Phase
Phase is the position of one sound wave relative to other 
sound waves.
9.9.15  Root Mean Square (RMS)
RMS is a mathematical formula used to determine the 
average amplitude of an audio signal.
9.9.16  Signal-to-Noise (S/N Ratio)
Signal-to-noise ratio describes the difference between the 
highest signal level before distortion and the average level 
of the noise floor.
9.9.17 Sample Rate
Sample rate indicates the number of samples taken 
of an audio signal each second and determines the 
frequency range of the audio file. The higher the fre-
quency of the sample rate, the closer the shape of the 
digital waveform will be to that of the original ana-
logue waveform.
9.9.18 Sound Wave
Sound travels through air as longitudinal waves and is 
measured in hertz (Hz). Humans can hear sound waves 
with frequencies of 20 to 20,000 Hz.
9.9.19 Waveform
Waveform is a term that describes the visual representa-
tion of an audio signal, usually displayed as amplitude 
across time. In acoustics, waveform refers to a sound 
wave of a specific frequency.

167
C H A P T E R  10
Forensic Toxicology
Amarnath Mishra and Nino Nardareshvili
CONTENTS
10.1 Introduction 
168
10.2 Detection and Measurement of Drugs and Alcohol in Blood and Urine 
169
10.2.1 Time Duration of Drugs in the System 
169
10.3 Testing of Opium/Crude Morphine/Poppy Straw 
170
10.3.1 Presumptive Tests (Color Tests) 
170
10.3.1.1 Marquis Test 
170
10.3.1.2 Ferric Salt Test 
170
10.3.2 Alternate Test for Meconic Acid 
170
10.3.2.1 Ferric Chloride Test 
170
10.3.2.2 Porphyroxine Test 
170
10.3.3 Thin-Layer Chromatography 
170
10.4 Test for Diacetyl Morphine/Heroin/Smack/Brown Sugar 
171
10.4.1 Presumptive Tests (Color Tests) 
171
10.4.1.1 Marquis Test 
172
10.4.1.2 Mecke’s Test 
172
10.4.1.3 Frohde Test 
172
10.4.1.4 Nitric Acid Test 
172
10.4.2 Thin-Layer Chromatography 
172
10.5 Test for Cannabis 
172
10.5.1 Microscope Examination 
172
10.5.2 Color Tests 
173
10.5.2.1 Fast Blue B Salt Test 
173
10.5.2.2 Alternate Test 
173
10.5.2.3  Test for Differentiation between Bhang, Ganja, and Charas 
173
10.5.2.4  Thin-Layer Chromatography 
173
10.6 Test for Cocaine 
173
10.6.1 Color Test 
173
10.6.1.1 Scott’s Test 
174
10.6.1.2 Ethyl Benzoate Test 
174
10.6.2 Thin-Layer Chromatography 
174
10.7 Test for Benzodiazepine 
174
10.7.1 Thin-Layer Chromatography 
174
10.8 Analysis of Alcohol in Liquors/Drinks 
175
10.8.1 Introduction 
175
10.8.1.1 Qualitative Analysis of Liquor 
175
10.9 Controlled Substances 
176
10.9.1 Scope and Application 
176
10.9.2 Analytical Reference Standard 
176
10.9.3 Database 
176
10.9.4 Control Samples 
176

168
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
10.1 INTRODUCTION
Time passes, but the need for toxicological understand-
ing persists. As much as we might wish for the end of 
poverty, ignorance, hunger, and exposure to hazard-
ous chemicals, and as much as we work toward these 
goals, the challenges are formidable, and the end is not 
in sight. Chemicals and finished products made from 
chemicals continue to play an ever-present part in our 
lives. Although it is not evident that the benefits of chemi-
cals always outweigh their risks, there is little doubt that 
a wide spectrum of chemicals and drugs has enhanced 
both the duration and quality of our lives. That said, 
some of them in certain situations are clearly harmful to 
certain people. Among the fruits of toxicologists’ labors 
is information on how best to eliminate, reduce, or pre-
vent such harm.
The term “forensic toxicology” covers any applica-
tion of the science and study of poisons to the admin-
istration of justice. The subject is usually associated 
with work for the police, the coroner, and the crimi-
nal law courts. However, the analysis and identifica-
tion of medicines and the maintenance of agricultural, 
industrial, and public health are also aspects of forensic 
toxicology.
Accidental self-poisoning and attempted suicide cases 
are generally the responsibility of the clinical toxicolo-
gist, who may work in conjunction with a poison control 
center. A small proportion of these cases is referred to 
the forensic toxicologist, either because of an allegation 
of deliberately harmful poisoning or because the patient 
dies and a coroner’s inquest is ordered. The defining dif-
ference between the clinical toxicologist and the forensic 
toxicologist is the judicial element. The clinical toxi-
cologist is primarily concerned with the identification of 
drugs and poisons as an aid to the diagnosis and treat-
ment of acute and chronic poisoning. If the patient dies, 
the analytical data obtained by the clinical toxicologist 
may well be sufficient for use by the pathologist and the 
coroner in determining the cause of death in cases where 
there are no suspicious circumstances. In other cases, 
including those where the patient recovers but claims 
to have been poisoned by a third party, it is usual for 
the investigation to be referred to a forensic toxicologist. 
Although the above indicates that the forensic toxicolo-
gist is generally involved in cases of suspected poisoning, 
more recently other roles have developed in areas such 
as doping in sports (of both humans and animals) and 
workplace drug- testing biological systems. Forensic toxi-
cology deals with the application of toxicology to cases 
and issues where those adverse effects have administra-
tive or medicolegal consequences.
Toxicology is the study of the adverse effects of drugs 
and chemicals on and where the results are likely to be 
used in court. Forensic toxicology is a completely modern 
science, based on published and widely accepted scien-
tific methods and practices, used to analyze drugs in bio-
logical materials and interpret those results. Many of the 
methods it employs have been derived from innovations 
in clinical medicine and academic laboratories through-
out the world. Thousands of articles related to forensic 
toxicology methods, instrumentation and interpreta-
tion are published in hundreds of peer-reviewed journals 
every year, increasing our understanding of the benefits, 
risks, and dangers associated with use and abuse of illicit 
and recreational drugs, medications, and alcohol.
Forensic toxicologists work with pathologists, medi-
cal examiners, and coroners in helping to establish the 
role of alcohol, drugs, and poisons in the cause of death. 
The toxicologist identifies and quantifies the presence of 
drugs and chemicals in blood and tissue samples. This 
is done using state-of-the-art chemical and biomedical 
instrumentation capable of detecting small amounts of 
toxic materials, positively identifying them, and accu-
rately measuring how much is present. Accuracy, valid-
ity, and reliability are essential, as this information is 
used in the determination of the cause and manner of 
death. Those determinations are the prerogative of the 
medical examiner or coroner; however, the toxicolo-
gist is a key member of the team of experts who assist 
10.9.5 
Method Blank 
176
10.9.6 
Standard—Primary 
176
10.9.7 
Standard—Secondary 
176
10.9.8 
Modification 
176
10.9.9 
Instrument Blank 
176
10.9.10 Solvent 
176
10.10 Safety 
177
10.11 Sampling Plan 
177
10.11.1 Scope 
177
10.12 Minimum Examination Requirements 
177
10.12.1 Physical Examination 
177
10.13 Categorizing Analytical Techniques 
178
Bibliography 
178

169
Forensic Toxicology
in that determination, consulting on pharmacology, 
drug kinetics and interactions, metabolism, adverse and 
idiosyncratic reactions, drug tolerance, postmortem arti-
facts, drug stability, and other factors. The pathologist 
considers this information in the context of the investi-
gative and medical history of the case as well as the find-
ings of disease or other medical conditions at autopsy. 
Accurately establishing the appropriate cause and man-
ner of death has serious implications for public health 
and public safety, and forensically reliable toxicology is 
an essential component of that process.
Forensic toxicologists perform analysis of drugs 
and alcohol in biological samples—typically blood and 
urine, but increasingly in other matrices such as oral 
fluid and hair—to determine the timing, extent, and 
impairment resulting from different patterns of drug and 
alcohol use. The toxicologist uses state-of-the-art ana-
lytical methods, such as those found in many research 
and hospital laboratories, to isolate drugs from complex 
biological samples, prepare them for analysis through 
extraction and purification, then determine the identity 
and amount of drug present. Following the analytical 
phase, the forensic toxicologist provides interpretation 
of the result with respect to whether the dose represents 
typical therapeutic use, recreational use, or potential 
abuse, and he or she can provide opinions about the 
likely effects of these patterns of use. This can include 
performance enhancement that occurs following the 
use of stimulants, and impairment from recreational or 
prescription medication use and misuse. Forensic toxi-
cologists review and testify in cases of impaired driving 
involving alcohol and drugs, and address diverse issues 
such as transportation safety, drug-facilitated crimes, 
competency, intoxication, and diminished capacity. 
Forensic toxicologists frequently testify in court to both 
their findings and their interpretation.
Enforcing these rules requires periodic off- season, 
random and event-focused drug testing for  performance- 
enhancing drugs and other medications that appear on 
the organizations’ prohibited substances lists. Forensic 
toxicologists in this field use many of the same high-per-
formance analytical methods to detect current and his-
torical use of banned substances, including stimulants, 
anabolic steroids, and diuretics.
Use of drugs by people in the workplace has signifi-
cant safety and economic consequences. Forensic toxi-
cologists perform testing of urine samples in regulated 
and inspected laboratories. Testing for five major classes 
of abused drugs and their metabolites, these scientists 
employ highly uniform and well-defined techniques and 
methods to minimize the risk of errors, ensuring that 
employees are treated fairly and that testing is done to 
the highest forensic standards. The majority of work-
place drug testing is not covered directly by accreditation 
programs, however. These unregulated programs can 
perform tests using other matrices such as oral fluids, 
sweat, and hair.
10.2 DETECTION AND MEASUREMENT OF 
DRUGS AND ALCOHOL IN BLOOD  
AND URINE
This is very important for the qualitative and quantitative 
analysis of drugs and alcohol in blood and urine samples. 
There are basic drug test types and their approximate 
detection times are given in Table 10.1.
10.2.1 Time Duration of Drugs in the System
Alcohol—3–5 days in urine, up to 90 days in hair 
and around 10–12 hours in blood 
Amphetamines—1–3 days in urine, up to 90 days 
in hair and around 12 hours in blood 
Barbiturates—2–4 days in urine, up to 90 days in 
hair and 1–2 days in blood 
Benzodiazepines—3–6 weeks in urine, up to 90 
days in hair and 2–3 days in blood 
Cannabis—7–30 days in urine, up to 90 days in 
hair, 2 weeks in blood 
Cocaine—3–4 days in urine, up to 90 days in hair, 
1–2 days in blood 
Codeine—1 day in urine, up to 90 days in hair, 
12 hours in blood 
Heroin—3–4 days in urine, up to 90 days in hair, 
up to 12 hours in blood 
LSD—1–3 days in urine, up to 3 days in hair, 2–3 
hours in blood 
TABLE10.1 Basic Drug Test Types and Their Approximate Detection Times
Urine
Blood
Hair
Saliva
Marijuana—Single Use
1–7+ days
12–24 hrs
Doubtful
Not validated
(0–24 hours?)
Marijuana—Regular Use
7–100 days
2–7 days
Amphetamines
1–3 days
24 hours
Cocaine
1–3 days
1–3 days
Heroin, Opiates
1–4 days
1–3 days
Months
PCP
3–7 days
1–3 days

170
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
MDMA (ecstasy)—3–4 days in urine, up to 90 days 
in hair and 1–2 days in blood 
Methamphetamine (crystal meth)—3–6 days in 
urine, up to 90 days in hair, 24–72 hours in 
blood 
Methadone—3–4 days in urine, up to 90 days in 
hair, 24–36 hours in blood 
Morphine—2–3 days in urine, up to 90 days in 
hair, 6–8 hours in blood 
10.3 TESTING OF OPIUM/CRUDE 
MORPHINE/POPPY STRAW
10.3.1 Presumptive Tests (Color Tests)
Positive results of these tests are only a presumptive indi-
cation for the presence of opium alkaloids. It is manda-
tory for the analyst to confirm such results by use of an 
alternate technique.
10.3.1.1 Marquis Test
Take a small amount of suspected sample in a test tube 
and add about 10 drops of water, then crush the sam-
ple with a glass rod. Place a few drops of water solu-
tion through filter paper/supernatant liquid on a spotting 
plate and add a few drops of Marquis reagent. The devel-
opment of a purple-violet color indicates the presence of 
opium/crude morphine.
Preparation of Marquis Reagent: 8–10 drops of 40% 
formaldehyde solution is added to 10 mL of conc. sulfu-
ric acid.
10.3.1.2 Ferric Salt Test
Take a small amount of suspected material on a spot plate 
and add about 2 drops of water; triturate the sample until 
the water becomes a brown color. Take 1 drop of brown 
liquid to another part of the spot plate and add 1 drop 
of reagent. The appearance of a brown-purple color indi-
cates the positive test for the presence of meconic acid. 
This meconic acid is present in raw and prepared opium, 
but it will not be detected in crude morphine.
Preparation of Ferric Salt Reagent: Dissolve 1 g of 
ferric sulfate in 20 mL of water.
10.3.2 Alternate Test for Meconic Acid
10.3.2.1 Ferric Chloride Test
Dissolve an appropriate sample of opium in water and 
add a drop of dilute hydrochloric acid followed by a few 
drops of 10% solution of ferric chloride. A red color will 
appear. Divide this solution into two parts. Take the first 
part, add dilute hydrochloric acid to it in excess, and 
warm. The red color of the solution remains there. Take 
the second part and add a solution of mercuric chloride. 
The color of the solution is not affected.
Preparation of Mercuric Chloride Reagent: Dissolve 
5 g mercuric chloride in 100 mL of water.
Dilute Hydrochloric Acid: About 10% W/W of HCl 
in water.
10.3.2.2 Porphyroxine Test
Take a small amount of suspected material on a spot 
plate and add 2 drops of water. Triturate it with glass 
rod. Take 1 drop of brown liquid from this mixture to 
another part of the plate, add 1 drop of 2 N hydrochloric 
acid, and heat gently. Appearance of red color indicates 
the presence of porphyroxine.
10.3.3 Thin-Layer Chromatography
Stationary Phase: Activated silica gel (with or without 
fluorescing substance) TLC (thin-layer chromatography) 
plates of 0.25/0.20 mm thickness.
Mobile Phase/Solvent Systems
System A: Toluene, Acetone, Ethanol, and Conc. 
Ammonia (45:45:7:3)
System B: Ethyl acetate, Methanol, and Conc. 
Ammonia (85:10:5)
System 
C: 
Ethanol, 
Chloroform, 
Dioxane, 
Petroleum ether, Benzene, Ammonium hydrox-
ide, and ethyl acetate (5:10:50:15:10:15:5)
System D: Ethanol, benzene, ammonium hydroxide 
and dioxane (5:50:5:40)
Visualization Methods
1. UV light at 254 nm
2. Dragendorff’s reagent spray
3. Acidified potassium iodoplatinate reagent spray
Preparation of Dragendorff’s Reagent: Mix together 
2 g of bismuth subnitrate, 25 mL of glacial acetic acid 
and 100 mL of water to produce solution (1); dissolve 
40 g of potassium iodide in 100 mL of water to produce 
solution (2). Mix 10 mL of solution (1), 10 mL of solu-
tion (2), 20 mL of glacial acetic acid, and 100 mL of 
water.
Preparation of Acidified Potassium Iodoplatinate 
Reagent: Dissolve 0.25 g of platinic chloride and 5 g of 
potassium iodide in water to 100 mL. For the acidified 
version, 2 mL of concentrated hydrochloric acid is added.
For screening of opioids viz. morphine, codeine, the-
baine, paperverine, and narcotine, TLC is used.
In TLC for separation of morphine, codeine, the-
baine, paperverine and narcotine, keeping standard in 

171
Forensic Toxicology
first row and samples in second to sixth rows, the plate 
was run using solvent system Toluene: Acetone: Ethanol: 
Conc. Ammonia in 45:45:7:3, v/v/v/v ratio, which is 
shown in Figure 10.1.
The developed plate was sprayed with Dragendorff’s 
reagent spray. Appearance of yellow/orange/red-orange/
brown-orange spots indicated the presence of opiates, 
namely morphine, codeine, thebaine, paperverine, and 
narcotine.
In TLC for separation of morphine, codeine, the-
baine, paperverine, and narcotine, keeping standard 
in first row and samples in second to sixth rows, plate 
was run using solvent system Ethyl acetate: Methanol: 
Conc. Ammonia in 85:10:5, v/v/v ratio, which is shown 
in Figure 10.2.
The developed plate was sprayed with Dragendorff’s 
reagent spray. Appearance of yellow/orange/red-orange/
brown-orange spots indicated the presence of opiates, 
namely morphine, codeine, thebaine, paperverine, and 
narcotine.
In TLC for separation of morphine, codeine, the-
baine, paperverine, and narcotine, keeping standard 
in first row and samples in second to sixth rows, plate 
was run using solvent system Ethanol: Benzene: Amm. 
Hydroxide: Dioxane in 5:50:5:40, v/v/v/v ratio, which is 
shown in Figure 10.3.
The developed plate was sprayed with Dragendorff’s 
reagent spray. Appearance of yellow/orange/red-orange/
brown-orange spots indicates the presence of opiates, 
namely morphine, codeine, thebaine, paperverine, and 
narcotine.
10.4 TEST FOR DIACETYL MORPHINE/
HEROIN/SMACK/BROWN SUGAR
10.4.1 Presumptive Tests (Color Tests)
Positive results of these tests are only a presumptive indica-
tion for the presence of heroin. It is mandatory for the ana-
lyst to confirm such results by use of an alternate technique.
FIGURE 10.1 TLC plate showing the separation of dif-
ferent analytes (using Toluene: Acetone: Ethanol: Conc. 
Ammonia) (45:45:7:3, v/v/v/v).
FIGURE 10.2 TLC plate showing the separation of dif-
ferent analytes (using Ethyl acetate: Methanol: Conc. 
Ammonia) (85:10:5, v/v/v).
FIGURE 10.3 TLC plate showing the separation of 
different analytes (using Ethanol: Benzene: Amm. 
Hydroxide: Dioxane) (5:50:5:40, v/v/v/v).

172
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
10.4.1.1 Marquis Test
Take a small amount of suspected sample on a spotting plate 
and add a few drops of Marquis reagent. The appearance of 
a purple-violet color indicates the presence of heroin.
Preparation of Marquis Reagent: 8–10 drops of 40% 
formaldehyde solution is added to 10 mL of conc. sulfu-
ric acid.
10.4.1.2 Mecke’s Test
Take a small amount of suspected sample on a spotting 
plate and add a few drops of reagent. The appearance of 
a deep green color indicates the presence of heroin.
Preparation of Mecke’s Reagent: 0.25 g of selenious 
acid is dissolved in 25 mL of conc. sulfuric acid.
10.4.1.3 Frohde Test
Take a small amount of suspected sample on a spotting 
plate and add a few drops of reagent. The appearance of 
purple, becoming a gray-purple color, indicates the pres-
ence of heroin.
Preparation of Frohde’s Reagent: 50 mg of molybdic 
acid or sodium molybdate is dissolved in 10 mL of hot conc. 
sulfuric acid. The resulting solution should be colorless.
10.4.1.4 Nitric Acid Test
Take a small amount of suspected sample on a spot-
ting plate and add a few drops of conc. nitric acid. The 
appearance of a yellow color, which turns to green on 
standing, indicates the presence of heroin.
10.4.2 Thin-Layer Chromatography
Sample Preparation: Take appropriate amount of sus-
pected sample in methanol.
Stationary Phase: Activated silica gel (with or with-
out fluorescing substance) TLC plates of 0.25/0.20 mm 
thickness.
Mobile Phase/Solvent Systems
System A: Ethyl acetate, Methanol, and Conc. 
Ammonia (85:10:5)
System B: Chloroform and Methanol (90:10)
System C: Diethyl ether (water saturated), Acetone, 
and Diethylamine (85:8:7)
Other Solvent Systems
System 1: Ammonia, Benzene, Dioxane, and Ethanol 
(5:50:40:5)
System 2: Acetic acid, Ethanol, and Water (30:60:10)
System 3: Chloroform, Dioxane, Ethyl acetate, and 
Ammonia (25:60:10:5)
System 4: Ethyl alcohol, Chloroform, Dioxane, 
Petroleum ether (30°–60°), Benzene, Ammonia, 
and Ethyl acetate (5:10:50:15:10:5:5)
System 5: Ethyl acetate, Benzene, and Ammonia 
(60:35:5)
System 6: Ethyl acetate, n-Butyl ether, and Ammonia 
(60:35:5)
Visualization Methods
1. UV light at 254 nm
2. Dragendorff’s reagent spray
3. Acidified potassium iodoplatinate reagent spray
Preparation of Dragendorff’s Reagent: Mix together 
2 g of bismuth subnitrate, 25 mL of glacial acetic acid, 
and 100 mL of water to produce solution: (1) dissolve 
40 g of potassium iodide in 100 mL of water to produce 
solution; (2) mix 10 mL of solution (1), 10 mL of solu-
tion (2), 20 mL of glacial acetic acid, and 100 mL of 
water.
Preparation of Acidified Potassium Iodoplatinate 
Reagent: Dissolve 0.25 g of platinic chloride and 5 g of 
potassium iodide in water to 100 mL, and add 2 mL of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid to make it acidic.
10.5 TEST FOR CANNABIS
10.5.1 Microscope Examination
The following microscopic features (trichomes) broken 
or as such are found on the surface of the fruiting and 
flowering tops of cannabis, which are the characteristic 
features of cannabis product.
1. Nonglandular hair (trichomes), numerous, uni-
cellular, rigid, curved, with a slender-pointed 
apex, and an enlarged base, usually contain-
ing a cystolithic hair but frequently broken 
and the cystolith freed (especially in cannabis 
resin)
2. The glandular trichomes occur in three forms:
a. Sessile glands with one-celled stalk (gener-
ally on the lower epidermis) 
b. Long multicellular stalk form (generally on 
the bracteoles surrounding the female flow-
ers). The head in both forms is globular, 
consisting of 8 to 16 cells. It is frequently 
detached (especially in cannabis resin)
c. Small glandular trichome, with one-celled 
stalk 
(for 
the 
diagram/figures, 
please 
see  “Recommended Methods for Testing 
CANNABIS, U.S., New York 1987”)

173
Forensic Toxicology
10.5.2 Color Tests
Positive results of color tests are only the presumptive 
indication of the possible presence of cannabis products. 
It is necessary for the analyst to confirm the presence of 
cannabis product by the use of an alternative technique.
10.5.2.1 Fast Blue B Salt Test
10.5.2.1.1 Filter Paper Method
Fold two filter papers to form fluted funnels. Keep these 
paper funnels on each other. Place a small amount of sus-
pected sample into the corner of the upper funnel of the 
paper and add 2 drops of solution 1. Allow the liquid 
to penetrate to the lower filter paper funnel. Discard the 
upper filter paper and dry the lower filter paper. Now add 
a very small amount of the solid Fast Blue B reagent to 
this lower paper and add 2 drops of solution 2. A purple-
red-colored stain on the filter paper indicates the pres-
ence of cannabis product.
Reagents
• Solid reagent: Dilute and mix Fast Blue B Salt with 
anhydrous sodium sulfate in the ratio of 1:100.
• Solution 1: Petroleum ether
• Solution 2: A 10% w/w aqueous solution of 
sodium bicarbonate
10.5.2.1.2 Test Tube Method
Take a small amount of suspected material in a test tube; 
add to it a very small amount of the solid reagent and 
1 mL of solution 1. Shake well for 1 minute and add 1 
mL of solution 2. Shake the test tube for 2 minutes, and 
allow this test tube to stand for 2 minutes. A purple-red 
color in the lower layer of chloroform indicates the pres-
ence of cannabis product.
Reagents
• Solid reagent: Dilute and mix Fast Blue B Salt 
with anhydrous sodium sulphate in the ratio of 
2.5:100.
• Solution 1: Chloroform
• Solution 2: 0.1 N aqueous sodium hydroxide 
solution
10.5.2.1.3 Duquenois-Levine Test
Take a small amount of suspected material in a test tube 
and shake with 2 mL reagent for 1 minute, add 2 mL of 
conc. HCl and shake it well. Allow it to stand for 10 min-
utes and then add 2 mL of chloroform. The appearance 
of violet color in chloroform layer (lower layer) indicates 
the presence of cannabis.
Reagent: 5 drops of acetaldehyde and 0.4 g of vanil-
lin are dissolved in 20 mL of 95% ethanol.
10.5.2.2 Alternate Test
Extract the sample with petroleum ether. Filter and 
evaporate to dryness. Add 2 mL of Duquenois reagent 
to dissolve the residue. Add 2 mL conc. HCl. Shake 
and keep for 10 minutes. Transfer the solution into a 
test tube add 2 mL of chloroform and shake. Purple 
color in the chloroform layer indicates the presence of 
tetrahydrocannabinols.
Reagent: 5 drops of acetaldehyde and 0.4 g of vanil-
lin are dissolved in 20 mL of 95% ethanol.
10.5.2.3  Test for Differentiation between 
Bhang, Ganja, and Charas
Extract the suspected material of cannabis in ethanol. 
Take a drop of extract in a cavity of a spot tile or in a 
micro tube, add 2 drops of chromogenic reagent 1 and 
mix thoroughly, followed by the addition of 2 drops of 
reagent 2.
Bhang gives a green color, ganja a blue color, while 
charas gives a violet color.
Reagent 1: p-Aminophenol (1 mg) in ethanol (10 mL)
Reagent 2: Caustic potash (1 g) in distilled water 
(10 mL)
10.5.2.4 Thin-Layer Chromatography
1. Stationary Phase: Activated silica gel (with or 
without fluorescing substance) TLC plates of 
0.25/0.20 mm thickness.
Mobile Phase/Solvent Systems:
System A: Petroleum ether and Diethyl ether (80:20)
System B: Cyclohexane, Di-isopropyl ether and 
Di-ethylamine (52:40:8)
System C: n-Hexane, Dioxane, and Methanol 
(70:20:10)
Visualization: Fast Blue B Salt
2. Stationery Phase: Silica gel G, TLC plate modi-
fied with 10% solution of silver nitrate by dip-
ping or spraying and dried.
System D: Toluene, using nonsaturated condition 
(development in open chamber)
Silica gel G, TLC plate modified with 10% solution 
of diethylamine by dipping or spraying imme-
diately before use 
System E: Xylene, hexane, and diethylamine (25:10:1)
10.6 TEST FOR COCAINE
10.6.1 Color Test
Positive results of color tests are only the presumptive 
indication for the presence of cocaine. It is necessary 
for the analyst to confirm the presence of cocaine by an 
alternative technique.

174
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
10.6.1.1 Scott’s Test
Step 1: Take an appropriate amount of suspected 
material in a test tube, add 5 drops of solution 1 
and shake well. A blue color develops at once if 
cocaine is present. If blue color has not appeared, 
add more test sample. If blue color is still not 
developing, then it indicates that the sample does 
not contain cocaine.
Step 2: Add 1 drop of solution 2, and shake. The 
blue color will disappear and a clear pink-col-
ored solution will appear. If the blue color does 
not disappear, add a second drop of solution 2.
Step 3: Add several drops of solution 3 and shake. 
The appearance of a blue color in the chloroform 
layer indicates the presence of cocaine.
Reagents
Solution 1: 2% Cobalt thiocyanate in water, diluted 
with 96% glycerin in 1:1
Solution 2: Conc. hydrochloric acid
Solution 3: Chloroform
10.6.1.2 Ethyl Benzoate Test
Take appropriate amount of suspected sample and 
moisten it with nitric acid. Evaporate to dryness. Add a 
few drops of alcoholic potash. Odor of ethyl benzoate 
indicates the presence of cocaine.
10.6.2 Thin-Layer Chromatography
Developing Solvent Systems
System A [1]: Chloroform, Dioxane, Ethyl acetate, 
Ammonia (29%) (25:60:10:5)
System B [1]: Methanol, Ammonia (29%) (100:1.5)
System C [1]: Cyclohexane, Toluene, Diethylamine 
(75:15:10)
System D [2]: Ethyl acetate, Benzene, Ammonium 
hydroxide (60:35:5)
System E [2]: Chloroform, Ethyl acetate, Ammonium 
hydroxide (40:10:10 drops)
Visualization Methods
1. UV light 254
2. Acidified potassium iodoplatinate reagent
3. Dragendorff’s reagent
Preparation of Solution for TLC
An appropriate sample of exhibits and standard are 
dissolved in methanol.
10.7 TEST FOR BENZODIAZEPINE
10.7.1 Thin-Layer Chromatography
Stationary Phase: Activated silica gel (with or without 
fluorescing substance) TLC plates of 0.25/0.20 mm 
thickness.
Solvent/Mobile/Developing System
Solvent System A: Chloroform and Acetone 80:20
Solvent System B: Chloroform and Methanol 90:10
Solvent System C: Cyclohexane, Toluene, and 
Diethylamine 75:15:10
Sample Preparation: The solutions of exhibit powder/tablet/ 
capsules and standard may be prepared in methanol.
Visualization
The plates must be dried prior to visualization at 
120°C for 5 minutes in an oven or by using a hot-air 
blower to remove all traces of diethylamine from the plate.
Visualization Methods 
1. UV light at 254 nm
2. 2 N Sulfuric acid/heat/UV light at 366 nm
3. Acidified potassium iodoplatinate reagent
Preparation of Acidified Potassium Iodoplatinate 
Reagent: Dissolve 0.25 g of platonic chloride and 5 g of 
potassium iodide in sufficient water to produce 100 mL. 
This is potassium iodoplatinate reagent; for the acidified 
version, add 5 mL of concentrated hydrochloride acid to 
100 mL of iodoplatinate solution.
Method: First observe the plate under UV light 
at 254 nm. Spray the plate with 2 N sulfuric acid and 
heat it in a oven at 80°C for 5 minutes. Observe the 
fluorescent spot on plate under UV light at 366 nm. 
Spray the plate with acidified iodoplatinate reagent. 
Appearance of purple color indicates the presence of 
benzodiazepines.
For screening of benzodiazepam drugs viz. alpra-
zolam, chlorazepam, diazepam, lorazepam, and nitraz-
epam, TLC is used.
In TLC, for separation of alprazolam, chlorazepam, 
diazepam, lorazepam and nitrazepam, keeping standard 
in first row and sample in second row, plate was run using 
solvent system Ethyl Acetate, Methanol: Conc. Ammonia 
in 85:10:5, v/v/v ratio, which is shown in Figure 10.4.
The developed plate was first observed under UV 
light at 254 nm. The developed plate was sprayed with 
acidified iodoplatinate reagent. Appearance of purple 
color indicated the presence of benzodiazepines, namely 
alprazolam, chlorazepam, diazepam, lorazepam, and 
nitrazepam.

175
Forensic Toxicology
10.8 ANALYSIS OF ALCOHOL 
IN LIQUORS/DRINKS
10.8.1 Introduction
Liquor is normally known as a mixture of water and 
alcohol. The term “alcohol” is often used for ethyl alco-
hol. Country-made liquor is an alcoholic product, usually 
prepared from fermentation of carbohydrates present in 
cereals, jaggery, fruits, mahua, palm, molasses, and so on. 
The liquors are sold on the market in various brands and 
covered under the Excise Act. The possession, sale, and 
transportation of liquor is allowed only as per the Rules 
and Regulations of Excise and Prohibition. Many times, 
these liquors are smuggled from one state to another state, 
illegally possessed, and transported without proper valid 
documents. These samples are seized by the police and sub-
mitted to the forensic laboratory for their examination. The 
liquor is examined in the laboratory for two purposes: first, 
for excise purposes, where mainly the presence of alcohol 
plays an important role and accordingly the examination 
of liquor samples for the qualitative and quantitative analy-
sis is the main purpose of the investigation. Second, the 
liquor is examined for quality control/ duplicate samples, 
which are being sold in the market in which the examina-
tion is carried out for parameters other than alcohol con-
tents. The alcohol contents are also reported in percentage 
of proof spirit, percentage of alcohol (weight by volume), 
and percentage of alcohol (volume by volume).
10.8.1.1 Qualitative Analysis of Liquor
10.8.1.1.1 Test for Ethyl Alcohol
The following tests are to be carried out for the detection 
of ethyl alcohol in the exhibits.
1. Iodoform Test: Take about 1 mL or appropri-
ate of sample (distilled or as such depending 
upon the nature of sample and concentration 
of ethanol) and add about 1 mL of 5% sodium 
hydroxide solution and then add iodine solution 
(20 g potassium iodide + 10 g iodine in 100 mL 
water) drop-wise with shaking until the liquid 
becomes persistent dark brown in color. Keep it 
for 2–3 minutes. If the iodine color disappears, 
add more drops of iodine solution until the liq-
uid is the persistent brown color of iodine. Add 
a few drops of dilute sodium hydroxide solution 
to remove extra iodine. Add an equal volume of 
water; keep it for 10 minutes. Yellow crystalline 
precipitate indicates the presence of ethanol.
2. Dichromate Test: To about 1 mL or appropriate 
amount of sample (distilled or as such, depending 
upon the nature of samples and concentration of 
ethanol) is added about 0.2 mL of 2% potassium 
dichromate solution, followed by about 1 mL 
of conc. sulfuric acid. The yellow color of the 
dichromate changing to green or blue indicates 
the presence of ethanol.
10.8.1.1.2 Test for Methanol
1. Chromotropic Acid Test: Take about 1 mL or 
appropriate amount of sample (distilled or as 
such, depending upon the nature of sample and 
concentration of methanol) in a test tube; add 
about 2 mL of potassium permanganate solu-
tion (3 g potassium permanganate and 15 mL 
of phosphoric/orthophosphoric acid in 100 mL 
distilled water) and shake well. Now add a few 
crystals of sodium bisulfate and shake till the 
disappearance of color (potassium permanga-
nate color) of the solution. Add about 1 mL 
of chromotropic acid (5% of aqueous solution 
of sodium salt of chromotropic acid) and add 
conc. sulfuric acid slowly with the inner side-
wall of the test tube to the extent of 15 mL. 
Appearance of violet color indicates the pres-
ence of methanol.
2. Schiff’s Reagent Test: Take about 4.5 mL of 
sample (distilled or as such, depending upon the 
nature of sample) in a test tube and add 0.5 mL 
of ethanol (if the concentration of ethanol is high 
in the sample, the sample is fortified accordingly 
so that 5 mL volume should contain only 0.5 mL 
ethanol. Add 2 mL of 3% potassium perman-
ganate solution and 2 mL of phosphoric acid. 
Keep it for 10 minutes. Add 1 mL of 10% oxalic 
acid followed by 1 mL of concentrated sulfuric 
acid. The contents are cold at room temperature. 
Now add 5 mL of Schiff’s reagent, keep it for 
half an hour, and observe the color. The appear-
ance of purple color indicates the presence of 
methanol. The parallel experiments may also be 
carried out with the control sample, containing 
FIGURE 10.4 TLC plate showing the separation of dif-
ferent analytes (using Ethyl Acetate, Methanol: Conc. 
Ammonia) (85:10:5, v/v/v).

176
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
0.5 mL solution (0.5% methanol in rectified 
spirit/ethanol) mixed with 4.5 mL of water, and 
a blank sample having 5 mL water. The color 
that appeared in the test sample may be matched 
with the color of the control/standard sample of 
methanol which is equivalent to 2 mg of metha-
nol. Thus the semiquantitative examination of 
methanol may be carried out.
10.9 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
10.9.1 Scope and Application
The following methods are used to identify controlled 
substances. Controlled substances are commonly found 
both in liquid and solid samples, varying in size from 
a few milligrams to multi-kilogram submissions, while 
the concentration can vary from a few parts per million 
to almost 100% purity. Because of the great diversity of 
controlled substances as well as variations in size and 
concentration, we have established performance-based 
methods (guidelines) and not rigid step-by-step instruc-
tions for the analysis of controlled substances. These 
procedures allow the individual scientist the flexibility to 
choose the best methods with which to analyze controlled 
substance submissions. A subdiscipline included in this 
manual is methamphetamine quantitation. Since these 
subdisciplines require additional training and proficiency 
testing above what is required for controlled substances 
analysis, only qualified analysts who have been trained 
in these areas will be able to perform subdisciplines.
10.9.2 Analytical Reference Standard
An analytical reference standard is a dilution or extrac-
tion standard that is created to allow for the analysis of 
the standard by a particular instrument or method (e.g., 
dilution of cocaine with methanol for GC/MS analysis). 
This standard can be produced using either a primary or 
a secondary standard (positive control).
10.9.3 Database
A listed compound found in the schedule of controlled 
substances.
10.9.4 Control Sample
A comparison standard for verifying or checking the 
findings of an experiment. A positive control contains the 
analyte of choice for the method or test being evaluated. 
A positive control is used to evaluate a positive result. A 
negative control does not contain the analyte of choice 
and is used to verify a negative result.
DAILY For procedures covered by this document, 
“daily” refers to testing conducted within 72 hours.
10.9.5 Method Blank
A method bank is a analytical control consisting of all 
reagents and solvents that is carried through the entire 
analytical procedure. The method blank is used to define 
the level of laboratory background contamination.
10.9.6 Standard—Primary
A primary standard is a commercially purchased com-
pound that is traceable back to a manufacturer. Its 
identity is confirmed by verifying its composition by 
comparing FTIR or GC/MS results with literature or a 
previously confirmed primary standard. If a certificate 
of analysis is accompanied with the standard, then that 
also can be used as a verification source. The resulting 
documentation of this comparison will be maintained in 
the Standard Verification Logbook.
10.9.7 Standard—Secondary
A secondary standard is a laboratory-produced sample 
or casework sample that has been compared to a primary 
standard. A secondary standard must be compared to a 
primary standard by utilizing GC/MS, GC/FTIR, or 
FTIR. The resulting documentation of this comparison 
will be maintained in the Standard Verification Logbook.
10.9.8 Modification
A change—an alteration or amendment that introduces 
new elements into the details, or cancels some of them, 
but leaves the general purpose and effect of the subject-
matter intact.
10.9.9 Instrument Blank
A volume of clean solvent that is analyzed on an instru-
ment to ensure that the instrument is working properly 
and/or there are no contamination issues associated with 
the instrument.
10.9.10 Solvent
A liquid substance that is used to dissolve or dilute 
another substance.

177
Forensic Toxicology
10.10 SAFETY
Refer to the Forensic Services Division Safety Manual 
and the appropriate Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) 
for general safety tips and hazard information regarding 
the use of reagents and solvents, the handling of gas cyl-
inders and overall safety guidelines.
Everyone should be aware that the majority of the 
chemicals used in the chemistry section have one or more 
hazardous properties.
Many exhibits of evidence contain potential haz-
ards (razor blades, syringes, and broken glass) and/or are 
potentially infected with biological hazards. It is impor-
tant to take the appropriate precautions to reduce the 
risk of injury to oneself and to others who may handle 
the evidence in the future.
10.11 SAMPLING PLAN
10.11.1 Scope
The principal purpose of sampling is to answer a relevant 
question about the population by examining a portion of 
the population. Therefore, a sampling plan needs to be 
used only when multiple items are grouped together as 
one exhibit. If you are analyzing only a single item, then 
a sampling plan is not needed. Two types of sampling 
plans can be incorporated to help make this determina-
tion: statistical and non-statistical. The sampling strat-
egy will guide the analyst to the proper plan to use. Both 
plans set a minimum number to be analyzed, which can 
always be exceeded. In cases where a relevant question 
about the population is not needed, the analyst could 
itemize the population in a way that no more than one 
entity is tested. When an agency combines multiple items 
with residue into one exhibit, the analyst may choose to 
examine only one item, either by itemizing it separately 
or by making the report clearly reflect what has been 
examined.
In most controlled substance cases, a non-statistical 
approach may suffice. This type of sampling plan must 
provide an adequate basis for answering the question 
applicable to the law (e.g., Is there a controlled substance 
present in the population?).
A statistical-based approach will be applied to 
cases with multiple visually consistent items (except 
marijuana and commercially prepared pills, capsules 
and tablets) that meet or exceed a weight enhancement. 
Statistically selected units must be analyzed and must 
have both presumptive and confirmatory-level test-
ing. The statistical approach will return a sample size 
(n) needed to test from a known population (N) that 
will give us a predetermined level of confidence that a 
significant portion of the population is the same. The 
hypergeometric sampling plan allows us to state with 
95% confidence that at least 90% of the total popula-
tion is the same.
For the non-statistical method (square root method), 
the number returned is the number of items that need a 
presumptive test. A confirmatory test will then have to be 
done on at least one of the items.
For the statistical method (Hypergeometric Plan), 
the number returned is the number of items that need 
both a presumptive test and a confirmatory test.
When the sampling strategy dictates a sampling plan 
and it is not executed, it should be documented in your 
notes or in a conversation log as to why you did not use 
a sampling plan.
10.12 MINIMUM EXAMINATION 
REQUIREMENTS
10.12.1 Physical Examination
After removing the sample from its packaging (if appro-
priate), a thorough physical characterization of an exhibit 
should be conducted, and the following observations 
should be noted, if applicable: type of material, color, 
size, shape, amount, morphology, significant markings, 
odor, and texture.
Every attempt should be made to preserve evidence. 
No more than half the available sample should be used 
in most cases, and the physical combination of evidence 
items will not be permitted.
If it becomes necessary to use the entire sample, 
the extracted sample remaining after the analysis may 
be sealed and returned with the evidence. If no sample 
can be maintained after analysis, then the analyst shall 
record this in the note packet with a statement such as 
“evidence consumed in analysis.”
In some cases, representative sampling may be desir-
able on evidence that is visually consistent.
At some point during the physical examination of 
the item, a weight must be determined (except when 
dealing with residue amounts). Gross weight measure-
ments are made by weighing the entire item (packaging 
and contents). Net weight measurements are determined 
by weighing only the contents of an item. Gross weight 
measurements are acceptable for samples that are below 
the state and federal sentencing guidelines. Net weight 
measurements should be used when the sample has the 
potential to exceed these sentencing enhancements. Items 
that contain a small amount of material that clings to 
the packaging can be considered residue and reported as 
such. The balance should be cleaned and tared prior to 
weighing a sample.

178
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
10.13 CATEGORIZING 
ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES
Techniques for the analysis of drug samples can be broken 
down into three categories, based on their discriminat-
ing power. Table 10.2 lists examples of such techniques 
in order of decreasing discriminating power from A to C.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anthony CM, David Osselton M, and Brian W (Eds). 
Clarke’s Analysis of Drugs and Poisons, 3rd edition 
(2004). London: British Pharmacopoeia.
Butler William P. (1967) Methods of Analysis for 
Alkaloids, Opiates, Marihuana, Barbiturates & 
Miscellaneous Drugs. Washington, DC: Department 
of Justice, p. 59.
Clarke EGC (1986) Isolation and Identification of Drugs, 
2nd edition. London.
ENFSI (European Network of Forensic Science Institutes) 
(2003) Guidelines on Representative Drug Sampling. 
Version 1-1.
Frank RS, Hinkley SW, and Hoffman CG (Mar 1991) 
Representative sampling of drug seizured in multiple 
containers. Journal of Forensic Scientist, Vol 36, No. 
2:350–57.
Garratt DC. Quantitative Analysis of Drugs, 3rd edition 
(1964). New York, NY: Springer, pp. 476–501.
Georgia Bureau of Investigation (Dec 27, 2004) Chemistry 
Operations Manual—Sampling. Revision 10.
Huestis M, Mitchell J, and Cone E (Oct 1996) Uri- 
nary excretion profiles of 11-nor-9-carboxy-delta-9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol in humans after single smoked 
doses of marijuana. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 
Vol 20:441–52.
Huestis M, et al. (2007) Cannabinoid concentrations in 
hair from documented cannabis users. Forensic Sci 
Int. 2007; Vol 169(2–3): 129–136.
Klemenc S (2000) Noscapine as an adulterant in illicit 
heroin samples. Forensic Science International, Vol 
108:45–9.
Anderson et al. Recommended Methods for Testing 
Opium/Crude Morphine: Manual for Use by 
National Narcotics Laboratories (1987) New York, 
NY: United Nations.
TABLE 10.2 Categories of Analytical Techniques
Category A
Category B
Category C
FTIR
Gas chromatography
Color test
GC/FTIR
HPLC
UV
GC/MS
Microcrystalline test
X-ray
Cannabis only:
Macroscopic examination
Microscopic
Pharmaceutical 
identifiers

179
C H A P T E R  11
Clinical Forensic Medicine
Child Sexual Abuse
Dalia M. Al-Saif and Lori D. Frasier
CONTENTS
11.1   Introduction 
180
11.2   Forensic Interview 
180
11.2.1  Memory of the Child and Techniques to Elicit Information 
180
11.2.2  Script versus Episodic Memory 
180
11.2.3  Recall versus Recognition Memory 
181
11.2.4  Source-Monitoring Errors 
182
11.2.5  Child Responses in the Forensic Interview 
182
11.2.6  Interview Settings 
182
11.2.7  Forensic Interviewing Protocols 
183
11.2.8  NICHD Protocol 
183
11.2.9  NICHD Phases of the Forensic Interview 
183
11.2.10 Extended Forensic Interview 
184
11.3   Medical History 
185
11.4   Medical Examination 
185
11.4.1   Anatomy and Variations of Female External Genitalia 
186
11.4.2   The Hymen 
187
11.4.3   Types and Configurations 
188
11.4.4   Anatomical Variations of the Hymen and Vagina 
189
11.4.5   Physiological Changes of Female External Genitalia 
190
11.4.6   Anatomy of the Anal Canal and Perianal Area 
190
11.4.7   Anatomical Variations of the Area 
191
11.4.8   Positions and Techniques of the Anogenital Examination 
192
11.4.9   Anogenital Findings and Evidence of Sexual Assault 
192
11.4.10 Consensual versus Non-Consensual Sexual Intercourse 
193
11.4.11 Previous Sexual Activity 
193
11.4.12 Accidental Anogenital Injuries versus Sexual Assault 
194
11.4.13 Tampons and Hymenal Findings 
195
11.4.14 Healing of Anogenital Injuries 
195
11.4.15 Lack of Anogenital Injuries 
197
11.4.16 Hymenal Orifice Diameter, Posterior Rim of the Hymen, and Evidence of Sexual Assault 
197
11.4.17 Notches 
198
11.4.18 Anal/Perianal Findings and Evidence of Sexual Assault 
198
11.4.19 Conditions Mimicking Sexual Abuse 
199
11.4.20 Forensic Evidence 
200
11.4.21 Collection of Forensic Evidence 
201
11.5   Sexually Transmitted Infections and Evidence of Child Sexual Abuse 
202
11.5.1   Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
202
11.5.2   Chlamydia trachomatis 
203
11.5.3   Screening for NG and CT in Cases of CTA 
203

180
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
11.1 INTRODUCTION
Child sexual abuse (CSA) is defined as “the involvement of 
dependent, developmentally immature children and ado-
lescents in sexual activities that they do not fully compre-
hend, to which they are unable to give informed consent or 
that violate the social taboos of family roles” (Finkelhor, 
1994; Pereda et al., 2009a,b; Stoltenborgh et al., 2011). It 
involves pedophilia, rape, and all forms of incest.
It is one of the most important international public 
health problems that affects all societies, regardless of cul-
tural, religious, or economic background. The international 
combined prevalence is 11.8%, and it is highest for girls in 
Australia and boys in Africa, and lowest for both in Asia 
and Europe (Stoltenborgh et al., 2011; Pereda et al., 2009). 
Variations in prevalence among countries and continents 
could be attributed to different ethnicities with their dif-
ferent cultural beliefs and values that affect the rate of dis-
closure and reporting (Kenny and McEachern, 2000). The 
predominant victims are girls—between 10% and 20% of 
their peer population—while male victims constitute less 
than 10%, with a male to female ratio of 1:2.5–3.
CSA has long-term consequences of physical health 
symptoms, including those regarding general health, 
GI, gynecologic pain, cardiopulmonary symptoms, and 
obesity. Those with a history of CSA were found to be 
1.35–2.12 times more likely to have health problems. 
CSA is also associated with psychological disturbances 
that might appear later in life. Anxiety disorders, eat-
ing disorders, depression, posttraumatic stress disorders, 
sleep disorders, and suicidal attempts were all signifi-
cantly correlated with a history of CSA.
Concerns about CSA can arise after an alarming 
sexualized behavior or statement from the child. It might 
surface subsequent to a custody or parental visitation 
argument. The child should be presented to the medical 
care provider, who can provide medical evaluation of the 
child to evaluate the child’s health and, in acute cases, 
assess for injuries, collect evidence, and test for short-
term consequences of sexual abuse like sexually trans-
mitted infections and pregnancy. Sometimes the main 
role of the expert is to provide a virginity check, as vir-
ginity is of considerable importance in certain cultures.
Assessment of an alleged case of child sexual abuse 
consists of a well-structured forensic interview, medical 
history, medical examination, and a proper interpretation 
of findings. The role of an expert is to correlate the pro-
vided history of incident with physical findings to attain 
a reliable diagnosis of the condition.
11.2 FORENSIC INTERVIEW
Sexual victimization of children is usually surrounded 
with secrecy and mostly lacks corroborative evidence like 
physical signs, medical findings, or non-victim witnesses; 
hence, most of the time, children are the only source of 
information. Children from the age of 4 years can be con-
sidered as informative witnesses. The quality of informa-
tion obtained from them is dependent on the techniques 
used by the interviewer and the response of the child to 
these techniques. Several approaches to collecting data 
from children were researched and best- practice guide-
lines were structured to ensure good quality of these 
data. Different child forensic interview protocols orga-
nized these guidelines with the aim of increasing adher-
ence to them. These protocols are used to interview 
children regarding allegations of different types of abuse 
and even for child witnesses of violence.
The following discussion examines factors that affect 
collection of information from children and research-
proven best techniques of eliciting such information.
11.2.1  Memory of the Child and Techniques 
to Elicit Information
A child’s disclosure of a sexual abuse is delayed most of 
the time due to several factors, including those related to 
the child, the perpetrator, and the interaction between 
them. This delay affects the child’s memory and the 
reactions of the child in the forensic interview. Some 
understanding of memory is needed for better practice of 
forensic interview guidelines.
11.2.2 Script versus Episodic Memory
Specific details of any incident, like time and place, are 
vital for that incident to be legally supported. In the case 
of child victimization, these details are highly dependent 
on the child’s memory.
11.5.4   Syphilis 
204
11.5.5   HIV 
204
11.5.6   Human Papillomavirus (HPV) 
204
11.5.7   Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV) 
204
11.5.8   Trichomonas vaginalis (TV) 
205
11.5.9   Bacterial Vaginosis 
205
Bibliography 
205

181
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
Child sexual abuse is often a repeated event over a 
long period of time. Children and even adults tend to 
incorporate repeated incidents into a general scheme 
that is known as script memory (Goodman et al., 2002). 
Retrieving an instance of a repeated event activates all 
similar instances, leading to overlapping and confusion. 
Children might disclose good-quality, forensically vital 
details but fail to specify time and place of occurrence, 
which divests these details of any legal importance. 
Also, rare but crucial information could be masked by 
the repeated other details and not even mentioned by the 
child. For example, the child could be asked to specify 
the place of the incident, and he/she might choose to 
mention the most common one but fail to tell about a 
rare but important one where physical evidence could be 
allocated. This can result in contradictions in the child’s 
account, which can mislead the investigators and affect 
the credibility of the child.
Interviewers are recommended to shift the child’s 
recollections from script memory to episodic memory 
by asking the child to give details of a single incident. 
The child is asked whether this type of incident occurred 
many times or only one time. If there were many times, 
the child is then asked to talk about the first incident, 
the last one, or the most remembered one. The child is 
requested to give all that he/she knows about this single 
event.
A technique that is suggested in repeated abuse is to 
ask the child about specific information in the incident in 
the context of all incidents (e.g., “Did he hit you at any 
time?”). Children are more receptive to suggestions by 
adults if asked about a particular incident than if asked 
in general.
11.2.3 Recall versus Recognition Memory
Research has shown that more details could be obtained 
from children by tapping recall memory, where the child 
freely narrates what happened without any influence 
from the interviewer. This is best conducted with invi-
tation prompts using open-ended questions (e.g., “Tell 
me all that happened, from the beginning till the end”). 
Data obtained after this type of prompt are more legally 
important, as they come from the child freely without 
being introduced by someone else. These prompts yield 
more central and accurate details of the alleged assault, 
especially in older children, and it has been found to 
be effective in delayed interviews. Young children pres-
ent difficulties responding to such questions; however, 
research has shown that they could still give many 
forensically important details without the need for more 
focused questions.
Invitations could be cued by data already mentioned 
by the child to get more details (e.g., “Tell me all about the 
touch” if the touch was already mentioned by the child in 
the general invitation). Cued invitations were found to be 
more useful with older children (Lamb et al., 2007).
Direct inquiries using the WH questions (what, 
where, who, and how) can bring about specific details of 
place, persons, acts, and so on. Specifying a time using 
the When question is a difficult task for children, espe-
cially in a repeated event and with a delayed interview. 
This can be replaced by one of the other WH questions 
by anchoring the detail in question to a well-recognized 
event like a school vacation or a birthday party (e.g., 
“What grade of school were you in at that time?”). Asking 
about the number of incidents (“How many times?”) is 
also a difficult job, and the child can be asked a general 
question of whether it was one time or many times.
Invitations that provoke free-recall memory and end 
up with a free narrative could be confusing and lead to 
mixing up several acts within an event. Time segmenta-
tion is suggested, where the narrative is segmented into 
parts and details of each section are obtained separately 
(e.g., “Tell me everything that happened since he entered 
the room till he went out of the room”).
Prompts tapping recognition memory include 
option-posing prompts (e.g., “Did he touch you over or 
under your clothes?” or “Did she slap you?”). The child 
is offered choices to search his or her memory for the true 
one without allowing the child to freely give information. 
This type of questioning is risky, owing to the children’s 
suggestibility (especially young age groups of 6 years or 
less) if introduced early in the interview and if repeated. 
Offering choices to children gives them the opportunity 
to pick any of the choices, which affects the reliability of 
information, as the choice could be the easiest rather than 
the true one. This suggestibility of children increases with 
long delays before the forensic interview. It can allow for 
contradictory information, which is encountered less in 
free-recall narrative.
Option-posing prompts should be delayed till all 
invitation prompts are exhausted, and if used, should be 
paired with an invitation (e.g., when the child chooses 
one answer, it is followed by, “Tell me all about it”).
Suggestive prompts (“He was lying over you, wasn’t 
he?”) are even more risky and should be discouraged and 
limited to situations where the information is important 
for the safety of the child or it was proven by another cor-
roborative evidence but the child denies it.
A multipart prompt where the interviewer includes 
two or more demands in a single question is commonly 
used by forensic interviewers, even trained ones. An 
example: “Did he touch your private parts or hurt your 
body?” Children rarely ask for clarifications of such 
questions. They would rather choose to answer with few 
words, which affects the amount of details that are cen-
tral to the allegation. These prompts should be discarded 
from any forensic interview with children.

182
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Facilitators (e.g., Aha, OK, repeating what the child 
says in a neutral way) were shown to encourage the con-
tinuation of the narrative provided spontaneously by the 
child.
11.2.4 Source-Monitoring Errors
When a child is asked about an event, there might be 
mixing of real incidents with other sources of informa-
tion, which could be TV shows, stories, or witnessed 
events.
Previous interviews with the child, whether by the 
police, social workers, schoolteachers, or even a curious 
caregiver, can introduce information that later might mix 
up with reality. Psychological therapy, although of bene-
fit, can introduce fabrication following memory-recovery 
practices that therapists use. Source-monitoring errors 
are exacerbated after using suggestive prompts and with 
repeated exposure to information introduced by others.
Such testimony could appear as an implausible, 
fantastic description of the event, raising suspicions 
regarding its reality. However, the interviewer should 
be nonjudgmental and broad minded as these details 
might have true explanations that carry a real forensic 
importance.
The interviewer needs to differentiate between these 
sources by directly asking the child whether what has 
been said did truly happen to him/her. This inquiry 
should be used cautiously, as it might give the child the 
feeling that he not believable, which could discourage 
further disclosure. This direct questioning is not appli-
cable to young children at 3 years of age or younger. 
Children can be asked about their feelings and what they 
heard, smelled or saw during the incident, as these can-
not be fabricated if not truly experienced by the child. 
Children who participated in an event rather than wit-
nessing it are more able to give accurate details and their 
suggestibility is lowered.
At the same time, interviewers need to open their 
minds to other explanations for what is mentioned by 
a child. An example is touching private parts, which 
could be an innocent touch during toilet training. The 
child might give implausible information that seems to 
be fantastic and imaginary; getting more details could 
reveal the truthfulness of these data. Inconsistencies in 
a child’s account could be solved by asking more details 
and showing the child that the interviewer is confused 
and needs further explanation.
11.2.5 Child Responses in the Forensic Interview
Children behave emotionally different during the forensic 
interview, and the higher the number of abuse allegations, 
the less the child is upset during the interview. A research 
study showed that most children showed neutral expres-
sions and very few cried during disclosure. Crying was 
found to be more associated with sexual abuse than with 
other types of abuse.
Reluctance and denial are recognized responses 
during a child’s forensic interview. Children use dif-
ferent methods to redirect the interviewer into neutral 
subjects that are not related to the abuse by providing 
answers unrelated to the question. Some children say 
that they don’t want to talk about it. These responses are 
explained by shame, embarrassment, assuming respon-
sibility, and committing to the perpetrator’s request for 
secrecy, especially if the perpetrator is emotionally con-
nected with the child. Older children are more likely to 
disclose events, and their disclosures were found to be 
more accurate. However, this is balanced by their socio-
emotional development and knowledge of consequences 
of disclosure that stand ahead of disclosure. Interviewers 
are faced with difficulties with such children, and they 
try to overcome this reluctance by shifting to more sug-
gestive option-posing questions and fewer supportive 
utterances.
In fact, these children need more support, and an 
extended rapport-building phase is needed to overcome 
this reluctance. Empathetic comments (like “I wonder if 
it makes you nervous to be questioned by a stranger”) 
help overcome anxiety, in contrast to attempts to mini-
mize the child’s feelings (like, “Don’t be embarrassed to 
say this”).
Confrontation and forced extraction of information 
doesn’t help with a reluctant child. Sometimes, ending 
the interview would be the best choice, where another 
session could reveal more data.
A child’s reluctance could be attributed to cultural 
issues and thus training, experience and cultural sensi-
tivity of the interviewer could enhance rapport-building 
with the child and make him or her more comfortable 
with people different from themselves, which results in 
increased disclosure.
11.2.6 Interview Settings
The forensic interview should be conducted in a place that 
maximizes the child’s concentration and enhances disclo-
sure. Reduction of distracting objects is recommended. 
The presence of accompanying caregivers should be dis-
couraged. The caregiver could be the suspect, and disclo-
sure is more free in the absence of the perprator. Children 
6 years or younger might suffer separation anxiety in 
unfamiliar situations. The caregiver needs to encourage 
the child to be alone, and the child might need to know 
where the caregiver is so the child can periodically check. 
With insisting children, the caregiver could stay in the 

183
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
interview room but sit behind the child so the caregiver’s 
expressed emotions wouldn’t be seen by the child.
The use of anatomical aids like anatomically detailed 
dolls and diagrams is a controversial issue. It has the 
advantage of clarification and consistency of what 
the child says, distancing the child from showing his 
own body parts, and communicating with a shy child. 
However, they have the disadvantage of distracting the 
child, upsetting the child and caregiver by the private 
parts of the doll. Also young children don’t understand 
the doll presentation of themselves or another person. 
These aids have been found to increase the number of 
true reports, but at the same time there is an increase 
in false reports. They are suggestive methods where the 
interviewer is introducing the private parts of the doll 
or the drawing and asking the child if anybody touched 
them. These methods carry the same risk of suggestive 
questions and could challenge a criminal case. For those 
interviewers who find them of help, it is recommended to 
use them as demonstration aids, late in the interview, and 
only after exhausting all other ways of extracting data 
from the child.
Electronic recording of the forensic interview, 
whether audio or video, is a vital tool in any forensic 
interview setting. It has been found to be more accu-
rate than a verbatim transcript that can miss many of 
the forensically important central details of the incident. 
They are widely used and recommended in many forensic 
interview settings.
11.2.7 Forensic Interviewing Protocols
Research-proven best practice guidelines of the forensic 
interview are organized into different protocols. RATAC 
(Rapport, Anatomy, Touch, Abuse, Closure) and NICHD 
(The National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development) are among the well-known protocols and 
are followed by many forensic interviewers and accepted 
in many jurisdictions.
11.2.8 NICHD Protocol
The NICHD is the most researched forensic interview-
ing protocol where the behavior of the interviewers was 
reviewed to test for its applicability. It was found to be 
applicable across countries. It is of value in interviewing 
children with low verbal abilities and was modified to be 
appropriate in obtaining forensic information from child 
witnesses of violence.
The interviewer gender has its effect on the interac-
tion with the child during the forensic interview; however, 
this effect diminished following the NICHD protocol 
guidelines. This protocol increases the use of open-ended 
questions and elicits more details from the alleged vic-
tims. The NICHD protocol helped produce children’s 
statements that were of higher quality. Also it has been 
found to increase the accuracy in judging the credibility 
of the child, which enhances the delivery of justice.
This section will discuss the stages of the forensic 
interview based on best-practice guidelines that are fol-
lowed in the NICHD protocol.
Before starting the interview, it is recommended to 
inquire about the child’s background to assess develop-
ment and linguistic abilities and to know more about the 
surrounding environment for better understanding of the 
situation.
11.2.9 NICHD Phases of the Forensic Interview
1. Introduction: The interview starts with introduc-
ing the interviewer and the place of the interview 
to the child. The role of the interviewer should 
be explained, allowing any further inquiry from 
the child. The child should be aware of any video 
or audio recording and any witnesses, whether 
inside or outside the room.
The child is then given some rules to be 
followed through the interview. He/she is 
instructed to tell only true things that really hap-
pened to him/her, not to guess, to correct any 
mistake said by the interviewer, and to indicate 
any lack of understanding so the interviewer can 
rephrase the question in a simple way. These 
rules have been found to decrease confusion and 
suggestibility.
2. Rapport-building: This is an icebreaker phase 
where children are asked to talk about them-
selves (e.g., “I want to know you better, tell me 
things you like to do”). This can relieve anxi-
ety and encourage more talk in the following 
stages.
3. Training in episodic memory: The child is then 
asked to narrate a neutral event that is not related 
to the alleged abuse. This narrative event prac-
tice increases the rapport and helps assess the 
child’s verbal and cognitive abilities. The devel-
opmental age of the child affects memory, sug-
gestibility, language, and emotional maturity; 
each of these plays a role in the child’s response 
to questions from adults. The interviewer should 
use age-appropriate questions for better and less 
suggestible responses by children.
The interviewer should choose a neutral event 
to talk about, like a birthday party or a recent 
event that the child remembers well. It is bet-
ter to be close in time and similar to but not 
the same time and setting in which the alleged 

184
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
assault took place. The interviewer should use a 
neutral voice tone and facial expressions, as less 
neutral expressions might lead to biases during 
the interview. Expressing emotions during the 
training phase and shifting to blunt emotions in 
the allegation phase could discourage the child 
narrative.
Techniques tapping the child’s recall memory 
are used, starting with general invitations fol-
lowed by gradual use of the more focused cued 
invitations and time segmentation.
The response of the child during this stage 
predicts the amount of detail that might be given 
in the substantive (allegation) phase. Children 
who have been trained in the use of open-ended 
questions in this stage respond with 2.5 times 
more information in the subsequent phases 
of the interview. This emphasizes how sensitive 
the child is to the interviewer’s expectations. If 
the child didn’t respond well in this stage, it is 
better to stop the interview, as hasty introduc-
tion of the allegation phase would lead to more 
reluctance.
4. Transition to substantive issues: After the narra-
tive event practice, the child is smoothly moved 
into getting the allegation narrative. The inter-
viewer asks the child to tell the reason of his 
presence with the interviewer. A reluctant child 
could gradually be asked more specific questions 
but only after exhausting general invitations 
(e.g., “Now that I know you better, tell me why 
are you here today”; “Your mother is concerned 
that something might have happened to you, tell 
me about it”; “Did anybody hurt you? Tell me 
more about it”; “I have heard that your uncle 
bothered you, tell me about it”).
5. Investigating the incident: If the child responded 
well following the general invitations, the inter-
viewer then asks the child to provide more 
information (e.g., “Tell me more about that”). 
Children might respond with silence, say they 
don’t know or shift the topic back into a neu-
tral one. The interviewer needs to draw the child 
back without forced extraction of information. 
Questions should start as general, and gradually 
focused questions are used, like a zooming cam-
era, while maintaining the general picture of the 
whole incident. Examples of these focusing ques-
tions are follow-up inquiries (e.g., “Then what 
happened?”), cued invitations (e.g., “You men-
tioned earlier that he punched you on face, tell 
me all about this”), temporal cues (time segmen-
tation, for example, “You said that he took off 
his clothes; tell me all that happened just after he 
took off his clothes”), and direct questions (e.g., 
“Where did that occur?”).
6. Break: During the break the interviewer can 
review and document the obtained information, 
looking for missing data.
7. Eliciting information that you expected but not 
mentioned by the child: Information already 
known by the interviewer could be used in the 
option-posing style as a final resource if no data 
was obtained using the open-ended prompts. 
These risky questions should be paired with gen-
eral invitations (e.g., “Did he touch you under 
your clothes? Tell me all about it”).
8. Close the interview by thanking the child for 
providing information and asking if there is any-
thing more the child wants to add or to ask the 
interviewer about.
9. Neutral topic: At the end of the interview, the 
child is shifted into a neutral topic. The inter-
viewer spends a couple of minutes drawing the 
child away from the allegation by talking about 
something unrelated, like what the child is plan-
ning to do after leaving.
11.2.10 Extended Forensic Interview
Disclosure is a process rather than an event, and an 
extended forensic interview is offered where children are 
given the opportunity to release additional information 
at more than one session.
This process is advised with children who are reluc-
tant, frightened, or too young to give details. More than 
one forensic interview decreases the risk of suggestibil-
ity and allows for a better understanding of the child’s 
language and the observation of how the child interacts 
with caregivers and family members. Concern about 
memory contamination by several interviews is overcome 
by ensuring adherence to guidelines where free recalls 
are encouraged rather that suggestive prompts given. 
Benefits of extended evaluations for resolving suspicious 
abuse cases outweigh the risks.
It should be acknowledged that different profession-
als can conduct the forensic interview and that no single 
forensic interview is perfect; even well-experienced foren-
sic interviewers are faced with difficult interviews. They 
need to apply their experience and background knowl-
edge to overcome the difficulties and to end up with a 
legally sound forensic interview. An interview should use 
the best methods of extracting information that don’t 
negatively affect the emotions of the interviewed child. 
Following best-practice guidelines in a well-structured 
protocol together with regular peer reviews is recom-
mended to reach this goal.

185
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
11.3 MEDICAL HISTORY
Physicians who are evaluating suspected cases of child 
sexual abuse need to elicit some information from chil-
dren with the main goal of maintaining their health and 
protection. Taking the medical history could help the 
examiners refer the child to other medical services or to 
initiate specific treatments. Physicians should be familiar 
with the principles of the forensic interview to avoid con-
taminating the child’s memory and to end up with legally 
accepted information that can be used later in the court 
in conjunction with the forensic interview.
Information should be collected from previous inter-
views from legal authorities or social services. Parents 
or caretakers are interviewed separately. Detailed back-
ground family and social history should be obtained. 
This clarifies the living situation and those who spend 
time with and take care of the child. Custodial issues 
should be made clear. It is important to inquire about the 
behaviors of the child and any changes that can be traced 
and correlated with the timing of abuse. Examples are 
sleeping and eating patterns, behavioral changes, devel-
opmental regression, and sexualized behavior or sexually 
spoken words.
A history of past medical or surgical history as well as 
any previous accidental falls, anogenital surgery or pro-
cedures should be obtained, as they could explain later 
findings during the medical examination. Specific signs 
such as genital discharge or itching should be probed to 
determine the possibility that the child contracted a sex-
ually transmitted infection.
The child should be talked to separately, as the pres-
ence of parents could influence the emotion of the child 
and hence affect the disclosure. This could be difficult 
with young children, but parents should be encouraged 
to leave the child at this stage. A clear reliable history 
could be obtained even from very young children who 
have the verbal ability to narrate an incident, and hence 
age shouldn’t be used as a barrier from obtaining a his-
tory from the child. The medical history provides an 
opportunity for the examiner to build trust with the 
child and to relieve the anxiety that is experienced by 
some children. The child needs to be informed about the 
role of the examiner and the special part of the exami-
nation involving private parts of the body that are not 
examined in routine pediatric assessment.
Specific questions including the exact details of the 
incident are important for predicting the presence of 
findings in the examination. For example, anal or rec-
tal bruising or tears were significantly more prevalent in 
children who provided a history of anal penetration.
The timing of the incident (or of the last one, if many 
incidents were disclosed) is also important for predicting 
the presence of injuries, interpreting healed findings, and 
for deciding on collecting forensic evidence. Questions 
should include specifics of the incident that may lead to 
the possibility of finding evidence of the assailant’s body 
fluids. There should be an inquiry about whether there 
was pain or bleeding during the incident and whether 
there are presenting symptoms of painful urination or 
bowel movement. The presence of bleeding at the time of 
assault and the timing of examination after the assault 
are predictors of abnormal anogenital examination. Time 
between the assault and the examination is inversely 
related to the number and severity of the detected inju-
ries. Examination within 72 hours detected more injuries 
than delayed examinations. Bruises, in contrast, can be 
more apparent with time. Adolescents should be asked 
about menstruation, tampon use, previous speculum 
examination, depression, eating disorders, or any other 
mental health problems.
The child should be prepared for the medical exami-
nation by the examiner explaining every step and assur-
ing the child that the examination is noninvasive and 
painless. The child is given the opportunity to ask any 
question during all stages of the medical evaluation. The 
physician should ask for an explanation of any observed 
physical finding during the examination.
The child and parents should understand that at the 
end of the medical evaluation, no one can tell if the child 
has been abused or that the findings were consistent with 
the provided history. It is also important to explain that 
a normal examination does not rule out abuse. The deci-
sion about the amount of information to be told to the 
child depends on the child’s age and ability to understand 
the given information.
The medical history is not recorded in the same man-
ner as the forensic interview and hence, physicians are 
highly encouraged to maintain good documentation of 
the obtained history with all detailed behaviors of the 
child during the interview and interactions with caretak-
ers. These documents could be released during legal pro-
ceedings and would be the only source of information of 
what the child disclosed in the clinic.
11.4 MEDICAL EXAMINATION
There is a universal agreement among experts that a 
reliable history provided by the child following a well-
structured forensic interview represents the most impor-
tant element in the evaluation of suspected child sexual 
abuse. However, in many situations such history is unob-
tainable, either because the child is nonverbal or avoids 
telling what happened for several reasons. Some of those 
reasons are discussed in the preceding section regarding 
the forensic interview. Such cases emphasize the impor-
tance of other corroborative evidence such as findings in 

186
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
the body of the child. The detection of physical findings 
that are consistent with the provided history will further 
strengthen the case. It should be emphasized, however, 
that absence of positive physical findings should not be 
used as a proof of lack of sexual assault, as the findings 
following examination of sexual assault cases most of the 
time are normal.
A body of research has been conducted to reach a con-
sensus on the findings that could be used as an evidence 
of trauma following sexual assault. Different study designs 
and samples have led to variable findings; some of them were 
constant among studies, which allowed for interpretation.
Medical examiners who are involved in cases of 
alleged child sexual abuse should have a good knowledge 
of the normal anatomy and development of the anal and 
genital areas. These are not part of the routine pediatric 
assessment; hence, many physicians are not familiar with 
them. Examination of the anogenital area is particularly 
important for medical examiners, as it is the target for 
sexual assault.
11.4.1  Anatomy and Variations of Female 
External Genitalia
Female external genitalia consists of the mons pubis, 
which is a hair-bearing (in adolescence) rounded emi-
nence of skin with an underlying pad of fat that overlies 
the pubic bone.
Labia majora (single: labium majus) extend down-
ward and backward from the mons as two longitudinal 
skin folds enclosing fat together with superficial and deep 
fascia. The skin of the outer side is hair-bearing while 
the inner is smooth and non-hair-bearing. The labia meet 
anteriorly at the anterior commissure and posteriorly 
become parallel to each other, fusing with other skin to 
form the posterior labial commissure (Figure 11.1).
Inner to the labia majora are two smaller non-hair-
bearing skin folds that are devoid of fat, the labia minora 
(single: labium minus). Each of them split anteriorly and 
joins with the other one to enclose the clitoris (erectile 
tissue). They extend obliquely downward, laterally, and 
backward to meet posteriorly with a fold of skin stretch-
ing between them, the posterior fourchette. There is a 
great diversity in the size and symmetry of labia minora. 
Labial adhesions (agglutination) are partial or complete 
fusion of the labia minora that could obscure the view of 
inner vulvar structures (Figure 11.2a).
Labia adhesion was thought to result from trauma in 
sexual abuse; however, its frequent presence in children 
screened for non-abuse has led to consideration of its 
innocent nature. It results from skin irritation that could 
be related to infection or friction. It is mostly seen in fair-
skinned girls, owing to their thin skin that is more vul-
nerable to irritation. This adhesion usually breaks down 
spontaneously with age as estrogen levels increase, and 
that’s the basis of its treatment with the application of a 
small amount of estrogen
The posterior fourchette could present with several 
conditions that can be confused with the trauma of sex-
ual abuse. These include friability of the fourchette that 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 11.2 (a) Labial adhesion. Note how the inner 
vulvar structures are obscured by the adhesion. (b) 
Friability of the posterior fourchette likely represents 
dehiscence of the labial adhesion.
FIGURE 11.1 An example of prepubertal genital anat-
omy with major figures labeled.

187
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
dehisces easily with traction on labia majora. It should 
not be confused with trauma, and the posterior four-
chette needs to be assessed prior to any manipulation 
of vulva. A midline avascular area in the posterior four-
chette is a congenital finding that might be mistaken for 
a scar. Together with the friable fourchette, these areas 
were observed in cases with minor posterior adhesions of 
labia minora and thought to be a result of dehiscence of 
these adhesions (Figure 11.2b).
The midline raphe is a midline area of raised tissue 
that results from fusion of the two halves of the perineum 
and could extend from the posterior fourchette along the 
perineum to the anal opening.
The cleft between the labia minora is the vestibule. It 
contains the external urethral opening as a short sagit-
tal cleft with slightly raised margins anteriorly and the 
vaginal introitus that covers the hymen posteriorly. Ducts 
of greater vestibular glands (Bartholin’s glands) open lat-
eral to the hymen. The concave boat-like area between 
the vestibule, just between the vaginal introitus and the 
stretched posterior fourchette, is the fossa navicularis.
Erythema of the vestibule is a normal finding result-
ing from congestion of capillaries. While increased vas-
cularity results from dilatation of other vessels, both are 
observed in normal children.
Vestibular (or periurethral) bands are extensions of 
tissue that connect the vestibule with its structures like 
the urethra or hymen. Periurethral bands are very com-
mon and found in children of all ages. Some these bands 
might have a semilunar shape, giving the view of pockets 
on both sides of the urethra. Bands could be multiple and 
bilateral and could also be found posterior to urethra as 
perihymenal bands (Figure 11.3).
These bands, although common in newborns, are 
more frequently observed in older age groups. This is 
attributed to the redundant tissues at the neonatal period 
that resolve with age, giving a better view of the vestibule 
(Berenson 1993). Bands in the posterior vestibule give the 
view of an irregular fossa navicularis.
The linea vestibularis is a congenital white line or 
spot on the posterior vestibule. It is a congenital finding 
that could persist or become more prominent with age 
(Figure 11.4).
A patulous or dilated urethra is a normal anatomi-
cal variation, where the urethral opening looks large. 
The urethra may spontaneously dilate when traction is 
applied to the labia majora for visualization of the inter-
nal structures. Urethral prolapse appears as a red mass 
anterior in the vestibule and is a non-specific finding 
that should not be mistaken for trauma (Figure 11.5).
11.4.2 The Hymen
The hymen is a folded mucous membrane of endodermal 
origin that is attached to the vaginal wall and partially or 
completely covers the vaginal introitus. Vascular supply is 
rich near its attachment but scarce close to the edge and 
FIGURE 11.3 Periurethral bands.
FIGURE 11.4 Linea vestibularis.
FIGURE 11.5 Urethral prolapse.

188
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
the amount of elastic fibers is highly variable. This small 
tissue carries great importance, owing to its ancient cor-
relation with virginity, which is thought to be lost when 
the hymen is broken.
With increased awareness of the issue of child sex-
ual abuse, this tissue regained its importance as a poten-
tial indicator of this abuse. Several researchers studied 
this tissue with the goal of coming up with findings 
that could be diagnostic of sexual abuse. Many findings 
were classified as normal or non-specific. Knowledge of 
these normal findings is essential to avoid attributing 
them to trauma.
When evaluating findings on the hymen, the conven-
tion of the clock face is used to locate findings on the 
hymen, with the 12 o’clock anterior near the urethra and 
the 6 o’clock posterior toward the anus.
11.4.3 Types and Configurations
The hymen is a constant finding in all newborn girls. Its 
absence is associated with other anomalies of the genital 
tract like vaginal agenesis. The most common types of 
hymen that have been described include the following.
Annular: Hymenal tissue that presents circumfer-
entially (360 degrees) around the introitus. It could be 
smooth or redundant with folded tissue. The opening 
could be central, anterior or posterior (Berenson et al., 
1991; Mor et al., 1986).
Crescentic: A posterior rim of hymen that is attached 
anteriorly at 1 o’clock and 11 o’clock with absent tissue 
below the urethra (Figure 11.6).
Fimbriated: A redundant hymen, which is folded on 
itself. Some studies use this terminology to describe a 
fringed hymen with several clefts that give it a ruffled 
appearance (Figure 11.7).
Septated: A band of tissue that extends from one 
side of the hymen to the other, either vertically or hori-
zontally, making a septum that divides the hymenal ori-
fice into two openings. This could be associated with a 
septated vagina, and it is suggested to pass a feeding tube 
between both openings to exclude this variation. One of 
the openings could be a blind pouch, leaving a single real 
opening (Figure 11.8).
Cribriform: A hymen with multiple small openings 
that result from congenitally incomplete canalization of 
the vaginal introitus.
Microperforate: A hymen with a small opening. The 
configuration of the hymen in this case is usually sleeve-
like (Figure 11.9).
Carancula hymenalis (myrtiform caruncle): Found 
in sexually active girls where remnants of the hymen are 
present in between transections.
Imperforate hymen: Absent opening, a variation 
that presents a medical problem at puberty with failure 
of escape of menstrual blood, leading to hematocolpos. 
This is surgically corrected. It is thought that this type of 
hymen still has a small undetectable opening that allows 
the passage of discharge through prepubertal and pre-
menarchal stages, while a real imperforate hymen, a rare 
finding, would be problematic since early childhood.
Prevalence of hymenal configurations differs between 
studies with the annular, crescentic, and fimbriate (with 
its two definitions) representing the majority.
FIGURE 11.7 Fimbriated hymen.
FIGURE 11.8 Septated hymen.
FIGURE 11.6 Crescentic hymen.

189
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
11.4.4 Anatomical Variations of the Hymen and Vagina
External hymenal (vestibular) ridges are longitudinal 
elevations of hymenal tissue that extend from the urethra 
anteriorly or fossa navicularis posteriorly to the rim of 
the hymen. They could be present at both sites. These 
ridges might persist, disappear, or appear for the first 
time in the follow-up examination of non-abused chil-
dren (Figure 11.10).
Longitudinal internal vaginal ridges are fibrous-like 
solid elevations that extend longitudinally in the vaginal 
walls and are covered with normal vaginal mucosa. They 
are different from the horizontal rugae of the vagina and 
can be single or multiple in the anterior, posterior, or 
lateral vaginal walls. These ridges could end before the 
hymen or extend to reach the rim of the hymen. Their 
extension to the hymen might lead to misinterpretation 
of absent hymenal tissue at this site. Ridges of the vagina 
are more often seen in older children than in newborns, 
as the hymen decreases, giving a better view of the vagi-
nal content. An oblique rather than a direct view of the 
hymen is used to see these ridges.
Ridges in the midline anteriorly and posteriorly are 
more wide and prominent and called vaginal columns. 
The anterior midline columns are related to the urethra, 
as it is present at the same site.
Bumps (mounds) are solid elevations at the rim of the 
hymen, with the base measuring at least the same as its 
length. They could be multiple and on any location of the 
hymenal rim. Bumps could result from the intersection 
of external ridges or internal longitudinal vaginal ridges 
with the hymenal rim or present independently. A bump 
can give a false view of a notch just next to it. The base of 
this pseudo notch doesn’t extend beyond the base of the 
bump (Figure 11.11).
Tags are flaps of hymenal tissue that extend from the 
rim of the hymen. Their length is more than their width. 
They might be multiple and could exist independently or 
similar to bumps as an extension of external or inter-
nal vaginal ridges. They may result from cleavage of a 
hymenal septum.
Notches are concave-like irregularities of the 
hymenal rim. They are classified according to their 
depth into superficial notches that extend to half or 
less of the width of the hymen at the site where it is 
located. Deep notches extend to more than half of 
the hymenal width. Anterior and lateral notches were 
found normally in non-abused children, while poste-
rior deep ones were not observed in any of the nor-
mative studies. Clefts that extend to the base of the 
hymen are found normally in the ventral half of the 
hymen but none were noticed in the posterior half in 
normative studies.
A cyst, which is a fluid-filled elevation, could be 
found in the rim of the hymen, tip of a tag, or on any side 
of the vestibule.
Hymenal erythema or the presence of a prominent 
vessel that is more than twice the width of surrounding 
vessels in an area where it is not normally expected to 
find such a vessel (Figure 11.12).
The shape and configuration of the hymen together 
with some of the anatomical variants change dynami-
cally with age, and an understanding of the physiological 
influence of hormones on the hymen can lead to a better 
appreciation of these changes.
FIGURE 11.9 Microperforate or sleevelike hymen.
FIGURE 11.10 External hymenal ridge.
FIGURE 11.11 Bump caused by intersection of the intra-
vaginal ridge with the hymen.

190
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
11.4.5  Physiological Changes of Female 
External Genitalia
External genitalia of the female undergo physiological 
changes in different ages under the influence of hormones, 
particularly estrogen. Changes in serum estrogen can be 
explained with the hypothalamus–pituitary–gonadal 
axis. This axis is activated in the body of the girl during 
the gestational period. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
(GRH) from the hypothalamus activates the release of 
follicular-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing 
hormone (LH) from the pituitary, which in turn exerts 
an effect on the ovaries to release estrogen.
In late pregnancy, maternal estrogen increases and 
applies negative feedback on the axis, leading to the inhi-
bition of endogenous secretion of estrogen.
On delivery, there is a withdrawal of maternal estro-
gen effect on the axis, leading to reactivation and estro-
gen secretion from the body of the newborn girl. In the 
first few days of life, maternal estrogen that is still present 
in the body together with a surge of endogenous estrogen 
act upon the internal and external genitalia.
The effect of estrogen on external genitalia is reflected 
on the hymen that appears pink, pale, and redundant. 
Abundant hymenal tissue is folded on itself to accom-
modate the increased amount of tissue. Its edges could 
fold backward, obscuring the view of the vestibule. High 
estrogen could have an effect on the uterine lining, lead-
ing to spotting of blood that is noticed in the first days of 
life in some newborn girls (mini menstruation).
High estrogen levels fade up at the age of 2–4 years 
and result in a decreased amount of hymen tissue. At this 
stage, the hymen is thin and translucent, with lacy vessels 
and attenuation of the posterior rim. Folds of the hymen 
disappear and the tissue smooths out with rolled edges, 
returning back. Some notches might disappear.
It was observed that annular hymens change con-
figuration into crescentic shape, and this was found 
mostly in annular hymens that show an anterior notch 
at 12 o’clock. This was explained with the evolution of 
hymenal tissue that disappears anteriorly starting with 
these notches, which are more frequently observed at 
the anterior and lateral areas in non-abused children. 
Vertical and horizontal diameters of the hymen were 
found to increase with age and could be attributed to this 
decrease in hymenal tissue.
A similar effect of increased estrogen on genitals 
is observed again toward puberty. Labia minora are 
enlarged and become paler. The hymen turns pale, thick, 
redundant and more elastic. Elasticity was measured in 
one study with a speculum and found to be an early sign 
of puberty. It increases with age and is well correlated 
with later stages of puberty (Figure 11.13).
11.4.6 Anatomy of the Anal Canal and Perianal Area
The anal canal is about 2.5–4 cm in length and extends 
from the rectal ampulla to end at the anal opening. 
The upper part is lined with the columnar epithelium, 
an extension of the rectal epithelial tissue. The mucous 
membrane of this part folds longitudinally to form the 
anal columns; furrows between the columns are called 
anal sinuses. At the lower end of anal sinuses are semi-
lunar, valve-like horizontal folds of mucous membrane 
that join together, making the dentate line. Just below 
this line is the anal transitional zone where the colum-
nar epithelium transforms into the squamous epithelium 
that lines the lower part of the anus. The anal canal is 
lined with the internal anal sphincter that is an exten-
sion of the muscular coat of the colon. Superficial to it 
is the external anal sphincter with its deep, superficial 
FIGURE 11.13 Estrogenized adolescent hymen.
FIGURE 11.12 Prominent vessel on the surface of the 
hymen, also a normal finding.

191
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
and subcutaneous parts. This is responsible for volun-
tary control over the anal opening and gives the anus 
its puckered, corrugated look. The area surrounding the 
anal opening is called the anal verge, and it is the area of 
interest in the examination of sexual assault cases with 
anal involvement.
11.4.7 Anatomical Variations of the Perianal Area
Erythema is a normal finding in the perianal area, par-
ticularly in children who are still in diapers. It can extend 
up to 3 cm around the anal opening.
Pigmentation is also observed in children screened 
for non-abuse. Its prevalence is greater in blacks, and it is 
expected to be a darker color.
Skin tags are protrusions of anal verge tissue, which 
interrupts the symmetry of the perianal skin folds. It is 
normally found in the midline anterior and posterior but 
can be found in any location.
The smooth area in the anal verge is where anal folds 
are absent and are explained with the congenital anom-
aly of superficial division of the external anal sphincter 
just underlying this smooth part (Figure 11.14).
Venous congestion is a purplish discoloration sur-
rounding the anal opening that appears after a period of 
separation of gluteal folds to view the anus. It increases 
parallel to the time taken in the examination and disap-
pears with release of gluteal folds. It results from pooling 
of venous blood that fails to return back from the pelvis 
and shouldn’t be confused with real bruises that are trau-
matic in nature (Figure 11.15).
Intermittent dilatation of the anal sphincter is a nor-
mal reflex to the stimulation of the sphincter by sepa-
rating the gluteal folds. It results from the inhibition of 
reflex closure of the anus (McCann et al., 1989).
A normal variant that could be mistaken for an 
injury is an extension of the dentate line that could be 
seen upon dilatation of the anal sphincter. A follow-
up exam would show persistence of such a finding 
(Figure 11.16).
Failure of midline fusion can have the appearance of 
anal laceration. Its persistence in the follow-up examina-
tion would reveal its congenital nature (Figure 11.17).
FIGURE 11.14 Smooth area in the anal verge.
FIGURE 11.15 Perianal venous congestion.
FIGURE 11.16 Extension of the dentate line.
FIGURE 11.17 Failure of midline fusion.

192
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
11.4.8  Positions and Techniques of the 
Anogenital Examination
Several positions and methods were used by examiners 
with the goal of reaching the best view of the anogenital 
area. Supine lithotomy position is used to better view the 
mons, labia, and posterior fourchette. It can be modified 
to frog leg position in children of young age groups in 
which the knees are abducted and the feet are approxi-
mated to each other. The child could be examined in the 
lap of the caregiver.
Gentle separation of labia can expose the vestibule; 
but labial traction, where the examiner pulls the labia 
majora between the index finger and thumb outward and 
downward, was proven to be superior to labial separation 
in viewing the vestibule, fossa navicularis, the hymen, 
and content of the vaginal canal.
Prone knee-chest position is managed with the child 
in a kneeling position with approximation of the chest to 
the knees and the side of the face on the bed. The knees 
are separated in 90 degrees of flexion. The gluteal folds 
are separated to visualize the introitus. This position is 
the best to examine the hymen, especially the posterior 
part, which drops down under the effect of gravity. It 
smooths the irregularities and only real findings persist, 
the false notches next to bumps disappear.
Combining the three methods of labial separation, 
traction, and prone position increases the chance of 
detecting injuries to the genitalia, especially the hymen. 
Although not needed in all cases, data collected through 
the three methods may be necessary in certain cases.
The prone knee-chest position is used also to exam-
ine the perianal area. Some children do not tolerate this 
position, and a supine knee-chest position is another 
option, where the knees are approximated to the chest 
while the child is lying supine.
A redundant hymen with edges that are folded back-
ward or collapsed, obscuring the opening, was found 
to open with water floatation. In adolescence, when the 
hymen is less sensitive, a Q-tip or a large swab can be 
used to evaluate the hymen’s rim. This could be covered 
with balloon latex for contrast.
The use of the Foley catheter was also studied and 
found to be superior in its ability to provide a wider view 
of the hymenal rim. It is inserted and inflated with air and 
then pulled against the hymen to show the whole edge. It 
needs to be manipulated to several directions to demon-
strate hymenal edge at the opposite side. A Foley catheter 
is needed to evaluate the redundant hymen of adolescent 
girls, as it represents difficulty owing to its folded nature. 
It is well tolerated by girls at this age group. Injuries to the 
hymen were detected more frequently with this method.
Toluidine blue is a dye that is used in histological 
slides. It stains nuclei of cells and needs a broken skin 
or mucous membrane to expose such nuclei. It is applied 
after collection of evidence and the excess is removed with 
gauze that is dampened with warm water. It is useful to 
demonstrate small breaks in the tissues. Such breaks can 
be misinterpreted as trauma if there is a breakdown of 
skin due to infection or irritation. Toluidine blue uptake 
must be interpreted with caution.
11.4.9  Anogenital Findings and Evidence of 
Sexual Assault
Although not inevitable, documenting injuries in sus-
pected cases of child sexual abuse represents an impor-
tant factor in legal proceedings. Such findings, when 
present, strengthen the case. The diagnosis of anogenital 
injury requires the presence of either acute findings or 
an evidence of previous trauma. Acute findings resulting 
from blunt trauma include hematomas, bruises (ecchy-
moses), abrasions, and lacerations. Swelling and red-
ness are other acute signs of injury but are subtle and 
can result from other causes like irritation or infection 
(Adams et al., 2001). It was found that children who 
present with genital injuries have more nongenital inju-
ries than those who are free of genital injuries.
Vulvar injuries are mostly presented as ecchymosis, 
abrasions, or lacerations in the fourchette, fossa navicularis, 
and/or labia minora. The resistance that these parts present 
at the entrance of the introitus explains their greater involve-
ment. Injuries are more documented in the less estrogenized 
tissues, while high estrogen levels increase tissue elasticity 
and protect tissues (Adams et al., 2001).
Hymenal injuries include lacerations, either partial 
or complete, reaching the hymenal attachment with the 
vaginal wall. The are mostly located at the posterior part 
of the hymen between 5 o’clock and 7 o’clock. Lacerations 
might present with minor bleeding and pain and acute 
signs of trauma like redness and swelling are noted at the 
edges of the laceration (Figures 11.18 and 11.19).
FIGURE 11.18 Acute injury due to sexual assault in a 
young child. Attempted penetration results in superficial 
bruising on the hymenal surface. This type of injury will 
usually heal without any residual findings.

193
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
Violent rape can lead to extensive lacerations that 
reach the vagina and perineal body and result in an 
extensive hemorrhage.
A swab or Foley catheter might be used to bet-
ter locate a laceration in an adolescent that is hidden 
between the folds of a redundant hymen. If acute, the 
laceration could bleed again after manipulation, as a pre-
formed blood clot might detach.
Acute perianal injuries that result from forced sexual 
assault include erythema, swelling, bruises, abrasions, 
fissures, and lacerations. Although these findings can 
be used as an evidence of sexual abuse, there are other 
explanations for their presence. Erythema of the anal 
verge and thickening of anal folds are examples of the 
non-specific findings that can be misdiagnosed as being 
of traumatic nature.
Bruises, abrasions, fissures, and lacerations are of 
traumatic origin, whether from sexual abuse or not. 
Accidental injuries like falling astride, impacting bicycle 
crossbars or playground equipment, and pedestrian acci-
dents can all result in similar injuries as those resulting 
from sexual abuse.
Anal fissures are superficial linear splits in the skin. 
They can result from sexual abuse but are also commonly 
seen in children who complain of constipation and pass 
hard stools. They can result from diseases like skin gut 
disease or Crohn’s disease.
Lacerations are deeper splits of skin in the perianal 
area that reach the subcutaneous tissue (Myhre et al., 
2013). Their diagnosis is obvious if located outside the 
midline, while they could be confused with a congeni-
tal midline failure of fusion if located in the midline. 
A  follow-up examination is needed to confirm the diag-
nosis. Myhre found that both fissures and lacerations are 
significantly associated with anal abuse with penetration 
(Figure 11.20).
Several factors should be considered before diag-
nosing anogenital injuries as resulting from CSA. 
Discussion of some of the aspects is presented in the 
following sections.
11.4.10  Consensual versus Non-Consensual 
Sexual Intercourse
The presence of anogenital injuries does not specify the 
sexual act as being non-consensual. Similar injuries to 
the hymen, fossa navicularis, and posterior fourchette 
were documented in girls after consensual sexual inter-
course. However, a study showed that the non-consen-
sual group had a higher prevalence and different pattern 
of anogenital injuries. Lacerations of the posterior four-
chette and fossa navicularis, abrasions of the labia, 
ecchymosis of the vagina and cervix together with the 
involvement of the perineum and anus were seen more in 
the non-consensual group. The increased involvement of 
the fourchette, fossa and labia in this group is explained 
by their being the most resistant parts at the entry of any 
attempted penetration. The hymen was found to be more 
involved in the consensual group. The assaulted group 
had more nongenital injuries. Tissue responses to con-
sensual and non-consensual intercourse are affected by 
many factors, and a significant difference was correlated 
with knowing the offender and with prior reporting of 
sex within 72 hours.
11.4.11 Previous Sexual Activity
Previous sexual activity has an effect on the presence 
of anogenital injury, as it was found that self-reported 
virgins presented with more anogenital injuries fol-
lowing sexual intercourse but with the same pattern as 
non-virgins. Another study found hymenal tears but not 
other genital injuries to be found more in self-reported 
virgins. Also the age at which the first vaginal penetra-
tion occurred is crucial to the finding of hymenal trauma. 
Adams et al., (2001) did not find this correlation between 
the age and the presence of genital injuries. This could be 
explained by the adolescent age group that was selected 
in the study.
FIGURE 11.20 Perianal lacerations and bruising in a 
sexually assaulted mentally disabled child.
FIGURE 11.19 Lacerations of the hymen from penetrat-
ing trauma at 4 o’clock and 8 o’clock in an adolescent.

194
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
11.4.12  Accidental Anogenital Injuries versus 
Sexual Assault
Children often present to the hospital with anogenital 
injuries where the caregivers provide a history of an acci-
dent. These cases might pose a challenge to the medical 
examiner, as injuries to such areas are rare and should 
raise a suspicion of sexual assault. Findings from a sexual 
assault versus an accident could be very similar. Therefore, 
a detailed history of the event should be obtained and 
compared with the findings in order to determine the 
plausibility of the provided history. Accidents that could 
lead to genital injuries include falls in general, falls on a 
bicycle crossbar, and activities around a playground or 
pool.
Sexual abuse injuries mostly involve the posterior 
genital structures—the posterior hymen, posterior four-
chette, and fossa navicularis—and hence the involvement 
of these structures is highly suggestive of sexual abuse.
Straddle injuries occur when the child falls astride 
with a hard object coming between the legs and compress-
ing the soft tissues of the anogenital areas with the bony 
pelvis. Various objects were documented, with monkey 
bars being among the most common. This compression 
could result in hematomas, abrasions, and lacerations 
that involve the anterior, lateral, or posterior part of the 
external structures rather than interior vaginal introitus. 
The labia and pelvic skeleton protect the hymen from 
these accidental injuries, and hence injuries are seen more 
in the labia majora and minora, posterior fourchette, and 
fossa navicularis. It is unusual to involve the hymen or 
vagina even with higher-force straddle falls, such as from 
inline skating (Figures 11.21 and 11.22).
Straddle injuries are usually unilateral and rarely 
involve the perianal area. Anotched posterior fourchette 
was found in girls reporting a straddle injury. A clear his-
tory should be provided to correlate with the findings to 
reach a plausible explanation of the injuries.
Accidental impalement of the vagina and anus could 
be part of a straddle fall or occur independently where an 
object penetrates the vagina or anus. This type of acci-
dent is rare, and it can result in injuries to the vagina, 
hymen, posterior fourchette, or fossa navicularis, with 
little injury to the labia minora. If penetrating the anus, 
it causes perianal lacerations, anal tears, and accidental 
rectal penetration. The posterior distribution of these 
injuries is similar to injuries resulting from sexual assault 
and might present a difficulty unless a good explanation 
is provided for these findings (Figure 11.23).
Injuries considered to be unique to sexual assault 
with penetration were documented in motor vehicle acci-
dents. Pedestrians run over by a vehicle were reported to 
have bruises, lacerations, and abrasions of the anogeni-
tal area similar to those resulting from sexual assault. 
Four cases were reported with injuries to the posterior 
fourchette, fossa navicularis, vestibule, labia majora and 
minora, as well as radiating anal lacerations, hemato-
mas, posterior laceration of the hymen, and vaginal lac-
erations following a low-velocity motor vehicle passing 
over their trunks. These findings are identical to those 
of sexual assault and found to heal in a similar way. 
There could be associated injuries to the intra-abdominal 
organs and/or fractures of the limbs. Proposed mecha-
nisms for such injuries are increased intra-abdominal 
pressure that pushes the genitals outside, resulting in 
shearing forces that tear the skin. Although other body 
injuries can explain their presence, a thorough investiga-
tion should be done for the possibility of previous sexual 
assault, as healed clefts of the hymen could be similarly 
present following assault and accidents.
It must be emphasized that a good protocol-based 
forensic interview of the child is an invaluable tool to 
allocate findings to accidental injuries or assault. Details 
of the history can be correlated with physical findings, 
and a plausible explanation should be reached before 
excluding sexual assault as a cause. Also an inquiry 
about accidental injuries is needed to exclude them 
as a cause of healed injuries or suspicious non-acute 
findings.
FIGURE 11.22 Posterior fourchette and perineal injury 
caused when a child fell on the arm of a metal chair. Note 
the hymen is not injured.
FIGURE 11.21 Labial hematoma in a child that was 
caused when she fell on a bar at the playground.

195
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
Sports such as gymnastics, aerobics, swimming, bik-
ing, horseback riding, and other vigorous sports were 
not found to be associated with anogenital injuries and 
shouldn’t be used to explain their presence.
11.4.13 Tampons and Hymenal Findings
The influence of tampon use on the hymen emerges as a 
legal issue when some attribute hymenal findings to their 
use while others refute any relation. Emans et al., (1994) 
found that the diameter of the hymen is wider in tam-
pon users but the cause-and-effect relationship was not 
established, and it could be that the wider diameter is the 
cause for choosing this menstrual hygiene method rather 
than a result of its use. Authors concluded that complete 
clefts could not be attributed to the use of tampons, to 
sports, or even to speculum examination, owing to the 
elasticity of the hymen, which can accommodate disten-
tion without any injury.
Adams (2004) found that most tampon users who are 
not sexually active have no deep notches or clefts and only 
those few with complete clefts in the posterior hymenal rim 
have reported painful insertion of tampons.
Goodyear stated that tampon use cannot be 
excluded as a cause of hymenal clefts, especially since 
they were documented in some of Emans’ cases who were 
non- sexually active tampon users, and the correlation 
 compared with pad users was nearly significant.
A girl should be asked about any incident of diffi-
cult tampon insertion or speculum examination before 
the examiner concludes that a cleft is a result of sexual 
assault.
11.4.14 Healing of Anogenital Injuries
The healing of anogenital injuries has its implications 
in the medicolegal assessment of suspected child sexual 
abuse. The importance of understanding healing arises 
from the fact that it has been used by medical exam-
iners as an explanation for the lack of injuries in cases 
presenting with an alleged sexual abuse. They indicate 
that the absence of physical findings doesn’t preclude a 
previous injury. Examiners were advised not to delay the 
examination of suspected cases, as the healing process 
is rapid and could be complete. Examination within the 
first 72 hours would result in better detection of injuries. 
Children who provide a history of pain or bleeding at the 
time of assault were found to be normal most of the time 
if examined after a few weeks. Anal injuries, including 
bruising, lacerations, and scars were detected more often 
in early examination, within 7 days of the assault.
Another medicolegal importance of healing is 
that many of the healed injuries are attributed to non- 
intentional (accidental) injuries. It was found that acci-
dental injuries heal in exactly the same way as those of 
abuse, and hence differentiating between them presents 
a challenge to the examiner. This emphasizes the impor-
tance of asking about previous incidents of accidental 
falls or injuries that the child experienced. Accidental 
injuries that result in persistent healed injuries should be 
painful, bloody, and memorable rather than being occult 
and missed by the child or the caregiver.
Longitudinal studies followed cases of accidental 
and abusive anogenital injuries to study the time of heal-
ing and the sequel of such injuries. Researchers found 
that hematomas and superficial lacerations of the labia 
majora and minora heal completely, without any evidence 
of previous trauma. Some injuries to the labia healed 
FIGURE 11.23 (a) Anal laceration caused accidentally 
when a child fell on a toy while bathing. (b) Toy that the 
child fell on.
(a)
(b)

196
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
with labial adhesions, a finding that is seen even in non-
abused children, and hence considered a non- specific 
finding that cannot be used as a proof of previous injury.
Injuries to the posterior fourchette, even deep ones, 
heal completely or with a minor vascular change as a 
faint midline irregular avascular appearance. These are 
similar to and sometimes cannot be distinguished from 
the midline avascular area. Tensive lacerations of the 
posterior fourchette heal with tissue distortion.
Injuries to the vulva and vagina healed with bridging 
synechiae and adhesions. Perihymenal and hymenal swell-
ing, petechiae, hematomas, and abrasions of the hymen 
heal completely, while perihymenal tears healed with vascu-
lar changes of the perihymenal mucosa. Fusion of the labia 
minora to the hymen was also documented in three abuse 
cases and only one non-abused case, and it was thought to 
be a result of a healed scar from previous injury.
Partial tears to the hymen could end up with a 
smooth-edged normal hymen or with a superficial notch 
that could be peaked. The edges of this partial lacera-
tion turn from jagged edges into a smooth one. These 
resultant notches are similar to superficial notches nor-
mally found and cannot be differentiated from them. 
Hence, this finding cannot be used as a proof of previ-
ous hymenal injuries. These notches are more difficult to 
detect in estrogenized redundant hymen of newborn or 
pubertal girls. Lacerations exceeding half the width of 
the hymenal tissue were found to heal with deep notches.
A consistent finding that is diagnostic of healing of 
a previous penetrating injury is a complete transection 
of the hymen. A tear of the hymen that reaches the base 
at the attachment to the vaginal wall was found to heal 
with a full thickness cleft. The presence of such clefts in 
the posterior hymen was not found in non-abused cases 
and hence is considered an indication of previous trauma 
to the hymen. Transections can hide between folds of a 
redundant hymen in adolescents but can be detected with 
a cotton-tipped applicator (Figure 11.24).
Scarring of the hymen was not documented apart 
from extensive hymenal lacerations that healed with a 
scar and contractures. These scars can be found adjacent 
to the hymen as adhesions between the hymen and the ves-
tibule but not on the hymen itself (McCann et al., 1992). 
Berkowitz (2011) reported a case of extensive lacera-
tions through the hymen, posterior fourchette, perineal 
body, and 2–3 mm of anus. Healing was with decreasing 
hymenal opening and a scar covering the genital area, 
ending with a hymen with no opening and hematocolpos. 
Adhesions around the hymen were reported in prepuber-
tal children with allegation of sexual assault.
Berenson (2000) reported a sexual abuse case with 
hymenal perforation where the hymenal edges were 
intact and a single small well-demarcated fenestration 
was found in the middle of the hymenal tissue. Hostetler 
et al. (1994) reported the same finding in three girls who 
presented as cases of sharp-penetrating genital injuries. 
This fenestration was thought to result from a healed 
hymenal injury.
Anal injuries heal in a similar manner, with super-
ficial lacerations, abrasions, fissures, hematomas, and 
swelling, healing rapidly and completely. Healed lacera-
tions and tears might present as wedge-shaped scars or 
distortions of the anal folds. These findings fade with time 
and appeared less at puberty. Some lacerations healed 
with a narrow fibrotic line that is easily interpreted if out-
side the midline. However, if located in the midline, it 
could be confused with congenital midline variations like 
midline raphe. Any midline finding should be interpreted 
cautiously, as it could be congenital. Anal tags were found 
following injuries to the anal area, and scarring and pig-
mentation were also noticed after surgical repair of anal 
injuries. McCann (2003) found that all perianal injuries 
that occurred after a single sodomy healed rapidly
In general, anogenital injuries heal quickly (days 
to weeks) and most of the time with no or non-specific 
findings. Variations in the timing of healing depend on 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 11.24 (a) Acute tear of the hymen from sexual 
assault in a child. (b) Six-week follow-up of the child 
demonstrating a transection at the site of the previous 
deep laceration.

197
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
many factors, including the depth and severity of injury 
and the healing ability of the injured child. Absence of 
findings in a child with alleged sexual abuse doesn’t pre-
clude abuse, and in fact, the anogenital area is expected 
to be free of injury, owing to the rapidity of the healing 
process.
11.4.15 Lack of Anogenital Injuries
The detection of injuries during the medical examina-
tion of a suspected child sexual abuse case would pres-
ent strong corroborative evidence that strengthens the 
case, especially if correlated with a clear history that is 
provided by the child. However, these injuries are not 
inevitable, and their absence is more common. Injuries 
were absent in 52% of sexually active girls (Adams et al., 
2004). A review of 21 studies involving children exam-
ined for an alleged sexual assault found that these inju-
ries are absent in 26%–73% of girls and 17%–82% of 
boys. Older studies have shown a higher rate of injuries, 
and this was explained by the fact that previously, only 
severe cases of sexual assault sought medical evalua-
tion. Additionally, the classification of abnormal findings 
has changed, as more research into normal findings has 
emerged, such that many abnormal findings were reclas-
sified into non-specific or normal. This reclassification 
lowered the rate of detected injuries (Bays and Chadwick, 
1993). One study found that injuries were mostly absent, 
even in cases with repeated episodes of sexual assault 
with penetration. Adams found that the majority of 
legally proven cases of child sexual abuse were found to 
be free of injuries.
This area of forensics sparks much debate among 
medical and legal professionals, who both believe in the 
effect of finding injuries on the legal outcome of the case. 
The greatest controversy was regarding the methods of 
confirming child sexual abuse other than physical exam-
ination in order to set a sample for studying the pres-
ence or absence of injuries in abused cases. While some 
chose behavioral screening, parental interviews, and 
child interviews, Adams chose legal outcome as a more 
accurate indicator to prove the occurrence of sexual 
assault. However, even this method was biased, as stated 
by Adams, because most of those cases ended up with 
plea bargains so that no one would know what really 
happened.
Reasons that were suggested for lacking anogenital 
injury in cases assessed for sexual assault include the 
following:
1. Sexual assaults involved acts that were not 
expected to leave any finding, like fondling.
2. Children lacked the concept of penetration 
and could refer to the mere genital touch as 
penetration. Sexual assault is not confined to 
penetration past the hymen but involves any 
penetration, even labial, that doesn’t leave any 
finding.
3. Adolescents have an elastic hymen that allows 
distention without leaving any injury, and 
this explains the lack of correlation between 
a history of penetration and lack of findings. 
Adolescents who were involved in consensual 
sexual acts and therefore were expected to bet-
ter understand the concept of penetration were 
found to have no injuries (Anderst et al., 2009). 
However, this elasticity is not a feature of the 
preadolescent hymen and hence cannot explain 
a lack of hymenal injuries with penetration in 
this age group.
4. The anus can accommodate the passage of 
large stools without injury and is expected 
similarly to allow penetration without leaving 
any sign.
5. Healing is rapid, and previous injuries might 
leave no evidence that can be traced. Most of the 
cases are examined late and hence most poten-
tial findings are expected to subside.
6. False allegations should be considered as an 
explanation of absent findings. Causes of false 
allegation include custody disputes, delusional 
psychotic parents, sexual play between children 
and age-appropriate sexual exploration.
In conclusion, it is important to know that the pres-
ence of anogenital injuries means that a trauma had 
occurred either sexually (consensual or non-consensual), 
or accidentally. It is of equal importance to know that 
the presence of injures is not inevitable after a sexual 
act, even a non-consensual one, and that their absence 
doesn’t negate the incident of sexual contact. An accurate 
history of the event and an accurate assessment of physi-
cal findings are the main factors that allow reaching a 
just decision.
11.4.16  Hymenal Orifice Diameter, Posterior Rim of 
the Hymen, and Evidence of Sexual Assault
The significance of hymenal orifice diameter measure-
ments as a tool in diagnosing child sexual abuse was 
among the first researched findings. A “gapping hymenal 
orifice” was the term used when the vagina was easily 
seen without labial separation or traction and was docu-
mented in non-abused girls. Studies have reached vari-
able conclusions, with some finding that it is a useful 
tool, while others negate its importance. Measurements 
that were suggested to be used as criteria for a nor-
mal hymenal orifice diameter varied widely among 

198
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
studies. The positions and techniques of the examina-
tions differed among studies and have their effect on the 
measurements.
It was found that the vertical diameter increases with 
BMI (body mass index) and that both vertical and hori-
zontal diameters increase with age. The diameter was 
found to change with the position of the child, the exami-
nation method, the degree of the perihymenal muscular 
relaxation, the hymenal configuration, and the degree of 
tissue estrogenization. One study found that the correla-
tion between sexual abuse and increased diameter was 
found to be significant only in cases where other find-
ings were observed, like lacerations of the hymen or the 
presence of posterior hymenal clefts at 5 to 7 o’clock. 
However, the presence of any of these findings is enough 
for diagnosis, regardless of the hymenal orifice diameter.
A horizontal hymenal orifice diameter of 6.5 mm or more 
was found of high specificity but low sensitivity, and that of 
11.5 mm or more was more specific to abuse cases. This 
increase in the specificity was at the expense of sensitivity.
The variability of results from different studies dimin-
ished the importance of this tool in diagnosing previous 
sexual assaults. A more reliable method was used, which 
is measuring the posterior rim of the hymen at 6 o’clock. 
This method was hindered by the difficulty in estimat-
ing, using photos, the point of hymenal attachment to the 
vaginal wall. The light reflex that is present in the photo-
graphs was used as an estimate to locate this point. This 
measurement was also found to change with the exami-
nation method and the degree of relaxation, but McCann 
found no changes with the examination method.
A measurement of 1 mm or more was found in the 
non-abused children. Those non-abused children with less 
than 1 mm diameter were more found to have longitudinal 
intravaginal ridges, which could explain the lower hymenal 
rim measurements. Lower measurements were docu-
mented in abused cases; however, only a few of them were 
reported. The rarity of this finding lowered its sensitivity 
and questioned its usefulness alone as a diagnostic tool of 
child sexual abuse. Narrowing of the hymen could be of 
significance only if compared to the rest of the hymen.
The term “attenuation of the hymen” is used to 
describe a narrow hymenal rim. However, attenuation of 
tissue should be used as evidence only if the same tissue, 
previously examined, appeared to attenuate upon a sec-
ond examination, an unexpected situation in the majority 
of child sexual abuse cases. Adding to that, attenuation 
is a normal physiological process in which lowered levels 
of prepubertal estrogen lead to a decrease in the overall 
hymenal tissue that was found in longitudinal studies of 
non-abused children.
In conclusion, hymenal measurements should not 
be used alone as a diagnostic tool for previous penetra-
tion. The continuity rather than the width of the poste-
rior hymenal rim should be assessed where a clear rim of 
hymenal tissue is always present in the posterior part of a 
normal hymen between 3 o’clock and 9 o’clock.
11.4.17 Notches
Notches were well documented in normative studies. 
Their depth and location were given importance, to be 
used as evidence of a sexual assault. Superficial and deep 
notches are normally found in the anterior half of the 
hymen at and/or above 3 to 9 o’clock as a part of the 
normal evolution of the annular hymen into a crescent. 
Superficial notches formed part of the normal irregularity 
of the posterior hymenal rim. However, deep notches and 
complete clefts that extend to where the hymen attaches 
to the vaginal wall were not found in the posterior hymen 
of any normative study, and only in sexually active girls 
in control studies, which makes them an important sign 
indicating previous trauma to the hymen. Lateral deep 
notches and clefts at 3 o’clock or 9 o’clock in adolescents 
were found significantly more in sexually active girls.
It is difficult to rely on measurements as small as 
1 mm (lower measurement of a normal hymen) to deter-
mine whether a notch is superficial or deep, and hence it 
is emphasized again that it is better to assess the continu-
ity of the posterior rim of the hymen that was a consis-
tent finding in all non-abused children.
11.4.18  Anal/Perianal Findings and Evidence of 
Sexual Assault
While acute findings of anal sexual abuse are obvious, 
controversy arises in the determination of findings that 
result from chronic ongoing abuse. Skin tags were clas-
sified as a normal finding—especially if located in the 
midline—as they were commonly found in non-abused 
children. However, longitudinal studies have shown skin 
tags developing in the healing process of anal injuries.
Scars were noticed as fine fibrous lines in the area of a 
healed laceration. They were found in the midline, cross-
ing the midline, and outside the midline. With time, these 
scars become less apparent, and midline scars become 
hidden between anal folds. While it is easy to interpret 
scars that are outside the midline to be a result of trauma, 
apparent midline, scars be difficult to distinguish from 
median raphe wedge-shaped scars that were described in 
older studies. None were found in a longitudinal study 
that followed four cases with anal lacerations.
Hyperpigmentation was noticed after surgical cor-
rection of an anal trauma resulting from sexual abuse.
Anal dilatation is a non-prominent feature of acute 
abuse. Its association with chronic abuse has been 
studied. It can be external where the anal canal can 
be seen, or total where both the external and internal 
anal sphincters dilate, enabling the examiner to see the 

199
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
rectal ampule (Myhre et al., 2013). Dilatation was found 
in 49% of prepubertal children who were selected for 
non-abuse.
There is an association between the prone knee-chest 
position and the dilatation of the anal sphincter. The anal 
tone is a reflex that increases with increased abdominal 
pressure. Decreasing abdominal pressure, as happens in 
the knee-chest position, decreases the tone resulting in 
anal dilation.
Anal dilatation with stool in the rectal ampule is 
common and is produced by the distention of the rectum. 
This distention results in inhibition of the reflex that is 
responsible for keeping the anus closed. It also modifies 
the response of the anal muscles to stimulation and the 
voluntary effort to contract the external sphincter. With 
distention, the contraction can be sustained for only a 
brief period of time, which explains the intermittent 
dilatation.
Other effects on anal dilatation include anesthesia, 
injuries, and diseases of the nervous system or smooth/
striated muscles.
Attempts to measure the antero-posterior (AP) and 
horizontal diameters of the anal opening during dila-
tation showed that almost all children in a non-abused 
group have a maximum AP measurement of less than 20 
mm. Nearly half of them had stool in the rectal ampule. 
This dilatation was intermittent in two-thirds of the 
cases. Lower measurements were documented in the 
absence of stool.
A dilated anus could have a round or oval shape. 
Marked irregularities in anal dilatation are rare, and 
moderate irregularity could result from intermittent 
opining and closing of the sphincter. Neuromuscular dis-
eases can show similar irregularity.
Although immediate total dilatation with AP diam-
eter of 20 mm or more without stool in the ampule is of 
concern (Myhre et al., 2001), total anal dilatation is still 
an indeterminate finding, and more research is needed 
before reaching a conclusion about its association with 
anal sexual abuse (Myhre et al., 2013).
The presence of anal warts as a suspicious finding 
of sexual abuse is discussed with sexually transmitted 
infections (STIs).
11.4.19 Conditions Mimicking Sexual Abuse
The diagnosis of CTA based on physical findings can 
be challenging. Many conditions might present with 
features that are similar to those resulting from sexual 
abuse. These conditions include infectious, neoplas-
tic, inflammatory, congenital, or genetic diseases. The 
examiner should have knowledge about the existence 
of such conditions. While a good social and medical 
history of the child with a review of systems could 
reach the accurate diagnosis easily, some conditions 
are more confusing and need more investigation before 
giving a final diagnosis of sexual abuse, with its legal 
and social consequences. Some of these situational dif-
ficulties in diagnosis are discussed in this section, as 
follows:
1. A condition that mimics signs and symptoms 
of abuse might coexist with sexual abuse, mak-
ing the diagnosis more difficult. An example is 
a vaginal foreign body that is common in girls 
and is frequently composed of small bits of toi-
let paper. However, larger objects can be self-
inserted by the child or inserted by a sexual 
perpetrator. Such foreign bodies can cause a 
copious vaginal discharge that may raise a con-
cern of abuse. A concurrent infection could be a 
complicating issue. However, repeated insertion 
of foreign bodies into the vagina by a child and 
the presence of an infection could raise a con-
cern of previous sexual contact.
Perianal fissures are features of lichen sclero-
sus that can make defecation painful, potentially 
resulting in encopresis. Both fissures and encop-
resis are suspicious findings that raise the con-
cern of sexual abuse.
2. A known disease could present with features 
that mimic features of sexual abuse and lead to 
confusion. An example of this is Crohn’s disease, 
with fissuring, scars, and fistulae in the anogeni-
tal area.
3. Rarely, both infectious conditions and injuries, 
whether accidental or resulting from sexual 
abuse, can end up with scars. These scars can 
be so similar as to make it difficult to recognize 
their origin. The location of some scars can be 
used as a clue to their origin, while geomet-
ric scars are more likely to be of a traumatic 
nature.
4. The presence of a pathological condition does 
not rule out sexual abuse, as both can coexist. 
Lichen sclerosus, for example, is characterized 
by atrophic skin that is easily broken. Fissures or 
lacerations could occur following sexual abuse 
in a child who has atrophic skin, which leads 
to visible injuries that would be undetectable 
in an otherwise healthy skin. However, normal 
activities and toileting can also lead to injuries 
in lichen sclerosus. Differentiating the trauma 
of sexual abuse in the face of lichen sclerosus is 
extremely difficult (Figure 11.25).
5. Some infectious conditions could result either 
from sexual contact or innocent contact. This is 
discussed in the section on sexually transmitted 
infections.

200
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
6. Location of the skin condition could be the rea-
son for suspicion, as in the case of Mongolian 
spots or vascular malformations if located in the 
vaginal or perianal area (Figure 11.26).
The workup for any suspicious case should involve a 
prior knowledge of mimicking conditions and their dif-
ferent presentations (Table 11.1). A detailed history from 
the child and the caregiver could easily unveil the true 
condition. Proper examination by experienced clinicians 
with appropriate referral is needed in certain situations; 
a skin biopsy confirms the diagnosis. A follow-up exami-
nation is needed to differentiate congenital and acquired 
conditions. Referral to social services should be started if 
all attempts fail at reaching a diagnosis for a suspicious 
skin condition.
11.4.20 Forensic Evidence
Forensic evidence is powerful evidence in cases of 
child sexual abuse, especially if it correlates with the 
history provided by the victim and the physical find-
ings. However, the procedure of its recovery could be 
uncomfortable and stressful both to the child and the 
examiner, mainly if the examiner lacks proper training. 
Studies show a low rate of recovered evidence from child 
cases (<25%). This was explained by the delayed nature 
of their presentation that ends up with losing evidence 
in most of the cases. Also it has been found that the 
exchange of biological material between the perpetrator 
and the victim is minimal in young children.
The decision on whether to collect evidence depends 
on several factors. Screening tools have been suggested 
FIGURE 11.25 Lichen sclerosus in a prepubertal child.
FIGURE 11.26 Vascular malformation/hemangioma 
leading to extreme redness and swelling of the vaginal 
area. The condition was followed for several weeks and 
did not change.
TABLE 11.1 Anogenital Conditions Mimicking Features 
of Sexual Abuse.
Congenital
Mongolian spots
Vascular malformations
Epidermal nevus
Hemangioma of infancy
Inflammatory
Psoriasis
Crohn’s disease
Bullous pemphigoid
Seborrheic dermatitis
Contact dermatitis
Kawasaki syndrome
Behçet’s disease
Pemphigus vulgaris
Lichen sclerosus
Perianal pseudo verrucous papules and nodules (PPPN)
Neoplastic
Darier’s disease
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Bowenoid papulosis
Rare neoplasms
Infectious
Vulvovaginitis
Pinworms
Human papillomavirus
Molluscum contagiosum
Herpes simplex virus
Epstein–Barr virus
Perianal and vaginal streptococcal infections
Viral exanthems of any kind
Anatomic
Urethral prolapse
Hematologic
Hemorrhagic disease of the newborn
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP)

201
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
to determine which cases are eligible for evidence col-
lection. These tools are based on obtaining informa-
tion, some of which is known only by the child. This 
can be misleading, as children might provide unreliable 
answers. Hence, screening tools require skills and train-
ing before application, and any decision on evidence col-
lection should not be based on history only.
The probability of recovering forensic evidence from 
a child suspect of sexual abuse is governed by different 
dynamics that represent the principle elements for assess-
ing the need for evidence collection:
1. The type of assault: A history of genital/geni-
tal or genital/anal contact or ejaculation is pre-
dictive for the detection of forensic evidence. 
However, lack of reporting such type of contact 
should not preclude evidence collection. There 
have been reported cases where semen was 
recovered from children who mentioned only 
digital contact.
2. The presence of physical injuries could be pre-
dictive for the recovery of evidence, according 
to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). 
Pain and bleeding were significantly associ-
ated with positive evidence. However, with the 
introduction of DNA technology, long inter-
vals could pass where the injuries would heal 
and leave no physical signs, while DNA could 
still be recovered. Hence, collection of evidence 
is appropriate even in the absence of physical 
injuries.
3. The time of the last contact determines the neces-
sity of immediate examination and evidence 
collection. The evidence should be collected as 
close as possible to the time of the last contact. 
Evidence could be lost from the body by degra-
dation of some seminal components in body ori-
fices. It can drain from the vagina or wash from 
the mouth.
There is a debate regarding the time limit for evi-
dence collection in the case of suspected child sexual 
abuse. While the AAP recommends 72 hours as the time 
limit (American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on 
Adolescence, 1994; American Academy of Pediatrics 
Committee on Child Abuse and Neglect, 1999), recent 
studies suggest lowering this limit to 24 hours, as there 
is minimal recovery of evidence, including DNA, beyond 
this time limit. These suggested time limits depend on 
the age of the child and the type of the collected evi-
dence. In prepubertal children, the body rarely retains 
evidence beyond 24 hours, while evidence was recovered 
more from clothes and bed linens after that time interval. 
Therefore, there should be a meticulous search for these 
items.
As the age of the child increases, the possibility of 
recovering evidence from the body after longer time 
periods increases. Adolescent cases act as adults where 
evidence could persist up to 96 hours. The vagina was 
found to be the most common source of evidence in this 
age group.
A possible explanation for low detection of evi-
dence from the vagina in prepubertal girls is that sexual 
assault in this age group rarely involves vaginal inter-
course, owing to the relatively small size of the hymen 
and vagina.
It should be acknowledged that the need for a timely 
forensic assessment should depend not only on the chance 
of recovering evidence but also on many other factors. 
Documenting and treating injuries, post-exposure pro-
phylaxis for certain STIs and pregnancy prophylaxis, 
child safety and the emotional needs of the family and the 
child as provided by the available community resources 
should all be considered. Thus, 72 hours could be used 
as the time limit to assess these children, although most 
evidence would be lost after 24 hours.
1. Actions taken by the child after the assault could 
affect the possibility of recovering evidence. 
Bathing, changing clothes, washing the body, 
and wiping can all lower the chance of finding 
evidence. However, there are reported cases 
where evidence was recovered even after bathing 
and wiping.
2. The age of the perpetrator is a predictive factor; 
those older than 18 years were more often linked 
with positive evidence recovery.
3. Female victims are more likely to have positive 
forensic evidence than male victims.
11.4.21 Collection of Forensic Evidence
Collected evidence includes semen, saliva, and blood. 
DNA can be extracted from blood, sperm, and shed 
epithelial cells in the saliva and skin. These samples are 
obtained with swabbing the body orifices like the mouth, 
vagina, and anus or by swabbing the stains that are 
present on the skin of the victim. Evidence can also be 
obtained from clothes, bed linens, or any other surface 
that may have had contact with biological material from 
the perpetrator.
Forensic evidence kits that include items needed in 
the procedure of evidence collection have been developed 
according to different jurisdiction systems. Standardizing 
the procedure of forensic evidence collection is needed 
for legal acceptance. Protocols of these kits include col-
lection of clothes and sample collection from possible 
points of contact with the perpetrator. Number of swabs, 

202
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
areas to be swabbed, and the technique of collection are 
instructed in the protocol of each kit. However, the kits 
are not used uniformly across cases, and discretion in 
its application occur. While all children can be sampled 
for oral, anal, and skin evidence, only pubertal girls can 
have a vaginal or endocervical sample, which can retain 
evidence for a longer time. Prepubertal girls are not toler-
ant to collecting such a sample, as their hymens are too 
sensitive to be touched by a sampling swab.
Given the different factors that can affect a deci-
sion on whether to collect evidence and what to collect 
at which time interval, it should be acknowledged that 
depending solely on those as discrete indicators for the 
presence or absence of trace evidence or DNA of the 
perpetrator could lead to missed identification of some 
cases. Therefore, any decision to collect evidence should 
be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. As a general guide 
and to ensure effective evidence collection, examiners 
need to collect as soon as possible after the last contact, 
and not necessarily stop after 24 hours. The examiner 
should consider obtaining evidence in cases with an 
inadequate history or unconsciousness. Evidence collec-
tion should proceed even if the physical examination was 
normal, and other items that might have evidence should 
be looked for.
It is suggested that an examination of children 
younger than 10 years could be delayed if the child is 
asymptomatic, presents after 24 hours from the assault, 
denies genital contact or ejaculation, and in the case of a 
young familial perpetrator.
Proper collection and storage should be coordinated 
with police, and chain of custody should be maintained 
throughout the process of collection, storage, and trans-
fer to the laboratory.
11.5 SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS 
AND EVIDENCE OF CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE
Several microorganisms are sexually transmitted. Some 
have gained forensic importance owing to their potential 
use as evidence of child sexual abuse. Neisseria gonor-
rhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis, Trichomonas vaginalis, 
syphilis, HIV, human papillomavirus, and herpes sim-
plex virus are some of the STIs that are encountered in 
children who are evaluated for sexual abuse. The preva-
lence of STIs in these children is different in various stud-
ies but generally low.
Tests that are used to detect causative organisms in 
children should be selected cautiously. While in adults, 
the main purpose of testing is screening and treatment of 
the infection, which needs a highly sensitive test, children 
do need the same sensitivity but with high specificity 
also. Tests that are highly sensitive but with low specific-
ity can lead to false positive results, with disastrous legal 
consequences for the child, the suspect, and the family 
unit, if the suspect was a family member.
Before reaching a diagnosis of sexual abuse by the 
presence of an STI that is strongly associated with sexual 
contact, there should be an exclusion of other explana-
tions for its presence. An infection from a previous unre-
lated sexual abuse should also be considered. In general, 
obtained samples should be retained for repeated tests 
and for testing other STIs.
Trying to link a child with a positive test to a sus-
pect who is also positive for the same microorganism 
requires the isolation of genetically identical organisms. 
This should be interpreted considering many factors that 
differ with the type of the organism.
The prevalence of STIs in children is low, and hence 
not all children who are evaluated for sexual abuse need 
to be investigated for STIs. The AAP and Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines recom-
mend testing children in the following situations:
• The child has signs or symptoms indicative of 
an STI.
• The child has findings indicative of penetration.
• The suspect is known to have STIs.
• STIs are highly prevalent in the community.
Girls often present with vaginal malodorous dis-
charge and sometimes bleeding. A foreign body might 
be discovered in the vagina, which is, most of the time, 
toilet paper. Although exploration could be an explana-
tion for their presence, these girls need to be tested for 
STIs, as sexual abuse has been reported in some cases 
with foreign bodies.
Detection of an STI in a child without a disclosure 
of any sexual contact should be suspicious and needs to 
be reported and properly investigated. At the same time, 
there should be an open mind to other innocent modes 
of transmission.
11.5.1 Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Neisseria gonorrhoea (NG) is Gram-negative intracel-
lular diplococcus that remains alive in body fluids and 
is transmitted through sexual contact. It can infect the 
eyes, pharynx, or anogenital area. Anogenital infection 
is mostly asymptomatic in adolescents and adults, while 
mostly symptomatic in children with purulent discharge, 
itching and redness of the urethra, vagina, or anal area. 
The type of the epithelium and pH of the vagina that 
differs in the two age groups explains this difference in 
the presence of symptoms. Asymptomatic infections have 
been reported in children but are rare. Prepubertal girls 
have a low risk of ascending infection and complications 
following the infection.

203
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
The incubation period is in the range of 2–7 days but 
may reach 3 weeks in children. This has a legal implications 
in tracing the suspects who were in contact with the child 
in that time period, in the case of a single recent contact.
Although sexual contact is the most common mode 
of transmission, innocent transmission should be excluded 
before reaching a diagnosis of child sexual abuse. Vertical 
transmission from an infected mother to a newborn dur-
ing childbirth can result in genital, respiratory, or eye 
infection. It can persist for the immediate neonatal period 
up to 1 month after birth. There are reported cases of rare 
non-sexual transmission. Some research has demonstrated 
the survival of the microorganisms on inanimate objects 
for periods of time that are sufficient for transmission 
and infecting others. Fomites, linens, and toilet seats are 
some of these objects. NG has been isolated from artifi-
cially inoculated toilet seats but not in random swabbing 
of the seats. It has also been found that some neonates 
were infected with NG while their mothers were negative 
for it. Non-sexual transmission was the explanation of the 
NG epidemics that ceased once the source of infection was 
discovered and eliminated.
Regardless of the proposed non-sexual transmission, 
sexual contact remains the main mode of transmission. 
An NG infection that is detected beyond the neonatal 
period should raise a strong suspicion of sexual contact 
and a thorough investigation and reporting to child pro-
tective services should be done.
Recent CDC reports recommend a nucleic acid 
amplification test (NAAT) as the preferred test for 
the diagnosis of NG infection. It has the advantage of 
non-invasive sampling that uses the first-catch urine to 
detect the organism. It is so sensitive as to detect a sin-
gle strand of DNA or RNA of the organism and hence 
does not need swabbing to collect more organisms that 
are required for cultures. It can detect the infection in 
symptomatic and asymptomatic cases. There is no need 
to repeat the NAAT for confirmation of the test in ado-
lescents or adults.
Culture is still the method of choice to detect NG 
in boys, and the rectum and pharynx in boys and girls. 
Cross reactivity with other normal flora that is found in 
the pharynx and rectum (e.g., N. meningitidis) can give 
false positive NAAT results. A swab with specific fea-
tures is inserted 2–3 cm in the rectum and 1–2 cm in the 
urethra and rotated to obtain a good sample for culture. 
Meatal discharge can be collected for culture with no 
need to swab the urethra. Culturing the organism is also 
needed to determine the sensitivity of the organism in 
cases of treatment failure.
Serotyping determines the genetic sequence of organ-
isms in an attempt to create a linkage between them. This 
has been used in epidemiological settings, and it has the 
potential to be used in forensic settings to link the victim 
with the suspect as a proof of sexual contact. However, 
interpreting such typing needs the consideration of sev-
eral factors: the probability of two unrelated strains hav-
ing the same DNA genotype, the frequency of a particular 
genotype in a random sample of NG isolates, genotypic 
differences that are needed to determine lack of relation, 
and the level of genetic variations that occurs in isolates 
from the local population. Serotyping is not standardized 
for use in a forensic setting and is not validated for use in 
providing evidence in court.
11.5.2 Chlamydia trachomatis
Chlamydia trachomatis (CT) is identified by the presence 
of Gram-negative intra-cytoplasmic inclusion bodies. 
Worldwide, it is the most prevalent STI. Its prevalence 
is attributed to the asymptomatic subclinical nature of 
infection that lasts for a long time. Children with CT, 
unlike infection with NG, are commonly asymptomatic. 
Sexual contact is the most common mode of transmis-
sion. Vertical transmission from an infected mother can 
persist asymptomatic for up to 2–3 years, which makes 
a determination of sexual contact more difficult in this 
age group.
NAAT is recommended by the CDC in testing for 
CT in the first-catch urine sample from girls. Culture is 
the method of choice for the detection of the infection in 
the rectum and pharynx in boys and girls and for detect-
ing the infection in boys. Meatal discharge is enough for 
culturing the organism. Culture is also needed for the 
sensitivity of the organism for treatment purposes.
Comparing serovars is complex, and although it can 
be used for epidemiological purposes, its relevance in the 
forensic setting needs knowledge of the local prevalence 
of these types. It is of potential benefit only after consid-
ering other factors that affect the interpretation, similar 
to the situation with NG.
11.5.3 Screening for NG and CT in Cases of CTA
The risk of sexual transmission of NG and CT to child 
victims of sexual abuse has not been studied; there is a 
low prevalence of NG and CT in this age group. A study 
showed that only 16 cases turned out to be positive for NG 
or CT out of 2008 children investigated for the possibil-
ity of sexual abuse within 72 hours post assault. Almost 
all were symptomatic with acute vulvovaginitis. This low-
ers the need for screening asymptomatic children (Simmons 
and Hicks, 2005). If indicated, such screening should be 
done before starting treatment. With initial assessment in 
the case of a single recent contact, the examiner should look 
for signs of infection such as discharge and redness. A first 
voided urine, or one hour after the last voided one, should 
be obtained for NAAT for both NG and CT in girls. Swab 

204
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
the pharynx and rectum, and the urethra in boys, for cul-
ture if the infection is suspected (Papp et al., 2014).
As the organisms might not appear on the first 
test owing to the incubation period, a repeated test—
if  indicated—should be done on the 2-week follow-up 
examination. The unlikely ascending infection and com-
plication in children warrants a delayed treatment till the 
follow-up testing.
In cases of an extended sexual abuse over a long time 
period or a single abuse that occurred a long time before 
the examination, giving sufficient time for the organism 
to appear, a single test is enough.
11.5.4 Syphilis
Treponema pallidum, the organism responsible for syph-
ilis, is a spirochete that is transmitted sexually. Other 
modes of transmission include vertical transmission from 
an infected mother. Rare cases with innocent transmis-
sion via oral lesions through kissing and touching were 
reported. However, whenever the infection is detected in 
a child beyond the neonatal period, sexual abuse should 
be highly suspected, and the child needs to be thoroughly 
investigated.
There are several manifestations of syphilis as a pri-
mary chancre or skin rash. Condyloma lata can be con-
fused with genital warts.
Testing for the presence of treponema involves prob-
able serological tests (specific FTA-ABS and non-specific 
RPR/VDRL) and definitive tests (dark field microscopy 
and skin biopsy). A child who has disclosed sexual con-
tact or a suspected victim of sexual abuse needs a test of 
the serum at the initial presentation and at 6 weeks, 3 
months, and 6 months to let time for seroconversion and 
the appearance of antibodies. The first sample is used to 
compare with the others.
11.5.5 HIV
The risk of sexual transmission of HIV depends on many 
factors: the infection of the perpetrator, the type of con-
tact, the amount of transmitted material and the pres-
ence of tissue injury. A single vaginal penetration has a 
risk of 0.0001–0.003, while a single anal penetration 
poses a 0.005–0.032 risk of HIV transmission.
After excluding other modes of transmission; non-
transfusional, non-vertical HIV in a child should be 
suspicious for sexual abuse. In cases with disclosure of 
sexual abuse, the child should be tested for HIV if there 
is a concurrent STI, the child has injuries following the 
assault, the suspect is known to have HIV or has high-
risk behavior, in the case of multiple perpetrators, or if 
HIV is common in the community.
Testing the serum for the infection should be as close 
to the assault as possible. Other samples at 6 weeks, 3 
months, and 6 months after the incident should be taken. 
Phylogenetic analysis of the HIV strains and their poten-
tial use in determining the source of infection is being 
researched. This has the potential to provide a direct link 
between the suspect and the abused victim.
11.5.6 Human Papillomavirus (HPV)
Genital warts or (condyloma acuminata) can be trans-
mitted sexually, but the examiner should be open-
minded to other modes of transmission. Autoinoculation 
from other body areas of the child and innocent hetero-
inoculation from the parent or caregiver during toi-
leting or diaper change cannot be differentiated from 
sexual contact. The virus can be transmitted vertically 
from an infected mother and it may persist up to 5 years 
after birth. The predictive value of anogenital warts as 
an evidence of sexual abuse increases with the age of 
the child.
Genital warts are diagnosed clinically by the detec-
tion of flesh-colored flat papules that can make clusters. 
They can be found in the perianal area, labia, penile 
shaft, or scrotum. Warts are painless but if irritated 
can be itchy and bleed. The body of the child should be 
examined for the presence of extra-genital warts, and 
the caregiver should also be examined for their presence. 
The differentiation between innocent and sexual trans-
mission by the caregiver can never be reached. Although 
certain types of HPV are more found in genital areas, 
the same types were also recorded in children, so typing 
cannot be used to determine the mode of transmission.
The difficulty in liking an HPV infection to sexual 
abuse is attributed to the subclinical infection in some 
cases and the long persistence after vertical transmis-
sion. The variable incubation period that might reach 
weeks to years can present a difficulty in tracing the 
suspect.
11.5.7 Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV)
Herpes simplex type 1 is mostly non-genital, while type 2 
is commonly a genital infection. However, typing cannot 
be used to differentiate between a sexual and non-sexual 
mode of transmission, as either type can infect both sites.
Unroofed vesicles should be swabbed and cultured 
for the detection of the virus. The typical vesicular erup-
tion of HSV might not present in children. Thus, any 
eruption, ulceration or skin lesion in the anogenital area 
of the child should be swabbed. Polymerase chain reac-
tion (PCR) for detection of HSV in the vesicles has been 
used in adults to increase the retrieval of the virus.

205
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
As with HPV, vertical, hetero- and autoinoculation 
in addition to sexual contact cannot be differentiated, 
and investigating the child is needed before reaching a 
diagnosis of sexual abuse.
11.5.8 Trichomonas vaginalis (TV)
TV is diagnosed by the presence of motile flagellate in the 
wet mount sample of the vagina. Vertical transmission is 
rare but can persist up to 9 months. The presence of TV 
is strongly associated with sexual contact. If detected in 
the child’s urine, it could be fecal contamination with 
Pentatrichomonas hominis, a non-pathogenic intestinal 
flagellate appearing similar to TV.
11.5.9 Bacterial Vaginosis
Bacterial colonization is commonly encountered in the 
vagina of an abused child but also found in non-abused 
children; hence, its presence should be interpreted cau-
tiously 
(Kohlberger 
and 
Bancher-Todesca, 
2007). 
Gardnertella vaginalis, enterobacteriaceae, bacteroids, 
and ureaplasma are part of the long list of bacteria that col-
onizes the vagina in prepubertal and pubertal girls. Their 
presence is not diagnostic of sexual abuse (Table 11.2).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams JA. Normal studies are essential for objective 
medical evaluations of children who may have 
been sexually abused. Acta Paediatr. 2003;92(12): 
1378–80.
Adams JA. Medical evaluation of suspected child sex-
ual  abuse. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2004;17(3): 
191–7.
Adams JA. Guidelines for medical care of children evalu-
ated for suspected sexual abuse: An update for 2008. 
Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2008;20(5):435–41.
Adams JA. Medical evaluation of suspected child sexual 
abuse: 2011 update. J Child Sex Abus. 2011;20(5): 
588–605.
Adams JA, Botash AS, Kellogg N. Differences in hymenal 
morphology between adolescent girls with and with-
out a history of consensual sexual intercourse. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2004;158(3):280–5.
Adams JA, Girardin B, Faugno D. Adolescent sexual 
assault: Documentation of acute injuries using photo-
colposcopy. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2001;14(4): 
175–80.
Adams JA, Harper K, Knudson S, Revilla J. Examination 
findings in legally confirmed child sexual abuse: It’s 
normal to be normal. Pediatrics. 1994;94(3):310–7.
Adams JA, Kaplan RA, Starling SP, Mehta NH, Finkel 
MA, Botash AS et al. Guidelines for medical care 
of children who may have been sexually abused. J 
Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2007;20(3):163–72.
Adams JA, Knudson S. Genital findings in adolescent girls 
referred for suspected sexual abuse. Arch Pediatr 
Adolesc Med. 1996;150(8):850–7.
Adams JA, Starling SP, Frasier LD, Palusci VJ, Shapiro 
RA, Finkel MA et al. Diagnostic accuracy in child 
sexual abuse medical evaluation: Role of experience, 
training, and expert case review. Child Abuse Negl. 
2012;36(5):383–92.
Altchek A, Wasserman B, Deligdisch L. Prepubertal dis-
tal longitudinal vaginal folds. J Pediatr Adolesc 
Gynecol. 2008;21(6):351–4.
American Academy 
of 
Pediatrics 
Committee 
on 
Adolescence. Sexual assault and the adolescent. 
Pediatrics. 1994;94(5):761–5.
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Child 
Abuse and Neglect. Guidelines for the evaluation of 
sexual abuse of children: Subject review. Pediatrics. 
1999;103(1):186–91.
Anderst J, Kellogg N, Jung I. Reports of repetitive penile-
genital penetration often have no definitive evidence 
of penetration. Pediatrics. 2009;124(3):e403–9.
Asati DP, Singh S, Sharma VK, Tiwari S. Dermatoses 
misdiagnosed as deliberate injuries. Med Sci Law. 
2012;52(4):198–204.
TABLE 11.2 Implications of Commonly Encountered 
Sexually Transmitted (ST) or Sexually Associated (SA) 
Infections for Diagnosis and Reporting of Sexual Abuse 
among Infants and Prepubertal Children
ST/SA Confirmed
Evidence of 
Sexual Abuse
Suggested 
Action
Gonorrheaa
Diagnostic
Reportb
Syphilisa
Diagnostic
Reportb
Human Immunodeficiency 
Virusc
Diagnostic
Reportb
Chlamydia trachomatisa
Diagnostic
Reportb
Trichomonas vaginalis
Highly suspicious
Reportb
Anogenital warts 
(condylomata 
acuminata)a
Suspicious
Reportb
Genital herpesa
Suspicious
Reportb,c
Bacterial vaginosis
Inconclusive
Medical 
follow-up
Source:  Adapted from Kellogg N, American Academy of 
Pediatrics Committee on Child Abuse and Neglect. 
Pediatrics, 116, 506–512, 2005.
a If not likely to be perinatally acquired and rare non-sexual, 
vertical transmission is excluded.
b Reports should be made to the agency in the community man-
dated to receive reports of suspected child abuse or neglect.
c If not likely to be acquired perinatally or through transfusion, 
unless there is a clear history of autoinoculation.

206
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Bays J, Chadwick D. Medical diagnosis of the sexually 
abused child. Child Abuse Negl. 1993;17(1):91–110.
Bechtel K. Sexual abuse and sexually transmitted infec-
tions in children and adolescents. Curr Opin Pediatr. 
2010;22(1):94–9.
Berenson AB. Appearance of the hymen at birth and 
one year of age: A longitudinal study. Pediatrics. 
1993;91(4):820–5.
Berenson AB. A longitudinal study of hymenal mor-
phology in the first 3 years of life. Pediatrics. 
1995;95(4):490–6.
Berenson AB. Normal anogenital anatomy. Child Abuse 
Negl. 1998;22(6):589–96; discussion 97–603.
Berenson AB, Chacko MR, Wiemann CM, Mishaw CO, 
Friedrich WN, Grady JJ. A case-control study of 
anatomic changes resulting from sexual abuse. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol. 2000;182(4):820–31; discussion 
31–4.
Berenson AB, Chacko MR, Wiemann CM, Mishaw CO, 
Friedrich WN, Grady JJ. Use of hymenal measure-
ments in the diagnosis of previous penetration. 
Pediatrics. 2002;109(2):228–35.
Berenson AB, Grady JJ. A longitudinal study of hymenal 
development from 3 to 9 years of age. J Pediatr. 
2002;140(5):600–7.
Berenson A, Heger A, Andrews S. Appearance of the 
hymen in newborns. Pediatrics. 1991;87(4):458–65.
Berenson AB, Heger AH, Hayes JM, Bailey RK, Emans 
SJ. Appearance of the hymen in prepubertal girls. 
Pediatrics. 1992;89(3):387–94.
Berkowitz CD. Healing of genital injuries. J Child Sex 
Abus. 2011;20(5):537–47.
Black CM, Driebe EM, Howard LA, Fajman NN, Sawyer 
MK, Girardet RG et al. Multicenter study of nucleic 
acid amplification tests for detection of Chlamydia 
trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae in children 
being evaluated for sexual abuse. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J. 2009;28(7):608–13.
Boos SC. Accidental hymenal injury mimicking sexual 
trauma. Pediatrics. 1999;103(6 Pt 1):1287–90.
Boos SC, Rosas AJ, Boyle C, McCann J. Anogenital inju-
ries in child pedestrians run over by low-speed motor 
vehicles: Four cases with findings that mimic child 
sexual abuse. Pediatrics. 2003;112(1 Pt 1):e77–84.
Bottoms BL, Goodman GS, Schwartz-Kenney BM, 
Thomas SN. Understanding children’s use of secrecy 
in the context of eyewitness reports. Law Hum 
Behav. 2002;26(3):285–313.
Boyle C, McCann J, Miyamoto S, Rogers K. Com-
parison of examination methods used in the 
evaluation of prepubertal and pubertal female 
genitalia: A descriptive study. Child Abuse Negl. 
2008;32(2):229–43.
Cantlon J, Payne G, Erbaugh C. Outcome-based practice: 
Disclosure rates of child sexual abuse comparing 
allegation blind and allegation informed structured 
interviews. Child Abuse Negl. 1996;20(11):1113–20.
Carnes CN, Nelson-Gardell D, Wilson C, Orgassa UC. 
Extended forensic evaluation when sexual abuse is 
suspected: A multisite field study. Child Maltreat. 
2001;6(3):230–42.
Cederborg AC. Factors influencing child witnesses. Scand 
J Psychol. 2004;45(3):197–205.
Chen LP, Murad MH, Paras ML, Colbenson KM, Sattler 
AL, Goranson EN et al. Sexual abuse and life-
time diagnosis of psychiatric disorders: Systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2010;85(7):618–29.
Christian CW. Timing of the medical examination. J Child 
Sex Abus. 2011;20(5):505–20.
Christian CW, Lavelle JM, De Jong AR, Loiselle J, Brenner 
L, Joffe M. Forensic evidence findings in prepubertal 
victims of sexual assault. Pediatrics. 2000;106(1 Pt 
1):100–4.
Closson FT, Lichenstein R. Vaginal foreign bodies and 
child sexual abuse: An important consideration. 
West J Emerg Med. 2013;14(5):437–9.
Colvin CW, Abdullatif H. Anatomy of female puberty: 
The clinical relevance of developmental changes in the 
reproductive system. Clin Anat. 2013;26(1):115–29.
Dalton SR, Hossler E, Maroon M, Pride H, Shabanowitz 
R. Secondary syphilis and suspected child abuse. J 
Am Acad Dermatol. 2013;69(4):640–2.
Darville T. Chlamydia trachomatis infections in neo-
nates and young children. Semin Pediatr Infect Dis. 
2005;16(4):235–44.
Daval-Cote M, Liberas S, Tristan A, Vandenesch F, Gillet 
Y. Gonococcal vulvovaginitis in prepubertal girls: 
Sexual abuse or accidental transmission? Arch 
Pediatr. 2013;20(1):37–40.
de Barbeyrac B, Benali L, Clerc M, Garapon S, Bébéar 
C, Gromb S. Chlamydia trachomatis infection in 
children: Do not forget perinatal acquisition: A case 
report of a 7-year-old girl, C. trachomatis infected, 
presumed sexually assaulted. J Forensic Leg Med. 
2010;17(2):96–8.
de Barbeyrac B, Benali L, Clerc M, Garapon S, Bébéar 
C, Gromb S. Authors reply to: Min Karen L et al. 
A response to: Chlamydia trachomatis infection 
in children: Do not forget perinatal acquisition. 
[2010;17:450]. J Forensic Leg Med. 2011;18(4):187.
DeMattia A, Kornblum JS, Hoffman-Rosenfeld J, Trees 
DL, Tumpey AJ, Laraque D. The use of combina-
tion subtyping in the forensic evaluation of a three-
year-old girl with gonorrhea. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2006;25(5):461–3.

207
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
Dendrinos ML, Quint EH. Lichen sclerosus in chil-
dren and adolescents. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 
2013;25(5):370–4.
Dion J, Cyr M. The use of the NICHD protocol to enhance 
the quantity of details obtained from children with 
low verbal abilities in investigative interviews: A 
pilot study. J Child Sex Abus. 2008;17(2):144–62.
Edgardh K, Ormstad K. The adolescent hymen. J Reprod 
Med. 2002;47(9):710–4.
Ehrnst A. Challenges in virological diagnosis of HIV -1 
transmission from sexual abuse—HIV-1 genetic 
links are mandatory. Am J Reprod Immunol. 
2013;69(Suppl. 1):116–21.
Emans SJ, Woods ER, Allred EN, Grace E. Hymenal 
findings in adolescent women: Impact of tam-
pon use and consensual sexual activity. J Pediatr. 
1994;125(1):153–60.
Everson MD. Bizarre, improbable, and fantastic elements 
in children’s accounts of abuse. Child Maltreat. 
1997;2:134–49.
Faller KC. Anatomical dolls: Their use in assessment 
of children who may have been sexually abused. J 
Child Sex Abus. 2005;14(3):1–21.
Faller KC, Cordisco-Steele L, Nelson-Gardell D. 
Allegations of sexual abuse of a child: What to do 
when a single forensic interview isn’t enough. J 
Child Sex Abus. 2010;19(5):572–89.
Finkelhor D. The international epidemiology of child sex-
ual abuse. Child Abuse Negl. 1994;18:409–17.
Floyed RL, Hirsh DA, Greenbaum VJ, Simon HK. 
Development of a screening tool for pediatric sexual 
assault may reduce emergency department visits. 
Pediatrics. 2011;128(2):221–6.
Fontes LA, Plummer C. Cultural issues in disclo-
sures of child sexual abuse. J Child Sex Abus. 
2010;19(5):491–518.
Frasier LD. The pediatrician’s role in child abuse inter-
viewing. Pediatr Ann. 1997;26(5):306–11.
Gardner JJ. Descriptive study of genital variation in 
healthy, nonabused premenarchal girls. J Pediatr. 
1992;120(2 Pt 1):251–7.
Girardet R, Bolton K, Lahoti S, Mowbray H, Giardino 
A, Isaac R et al. Collection of forensic evidence 
from pediatric victims of sexual assault. Pediatrics. 
2011;128(2):233–8.
Goodman GS, Batterman-Faunce JM, Schaaf JM, Kenney 
R. Nearly 4 years after an event: Children’s eyewit-
ness memory and adults’ perceptions of children’s 
accuracy. Child Abuse Negl. 2002;26(8):849–84.
Goodyear-Smith F. What is the evidence for non-sexual 
transmission of gonorrhoea in children after the 
neonatal period? A systematic review. J Forensic Leg 
Med. 2007;14(8):489–502.
Goodyear-Smith FA, Laidlaw TM. Can tampon use cause 
hymen changes in girls who have not had sexual 
intercourse? A review of the literature. Forensic Sci 
Int. 1998;94(1–2):147–53.
Gray H. Anatomy of Human Body. Philadelphia, PA: Lea 
& Febiger 1918.
Hammerschlag MR, Guillén CD. Medical and legal 
implications of testing for sexually transmit-
ted infections in children. Clin Microbiol Rev. 
2010;23(3):493–506.
Hariton TN. Sexual assault in prepubertal girls: “It is 
normal to be normal” – or is it? Evidence of vagi-
nal penetration in prepubertal girls. Med Sci Law. 
2012;52(4):193–7.
Hariton TN. Response to “signs of recent or healed injury 
to the genitalia in prepubertal girls describing penile-
vaginal contact are uncommon.” Med Sci Law. 
2013;53(2):119–20.
Hariton TN. Response to Alfonso O. Lopez’s letter to the 
editor “Criminal defense perspective and articles 
regarding sexual assault in prepubertal girls.” Med 
Sci Law. 2013;53(2):116.
Hariton TN. Response to Dr John Stirling’s letter to the 
editor “Evidence of sexual assault in prepubertal 
girls.” Med Sci Law. 2013;53(2):113–4.
Heger AH, Ticson L, Guerra L, Lister J, Zaragoza T, 
McConnell G et al. Appearance of the genitalia in 
girls selected for nonabuse: Review of hymenal mor-
phology and nonspecific findings. J Pediatr Adolesc 
Gynecol. 2002;15(1):27–35.
Heppenstall-Heger A, McConnell G, Ticson L, Guerra L, 
Lister J, Zaragoza T. Healing patterns in anogeni-
tal injuries: A longitudinal study of injuries asso-
ciated with sexual abuse, accidental injuries, or 
genital surgery in the preadolescent child. Pediatrics. 
2003;112(4):829–37.
Hershkowitz I, Fisher S, Lamb ME, Horowitz D. Improv- 
ing credibility assessment in child sexual abuse allega-
tions: The role of the NICHD investigative interview 
protocol. Child Abuse Negl. 2007;31(2):99–110.
Hershkowitz I, Orbach Y, Lamb ME, Sternberg KJ, 
Horowitz D. Dynamics of forensic interviews with 
suspected abuse victims who do not disclose abuse. 
Child Abuse Negl. 2006;30(7):753–69.
Hlavka HR, Olinger SD, Lashley JL. The use of anatomi-
cal dolls as a demonstration aid in child sexual abuse 
interviews: A study of forensic interviewers’ percep-
tions. J Child Sex Abus. 2010;19(5):519–53.
Hornor G. Common conditions that mimic findings of sex-
ual abuse. J Pediatr Health Care. 2009;23(5):283–8.
Hostetler BR, Muram D, Jones CE. Sharp penetrating 
injuries to the hymen. In: Muram D, editor. J Pediatr 
Adolesc Gynecol. 1994;7: 94–6.

208
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Ingemann-Hansen O, Charles AV. Forensic medical 
examination of adolescent and adult victims of sex-
ual violence. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 
2013;27(1):91–102.
Ingram DM, Everett VD, Ingram DL. The relation-
ship between the transverse hymenal orifice 
diameter by the separation technique and other pos-
sible markers of sexual abuse. Child Abuse Negl. 
2001;25(8):1109–20.
Jenny C. Emergency evaluation of children when sexual 
assault is suspected. Pediatrics. 2011;128(2):374–5.
Jenny C, Crawford-Jakubiak JE, Committee on Child 
Abuse and Neglect, American Academy of Pediatrics. 
The evaluation of children in the primary care set-
ting when sexual abuse is suspected. Pediatrics. 
2013;132(2):e558–67.
Joanne A. Time Limits for Conducting a Forensic 
Examination: Can Biological Evidence be Recovered 
24, 36, 48, 72, 84 or 96 Hours Following a Sexual 
Assault? May 19, 2005.
Jones LW, Bass DH. Perineal injuries in children. Br J 
Surg. 1991;78(9):1105–7.
Jones JS, Dunnuck C, Rossman L, Wynn BN, Genco M. 
Adolescent Foley catheter technique for visualizing 
hymenal injuries in adolescent sexual assault. Acad 
Emerg Med. 2003;10(9):1001–4.
Jones JS, Rossman L, Hartman M, Alexander CC. 
Anogenital injuries in adolescents after con-
sensual sexual intercourse. Acad Emerg Med. 
2003;10(12):1378–83.
Katz C, Hershkowitz I. The effect of multipart prompts 
on children’s testimonies in sexual abuse investiga-
tions. Child Abuse Negl. 2012;36(11–12):753–9.
Kellogg N. The evaluation of sexual abuse in children. 
Pediatrics. 2005;116(2):506–12.
Kempe H. Sexual abuse, another hidden pediatric 
problem: The 1977 C. Anderson Aldrich lecture. 
Pediatrics. 1978;62: 382–9.
Kenny MC, McEachern AG. Racial, ethnic, and cultural 
factors of childhood sexual abuse: A selected review 
of the literature. Clin Psychol Rev. 2000;20(7): 
905–22.
Kimberley N, Hutson JM, Southwell BR, Grover SR. 
Vaginal agenesis, the hymen, and associated anoma-
lies. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2012;25(1):54–8.
Kimberly W, Stuart B. Sexually transmitted dis-
eases 
treatment 
guidelines, 
2010. 
MMWR. 
2010;59(RR-12):90–5.
Kimberly A. Workowski M. Sexually transmitted diseases 
treatment guidelines, 2006. MMWR Recomm Rep. 
2006;55(RR-11):1–94.
Kohlberger P, Bancher-Todesca D. Bacterial coloniza-
tion in suspected sexually abused children. J Pediatr 
Adolesc Gynecol. 2007;20(5):289–92.
Lamb ME, Garretson ME. The effects of interviewer 
gender and child gender on the informativeness of 
alleged child sexual abuse victims in forensic inter-
views. Law Hum Behav. 2003;27(2):157–71.
Lamb ME, Orbach Y, Hershkowitz I, Esplin PW, 
Horowitz D. A structured forensic interview protocol 
improves the quality and informativeness of investi-
gative interviews with children: A review of research 
using the NICHD Investigative Interview Protocol. 
Child Abuse Negl. 2007;31(11–12):1201–31.
Lamb ME, Orbach Y, Sternberg KJ, Hershkowitz 
I, Horowitz D. Accuracy of investigators’ ver-
batim notes of their forensic interviews with 
alleged child abuse victims. Law Hum Behav. 
2000;24(6):699–708.
Lamb ME, Sternberg KJ, Orbach Y, Hershkowitz I, 
Horowitz D. Differences between accounts pro-
vided by witnesses and alleged victims of child 
sexual abuse. Child Abuse Negl. 2003;27(9): 
1019–31.
Lo MK, Say PJ, Healy C. A response to: Chlamydia tra-
chomatis infection in children: Do not forget peri-
natal acquisition [2010;17:96–98]. J Forensic Leg 
Med. 2010;17(8):450–1.
Lopez AO. Criminal defense perspective and articles 
regarding sexual assault in prepubertal girls. Med 
Sci Law. 2013;53(2):115.
McCann J, Miyamoto S, Boyle C, Rogers K. Healing 
of hymenal injuries in prepubertal and ado-
lescent girls: A descriptive study. Pediatrics. 
2007;119(5):e1094–106.
McCann J, Miyamoto S, Boyle C, Rogers K. Healing 
of nonhymenal genital injuries in prepubertal and 
adolescent girls: A descriptive study. Pediatrics. 
2007;120(5):1000–11.
McCann J, Voris J, Simon M. Genital injuries resulting 
from sexual abuse: A longitudinal study. Pediatrics. 
1992;89(2):307–17.
McCann J, Voris J, Simon M, Wells R. Perianal find-
ings in prepubertal children selected for nona-
buse: A descriptive study. Child Abuse Negl. 
1989;13(2):179–93.
McCann J, Voris J, Simon M, Wells R. Comparison of 
genital examination techniques in prepubertal girls. 
Pediatrics. 1990;85(2):182–7.
McCann J, Voris J. Perianal injuries resulting from 
sexual abuse: A longitudinal study. Pediatrics. 
1993;91(2):390–7.
McCann J, Wells R, Simon M, Voris J. Genital findings in 
prepubertal girls selected for nonabuse: A descrip-
tive study. Pediatrics. 1990;86(3):428–39.
Mor N, Merlob P, Reisner SH. Tags and bands of the 
female external genitalia in the newborn infant. Clin 
Pediatr (Phila). 1983;22(2):122–4.

209
Clinical Forensic Medicine: Child Sexual Abuse
Mor N, Merlob P, Reisner SH. Types of hymen in the 
newborn infant. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 
1986;22(4):225–8.
Myhre AK, Adams JA, Kaufhold M, Davis JL, Suresh P, 
Kuelbs CL. Anal findings in children with and with-
out probable anal penetration: A retrospective study 
of 1115 children referred for suspected sexual abuse. 
Child Abuse Negl. 2013;37(7):465–74.
Myhre AK, Bemtzen K, Bratlid D. Perianal anatomy 
in non-abused preschool children. Acta Paediatr. 
2001;90(11):1321–8.
Myhre AK, Berntzen K, Bratlid D. Genital anatomy 
in non-abused preschool girls. Acta Paediatr. 
2003;92(12):1453–62.
Myhre AK, Myklestad K, Adams JA. Changes in genital 
anatomy and microbiology in girls between age 6 
and age 12 years: A longitudinal study. J Pediatr 
Adolesc Gynecol. 2010;23(2):77–85.
Narang T, Kanwar AJ, Kumaran MS. Condyloma lata in a 
preschooler: The dilemma of sexual abuse versus non-
abuse. Indian J Sex Transm Dis. 2013;34(2):135–7.
A National Protocol for Sexual Assault Medical Forensic 
Examinations 
Adults/Adolescents. 
Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice 2013.
Newton AW, Vandeven AM. The role of the medical pro-
vider in the evaluation of sexually abused children 
and adolescents. J Child Sex Abus. 2010;19(6): 
669–86.
Orbach Y, Hershkowitz I, Lamb ME, Sternberg KJ, Esplin 
PW, Horowitz D. Assessing the value of structured 
protocols for forensic interviews of alleged child 
abuse victims. Child Abuse Negl. 2000;24(6): 
733–52.
Orbach Y, Lamb ME. Assessing the accuracy of a child’s 
account of sexual abuse: A case study. Child Abuse 
Negl. 1999;23(1):91–8.
Orbach Y, Lamb ME. Enhancing children’s narratives 
in investigative interviews. Child Abuse Negl. 
2000;24(12):1631–48.
Orbach Y, Lamb ME. The relationship between within-
interview contradictions and eliciting interviewer 
utterances. 
Child 
Abuse 
Negl. 
2001;25(3): 
323–33.
Ornstein A, Hatchette T. Human papillomavirus and 
anogenital warts in children. CMAJ. 2012;184(3): 
321.
Palusci VJ, Cox EO, Shatz EM, Schultze JM. Urgent medi-
cal assessment after child sexual abuse. Child Abuse 
Negl. 2006;30(4):367–80.
Papp JR, Schachter J, Gaydos CA, Van Der Pol B. 
Recommendations for the laboratory-based detec-
tion of Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria 
 gonorrhoeae—2014. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2014; 
63(RR-02):1–19.
Paradise JE. Predictive accuracy and the diagnosis of 
sexual abuse: A big issue about a little tissue. Child 
Abuse Negl. 1989;13(2):169–76.
Parnis D, Du Mont J. Examining the standardized appli-
cation of rape kits: An exploratory study of post-
sexual assault professional practices. Health Care 
Women Int. 2002;23(8):846–53.
Pereda N, Guilera G, Forns M, Gómez-Benito J. The 
international epidemiology of child sexual abuse: A 
continuation of Finkelhor (1994). Child Abuse Negl. 
2009;33(6):331–42.
Pereda N, Guilera G, Forns M, Gómez-Benito J. The 
prevalence of child sexual abuse in community and 
student samples: A meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev. 
2009;29(4):328–38.
Pillai M. Genital findings in prepubertal girls: What 
can be concluded from an examination? J Pediatr 
Adolesc Gynecol. 2008;21(4):177–85.
Pokorny SF, Murphy JG, Preminger MK. Circumferential 
hymen elasticity: A marker of physiologic maturity. 
J Reprod Med. 1998;43(11):943–8.
Poole DA, Dickinson JJ. Evidence supporting restrictions 
on uses of body diagrams in forensic interviews. 
Child Abuse Negl. 2011;35(9):659–69.
Price 
J. 
Injuries 
in 
prepubertal 
and 
pubertal 
girls. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol. 
2013;27(1):131–9.
Price HL, Connolly DA. Children’s recall of emotion-
ally arousing, repeated events: A review and call 
for further investigation. Int J Law Psychiatry. 
2008;31(4):337–46.
Roberts KP, Powell MB. Describing individual inci-
dents of sexual abuse: A review of research 
on the effects of multiple sources of informa-
tion on children’s reports. Child Abuse Negl. 
2001;25(12):1643–59.
Salhan B, Omisore OT, Kumar P, Potter J. A rare presenta-
tion of imperforate hymen: A case report. Case Rep 
Urol. 2013;2013:731019.
Sayfan L, Mitchell EB, Goodman GS, Eisen ML, Qin J. 
Children’s expressed emotions when disclosing mal-
treatment. Child Abuse Negl. 2008;32(11):1026–36.
Saywitz K, Camparo L. Interviewing child witnesses: 
A developmental perspective. Child Abuse Negl. 
1998;22(8):825–43.
Shapiro RA, Makoroff KL. Sexually transmitted diseases 
in sexually abused girls and adolescents. Curr Opin 
Obstet Gynecol. 2006;18(5):492–7.
Siegfried EC, Frasier LD. Anogenital skin diseases of 
childhood. Pediatr Ann. 1997;26(5):321–31.
Simmons KJ, Hicks DJ. Child sexual abuse examination: Is 
there a need for routine screening for N. gonorrhoeae 
and C. trachomatis? J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 
2005;18(5):343–5.

210
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Sjöberg RL, Lindblad F. Delayed disclosure and dis-
rupted communication during forensic investigation 
of child sexual abuse: A study of 47 corroborated 
cases. Acta Paediatr. 2002;91(12):1391–6.
Snell R. Clinical Anatomy, by Regions. 9th ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 2012.
Springman RE, Wherry JN, Notaro PC. The effects of 
interviewer race and child race on sexual abuse dis-
closures in forensic interviews. J Child Sex Abus. 
2006;15(3):99–116.
Stefanaki C, Barkas G, Valari M, Bethimoutis G, 
Nicolaidou E, Vosynioti V et al. Condylomata acumi-
nata in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2012;31(4):422–4.
Sternberg KJ, Lamb ME, Hershkowitz I, Yudilevitch 
L, Orbach Y, Esplin PW et al. Effects of intro-
ductory style on children’s abilities to describe 
experiences of sexual abuse. Child Abuse Negl. 
1997;21(11):1133–46.
Stirling J. Evidence of sexual assault in prepubertal girls. 
Med Sci Law. 2013;53(2):112.
Stoltenborgh M, van Ijzendoorn MH, Euser EM, 
Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ. A global perspec-
tive on child sexual abuse: Meta-analysis of 
prevalence around the world. Child Maltreat. 
2011;16(2):79–101.
Thackeray JD, Hornor G, Benzinger EA, Scribano PV. 
Forensic evidence collection and DNA identifi-
cation in acute child sexual assault. Pediatrics. 
2011;128(2):227–32.
Tobey AE, Goodman GS. Children’s eyewitness memory: 
Effects of participation and forensic context. Child 
Abuse Negl. 1992;16(6):779–96.
Varese F, Smeets F, Drukker M, Lieverse R, Lataster T, 
Viechtbauer W et al. Childhood adversities increase 
the risk of psychosis: A meta-analysis of patient- 
control, prospective- and cross-sectional cohort 
studies. Schizophr Bull. 2012;38(4):661–71.
Victor V. Re: The development of forensic interview train-
ing models: A reply to Lamb, Orbach, Hershkowitz, 
Esplin, and Horowitz (2007). Child Abuse Negl. 
2008;32(11):1003–6.
Vitale V, Cigliano B, Vallone G. Imperforate hymen caus-
ing congenital hydrometrocolpos. J Ultrasound. 
2013;16(1):37–9.
Watkeys JM, Price LD, Upton PM, Maddocks A. The 
timing of medical examination following an allega-
tion of sexual abuse: Is this an emergency? Arch Dis 
Child. 2008;93(10):851–6.
Whaitiri S, Kelly P. Genital gonorrhoea in children: 
Determining the source and mode of infection. Arch 
Dis Child. 2011;96(3):247–51.
Woods 
CR. 
Gonococcal 
infections 
in 
neonates 
and young children. Semin Pediatr Infect Dis. 
2005;16(4):258–70.
Yavagal S, de Farias TF, Medina CA, Takacs P. Normal 
vulvovaginal, perineal, and pelvic anatomy with 
reconstructive considerations. Semin Plast Surg. 
2011;25(2):121–9.
Yordan EE. The hymen and tanner staging of the 
breast. In: Yordan RA, editor. J Pediatr Adolesc 
Gynecol. Spring 1992;5(2):76–9. doi: 10.1016/
S0932-8610(19)80071-3.
Young KL, Jones JG, Worthington T, Simpson P, Casey 
PH. Forensic laboratory evidence in sexually abused 
children and adolescents. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2006;160(6):585–8.

211
C H A P T E R  12
Forensic Entomology
Adrienne Brundage, Jason Byrd, and Lerah Sutton
CONTENTS
12.1 Introduction 
212
12.2 History and Entomological Research 
212
12.3 Areas of Forensic Entomology 
213
12.3.1 
Urban 
213
12.3.2 
Stored Product 
214
12.3.3 
Medicolegal/Medicocriminal 
214
12.4 What Can Insects Tell Us about the Scene? 
215
12.4.1 
Time of Colonization 
215
12.4.2 
Case Study: Time of Colonization 
215
12.4.3 
Extension of Time of Colonization Estimation 
216
12.4.4 
Case Study: Time of Colonization Extension 
216
12.4.5 
Cause and Manner of Death 
216
12.4.6 
Case Study: Cause and Manner of Death 
216
12.4.7 
Season of Colonization and Postmortem Movement 
216
12.4.8 
Case Study: Season of Death 
217
12.4.9 
Evidence of Neglect 
217
12.4.10 Entomotoxicology 
218
12.4.11 Case Study: Entomotoxicology 
218
12.5 DNA Analysis 
218
12.6 Basic Insect Anatomy 
219
12.7 The Insect Life Cycle 
220
12.7.1 
Calculating Time of Colonization 
220
12.7.2 
Insect Succession and Extended Time of Colonization 
221
12.7.3 
Adventive and Incidental Species 
223
12.7.4 
Important Insects in Decomposition 
223
12.8 Working a Case at the Crime Scene 
223
12.8.1 
Assembling a Collection Kit 
223
12.8.2 
Collecting Evidence on Scene 
225
12.8.2.1 Collection of Temperature and Meteorological Data 
225
12.8.2.2 Collection and Preservation of Insects on Scene 
227
12.8.2.3 Packaging and Shipment of Live Insects on Scene 
229
12.8.2.4 Labeling Collected Specimens 
230
12.8.2.5 Shipment of Evidence to an Entomologist 
230
12.9 Working with an Entomologist 
230
12.9.1 
Laboratory Identification and Analysis 
230
12.9.2 
Case Report Information 
230
12.10 Conclusion 
231
Bibliography 
231

212
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
12.1 INTRODUCTION
Entomology is the scientific study of insects, and the sci-
ence itself is a specialized area of zoology. Entomology 
as a science is extremely broad in its interpretation. 
Technically, any form of scientific study in which there 
is a focus on insect-related inquiries can be defined as 
entomology. Despite human interaction with insects 
throughout human societies from prehistory to today, the 
scientific study of insects experienced a slow and irregu-
lar start. In the 1st century BC, Aristotle published a 
text, Historia Anima–lium, in which Book 4 detailed ani-
mals without blood, the non-vertebrates. In that book, 
he includes insects as class Entoma. The current class, 
Insecta, is the Latin translation of Aristotle’s Entomon. 
The 11th century demonstrated a written record of the 
understanding that some predatory insects can protect 
crops (Needham et al., 2000). Entomology as a studied 
discipline did not start until the 16th century (Saltini, 
1989). In the 17th and 18th centuries, entomology 
matured as a science, with many works being published 
that encompassed systematics, developmental biology, 
anatomy, and physiology.
Scientists have struggled with both the estimation of 
total number of insect species, and total number of insects 
as a percentage of biomass on earth. Approximately one 
million insect species have been described. However, 
scientists now estimate that 5.9–7.8 million species may 
exist (Stork et al., 2015). Insects make up 75%–80% of 
the world’s known species. The extreme success of insects 
is due to their adaptability. Species of insects can fly and 
swim, have adapted to high-altitude freezing conditions, 
brine pools, subterranean life in the absence of light, and 
as parasites. The insects of interest to forensic entomolo-
gists are those that have adapted to the carrion ecosys-
tem. These insect species are attracted to decomposing 
human and animal tissue, which they colonize with their 
eggs and larvae, who feed on the remains and develop in 
a predictable manner with a rate that is largely based on 
temperature influences.
Simply stated, forensic entomology can be defined as 
the scientific study of insects and their arthropod rela-
tives that interacts with legal matters. Of course, expan-
sion of the term “entomology” to include “arthropod 
relatives” is contrary to the basic definition of the word. 
However, the fact remains that entomologists are fre-
quently consulted on cases involving non-insect arthro-
pods. In many cases, the entomologist may choose to 
consult with a subject matter expert about the particu-
lar organism in question. Doing so may be a preferred 
approach, but empirical research on the organism in 
question may provide enough data for the entomologist 
to present the information in court as an expert witness.
This chapter will discuss the overall utility of insects 
in a legal investigation and how entomological knowledge 
may be applied in a variety of cases. In some instances, 
photographic documentation may provide some useful 
information to the forensic entomologist. However, the 
standard procedure is to collect live and preserved ento-
mological samples at the crime scene during the overall 
scene investigation. This type of physical evidence col-
lection should be supplemented by making additional 
collections during the autopsy. This chapter will provide 
step-by-step instructions for collection and documenta-
tion at the crime scene and during autopsy. This chapter 
is designed to brief the reader on the scope and appli-
cation of forensic entomology, and provide a step-wise 
procedure for the scene investigator to follow, including 
proper packaging and shipment to a qualified forensic 
entomologist.
12.2 HISTORY AND 
ENTOMOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Forensic entomology is not a new concept. Though its 
utility in death investigations, civil litigation, and other 
criminal cases may be relatively new by comparison, 
using insects to answer certain scientific questions has 
been in practice for hundreds of years. In general, there 
are three major subfields of forensic entomology: urban, 
stored product, and medicolegal. Urban cases often relate 
to termite infestations and stored product usually relates 
to commercial food contamination. But the medicolegal 
aspect dates back as early as 13th-century China from its 
use—and subsequent write-up—in a local death inves-
tigation by Sung Tz’u in The Washing Away of Wrongs 
(McKnight, 1981). In the 19th century, other countries 
began to publish on the topic as well. European scien-
tists produced two milestone publications, one in 1855 
by Bergeret and another in 1894 by Mégnin. Canadian 
scientists Johnston and Villeneuve published on the topic 
in 1897. Scientific research in the United States was con-
ducted and published concurrently with the European 
studies and continued into the 20th century, but none 
of the material was utilized in a courtroom setting until 
the 1970s and 1980s (Villet et al., 2010). It was not until 
the late 1980s and after that police and other investiga-
tors began making regular use of entomology evidence in 
death investigations and their subsequent criminal trials. 
This awareness was bolstered by trainings and workshops 
on the utility of entomological evidence. Entomologists 
began presenting their empirical research and casework 
at major forensic conferences, which helped to show the 
value of entomologists as expert witnesses and case con-
sultants (Anderson, 2005).
Early research into forensic entomology took a much 
different focus than the ongoing research of today. In 
fact, it was not truly focused on forensic science casework 
until the late 20th century. Initially, entomology research 

213
Forensic Entomology
that had a medicolegal application looked only at decom-
position-related studies—and even then, it did not spe-
cifically address vertebrate remains. Rather, these early 
entomology studies looked at the succession patterns of 
insects as they related to decomposition of organic plant 
material such as trees. In some cases, they focused on 
changes in insects within different landscapes such as 
lakes or sand dunes (Vincent et al., 1985; Graham, 1925; 
Forbes, 1925; Chapman et al., 1926). The initial focus 
of this research did not have a forensic application but 
instead was intended to gain more information on indi-
vidual arthropod species, since little taxonomic informa-
tion was available at that time (Dorsey, 1940). Carrion 
food sources were used to attract insects of interest to the 
research site, and researchers then described the unique 
larval and adult specimens they observed. This informa-
tion was also used to explain the history and life cycle of 
insect species as well as in attempts to suppress certain 
species that had a negative impact on livestock (Davis, 
1915; Cole, 1942; Deonier, 1940).
Concurrently with the insect succession studies, 
research endeavors were addressing taxonomy, ecology, 
morphology, physiology, and other descriptive studies 
of several insect families and orders that would come 
to be forensically important in later decades. The mor-
phological and physiological research was more broadly 
focused on entire orders of flies, beetles, and springtails 
(Motter, 1898; Folsom, 1902; Davis, 1915; Illingworth, 
1926; Steele, 1927; Dorsey, 1940), whereas the taxon-
omy research focused more closely on two Diptera fami-
lies: Sarcophagidae and Calliphoridae (Aldrich, 1916; 
Knipling, 1939; Hall, 1948). Shortly thereafter, the link 
between insect succession, development, and temperature 
began to be better understood. One of the first to associate 
temperature with developmental rate was Kamal’s study 
on Diptera aged at constant temperature (Kamal, 1958). A 
study by Howden in 1950 looked at beetle succession on 
carrion, which was one of the first studies of its kind ever 
conducted (Howden, 1950). These two studies would be 
the harbingers of future research in forensic entomology.
In the 1960s, entomology research quickly gained 
a forensic science focus with particular regard to insect 
succession throughout decomposition. Studies conducted 
by Jerry Payne included various ecological systems, 
including aquatic systems and burials, and were also 
the first to introduce utilize pigs and suitable substitutes 
for humans in decomposition research. His work—par-
ticularly his 1967 dissertation—is arguably the first true 
research on forensic entomology as it is practiced today 
(Payne, 1965, 1967, 1968; Payne and Crossley, 1966; 
Payne et al., 1968; Payne and King, 1969, 1970, 1972). 
From the 1970s to the turn of the century, forensic ento-
mology research was a burgeoning discipline, with stud-
ies being published on topics ranging from mosquitoes 
in medical research to fly egg identification using new 
microscopy techniques. The importance of field research 
was recognized with the opening of the Anthropological 
Research Faculty, also known as the “Body Farm,” at the 
University of Tennessee, where the founders would begin 
to draw a tangible link between human decomposition 
and forensic entomology (Rodriguez and Bass, 1985).
Though the research foundation for forensic ento-
mology was laid primarily in the mid-20th century, from 
the 1980s and beyond forensic entomology became rec-
ognized as a useful application to criminal proceedings. 
Along with this recognition came the necessity for better 
and more plentiful research into all the various aspects of 
entomology that could be used—and subsequently testi-
fied to—in a criminal investigation. Numerous publica-
tions were produced between 1980 and the early 2000s 
that addressed temperature effects on insect develop-
ment, collection and rearing procedures, insect succes-
sion models for decomposition, use of pigs as models for 
humans, statistical error rates, weather and climate data, 
and even the application of DNA to forensic entomol-
ogy cases. In the United States and in many other coun-
tries worldwide, forensic entomology is well established 
as an important component of a death investigation. 
New applications even include wildlife and animal death 
investigations (Anderson, 1999). Two major forensic 
entomology textbooks are widely utilized, both of which 
have seen a second edition published within the last 10 
years (Catts and Haskell, 2008; Byrd and Castner, 2010). 
To attempt to fully explain all the research upon which 
the current state of forensic entomology has been built 
would be too lofty an undertaking for this chapter, but 
the scope of forensic entomology continues to grow year 
after year, with new students and researchers producing 
groundbreaking studies and applications that better uti-
lize insects in forensic investigations.
12.3 AREAS OF FORENSIC ENTOMOLOGY
The broad field of forensic entomology is commonly bro-
ken down into three general areas: medicolegal, urban, 
and stored product pests. Although most forensic ento-
mologists focus in medicolegal entomology, some focus 
only in urban or stored product areas, while a few ento-
mologists may work in more than one area on a routine 
basis.
12.3.1 Urban
The urban aspect of forensic entomology deals with the 
insects that affect human society and its environment. 
Generally, urban forensic entomologists are called upon 
to identity the insect pests responsible for infestations of 
public, commercial, and private dwellings (Figure 12.1).

214
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
These scientists develop control and eradication 
plans, and identify the causes that led to an infestation. 
This casework can sometimes result in criminal or civil 
litigation. The urban forensic entomologist casework 
generally involves roaches, biting and non-biting flies, 
and bedbugs. Most of the questions answered are cen-
tered on control issues, but urban forensic entomologists 
are commonly requested for expert opinion on arte-
facts on human and animals that either may be insect 
derived or patterns of injury. There is some overlap with 
the  medicolegal aspect of forensic entomology, as urban 
insect pests may feed on both the living and the dead. 
Urban pests may produce problems for the forensic inves-
tigator because their feeding and scavenging may pro-
duce antemortem, perimortem, or postmortem artifacts 
that may be misinterpreted as injuries.
12.3.2 Stored Product
Many food products can become infested or contami-
nated by insect pests (Figure 12.2). Such contamina-
tion may result from improper handling, packaging, 
or storage. Some infestations may be accidental, while 
others may be a case of intentional contamination. 
Additionally, some reported cases of contamination 
may be allowable, as the U.S. federal government sets 
allowable limits for insect contamination of food prod-
ucts. These limits are defined dependent on the food 
item in question, so the stored product forensic ento-
mologist must be familiar with the food item and the 
allowable limits of insect matter. Simply because an 
insect is found in a food item does not necessarily imply 
liability. Stored product entomologists may be called 
upon to assist in control and eradication measures, 
and their work has general overlap with urban forensic 
entomology on common pest species. They may also 
be able to determine when a particular investigation 
or contamination event occurred. They often provide 
testimony in criminal and civil court actions to assist 
the trier of fact in assigning liability and assessment of 
monetary damages.
12.3.3 Medicolegal/Medicocriminal
When many people use the term “forensic entomology,” 
they are indeed referring to medicolegal forensic ento-
mology. This area of forensic entomology focuses on 
the insects that inhabit decomposing human and animal 
remains. Commonly, the medicolegal forensic entomolo-
gist is called upon to determine a minimum postmor-
tem interval, or establish a time of colonization of the 
remains utilizing the recovered insect species. Expert 
opinions may be offered on the postmortem movement 
of remains, time of burial versus minimum time of death, 
postmortem treatment of remains such as freezing or 
concealment, recovery of victim DNA from the digestive 
system of insect larvae, and possibly a qualitative toxico-
logical assessment of the insect larvae. This area of foren-
sic entomology is the most widely practiced, and is the 
specialization of the majority of currently board certified 
forensic entomologists.
FIGURE 12.2 Cowpea beans infested with weevils, a 
common stored product pest. (Photo courtesy of CSIRO.)
FIGURE 12.1 Damage to a dwelling from a termite 
infestation. (Photo courtesy of Chris Baranski.)

215
Forensic Entomology
12.4 WHAT CAN INSECTS TELL 
US ABOUT THE SCENE?
The estimated time of insect colonization, cause and 
manner of a person’s death, the season of insect coloni-
zation and the colony’s postmortem movement, and evi-
dence of neglect of a living person can all potentially be 
determined through medicolegal forensic investigation.
12.4.1 Time of Colonization
Knowledge of insect biology and life history allow an 
investigator to tell a great deal about a crime scene. 
The primary question asked of a forensic entomolo-
gist is time of colonization estimation (TOC). TOC is 
often associated with the minimum postmortem interval 
(PMI), or time of death, due to the life history and hab-
its of colonizing insects (Amendt et al., 2007; Benecke, 
2004; Smith, 1986). Forensically important insects are 
generally in the ecological group of decomposers—those 
organisms that utilize the nutrients bound up in dead 
matter (Price, 1997). Decomposers efficiently find and 
exploit dead matter, and those that reply upon ephemeral 
resources such as remains of humans and animals excel 
at resource location (Price, 1997; Cain et al., 2008). Due 
to this resource location efficiency, colonizing insects 
with unobstructed access to bodies may arrive at a 
newly dead organism within minutes after death (Catts 
and Haskell, 2008; Hall, 1995, Byrd and Castner, 2010) 
(Figure 12.3). Therefore, estimation of colonizing insect 
age (TOC estimation) may be used as an indicator of 
how long that body has been available for insect coloni-
zation, and, by extension, how long that body has been 
dead (PMI) (Byrd and Castner, 2010; Davidson, 1944). 
TOC estimation relies on knowledge of basic insect 
physiology. Insects are poikilothermic, meaning their 
growth and development is affected by ambient tempera-
ture (Davidson, 1944), and each insect species has a lower 
and upper threshold, below or above which the insect 
no longer grows (Price, 1997). Between these thresh-
olds, lower ambient temperatures lead to slower insect 
growth, while higher ambient temperatures lead to faster 
insect growth. This growth pattern may be described by 
a mathematical formula (Michaud and Moreau, 2011; 
Higley et al., 1986; Byrd and Castner, 2010).
It is possible to use this mathematical formula to 
estimate the PMI, given some obvious assumptions. If 
we assume the insects observed on a body arrived right 
after death, and their growth was primarily dictated by 
ambient temperature, then it is possible to calculate the 
time needed for an observed colonizing insect to reach 
the observed developmental stage at the observed ambi-
ent temperature. This calculated time is the time of col-
onization, which, under most circumstances, we may 
assume is equal to the postmortem interval (Smith, 1986; 
Byrd and Castner, 2010; Catts and Haskell, 2008). If the 
arrival time of insects is different from time of death (i.e., 
the body was blocked from insect activity, insects arrived 
before death, substances were used to repel insects, etc.) 
then the time of colonization does not equal time of 
death, and should not be used as such (Byrd and Castner, 
2010; Tomberlin et al., 2011).
12.4.2 Case Study: Time of Colonization
The neighbors of an elderly male resident of a mobile 
home community called for a welfare check after notic-
ing papers piling up on the resident’s front porch. Officers 
responding to the call found the mobile home near dump-
sters at the back of the park. It had no air conditioning, 
the windows were open, and the resident was found in 
the late stages of decay, lying near the center of the liv-
ing room. The advanced stages of decay and the witness 
statements led the pathologist to estimate several weeks 
had passed since the decedent had died. Insect activity, 
however, told a different story. Large, third instar (third 
stage) larvae were found in the head region of the dece-
dent. Adult flies were active all over the mobile home. 
The ambient temperature of the trailer was the same as 
outdoors, due to the lack of air conditioning, and the 
open windows allowed for easy access to the body. Flies 
of the same species were found in the dumpster, indicat-
ing that the flies colonizing the body were likely pres-
ent at the moment the resident died, and had unfettered 
access to his body. Calculation of time of colonization 
(TOC) using ambient temperatures indicated a time of 
death of 5 days prior to discovery. Further investigation 
corroborated this TOC estimation.
FIGURE 12.3  Blowflies are often the first insects to 
colonize human and animal remains after death. They 
are especially quick to colonize areas of trauma. (Photo 
courtesy of Paul Venter.)

216
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
12.4.3 Extension of Time of Colonization Estimation
The insects that colonize a body are not static; they 
arrive in blending waves made up of different species, 
depending on time of year, temperature, location, and 
state of decomposition of the body (Price, 1997; Michaud 
et al., 2015). This is known as insect succession (Price, 
1997). Knowledge of the order in which insects arrive at 
carrion, and the time they take utilizing that carrion as a 
resource, allows investigators to estimate TOC (and, by 
extension, PMI) to include the life of several successive 
waves of insects.
12.4.4 Case Study: Time of Colonization Extension
The nearly skeletonized body of a middle-aged female was 
found in a park. The lack of tissue made PMI estimation by 
pathologists nearly impossible. Investigators noticed many 
small, flat, and “hairy” beetle larvae feeding in the tissue, 
and numerous pupal casings around the body. Analysis 
of this evidence indicated the pupal casings belonged to a 
species of blowfly, common in the area, that is known to 
colonize fresh bodies. The flattened beetle larvae were der-
mestid beetles, known to feed on dry remains. Using ambi-
ent temperature, entomologists were able to calculate the 
TOC estimation using both the time it took the initial colo-
nizers to arrive at and colonize the body, develop through 
their larval stages, pupate, and emerge into adults, and 
the time necessary for the second grouping of insects, the 
dermestid beetles, to arrive and colonize the body (Figure 
12.4). This allowed for an extension of the TOC estimation 
and gave a range for the possible time of death.
12.4.5 Cause and Manner of Death
Insect colonizers tend to oviposit and feed on tissue 
that is easily accessible and in a state ready for eating. 
This means that insects showing up quickly after death 
will colonize an animal in the areas of the body easy to 
locate, protected from elements and danger, and easy for 
the offspring to feed upon. These areas include natural 
bodily openings, such as the eyes, ears, nose, mouth, and 
genitalia. This also includes unnatural bodily openings, 
such as perimortem wounds (Byrd and Castner, 2010; 
Smith, 1986; Campobasso, 2001). Larvae hatching from 
eggs oviposited in any of these areas will feed on the 
tissues in the general vicinity of the egg mass, and then 
move into new areas. Early maggot masses can therefore 
be expected only in areas of natural bodily opening (e.g., 
the head and genitals). If maggot masses are found in 
any other area, especially those likely to be inflicted with 
wounds during a struggle, then there was likely a wound 
of some sort in that area that allowed for larval penetra-
tion. The presence of wounds may indicate a death from 
something other than natural causes, or give indication 
of events that happened just before death (Smith, 1986).
Similarly, certain diseases such as diabetes may cause 
festering wounds on appendages, especially the feet. 
These wounds will attract colonizing insects in the same 
manner as a decomposing body (James, 1947; Smith, 
1986). Presence of maggot masses in these areas in con-
cert with medical history may give some clue as to dis-
eases present in the decedent around the time of death.
12.4.6 Case Study: Cause and Manner of Death
The body of a young man was found by the roadside in an 
advanced state of decay. Autopsy technicians noted that 
the flesh of the head was nearly gone, as was the flesh of the 
left hand and right foot. Large maggot masses were pres-
ent in the head, hand, and foot regions, and accounted for 
the consumption of tissue. While insects were expected 
to colonize the head region, they are unable to feed on 
the hands or feet without the presence of wounds. Large 
maggot masses in these areas indicated wounds on these 
appendages right around the time of death.
12.4.7 Season of Colonization and 
Postmortem Movement
All arthropods, including insects, have a distribution 
range based on a variety of factors. These may include 
availability of food, dispersal ability, and climate. This 
results in different species of decomposers living in dif-
ferent areas at different times of the year. Knowledge of 
the range and distribution of various insects is important 
FIGURE 12.4 Dermestid beetles feeding on soft tissues 
still present on a human skull. (Public domain photo 
(CCO 1.0)).

217
Forensic Entomology
when it comes to forensics, since it can indicate the poten-
tial location of death. For example, Brundage, Bros, and 
Honda (2011) showed that forensically important flies 
showed significant habitat differences within a single 
county, with different communities maintained in urban, 
rural, and riparian habitats. This suggests that animals 
killed and colonized in urban areas will have very dif-
ferent species of flies feeding on the remains than those 
killed and colonized just a few miles away in rural or 
riparian habitats. Similarly, Gruner, Slone, and Capinera 
(2007) showed significantly different species composi-
tion of flies colonizing animal remains in winter, spring, 
summer, and fall. This indicates that remains found in 
the same area at different types of year will be associ-
ated with different insect species. Knowledge of the types 
of forensically important insects common to different 
regions and different seasons can allow an investigator to 
determine potential location of death and colonization, 
differentiate the place of death from a potential dump 
site, and narrow down the season during which the ani-
mal remains decomposed.
Insects may also indicate the movement of remains 
after death through evidence of insect colonization left 
over at the original death site. Diptera larvae exploit car-
rion for a relatively short time. After they have finished 
feeding upon the remains, they leave those remains and 
find a protected place in which to pupate. This area may be 
directly underneath the body, in the vicinity of the body, 
or farther away across smooth surfaces (Byrd and Castner, 
2010). The presence of numerous pupal casings or pupat-
ing flies in a particular area indicates that at one time a 
body was present, and may give evidence that a carcass was 
once in the area, even if it is long gone (Figure 12.5).
Similarly, fly larvae may continue to feed on purged 
fluids from a decomposing animal long after the majority 
of the tissue has been removed through scavenger feeding 
or movement of the body to conceal a crime (Haglund 
and Sorg, 1996). Maggots that were once associated 
with remains may feed on fluids that have seeped into 
the ground, soaked into bedding (Kelly et al., 2009) or 
other material, or were dropped from suspended bodies 
(Haglund and Sorg, 1996; Fisher et al., 2006). These lar-
vae may be analyzed in the same way as those removed 
directly from the carcass, and used to construct a TOC 
estimation of the purged fluids.
12.4.8 Case Study: Season of Death
The skull of an unknown male was discovered disar-
ticulated from a body in a heavily wooded area during 
early fall. The skull was completely devoid of flesh, and 
had the remains of a paper wasp nest inside the skull 
cavity. No indication of time of death was present near 
where the skull was found. Entomologists studied the 
wasp nest. This particular species of wasp was known 
to build its nests in enclosed, dry areas during spring, 
and inhabit those nests for the duration of spring, sum-
mer, and fall, leaving only when winter proper arrived. 
Nests were then abandoned and not reused again. The 
fact that a wasp nest was present in the skull indicated 
that the skull had to be completely clean of tissue during 
the spring, to allow for building of the nest. The fact that 
the nest had no living wasps or larvae associated with 
it when discovered indicated that it was not a recently 
built nest, but had been built at least the year before. This 
told investigators that the skull had to be clean and dry 
at least a year and a half before discovery to allow for 
the wasp nest to be used and abandoned. Therefore, the 
owner of the skull likely did not die during the summer 
months, but likely the sometime before spring the year 
prior to discovery. The skull would have had to be fully 
devoid of tissue before nest construction. This added at 
least a year to the minimum time of death.
12.4.9 Evidence of Neglect
Insects colonizing a body are most commonly used 
to determine time of death (Byrd and Castner, 2010). 
However, they do have the ability to colonize festering 
wounds of still-living humans and animals (James, 1947). 
An investigator can use the same techniques as discerning 
time of colonization or postmortem interval to calculate a 
time of neglect: the primary difference is that the first two 
terms describe insects that colonized a body after death, 
while the latter describes insects that colonized a living 
human. The science is the same. An investigator can use 
the ambient temperature and knowledge of the insect life 
cycle to estimate the age of the larvae collected from a 
still-living patient. Assuming that the insects colonized an 
FIGURE 12.5 Puparia of blowflies (Calliphoridae) under 
leaf litter and on top of soil.  These insects have dispersed 
from the body as larvae and formed pupae in a protected 
location. (Photo courtesy of Lerah Sutton.)

218
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
open wound, the age of the insect indicates how long that 
insect has been feeding on the patient. If the insect is large 
enough to see, or is feeding on apparent areas (rather than 
internally or in areas that are not easily visible), then it 
can be inferred that the patient was neglected for as long 
as the insect was feeding. This gives the investigator an 
estimated time of neglect.
Time of neglect may cause some problems when try-
ing to determine TOC for PMI estimation, however. It is 
important to keep in mind that many of the same spe-
cies that colonize dead animals have the ability to colonize 
open wounds, and may be present before the animal was 
dead (James, 1947). If these insects did colonize a patient 
before death, then using the full insect age will lead to 
an incorrect PMI estimation. This is one of the reasons 
forensic entomologists use the term “time of colonization” 
to describe the insect age calculations. Use caution when 
attempting these estimations unless it is known for certain 
that the insects colonized after death and not before.
12.4.10 Entomotoxicology
Insects that colonize a body after death are feeding 
directly on tissue, and whatever substances happen to 
be in that tissue. The old adage “you are what you eat” 
applies quite literally in these cases (Campobasso, 2001). 
Any and all substances present in decomposing tissue are 
ingested by colonizing insects, and these decomposers 
lack the physiology to excrete many of these substances 
(Pounder, 1991; Campobasso, 2001). The chemicals end 
up being stored in the insect body, and can be extracted 
through common toxicological methods. It is therefore 
possible to test for the presence of chemicals in a decom-
posed or mummified animal by testing the insect colo-
nizers rather than the animal tissue itself, using common 
toxicology techniques (Gosselin et al., 2011).
One important limitation to this technique is it 
is unable to determine an exact amount of substance 
presence in animal tissues (Tracqui et al., 2004). As the 
colonizers feed, they will intake varying amounts of the 
substance, and bioaccumulate the chemical in tissues. 
There is no known correlation between the amount of 
chemical present in a living human, and the amount 
of chemical stored in insect tissues during colonization 
(Tracqui et al., 2004). We cannot quantify the chemi-
cal using this method, only answer the yes-or-no ques-
tion “Was this chemical present in the decedent?” with 
certainty.
12.4.11 Case Study: Entomotoxicology
The mummified body of a male was found in a deeply 
wooded area at the end of a harsh winter. The body was 
clothed in hiking gear associated with warmer tempera-
tures, indicating the decedent had not been prepared 
for the cold. Investigators postulated that the remains 
belonged to someone who had gotten lost during warmer 
months. However, witnesses stated that the decedent had 
been seen in early December, and was not known to hike 
in the snow. Pupal casings around the body were col-
lected and tested for the presence of alcohol and drugs. 
All casings came back positive for both ethanol and her-
oin, indicating that the decedent had both of these sub-
stances in his body at the time of his death. Investigators 
theorized the decedent was not in his right mind when 
entering the woods, which explained his lack of protec-
tive clothing.
As with all forensic sciences, forensic entomology is 
simply the application of a science to a practical situa-
tion. These cases and scenarios illustrate the most com-
mon use of insects in casework, although the applications 
are truly endless. Any practical application simply takes 
advantage of the knowledge we have gained about insects 
through general study.
12.5 DNA ANALYSIS
One aspect of forensic entomology that cannot be over-
looked is the use of DNA. As DNA analysis has become 
ubiquitous in forensic investigations (James 1947), its 
use is becoming more and more common in all aspects 
of forensic science, including forensic entomology (Wells 
et al., 2007). The most common usage of DNA is for 
positive identification of insects associated with remains 
(Wells and Stevens, 2008; Benecke, 1998). The cor-
rect identification of colonizing insects is important for 
TOC analysis, yet morphological characteristics may be 
obscured due to poor collection techniques or damage 
during processing. DNA analysis allows investigators to 
potentially identify insect species without the need for 
morphological characteristics (Meiklejohn, et al., 2011, 
Rolo et al., 2013).
Additionally, DNA analysis allows investigators to 
test for the presence of human DNA on or in an insect 
specimen, thereby determining if that specimen had 
fed upon human remains, or had been associated with 
human remains prior to collection (Wells et al., 2001). 
It may also indicate the movement of human DNA by 
insect movement, rather than by human or animal move-
ment (Durdle, van Oorschot, and Mitchell, 2009). Both 
of these circumstances are important, as they may change 
the timeline of a decedent.
DNA use is an area of ongoing investigation, and 
while common in forensic science laboratories, it is still 
rare in forensic entomology. Both cost and time are bar-
riers to the full adoption of molecular methods for iden-
tification, and until these methods become cheaper and 

219
Forensic Entomology
easier to use on a regular basis, they will be outmatched 
by morphological identification techniques.
12.6 BASIC INSECT ANATOMY
Insect anatomy is the foundation of entomology. 
Arthropods in general have evolved strategies to live 
successfully under a variety of conditions, and a strong 
understanding of external and internal anatomy of the 
insects involved in decomposition gives the investigator a 
good basis to understand insect behavior.
The overall body form of an insect is cylindrical and 
elongate, and is broken up into three major body regions: 
the head, the thorax, and the abdomen. The head is made 
of sclerotized, or hardened, segments fused to form a 
capsule. It is rigid to protect the brain and give strength 
to the mouthparts, and houses the sensory center of the 
organism. The sensory center consists of olfactory input 
through the antennae, and visual input through the eyes 
(Gullan and Cranston, 2009).
Visual input allows the insect to see movement of 
prey or enemies, potential oviposition sites, potential 
food, and it assists in mate location. Most insects have 
two types of eyes: the simple eyes and the compound 
eyes. The compound eyes, when present, take up the bulk 
of the insect head, and consist of many individual units 
or lenses working together to form a single image. Single 
lenses, called the simple eyes, are present at the vertex of 
the head in some organisms, and give the insect informa-
tion about light and dark. Working together, the com-
pound and simple eyes allow flies and other insects to 
find carrion (Gullan and Cranston, 2009; Nation, 2011).
Insect antennae act as the center for olfaction (Gullan 
and Cranston, 2009). The antennal structures are found 
anterior on the head, and come in a variety of forms, from 
long and thin to robust with many tiny hairs. The anten-
nae pick up on airborne molecules, including products of 
decomposition, which allow the insect to locate potential 
resources from great distances. Insects use the relative 
abundance of volatiles to locate decomposing matter that 
is out of visual range (Gullan and Cranston, 2009).
The insect mouthparts come in a variety of forms, 
depending on the evolved use. Some insects have chew-
ing mouthparts with large mandibles, which allow that 
insect to feed on a variety of substrates. Other insects 
have piercing and sucking mouthparts, which allow the 
insect to pierce through skin or the surface of a plant 
and feed on the internal fluids. Still others have sponging 
mouthparts, which enable the insect to extrude digestive 
juices into the environment and soak up the resulting 
digested substance (Nation, 2011). Some insects have 
siphoning mouthparts which act like a straw and allow 
the insect to feed on freely available liquids like water 
and nectar, while others have specialized mouth hooks, 
in place of the mouthparts, that can scrape food in the 
environment for eating. The types of mouthparts found 
in forensically important insects vary based on the type 
of tissue each insect is feeding upon. Those insects that 
feed during the early stages of decomposition tend to 
have sponging mouthparts as adults and mouth hooks as 
larvae. Those that feed during the later stages of decom-
position, when tissue tends to be tougher, tend to have 
chewing mouthparts (Mullen and Durden, 2002).
The thoracic region of the adult insect has three pairs 
of legs, and often has wings. The legs are five-segmented, 
and adapted for a myriad of other behaviors common 
to the individual insect. There are usually two pairs 
of wings, and the wings tend to be slender with veins 
throughout for strength. These veins and the open areas 
between the veins (called cells) are used to identify many 
insect species. Some insects may not have wings at all, 
or have lost their wings through evolution or behavior. 
Other insects have modified wings for protection and 
flight. Beetles have two pairs of wings, but the first pair 
is hardened into a protective covering for the hind wings. 
Flies have one pair of well-developed wings, while the 
hind wings are reduced into knob-like organs that are 
used for balance during flight (Nation, 2011).
The abdomen is generally cylindrical, and varies from 
9 to 11 visible segments. Each segment bears a pair of holes 
on the lateral surfaces called the spiracles, which allow for 
oxygen to diffuse into the internal trachea. The abdomen 
does not usually have any appendages, and primarily serves 
to house the internal organs. The terminal end of the abdo-
men houses the genitalia and other specialized structures. 
Some female genitalia are heavily sclerotized and used for 
defense as stingers (Gullan and Cranston, 2009).
The internal organs of the insect are housed within 
a hollow body cavity called the hemocoel. This cavity 
contains all the organs, including the heart and brain, 
and the digestive, reproductive, nervous, and respira-
tory systems. The organs are bathed in a nutrient-rich 
hemolymph, which fills the hemocoel with fluid. The 
hemolymph combines some of the functions of vertebrate 
blood and lymph, delivering nutrients, removing metabo-
lites, and carrying out basic immune functions (Nation, 
2011). Circulation of hemolymph is maintained mostly 
by a system of muscular pumps moving the hemolymph 
through compartments separated by membranes. Insects 
have an open circulatory system: hemolymph is not con-
fined to vessels. Instead, it sloshes around the hemocoel 
and bathes the organs with nutrients and hormones while 
removing wastes and assisting in immune functions 
(Mullen and Durden, 2002). Most insect hemolymph 
doesn’t carry oxygen, and therefore does not have the 
characteristic red color caused by hemoglobin. The heart 
is a simple dorsal tube, closed at the posterior end, and 
dotted with openings called ostia. The ostia allow hemo-
lymph to enter the dorsal vessel, and the vessel pumps the 

220
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
hemolymph forward toward the brain. The hemolymph 
then flows backward in the hemocoel, assisted by mus-
cle contractions in the ventral diaphragm (Mullen and 
Durden, 2002).
Oxygen is provided to the tissues from the environ-
ment via the respiratory system. Air enters the insect via 
the openings found on the lateral or posterior surfaces of 
the body, called spiracles. Spiracles are attached to a net-
work of tracheal tubes that branch throughout the body, 
ultimately contacting all the internal organs and tissues 
(Mullen and Durden, 2002; Gullan and Cranston, 2009).
The digestive system is responsible for the break-
down of foods and the excretion of waste products. It 
begins with the foregut, which receives the ingested food, 
and is responsible for the initial digestion through mus-
cular grinding. Chemical digestion primarily takes place 
in the midgut, where enzymes break down carbohydrates 
and proteins into absorbable units, which are absorbed 
through the midgut lining. Whatever is left over after 
absorption moves into the hindgut, where excess water 
and ions are absorbed. Waste products are excreted into 
the environment (Mullen and Durden, 2002; Nation, 
2011).
The insect nervous system is in charge of convey-
ing and integrating information about the internal and 
external environments. It consists primarily of the brain, 
found along the dorsal region of the head capsule, and a 
ventral nerve cord, which travels ventrally from the brain 
along the thorax and abdomen. The nerve cord is stud-
ded with ganglia, thickened regions of tissue that contain 
nerve cells. Each ganglion is the nerve center for its asso-
ciated segment, and sends information from that segment 
back to the brain for processing (Nation, 2011).
12.7 THE INSECT LIFE CYCLE
The bulk of forensic entomology relies on an understand-
ing of the reproduction of insects and the resulting life 
cycle. Reproduction in most insects involves two sexes: 
a male and a female. The female reproductive system is 
responsible for producing and storing eggs, providing 
eggs with nutrition, receiving and storing the sperm, fer-
tilizing the eggs, and depositing the eggs into the envi-
ronment. The male reproductive system is responsible for 
producing sperm and presenting it to the female for egg 
fertilization (Nation, 2011).
The primary forensically important insects are 
the Diptera, or the true flies, due to their ability to 
quickly locate and colonize remains. The dipteran life 
cycle is therefore considered the most important life 
cycle to understand (Smith, 1986; Catts and Haskell, 
2008). The Diptera exhibit a complete metamorpho-
sis, meaning they start out as eggs, hatch into the 
first of several larval instars, pupate, and eclose into 
adults. Most dipteran females lay eggs, and are termed 
oviparous. Others retain the eggs internally until they 
hatch, and deposit early instar larvae into the envi-
ronment. These are called ovoviviparous or larvipa-
rous. A very few groups retain the developing larvae 
in their bodies until the larvae are ready to pupate. 
These are called pupiporous flies (Nation, 2011). The 
larvae tend to inhabit aquatic or semiaquatic environ-
ments during these immature stages. The number of 
larval stages, termed instars, varies with species. In 
general, flies have three or four larval instars before 
pupation. Once the larval stage has finished feeding, 
the immature fly will enter the dispersal, or wandering 
stage (Mullen and Durden, 2002). This dispersal stage 
takes the larvae 15–20 feet away from the carrion and 
to a protected place in which to pupate (Catts, 1992). 
The dispersing larvae will crawl under things in the 
environment, or dig a few centimeters down into the 
soil, where the outer cuticle of the larva hardens into a 
protective shell, ultimately called the pupal case. Inside 
this pupal casing, enzymes transform the larvae into 
an adult (Nation, 2011).
12.7.1 Calculating Time of Colonization
Dipteran larvae do not produce their own heat (Nation, 
2011). Instead, they rely upon the ambient temperature, 
which determines how quickly or slowly they grow 
(Davidson, 1944). Warmer ambient temperatures result 
in a quick life cycle, while slower ambient temperatures 
result in an extended life cycle. It is this property that 
allows forensic entomologists to apply insect develop-
ment data to determine a TOC estimation on remains. 
This also makes temperature the most important density 
independent factor for insects (Beck, 1983; Byrd, 1998).
Temperature has a significant effect on dipteran 
metabolic and developmental rate (Nation, 2011). Every 
insect has thermal activity and death thresholds: both 
lower and upper limits, below or above which they can 
no longer function (Nation, 2011; Beck, 1983; Block, 
1982). These thermal thresholds are naturally different 
for different species, and often associated with life his-
tory and climate. There is a distinct variation among 
species when it comes to temperature thresholds. The 
lower limits are better known than the upper limits, 
and become important when mathematically calculat-
ing a TOC estimation (Block, 1982). Experimentally 
determined developmental thresholds for forensically 
important flies are usually between 6°C and 10°C. If 
published thresholds are not available, a the general 
rule of thumb is to use a lower developmental thresh-
old for cold-weather species, and a higher threshold for 
warm-weather species (Ames and Turner, 2003; Davies 
and Ratcliffe, 1994; Anderson, 2000).

221
Forensic Entomology
Each stage of insect growth requires a certain 
amount of heat above a minimum temperature and 
below a maximum temperature (Hagstrum and 
Milliken, 1988; Davidson, 1944), which may be repre-
sented by a linear model. These linear models describe 
units of heat-time called degree day or degree hour 
models. In these cases, development is recorded as the 
temperature above the minimum developmental thresh-
old multiplied by either days or hours (i.e., a unit of 
time) (Yang et al., 1995; Michaud and Moreau, 2011; 
Higley et al., 1986).
The model allows us to calculate the time it takes a fly 
to develop using ambient temperature and this formula:
(Average ambient temperature – Minimum 
 
 threshold) × Unit of time
The average ambient temperature over a given period 
of time (days or hours) is calculated, and the develop-
mental threshold of an insect species is subtracted (6°C 
or 10°C, usually). The results are multiplied by a unit 
of time (number of days or hours). The result is called a 
“degree day” (DD) (if the unit of time used was a day) 
or a “degree hour” (DH) (if the unit of time used was 
an hour). These are the two most common units of time 
seen in this type of model, simply because weather sta-
tions often record ambient temperature in daily or hourly 
intervals.
The formula may be used to calculate how many 
degree days (DD) or degree hours (DH) are necessary for 
an insect to get through various stages in its life cycle, 
as well as how many degree days have accumulated 
over time. The DD/DH necessary for an insect to get 
through its life cycle is determined in the lab. The data 
are recorded as hours needed for a species to develop at a 
given temperature, and these data may be converted into 
DD or DH simply by using the formula. These develop-
mental data may be found in scientific publications and 
accessed online. Each developmental stage, from egg to 
adult, may be calculated in this manner.
Once the DD or DH necessary for insect development 
is known, it is possible to calculate the time necessary for 
the DD to accumulate at recorded ambient temperatures. 
The species threshold temperature is used in the same 
DD formula, but the average temperature is a weather 
station recording over a given period of time. Once all 
this information is calculated, the DD necessary for an 
insect species to develop is applied to the total DD accu-
mulated (ADD) over a period of time to determine how 
long it would take an insect to develop to an observed life 
stage given the recorded ambient temperature.
Take, for example, the case of an unknown decedent 
found by the side of the road. Investigators discover this 
body covered in third instar maggots. The maggots are 
actively feeding, and there is no indication that the flies 
were kept from immediately colonizing the body after 
death. A forensic entomologist would first need to collect 
the maggots for identification. Then, the entomologist 
would need to find developmental data on that species 
of maggot in the literature. This data would be recorded 
as number of hours necessary for development at a stan-
dard temperature. Using this information, the entomolo-
gist could calculate the number of degree days necessary 
for the maggots to reach the beginning and end of the 
third instar. This range would allow the investigator 
to account for the fact that the exact age of the maggot 
remains unknown – it is not possible to tell if the maggot 
was at the very beginning of the third instar, or near-
ing the very end of the third instar, so a range of pos-
sible developmental times is necessary. The entomologist 
would then find out the historical ambient temperature 
by finding data from local weather stations. These data 
are reported in average daily or hourly temperatures, 
and made available through governmental databases. 
The number of degree days or degree hours that accu-
mulated in the environment could then be calculated, 
and the time necessary for the colonizing fly to reach the 
observed stage of development determined.
12.7.2 Insect Succession and Extended 
Time of Colonization
Insect that feed on bodies are broken up into different 
ecological groups: necrophagous species, which feed pri-
marily upon animal and human remains; omnivorous 
species can feed upon both remains and other organ-
isms colonizing those remains; predators and parasites 
feed on necrophagous or omnivorous species; adven-
tive species use the remains as an extension of their pri-
mary environment; and incidental species are associated 
with remains simply due to happenstance (Roberts and 
Márquez-Grant, 2012; Price, 1997). The most useful of 
these groups are the necrophagous species, since they are 
feeding directly on the remains themselves. However, 
some information may be gleaned from the other eco-
logical groups (Price, 1997; Smith, 1986). Necrophagous 
insects arrive on and in a corpse in a relatively predictable 
sequence, and form the ecological succession of insects. 
This succession is influenced by the environment, season, 
and the decompositional state of the remains. The insects 
arrive in blending waves, called seres, of organisms, each 
comprised of different species attracted to a particular 
state of decay (Goff, 1993; Smith, 1986).
The number of seres that colonize a body depends 
on the placement of the remains. Exposed corpses yield 
approximately eight seres, while buried remains yield 
only three (Mégnin, 1894). This difference is due to the 
availability of decomposing tissue, along with the abil-
ity of those insects to reach tissue that is blocked from 

222
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
easy access. While some insects will readily colonize tis-
sue placed in the open air, they may not be able to reach 
that same tissue buried just a few inches below the soil 
surface. Buried bodies therefore have a lower number of 
colonizing insects, and take a longer period of time to 
decompose that those in the open air (Mégnin, 1894).
Different insects are attracted to different stages of 
generalized decomposition. While stages of decompo-
sition are not necessarily discrete and are notoriously 
imprecise, historically scientists have broken up decom-
position of animal remains into five major stages: fresh, 
putrefaction, active decay, butyric fermentation, and dry 
decay (Haglund and Sorg, 1996). Each of these stages 
attracts one or more seres of insects and other arthropods 
in a predictable sequence. From the moment of death, the 
insect fauna of an animal body begins to change. Any 
ectoparasites (insects feeding on the living animal tis-
sue) associated with the body leave relatively quickly as 
the body cools and the blood ceases to circulate (Mullen 
and Durden, 2002). Myiasis-causing flies may or may not 
die—it is dependent upon if they are obligate parasites of 
living tissue, or facultative parasites that can feed on both 
living and dead tissue. Botflies, for example, are depen-
dent upon a living host, and if the host dies, the botfly 
dies. Cochliomyia sp., on the other hand, can feed on liv-
ing or dead hosts, and may just continue to feed after the 
animal dies (Mullen and Durden, 2002; Smith, 1986).
Insects in the necrophagous group are attracted to 
the body within minutes of death, and are therefore asso-
ciated with the fresh stage of decay. The first adults tend 
to be observed on a fresh corpse within an hour after 
death, as long as there is adequate access to the body 
(Smith, 1986). Some investigators report arrival time to 
be as early as 15 seconds after death, although this tim-
ing has yet to be adequately studied (Catts and Haskell, 
2008). Eggs and first instar maggots tend to appear with 
the onset of autolysis, and this early sere is character-
ized by the presence of adult flies and fly eggs. Eggs will 
be found near natural bodily openings, on wounds, and 
sometimes in protected folds of skin or coverings. Those 
eggs will hatch to first instars quickly in warm environ-
ments, but there will not be a large maggot mass on the 
body; the tissue will still look fresh. Primarily, blow-
flies, houseflies, and flesh flies will make up the earliest 
seres observed (Midgley et al., 2010; Schoenly and Reid, 
1987). Larvae grow according to ambient temperature, 
and move throughout the body. This movement will 
spread bacteria and digestive enzymes as the larvae feed 
on tissues. The larvae move in a mass, benefiting from 
communal heat and shared digestive secretions. Larvae 
first feed between muscles, then on the muscle fibers 
themselves as the maggots grow and the digestive juices 
get to work. The rate of decay increases, and the odors 
emitted from the body attract more blowflies, flesh flies, 
beetles, and mites. They are joined by parasitic wasps 
that lay their eggs inside maggots and later inside pupae. 
This second sere is characterized by putrefaction of tis-
sue, and the presence of blowflies and flesh flies primarily 
(Byrd and Castner, 2010).
Once the body enters active decay, several genera-
tions of maggots are present on the body. Some of the 
maggots will be well into the third instar, and will begin 
to disperse from the remains to find pupation sites. These 
maggots will burrow into the soil or crawl under nearby 
objects for safety. This later decompositional stage no 
longer proves attractive for early sere members, which 
make way for those insects that prefer later stages of 
decay. Predatory maggots are much more abundant at 
this stage, and may be feeding upon other species in the 
maggot mass, along with predatory beetles that feed on 
both larvae and animal tissues (Watson and Carlton, 
2005). Parasitic wasps are also common, attacking the 
huge maggot masses and developing pupae. Active decay 
attracts a new sere characterized by carpet beetles and 
grease moths. As active decay moves into butyric fer-
mentation, two additional seres are attracted: first, a sere 
consisting of small flies known as cheese skippers and 
beetles arrive at the body. The second sere consists of 
dump flies, phorid flies, and clown beetles (Smith, 1986). 
As the carrion is stripped of most of its soft tissue, the 
remaining tissue begins to dry out, making the body less 
palatable to the mouth hooks of maggots. Beetle adults 
and larvae feed on skin and ligaments, while certain late-
stage flies, such as the cheese fly, arrive to feed on what-
ever moist flesh remains. Predators and parasites are still 
prevalent at this stage, feeding on the straggling mag-
gots or other soft-bodied insects in the vicinity (Schoenly, 
1992; Smith, 1986).
Once the remains have completely dried out, the 
body attracts insects that can feed on keratinized hair 
and skin. This dry stage of decomposition is highly 
attractive to a new sere consisting primarily of mites and 
beetles. This stage tends to last for a long while, since the 
business of feeding on dried-out tissue takes a great deal 
of time and digestive enzymes. The beetles will remain 
on the bones as long as the skeleton is undisturbed and 
has dried tissue (Schoenly, 1992). After the dried tissue 
has been cleaned by the beetles, moths, and mites, only 
the bones’ empty pupal casings remain. There is no lon-
ger any major insect activity, and any further decomposi-
tion is accomplished by bacteria and physical factors.
By way of comparison, a buried animal has fewer 
seres with lower species diversity (Payne, 1968). Freshly 
buried animals tend to attract flies that must burrow 
through the top layers of soil to reach the remains. Active 
decay may attract root-eating beetles, and dry decay is 
populated by rove beetles (Payne, 1968; Smith, 1986). 
Since early successional experiments, there have been 

223
Forensic Entomology
many, many attempts to characterize the number of seres 
that show up on bodies of different sizes. It is difficult to 
positively identify the seres, however, and entomologists 
have agreed upon only a broad definition of these blend-
ing waves. Use of insect succession for TOC estimation 
is therefore dependent largely upon the types of flies and 
beetles present in the area, and their likelihood of arriv-
ing at fresh versus decaying flesh (Smith, 1986).
12.7.3 Adventive and Incidental Species
A myriad of other insect and arthropod species may be 
associated with decomposing carrion simply by chance. 
These organisms use the body for shade, shelter, or as a 
vantage point for predation. These arthropods could just 
as easily use any object in the environment, and do not 
have any intrinsic forensic significance. However, their 
presence may indicate an extended postmortem interval 
(e.g., the presence of a spider web on a body indicates 
an extended PMI). As a group, the organisms that may 
be found on carrion but do not have any direct foren-
sic application are called adventive species (Smith, 1986; 
Byrd and Castner, 2010; Catts and Haskell, 2008).
Any mobile terrestrial or airborne arthropod may 
accidentally land on or in the vicinity of carrion. These 
specimens may be collected along with the forensically 
important organisms, but they do not have any forensic 
value, due to their unpredictable arrival and accidental 
nature. These organisms are called incidental species as 
a group since they don’t use the body for anything at 
all, and are often identified and ignored during a forensic 
case (Smith, 1986; Byrd and Castner, 2010).
12.7.4 Important Insects in Decomposition
Diptera are commonly known as the true flies, and are one 
of the largest and most diverse orders. The order name 
literally means “two winged,” and refers to the fact that 
the hind pair of wings is greatly modified and reduced. 
There are approximately 120,000 species worldwide, 
with around 20,000 found in North America. Diptera 
are considered the most important order to human and 
animal health, due to their vector capabilities, and are 
the most important in forensics, since they often com-
pose the bulk of the first sere.
12.8 WORKING A CASE AT 
THE CRIME SCENE
The application of entomology and the types of cases 
encountered can be extensively varied, but the standard 
procedures for working any case on scene are gener-
ally the same. Some basic equipment and information is 
required at all scenes and can be obtained with relative 
ease. At every scene, a kit will be needed for proper col-
lection and storage of the insects. Once the insects are 
properly collected, they should be sent to an entomolo-
gist who will identify and analyze them at a later date. 
Temperature data is also of vital importance to entomo-
logical analysis. Since it is uncommon for an entomolo-
gist to be present on every scene—though very helpful 
when possible—making a collection kit ahead of time 
and learning some of the basics of how to collect forensi-
cally significant insects can make the collection process 
simple and straightforward.
12.8.1 Assembling a Collection Kit
The first step toward being prepared to collect insect evi-
dence on scene is assembling a collection kit. While there 
are some prefabricated kits commercially available for 
purchase, many of the required items can be easily and 
inexpensively obtained at local stores, though some items 
may need to be ordered ahead of time. Essential collec-
tion kit items include the following:
• Insect net
• Thermometer
• Collection vials
• Preservation chemicals
• A mixture of kerosene, alcohol, and acetic 
acid (KAA)
• 80% ethyl alcohol (EtOH)
• Ethyl acetate
• Featherweight forceps
• Kill jar
• Plastic spoons
• Plastic containers
• Aluminum foil
• Vermiculite
• Food source
• Beef liver
• Canned cat food
• Labels
• Plain paper
• Self-adhesive
• Pencil
• Trowel
• Gloves
• Ruler or scale
• Camera
• Shipping containers
• Entomological Death Scene Form (Figure 12.6)

224
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Forensic Entomology Data Form
Date: _____________________________________
Collector: ________________________________
Case Number: _____________________________
Agency: __________________________________
Location : (GPS coordinates, nearest physical address, city, state, country)
Decedent: _________________________________
Age: _____________
Sex: _______________
Last Seen Alive: ____________________________
Date/Time Found: _________________________
Date Reported Missing: ____________________
Time of Insect Collection: _____________________
Site Description:
Condition of the remains: 
whole     
partial
If partial, what part is present:
Presence of trauma:
yes     
no     
unknown
Evidence of scavenging:
yes     
no     
unknown
Evidence of possible traumatic injury sites: (Comment and/or draw below)
Type of body/remains concealment: 
none     
plastic bag     
container, type: __________     
burial, depth: __________
other: ____________
Location(s) of insect activity: (check all that apply)
head     
mouth     
eyes     
ears     
anus     
genitals     
chest     
abdomen
wound(s), location(s): __________
________
other: _________________
Location on body of insect specimen collection: (check all that apply)
head     
mouth     
eyes     
ears     
anus     
genitals     
chest     
abdomen
wound(s), location(s): __________________      
other: _________________
Approximate stage of decomposition:
fresh     
bloated     
active decay     
advanced decay    
skeletonized     
saponification     
mummification     
dismemberment     
other: ______________
Body exposure: (check all that apply)
open air     
burial
fully clothed     
partially clothed     
nude    
full sun     
partial shade     
full shade    
debris, type: __________     
other: ____________________________________________________
Portion of body clothed and description of clothing
:  
Location of body and insect collection site: (check all that apply)
indoor     
outdoor     
aquatic     
rural     
urban/suburban
Indoor:
house     
shed or outbuilding
Was structure closed to outside insect access?
Outdoor: (check all that apply)
forest     
field     
pasture     
brush   
grass     
roadside     
pavement
yes     
no     
unknown
Was structure temperature controlled?
yes, temperature: ______________
no     
unknown
trash container     
vacant lot
other: ___________________________
Aquatic: (check all that apply)
pond     
lake     
creek     
river
canal     
ditch     
gulf     
swampy area
salt water   
fresh water   
brackish water
standing water     
running water
other: 
_______________________________
Water temperature: ______________________
Was the body floating on water surface?
yes     
no     
unknown
Notes on the collection site or body condition:
Scene temperatures: (complete all that apply)
ambient:_________   ambient (1 ft):_______   body surface:_______   ground surface:_______
under-body interface:_______   maggot mass:_______   soil temperature (1 inch):_______   
soil temperature (3 inches):_______   A/C or Heat:_______   ceiling fan: on/off   
Note: Record all temperatures periodically each day at the side for 3-5 days after recovery.
Method of insect preservation for soft-bodied specimens:
hot water kill and 80% ethanol     
80% ethanol     
other:____________________
Number of preserved samples:
Number of live samples:
How are live samples being maintained?
room temperature at: _________
other: _____________________
Where were the specimens sent?
FIGURE 12.6 Entomological Evidence Data Form used to document the conditions at the crime scene when collect-
ing insect evidence. (Courtesy of Richard Merritt.)

225
Forensic Entomology
12.8.2 Collecting Evidence on Scene
Once the collection kit is assembled, the process of 
collecting entomological evidence on scene should be 
simple. Since blowflies go through several developmental 
stages on scene associated with the decomposition pro-
cess of a body, it is important to collect a representa-
tive sample from each life stage present. This includes 
adults, eggs, larvae, and pupae. Adult beetles and bee-
tle larvae (grubs) may also be collected and sent to an 
entomologist, but they don’t offer as much insight into 
the TOC window as do blowflies. Temperature data 
must be collected on scene in order to ascertain the 
developmental stage of the insect and for comparison 
to historical weather data, which will also be used in 
entomological analysis. Collection on scene can be split 
into six steps as indicated in the following sections.
1. Visual observations and photographs of scene.
a. This should always be the first step in ento-
mological evidence collection on scene, 
because the act of collecting insects may, 
in some cases, alter the appearance of the 
scene due to the invasive nature of insect 
collection. Photographs of the scene itself 
should be taken, including botanical habi-
tat and tree cover, to indicate the amount 
of sun or shade that was present over the 
body throughout the process of decompo-
sition if the scene is outdoors. If the scene 
is indoors, be sure to photograph windows, 
doors, or other areas where light or airflow 
may enter the scene. This step can be sup-
plemented by filling out the Entomological 
Death Scene Form (Figure 12.6), which 
will list all information necessary to docu-
ment. Environment, weather conditions, 
state of decomposition, and any other sig-
nificant findings should be noted before 
any collection begins. Photographs of the 
insects themselves should also take place 
before collecting them. These photographs 
should be associated with written descrip-
tions of the insects or other arthropods 
noted on scene. These descriptions can be 
general in nature (i.e., nonscientific), but 
should be as detailed as possible to give 
the entomologist a complete account of the 
death scene from the point of view of the 
on-scene investigator. Sketches with com-
pass directions or other diagrams can be 
included to supplement the photographs, 
and any trauma, dismemberment, wrap-
ping, or other artifacts on the remains 
should be noted, as these may alter insect 
activity and development.
12.8.2.1 Collection of Temperature and 
Meteorological Data
2. Because insects undergo temperature-dependent 
development, it is paramount that accurate tem-
perature data is collected on scene. The warmer 
it is, the faster the insects will develop. Likewise, 
the colder is it, the slower they will develop. 
As such, it is important to identify the closest 
weather station that collects temperature data in 
order to obtain historical data that will be used 
in the entomological analysis. For temperature 
data collection on scene, several different mea-
surements must be taken.
a. Ambient air temperature. This tempera-
ture should be taken at about 4 ft. from the 
ground surface in the shade. If indoors, note 
the setting of the thermostat (if present) as 
well as the recorded ambient temperature 
(Figure 12.7).
b. Body surface temperature. This should be 
taken from the upper surface of the remains 
by placing the temperature probe just on 
the surface of the remains. If the body is 
wrapped, placing the probe on the outer sur-
face of the wrapping is appropriate (Figure 
12.8).
c. Body–ground interface temperature. This 
temperature should be measured by plac-
ing the thermometer directly in between the 
body and the surface upon which it is rest-
ing (e.g., soil, floor). Be sure not to puncture 
the body or introduce any new trauma in the 
process of taking this temperature measure-
ment (Figure 12.9).
d. Maggot mass temperature. Place the tem-
perature probe slightly into the center of the 
maggot mass to obtain an accurate reading. 
FIGURE 12.7 Recording ambient air temperature at the 
scene. (Photo courtesy of Lerah Sutton.)

226
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
If there is more than one area of the body in 
which maggots are feeding, this step should 
be repeated at every area of collection.
e. Ground surface temperature. This reading 
should be taken several feet away from the 
body along the surface of the ground—either 
floor or soil. If the scene is outdoors, an addi-
tional reading should be taken by inserting the 
probe a few inches into the soil (Figure 12.10).
 
f. Under-body soil temperature. In an outdoor 
scene, a soil sample may be requested from 
underneath the body, in which case a soil 
temperature should be taken by inserting the 
temperature probe a few inches into the soil 
directly under where the remains were located. 
This should not be done until all other docu-
mentation and evidence processing has been 
completed and the body has been removed.
 
g. Daily ambient air temperature. If pos-
sible, the ambient air temperature should 
be recorded on scene for 3–5 days after the 
body has been removed. This will allow an 
entomologist to compare the data obtained 
from the nearest weather station to the tem-
peratures collected on scene and to then cor-
relate the historical data with the on-scene 
temperature collection. This type of tem-
perature data can prove very important in 
courtroom testimony when standard error is 
calculated. If temperature data can be col-
lected on scene several times throughout the 
day, that is ideal, but a daily maximum and 
minimum will suffice.
 
h. Storage temperature. If insect collection did 
not occur until after the body was removed 
from the scene, or if additional insect collec-
tion took place at autopsy, the temperature 
of the storage location should also be noted 
along with the length of time the body was 
stored before collection took place.
 
i. Historical weather data. This information 
can be obtained after leaving the scene by 
contacting the National Weather Service or 
other certified weather-recording entities. 
By using GPS coordinates or other loca-
tion information recorded on scene, locate 
the nearest weather station to the death 
scene. Document its station number and its 
distance from scene. Daily maximum and 
minimum temperatures should be obtained 
from the weather station for comparison 
to scene data, and hourly data should also 
be obtained when available. Precipitation, 
humidity, cloud cover, wind speed, or other 
necessary weather information should be 
obtained when useful or requested by the 
consulting entomologist.
FIGURE 12.9 Recording body–ground interface tem-
perature. (Photo courtesy of Lerah Sutton.)
FIGURE 12.10  Recording ground surface temperature. 
(Photo courtesy of Lerah Sutton.)
FIGURE 12.8 Recording upper body surface temperature. 
(Photo courtesy of Lerah Sutton.)

227
Forensic Entomology
12.8.2.2 Collection and Preservation 
of Insects on Scene
3. A representative sample of all life stages and spe-
cies of insects observed on scene should be docu-
mented, collected, and preserved for subsequent 
analysis.
a. Collecting insects for a preserved sample 
should begin with adult insects—generally 
flies found over or around the body, though 
beetles may also be present. About 50 adult 
flies should be collected, if possible, but a 
representative sample of each species present 
should be collected if collecting 50 is not fea-
sible. For beetles, 10–15 adults should be col-
lected. Adult flies should be collected using an 
insect net. When they are present over a body, 
a sweeping motion should be used over the 
body to trap insects in the net. This motion 
should be done quickly enough to prevent the 
net from dragging over the body itself but not 
so quickly as to scatter the adult flies. Another 
option for collection if adult flies are not abun-
dant over the body is to hold the net with the 
base of the ring down and the enclosed mesh 
portion of the net up toward the sky. To a fly, 
“up” is always “out” (Figure 12.11). Moving 
very slowly in a downward motion toward 
the surface of the body will allow the net to 
appear as part of the natural environment to 
a fly. Once the opening of the net is near the 
insects of interest, gently rustle the net, which 
will cause the adults to fly up and into the net. 
When flies are trapped in the net, there are two 
options for killing the adults. The first is to 
fold the mesh portion of the net over the hoop 
to prevent their escape and insert it into a kill 
jar charged with ethyl acetate. Tighten the lid 
over the mesh of the net and leave the adults 
in the jar for several minutes. Once they have 
stopped moving they can be placed into a dry 
vial or one with alcohol. The second method 
is to continue holding the tip of the net up and 
reach inside the net with a vial of preservation 
solution (alcohol or KAA). Place the opening 
of the vial directly underneath the insects in 
the net and gently tap the insects from outside 
the net, causing them to fall into the preserva-
tion solution (Figure 12.12). It is not necessary 
to keep adult insects alive for shipment to an 
entomologist, so either method of preserving 
the adults is sufficient. Adult beetles may be 
collected with soft-touch forceps and placed 
into a kill jar or directly into preservation solu-
tion. If a live adult collection is requested, do 
not mix beetles with flies, as beetles are often 
predators and will eat the other evidence.
b. After collecting the preserved adults, larval 
samples should be obtained. The maggots 
are generally the most important compo-
nents of entomological collection analysis, so 
a complete and representative sample is vital. 
Fifty to sixty individuals of each observed 
species should be collected from each colo-
nized area of the body. Different species may 
be distinguished based on shape, color, or 
size. When possible, they should be collected 
separately. The largest maggots are usually 
the oldest larvae and should be collected 
first, as they were likely the first to colonize 
FIGURE 12.11 When capturing flying adult insects in a 
net, holding the tail of the net up and toward light will 
prompt the insects to crawl or fly upward, thereby trap-
ping them in the net more effectively. (Photo courtesy of 
Lerah Sutton.)
FIGURE 12.12 Adult blowflies may be collected by plac-
ing them directly into a killing solution from within the 
insect net. (Photo courtesy of Lerah Sutton.)

228
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
the remains. Obtaining a preserved sam-
ple of maggots on scene is very important, 
because it allows an entomologist to deter-
mine the age of the maggots at the time of the 
death scene investigation. To do this, mag-
gots must be properly preserved on scene to 
prevent decomposition or degradation of the 
sample during shipment to an entomologist. 
One option is to place the larvae, which have 
been collected with featherweight forceps, 
into very hot (i.e., nearly boiling) water for 
about 15 seconds and then place them into 
a vial of EtOH (Figure 12.13). If hot water 
is not readily available on scene, placing 
the  larvae into a solution of KAA for sev-
eral seconds will be an adequate substitute 
for hot water. After immersion in KAA, the 
maggots should be transferred into a vial of 
EtOH (Figure 12.14). Soft-bodied insects 
should not be kept in KAA for an extended 
period of time or shipped in this solution, as 
it is a fixative: exposure to KAA for too long 
will result in maggots that are brittle and 
 difficult to work with. If there is a maggot 
mass with large numbers of maggots, they 
may be collected using a plastic spoon as an 
alternative to individually picking them up 
with forceps. Beetle larvae (grubs) should  
be collected and preserved the same way as 
the fly larvae, but only 10–20 individuals of 
each observed species are needed.
c. The oldest insects on scene are often the fly 
pupae, and a sample of 50–60 should be col-
lected from on or around the remains. Pupae 
are small, rigid, and brown to black in color. 
They may look similar to roach egg casings 
or mouse droppings but can be distinguished 
by their segmented casings. Maggots will 
migrate away from a body before pupating 
(Figure 12.15), so the area surrounding the 
remains should be searched for pupae. In an 
outdoor environment, maggots may burrow 
down an inch or two into loose soil or under 
rocks or limbs; thus, it may be necessary to 
use a trowel to dig a few inches into topsoil 
to uncover pupae. Indoors they may be found 
under rugs or baseboards. Pupae should be 
collected using featherweight forceps (Figure 
12.16). A preserved sample of pupae may be 
collected by placing them directly into EtOH, 
but a live sample is preferred.
FIGURE 12.13 Placing soft-bodied larvae into near-
boiling water to preserve them before packaging in a vial 
of preservation fluid such at EtOH. (Photo courtesy of 
Lerah Sutton.)
FIGURE 12.14 Place preserved larvae into a vial of 
EtOH with featherweight forceps. (Photo courtesy of 
Lerah Sutton.)
FIGURE 12.15 A post-feeding blowfly larvae that has 
wandered away from the body to enter the pupal stage. 
(Photo courtesy of Lerah Sutton.)

229
Forensic Entomology
12.8.2.3 Packaging and Shipment of 
Live Insects on Scene
4. As with the preserved samples, a representa-
tive sample of all observed insect species should 
be collected and kept alive for shipment to an 
entomologist. The collection methods are the 
same whether the samples are to be preserved 
or kept alive, but the packaging methods differ. 
One major difference is that a live adult sample 
of flies is not necessary for shipment to an ento-
mologist unless specifically requested.
a. After collecting maggots with featherweight 
forceps, the live sample should be placed into 
a “maggot motel.” This motel is assembled by 
taking a plastic storage container and placing 
some vermiculite or loose soil into the bottom 
of it. A small sheet of aluminum foil should 
be formed into a pouch—tightly enough so 
the maggots feel sheltered but not so tight as 
to prevent their eventual migration for pupa-
tion—and a food source placed inside the 
pouch. The maggots should then be gently 
placed directly onto the food source and the 
pouch should be placed on the vermiculite 
(Figure 12.17). Close the lid onto the plastic 
container and poke small air holes in the lid, 
ensuring they are not so large that the mag-
gots or flies will escape during shipment.
b. Pupae will be searched for and collected in 
the same way for a live sample as a preserved 
one (if requested). For their packaging, fill a 
plastic container with vermiculite and place 
the pupae into it, sealing the lid and poking 
small air holes (Figure 12.18). Neither foil 
nor a food source is necessary for a live pupae 
collection, as they have already finished the 
feeding stage of their life cycle.
c. If collecting live samples of beetles, ensure 
that both their larvae and adults are pack-
aged separately from the larvae or adults of 
flies. Beetles can be predacious and may eat 
the fly evidence, which would severely hinder 
entomological analysis.
12.8.2.4 Labeling Collected Specimens
5. Both preserved and live samples should be 
labeled inside and out (Figure 12.19). Plain 
paper labels must be written in pencil and 
placed either inside the vial of EtOH or inside 
the 
maggot/pupae 
motel. 
Write 
duplicate 
FIGURE 12.16 Pupae may be easily collected with 
featherweight forceps. (Photo courtesy of Lerah Sutton.)
FIGURE 12.17 A plastic container with a tight-fitting lid 
can be used to package live larvae with a food source for 
shipment to an entomologist. (Photo courtesy of Lerah 
Sutton.)
FIGURE 12.18 Post-feeding larvae and pupae can be pack-
aged in a small plastic container with vermiculite for ship-
ment to an entomologist. (Photo courtesy of Lerah Sutton.)

230
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
information—again in pencil—on self-adhesive 
labels and place them on the outside of the vials 
and plastic containers. Include case number, 
agency, location/address of the scene, date, time 
of collection, name (or initials) of collector, loca-
tion of collection on body or scene, and contents 
of the sample on both types of labels. Do not fill 
labels out in ink, as the alcohol will cause the 
ink to run and be illegible to the entomologist 
performing the analysis.
12.8.2.5 Shipment of Evidence to an Entomologist
6. Once all adults, larvae, and pupae have been 
collected in their preserved and live forms as 
appropriate, it is time to send the samples to an 
entomologist. It is a good idea to make contact 
with a consulting entomologist prior to going on 
scene, so he or she can tell you what type of sam-
ples are preferred and other types of information 
that must be collected on scene. Carefully place 
the properly labeled vials and plastic contain-
ers into shipping containers, ensuring that the 
“up” side of the box is clearly indicated for the 
postal service of choice to prevent the samples 
from getting damaged during transport. Be sure 
to include a fully filled-out entomological death 
scene form with the samples and any crime scene 
photos as appropriate. Note the total number 
of each type of sample included. The faster the 
samples are able to reach an entomologist, the 
better, since live samples must be removed from 
their shipment packaging and placed into rear-
ing facilities. It is best to contact the consulting 
entomologist upon shipment to let him or her 
know live samples will be arriving so the proper 
facilities can be prepared in a timely manner. 
Also ensure that contact information for the 
investigator who performed the collection is 
included with the samples, so that the entomolo-
gist may contact the investigator with questions 
or requests for additional information.
12.9 WORKING WITH AN ENTOMOLOGIST
12.9.1 Laboratory Identification and Analysis
Once the collected specimens are received by the foren-
sic entomology laboratory, there are several items which 
should be addressed promptly. First, the insects that were 
collected alive must be placed into a larger container and 
provided a suitable food source. The container with the 
larvae and their food source must then be placed inside 
another larger container with a substrate that allows for 
natural larval dispersal and burrowing. Ideally, the living 
larvae are in a temperature-controlled environment so 
that their growth can be carefully monitored. The soft-
bodied larvae that were preserved at the scene must then 
be placed in KAA, or blanched in hot water if this was 
not completed at the scene.
Once proper rearing and preservation has been 
accomplished, the entomologist will then seek to make 
an identification of the collected insects to the lowest 
taxonomic level possible. Having the identifications com-
pleted will provide the taxonomic identification neces-
sary for the entomologist to be able to gather growth 
and development data from the relevant literature. Once 
the life history information is gleaned from the relevant 
literature, meteorological data is obtained from a local 
recording station. Having the meteorological data will 
allow for a comparison of the climate at the crime scene 
versus the recording station location. This information 
is then utilized to determine the probable age of the col-
lected insects. The age of the insects equates TOC and/or 
the minimum PMI.
12.9.2 Case Report Information
For medicocriminal casework, basic case report infor-
mation should include the identification of the insects 
collected; the location, or station identification, for 
the meteorological data; and the entomologist’s esti-
mation of insect age. For urban and stored product 
forensic entomology case reports, the insect identifica-
tion is included, as well as any health or disease trans-
mission concerns, and the source of infestation. The 
published case report is what the forensic entomologist 
FIGURE 12.19 All entomological samples should be 
labeled inside on plain paper and outside on a self-
adhesive label. All labels should be written in pencil. 
(Photo courtesy of Lerah Sutton.)

231
Forensic Entomology
will submit to the investigative agency. In turn, this is 
what will form the basis of the deposition and expert 
witness testimony.
12.10 CONCLUSION
Entomological evidence will not be present in all 
legal investigations. In the cases where entomological 
evidence is present, it will likely not provide all the 
answers the investigator may seek to obtain. However, 
in the cases where entomological evidence is found 
and recovered, an analysis of such evidence will pro-
vide information that may not be obtained otherwise. 
That information, even if slight, is another piece of the 
investigation that may be useful in the later stages of 
a legal investigation. The collection of entomological 
evidence is not difficult, expensive, or time consuming. 
Therefore, there is little reason for investigating agen-
cies to omit the collection of entomological evidence 
from their crime scene protocols. Utilizing the equip-
ment and methods detailed in this chapter, the inves-
tigator should have the basic skills needed to process 
a crime scene for entomological evidence, and be able 
to gather the needed environmental information. With 
the collected insects, environmental data, and adequate 
photography of the scene, the investigator should be 
able to package and ship the materials to a qualified 
forensic entomologist. Having provided the needed 
information, the investigator should receive a report 
of analysis from the entomologist detailing the species 
identification and estimated minimum time of coloni-
zation in a comprehensive report.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aldrich, J.M. 1916. Sarcophaga and Allies in North 
America. La Fayette, IN: Thomas Say Foundation.
Amendt, J., C. P. Campobasso, E. Gaudry, C. Reiter, H. 
N. LeBlanc, and M. J. R. Hall. 2007. Best practice 
in forensic entomology—Standards and guidelines. 
International Journal of Legal Medicine 121:90–104.
Ames, C. and B. Turner. 2003. Low temperature episodes 
in development of blowflies: Implications for post-
mortem interval estimation. Medical & Veterinary 
Entomology 17:178–186.
Anderson, G. S. 1999. Wildlife forensic entomology: 
Determining time of death in two illegally killed 
black bear cubs. Journal of Forensic Sciences 44 
(4):856–859.
Anderson, G. S. 2000. Minimum and maximum devel-
opment rates of some forensically important 
Calliphoridae (Diptera). Journal of Forensic Sciences 
45 (4):824–832.
Anderson, G. S. 2005. Effects of arson on forensic ento-
mology evidence. Canadian Society of Forensic 
Sciences Journal 38 (2):49–67.
Beck, S. D. 1983. Insect thermoperiodism. Annual Review 
of Entomology 28 (1):91–108.
Benecke, M. 1998. Random amplified polymorphic DNA 
(RAPD) typing of necrophageous insects (Diptera, 
Coleoptera) in criminal forensic studies: Validation 
and use in practice. Forensic Science International 
98 (3):157–168.
Benecke, M. 2004. Neglect of the elderly: Forensic ento-
mology cases and considerations. Forensic Science 
International 146:S195.
Block, W. 1982. Cold hardiness in invertebrate poikilo-
therms. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology 
Part A: Physiology 73 (4):581–593.
Brundage, A., S. Bros, and J. Y. Honda. 2011. Seasonal 
and 
habitat 
abundance 
and 
distribution 
of 
some forensically important blowflies (Diptera: 
Calliphoridae) in Central California. Forensic 
Science International 212 (1–3):115–120. doi: 
10.1016/j.forsciint.2011.05.023.
Byrd, J. H. 1998. Temperature dependent development 
and computer modeling of insect growth: Its appli-
cation to forensic entomology. PhD Dissertation, 
Entomology, University of Florida.
Byrd, J.H. and J. L. Castner. 2010. Forensic Entomology 
the Utility of Arthropods in Legal Investigations. 
Edited by Byrd, J. H. and J. L. Castner. 2nd ed. Boca 
Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis.
Cain, M. L., W. D. Bowman, and S. D. Hacker. 2008. 
Ecology. Edited by Cain, M. L. Sunderland, MA: 
Sinauer Associates.
Campobasso, C. P. 2001. Factors affecting decomposi-
tion and Diptera colonization. Forensic Science 
International 120 (1–2):18–27.
Catts, E. P. 1992. Problems in estimating the postmor-
tem interval in death investigations. Journal of 
Agricultural Entomology 9 (4):245–255.
Catts, E. P. and N. H. Haskell. 2008. Entomology and 
Death: A Procedural Guide. Edited by Catts, E. P. 
and N. H. Haskell. Second edition. Clemson, SC: 
Joyce’s Print Shop.
Chapman, R. N., C. E Mickel, J. R. Parker, G. E. Miller, 
and E. G. Kelly. 1926. Studies in the ecology of sand 
dune insects. Ecology 7 (4):416–426.
Cole, A. C. 1942. Observations of three species of 
Silpha (Coleoptera: Silphidae). American Midland 
Naturalist 28 (1):161–163.
Davidson, J. 1944. On the relationship between tem-
perature and rate of development of insects at con-
stant temperatures. Journal of Animal Ecology 13 
(1):26–38.
Davies, L. and G. G. Ratcliffe. 1994. Development 
rates of some pre-adult stages in blowflies with 

232
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
reference to low temperatures. Medical and 
Veterinary Entomology 8:245–254.
Davis, W. T. 1915. Silpha surinamensis and Creophilus 
villosus as predaceous insects. Journal of New York 
Entomological Society 23:150–151.
Deonier, C. C. 1940. Carcass temperatures and their rela-
tion to winter blowfly populations and activity in 
the Southwest. Journal of Economic Entomology 
33:166–170.
Dorsey, C. K. 1940. A comparative study of the larvae of six 
species of Silpha (Coleoptera, Silphidae). Annals of the 
Entomological Society of America 33 (1):120–139.
Durdle, A., R. A. H. van Oorschot, and R. J. Mitchell. 
2009. The transfer of human DNA by Lucilia cup-
rina (Meigen) (Diptera: Calliphoridae). Forensic 
Science International Genetics Supplement Series 2 
(1):180–182.
Fisher, R. S., W. U. Spitz, and D. J. Spitz. 2006. Spitz 
and Fisher’s Medicolegal Investigation of Death : 
Guidelines for the Application of Pathology torime 
Investigation. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas 
Publisher.
Folsom, J. W. 1902. Collection of the grave. Psyche: A 
Journal of Entomology 9 (315):363–367.
Forbes, S. A. 1925. The lake as a microcosm. Illinois 
Natural History Survey Bulletin 15 (9):537–550.
Goff, M. L. 1993. Estimation of post-mortem interval 
using arthropods’ development and successional 
patterns. Forensic Science Reivew 5:81–94.
Gosselin, M., S. M. R. Wille, M. del Mar Ramírez 
Fernandez, V. Di Fazio, N. Samyn, G. De Boeck, and 
B. Bourel. 2011. Entomotoxicology, experimental 
set-up and interpretation for forensic toxicologists. 
Forensic Science International 208 (1):1–9.
Graham, S. A. 1925. The felled tree trunk as an ecological 
unit. Ecology 6 (4):397–411.
Gruner, S. V., D. H. Slone, and J. L. Capinera. 2007. 
Forensically important Calliphoridae (Diptera) asso-
ciated with pig carrion in rural north-central Florida. 
Journal of Medical Entomology 44 (3):509–515.
Gullan, P. J. and P. S. Cranston. 2009. The Insects: An 
Outline of Entomology. New York, NY: John Wiley 
& Sons.
Haglund, W. D. and M. H. Sorg. 1996. Forensic 
Taphonomy: The Postmortem Fate of Human 
Remains. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Hagstrum, D. W. and G. A. Milliken. 1988. Quantitative 
analysis of temperature, moisture, and diet fac-
tors affecting insect development. Annals of the 
Entomological Society of America 81 (4):539–546.
Hall, D. G. 1948. The Blowflies of North America. 
Baltimore, MD: Thomas Say Foundation.
Hall, M. J. M. 1995. Trapping the flies that cause myiasis: 
Their responses to host-stimuli. Annals of Tropical 
Medicine and Parasitology 89 (4):333–357.
Higley, L. G., L. P. Pedigo, and K. R. Ostlie. 1986. 
DEGDAY: A program for calculating degree-days, 
and assumptions behind the degree-day approach. 
Environmental Entomology 15 (5):999–1016.
Howden, A. E. T. 1950. The succession of beetles on 
carrion.
Illingworth, J. F. 1926. Insects attracted to carrion in 
Southern California. Proceedings of the Hawaiian 
Entomological Society 6:397–401.
James, M. T. 1947. The Flies that Cause Myiasis in  
Man. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office.
Kamal, A. S. 1958. Comparative study of thirteen spe-
cies of sarcosaprophagous Calliphoridae and 
Sarcophagidae (Diptera) I. Bionomics. Annals 
of the Entomological Society of America 51 
(3):261–271.
Kelly, J. A., T. C. van der Linde, and G. S. Anderson. 2009. 
The influence of clothing and wrapping on carcass 
decomposition and arthropod succession during the 
warmer seasons in Central South Africa. Journal of 
Forensic Sciences 54 (5):1105–1112.
Knipling, E. F. 1939. A key for blowfly larvae con-
cerned in wound and cutaneous myiasis. Annals 
of the Entomological Society of America 32 
(2):376–376.
McKnight, B. 1981. The Washing Away of Wrongs: 
Forensic Medicine in Thirteenth-Century China. 
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Center for 
Chinese.
Mégnin, P. 1894. La Faune des cadavres: Application de 
l'entomologie à la médicine légale. Paris: Masson & 
Gauthier-Villars.
Meiklejohn, K. A., J. F. Wallman, and M. Dowton. 2011. 
DNA-based identification of forensically important 
Australian Sarcophagidae (Diptera). International 
Journal of Legal Medicine 125 (1):27–32.
Michaud, J.-P. and G. Moreau. 2011. A statistical 
approach based on accumulated degree-days to 
predict decomposition-related processes in foren-
sic studies. Journal of Forensic Sciences (Blackwell 
Publishing Limited) 56 (1):229–232.
Michaud, J.-P., K. G. Schoenly, and G. Moreau. 2015. 
Rewriting ecological succession history: Did car-
rion ecologists get there first? Quarterly Review of 
Biology 90 (1):45–66. doi: 10.1086/679763.
Midgley, J. M., C. S. Richards, and M. H. Villet. 2010. 
The utility of coleoptera in forensic investigations. 
Current Concepts in Forensic Entomology, 57–68. 
Netherlands: Springer.
Motter, M. G. 1898. A contribution to the study of the 
fauna of the grave: A study of on hundred and 
fifty disinterments, with some additional experi-
mental observations. Journal of the New York 
Entomological Society 6 (4):201–231.

233
Forensic Entomology
Mullen, G. R. and L. A. Durden. 2002. Medical and 
Veterinary Entomology. New York, NY: Academic 
Press.
Nation, J. L. 2011. Insect Physiology and Biochemistry. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Needham, J., G.-D. Lu, and N. Sivin. 2000. Science 
and Civilization in China: Volume 6 Biology and 
Biological Technology, Part 6 (Medicine). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Payne, J. A. 1965. A summer carrion study of the baby pig 
Sus scrofa Linnaeus. Ecology 46 (5):592–602.
Payne, J. A. 1967. A comparative ecological study of pig 
carrion decomposition and animal succession with 
special reference to the insects. PhD Dissertation, 
Clemson University.
Payne, J. A. 1968. Arthropod succession and decomposi-
tion of burried pigs. Nature 219 (5159):1180–1968.
Payne, J. A. and D. A. Crossley. 1966. Animal species 
associated with pig carrion. Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory–Technical Monograph 1432:1–65.
Payne, J. A. and E. W. King. 1969. Lepidoptera associ-
ated with pig carrion. Journal of the Lepidopterists’ 
Society 23:191–195.
Payne, J. A. and E. W. King. 1970. Coleoptera associated 
with pig carrion. Entomologist’s Monthly Magazine 
105 (1265–1267):224–232.
Payne, J. A. and E. W. King. 1972. Insect succession 
and decompostition of pig carcasses in water. 
Journal of the Georgia Entomological Society 7 
(3):153–162.
Payne, J. A., F. W. Mead, and E. W. King. 1968. Hemiptera 
associated with pig carrion. Annals of the 
Entomological Society of America 61 (3):565–567.
Pounder, D. J. 1991. Forensic entomo-toxicology. Journal 
of the Forensic Science Society 31:469–472.
Price, P. W. 1997. Insect Ecology. New York, NY: John 
Wiley & Sons.
Roberts, J. and N. Márquez-Grant. 2012. Forensic 
Ecology Handbook: From Crime Scene to Court. 
Vol. 9. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Rodriguez, W. C. and W. M. Bass. 1985. Decomposition 
of buried bodies and methods that may aid in their 
location. Journal of Forensic Science 30 (3):836–852.
Rolo, E. A., A. R. Oliveira, C. G. Dourado, A. Farinha, 
M. Teresa Rebelo, and D. Dias. 2013. Identification 
of sarcosaprophagous Diptera species through DNA 
barcoding in wildlife forensics. Forensic Science 
International 228 (1–3):160–164. doi: 10.1016/j.
forsciint.2013.02.038.
Saltini, A. 1989. Storia delle scienze agrarie. Bologna: 
Edagricole.
Schoenly, K. and W. Reid. 1987. Dynamics of heterotro-
phic succession in carrion arthropod assemblages: 
Discrete seres or a continuum of change? Oecologia 
73 (2):192–202.
Schoenly, K. 1992. A statistical analysis of succes-
sional patterns in carrion-arthropod assemblages: 
Implications for forensic entomology and deter-
mination of the postmortem interval. Journal of 
Forensic Sciences 37 (6):1489–1513.
Smith, K. G. V. 1986. A Manual of Frensic Entomology. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Steele, B. F. 1927. Notes on the feeding habits of carrion 
beetles. Journal of the New York Entomological 
Society 35 (1):77–81.
Stork, N. E., J. McBroom, C. Gely, and A. J. Hamilton. 
2015. New approaches narrow global species esti-
mates for beetles, insects, and terrestrial arthropods. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
112 (24):7519–7523.
Tomberlin, J. K., R. Mohr, M. E. Benbow, A. M. Tarone, 
and S. Van Laerhoven. 2011. A roadmap for bridg-
ing basic and applied research in forensic entomol-
ogy. Annual Review of Entomology 56 (1):401–421. 
doi: 10.1146/annurev-ento-051710-103143.
Tracqui, A., C. Keyser-Tracqui, P. Kintz, and B. Ludes. 
2004. Entomotoxicology for the forensic toxicolo-
gist: Much ado about nothing? International Journal 
of Legal Medicine 118 (4):194–196.
Villet, M. H., C. S. Richards, and J. M. Midgley. 2010. 
Contemporary precision, bias and accuracy of mini-
mum post-mortem intervals estimated using develop-
ment of carrion-feeding insects. In Current Concepts 
in Forensic Entomology, 109–137. Netherlands: 
Springer.
Vincent, C., D. K. McKevan, M. Leclercq, and C. L. 
Meek. 1985. A bibliography of forensic entomology. 
Journal of Medical Entomology 22:212–219.
Watson, E. J. and C. E. Carlton. 2005. Succession of 
forensically significant carrion beetle larvae on large 
carcasses (Coleoptera: Silphidae). Southeastern 
Naturalist 4 (2):335–346.
Wells, J. D., F. Introna, G. Di Vella, C. P. Campobasso, 
J. Hayes, and F. A. H. Sperling. 2001. Human and 
insect mitochondrial DNA analysis from maggots. 
Journal of Forensic Sciences 46 (3):685–687.
Wells, J. D. and J. R. Stevens. 2008. Application of DNA-
based methods in forensic entomology. Annual 
Review of Entomology 53 (1):103–120.
Wells, J., R. Wall, and J. Stevens. 2007. Phylogenetic 
analysis of forensically important Lucilia flies 
based on cytochrome oxidase I sequence: A cau-
tionary tale for forensic species determination. 
International Journal of Legal Medicine 121 
(3):229–233.
Yang, S., J. Logan, and D. L. Coffey. 1995. Mathematical 
formulae 
for 
calculating 
the 
base 
tempera-
ture 
for 
growing 
degree 
days. 
Agricultural 
and Forest Meteorology 74 (1–2):61–74. doi: 
10.1016/0168-1923(94)02185-M.


235
C H A P T E R  13
Forensic Veterinary  
Science and Medicine
Víctor Toledo González and Francisco Carvallo Chaigneau
CONTENTS
13.1 Introduction 
236
13.2 Areas of Forensic Medicine and Veterinary Science 
236
13.3 Forensic Veterinary Science and Development 
236
13.4 Medicine, Forensic Science, and Criminalistics 
237
13.5 Legislation 
240
13.6 Animals in Forensic Cases 
240
13.6.1 Circuses 
240
13.6.2 Zoos 
241
13.6.3 Competition Animals 
241
13.6.4 Massive Disasters 
241
13.6.5 Dog and Forensic Jobs 
241
13.6.6 Animals in Natural Disasters 
241
13.6.7 Human–Animal Relationships 
242
13.7 International and Cultural Considerations 
242
13.8 Forensic Techniques 
242
13.8.1 Forensic Odontology 
242
13.8.2 Bloodstains 
244
13.8.2.1 Stains on Hard Surfaces 
245
13.8.2.2 Stains on Soft Surfaces 
245
13.8.2.3 Liquid Samples 
246
13.8.3 Veterinary Trichology 
246
13.8.4 Tissues 
246
13.8.5 Comparative Anatomy 
246
13.8.6  Marks (Impressions of the External Structure of Objects) 
246
13.8.7 Footprints 
247
13.8.8 Taphonomy 
247
13.8.9 Toxicology 
247
13.8.9.1 Sampling 
248
13.8.10 Veterinary Pathology 
249
13.8.10.1 Sampling 
249
13.8.11 Forensic Entomology 
251
13.8.11.1 Procedure 
251
13.12 Conclusion 
252
Acknowledgments 
253
Bibliography 
253

236
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
13.1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, we have been bombarded by a number of 
so-called forensic science TV programs involving homi-
cides, suicides, and robberies. One or two professionals 
routinely analyze these cases, and the culprits are found 
and arrested within 30 minutes—the magic of television!
In reality, this is nearly impossible, because the evi-
dence gathered cannot be analyzed by a mere three peo-
ple, let alone the case be resolved by a single professional. 
The field of forensic science is not an activity for general 
practitioners either.
The forensic analysis group (as seen in the field) is 
multidisciplinary and consists of specialists involved in the 
corresponding areas in which they are competent. Many 
disciplines are intertwined to analyze one or more evidence 
samples, thus allowing one source to determine the “how” 
and “who” of a wrongfully committed act. Unfortunately, 
despite the technological capacity that we possess in our 
day, it is not always possible to reach such conclusions.
In recent years, humanity has become aware of the 
environmental damage our species has wrought upon the 
planet. The brutal urban expansion (demographic and 
technological) to natural areas by displacing native flora 
and fauna is an excellent example of this. This new con-
sciousness has led people to organize protests and demon-
strations against road projects as well as energy and natural 
resource exploitation. We are still encroaching into wildlife 
habitation, however, and the question of how to deal with 
our new neighbors arises. As a direct result, cases of ani-
mal abuse and cruelty (which may be a manifestation of 
future criminal behavior in young children) are on the rise.
Social demand is calling for the discussion of these 
issues, requiring a higher degree of knowledge, training, 
and specialization by those who must enforce the law 
than is currently seen. However, one such specialization 
(that of the veterinary forensic experts) was not consid-
ered due to the lack of professionals trained in recognized 
institutions. This discipline would ensure reasonable pro-
tection and hope for wildlife welfare and conservation, 
companion animal welfare, and dignified treatment of 
animals intended for human consumption. Such disci-
pline, which considers animals as active members in the 
development of a society, necessary and just.
Thus was born the imperative that profession-
als involved in animal care and trained under classi-
cal concepts of each profession (holistic veterinarians, 
marine biologists, biologists, etc.) integrate and perfect 
these concepts in a forensic context to deal with animal 
legal issues and criminology. These professionals have 
responded to such concerns (by analyzing new evidence 
of animal origin) for some time, but their findings were 
discarded without being used by prosecution.
More recently, the concept of forensic veterinary 
science has evolved. These disciplines deal with cases 
concerning unlawful acts involving animals (committed by 
or against them) but under a objective prism and scientific 
approach that allows us to answer the same “who, how, 
and why” questions. Investigators so involved must oper-
ate under strict moral, ethical, and bioethical standards. 
Such work must be closely linked to the work of all enti-
ties involved in the justice system, thus allowing using new 
valid evidence to be considered in judicial proceedings that 
involve animals as well as people. Clearly, such work must 
also be supported in the very laws of the region or country 
in question (considering how altruistic social development 
and its subsequent religious practices can be) without los-
ing the objectivity and autonomy of judicial exercise.
It is noteworthy that this area is more developed in 
some countries, but is still constantly improving. This 
largely corresponds to more personal rather than insti-
tutional efforts by individuals who have decided to con-
tribute their expertise in an effort to combat this widely 
recognized challenge. Success may alter our reality, bring-
ing about a slightly better and more just world where 
humans and wildlife might live in peace and harmony.
13.2 AREAS OF FORENSIC MEDICINE 
AND VETERINARY SCIENCE
In general we could say that there are two major areas 
in which forensic veterinary science could contribute 
greatly: Animal abuse cases and cases of wrongful acts 
against wildlife.
We will review veterinary forensics, animals involved 
in forensic cases, where and when a forensic veterinarian 
may act, and the implementation of some criminology 
techniques (in concise detail) to help make possible a type 
of expert research involving animals.
13.3 FORENSIC VETERINARY 
SCIENCE AND DEVELOPMENT
In simple terms we could say that forensic veterinary sci-
ence is justice based on scientific research, in cases where 
an animal’s life or well-being is compromised, and when 
it directly or indirectly affects human endeavors.
The human forensic discipline is much more devel-
oped than its animal counterpart, and is widely rec-
ognized around the world. Consequently, for decades 
professionals in the human forensics field have been able 
to obtain and perfect academic degrees not available 
to veterinary practitioners. Although some institutions 
have begun generating that knowledge for veterinar-
ians, such sharing is a recent development. Therefore, 
the development of forensic veterinary science (and any 
specialization) seen in the field presently is usually due to 
self-training.

237
Forensic Veterinary Science and Medicine 
To date, in many countries the classically trained 
veterinary professional’s work has been enough to col-
laborate and provide services in this area. However, the 
future goal is to have professionals who will be constantly 
refining and specializing aspects of forensic veterinary 
science. These professionals could take greater advantage 
and learn from the (non-veterinary) techniques acquired 
through multidisciplinary investigation without loss of 
traditional veterinary knowledge.
To further this discipline, the following is required:
1. Forming multidisciplinary working groups for 
the development of a database to compare animal 
evidence (whole animals, parts of it, or by-prod-
ucts found in places where a crime has occurred)
2. Generating and publishing scientific research to 
validate evidence or investigative proceedings in 
a court of law
3. Generating debates and conversations among 
professionals involved in forensic science in gen-
eral, and practitioners of veterinary forensics in 
particular, thus allowing the establishment of 
agreements on standardization of procedures 
and protocols, which in turn allows the global-
ization and collaboration of different institutions 
at the national and international level
4. Generating multidisciplinary consulting along-
side specialization
Cooper and Cooper (2007) indicate that the skill sets 
of the veterinary forensics investigator may be applied to 
such areas as criminal and civil cases, insurance claims, 
malpractice, industrial disputes, drafting environmen-
tal impact governmental requirements, inspection of pet 
shops, zoonosis, animal abuse (domestic, consumption, or 
wildlife), animal welfare, smuggling, investigation, and so 
on. This is not yet a complete list, and the work of forensic 
veterinary experts can be as varied as the situations that 
may arise when an animal is a victim. This list is varied, 
and contains concepts that will be reviewed later.
13.4 MEDICINE, FORENSIC 
SCIENCE, AND CRIMINALISTICS
Before going further, it must be stated that when speak-
ing of forensic medicine as applied to both humans and 
animals, it is meant that the study is performed on the 
animal (living or dead) and must be performed by a medi-
cal specialist in forensic sciences (an expert on pathology 
or a clinical veterinary medicine). Forensic science, on 
the other hand, works with all others aspects of evidence 
(ranging from footprints to DNA) and those working in 
it are well qualified in one of the basic sciences such as 
anatomy, chemistry, biology, or a similar field.
Furthermore, criminology is defined as the study of 
the signs of a criminal act in order to determine all pos-
sible information concerning the circumstances of the 
crime. In this way, answers to such questions as how the 
crime was committed and who the perpetrator was can 
be obtained. It must be noted that criminology can be 
divided into three fundamental parts:
1. Forensic or criminalistic techniques
2. Criminal tactics
3. Methodological techniques
The first uses the achievement of art, basic science, 
and technical trades in the research process. Its appli-
cation allows for an objective analysis of the evidence 
and the resulting applications by an expert researcher. 
Criminal tactics studies, on the other hand, focus on 
the principles of research planning, the general theory 
of distinctive versions, and learning the legal basis of the 
research as used in each case (modus operandi). Finally, 
the methodology of classical scientific inquiries may be 
applied. This may include observation, experimenta-
tion, measurement, classification, comparison, and /or 
modeling.
In this context, we could say that animals can partic-
ipate in a criminal act in the role of offender, victim, tan-
gential face (the animal no participle directly in conflict 
but it may can provide indirectly some evidences on what 
had happened [maybe contain hair of aggressor, etc.]), or 
as an agent (in some cases used as a biomarker or biosen-
sor). A few authors have written about this, but in 2007 
Cooper and Cooper, in Introduction to Veterinary and 
Comparative Forensic Medicine, wrote about it, indicat-
ing that animals can participate in a criminal act as per 
the following.
The animal in the role of offender (the cause) may 
cause a range of injuries ranging from the physical harm 
of bites of varying degrees, abrasions or lacerations 
(Figures 13.1 and 13.2), and allergic reactions (in cases 
of hypersensitivity) to the psychological harm to humans 
or other animals and/or transmission of diseases that 
may or may not be zoonotic (diseases naturally transmit-
ted between vertebrate animals and humans, a definition 
offered by the World Health Organization, WHO). In 
this case, the animal may be the perpetrator or the vic-
tim. It is also noteworthy that in this context, zoonosis 
can be classified as evidence in three groups:
• Those that are equally dangerous for humans 
and animals (e.g., rabies or anthrax)
• Those that rarely occur or produce mild effects 
in animals, but cause serious disease in humans 
(e.g., brucellosis, hydatidosis, herpes virus)
• Those that can cause outbreaks in domestic and 
wild animals but are rarely of great significance 

238
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
to humans in terms of health (Newcastle dis-
ease, spongiform encephalopathies, transmittable 
diseases/TSEs).
Other common zoonoses are rabies, toxocariasis, 
leishmaniasis, leptospirosis, brucellosis, and others in 
dogs; toxoplasmosis, pasteurellosis, and others in cats; 
avian influenza, chlamydophilosis, psitacosis, salmo-
nellosis, fiardiasis, and others in birds; salmonellosis in 
reptiles; rabies, salmonellosis, hydatidosis, brucellosis, 
bovine tuberculosis, leptospirosis, anthrax, E. coli, and 
others in farm livestock; rabies, hantavirus syndromes, 
rat bite fever (Haverhill fever), and lymphocytic chorio-
meningitis in rodents; anisakiasis in fishes, and so on.
Importantly, many zoonotic diseases can be trans-
mitted via food, as in the case of salmonellosis, bru-
cellosis, tuberculosis, and transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathy. 
The animal victim may suffer a series of injuries and 
insults caused by humans rather than by natural causes.
Animals can suffer physical damage such as trauma, 
heat, cold, immersion in water (or other toxic liquids), and 
intoxications. In addition, they may suffer psychological 
damage, including deprivation of company or unsuit-
able social grouping, taunting, teasing and/or threaten-
ing, and sexual damage. Some of these symptoms are not 
clearly understood in veterinary clinical exercises.
In some cases, certain anomalous behaviors of the 
animal patient were observed that reflected improper 
conduct of the owner (even symptoms of abuse normally 
associated with violence). This reinforces the theory of 
the need for forensic specialists who have the veterinary 
expertise required in events like this.
Sometimes the victims are wild animals. By-products 
of human progress and population growth or the entry 
of exotic animals (invasive species) into a place can lead 
to displacement of other native species as a result of the 
ensuing struggle for food or land. In extreme cases, this 
may lead to the extinction of a whole species.
Animals also play a role in other philosophies, up to 
and including various occult and satanic rituals. As such, 
they may be subjected to various types of abuse or bizarre 
methods of slaughter in furtherance of these beliefs.
Still other animals may be victims of neglect. This 
occurs in cases where the animals are not provided with the 
necessities needed to meet their basic requirements of life, 
such as nutrition and housing. The first problem mainly 
consists of the questions of what is a sufficient quantity 
and quality of food to stay healthy, and access to drinking 
water of good quality. As for accommodation, it should be 
appropriate to the needs of the species concerned. Shelters 
should incorporate natural environmental elements and 
allow social interaction for when animals form a group. 
Also, in regard to malnutrition it is imperative to consider 
both ends of the spectrum: both very thin and obese ani-
mals are malnourished. Both extremes can cause meta-
bolic, physical, and behavioral changes or alterations. To 
determine the body condition of animals, two tables that 
had a score ranging from 1 to 5 were used, with 1 being 
for the slimmest animal and 5 being the most obese. The 
other table ranges from 1 to 9, but has the same purpose. 
Since this score is used only on live animals, it is recom-
mended to use the terms “good,” “proper,” or “emaciated 
animal” during the postmortem examination.
Also, abused animals can suffer non-accidental 
trauma (Figures 13.3 through 13.6), resulting in injuries 
with or without fracture, wounds caused by the impact 
of bullets or projectiles, flaking skin to conceal identifica-
tion marks and property damage, traps and snare damage 
(which sometimes can cause skin peeling or even ampu-
tation of some part of the body), deaths from overdose 
FIGURE 13.1 Alpaca attacked by dogs. Wounds in the 
neck area with abundant blood loss. (Víctor Toledo 
González Property.)
FIGURE 13.2 Bite wound close to the eye. (Víctor Toledo 
González Property.)

239
Forensic Veterinary Science and Medicine 
of drugs and anesthetics, veterinary malpractice or those 
practicing illegally, and/or thermal injuries. Among the 
latter, we mention direct exposure to flame or hot sur-
faces (e.g., cigarettes, lighters, fire marks for identifica-
tion), burns for electrocution (something becoming more 
common in high-voltage towers), microwave radiation, 
hyperthermia related to excessive ambient temperature 
(e.g., animals locked in cars or boxes for an extended trip 
without ventilation), excess radiant heat (e.g., near heat 
sources like stoves, fireplaces, etc., but without direct 
contact), hypothermia, and frostbite.
The role of animals as agents or biomarkers can pro-
vide valuable information on what is happening around 
them and therefore can affect us directly or indirectly.
An ideal biomarker would be a simple organism to 
study, one about which we have a well-known understand-
ing of its physiology and behavior in all possible habitats.
Animals (dead or alive) have always been natural 
models in various fields of forensic science. Examples 
include birds killed by poisoning from heavy metals 
resulting from industrial activity, livestock contaminated 
with heavy metals resulting from volcanic eruptions 
(natural disasters), animals poisoned by pesticides and 
herbicides, fish poisoned by mining tailings, and sick pets 
as a result of environmental pollution. Case animals are 
examined, and through laboratory tests or clinical exam-
ination indicate the presence of toxic or harmful elements 
in human and/or animal health items. In this context, 
these animals act as true sentinels of the environment.
The use of birds as environmental sentinels is not 
a new development: many decades ago, caged canaries 
were taken down into coal mines to detect traces of toxic 
gas that could be potentially dangerous to miners.
Another example of environmental monitoring 
involving animals concerns anthracosis (the deposition 
of carbon in the respiratory tract and associated lymph 
nodes). This is well documented in humans but has also 
been recognized in dogs, cats, and other animals that live 
in urban environments where air pollution is prevalent.
FIGURE 13.3 Dog thrown from a building. (Víctor 
Toledo González and Federico Cifuentes Ramos Property.)
FIGURE 13.4 It’s possible to show the large bruise on his 
right side was hit by the product dropped to the cement 
floor. (Photo: Víctor Toledo González and Federico 
Cifuentes Ramos Property.)
FIGURE 13.5 Dog hanged in central courtyard of a 
group of houses. The dog was fed by the residents but 
some of them did not agree. (Carlos Muñoz Quezada and 
Víctor Toledo González Property.)

240
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
13.5 LEGISLATION
In the last 30 years, animal law has seen particular growth 
in, and revision of, relevant legislation. This has been 
paired with concern for better enforcement, especially, but 
not exclusively, in the developed world. In other countries, 
such as in Latin America, animal law has remained fairly 
static while people are grappling with overwhelming prob-
lems of poverty and governance. At times, the moderniza-
tion of animal law has resulted from social pressure.
The animals likely to be affected by litigation can be 
categorized as domesticated species (dogs, cats, pets in 
general, and production animals); non-domesticated spe-
cies that are kept in captivity for conservation, education, 
entertainment (zoos); and wild species.
According to Cooper and Cooper (2007), concern for 
animal welfare that gives rise to investigations and litiga-
tion are the welfare of domestic (pets and livestock) or 
other captive animals; farm animal welfare (farm, market, 
slaughter); the transport of animals, species protection 
and laws regulating the taking and killing of wild animals 
and their exploitation; the keeping of animals and regu-
lation through licensing; commercial activities involving 
pedigreed animals such as horses and other performance 
or traction animals; the welfare of non-domesticated spe-
cies; the illegal movement/smuggling of animals; and ille-
gal possession of animals.
Particularly in regard to animal control regulations in 
wildlife, further concerns that give rise to investigations 
and litigation include insurance claims regarding injuries 
(death or damage caused by animals or to animals); civil 
law claims dealing with trespass, nuisance, or negligence; 
strict liability for animals; malpractice (professional negli-
gence); disciplinary proceedings resulting from professional 
misconduct; abuse of humans and animals; and accidents 
and occupational health and safety, among others.
Some laws (falsely labeled as animal protection) pro-
tect only the emotional integrity of the people involved, 
and not that of the animals—an example of which can 
be seen in human–animal relationships in traditional 
sports. Moreover, in some countries whose legislation 
contains penalties for cruelty or mistreatment, there is 
no clear definition as to what constitutes an act of cruelty 
or abuse. This is clearly a legal vacuum allowing for the 
payment of only very small fines. It is also worth consid-
ering that in some countries animals are without rights, 
and remain movable property much like a TV or car.
Following such logic, a person having ordinary 
rights and obligations may question whether newborn 
babies have such obligations. What about animals? Do 
they have obligations?
The discussion is a lengthy one, and opinions dif-
fer, but one aspect that is clear is that animals should be 
treated with dignity and respect. Compassionate treat-
ment should be given to all living beings that live in such 
close proximity to humans. Many animals also have func-
tions of great importance in that those animals are the 
source of work or food for many. Compassion should be 
applied in all such cases, as well as other situations, includ-
ing when animals are used in the rehabilitation of children 
with various syndromes (hippotherapy, etc.); animals used 
to guide the blind; rescue animals (saving human lives no 
matter the person’s religion, color, or political position); 
and animals who replace the child who could not be born. 
Another thing that is clear is that the road ahead is dif-
ficult and will require sensitizing authorities to the issues 
at hand, in the hope of getting responsible animal owner-
ship, protection, and welfare written into legislation.
13.6 ANIMALS IN FORENSIC CASES
13.6.1 Circuses
In many circuses, animals both small and large are still used 
as part of the entertainment. Many of the conditions in which 
these animals are found are not suitable for their mental, psy-
chological, and/or physical well-being. This conditions them 
to a degree of stress that can manifest into something much 
worse. Many television programs have shown elephants 
FIGURE 13.6 Bullet into respiratory cavity. (Carlos 
Muñoz Quezada and Víctor Toledo González Property.)

241
Forensic Veterinary Science and Medicine 
fleeing from handlers, demolishing everything in their path. 
Some of these cases may have been averted had the animals 
not been confined in small spaces with unsanitary feed, tied 
with worn ropes, and with obvious pathological alterations 
(e.g., estereotipes). These basic needs could be inspected 
during routine quarantines performed when circuses enter 
new countries or even states. Such quarantines already take 
place to scan for potentially sick animals that could spread 
infections (including zoonotic diseases) and could therefore 
be combined with animal welfare inspections. During these 
inspections (and subsequent quarantines, if any), official 
documentation required for animals could be checked more 
thoroughly than presently. It is here, then, where the forensic 
veterinary expert could act in tandem with official auditors 
to safeguard animal welfare and public health.
13.6.2 Zoos
Zoos operate under four well-defined mission activities: 
education, research, conservation, and recreation. However, 
many of them reach only the last two goals. Clearly, the 
former are not necessary in most zoos for the maintenance 
and reproduction of the species. Perhaps worse is the lack 
of necessary buildings provided to the animals in most zoos. 
The list is neverending but is comprised of such things as 
giraffes burned by improperly positioned or damaged wires 
or stressed animal escapes. In this last case, the animal is 
generally controlled by firearms with subsequent death of 
it. Obviously, the human element is always present when an 
event occurs, whether in response to acts of animal abuse, 
neglect, lack of knowledge, or inadequate habitat construc-
tions for them. Whatever the cause, it is clear that the ani-
mals habitually get the short end of the stick.
It would be unfair to not mention that there are good 
zoos worldwide, concerned about the animals’ well-being. 
These are not the norm, however, and most of them are 
privately owned. Many seized animals, thanks to the 
work of the veterinary expert, end up being adopted by 
such zoos. Others animals that are adopted by these zoos 
may be animals rescued from circuses, who are adopted 
temporarily in order to begin a rehabilitation program. 
Unfortunately, many of these animals have been mis-
treated or in captivity for prolonged periods, and are not 
able to survive on their own. Therefore, they are con-
demned to life in captivity with no possibility of returning 
to their natural environment. Fortunately, some of them 
can be released back to their natural environment after 
rehabilitation, giving satisfaction to their caregivers.
13.6.3 Competition Animals
In my country (Chile) and in many others, there is a 
plethora of “sports” that use animals. Blood horse racing, 
Chilean races (consisting of a contest of speed between 
two horses in a natural terrain), the rodeo, the “aman-
sadura” (taming horse), greyhound racing, dog sledding, 
dog fighting, cockfighting, and so on. We can agree or not 
about the morality of such activities, but the fact remains 
that they do exist. The problems with such activities 
(from a veterinary forensic view) are the practices that go 
on behind closed doors in some of these “sports.”
We have seen greyhounds with muscular deformities 
and the use of anabolic doping in racehorses or dogs. 
We have seen how bait dogs are killed, just as in a cock-
fight. In all cases, there is a common component that is 
illegal in many places: gambling! The only illegal aspect 
in many places, while animals are abused in the plain 
sight of all, leaving many people to feel they have no legal 
power to stop these “customs.”
13.6.4 Massive Disasters
In countries that have a high rate of disasters such as 
earthquakes, floods, and volcanic eruptions, the medical 
specialization of veterinarians who come to help animals 
affected by natural events is necessary. In Chile some years 
ago, the eruption of the Llaima volcano caused the deposi-
tion of heavy metals in many farm animals and pets. In this 
region, many families depend on their animals for what 
they produce, so this disaster meant so much pain for them.
It is important to emphasize that the role of the vet-
erinary professional in disasters and other emergencies 
can vary widely, from the large-scale and often distressing 
duties that were carried out following the 2004 tsunami 
to the more mundane (but no less important) rescue of 
stranded and/or displaced animals both large and small. 
All such endeavors are prime examples of the roles veteri-
narians may play in the legal/forensic component.
13.6.5 Dog and Forensic Jobs
Dogs (as well as other species) are used in various aspects 
of crime investigation. For example, a dog following of 
scent is used for tracking or detection of incendiary devices 
and narcotic drugs. Dogs also play a role in disaster relief.
On the other hand, it is necessary to point out the 
importance of having dogs in the search for bodies in 
mass disasters, such as avalanches, through the detection 
of blood. This work has the potential to be dangerous, 
and during the course of their work, dogs may them-
selves be injured or killed.
13.6.6 Animals in Natural Disasters
Canines have been used for many years to assist those 
who are blind, deaf, or similarly afflicted. More recently, 

242
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
they have begun to be utilized to provide assistance to 
those prone to epileptic seizures, and a recent report 
shows interest in the possible role of dogs protecting 
women from domestic abuse. In the past, adults have 
been the primary recipients of these benefits, but interest 
is steadily increasing toward providing such services to 
children.
The use of other animals has also provided a degree 
of assistance to humans by encouraging physical, emo-
tional, and social well-being (e.g., hippotherapy, dolphin 
therapy). All of these uses raise ethical and legal consid-
erations, however, and currently interest in the extent to 
which the welfare of such animals may be compromised 
has been on the rise.
13.6.7 Human–Animal Relationships
According to Cooper and Cooper (2007) and others, the 
close relationship that can exist between humans and 
their animal companions has long been recognized. Such 
relationships could also be strongly influenced by reli-
gious and cultural attitudes. Affinity with one’s animals 
may be present in situations where livestock is kept for 
commercial or research purposes (such as farming), but 
it is far more pronounced in situations with pets or com-
panion animals.
In some cases, such relationships may be negatively 
affected by aggression or neglect on the part of the 
human, though, and as a consequence the animal may 
suffer or (in extreme circumstances) die. Many decades 
ago, a correlation between people who practice cruelty 
to animals and their commission of human crime was 
observed (e.g., Ted Bundy and Jeffrey Dahmer, two 
American serial killers who in their youth had commit-
ted acts of animal cruelty). This research demonstrates 
the important role of the veterinary profession in recog-
nizing and preventing family violence. In this regard, one 
may also cite social worker Stuart James Hutton, who 
suggested in 1983 that evidence of animal abuse of any 
kind can be a useful indicator of early diagnosis of abuse 
to other family members.
On the other hand, the terms “bestiality” and “zoo-
philia” describe the sexual act between a person and an 
animal. Such practices have been documented by people 
from around the world throughout history, and persist 
even in modern times. These terms do not consider the 
damage done to the victim, however, and so the term 
“sexual abuse” should be used, as it is when speaking of 
human beings used involuntarily for sexual gratification. 
Regardless of what term is used to describe such atroci-
ties, the physical damage inflicted on an animal can lead 
to injuries to the genitals, lower digestive tract, rectum, 
and anus. These lesions may be severe and lead to the 
animal’s death. Depending on animal size, type of sexual 
act performed, and the gender of the animal, the trauma 
may be observed in external genitalia, anus, perianal 
area, vagina, or the uterus. In male specimens, the bands 
surrounding the penis and scrotum may also be affected.
13.7 INTERNATIONAL AND CULTURAL 
CONSIDERATIONS
There are wide variations among countries as to how ani-
mals are treated and the extent to which the authorities 
recognize violations of the law, even though the impor-
tance of animal welfare is being increasingly promoted 
on a global scale. As such, the expert opinion may vary 
if the circumstances of the alleged infringement are dif-
ferent from what was expected, and this is usually what 
happens when consulting in other countries or cultures. 
The biggest problem for veterinarians and other profes-
sionals concerning animal welfare cases is the lack of an 
objective definition of the subject. This makes decision 
making difficult for the courts, and for experts to relate 
findings and opinions with what is right according to the 
law, in contrast to the strong feelings and sensitivity of 
those involved.
The issue continues to evolve, and veterinarians 
aspiring to work in legal, disciplinary, or other hearings 
need to be aware of current discussions and dissensions 
if their statements are to be of optimum value for those 
who must arbitrate. It should be noted as well that in 
many countries, it is the obligation of the veterinarian to 
report cases of abuse (just as human doctors are required 
to do).
Specific procedures in veterinary forensics promote 
research in these situations in order to clarify the facts 
where alleged abuse of animals is suspected. Collaboration 
and encouragement is given to the application of existing 
legal rules (even touting new rules) related to the status 
of animals, behaviors of people toward them, and the 
public impact that causes offense to social sensitivity.
13.8 FORENSIC TECHNIQUES
Among the various possible techniques criminologists per-
form in the veterinary field, are discussed in the following.
13.8.1 Forensic Odontology
In human forensic work, forensic odontology is a very 
well-developed discipline largely concerned with, where 
legal implications may arise regarding the identification 
of cadavers and human remains; estimation of age in 
both the living and dead; identification and interpreta-
tion of bite wounds and lip imprints; and description and 

243
Forensic Veterinary Science and Medicine 
investigation of dental and oral lesions, especially those 
due to trauma.
Although the importance of animal bites (both in 
human and veterinary work) has long since been estab-
lished, comparative aspects have generally not attracted 
the same level of interest. Consequently, those who are 
involved in such work must often extrapolate from human 
odontology or make do with what has been published 
in veterinary, pathological, and zoological literature. 
Such literature is essential reading insofar as it highlights 
the comparative aspects where dentition is concerned. 
References to the odontology of some species may also be 
found in specialized journals, such as those that include 
reports of anomalies affecting the teeth in dolphins. 
Particular attention may have to be paid to gross postmor-
tem features in wildlife cases where it is alleged that dogs 
have been used illegally for hunting. A detailed example 
of how such studies could assist in forensic cases is pro-
vided in a paper by Simpson (2006). This research focuses 
on patterns and significance of bite wounds in otters.
Apparently, lip-print identification (cheiloscopy) is 
not widely used in animal forensics, but does seem to 
have potential. Such methods have parallels, as in, for 
example, the identification of gorillas using their unique 
nose prints.
The analysis of bite marks is a specialized field and 
has been admissible in a court of law for quite some years. 
In the case of animal work, reference can usefully be 
made to texts concerning human forensic medicine, such 
as the use in some cases of scanning electron microscopy, 
digital imaging, histology, contrast medium enhanced 
radiography, and computerized axial tomography.
Dental examination plays a crucial and informative 
role in postmortem forensic work, which explains why 
it is widely used by archaeologists to identify and age 
the skeletal remains of animals. A single tooth can assist 
in the speciation of both domesticated and wild animals 
(cetaceans are a particularly good example of the latter).
Today, pets such as cats and dogs are not solely des-
ignated to a role in functional values (care, work, etc.), 
as it was for decades for the family and social circle. 
In modern times, the values given to animals include 
emotional and psychological factors. It must be noted, 
though, that these new attributes are assigned by soci-
ety and pertain to obvious personal benefits. However, 
the increase of integration into family life can be seen 
as a process of adaptation between the two species, and 
with this increase in household dogs being reported, 
there is likewise a proportionate increase in the percent-
age of dog attacks of varying magnitude of humans and 
other animals. Much of the evidence caused by dogs 
today (found in crime scenes, or CSs, such as teeth, 
bites, secretions, etc.) are not considered legal during 
court proceedings in Chile. Perhaps more importantly, 
this evidence is analyzed by forensic scientists lacking 
veterinary training, who base these studies on a collec-
tion of forensic information that is limited or even non-
existent. This (unsurprisingly) eventually results in an 
inefficient process and incomplete research. Therefore, 
it is essential to have a worldwide database of exist-
ing dog bites with which to compare those present in a 
CS, allowing for the identification of the species of the 
aggressor at the very least.
Bites resulting in litigation proceedings increasingly 
occur. Reports indicate that the main victims of dog bites 
are children. The most affected ages vary between stud-
ies: 0–15, <6, 5–9, 7–12, and 7–9 years. The attacks are 
often fatal to children (especially the little ones), and the 
number of attacks against children is significantly higher 
than those against adults. Likewise, attacks of the elderly 
very often result in death. Obviously, this correlation 
can be explained by the difficulty in defending oneself 
while living in such age groups. While death may occur, 
more commonly the main consequences arising from dog 
bites are injuries and scars from the attacks. In addition, 
the potential for infectious disease transmission, psy-
chological scars, disabilities, economic costs of medical 
and psychological treatment, and costs of sick leave must 
be considered. Most dog attacks that occur seem to be 
without provocation to the casual observer. In reality, 
most attacks occur when an animal is disturbed while 
eating, because they do not like to be under threat or feel 
that their territory is being invaded. Many surveys con-
clude that the highest risk is given for large-breed dogs 
such as the German shepherd, pit bull terrier, rottweiler, 
and chow, but all dogs should be considered potentially 
 dangerous—even small dogs like the Jack Russell terrier, 
which can inflict severe bites.
Overall, the most common methods for the determi-
nation of the origins of a human bite include techniques 
to compare the morphology of the teeth (shape, size, and 
position of the teeth, together with the shape of the den-
tal arches), with similar traits and characteristics present 
in life-size photographs of the injuries, with transparent 
overlays.
Given the existence of the large number of animal 
species in Chile, and considering that the domestic dog 
is involved in the largest number of cases associated with 
bites (mild or severe), patterns of bites were compared 
according to skull shape and by morphologic and mor-
phometric analysis of dental semi-arcs of the domestic dog 
(Canis lupus familiaris) for medicolegal purposes. Plaster 
dental models and impressions of bite marks were obtained 
of three pure breeds—boxer, Dalmatian, and German 
shepherd—via plaster dental models. Measurements 
taken included the maximum external distance between 
upper and lower canine, and maximum external distance 
between upper and lower incisors. These results show that 
only the maximum distance between upper canine would 
allow statistically significant identification of a breed 

244
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
(p ≤ 0.05) in cast models. In a blind study as well as from 
a morphometric point of view, Dalmatians were identified 
with a high rate of sensitivity and specificity in compari-
son to the boxer and German shepherd, impeding a high 
grade of identification between these two latest breeds.  
The morphological study, however, allowed identifica-
tion and individualization of 100% of dogs (Figures 13.7 
through 13.9). It may be concluded, therefore, that both 
morphological and morphometric methods are useful and 
complementary tools in the identification and individual-
ization of a potentially aggressive dog.
While using alginate and plaster is not a problem as a 
forensic technique, it should be noted that some authors 
suggest the use of other materials such as vinyl polysilox-
ane (silicone) for printing, and plastic or resin for casting. 
These materials provide better quality and durability, 
unlike alginate impressions, which are not reusable and 
must be processed immediately. Also, the use of plaster 
may result in the existence of bubbles, thus increasing the 
possibility of the model fracturing.
The high correlation between measurements made on 
plaster models and the traces of bite wounds would use 
these models as a means of fixing the teeth of a speci-
men at the time of the assault or of discovery of a corpse. 
However, the values obtained allow, at the least, a narrow-
ing of the search range. Pretty and Sweet (2001) indicate 
that there are a minimum number of points of agreement 
or features that are required for positive identification. In 
many cases, a single tooth can be used to identify whether 
it contains enough unique features. The Chilean study 
reinforces the need for complementary morphological 
and morphometric studies to identify not only dog breeds 
but, more importantly, to identify a specific individual.
13.8.2 Bloodstains
In many cases where there is aggression between or 
against animals, bloodstains will be present on the vic-
tim and/or perpetrator. Bloodstains may also be found 
in the vicinity of the crime. Fresh blood is quite easy to 
identify as such, and may also be collected by just about 
anyone. If the bloodstains are several hours or even 
days old, however, the more sophisticated techniques 
utilized by the forensic veterinarian may be needed for 
identification.
The first thing that must be determined when blood 
is present is whether that blood is human or animal. 
Samples of human blood can be injected into a rabbit, 
and it will be expected to form antibodies against the 
human blood. After that, the blood found at the event site 
(depending on time elapsed) can be challenged against 
the serum sample obtained from the rabbit. If the cor-
responding blood is of human origin, the rabbit serum 
will show a precipitation reaction (band) indicating the 
presence of human blood. Likewise, if no such reaction 
occurs, then the blood is of animal origin.
Poaching of wild animals, illegal slaughterhouses, 
satanic rituals utilizing animals in their rites, pets with 
gunshot wounds, and even the entertainment industry 
are some cases where we could find and gather evidence 
via bloodstains. The forensic veterinarian will have 
techniques to gather this type of evidence, even if the 
crime scene has been cleaned in an attempt to destroy 
evidence.
Approximately 8% of the weight of a live human 
body is blood. This rule applies to animals as well; 
FIGURE 13.9 Semidental arcade for a German shep-
herd. (Photo: Víctor Toledo González Property.)
FIGURE 13.7 Semidental arcade for a boxer. (Photo: 
Víctor Toledo González Property.)
FIGURE 13.8 Semidental arcade for a Dalmatian. 
(Photo: Víctor Toledo González Property.)

245
Forensic Veterinary Science and Medicine 
therefore, the techniques used in humans are compatible 
for use in cases of animals.
The mammalian erythrocyte possesses biconcave 
nuclei, which do not contain DNA. Therefore, in order 
to obtain samples one must utilize the presence of DNA 
in other blood cells (neutrophils, leukocytes, etc.). The 
erythrocytes of birds do contain a nucleus, however.
In cases pertaining to wildlife hunting, slaughter-
houses, satanic rituals that use animals in their rites, or 
the shooting of domestic animals as entertainment, blood 
splatters may be found. This type of evidence may be col-
lected even in cases where the perpetrator has cleaned the 
crime scene in an attempt to obscure the crime.
Through blood splatter patterns (distribution of 
blood splatter), we can answer the question of how the 
victim came to be at the scene of the crime and from 
where he came. From this, one may reconstruct past 
events and determine how the crime was committed.
Arterial damage results in a “jet” of blood, contain-
ing a high volume per latid, and amount and trajectory 
of the jet will depend on the impact force used on the 
animal and/or the weapon or object used to commit the 
crime. The splatters found on walls can also be used to 
determine approximate time of death, by observing how 
far splatters have leaked toward the floor.
Bloodstains on jute and textiles that have been wet 
are often of a greenish color, light brown, or somewhat 
diffuse. If samples have not been wet, they can be darker 
in color, such as dark red or black. In metals (excluding 
stainless steel, which will always have a red color), the 
color varies under the influence of oxide or other sub-
stances likely to support corrosion.
In water, color intensity alone can be observed in 
correspondence with the concentration of blood.
As you can see, the techniques utilized in the investi-
gation of blood vary greatly.
13.8.2.1 Stains on Hard Surfaces
Scraping smooth surfaces or hardwood with a sharp knife 
allows residue of dried blood to be collected. If the blood-
stained item is small and transportable, package it in a 
paper bag or envelope. Dilution and contamination poten-
tial is minimized by eliminating the use of water as the col-
lection medium. Do not use a plastic container in place of 
a paper packet, because the static charge from the plastic 
will cause the blood flakes to disperse and stick to the sides 
of the container. This technique can be combined with 
the tape-lift method by scraping the stain near the tape’s 
sticky side. The static charge will cause the flakes to stick 
to the tape. The tape can then be placed on vinyl acetate.
For dried bloodstains on a non-absorbent surface, 
fingerprint-lifting tape may be placed over the stain and 
lifted off. The stain is transferred to the adhesive side of 
the tape, which may then be secured on a clear piece of 
acetate for submission to the laboratory.
13.8.2.2 Stains on Soft Surfaces
When the surfaces are porous and/or not conducive to 
scraping (carpets or other), a sample must be cut and 
removed from the tainted piece. If such a sample can-
not be taken, white blotting paper or filter paper may 
be placed under the disputed item, then drops of saline 
should be added to the stain until transferred to the tissue 
paper in sufficient amounts to assure that the material 
can be analyzed. It is then left to dry prior to packaging 
and shipping. In this case, the sample can be sent in very 
well-sealed paper, along with notes indicating the tech-
nique used.
Wrapped in Bloody Clothes: If animals are found 
wrapped in clothes or in conditions that avoid exposure to 
drafts or fans, the first thing you should do is remove evi-
dence such as hairs, fibers, gunshot residue, and so on, pres-
ent in the clothes or dry the blood sample to fix it to fabric 
(textile). Excessive heat can affect the quality of the sample, 
so caution should be used. Finally, these samples should be 
stored in cartons wrapped in wrapping paper separately. 
The paper should be thick so as to prevent breakage, and 
tight to ensure no waste of evidence such as fabric patches 
or blood granules. Also, the paper should not be pliable. 
Cuttings should be packaged in separate paper envelopes.
If the item is small and transportable, then package 
it in a paper bag (or plastic bag to prevent contamina-
tion of other objects). Bring it to a secured location, take 
it out of the bag, and allow the evidence and the bag to 
thoroughly air-dry.
Any materials such as knives, axes, or blunt objects 
gathered for evidence should be stored in hard cardboard 
or timber boxes. Boxes should be secured during trans-
port to prevent the breakdown of waste material stains.
If the samples are small they may be placed in petri 
dishes or tubes that do not contain anticoagulants.
If possible, the investigator should also collect 
samples from unstained areas of the item for negative 
controls.
Wet Absorption: A sterile swab, gauze pad, or 
threads are slightly moistened with sterile distilled water. 
An effort should be made to concentrate the stain in a 
localized portion of the swab or pad. For example, when 
using a swab, the stain should be concentrated on the 
tip. The collection medium is concentrated into the stain 
and allowed to air-dry. Some laboratories recommend 
following the first moistened swabbing with a second dry 
swabbing to ensure thorough sample collection. Both 
swabs are retained and submitted for analysis.
When the sample is air-dried, package into a paper 
packet and place in an envelope. For transportation pur-
poses and to prevent cross contamination, the threads 
may be placed in a plastic container for no more than 
2 hours. Once in a secure location, the threads must be 
removed from the plastic and allowed to air-dry. They 
may then be repackaged into a paper packet and placed 

246
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
in an envelope. Threads must also be taken from a nega-
tive control area, if available.
13.8.2.3 Liquid Samples
When blood is in abundance it may be collected with a 
syringe or other item (spoon, pipette, etc.) and stored in a 
sealed glass jar without additives. Keep it cool.
Wet bloodstains should be collected with sterile 
gauze or absorbent cloth soaked in saline. Rub the mate-
rial collected on the stain and let it dry, then scrape it.
All samples should be labeled securely, to avoid loss 
of information due to falling labels. Associated informa-
tion that should be labeled includes case number, sample 
number, source (species), and place of extraction (head 
neck, thorax, abdomen, etc.).
It is also important to collect a control sample that 
contains no blood. Employing the exact same techniques 
should collect this sample.
Two techniques are utilized for presumptive blood 
detection in veterinary forensics: the Adler test (benzi-
dine), which is highly toxic, and the use of luminol.
13.8.3 Veterinary Trichology
Hair is evidence that is nearly always present on a site 
where a crime occurred that involved an animal. Animal 
hair goes through the same three stages of growth as 
humans: an intermediate period where growth slows 
(anagen phase), a later state where growth stops (cata-
gen phase), and hair loss (telogen phase). Hair collected 
might fall as part of the normal cycle or as a result of 
some pathology (e.g., hypothyroidism) or direct physi-
ological state (e.g., pregnancy).
Birds lose their feathers in certain moments of life 
as well, whether by natural or artificial means, or as a 
result of food and production management during the 
production of eggs.
The hair is a filamentary epidermal portion that exists 
in almost all animals. It has a root attached to the hair fol-
licle (containing DNA) and a stem (which is the visible part) 
that contains very little DNA. In a cross section of a hair we 
can show that externally it has a structure called the cuticle, 
with its own characteristics, depending on the species. More 
internally, the cortex contains pigment granules that can 
determine the color, size, density, and distribution of hair 
(Diagram 13.1). This is obviously of great forensic utility.
13.8.4 Tissues
In some cases, pieces of tissue from animals may be 
found. This tissue may be the result of rustling (animals 
stolen for slaughter and other uses), or in cases where the 
species needs to be determined from a piece of meat. In 
either case the identification of the species can be accom-
plished by immunological studies.
Internationally, there are immunochemical methods 
(enzyme immunoassays kits, ELISA) that allow the quali-
tative detection of meat species. There are commercial kits 
for bovine, swine, sheep, and poultry species available as 
well. The kits use protein antibodies against muscle heat.
13.8.5 Comparative Anatomy
The first objective of medical research is identification. 
Comparative anatomical knowledge is an important 
tool when recognizing the species by analyzing skeletal 
remains present at a CS. The identification of the species 
through anatomy could provide new evidence that may 
be related to the crime. This can then be incorporated 
into the research if necessary. Furthermore, the study of 
the chemical composition of the bones could tell the time 
of death, or the possible origin of the animal.
The greatest complication a forensic veterinarian 
faces is the large number of species that exist. This is  
why the development of a professional is required who 
works in the area of comparative anatomy and, more-
over, may have a database with which to compare the 
bones found at potential crime scenes (especially when 
wildlife is involved). This area is also concerned with the 
identification of hairs, feathers, viscera, fingernails, hel-
mets, leathers, and so on.
13.8.6  Marks (Impressions of the External 
Structure of Objects)
The goal of marks studies is to identify and clarify the 
circumstances and mechanisms surrounding their forma-
tion. Residual marks and traces can be investigated by 
Transversal section of hair
Cuticle
Medula
Cortex
DIAGRAM 13.1 Transversal section of hair. (Víctor 
Toledo González Property.)

247
Forensic Veterinary Science and Medicine 
various areas according to their origin and nature, such 
as traces caused by animals that use mainly their claws 
and fangs (the latter is treated in forensic dentistry).
13.8.7 Footprints
Footprints found on a scene may identify the species 
of the animal victim or perpetrator. Depending on the 
nature of the substrate (and how hard the animal has 
tread), footprints may be found with difficulty or may 
be clearly indicated. Through analysis, the environment 
in which the animal lives can be found. For example, the 
presence of webbing between toes in a footprint could 
indicate that the animal spends much time in the water, 
whereas the presence of the front claws in a footprint 
indicates the animal digs in the earth.
Other information obtained from footprint analyses 
could include the approximate height and weight of the 
animal. The distance between the anterior and posterior 
long members indicate whether the animal was, for exam-
ple, running, walking, jogging, or dragging something.
Some animals, such as horses, use metal constructs 
on their feet—also known as horseshoes—which can be 
of different shapes and materials. These can present evi-
dence of defects, wear, and so on, which can help identify 
a specimen.
Pathologies affecting nails in some animal strains 
include asymmetries, cracks, fractures, and other defects 
that could also appear as trace evidence (individual char-
acteristics), another important anatomical element for 
identification.
13.8.8 Taphonomy
Taphonomy of vertebrates is the study of all the processes 
occurring in the bones from the time of the death of an 
organism, until the bones are recovered from archaeo-
logical sites or elsewhere. Taphonomy includes both nat-
ural processes, including environmental factors and the 
action of scavengers and small mammals, as well as cul-
tural processes. When the bone material is preserved, it 
becomes a valuable source of information. In this sense, 
the bones provide data concerning human behavior, the 
faunal composition of the site and surrounding area, and 
may also provide data on vegetation and even the climate 
of the room in which the bones were recovered.
A taphonomic agent is the physical cause of modifica-
tion made to a bone and the bone assemblage, and tapho-
nomical effect is the change resulting from the alteration 
suffered. Rodents are a taphonomic agent that can mod-
ify deployment scenarios and can be the cause of spatial 
associations of materials that would not otherwise have 
been related. Some of the taphonomic effects of rodents 
commonly found in archaeological sites are the marks of 
their teeth found in caves or galleries. In general, their bit-
ing is located in specific areas, such as edges and salient 
regions of skeletal parts. These gnawed marks consist of 
short grooves, which usually occur in pairs, parallel or 
overlapping, and the bottom has either a flat or rounded 
groove. The burrowing behavior of rodents can also alter 
the spatial distribution of finds from the site. There is a 
removal of sediment from the interior to the surface of the 
ground, as the rodents are digging their burrows, causing 
vertical and horizontal displacement. Small materials are 
those that are more likely to be displaced by the burrow-
ing activity, as many rodents simply avoided large objects 
(>5 cm) by digging beneath them.
Many animals view both human and animal bodies 
as a food source, which may cause taphonomic changes. 
Among the most common of these animals are dogs, rats, 
pigs, crows, eagles, gulls, and some fish. On the other 
hand, other vertebrates that are typically herbivores, such 
as squirrels, sheep, and cows, can gnaw bones, especially 
if they are in a nutritionally poor environment.
It is therefore important to be able to identify and 
interpret the bite marks; however, bite marks from mice, 
cats, small dogs, or wild animals may be difficult to dis-
tinguish between, especially if the individual is decaying. 
Therefore, the evaluation of the CS and the circumstances 
in which the body was found are important factors in 
the interpretation of patterns of injury, particularly if the 
body has been found outdoors or in the presence of ani-
mals or insects.
13.8.9 Toxicology
Many animals are victims of air pollution or poisoning 
from water runoff containing waste of industrial, min-
ing, and domestic activity (Figures 13.10 through 13.12). 
There are many elements which may come to mind, such 
as smog, heavy metals, aerosols, and so on, and all of 
them can cause behavioral issues, physiological disor-
ders, and even death. This death can occur in one animal 
or in a large number of them, depending on the sources 
of toxicological agent and the possibility of contact.
In the domestic environment, dog and cat poisoning 
can occur through consumption of harmful food (e.g., 
chocolate or onions), whereas in the wild, a large num-
ber of animals can access waters with heavy metals from 
mining waste. Therefore the investigation of the CS, 
along with a detailed account of its history, should be 
necessary in order to better establish the circumstances 
that could have caused injury or death.
Toxicity related to environmental contamination 
may be caused by natural phenomena or one linked to 
the ingestion of discarded human-made objects such as 
shotgun pellets, fishing weights, or lead vehicle batteries. 

248
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Other poisonings result from careless actions such as 
dogs given access to slug baits or cats lapping up spilled 
ethylene glycol. On farms, insecticides spilled or the over-
enthusiastic application of agricultural chemicals pose a 
threat to wildlife as well.
Malicious poisoning of wildlife and domestic animals 
such as raptors, foxes, dogs, and cats is depressingly com-
mon as well, and often involves the use of agrochemicals 
or rodenticides. These poisons affect the target species 
individually, or en masse. Examples are rabbits contami-
nated with carbofuran (eggs laced with strychnine or 
organophosphorus insecticide). These baits are indiscrim-
inate, though, and it may be a family dog out for a walk 
with the children that finds and consumes the poison.
13.8.9.1 Sampling
Overall, for toxicology studies, tissue blocks of about 200 
g should be saved, with special regard to liver, kidney, 
stomach (rumen in cattle), and esophageal contents in 
the main carnivores and birds. Additionally, blood with 
anticoagulant and fluids may be saved, as well as samples 
of bait substances and suspicious (fodder or food) items.
1. Samples must be free of dust pollution, preserva-
tives, and so on, and must be frozen after extraction.
Blood should be sent refrigerated (1°–4°C 
in a cooler with ice pack) while the serum 
should be frozen.
2. Freeze rumen content, blood, and serum extraction 
posthaste to determine cyanide and ammonium.
3. Use separate containers for each sample to avoid 
cross contamination, change gloves, and properly 
label items (indicate location and nature of item).
4. Always include histopathology specimens fixed 
in order to confirm the diagnosis in doubt.
5. Include a toxicology form containing some 
observations indicated at the site of the event and 
general and specific characteristics.
Some modes of sample collection and preservation 
include the following.
Cadaver: Collect using disposable gloves (double) 
and conserve in a resistant bag (body bag), and store at 
refrigerated temperatures.
Skeletons: Collect using disposable gloves (double) 
and store in a resistant bag (body bag). Collect soil sam-
ples up to 15 cm deep below the bones and place in air-
tight container.
Bait (items containing intoxicants or poisons): 
Collect using disposable gloves (double) and conserve 
in wrap in foil (separate samples) and store in plastic or 
airtight containers. Store all containers in a single bag 
or Styrofoam container. Use of ice packs is suggested in 
cases involving perishable material.
FIGURE 13.12 Vomiting bird with suspicious content. 
(Carlos Muñoz Quezada and Víctor Toledo González 
Property.)
FIGURE 13.10 Dead birds from eating a dog killed by 
poisoning. (Photo: Carlos Muñoz Quezada and Víctor 
Toledo González Property.)
FIGURE 13.11 Skeletal remains of a dead dog. Normally, 
in these cases there is not cadaverous fauna (arthropods 
and flies) when animals die intoxicated. (Photo: Carlos 
Muñoz Quezada and Víctor Toledo González Property.)

249
Forensic Veterinary Science and Medicine 
Tissues (fresh or decomposed): Collect up to 2 cm 
in depth at site of occurrence and preserve in envelopes 
or sealed containers. Transport refrigerated (less than 3 
hours) or frozen.
Hairs, feathers, and nails: Store sample in entirety 
(with root and follicle) or quills in cases involving feath-
ers and preserve in in paper bags and maintain at an 
ambient temperature, refrigerate, or freeze.
Excrement: Samples must be no older than 2 or 3 
days and may be collected whole or in pieces and pre-
served in sealed containers or envelopes. Transport to 
laboratory within a few hours using ice packs, or freeze.
The expert should have suspicions of intoxication 
when the animal had good health and had a sudden 
onset of symptoms (salivation, tremors, muscle spasms, 
dyspnea, hemorrhage, cyanosis, vomiting, diarrhea, sei-
zures, etc.), when the sudden death of an animal occurs, 
when clinical symptoms are similar in different subjects 
(different species) at once or in successive time periods 
when there have been previous cases of proven or sus-
pected poisoning in the same area, when there is presence 
of vomiting or bleeding from orifices, or when the bodies 
were found in abnormal postures.
Also, certain intoxicants that cause changes in the 
central nervous system might leave odors that emanate 
from the animal’s mouth or vomit.
13.8.10 Veterinary Pathology
In general, the involvement of a veterinarian in legal cases 
may be useful in a variety of ways. In particular, veterinary 
expertise may be sought for one or more of the follow-
ing: a clinical examination, a postmortem examination, 
laboratory investigations, a site visit, viewing radiographs 
or other images, examining histological sections or elec-
tron micrographs, giving advice/opinion based on reading 
reports, or viewing photos or video recordings.
The study of histopathological anatomy is the study 
of causes of death by working on the body via necropsy 
or in a laboratory setting by way of sample tissues. The 
forensic pathologist should be able to determine the etiol-
ogy or pathophysiology: whether the death was acciden-
tal, intentional, natural, or of undetermined origins.
Often, it will be necessary to perform a postmortem 
examination at the scene of the incident. This requires 
that the specialist determine three things: (1) date of 
death; (2) cause of death; and (3) circumstances of death 
(e.g., how the animal died, why the animal died, how 
long it took to die, when he died, where he died, who was 
involved, and was it a sudden or unexpected death).
Before necropsy is performed, an external examina-
tion of the specimen showing and describing injuries, 
determining body condition, determining evidence of 
immersion or burial, and the taking of samples (hair, 
feathers, non-animal elements attached to the body), is 
required. Also, any insects present may be gathered for 
forensic entomological study (more on this below).
Once the body has been opened, internal examina-
tion is required to differentiate natural disease lesions 
from those which may be unnatural (e.g., abuse). The 
next step is to differentiate antemortem from postmor-
tem lesions and finally take samples for histopathologi-
cal, microbiological or immunological examinations. 
Types of samples may include toxins, infectious agents, 
biological material for determination of DNA, blood, 
body fluids, and so on.
Finally, after the examination a report must be writ-
ten. This report must be in present tense, complete, and 
clear, using technical terminology as well as contain an 
explanation in layman’s terms, and present conclusions.
13.8.10.1 Sampling
Many tests with cadavers must be performed no more than 
24–48 hours after death, depending on ambient tempera-
ture. In cold locations (at 0°C [32°F] or less) you can per-
form almost all tests even beyond 48 hours. However, this 
still severely affects the integrity of tissue being used for 
histopathological analysis. Cases of common occurrence 
mentioned in the postmortem may have different decom-
position dynamics due to climate conditions as well.
For example, dead mammals or seabirds found 
on beaches have a thick layer of subcutaneous fat that 
keeps their temperature from cooling. This facilitates 
decomposition and attracts scavengers such as gulls or 
dogs. In this case, the samples are most likely to have 
relevant results in toxicology, entomology and eventually 
PCR (polymerase chain reaction) for infectious agents, 
depending on the strength of the latter, over time.
Ruminants (cows, sheep, goats, etc.) are similar to 
the previous case in that these animals usually have a 
thick layer of hair or wool (sheep) and additionally, their 
pre-stomachs contain and maintain live fermenting bac-
teria. Therefore, the temperature for several hours after 
the death of the animal will remain stable and invite the 
same problems. These bacteria may also be passed onto 
other tissues, causing contamination. If the temperature 
exceeds 10°C or 15°C (50°F or 59°F), the animal carcass 
will be decayed at around 24–48 hours.
Additionally, animals that have agonized for some 
time before dying often lose all energy reserves, which 
can undermine tissue health even before death. In such 
cases, more rapid decomposition may occur. Also, ani-
mals that have suffered severe bacterial or infectious pro-
cesses that result in sepsis may have bacteria in the blood 
that not only weakens the animal but also indicates ante-
mortem infection.
There are diseases that are normal zoonoses that can 
cause major disruptions in public health. This is why it 

250
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
is important to take adequate time to collect samples or 
perform an autopsy.
Some basic general considerations and procedures 
for samples follows:
1. Histopathology and Histochemistry Testing
• Use an airtight plastic bottle with dilution 
of formalin (1 part water, 9 parts of 37% 
formalin)
• Formalin volume should be 10 times the 
sample volume
• The sample should not be more than 1 cm 
thick (Diagram 13.2)
• Alcohol is not a good tissue fixative because 
of low tissue penetration capability 
 
 Freezing is not a desirable preservation tech-
nique for histopathology specimens, as crystals 
that damage the tissue structure are formed. 
Refrigeration is acceptable for a period of up to 
48 hours.
2. Immunohistochemistry
 
 These samples are treated the same as those used 
for histopathology. Samples should not spend 
more than 48 hours in storage.
3. PCR
 
 These samples should be frozen with utmost care 
taken to not contaminate the samples with for-
eign DNA. Wear gloves and always clean steril-
ized material used to extract each sample. Store 
samples in sterile jars or airtight bags.
4. Virology
 
 Samples must be buffered in a solution of 50% 
glycerol and frozen in sterile vials or bags. Lung, 
liver, spleen, kidney, and brain fragments may be 
collected at a maximum thickness of 1 cm.
5. Bacteriology
 
 Following are precautions to take during col-
lection of samples in a corpse. These samples 
should be collected first if infection is suspected.
 
   In general, you should use an aseptic technique, 
clean material, and be careful not to contaminate 
other parts of the animal or neighboring property.
 
   If intestinal infection is suspected, this sam-
ple should be taken first, before proceeding to the 
opening of the intestine. Samples can be attached 
to both ends of a thread segment of between  
5 and 10 cm and the entire segment may be pre-
served. Do not freeze these samples.
6. Mushrooms
 
 The sampling of these microorganisms is per-
formed in a manner similar to the collecting of 
samples in microbiology.
7. Cytology and Fluids
 
 Conjunctive and trachea swabs are collected with 
cotton swabs to isolate epithelial cells. Then, the 
swab is placed on glass slides, air-dried, and 
fixed for 5–10 minutes at 80%–100% methanol.
 
   Prints obtained from tissue are gently pressed 
against the slide and the organ to be sampled. 
This should be done on absorbent paper prior 
to the cleaning of excess blood from the surface. 
Like the preceding example, this sample must be 
fixed with air or methanol.
 
   The fluids can be sent in tubes containing 
anticoagulant that have been centrifuged at 
1500 rpm for 5 minutes. A drop of the resulting 
sediment is deposited on a microscope slide in 
a similar manner as performing a blood smear. 
The sample may be fixed the same way.
8. Parasitology
 
 Tissue impressions are obtained by gently press-
ing the slide against the organ to be sampled. 
The simple should be pre-cleaned with absorbent 
paper to remove excess blood from the surface. 
Like the preceding, the sample may then be fixed 
in air or methanol.
 
   The fluids can be sent in tubes with antico-
agulant and then centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 
minutes. A drop of sediment is deposited on a 
microscope slide and smear, similar to perform-
ing a blood smear, and fixed the same way.
• Ticks, fleas, lice, and mites can be preserved 
in 70% alcohol. To perform skin scraping, 
the material obtained from the lesion is 
mixed with mineral oil on a microscope slide 
and covered with a coverslip.
• Living nematodes can be immersed in 70% 
alcohol and dead parasites can be set in 
5%–10% 
formalin. 
Heartworms, 
lung-
worms, trematodes, and cestodes may be 
DIAGRAM 13.2 Sample handling.

251
Forensic Veterinary Science and Medicine 
fixed in a formalin solution of 5%, diluted 
with saline.
• For determination of endoparasites, send-
ing 10–20 g of fresh fecal material is recom-
mended. If processing is not immediate, it is 
recommended to set the stool in a solution of 
10% formalin for fixation of tibia eggs.
• For analysis of protozoa, a drop of fresh 
fecal material is mixed with a drop of Lugol’s 
solution (or saline) on a slide. The prepara-
tion should be covered with a coverslip and 
examined immediately.
Also, in some cases it is necessary to collect the full 
animal or group of animals.
13.8.11 Forensic Entomology
Insects and arthropods are also used in forensic investi-
gations. The presence of differing species can either nar-
row or broaden the investigation.
The insects are attracted to a corpse in order to feed 
and/or lay eggs. Sometimes this occurs while the ani-
mal is dying, during advanced putrefaction, or in other 
periods when only dried matter remains. Given this 
sequence, differentiated with the corpse arrival and phe-
nological characteristics of these insects, we can deter-
mine with some accuracy the postmortem interval (PMI: 
time elapsed since death to sample collection period). 
The presence of toxic substances in the body as a possi-
ble cause of death (entomotoxicology) may also be found 
in this manner. This may also determine whether the 
animal in question had died at the crime scene or been 
transported from another location. Legal and forensic 
entomological procedures should be used both methodi-
cally and rigorously when collecting samples, and the 
provision of additional vital information (such as con-
ditions and characteristics of the CS where the samples 
were taken) should be included.
13.8.11.1 Procedure
Before entering a crime scene where a corpse is present, it 
is vital to take measurements of environmental conditions. 
Temperature and humidity are basic examples of these 
conditions, but wind speed and direction should also be 
included (Diagram 13.3) (Figures 13.13 through 13.17).
Final Considerations: Each piece of evidence (bite 
marks, hair, blood patterns, etc.) should be photographed 
Cadaver
Above cadaver 1.3 m
and 30 cm
1,3 m
30 cm
Temperature and humidity record
1 m
6 m
10 cm
20 cm
Soil surface
Underground
Measure 10 and 20 cm deep at a
distance of 1 and 6 meters from
cadaver
Under the body without lifting,
after removing the corpse the
procedure is repeated on the soil
surface where the corpse was and
underground (10 and 20 cm)
DIAGRAM 13.3 Measuring points of temperature and humidity at a crime scene.
FIGURE 13.13 Sampling of flies in photos. Take a general 
picture of the crime scene. (Photo: Víctor Toledo González.)

252
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
to illustrate where it was found, with a scale (to indicate 
size) and without a scale. This establishes the relationship 
of the evidence to the victim, the victim to the room, and 
so on. These photographs should be taken from straight 
above or straight on at right angles, eliminating potential 
distance distortions.
13.12 CONCLUSION
In this chapter we have pointed out some views on ani-
mal forensics work. Many other disciplines can actively 
participate in this work (ballistic studies, genetic, chem-
istry, and others). However, it is necessary to supplement 
this activity with others of equal importance, such as 
work at the scene of crime, security crime scene, forensic 
tactics, legislations, and others.
FIGURE 13.14  Displacing the sweep net horizontally 
side by side. The process is repeated many times to col-
lect the largest number of flying insects. (Víctor Toledo 
González Property.)
FIGURE 13.15 Collection of flying insects should be 
conducted in surrounding areas. Many insects fly away 
from the body at the time the expert approaches them. 
(Víctor Toledo González Property.)
FIGURE 13.16 Alternative collection of flying insects. 
(Víctor Toledo González Property.)
FIGURE 13.17 After collection of flying insects, the mesh 
should adopt the position shown in the figure so that 
the specimens do not escape. (Víctor Toledo González 
Property.)

253
Forensic Veterinary Science and Medicine 
Don’t forget: Working with animals can be as varied 
as the number of species you can find—so forensic sci-
ence is a multidisciplinary job.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dr. Carlos Muñoz Quezada (Veterinarian), expert worker 
in Crime Scene Investigation (Chile); Dr. Noemi Friedrich 
MV, MSc., Veterinary Forensic Expert (ISCET) with a 
Diploma in Criminology and Penology (Argentina); Dr. 
Ricardo Olivares P-M (Veterinary Anatomist, Favet); Dr. 
Ana María Ramirez (Veterinary Hematologist, Favet); 
and Dr. Gustavo Farias Roldán (Veterinary Toxicologist, 
Favet) for their huge and generous collaboration in elabo-
ration of this chapter, for their support in the develop-
ment of Forensic Veterinary Medicine in Chile and their 
great human qualities.
Also, Mr. Rodrigo Marcos Quezada (Criminalist 
Investigator), Hector Casanova Oyarzún (Ballistic 
Engineer), and Mr. José Manuel Duarte (Proficient 
in  Documentology)—members of COLCRIM who 
have this huge challenge and contributed to its 
development.
Thanks to Mr. and Mrs. Cooper, who advance this 
discipline and write their experiences in cited books, and 
finally to Dr. Flavio Correa, a veterinarian from Cuba 
who spent most of his professional life developing veteri-
nary forensics in his country.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Arkow, P. and H. Munro. 2006. The veterinary profes-
sion’s roles in recognizing and preventing family 
violence: The experiences of the human medicine 
field and the development of diagnostic indicators of 
non-accidental (injury). In: International Handbook 
on Cruelty to Animals, ed. F. R. Ascione. West 
Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, pp. 31–58.
Brown, K., G. Townsend, and T. Winning. 2005. 
Forensic applications of dental and oral anatomy. 
In: Oral and Maxillofacial Anatomy, Histology 
and Embriology, ed. S. R. Prabhu. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Byrd, J. and J. Castner. 2000. Forensic Entomology: The 
Utility of Arthropods in Legal Investigations. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Ciocca, L (Eds.). 2010. Odontologia Médico-Legal. Chile: 
Jurídicas de Santiago.
Cooper, J. and M. Cooper. 2007. Introduction to 
Veterinary and Comparative Forensic Medicine. 
Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Cooper, J. and M. Cooper. 2013. Wildlife Forensic 
Investigation. CRC Press.
Correa, F. 2007. Medicina forense veterinaria. Monografía. 
Universidad de Granma, unidad docente de Medicina 
Veterinaria de Santiago de Cuba. http://www.ilus-
trados.com/documentos/eb-medicinaforense.doc 
(Accessed December 10, 2014).
David, T. J. 1986. Adjunctive use of scanning electron 
microscopy in bitemark analysis: A 3-D study. 
J Forensic Sci 31:1126–34.
Dorion, R. 2011. Animal bites. In: Bitemark Evidence, 
ed. R. Dorion. New York, NY: CRC Press, 
pp. 217–40.
Drinnan, A. J. and M. J. Melton. 1985. Court presenta-
tion of bitemark evidence. Int Dent J 35:316–21.
Friedrich, N. 2014. Bienestar animal: El abuso en los ani-
males. Revista Información Veterinaria. Órgano ofi-
cial del Colegio Medico Veterinario de la Provincia 
de Córdoba. p. 177.
Gov UK. 2013. Zoonosis diseases (zoonoses): Guidance, 
data and analysis. https://www.gov.uk/government/
collections/zoonotic-diseases-zoonoses-guidance-data-
and-analysis (Accessed July 14, 2015).
Gutiérrez, M. 2004. Análisis tafonómicos en el área 
interserrana. Facultad de Ciencias Naturales 
y Museo. PhD Thesis. Universidad de la Plata, 
Argentina.
Haglund, W.D. and Sorg, M.H. (eds.). 1997. Rodents and 
humans remains. In: Forensic Taphonomy. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 422–32.
Heath, S. E. 1999. Animal Management in Disasters. 
St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Hellman, D. S. and N. Blackman. 1966. Enuresis, fire set-
ting and cruelty to animals: A triad predictive of 
adult crime. Am J Psychiatry 122:1431–5.
Kaiser, L., C. R. Heleski, J. Siegford, and K. A. Smith. 
2006. Stress-related behaviors among horses used in 
a therapeutic riding program. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
228:39–45.
Lagoni, L., C. Butler, and S. Hetts. 1994. The Human–Animal 
Bond and Grief. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.
Morgan, M. and J. Palmer. 2007. Clinical review: Dog 
bites. BMJ 24:413–7.
Morse, D. R., J. V. Esposito, H. P. Kessler, and R. Gorin. 
1994. Age estimation using dental periapical radio-
graphic parameters: A review and comparative study 
of clinically based and regression models with the 
Operation Desert Storm victims. Am J Forensic Med 
Pathol 15:303–18.
Munro, H. M. C. and M. V. Thrusfield. 2001a. Non-
accidental physical injuries found in dogs and cats. 
J Small Anim Pract 42:279–90.
Munro, H. M. C. and M. V. Thrusfield. 2001b. Battered 
pets: Sexual abuse. J Small Anim Pract 42:333–7.
Munro, R. 2008. Animal Abuse and Unlawful Killing: 
Forensic 
Veterinary 
Pathology, 
First 
edition. 
Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders.

254
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
NFSTC Science Serving Justice. 2007. Collection tech-
niques. http://projects.nfstc.org/pdi/Subject01/pdi_
s01_m01_05.htm (Accessed December 25, 2014).
O‘Connor, T. 2000. The Archaeology of Animals Bones. 
United States: Sutton Publishing Limited, Phoenix Mill.
Palacio, J., M. Leon, and S. García-Belenquer. 2005. 
Aspectos 
epidemiológicos 
de 
las 
mordeduras 
caninas. Gac Sanit, no. 1 (January–February), 
pp. 50–8. http://scielo.isciii.es/scielo.php?pid=s0213-
91112005000100011&script=sci_arttext (Accessed 
June 25, 2015).
Pretty, I. A. and L. D. Addy. 2002. Associated postmortem 
dental findings as an aid to personal identification. 
Sci Justice 42:65–74.
Pretty, I. A. and L. D. Sweet. 2001. Forensic dentistry. 
Br Dent J 190:359–66.
Rawson, R. D., A. Bell, B. S. Kinard, and J. G. Kinard. 1979. 
Radiographic interpretation of contrast-media-
enhanced bite marks. J Forensic Sci 24:898–901.
Rigdon, J. D. and F. Tapia. 1977. Children who are cruel 
to animals: A follow-up study. J Oper Psychiatry 
8:27–36.
Rothwell, B. R. 1995. Bite marks in forensic dentistry: A 
review of legal, scientific issues. J Am Dent Assoc 
126:223–32.
Rutty, G. N. 2001. Essentials of Autopsy Practice, Vol. 1. 
London: Springer-Verlag.
Simpson, V. R. 2006. Patterns and significance of bite 
wounds in Eurasian otters (Lutra lutra) in southern 
and south-west England. Vet Rec 158:113–9.
Souviron, R. 2011. Animal bites. In: Bitemark Evidence, 
ed. R. Dorion. New York, NY: CRC Press, 
pp. 209–16.
Sprayson, T. 2006. Taking the lead: Veterinary interven-
tion in disaster relief. In Practice 28:48–51.
Sweet, D. and C. M. Bowers. 1998. Accuracy of bitemark 
overlays: A comparison of five common methods 
to produce exemplars from a suspect’s dentition. 
J Forensic Sci 43:362–7.
Sweet, D., J. A. Lorente, M. Lorente, A. Valenzuela, and 
E. Villanueva. 1997. An improved method to recover 
saliva from human skin: The double swab technique. 
J Forensic Sci 42:320–2.
Toledo, V., L. Ibarra, V. Rojas, L. Ciocca, N. Rocha, and 
G. Jara. 2012. Estudio preliminar de patrones de 
mordedura según forma del cráneo, mediante el 
análisis morfológico y morfométrico de semiarcadas 
dentarias de perro doméstico (Canis familiaris) con 
fines de identificación. Int J Morphol 30:222–9.
Universidad de Murcia. 2005. Guía para el envío de 
muestras al servicio de toxicología y veterinaria 
forense de la universidad de Murcia. https://www.
um.es/grupos/grupo-toxicologia/guia-muestras.pdf 
(Accessed July 3, 2015).
World Health Organization (WHO). 2005. Landmark 
Study on Domestic Violence. News Release 
WHO/62, 24 November 2005. World Health 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
Yarrow, R. 2005. The tsunami and its aftermath. Vet Rec 
156: 687.

255
C H A P T E R  14
Ethics in Forensics
Ghada Hasabo
14.1 INTRODUCTION
Forensic science is a professional occupation concerned 
with the scientific analysis and examination of physi-
cal evidence, its interpretation, and its presentation 
in court. It involves the applying of many principles, 
techniques, and strategies of the physical sciences, and 
has as its primary objective the determination of physi-
cal facts which can be important in legal cases (Figure 
14.1).
It is the duty of all individuals active in the profes-
sion of forensic science to serve the interests of justice to 
their greatest and most effective ability at all times. For 
this duty, they use all the scientific tools at their com-
mand to determine all the many physical facts relative to 
the matters under investigation. Having created factual 
determinations, forensic scientists then interpret and 
appraise their findings. To do this, they are guided by 
expertise and data that will lead them to opinions and 
conclusions concerning the matters under study. These 
findings, conclusions, and opinions are then reported to 
criminal investigators, with all the accuracy and talent 
of which these experts are capable, such that everyone 
involved in the criminal proceeding might readily be 
able to place the findings in their correct relationship to 
the matter at hand.
In doing so, these forensic specialists are guided by 
those practices and procedures that are typically rec-
ognized among the profession to be in line with a high 
level of skilled ethics. For the best forensic practice, it is 
obviously necessary not only to have sufficient scientific 
knowledge and experience, but also to do this under the 
umbrella of ethics (Figure 14.2).
14.2 CODES OF ETHICS 
IN FORENSIC SCIENCE
The majority of forensic science practitioners work in tra-
ditional crime laboratories or identification units (Melson, 
2012). Others may belong to a forensic science professional 
organization. It is through their employment or member-
ship in specialized organizations, either membership soci-
eties or certification organizations, that they will become 
exposed to codes of ethics or rules of skilled responsibility.
Except for physicians, few laboratories or forensic 
units had their own codes to guide practitioners’ behav-
ior, until the American Society of Crime Laboratory 
Directors/Laboratory (ASCLD/LAB) Accreditation Board 
adopted a consistent code for their forensic laboratories. 
Even fewer forensic science practitioners privately follow 
their own specific code of ethics.
Most professionals who belong to a forensic science 
society work in organizations that don’t have a clear 
code—or if they do, there’s no effective social control 
mechanism. Consequently, for years, or maybe decades, 
forensic scientists were not subject to enforceable codes 
or alternative parameters on their behavior, except 
maybe through excoriation by the courts rejecting proof 
or reversing judgments of conviction due to professional 
nonfeasance or malfeasance by the forensic scientists.
The 2009 report of the National Research Council 
of the National Academy of Sciences recognized the 
inequality within the existing codes of ethics and their 
lack of widespread coverage (National Academies of 
Sciences and National Research Council 2009). One 
of the recommendations of the report encourages the 
formation of a national code of ethics with a means of 
CONTENTS
14.1 Introduction 
255
14.2 Codes of Ethics in Forensic Science 
255
14.2.1 Codes of Ethics in Professional Organizations 
256
14.2.2  The Development of an Association’s Code of Ethics and Conduct 
257
Bibliography 
261

256
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
enforcement. Such a code may be implemented through 
certification organizations, once a demand for individual 
certification becomes obligatory, as the report addition-
ally suggested.
14.2.1 Codes of Ethics in Professional Organizations
Persons in the criminal justice community who depend on 
forensic science to clear a defendant could argue over the scope 
of codes of ethics; however, there’s one thought that everyone 
ought to agree upon, enunciated in 1971 by Professor James 
Starrs: “The forensic scientist can wait no longer to tighten 
the outlines of the ethical guides that should be drawn to 
govern his conduct in the criminal justice system.”
Until now, forensic science societies and certification 
organizations were the first sources of ethics in forensic 
science. These societies vary in nature, from national and 
international societies such as the American Academy 
of Forensic Sciences (AAFS) and the International 
Association of Identification (IAI), representing a variety 
of forensic science disciplines; to regional societies such as 
the California Association of Criminalists (CAC) and the 
Mid-Atlantic Association of Forensic Scientists (MAAFS); 
to discipline-specific organizations such as the National 
Association of Medical Examiners (NAME) and the 
Society of Forensic Toxicologists (SOFT). Practitioners 
may belong to more than one organization. Thus, a 
specialist could belong to organizations that each have 
their own codes, differing in nature and scope from one 
another, some enforceable and a few not, or have no code 
in any respect. Once adopted by such organizations, the 
codes become very necessary and relevant. Regardless of 
their nature, however, the regular influence of these codes 
over the practitioner is often low.
If no social monitor mechanism is obtained for an 
association’s code, problems related to the applied foren-
sic science should be referred to the practitioner’s senior. 
Until the ASCLD/LAB guidelines were adopted, very 
few, if any, using agencies had a code of ethics pertaining 
specifically to forensic specialists (again with the excep-
tion of physicians and different medical practitioners, 
who have had to adjust to various state medical board 
moral codes). Instead, employers had to fit ethical mis-
conduct into the agency’s government code of ethics—
for instance, for those who primarily were government 
workers.* In different circumstances, the misconduct 
had to be handled through the performance work setup 
and also the employee’s annual performance analysis. If 
the misconduct was serious enough, the entity’s internal 
affairs division or workplace of skilled responsibility 
might need to investigate the alleged misconduct.
The investigative entities may fail to have any guid-
ance on ethical issues applicable to forensic science prac-
titioners. The disciplines among forensic science could 
differ from one another, and therefore the role and ethi-
cal issues of police and lawyers could also be “different 
from the scientist, [but] the moral responsibilities of the 
individual do not differ.”
That concept is important in considering the differ-
ent codes of ethics. Despite their variations, exceptions 
to the codes rely on the individual’s own sense of moral-
ity. In fact, the very foundation of professional organi-
zations’ codes of ethics depends on personal morality 
(Schroeder, 1984). The construct of a morality-based code 
is recognized by some organizations, and in this there’s a 
differentiation between codes of ethics and codes of con-
duct or rules of professional responsibility. Recognizing 
that codes of ethics place confidence in personal moral-
ity, such as not to lie, cheat, or steal, and contain broad 
ethical concepts, some organizations have solely a code 
of conduct or code of professional responsibility that is 
* See the Paul Coverdell National Forensic Science Improvement Act 
(P.L. 106–561) grant program, 42 U.S.C. § 3797k(4), which requires 
as part of the application for a grant that the applicant certify that 
“a government entity exists and an appropriate process is in place 
to conduct independent external investigations into allegations of 
serious negligence or misconduct substantially affecting the integ-
rity of the forensic results committed by employees or contractors of 
any forensic laboratory system, medical examiner’s office, coroner’s 
office, law enforcement storage facility, or medical facility in the 
State that will receive a portion of the grant amount.”
Experience
Ethics
Knowledge
Good
forensic
practice
FIGURE 14.1 The three essential contributors for good 
forensic practices.
FIGURE 14.2 The forensic scientist must work under an 
umbrella of ethics.

257
Ethics in Forensics
specifically designed for the specialty represented by the 
organization and for its members’ skilled development.
Different societies and organizations each have a 
code of ethics and a code of professional responsibil-
ity. Despite each code’s application to a specific career, 
many organizations describe their code as being more 
aspirational than concrete ethical rules. For example, 
the Forensic Toxicologist Certification Board’s Code of 
Ethics is captioned “Aims and Ideals” (FTCB, n.d.). The 
National Association of Doctors, however, combines 
aims and ideals in its “Code of Ethics and Conduct.” The 
latter title suggests that ethics and conduct align and are, 
in fact, indivisible.
The misnomer in calling the document a code of 
ethics is readily apparent in the provisions that make it 
unethical to fail to abide by the organization’s bylaws  
or constitution. The Association of Forensic DNA 
Analysts and Administrators (AFDAA), for example, 
makes it unethical not to “comply with the bylaws of the 
Association.”
The Mid-Atlantic Association of Forensic Scientists 
(MAAFS), on the  other hand, makes it unethical to form 
unauthorized public statements representing the organi-
zation (MAAFS, n.d.). The ASCLD Code of Ethics con-
tains a similar provision.
If morality is admittedly the bedrock of ethics, it’s 
exhausting to investigate how an organization can legislate 
non-compliance with bylaws and the creating of unauthor-
ized statements as unethical conduct. In different organi-
zations, an equivalent provision may be found within the 
governing documents; however, those organizations are 
careful to call their documents codes of ethics and con-
duct. A code of conduct that is vis-à-vis a code of ethics is 
more accepted to prohibit personal conduct thought to be 
adverse to the better interests and aims of the association.
Many of the codes are complete separate documents 
of the organization; others are incorporated into the gov-
erning documents of the organization, and used to be 
the bylaws. The incorporation model has the advantage 
of requiring the membership to vote for a change within 
the code as a modification of bylaws; the disadvantage is 
that the code is commonly difficult to update. For exam-
ple, the Code of Ethics for the Northwest Association 
of Forensic Scientists is not part of its bylaws and needs 
solely a majority vote of the membership at any business 
meeting to amend it, whereas a modification to its bylaws 
needs a three-quarters affirmative vote of the members 
attending the Association Business Meeting.
Regardless of whether or not the code could be a 
part of the bylaw documents or a complete document, a 
good implementation of a code of ethics depends in great 
part on the membership’s awareness of and commitment 
to it. Some codes idealistically proclaim their members’ 
commitment. As an example, the Forensic Toxicologist 
Certification Board states that every member “shall pledge 
himself to conform to the code of ethics.” The Southwestern 
Association of Forensic Scientists (SWAFS) goes one step 
further and adds that “every member can receive a copy of 
the Code” and imposes on the member the responsibility to 
“read the Code and be aware of its implications.”
The sole organizations that seem to want annual 
avowal of the code by its members are the AAFS and 
NAME. Every year as a part of the annual renewal of mem-
bership, AAFS and NAME members should acknowledge 
their acceptance of the provisions of the code (AAFS, n.d.). 
NAME needs members to browse, perceive, and endorse 
the Code of Ethics and Conduct (NAME, n.d.). The two 
codes need the commitment to different codes of ethics 
and conduct. The NAME and also the American Academy 
of Psychiatry and the Law need agreement with the rules 
and moral principles of the American Medical Association 
and also the American Psychiatric Association, respec-
tively (NAME, n.d.). The Illinois State Police (ISP) Rules 
of Conduct/Code of Ethics needs all “Forensic Science 
Command employees” to even be conversant in the state 
personnel rules, the State Police Directives Manual, and 
also the Facility Operational Manuals.
14.2.2  The Development of an Association’s 
Code of Ethics and Conduct
The American Academy of Forensic Sciences (AAFS 
or the Academy) was started in 1948 as an associate 
interdisciplinary organization representing the differ-
ent disciplines among the forensic science community. 
Dr. R.B.H. Gradwohl noted, because the plan of an asso-
ciate academy was being developed, that
There is no fixed border for any forensic science; 
each has more than necessity to rely on the others. It 
would thus seem fitting that a central organization be 
of extreme value in collating and disseminating the 
fundamentals of all forensic sciences.
It is no surprise that the commencement members of the 
Academy recognized that personal, ethical values are essen-
tial to the moral conduct of forensic scientists. On January 
21, 1948, the Committee on a Permanent Organization 
issued its final report. The report declared that
There can be no Justice without Truth, whether that 
Truth be attested by lay or expert witnesses. That 
Truth of which we speak is something more than 
the mere willingness of witnesses to relate what they 
saw, heard or know. Individual fidelity to this moral 
standard which we term honesty is only one aspect 
of Truth and is not always sufficient to serve the ends 
of ultimate Justice between two litigants or members 
of society…. It is commonly known that all knowl-
edge is either consciously or unconsciously encum-
bered not only with the imperfections of the observer, 

258
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
but mostly by preconceived notions, prejudices and 
inadequate mechanisms for differentiating between 
appearances and reality…. Science, as an empirical 
method of discovering eternal truths in nature, is 
the one important handmaiden by which Truth and 
then Justice may be unfolded. And in so far as science 
has advanced to unroll a cloud of ignorance from the 
minds of men, to that extent have the legal controver-
sies of men been more equitably adjusted.
At the 1950 scientific meeting of the Academy 
in Chicago, the AAFS Constitution and bylaws were 
adopted. Chapter 1, Section 3 provided for adverse action 
against “a member who will violate any of the provisions 
of this Constitution and bylaws.” The provisions of these 
documents pertained primarily to membership, adminis-
tration, and structure and failed to specify whether any 
moral standards against that action should be taken, 
but “a member who has been found guilty of a crime 
or is guilty of gross misconduct despite the fact that no 
criminal charge has been made.” Sanctions that would 
be obligatory if the “charges” were sustained included 
censure, suspension, or expulsion.
An interesting provision in the bylaws, significantly 
in light of today’s litigious society, explicitly states that 
“kindly efforts in interest of peace, conciliation or refor-
mation, so far as possible and expedient, shall proceed 
the filing of formal charges affecting the character or 
standing of a member.”
The same initiation documents provided for an 
Ethics Committee consisting of the three immediate past-
presidents of the Academy. Such a committee was started 
in 1950. The committee’s task, however, wasn’t to make 
a code of ethics but to handle things wherever “incidents 
of conduct deemed ‘detrimental to the simplest interests 
of any skilled society’” were reported. AAFS records 
don’t reveal any such activity by the Ethics Committee 
throughout the 1950s (Field, 1998f, 33). Not till 1960, 
was a committee formed to make a code of ethics. That 
committee planned a comprehensive set of “rules” of eth-
ics (Field, 1998g, 47, 247). A part of the preamble for the 
planned Rules of Ethics reads as follows:
The purity and efficiency of judicial administration 
depends as much upon the character, conduct and 
demeanor of lawyers, physicians and forensic scien-
tists in this great trust as upon the fidelity and ability 
of the courts or the honesty and intelligence of jurors.
What followed were 15 non-exclusive, general rules 
for guidance of its members. These rules included can-
dor and fairness, how far a professional can move into 
supporting a client’s case, conflict of opinion among 
colleagues, participation in fraud and trickery, duty on 
discovery of fraud or imposition, conflicting interests, 
confidences of a client, right to withdraw, punctuality, 
actions toward jury, expenses, feat interest in litigation, 
fixing the fee, contingent fees, and membership within 
the academy.
The Rules of Ethics were not presented to the 
Academy membership for adoption. The AAFS Executive 
Committee met within the spring of 1963 and tabled the 
foundations. The explicit reason was as a result of that “it 
was felt that the Academy’s Constitution was accepted, 
which it absolutely was not possible to legislate morality 
and integrity.”
An ad hoc Committee on the Code of Ethics was 
formed within the mid-1970s. The Committee mem-
bers recognized that the multidisciplinary nature of the 
Academy created a challenge. Every one of the disciplines 
within the Academy had completely different, discipline- 
specific issues. Thus, it absolutely was determined that 
the code of ethics had to be generic and applicable to all 
or any members. Four criteria drove their drafting of the 
planned code: it should be desirable, it should be feasible, 
it should be enforceable, and it should be enforced. This 
time, the managerial Committee, meeting within the 
summer of 1976, voted to the present code to the general 
membership, and in 1977 it absolutely was adopted at the 
annual meeting of the Academy.*
The new code was developed to “promote the high-
est quality of professional and personal conduct of its 
members.” The two provisions the code provided are 
shown in Figure 14.3.
Every member of the American Academy of Forensic 
Sciences shall avoid any material misrepresentation of 
training, experience, or area of expertise.
Every member of the American Academy of 
Forensic Sciences shall avoid any material misrepre-
sentation of data upon which an expert opinion or 
conclusion is based.
Those two provisions of the code were thought to 
be necessary for all members; though the adopted code 
* Report to the AAFS Board of Directors from the Ethics and Long 
Term Planning Committee.
Every member of the American Academy
of Forensic Sciences shall avoid any
material misrepresentation of training,
experience, or area of expertise.
The New Code of the American Academy of
Forensic Sciences
Every member of the American Academy
of Forensic Sciences shall avoid any material
misrepresentation of data upon which an
expert opinion or conclusion is based.
•
•
(1)
(2)
FIGURE 14.3 The new code of the American Academy 
of Forensic Science (AAFS).

259
Ethics in Forensics
was far less specific than the rules that got proposed 
in 1963, the total modification to the Academy bylaws 
conjointly enclosed three voluntary “guiding prin-
ciples” that were deemed “essential to the attainment 
of the best quality of professionalism.” They were as 
follows:
1. The Forensic specialist should to maintain his 
skilled ability through existing programs of con-
tinuous education.
2. The Forensic specialist should render technically 
correct statements altogether written or oral 
reports, testimony, public addresses, or publica-
tions, and may avoid any deceptive or inaccurate 
claims.
3. The Forensic specialist should act in an exceed-
ingly impartial manner and do nothing which 
might imply partiality or any interest in a case 
except the proof of the facts and their correct 
interpretation.
However:
Any member whose professional or personal conduct 
becomes adverse to the best interests and purposes of 
the academy shall be liable to censure, suspension or 
expulsion.
The permissive investigatory action by the commit-
tee was directed to alleged violations that are related to 
false statement of criteria for membership, unauthorized 
public statements, and violations of the Code of Ethics. 
Curiously, the “Guiding Principles,” which were solely 
voluntary, were not captured under the investigatory 
authority of the committee.
The exclusion of the guiding principles from social 
control was intentional, and also the next revision of 
the Code of Ethics eliminated those principles, separat-
ing that iteration of the code even away from the precise 
nature of the 1963 proposal. The 1986 revision of the 
code, however, specifically incorporated three new pro-
visions that were tangentially documented through the 
liability and inquiring parts of the previous code’s social 
control section (Figure 14.4).
The three new provisions were as follows:
1. Each member of the American Academy of 
Forensic Sciences shall refrain from practicing 
professional or personal conduct adverse to the 
best interest and aims of the Academy.
2. Misrepresentation of one or more criteria for 
membership within the AAFS shall represent a 
violation of this section of the code.
3. Each member of the AAFS shall refrain from 
issuing public statements that seem to represent 
the position of the Academy without specific 
authority that first gets obtained from the Board 
of Administrators.
In 1989, AAFS revealed within the Journal of Forensic 
Sciences a special conference on ethics in the forensic sci-
ences, supported by the Ethics and Values board of the 
National Science Foundation (Peterson, 1989). The five 
papers constituting the conference set a vital benchmark 
within the development of moral concerns, and were 
instructive to the complete forensic science community. 
The introductory paragraph of the conference is instruc-
tive for its read of the relative breadth of moral standards:
Forensic scientists are expected to be honest with 
respect to their qualifications, examinations, and con-
clusions; they should be technically competent and 
only use methods of proven reliability; they should 
remain totally objective and nonpartisan with respect 
to their review of evidence and delivery of expert tes-
timony; and they are expected to present understand-
able and balanced reports/testimony to legal decision 
makers.
In the late 1990s, the Academy established an ad 
hoc Good Forensic Practices Committee to organize an 
aspirational set of guidelines to supplement the negli-
gible, baseline provisions of the AAFS Code of Ethics. 
Violations of the great Forensic Practices Guidelines 
would not,  however, be enforceable unless a violation 
was additionally a breach of the Code of Ethics (Barnett, 
2001). These guidelines were given to the Academy’s 
Executive Committee in 1999; however, they were never 
adopted by the Academy, and also the committee was 
disbanded.*
As of this writing, the last revision of the AAFS 
Code of Ethics occurred in 2008, and it remains 
* Report by Dr. Robert Weinstock, Chair, Good Forensic Practice 
Committee to the Executive Committee, American Academy of 
Forensic Sciences, January 14 (1999).
The Three New Provisions of AAFS Code of Ethics
Each member of the American Academy of Forensic Sciences shall
refrain from practicing professional or personal conduct adverse to
the best interest and aims of the Academy.
Misrepresentation of one or more criteria for membership within
the AAFS shall represent a violation of this section of the code.
Each member of the AAFS shall refrain from issuing public statements
that seem to represent the position of the Academy without specific
authority that first gets obtained from the Board of Administrators.
•
•
•
1
2
3
FIGURE 14.4 The three new provisions of the AAFS 
Code of Ethics.

260
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
general in nature with very little guidance on the actual 
moral and ethical obligations of forensic scientists or 
their professional conduct. There are two substantive 
changes, however, that were created within the last 
revision. First, “conduct adverse to the … purposes of 
the Academy” was modified to “conduct adverse to the 
… objectives of the Academy,” as they’re significantly 
articulated within the preamble to the bylaws. Those 
objectives were incorporated into the Code. Second, 
the prohibition on misrepresenting information was 
expanded to misrepresenting “scientific principles” in 
addition.
One contributor to the 1989 ethics conference used 
the AAFS Code of Ethics as an example that “many pro-
fessional codes of ethics do very little more than remind 
us of our parent’s admonitions” to not lie, cheat, steal, or 
kill. Another commentator has urged that “the drawback 
to the brevity and lack of specificity of the code of ethics 
of the AAFS is that it has little value as a guide to proper 
action in a particular circumstance.”
Despite its brevity and lack of specificity, however, 
the AAFS Code of Ethics and Conduct might be enforced 
by the Academy, in contrast to some societies that had no 
social control provisions. The Academy was one among 
the few organizations that might, and did, interact in 
social control actions leading to sanctions against its 
members.
Not all codes are as general as the AAFS code. An 
example of a additional detailed code of ethics is that 
belonging to the California Association of Criminalists 
(CAC). Peter Barnett, a frequent author of forensic sci-
ence ethics, recited the history of the CAC Code of 
Ethics:
The development of the CAC Code … was an effort 
by a group of early criminalists in California to help 
define a profession for the first time. The California 
criminalists who founded the CAC and adopted its 
code of ethics were really inventing something that 
had never before existed: a code of ethics that tried to 
bridge the gap between one profession with a strong 
ethical tradition—the law—and another nascent pro-
fession that was trying to develop professional recog-
nition and a means of self-governance.
The CAC Code of Ethics, first adopted in 1957, is 
detailed and multi-situational. However, as Barnett 
points out, the in-depth code is hard to revise; as a result 
the opponents to any revision can argue either that the 
proposal is already covered in existing provision, or 
would conflict with different provisions already effec-
tive. Additionally, such code could be difficult to apply 
to uncommon circumstances. The categorization of a 
selected code is somewhat subjective, divided into three 
classes (1–10 provisions, 11–20 provisions, and 21 or a 
lot of provisions); however, there’s a major distinction 
between the general code and the detailed code. The 
CAC Code of Ethics has 41 provisions, as an example, 
compared to the four provisions of the AAFS or the 
Association of Forensic DNA Analysts and Directors. 
Within the latter organization, the provisions are broad 
concepts:
1. Comply the bylaws of the Association.
2. Treat all data from any agency, client, or fellow 
member with the confidentiality needed.
3. Carry out the duties of the profession with integ-
rity, attention to accuracy and in an unbiased 
manner.
4. Don’t misrepresent qualifications, evidence, 
opinions, conclusions, or testimony.
Even broader ideas are reflected within the ABFT 
Code of Ethics, that exhorts its members to conduct 
themselves and to perform activities “with honesty 
and integrity” (ABFT, n.d.). The Code of Conduct of 
the Forensic Science Society of the UK provides less 
clarity, by mandating that members conduct themselves 
“honorably within the application of their profession” 
(FSSoc, n.d.). The breadth of these ethical imperatives, 
however, are minimal in comparison to the last provision 
of the ABFT Code of Ethics.* That provision instructs 
ABFT members to:
Act in accordance with the long-standing precepts for 
ethical practice of the profession…
Compare those general provisions to the specificity 
provided in Section III. K. of the CAC Code of Ethics:
K. Where the expert must prepare photographs or 
offer oral “background information” to the jury in 
respect to a specific type of analytic method, this 
information shall be reliable and valid, typifying 
the usual or normal basis for the method. The 
instructional material shall be of a level that will 
provide the jury with a proper basis for evaluating 
the subsequent evidence presentations, and not such 
as would provide them with a lower standard than 
the science demands.
The majority of the codes are in the intermediate 
category that departs from the broad principles but stays 
within the general classes most frequently encountered by 
forensic scientists. The CAC Code was adopted for crimi-
nalists, and the AAFS Code for a multidisciplinary soci-
ety. The other codes target a specific category of forensic 
* The American Board of Forensic Document Examiners has a 
 document entitled “Code of Ethics and Standard Practices,” the 
opening paragraph of which calls the same document the “Code of 
Ethics and Competency.”

261
Ethics in Forensics
scientists, like the ASCLD/LAB Guiding Principles of 
Professional Responsibility for Crime Laboratories and 
Rhetorical Scientists. Those guidelines pertain to labora-
tory management and “all laboratory personnel, together 
with technical support personnel and those who assist 
Forensic scientists in their work.”*
The Illinois State Police Forensic Sciences Command 
Rules of Conduct/Code of Ethics applies to directors, 
administrators, forensic scientists, toxicologists, and 
support personnel within the command (The Code of 
Ethics of the California Association of Criminalists 
[CAC], n.d.). The Association of Forensic DNA Analysts 
and Administrators code applies to those who are deal-
ing with forensic aspects of DNA analysis, as well as to 
their supervisors and laboratory administrators. Unlike 
the AAFS Code, some additional detailed codes of ethics 
are divided into broad classes of moral considerations.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Academy of Forensic Sciences (AAFS) Board 
of Directors’ Policy and Procedure Manual, Section 
4.4.4.6, http://www.aafs.org; National Association 
of Medical Examiners (NAME) Code of Ethics and 
Conduct Section 1.g., http://thename.org/ (Accessed 
March 2015).
American Academy of Forensic Sciences (AAFS) Code 
of Ethics and Conduct, Section 1.c. http://www. 
aafs.org (Accessed March 2016).
American Board of Forensic Toxicology (ABFT) Code of 
Ethics, http://www.abft.org/.
Illinois State Police Forensic Sciences Command Rules of 
Conduct/Code of Ethics, http://www.isp.state.il.us/
forensics/ (Accessed January 2016).
American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors 
(ASCLD) Code of Ethics, http://www.ascld.org/
(Accessed December 2015).
ASCLD/LAB 
Guiding 
Principles 
of 
Professional 
Responsibility for Crime Laboratories and Forensic 
Scientists, fn i. http://www.ascld-lab.org/(Accessed 
on Jan 2016).
Association of Forensic DNA Analysts and Administrators 
(AFDAA), Bylaws, Article III, E.1. http://www.afdaa.
org/Welcome.html (Accessed February 2016).
P.D. Barnett, Ethics in Forensic Science: Professional 
Standards for the Practice of Criminalistics. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press (2001), pp. 27, 28, 30.
* ASCLD/LAB Guiding Principles of Professional Responsibility for 
Crime Laboratories and Forensic Scientists, http://www.ascld-lab.
org/. As of May 6, (2011), 385 crime laboratories were accredited 
by ASCLD/LAB, including 192 state laboratories, 128 local agency 
laboratories, 23 federal laboratories, 17 international (outside the 
United States) laboratories, and 25 private laboratories.
The Code of Ethics of the California Association of 
Criminalists (CAC), http://www.cacnews.org/ (Accessed 
January 2016).
K.S. Field, History of the American Academy of Forensic 
Sciences, 1948–1998. West Conshohocken, PA: 
American Society for Testing and Materials. (1998a), 
pp. 15, 33, 47, 58, 59, 189, 205, 206, 208, 247–253, 
289–290.
The Forensic Science Society, UK (FSSoc) Code of 
Conduct, Section 2. http://www.forensicscience-soci-
ety.org.uk (Accessed November 2015).
Forensic Toxicologist Certification Board (FTCB) Code of 
Ethics, http://home.usit.net.
D.M. Lucas, The ethical responsibilities of the forensic 
scientist: Exploring the limits, Journal of Forensic 
Sciences 34 (1989) 719–729, 727.
K.E. Melson, Embracing the path forward: The journey to 
justice continues, New England Journal on Criminal 
and Civil Confinement 36 (Summer 2010) 197.
K.E. Melson, Codes of ethics in forensic science societ-
ies: The organizational parameters of morality and 
conduct. In Ethics in Forensic Science. J.C. Upshaw 
Downs, A.R. Swienton, Chap. 4. New York, NY: 
Elsevier. (2012), pp. 81–135.
Mid-Atlantic Association of Forensic Scientists (MAAFS), 
Code 
of 
Ethics, 
1.2.4, 
http://www.maafs.org 
(Accessed January 2016).
National Academies of Sciences, National Research 
Council, Strengthening Forensic Science in the United 
States: A Path Forward. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press. (2009), pp. 36–37, 63–64.
National Association of Medical Examiners (NAME), 
http://thename.org/.
See National Association of Medical Examiners (NAME) 
Code of Ethics and Conduct, http://thename.org/, 
and American Academy of Forensic Sciences (AAFS) 
Code of Ethics and Conduct, http://www.aafs.org.
National Association of Medical Examiners (NAME) 
Code of Ethics and Conduct Section 1.a, http://
thename.org/ and American Academy of Psychiatry 
and the Law Ethical Guidelines for the Practice of 
Forensic Psychiatry, Section I, http://www.aapl.org/.
National Association of Medical Examiners (NAME) 
Code of Ethics and Conduct Section 1.g, http:// 
thename.org/ (Accessed December 2015).
Northwest Association of Forensic Scientists (NWAFS) 
Bylaws, Chapter III, Section 3.E.(1); Constitution 
Article 
VI, 
Section 
2, 
http://www.nwafs.org/  
(Accessed January 2016).
J.L. Peterson, Symposium: Ethical conflicts in the forensic 
sciences, Journal of Forensic Sciences 34 (1989) 717.
J.L. Peterson, J.E. Murdock, Forensic science: Developing an 
integrated system of support and enforcement, Journal 
of Forensic Sciences 34 (1989) 749–762, 759. “A sur-
vey of 50 criminalistics laboratories in the summer of 

262
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
1987 yielded returns of only 6 such codes, many of 
which were of the parent police agency and not partic-
ularly relevant to forensic science matters.” But see the 
Illinois State Police Forensic Sciences Command Rules 
of Conduct/Code of Ethics, http://www.isp.state. il.us/
forensics/. Peterson and Murdock (1989).
O.C. Schroeder, Ethical and moral dilemmas confronting 
forensic scientists, Journal of Forensic Sciences 29 
(1984) 966–986, 969.
Southwestern Association of Forensic Scientists (SWAFS), 
Code of Professional Conduct Section VI, http://
www.swafs.us/ and Illinois State Police, Forensic 
Sciences Command, Rules of Conduct/Code of 
Ethics, Section VIII.C, http://www.isp.state.il.us/
forensics/.
J.E. Starrs, The ethical obligations of the forensic scientist 
in the criminal justice system, Journal of the AOAC 
54 (1971) 906–914, 914.

263
C H A P T E R  15
Forensic Digital Imaging
Michael Dixon, Mark Wood, and Stephen Cole 
This chapter covers the basic principles of forensic digi-
tal imaging theory. It is not intended to cover much in 
the way of photographic instruction, as this is available 
from many other publications and websites. It is also not 
intended to cover acceptable court practices, since this 
differs too much from country to country and is highly 
changeable over time.
15.1 IMAGE SIZE AND RESOLUTION
Bitmap images require sufficient resolution for the end 
purpose. If a photograph of a football crowd is required, 
where every person’s face needs to be clearly identifiable, 
it would be no good taking such a shot using a mobile 
phone. With photography it is the choice of camera and 
lens that determines the clarity of the image. The bitmap 
resolution of a digital camera is counted in megapixels.
Three choices affect resolution when taking a 
photograph:
• The maximum resolution of the camera
• The resolution set in the camera
• How the shot is framed
The maximum resolution of the camera: A 6-megapixel 
camera will have half the resolution of a 12-megapixel cam-
era. The greater the megapixel count, the greater the resolu-
tion. But the quality of the lenses used also affects the level 
of detail in a photograph.
The resolution is set in the camera, so it is pos-
sible to set the resolution of a 12-megapixel camera to 
6  megapixels—doing so, however, is a bad idea. Best 
practice should involve capturing as much data as pos-
sible. If later, a low-resolution file is required, then 
a copy of the original photograph can be resampled. 
CONTENTS
15.1 Image Size and Resolution 
263
15.2 Bit Depth 
266
15.3 Histograms 
268
15.4 File Formats 
270
15.5 Light Sources 
271
 15.5.1 Ambient Light 
271
 15.5.2 Speed Lights 
272
 15.5.3 Monolights (Flash Heads) 
272
 15.5.4 Mixed Light 
272
15.6 Camera Dynamic Range 
273
 15.6.1 Capture versus JPEG (and TIFF) 
273
 15.6.2 The RAW Process 
274
 15.6.3 The Tonal Range of RAW 
274
 15.6.4 Color Theory 
275
 15.6.5 Color Models 
275
 15.6.6  Assigning Profiles/Converting to a Profile 
276
 15.6.7 Image Audit Trail 
277
 15.6.8 Camera Usage 
277
 15.6.9 Angle of View 
277
15.6.10 Barrel Distortion 
278
15.6.11 Convolution Filters 
278

264
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
A 12-megapixel camera can comfortably produce an 
A3-sized print. If a high-quality lens is used the A3 
image could be re sampled to A2 with little or no loss 
of image quality. The physical size of the sensor also 
affects image sharpness.
Here’s how the shot is framed: Take a look at the 
photographs above, both were taken on a 12-megapixel 
camera. In the photograph on the right, the knife fills the 
frame, top to bottom, so effectively it’s a 12-megapixel 
image. The photograph on the left fills less than half 
the frame, so it’s effectively smaller than 6 megapixels 
(Figures 15.1 and 15.2).
There are two components that form the resolution 
of a bitmap. The amount of pixels in an image is one part 
of resolution; the second is the bit depth.
From this basic overview of pixel resolution, we 
will now take a look at some specifics. In the examples 
in Figures 15.3 through 15.5, a photograph has been 
resampled into three sizes; each image has been sized to 
14 × 14 cm, but the pixels per inch (ppi) has been changed 
for each. Notice how at 10 ppi, the pixel structure in the 
image is plainly seen, but at 30 ppi the image is decidedly 
acceptable. At 72 ppi, the image looks clear and sharp.
When deciding on the pixel resolution of an image, 
thought has to be given to the purpose of the file. It is 
common, and correct practice, for photographers to 
shoot at the maximum resolution of their camera. When 
scanning a document, sufficient pixel resolution for 1:1 
reproduction is often desired; for example an A4 docu-
ment would be scanned at a resolution that would allow 
it to be printed at A4.
Thus far we have briefly looked at input resolution, 
the megapixel count of the camera. Getting this part 
right means that high-quality image data is captured. 
Once captured and enhanced, this pixel data can be 
either printed, displayed on-screen, or stored for future 
use. These three options relate to output resolution.
Print and on-screen display resolutions vary. 
Typically, print resolution is 300 ppi, and for on-screen 
display the standard resolution is 72 ppi. When storing 
or archiving images, the output resolution should be 
FIGURE 15.1 Photograph of a knife from a distance, 
effectively limiting the resolution of the photo.
FIGURE 15.2 Close-up photograph of the same knife.

265
Forensic Digital Imaging
the same as the input resolution: a 12-megapixel image 
should be stored as a 12-megapixel image.
Figure 15.6 is from Adobe Photoshop. It shows 
Photoshop’s Image Size dialogue box, displaying the 
pixel dimensions for a 12-megapixel photograph; 
any other image editing software may look slightly 
different.
The screen grab has a boxed area called Document 
Size. The 12-megapixel image will make a 36.21 × 24.11 
cm print, if the required output resolution is 300 ppi. 
Resampling the photograph could make larger or smaller 
prints. Resampling is to either add or take away pixels.
FIGURE 15.3 Fingerprint image resampled to 14 cm/10 ppi.
FIGURE 15.4 The same fingerprint image resampled to 
14 cm/30 ppi.
FIGURE 15.5 The same fingerprint image resampled to 
14 cm/72 ppi.
FIGURE 15.6 The Image Size dialogue box from Adobe 
Photoshops®. It contains information for a 12-megapixel 
photograph. The width and height of the photograph in 
pixels is 4288 and 2848, respectively. Multiplying the 
width and height together gives 12,212,224 pixels. A 
megapixel is 1 million pixels; hence, 12 megapixels.

266
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
Figure 15.7 shows the specifications for the same 
photograph, where the document size is set for on-screen 
display, nominally 72 ppi. The resulting image would 
require a monitor one-and-a-half meters high to display 
it at the optimal magnification.
If this photograph were to be used for on-screen dis-
play, say on a website, the photograph would have to be 
resampled to a smaller size.
To determine print resolution, the width and height 
of the print would need to be known, along with the 
required output resolution. For on-screen display, the 
width and height of the final image would be set in 
 pixels—for example, 800 × 600 pixels.
The rules for calculating resolution are covered in 
the Printing section. In the meantime, consider this non-
sense request: “Please send your images at 72 dpi.” First, 
the unit of measurement used is in dpi (dots per inch); 
this is often interchanged with ppi. Strictly speaking, 
these terms refer to two different things and should not 
be mixed about. But for what do we have the 72 dpi or 
ppi image request? Because the required width and height 
have not been stated, there is no way to know what is 
being asked for. When output resolution is being speci-
fied, values for width, height, and pixel per inch have to 
be stated.
Pixels per inch (ppi) should be used to refer to cam-
era or scanning resolution, being a measure of bitmap 
resolution, while dots per inch (dpi) should be used to 
describe the resolution of a printing device.
That concludes this introduction to bitmap image 
resolution, as measured in pixels. But there is a second 
component that needs to be addressed when referring to 
bitmap images, and that is bit depth.
15.2 BIT DEPTH
Thus far we have looked at bitmap resolution as being a 
grid of pixels. Now we will look at the tone and color val-
ues of those pixels. To simplify the explanation, we will 
consider monochrome images, as the same rules apply to 
color images.
Computers work in a binary number system, and 
digital images are no different. A digitized photograph 
is just a series of 1s and 0s. Let us consider one pixel in 
an image. In the most basic bitmap image, a pixel can 
be on or off, being set to a value of 1 or 0. In computer-
speak, this would be a 1-bit image. Computer process-
ing power goes up in binary values: 1-bit, 2-bit, 4-bit, 
8-bit, 16-bit, 32-bit, and 64-bit. Modern operating sys-
tems such as Apple and Windows ship in both 32-bit and 
64-bit versions.
The greater the bits, the faster instructions can be 
processed. When considering digital images, a bit depth 
of 64 bits would generate over 18 quintillion levels of 
tonal information. Humans perceive less than 256 levels 
of tone. Therefore, the bit depth of monochrome images 
is usually set between 8 bits and 16 bits; similar rules 
apply to color images.
The example in Figure 15.8 shows four grayscale bit-
map images. The desired effect is to produce an image 
that looks like a black sphere with a specular highlight. 
Imagine it is a black snooker ball under bright television 
lights.
The 1-bit image (21) can only switch pixels on or 
off; it’s black and white, so it looks cartoon-like. The 
2-bit image (22) can have four values: black, white, and 
two intermediate grays—not very convincing. The 4-bit 
image (24) has 16 tones, including 2 black-and-white and 
14 intermediate gray tones; steps can still be seen in the 
image. When such steps are visible in a photograph, it 
is called posterization. The 8-bit image (28) has 256 lev-
els of tone, including black and white. An 8-bit image 
FIGURE 15.7 The Adobe Photoshop dialogue box for 
the image where the document size is set at 72 ppi.
2 steps
1-bit image
4 steps
2-bit image
16 steps
4-bit image
256 steps
8-bit image
FIGURE 15.8 Four grayscale images, illustrating 1-bit, 
2-bit, 4-bit, and 8-bit levels of tone, respectively.

267
Forensic Digital Imaging
can correctly render a monochrome photograph without 
posterizing.
In the examples in Figures 15.9 through 15.11, the 
final photograph in each sequence only has 60 levels of 
tone, but still looks photographic. The other images have 
posterized; the six-level example clearly shows why the 
phenomenon is known as posterization.
Although an 8-bit grayscale image is sufficient to 
correctly render a monochrome image, scanning soft-
ware can be set to scan monochrome in 16 bits, or more 
than 32,000 levels of tone (see Figure 15.12).
Understanding bit depth and color requires knowl-
edge of color channels. Most image-capture devices, 
DSLRs (digital single-lens reflex cameras), compact 
cameras, and scanners use the additive primaries of red, 
green, and blue to render color. Together abbreviated 
RGB, each of these primary colors is assigned to a chan-
nel. So, an RGB image has three color channels of at least 
8 bits per channel. When a color image is set to 8 bits, 
each channel contains 256 possible tones for red, green 
and blue. Three 8-bit channels create a 24-bit image; 224 
makes 16.7 million colors. (Three channels of 16 bits cre-
ate a 48-bit image.)
FIGURE 15.9 Six levels of tone becomes posterized.
FIGURE 15.10 Sixteen levels of tone looks somewhat 
less posterized.
FIGURE 15.11 Sixty  levels  of tone  still looks  photographic.
1-bit color channel
2 possible values
2-bit color channel
4 possible values
4-bit color channel
16 possible values
8-bit color channel
256 possible values
FIGURE 15.12 1-bit through 8-bit color channels. 

268
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
15.3 HISTOGRAMS
Essential to understanding digital imaging is the ability 
to read and make sense of histograms. A histogram can 
be likened to a bar chart that maps out the amount of 
tone in an image. For example, if a grayscale image were 
to have 16 levels of tone, its histogram could be displayed 
as shown in Figure 15.13.
Reading the histogram along the horizontal axis 
(Figure 15.14), we can see that tones 0, 1, 2, and 3 rep-
resent the darkest tones in the image. Black is 0, and the 
mid-tones of the image are values 4 to 10. As this is a 
nighttime scene, there are far more darker tones than 
mids. In the highlights, values 11 to 15, there are very 
few pixels. White is represented by 15, and only a few of 
the highlights on the statue are that bright. It should be 
noted that 0 is a value in computing: it’s not anything.
The histogram for this image looks different from 
the RTC scene. This histogram indicates the photograph 
has lots of mid-tones and highlight tones. Figure 15.15 
illustrates the histogram for the same image, as it appears 
in Adobe Photoshop.
The histogram appears in the Input Levels area of 
the Levels dialogue box. Each tone is a thin black line; 
the lines are spread across the 256 steps of the histogram, 
hence the white spaces—and its histogram is full of tone 
(Figure 15.16).
This second Photoshop histogram shows that tones 
are distributed across the full tonal range of the image; 
the spikes, tone values that hit the top of the histogram, 
seen as thin black lines, are a telltale sign that this image 
has been enhanced.
Referring back to the previous section on Bit 
Depth, we explained that typically photographs are 
8 bits per channel, so a monochrome photograph would 
have 256 tones available to render the image. Having 
0
0
25
50
75
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Histogram Containing 16 Tones
9 10 11 12 14 15
FIGURE 15.13 Histogram of a grayscale image with 16 
levels of tone.
0
0
25
50
75
100
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Histogram Containing 16 Tones
9 10 11 12 14 15
FIGURE 15.14 Reading the histogram along the hori-
zontal axis.
FIGURE 15.15 The histogram as it appears in Adobe 
Photoshop.
FIGURE 15.16 The histogram in the Input Levels of the 
Levels dialogue box.

269
Forensic Digital Imaging
256 tones in photography ensures that it looked photo- 
 graphic.
For every photographed scene (Figure 15.17a), there 
will be a unique histogram (Figure 15.17b). In digital 
photography, the histogram as displayed on a digital 
camera provides an excellent guide to whether the cor-
rect exposure has been achieved.
Histograms are discussed in more detail later. But 
to close this section, we will take a further look at 
Photoshop’s Level Dialogue box, where you cannot only 
view, but also edit the histogram.
In Photoshop’s Levels dialogue box, the Input Levels 
area, which contains the histogram, are isolated. Red circles 
indicate the three primary editing controls for Photoshop’s 
Levels; many software applications, such as Aperture, 
Photoshop Elements, and scanning software have similar 
controls in their respective Levels dialogue boxes.
On the far left, the red circle covers the Black Point 
Slider; on the far right of the histogram, the red circle 
covers the White Point Slider, and in the middle is the 
Gamma Slider. Moving these three sliders can change 
the tone of a bitmap image. This is done first by setting 
the Black and White Points and then, if necessary, adjust-
ing the mid-tones/gamma.
In the example shown in Figures 15.18 and 15.19, a 
low-contrast image has been enhanced using Photoshop’s 
Levels.
The photograph of the footprint looks too gray, as 
there is no strong contrast. The histogram in Figure 15.19 
(a)
FIGURE 15.17 (a) A photograph and (b) its histogram.
(b)
FIGURE 15.18 A low-contrast photograph enhanced.
FIGURE 15.19 Display of the histogram for the image.

270
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
shows that there are lots of tones in the mids, but there 
are no black pixels and only a few white ones. By moving 
the Black and White Sliders inward, then adjusting the 
Gamma, an enhanced image can be made that contains 
much better contrast (Figures 15.20 and 15.21).
Using Levels controls in this way can reveal hidden 
details in an image, as show in Figures 15.22 and 15.23.
This is an illustration of how Levels, changing the 
absolute black, white, and gamma of an image, can 
reveal hidden details. Changing the image to mono-
chrome helps add more clarity to the image.
An extreme example is how archaeologists revealed 
the text on some of the Dead Sea Scrolls. Well over 2000 
years old, some of these documents were hard to read, 
the black text almost indistinguishable from the black-
ened parchment on which they were written. Scanning 
the parchments, archaeologists used Photoshop’s Levels 
to change near blacks to very light gray, leaving the dark-
est blacks as black.
15.4 FILE FORMATS
The previous sections outlined resolution and bit depth. 
All bitmap images have values for resolution and bit 
depth. When a bitmap file is open in editing software 
such as Photoshop, the file type used is not important, 
but when storing files—that is, saving them—then the 
choice of file format will determine the amount of disc 
space required for storage, and if a compressing file for-
mat is chosen, consideration has to be given to how much 
data will be lost in compression.
FIGURE 15.20 The photograph enhanced for improved 
contrast.
FIGURE 15.21 Display of the histogram for the improved 
image.
FIGURE 15.22 A color photograph.
FIGURE 15.23 The same color photo converted to black 
and white and illustrating improved contrast.

271
Forensic Digital Imaging
File format means the method by which files are 
stored, whether on a camera’s compact flash card or 
on a computer’s hard drive. The choice of file format is 
important, because some methods of saving and storing 
damage pixel information. Table 15.1 illustrates the most 
common raster/bitmap file formats.
The three most significant file formats in  photo-  
graphy are: RAW (in its many forms), TIFF, and JPEG. 
Later, we will discuss the merits of photographing for raw 
capture, versus JPEG or TIFF. But for now, here is a little 
bit more information on JPEG lossy compression. Once a 
file has been damaged through lossy compression, image 
data will be lost, and there is no way to recover it—despite 
what you might have seen in Hollywood spy movies.
The images in Figure 15.24a and b show two ver-
sions of the same photograph with increasing levels of 
JPEG compression applied; note the appearance of JPEG 
artifacts, a block of pixels that have been averaged to the 
detriment of the image.
15.5 LIGHT SOURCES
The literal meaning of “photography” is “drawing with 
light.” Therefore, it is important to consider the four 
basic lighting conditions photographers use. The first is 
ambient light: the light of the sun, or artificial light such 
as incandescent bulbs, strip lights, and so on. The second 
and third types of light both use flash, but flash is used 
in two distinct ways—hence the two categories, speed 
lights and monolights (flash heads). The fourth type of 
light is in fact a mix of lights: for example, a sunlit room 
with flash used to illuminate shadow areas.
15.5.1 Ambient Light
When using ambient light, a photographer measures the 
available light and sets the ISO, aperture, and shutter 
speed of the camera to capture the optimal exposure. 
TABLE 15.1 File Formats
File Format
Extension
Description
Joint Photographic 
Expert Group
JPEG, and
JPEG 2000
JPEG files are perhaps the most common image format used. JPEG format allows 
images to be compressed so more data can fit on storage devices such as compact flash 
cards and hard drives. For example, a 2-gigabit memory card in a 12-megapixel 
camera can store 120 raw files, or 224 high-quality JPEGs (or 867 images on BASIC 
JPEG). The JPEG format achieves this by resampling an image into clusters of pixels; 
the greater the compression, the higher the resampling. JPEG is a lossy file format: by 
using it, data is thrown away.
Graphic Interchange 
Format
GIF
Pronounced originally as “jif,” then latterly with a hard g, “gif,” this file format was 
introduced by CompuServe in 1987. A GIF has a maximum of 256 colors or tones, 
and, along with JPEGs, is a common graphic format found on websites. Because GIFs 
have a maximum of only 256 colors, they are not suitable for color photographs.
Portable Network 
Graphic
PNG (PNG-8  
and PNG-24)
PNG is not a commonly used format but offers better quality to compression and 
transparency parameters than do GIF or JPEG, for web-based work. There are two 
forms of PNG: PNG-8, which can substitute for GIF, and PNG-24, which substitutes 
for JPEG. Sadly, Microsoft Internet Explorer, in various iterations, had problems 
rendering PNG files properly, so the PNG standard remains underutilized.
Portable Document 
Format
PDF
Adobe’s creation of the PostScript computer language made the desktop publishing 
revolution of the 1980s possible. By the early 1990s, there were several software 
applications, such as Aldus PageMaker and QuarkXPress, that could generate 
PostScript files. However, if a design company used PageMaker and wanted to 
send their work to a print company that used QuarkXPress, there was no easy 
way to achieve this. PDFs were devised to bridge this problem. A PDF file can be 
generated by many software applications and viewed on any computer that can 
run the free Adobe Acrobat Reader software. Although often used for text-based 
documents, a photograph can be saved as a PDF, so that it can be viewed in 
Acrobat Reader.
Encapsulated
PostScript
EPS
Before PDFs became the universal format to send documents to press, there was 
Encapsulated PostScript. Often used by graphic designers, the EPS format suits vector 
graphics such as logos. For example, Design Company A might have designed a logo 
for a sports club. Later, Design Company B is asked to design the sports club’s 
brochure. The best file format for sending the logo would be either EPS or PDF.

272
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
(ISO stands for International Standards Organization, 
which is a standardized industry scale for measuring sen-
sitivity to light.) If the scene to be photographed is very 
dark, the photographer may find it impossible to get a 
good exposure without using a tripod.
When using a tripod, the shutter speed can be 
changed to several seconds, or even minutes. This could 
be a problem if moving objects needed to be photo-
graphed, and the action frozen.
The accuracy of modern through-the-lens (TTL) 
light meters found in DSLRs allows photographers to set 
their exposures purely on the values obtained from the 
camera. Handheld light meters are now less common, 
but are necessary when using monolights.
15.5.2 Speed Lights
All but the top-end DSLRs have built-in flashguns. 
However, all DSLRs have a hot shoe bracket where a 
speed light can be fitted. The built-in flashgun is also 
called a speed light, though it will have significantly less 
light power than an external one.
Speed lights are usually used in conjunction with the 
camera’s TTL system, where the camera sets the flash 
power for the speed light. Speed lights are used by pho-
tojournalists and wedding photographers to create fill-
flash. Fill-flash lightens shadow areas, revealing hidden 
details. In the case of portraits shot in bright midday sun, 
it removes the shadows from the eyes. Speed lights can 
augment ambient light, or fully illuminate a subject at 
close range. They lack the power to illuminate anything 
but the smallest of rooms, but are extremely versatile and 
easy to use.
15.5.3 Monolights (Flash Heads)
If large internal spaces need careful lighting, monolights 
can be used. Monolights, or flash heads, are extremely 
powerful devices with enough power in their capaci-
tors to kill—only specialist monolights should be used 
outdoors.
Apart from the extra light power of monolights, their 
key difference from speed lights is the manner of setting 
exposures. With speed lights the camera’s TTL system 
will set the correct values for exposure and flash, while 
with monoblocks, a handheld light meter is required to 
take an incident light reading.
It is standard practice for the lowest ISO on the cam-
era to be set, and then the desired aperture. The camera’s 
shutter speed is set to synchronize with the monolight(s), 
and this is usually 1/125th second. These values are 
set into the handheld meter, and then test flashes are 
made until the correct flash power for the monolights is 
reached. Photographers who understand this process can 
then illuminate complex scenes and objects in a flat, neu-
tral way, or in a highly creative, mood-enhancing one.
15.5.4 Mixed Light
Fill-flash has already been mentioned, and is a form of 
mixed-light photography. “Mixed-light photography” 
simply means having more than one type of light source 
in a scene. For example, in a photograph taken in a room 
with large windows, on a bright sunny day, the daylight 
will be much brighter than the artificial light. Balancing 
the exposure so that the interior is properly exposed 
and the exterior is not burnt out can be challenging. 
(a)
FIGURE 15.24 (a) A photograph with JPEG Quality High, Best Quality. (b) The same photograph with JPEG Quality 
Low; artifacts have appeared in several areas of the images.
(b)

273
Forensic Digital Imaging
The relative light levels of mixed lights can be a prob-
lem, but the most regularly encountered problem when 
working with mixed lights are differences in the color 
temperature of the lights.
Human perception is such that when taking a pho-
tograph in mixed light, the untrained photographer is 
unlikely to notice the problem. But once the photograph 
is downloaded and opened on a computer monitor, the 
problems of mismatched white balance will be evident. 
If color is not critical, this is not a significant problem.
15.6 CAMERA DYNAMIC RANGE
The best digital cameras can capture up to 12 stops of 
light. This equates to a contrast ratio of approximately 
80,000 to 1, whereas the contrast ratio on a bright sunny 
day is likely to be 100,000 to 1. A scene lit by bright 
sunlight has a dynamic range impossible to capture 
in camera; so, unless it’s a cloudy day, or the scene to 
be captured has low contrast, the photographer has to 
decide which tonal range is essential and which tones can 
be lost.
The captured digital photograph’s dynamic range 
extends beyond the gamut of computer monitors, and 
the contrast ratio of monitors exceeds that of print. So, 
digital photography is a reductive process. The skilled 
photographer mediates the terms of the reduction. 
Figures 15.25 and 15.26 illustrate low and high dynamic 
range, respectively.
15.6.1 Capture versus JPEG (and TIFF)
Professional photographers almost exclusively shoot for 
RAW. This has not always been the case. For the first 
decade of the 21st century, digital photography was domi-
nated by JPEG (or TIFF) shooting. The shift to RAW is a 
good one but, thumbing through the advice of professional 
photo gurus, one might find advocates for JPEG.
If this is the case, check the date of the article. If the 
article or publication was written after 1998, the author 
was lagging behind the times. Please note that there is 
nothing wrong with shooting for JPEG; the point here is 
that RAW files have more tones and color to work with. 
Like many issues in photography, the RAW versus JPEG 
debate is often argued based on a fundamental misun-
derstanding of the digital process. RAW means unpro-
cessed, as in raw food being not yet cooked.
RAW should be written as “raw,” because it is not an 
acronym, nor a specific file format. However, to identify 
raw as a specific adjective, it is written here as RAW. All 
cameras capture RAW data. This data is produced by 
the analog-to-digital conversion of light information. Its 
sensor reads light passing through a camera. The sensor 
registers how much light is present; this is an analogue 
value. The camera’s processing turns the analog value 
into a digital one. Different camera manufacturers have a 
variety of strategies for this process, which leads to some 
cameras being great for low-light photography and oth-
ers more suited to sports. Professional-level cameras can 
be good all-around, though there are specialist camera 
types designed for specific types of work.
After the digital conversion takes place, the picture 
information has to be recorded. This is usually to a mem-
ory card, such as compact flash. Although all types of 
digital camera capture RAW data, not all can save RAW 
data to their memory cards. Consumer-level cameras are 
often restricted to writing JPEG files only, whereas many 
other types of camera can record JPEG and RAW files, 
and perhaps even TIFF files.
RAW files have several advantages over JPEG; 
this is true for camera types that can record RAW and 
FIGURE 15.25. A photograph with low dynamic range.
FIGURE 15.26 A photograph with high dynamic range. 

274
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
JPEG simultaneously. When a camera writes a JPEG 
(or TIFF) file to a memory card, a second level of pro-
cessing is made. Both RAW and JPEGs will have ana-
logue to digital processing, but JPEGs need an extra 
level of processing where specific colors and sharpening 
are applied.
This means photographers who record only JPEG 
files to a memory card have to have all their processing 
parameters set correctly in camera. For example, all in-
camera JPEGs have some degree of sharpening applied, 
even if the camera’s sharpening value is set to a nil value. 
Those shooting for RAW can defer nearly all of their 
RAW processing decisions to the computer stage of their 
workflow, including the degree of sharpening.
JPEGs are 8 bits per channel files; DSLRs are either 
12 bits or 14 bits per channel. The JPEG shooter reduces 
bit depth in camera: 12 bits becomes 8 bits, and whatever 
data is lost by doing this cannot be recovered later on 
the computer. RAW shooters preserve the 12- or 14-bit 
data, giving them more scope to change tones, and help-
ing them open up shadow areas or recover burnt-out 
highlights.
Extreme White Balance corrections can be made 
to RAW files. For instance, a camera’s White Balance 
might be set to Daylight, but the shots made in Tungsten 
light. If this happens to a photographer shooting for 
JPEG, the chances of successfully correcting the imbal-
ance would be slight. The RAW shooter, however, 
would be able to accurately reset the white point of the 
image post-shoot.
A RAW file is like a digital negative: it provides evi-
dence of the original captured scene—untampered and 
unedited—apart from the initial analog-to-digital con-
version. JPEGs are like a photographic print, and as such 
they sit at the end of the processing workflow. The list of 
RAW advantages could go on, but following are a few 
issues relating to RAW that need to be examined.
RAW files are much larger than JPEGs, so take up 
more storage space. Over time, certain RAW formats will 
become obsolete, and consideration has to be given to 
preserving ways to access older files. Until the late 1990s, 
processing RAW files was more complex than processing 
JPEGs. This is no longer true, and with the advent of 
software such as Apple’s Aperture, it is arguably easier to 
process RAW than it is JPEG. However, the ease of RAW 
processing is dependent on the software available to you.
15.6.2 The RAW Process
This section highlights key concepts when shooting for 
RAW. As mentioned previously, all digital cameras pro-
cess RAW data. Central to this process is the problem of 
taking a device that can only read luminance, black-and-
white (monochrome) information, and deriving color 
information from it. The CMOS (complementary metal-
oxide semiconductor) or CCD (charge-coupled device) 
sensors, used in the majority of digital cameras, cannot 
detect color.
They can only read how intense light is. In order for 
color information to be detected, a Bayer filter is placed 
over the sensor. The Bayer filter is a grid of RGB-colored 
elements. The red elements filter red to cyan light; the 
green elements, greens to magentas; and the blue filters, 
blues to yellows.
The process generates the ubiquitous RGB chan-
nel information found throughout digital imaging. 
Therefore, the Bayer filtering creates a patchwork of pix-
els. In each row of the sensor, there is an alternating pat-
tern of green then red, or blue then green, pixels being 
read (see Figure 15.27).
The patchwork of RGB pixels needs to be de-
mosaicked; the mosaic patchwork has to be resolved so 
that there are no gaps in the columns and rows of pixels. 
In areas of a detailed pattern, such as fabric, errors in de-
mosaicking can occur. Some cameras are more prone to 
this problem than others, and though some RAW decod-
ing software can mediate the problem, it is best to choose 
the best camera for the job.
15.6.3 The Tonal Range of RAW
In digital imaging, the histogram is a graph of the tones 
in an image (as discussed in the ePhotoPros article 
“Anatomy of the Histogram”). Photographers use the 
histogram, as displayed on the back of a DSLR, to evalu-
ate the merits of the exposure settings used for a shot. 
It is therefore disconcerting to learn that the on-camera 
histogram does not accurately represent the tones of a 
RAW file (Figures 15.28 and 15.29).
The image displayed on the back of a DSLR is a 
JPEG preview of the file captured by the camera. If the 
captured file is a JPEG, the on-camera JPEG will gener-
ate an accurate, and therefore reliable, histogram. If the 
FIGURE 15.27 A photograph with low dynamic range. 

275
Forensic Digital Imaging
captured file is RAW, the camera has no way of showing 
either a preview or histogram of the photograph.
So, the camera generates a JPEG preview. This is true 
even if the camera is set to record RAW only. Nearly all 
DSLRs generate a JPEG preview that is then embedded 
into a RAW file. It is this JPEG that is viewed on camera, 
and it is on this JPEG that the on-camera histogram is 
based. This could be problematic, but a little knowledge 
can be a good thing. RAW files contain more tones and a 
greater dynamic range than JPEG files. So, when review-
ing a shot on the back of a DSLR, the RAW shooter can 
allow the histogram to touch the right-hand edge of the 
graph.
For the JPEG shooter this would mean lost data, 
but the seasoned RAW shooter knows that as much as 2 
stops of apparently burnt-out highlight are present and 
recoverable.
15.6.4 Color Theory
This section outlines the broad issues of digital color and 
introduces the topic of color management. It is not neces-
sary to have a comprehensive knowledge of all aspects of 
this section.
15.6.5 Color Models
There are four color models used by photographers: 
RGB, CMYK, HSL, and Lab. Most of imaging devices 
use the RGB color model—that is, using red, green, 
and blue light signals to create color (see Figure 15.30). 
Printing devices commonly use color based on CMYK 
(cyan, magenta, yellow, and black). HSL (hue, satura-
tion, and lightness) is similar to HSB (hue, saturation, 
and brightness) and is used in computer graphics and 
digital imaging as an alternative to RGB. Lab color is a 
purely theoretical color model, and its significance will 
be described later.
In the RGB color model, the purest red may be 
described as Red 255, Green 0, Blue 0; this is because 
the scale of color levels in the RGB color model are gen-
erally described in a range of 0 to 255. Black would be 
described as Red 0, Green 0, Blue 0; white is defined as 
Red 255, Green 255, and Blue 255. Varying the RGB val-
ues creates color.
If equal values of green and blue were added to pure 
red (changing Red 255, Green 0, Blue 0 to Red 255, Green 
200, Blue 200) a pink color would be made. Change the 
values to Red 255, Green 255, Blue 200, and a soft lemon 
yellow is made.
The RGB color model is device dependent; that 
is to say, the purest red (Red 255, Green 0, Blue 0) is 
FIGURE 15.28 Histogram JPEG image. Histogram show-
ing extended range of raw.
FIGURE 15.29 Curves histogram of same image.
FIGURE 15.30 An illustration of the additive color 
model RGB. Red, green, and blue light combine to make 
white light.

276
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
dependent on the device producing it, whether that is a 
camera, monitor or scanner.
The CMYK color model is also device dependent, 
and, perhaps confusingly, photographers using inkjet 
printers do not need to convert their images from RGB 
to CMYK, even though inkjet printers use combinations 
of CMYK inks.
CMYK is the color model used to print magazines, 
newspapers, posters, and books (see Figure 15.31). 
Using combinations of cyan, magenta, yellow, and black 
(CMYK), a variety of colors can be reproduced. When 
set to Cyan 0%, Magenta 0%, Yellow 0%, and Black 
0%, the print would contain no ink and therefore no 
color, other than that of the paper or substrate.
When all the values are set to 100%, a solid black is 
achieved. In reality, printers do not lay down 100% of 
all the different inks; to do so would create pools of ink 
in the black areas of a print that would look heavy, and 
shadow detail would be lost.
Significantly, the CMYK model has a greatly reduced 
range of colors compared to RGB, so there are colors that 
can be recorded in RGB that cannot be reproduced in 
CMYK.
In order to help photographers print more of the col-
ors they can see on their RGB monitors, inkjet manu-
facturers have introduced printers with more than just 
the four inks required for standard CMYK output. In 
addition to CMYK, these are typically light cyan and 
light magenta. In the case of Epson’s K3 systems, two 
extra blacks are included; these help in the production of 
black-and-white prints.
The addition of light cyan and light magenta 
increases the gamut of a CMYK printer. To best access 
this extra gamut, prints are made from the RGB color 
model. There is an exception to this rule; for people using 
raster image processing (RIPs), they have to print using 
the CMYK color model.
Every device in the digital photography workflow 
has its own color space that can be defined using a 
color profile. So far, the RGB color space has only been 
referred to in a generic way; however, there are four nota-
ble RGB color spaces: Adobe RGB (1998), Color Match 
RGB, ProPhoto RGB, and sRGB IEC61966-1 or sRGB 
for short.
There is much comment on Adobe RGB being supe-
rior to sRGB; however, a digital camera does not shoot 
either sRGB or Adobe RGB. The camera assigns profiles 
to aid color management, but when shooting in RAW the 
pixel data downloaded from a camera has a color space 
larger than either sRGB or Adobe RGB.
The Adobe RGB color space is bigger than the sRGB 
color space; however, as a starting point, using sRGB 
will result in more reliable color matching. Once you are 
comfortable that everything is working using the sRGB 
working space, then, and only then, try other working 
spaces such as Adobe RGB (1998). Or, better still, try 
ProPhoto; but ProPhoto should only be embraced by 
advanced users.
Many devices ship with manufacturer’s profiles; 
increasingly these are excellent. In the case of third party 
inks and paper, generic profiles for these inks and papers 
can be downloaded for your printer, but these are only 
generic profiles. The quality of downloadable profiles 
vary from manufacturer to manufacturer; therefore, 
it may be necessary to create your own profiles to best 
match your equipment and papers. To do this, you will 
need a spectrophotometer.
15.6.6  Assigning Profiles / Converting  
to a Profile
Files without an embedded profile are known as untagged 
images and cannot be color-managed. Assigning a pro-
file provides color-aware applications the information 
needed to display or print the file accurately. Assigning 
a profile does not change the values of the pixels in a 
photographic image; rather, it allows the CMM to inter-
pret the color appearance of an image. So assigning a 
grayscale profile to a photograph would make that pho-
tograph appear black and white, even though the photo-
graph’s pixels remain in full color.
Converting an image to a profile will change the 
physical pixel data in a photograph from the source val-
ues to the destination color space values. This would 
be done to achieve accurate color matching between a 
soft proof and a print. Photographers may choose to 
convert copies of photographs they send to photo-labs. 
Photo-labs can supply the ICC profiles for their printing 
machines, giving photographers the ability to soft-proof 
FIGURE 15.31 CMYK color, also known as the subtrac-
tive color model: cyan, magenta, and yellow combine to 
make black. Note that the secondary colors here are red, 
green, and blue.

277
Forensic Digital Imaging
photographs and choose the best way to convert their 
photographs before sending them to the lab.
15.6.7 Image Audit Trail
This section outlines the importance of maintaining the 
integrity of a photograph; as evidence of the scene ren-
dered by the camera. It explains why a RAW workflow 
is ideally suited for this purpose. For those who need 
to continue shooting for a JPEG workflow, alternative 
explanations are given.
In digital imaging, there are two terms that can 
mean the same thing: image manipulation and image 
enhancement. In the realm of digital imaging, impor-
tant distinctions have to be drawn between changing the 
tones and colors of pixels in an image and moving pixels. 
It is imperative that photographic evidence is only ever 
enhanced. To displace or introduce new pixels into an 
image creates a forgery; it is image manipulation.
All digital photographs contain a text log, embedded 
in them, that records the original capture date and time 
of a photograph and subsequently tracks modifications 
to the file. This is true for nearly all computer data.
Furthermore, a digital camera embeds other text 
data in each photograph taken. All photographs from a 
DSLR contain date, time, camera model, lens type, ISO, 
aperture settings, and so on—together known as meta-
data. EXIF (exchangable image file format) metadata is 
written by devices such as cameras and is a great aid to 
proving the validity of an image, as well as in helping the 
cataloging process. Cameras with a GPS system will have 
the longitude and latitude of each photograph logged as 
EXIF metadata.
15.6.8 Camera Usage
This section briefly outlines the key concepts of camera 
usage, describing all the parameters that need to be con-
sidered when taking a photograph.
The parameter commonly referred to as ISO relates 
to light exposure; changing this parameter changes a 
camera’s sensitivity to light. Typically, ISO 100 is the 
lowest setting—lowest, because on this setting, greater 
levels of light are required to make an exposure. The key 
advantage of low settings such as ISO 100 is that the best 
range of tones can be captured, and it has no noise prob-
lems (see Figure 15.32).
Noise is caused when the camera’s sensitivity is 
increased to allow shooting in low light. Much like turn-
ing up the volume on a stereo system, background noise 
becomes apparent (see Figure 15.33). When high ISOs 
are needed, cameras such as Nikon’s D3 are renowned 
for their low noise characteristics at very high ISO.
15.6.9 Angle of View
There are two types of lens in common use: prime lenses 
and zoom lenses. Prime lenses have a fixed focal length, 
whereas the focal length can be changed on a zoom lens.
Different focal lengths result in different angles of 
view. The shorter the focal length, the wider the angle of 
view. The longer the focal length, the narrower the angle 
of view. Surveillance photographers and paparazzi use 
lenses with very long focal lengths to take photographs 
over a great distance. (See the series of photographs in 
Figure 15.34.)
Digital SLRs use one of two sizes of sensor; both 
have an aspect ratio of 3:2. The first size of sensor is 
“full frame.” These DSLRs use a sensor roughly the same 
size as 35 mm film; therefore, the diagonal measure of 
the sensor will be 35 mm. The second type of sensor is 
roughly two-thirds the size of the full-frame sensor and 
is known as either APS-C or DX.
These two sensor sizes have a significant effect on 
the angle of view of lenses: for example, a Nikon 50 mm 
lens will fit both a Nikon FX (full-frame) camera and a 
Nikon DX camera.
But the angle of view for the 50 mm lens on the FX 
camera will be greater than the angle that would be 
achieved on a DX camera. The significance for surveil-
lance work is that DX sensors yield a better telephoto 
value than do FX sensors—though FX (full frame) cam-
eras, such as the Nikon D3, give exceptional image qual-
ity in low light.
FIGURE 15.32 Image taken at a low ISO: there are good 
tones, and the image is clear.
FIGURE 15.33 Image taken at a high ISO: the image 
lacks contrast and detail; it looks gritty and contains col-
ored artifacts. The grittiness is luminance noise, and the 
colored artifacts are referred to as chroma or chromi-
nance noise.

278
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
15.6.10 Barrel Distortion
Lenses distort light; the images they produce do not faith-
fully map the placement of objects in a scene. Take a look 
at the tile wall photograph in Figures 15.35 and 15.36.
This test is often used to check the distortion found in 
a lens. In the case of architecture shots and interiors, the 
lens’s ability to map the placement of object can be vital, so 
high-quality lenses are used. These are often prime lenses.
15.6.11 Convolution Filters
Image editing packages often include what are usually 
called “user defined” or “custom” filters in image editing 
packages. A convolution matrix multiplies the central pixel 
value based upon the values of its neighboring pixels. This 
can be used to sharpen, blur, and enhance edge effects and 
is usually a 3 × 3 or 5 × 5 matrix (see Figure 15.37).
FIGURE 15.34 Photographs illustrating zooms at 10 mm, 50 mm, 105 mm, and 400 mm.
FIGURE 15.35 Image of a tile wall with minimal to no 
distortion.
FIGURE 15.36 While most lenses will have some bar-
rel distortion, this photograph clearly distorts the size 
and shape of the footprint, making a footwear match 
improbable.
FIGURE 15.37 Illustration of the use of a custom filter. 

279
A P P E N D I X 
Ethical, Legal, and Professional Aspects
The Art of Cross-Examination
Filomena Paciello and Kay Michiels 
Even though forensic evidence has proven to be very reli-
able, and forensic scientists need only a small amount of 
material to, for example, come up with a DNA profile, 
witness testimony is still intensively presented as evi-
dence in courtroom proceedings.
Roughly, we speak of two types of witness testimony. 
Eyewitness testimony, which, as the name suggests, is the 
testimony of someone who actually witnessed the alleged 
crime (or some other event relevant for discovering the 
truth). This testimony can be an alibi for the defendant 
or someone who says that they have seen the defendant 
leaving the scene of the crime or, days or weeks before 
the crime, having a fight with, for example, the victim.
There is also expert witness testimony. This testi-
mony is not based on what someone has seen, but based 
on their specific knowledge of some sort. They have con-
ducted either an investigation or analysis about some 
type of forensic evidence. Their knowledge is based on 
the fact that all forensic evidence is objective and may 
be in need of an subjective explanation in order to help 
the judge or jury to form their own independent opinion 
about the evidence.
The cross-examination is the forensic art of discover-
ing the truth in the witness evidence, and it represents the 
principal means by which the veracity of a witness is put 
to the test in the courtroom (Figure A.1).
The investigative purpose is focused not on what 
has happened, but on what is being said about what has 
happened.
Keep in mind that the difference between the two 
types of witness testimony may require a different 
approach. For eyewitness testimony, as a lawyer you 
want to know if this witness is telling the truth. There 
has been quite a lot of research done about the reliabil-
ity of eyewitness testimony. For example, we know that 
witnessing a crime in which a weapon is being used in 
general causes a distortion in remembering what has hap-
pened. This is called weapon focus. The presence of the 
weapon makes the witness focus more on the weapon 
and less on the suspect—which in the end may result in a 
less reliable description of the suspect.
As a game, the examination has rules drawn from 
a secular praxis of Anglo-American ideology. The 
 structure consists of three fundamental stages moments: 
(1) direct examination, (2) cross-examination, and (3) 
 reexamination. The subjects who ask the questions are 
the public prosecutor and the private party’s advocates.
The direct examination is conducted by the party 
who asked to interrogate the witness. The direct exami-
nation’s aim is to bring out facts framed in a version of 
history and to obtain a representation of facts as known 
to the witness; such facts should be useful in demonstrat-
ing the examiner’s thesis. The final purpose of the direct 
examination is to demonstrate that the witness is reliable 
and credible.
The cross-examination is conducted by the party 
who has a competing interest: to show that the facts 
alleged in the direct examination are not true or are 
incorrect or are not complete, so to discredit the witness, 
who has stated on other occasions different things, and 
force him or her to admit certain facts.
There are basically three types of cross-examination:
1. Apparent Cross-Examination: This type of cross-
examination does not attempt to deal with the 
merits or substance of the expert’s testimony, but 
rather attacks the witness’s qualifications and 
prejudice.
 
2. Real Cross-Examination: This cross-examination 
is the opposite of apparent cross-examination in 
that it deals with the merits and substance of the 
witness’s testimony.
3. Combination of Real and Apparent Cross-
Examination: This is the most common type 
of cross-examination employed, and, just as the 
description implies, deals with the merits and 
substance of the witness’s testimony and as well 
as his or her prejudice and lack of qualifications. 

280
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
In apparent cross-examination (when you can’t 
meet the experts head-on or on their merits), try 
to emphasize the witness’s lack of qualifications, 
such as his or her lack of academic standing, 
with questions that relate to fields that the wit-
ness is not aware of (Figure A.2).
The basic purpose of cross-examination involves the 
following:
• To discredit the witness
• To elicit testimony from the witness, which dis-
credits unfavorable testimony given by other wit-
nesses on the same side, creating a conflict with 
the testimony of other witnesses on the same side
• To elicit testimony to corroborate favorable 
testimony
• To elicit testimony to contribute independently 
to the development of your case
Stated another way, the goals of cross-examination 
are to discredit the witness and/or witness testimony, and 
to discredit the other side’s case and so support your case.
The commandments of cross-examination by Irving 
Younger, from his book The Advocate’s Deskbook, 
include the following 10 tips (encapsulated and 
paraphrased):
1. Be Brief: It is important to be succinct, because 
the less time spent, the less the chance you will 
screw up, and a simple cross that restates the 
important part of the story in your terms is more 
easily absorbed and understood by the jury.
2. Use Plain Words: Use a language of simplicity.
3. Use Only Leading Questions: The law forbids 
questions on direct examination that suggest the 
answer; the lawyer is not competent to testify. 
On cross-examination, the law permits ques-
tions that suggest the answer and allows the 
attorney to put words in the witness’s mouth. 
 Cross-examination, therefore, specifically per-
mits you to take control of the witness, taking 
him or her where you want to go.
4. Be Prepared: Advance preparation is essential to 
a successful cross-examination; never ask a ques-
tion that you do not know the answer to. Lawyers 
need skills to accomplish individual tasks (tactical 
skills) such as selecting jurors, delivering opening 
statements and closing arguments, and examin-
ing witnesses, as well as those skills that integrate 
individual actions to achieve greater effects and 
drive unfolding events toward a desired outcome 
(strategy).
5. Listen: For some, cross-examination of an impor-
tant witness causes stage fright; it confuses the 
mind and panic sets in. You have a hard time 
just getting the first question out, and you’re gen-
erally thinking about the next question and not 
listening to the answer.
6. Do Not Quarrel: When the answer to your ques-
tion is absurd, false, irrational, contradictory, or 
the like, stop and sit down. Resist the tempta-
tion to respond with “How can you say that?” 
or “How dare you make such an outrageous 
claim?” The answer to such a question often elic-
its a response that explains away the absurdity 
and rehabilitates the witness.
7. Avoid Repetition: Never allow a witness to repeat 
on cross-examination what he or she said on direct 
examination, because the more times a statement 
is repeated, the more likely the jury is to believe it.
8. Disallow Witness Explanation: Never permit the 
witness to explain anything on cross-examination. 
That is for your adversary to do.
9. Limit Questioning: Don’t ask even one question 
too many. Stop when you have made your point. 
Leave the argument for the jury. Try to predict 
which witnesses will be called by the opposition 
and anticipate what questions your opponent 
will ask each witness on direct examination.
FIGURE A.2 Law. (Public domain.)
FIGURE A.1 Film Poster—CROSS EXAMINATION 
(1932). (Public domain.)

281
Appendix: Ethical, Legal, and Professional Aspects
10. Save for Summation: Save the ultimate points 
for summation. A prepared, clear, and simple 
leading cross-examination does not argue the 
case, as any such arguments are most effective in 
your final summation (Figure A.3).
The reexamination seeks to again directly interro-
gate the witness, already submitted to your opponent’s 
cross-examination, so to clarify, correct, and complete 
testimony that emerged in cross-examination and/or 
reestablish its credibility. The party that conducted 
the direct examination can propose new questions to 
recover the sequence of facts after the cross-exami-
nation tried to put in doubt its existence; reexamina-
tion also allows explanation of any contradictions into 
which the witness has fallen.
Regarding particular reexamination questions, fac-
tors or variables to keep in mind are as follows:
• The context in which a question is placed
• The elements that compose it
• The question’s desired objectives and aims
A question usually is not only a question but also a 
covert argument: it assumes certain facts to assure rel-
evancy, the answer’s sincerity, the examiner’s loyalty, and 
the accuracy of any objections. Questions are used not 
only to gain knowledge but also to influence the answers 
and then persuade.
The semantic composition of the question concerns 
the meaning of the words used and the context in which 
it is placed. The syntactic composition of the question 
concerns the relation of the words inside the phrase and 
other aspects, such as the tone or the frequency with 
which examiners have asked them.
A fundamental distinction among types of questions 
takes into account the objectives discussed above:
 
1. Open questions: They have the broadest response. 
2. Closed questions: They involve a choice between 
clearly understood alternatives; this kind of 
question is preferred when communication is 
clear and there is a common frame of reference 
in which to address thorny topics.
The following sequences provide the interviewer stra-
tegic opportunities to make certain questions stand out:
• Tunnel: Sequence of closed questions
• Funnel: Sequence of questions from open to 
closed
• Inverted funnel: Sequence of questions from 
closed to open
• Irregular: Alternative sequence of open and 
closed questions
The issues to be considered in reexamination should 
be as follows:
• The verbal: The words that are said
• The para verbal: Pitch, timbre, volume, voice 
inflection
• The nonverbal, also called body language: Eye 
contact, body movements
Bear in mind that impediments to perceptive focus are 
possible in the testimony: physical interference (e.g., cir-
cumstances, light, exposure time, location), physiological 
interference (e.g., fatigue, sensory deficits, age), psycholog-
ical interference (e.g., simplification, Gestalt perception, 
emotional-affective perception, distribution, cognitive 
attitude, expectations, gravity, personality, stereotypes).
The following questions may help you prepare for 
cross-examinations:
• What are the facts beyond dispute?
• What is the context for the facts beyond dispute?
• Is the fact important to the judge or jury?
• Is the fact necessary for your theory of the case?
• Which witness are able to corroborate or deny 
these facts?
• Is there any other evidence to corroborate or 
deny these facts presented by a witness?
• What is believable?
Impeachment is a subset of cross-examination: wit-
ness impeachment is a polite term for challenging the 
credibility of a witness.
Categories of impeachment are as follows:
• Bias, prejudice, or interest
• Inadequate perception
• Inconsistent statement
• Character (prior convictions and/or no extrinsic 
evidence)
• Competency
• Contradictions
FIGURE A.3 Worldwide Justice. (Public domain.)

282
Manual of Forensic Science: An International Survey
It is important to keep in mind that during the crim-
inal trial, the main goal is to find out the truth about 
what happened at the scene of a crime instead of just to 
convict the defendant. The judge, jury and attorney are 
supposed to be without prejudice against the defendant 
(Figure A.4).
Research has shown that judges or juries highly 
value witness testimony: this is because witness testi-
mony can be used to fill in the blanks in a reconstruc-
tion of what might have happened. Looking at the 
exoneration forthcoming out of the Innocence Project, 
one can see that the majority of exonerations of those 
wrongly accused and imprisoned are based on eyewit-
ness testimony.*
To conduct a good cross-examination, prepara-
tion is key. As a defense lawyer, the cross-examination 
may be your best opportunity to present important 
facts, inferences, and impressions. Some researchers 
are convinced that at least 70% of the effectiveness 
of cross- examination is determined before the cross-
examination begins.†
Cross-examination is the most potent weapon in the 
trial lawyer’s arsenal, and it determines who wins and 
who loses the legal battle.
* The Innocence Project: http://www.innocenceproject.org/causes- 
wrongful-conviction.
† A Checklist of Winning Cross-Examination Concepts and Tech-
niques: http://publicdefender.mt.gov/training/PracticeManual-
Criminal/Ch9-CrossExam.pdf.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Clark Ronald H., Bailey William S., Dekle George R., Cross-
Examination Handbook: Persuasion Strategies & 
Techniques, 2010, New York, NY: Aspen Publishers; 
Pap/Com edition.
Davies Leonard E., Anatomy of Cross-Examination, 
2004, Bloomington, IN: Xlibris Corporation.
Guglielmo Gulotta, Le 200 regole della cross-examination. 
Un’arte scientifica, 2012, Italy: Giuffrè Editore.
Iannuzzi John Nicholas, Handbook of Cross Examination: 
The Mosaic Art, 2011, Bloomington, IN: Xlibris 
Corporation.
Loftus Elizabeth F., Loftus Geoffrey R., Messo Jane, 
Some Facts about Weapon Focus, Law and Human 
Behavior, vol. 11, no. 1, 55, 1987.
Maffeo Vania, L’ esame incrociato tra legge e prassi, 2012, 
Italy: CEDAM Editore.
Moses E. Ray, Cross-Examination in Criminal Defence, 
2001, Houston, TX: Center for Criminal Justice 
Advocacy. 
http://criminaldefense.homestead.com/
Cross.html.
Polchinski D. Peter, Cross-Examination Edge: A Guide to 
Effective Questioning, 2010, Tucson, AZ: Lawyers & 
Judges Publishing.
Pozner S. Larry, Dodd Roger, Cross-Examination: Science 
and Techniques, 2004, New York, NY: LexisNexis.
Pratt A. Timothy, The Ten Commandments of Cross-
Examination, FDCC Trial Tactics Section. http://
www.thefederation.org/documents/Pratt-SP03.htm.
Randazzo Ettore, L’esame incrociato, 2011, Italy: Giuffrè 
Editore.
Read Shane D., Winning at Trial, 2007, Boulder, CO: 
LexisNexis/National Institute for Trial Advocacy.
Simpson Walter, Pattern Cross Examination, 2014, Costa 
Mesa, CA: James Publishing.
Stone Marcus, La cross-examination. Strategie e tecniche, 
1990, Italy: Giuffrè Editore.
Torgan E. Evan, Cross-Examination: It’s Not as Hard 
as It Seems, 2009, NYSBA Practical Skills–Civil 
Practice–The Trial.
Wellman Francis L., The Art of Cross-Examination, 2010, 
Whitefish, MT: Kessinger Publishing.
Younger Irving, The art of cross examination, The ten com-
mandments of cross examination, in The Advocate’s 
Deskbook: The Essentials of Taking a Case, pp. 
292–301, 1988, New Jersey, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.law.uc.edu/sites/default/
files/Younger10.pdf.
FIGURE A.4 Goddess of Justice. (Public domain.)

283
Index
A
AAFS, see American Academy of 
Forensic Sciences
ABFO, see American Board of Forensic 
Odontology
Accidental impalement, of vagina, 194
Acid phosphatase test, 84–85
Acid Yellow 7, 67
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 99
Adventive species, 223
AFIS, see Automated Fingerprint 
Identification System
AFTE, see Association of Firearms and 
Tool Mark Examiners
AIFF, see Audio Interchange File 
Format
Airborne arthropod, 223
ALAC, see Apple Lossless Audio Codec
Alcohol
in blood and urine samples, 169
in liquors and drinks, 175–176
Alleles, 90, 93, 103
Alternate light source (ALS), 19, 62
Ambient light, 271–272
American Academy of Forensic Sciences 
(AAFS), 257
Code of Ethics, 257–261
American Board of Forensic 
Odontology (ABFO), 139
American Board of Forensic Toxicology 
(ABFT) Code of Ethics, 260
Amido black, 12, 67
“AmpFlSTRs Minifiler,” 95
Amphetamines, 169
AmpliSeqAncestry Panel, 101
AmpliSeqIdentity Panel, 101
Amplitude, 161, 165
Anal canal, 190–191
Anal dilatation, 198
Anal fissures, 193
Anal sexual abuse, 198–199
Anal sphincter
intermittent dilatation of, 191
internal, 190
Anal verge, smooth area in, 191
Analytical reference standard, 176
Ancestry study, 99
Angle of view, 277
Animal victim, 238
Annealing, 91
Annular hymen, 188
Anogenital examination, 192
Anogenital injuries
healing of, 195–197
lack of, 197
vs. sexual assault, 194–195
Anthropological Research Faculty, 
213
Anxiety, 30–32
Apparent cross-examination, 279
Apple Lossless Audio Codec (ALAC), 
161
Arrowhead Forensics scaled hinge lifts, 11
Arrowhead Forensics tie-down weapon 
storage boxes, 16
Arterial bleeding, 46–48
ASCLD/LAB guidelines, 256, 261
Association of Firearms and Tool Mark 
Examiners (AFTE), 17
ATP, see Adenosine triphosphate
Audio enhancement, 160
Audio file formats, 161
Audio Interchange File Format (AIFF), 
161
Audit trail, 165
Automated Fingerprint Identification 
System (AFIS), 74
Autosomal forensic markers
mini STRs, 93–95
short tandem repeats, 93
B
BackTrack™, 40
Bacterial vaginosis, 205–210
Bacteriology, 250
Band-pass filter, 164, 165
Band-stop filter, 164
Barberio test, 85
Barbiturates, 169
Barrel distortion, 278
Barrier filters, 71–72
Benzodiazepine
test for, 174–175
time duration, 169
Bhang, test for, 173
Biological relationship, 90
Biomarkers, 239
Biometric-based techniques, 111–112
Birthmarks, 121
Bit depth, 161, 165, 266–267
Bite-mark analysis, 145–147
Bitmap images, 263
Blood evidence collection, 16
Bloodstain pattern analysis (BSPA)
altered bloodstain, 47
angle of impact, 39–40
area of convergence, 40
arterial bleeding, 46–47, 48
biology/physiology/anatomy, 37–38
cast-off patterns, 45
categories, 38
clotted blood, 47–49
contact patterns, 40–41
diffused/capillary action, 52
diluted bloodstains, 49–50
documentation, 55–56
dried bloodstains, 50–52
drop(s) and free-falling volumes, 
41–42
evaluation of, 57–58
expirated bloodstains, 45–46
flow patterns, 41
glass–smooth edges, 39
history of, 36
impact spatter, 42–45
insects, 53
overview of, 35–36
presumptive testing and chemical 
enhancement, 56–57
role of, 37
saturation and pooling, 42, 43
scene and evidence precautions, 38
sequenced bloodstains, 54
voids patterns, 54–55
Bloodstains, 50–52, 244–246
in crime scenes, 80
examination of, 81–83
“Body Farm,” 213
Bounce lighting, 69
Brown sugar, test for, 171–172
BSPA, see Bloodstain pattern analysis
Bumps, 189
C
CAC, see California Association of 
Criminalists
Calcorrugoscopy, 150
California Association of Criminalists 
(CAC), 260
Cambridge Face Matching, 120
Cambridge Reference Sequence (CRS), 99
Camera dynamic range
angle of view, 277
assigning profiles, 276–277
barrel distortion, 278
capture vs. JPEG, 273–274

284
Index
color models, 275–276
color theory, 275
RAW process, 274
tonal range, of RAW, 274–275
usage, 277
Cannabis, 169, 172–173
Capillary electrophoresis (CE), 92–93
Capture vs. JPEG, 273–274
Carancula hymenalis, 188
CCTV
advantage for, 121
familiar face recognition, 117
footage, 111, 119
and identification systems, 112
CE, see Capillary electrophoresis
Chain of custody, 10, 19
Charas, test for, 173
Cheese skippers, 222
Cheiloscopy, 151–153,
Chemical processing, fingerprinting, 12
Child responses, in forensic interview, 182
Child sexual abuse (CSA)
accidental anogenital injuries vs. 
sexual assault, 194–195
anal canal, 190–191
anal/perianal findings, 198–199
anogenital examination, 192
bacterial vaginosis, 205–210
Chlamydia trachomatis, 203
consensual vs. nonconsensual sexual 
intercourse, 193
female external genitalia, 186–187, 190
forensic evidence, 200–202
forensic interview, see Forensic 
interview
herpes simplex virus, 204–205
hymen, 187–188
hymenal orifice diameter, 197–198
long term consequences of, 180
medical examination, 185–186
medical history, 185
mimicking sexual abuse, 199–200
Neisseria gonorrhoea, 202–203
NICHD protocol, 183
notches, 198
previous sexual activity, 193
recall vs. recognition memory, 
181–182
script vs. episodic memory, 180–181
sexual assault, 192–193
sexually transmitted infections, 202
source monitoring errors, 182
syphilis, 204
tampons, 195
vagina, anatomical variations of, 189
Chlamydia trachomatis (CT), 203
screening for, 203–204
Chromotropic acid test, 175
Cicuses, 240
Clipping, 165
Closed-back headphones, 162
Clotted blood, 47–49
CMYK color model, 276
Cocaine
color test, 173–174
detection times, 169
thin-layer chromatography, 174
Codec (compressor/decompressor), 165
Codeine, 169
Code of Ethics
American Academy of Forensic 
Sciences, 257–261
American Board of Forensic 
Toxicology, 260
in forensics science, 255
in professional organization, 256–257
Collecting evidence, on scene, 225–230
Collection kit items, 223
Color models, 275–276
Color test
cannabis, 172–173
cocaine, 173–174
Color theory, 275
Combined probability of exclusion 
(CPE), 104
Combined probability of inclusion 
(CPI), 104
Comparative anotomy, 246
Composite image, 124
Confirmatory test, 86
Consensual sexual intercourse, 193
Contextual factors, 120
Controlled substances, 176
Control sample, 176
Convolution filters, 278
Corpus identification, 136
CPE, see Combined probability of 
exclusion
CPI, see Combined probability of 
inclusion
Crescentic hymen, 188
Cribriform hymen, 188
Crime scene investigation, 21
definition of, 2
DNA and blood evidence 
collection, 16
evidence collection, 10
evidence submission, 6
final walk-through, 5
fingerprinting, 10–12
firearms and related collection, 
16–18
first responder, 3
initial walk-through, 4–5
miscellaneous evidence collection, 18
note-taking, 8
outer packaging, 10
photography, 6–8
post scene communication with 
investigators, 5–6
presumptive field tests, 18–19
reconstruction, 19
search methods, 9–10
security, 3–4
security and safety, 4
sketching, 8–9
trace evidence collection, 12–16
videography, 8
Crime scene investigator (CSI), 1, 4, 17
Crime scene investigator diver 
technologist (CSIDT), 25–26
course of study, 33–34
diver logbook, 34
evidence classification, 32
training, 32–33
victim and considerable variations, 27
Crime scene investigators (CSIs), 22, 23
knowledge and abilities, 24
psychological issues, 26
“short-term crisis reactions,” 28
victim and considerable variations, 27
Crime scene, working case at
collecting evidence, on scene, 
225–230
collection kit, 223
Criminal caseworks, 103–104
Criminology, 237–239
Cross-examination, 282
purposes of, 280
types of, 279
CRS, see Cambridge Reference 
Sequence
Crude morphine, 170–171
CSA, see Child sexual abuse
CSI, see Crime scene investigator
CSIDT, see Crime scene investigator 
diver technologist
CTA diagnosis, 203–204
Cultural considerations, 242
Cyanoacrylate, 12, 64–65
Cycle, audio forensics, 161
Cyst, 189
Cytology, 250
D
Data interpretation, 102–103
Daubert v. Merrell Dow 
Pharmaceuticals, 73
Decibel (dB), 165
Degree day (DD), 221
Degree hour (DH), 221
Denaturation, 91
Dental identification, 138
Dentin, 142
DFO, see 1,8-Diazafluoren-9-One
Diacetyl morphine, test for, 171–172
1,8-Diazafluoren-9-One (DFO), 63
Dichromate test, 175
Diffused/capillary action, 52
Digestive system, 220

285
Index
Digital audio forensics
audio enhancement, 160
audio fundamentals, 161–162
authentication, 160–161
filters, 164–165
headphone, types of, 162–163
terminology, 165–166
waveform editors, 163
Digital audio tape (DAT), 165
Digital imagery, 121–124
Digital single-lens reflex cameras 
(DSLRs), 272
Dilated urethra, 187
Diluted bloodstains, 49–50
Diptera, 223
Direct examination, 279
Direct lighting, 68, 69
Disaster victim identification (DVI), 147
DNA analysis, 218–219
DNA evidence, 16
DNA Identification Act (1994), 107
DNA molecule, 89
DNA typing
alternative markers
mitochondrial DNA, 99–100
single nucleotide polymorphism, 
98–99
analytical procedures
capillary electrophoresis, 92–93
DNA extraction, 91
polymerase chain reaction, 91–92
applications, 90
autosomal forensic markers
mini STRs, 93–95
short tandem repeats, 93
biostatical evaluations
criminal caseworks, 103–104
paternity test, 104–106
data interpretation, 102–103
forensic markers, in sexual 
chromosomes
X-chromosome, 97
Y-chromosome, 95–97
next-generation sequencing, 100–101
rapid DNA analysis, 101
real-time amplification plot, 92
Document Size, 265
Downsampling, 162
Dried bloodstains, 50–52
Drinks, alcohol in, 175–176
DSLRs, see Digital single-lens reflex 
cameras
Duquenois-Levine test, 173
DVI, see Disaster victim identification
Dynamic evidence funnel, 20
Dynamic range, 165
E
Earbud headphones, 162
E-FIT, 127
EFIT-V system, 129–132
Eigenfaces, 116
“Eigenfaces for Recognition” 
(Pentland), 116
Eigenspace, 114
Eigenvectors, 114
Electrical network frequency (ENF), 160
Electronic facial identification 
techniques, 124–129
Elicit information, 180
ENF, see Electrical network frequency
Entomology, 251–252
crime scene, working case at, 223–230
DNA analysis, 218–219
entomotoxicology, 218
evidence of neglect, 217–218
history of, 212–213
insect anatomy, 219–220
insect life cycle, 220–223
manner of death, 216–217
season of colonization, 216
season of death, 217
stored product area of, 214
urban area of, 213–214
working with, 230–231
Entomotoxicology, 218
Episodic memory, 180–181
Equalization (EQ), 165
Erythema of vestibule, 187
Ethyl alcohol, test for, 175
Ethyl benzoate test, 174
Evidence of neglect, 217–218
Evo-FIT, 129
Expert witness testimony, 279
Expirated bloodstains, 45–46
Extension, polymerase chain reaction, 91
External genitalia, of female, 190
External hymenal ridges, 189
Eyewitness testimony, 279
F
Facial Identification Scientific Work 
Group (FISWG), 123
Facial mapping, 121–124
Facial recognition, 111
and affecting factors, 119–121
algorithms, 116
composite image, 124
EFIT-V system, 129–132
electronic techniques, 124–129
fade, 123
familiar face recognition, 117–118
forensic imagery analysis, 121
historical insight into, 112–117
for identification, 111–112
intelligent search procedure, 128
morphological comparison, 123
stages in, 118–119
three-dimensional, 113
two-dimensional, 112–113
Facial Recognition Technology 
(FERET), 116
Verification Testing Protocol, 117
Fast blue B salt test, 173
Federation Dentaire International (FDI) 
tooth numbering, 148
Female external genitalia, 186–187
Ferric chloride test, 170
Ferric salt test, 170
File formats, 270–271
for forensic work, 162
Filter paper method, 173
Filters, 164–165
Fimbriated hymen, 188
Fingerprint(s), 90, 152
latent, see Latent fingerprint
patent, 10–11
plastic, 11
powders, 66
records, 23
FISWG, see Facial Identification 
Scientific Work Group
FLAC, see Free Lossless Audio Codec
Florence test, 85
Fly larvae, 217
Foley catheter, 192
Footprints, 247
Forensic biology
blood, 80–81
hair examination, 87
precipitin test, 83
saliva examination, 86–87
seminal fluid, 83–86
Forensic digital imaging, 263
bit depth, 266–267
camera dynamic range,  
273–278
file formats, 270–271
histograms, 268–270
light sources, 271–273
size, 263–266
Forensic discipline, 135
Forensic evidence, 200–201
Forensic imagery analysis, 121–124
Forensic interview
extended, 184
interview settings, 182–183
NICHD phases of, 183–184
protocols, 183
Forensic markers, in sexual 
chromosomes
X-chromosome, 97
Y-chromosome, 95–97
Forensic odontology, 135, 137–140
bite-mark analysis, 145–147
dental identification, 138
history of, 140–141
identification through soft tissues, 
149–153
mass disasters, 147–149

286
Index
odontograms, 143
possible identification, 139
radiological investigation, 143–145
teeth, 141–143
Forensics caseworks, 90
Forensic Toxicologist Certification 
Board, 257
Forensic toxicology, 168–169
alcohol in liquors/drinks, 175
analytical techniques, 178
benzodiazepine test, 174–175
cannabis
color tests, 172–173
microscope examination, 172
cocaine
color test, 173–174
thin-layer chromatography, 174
controlled substances, 176
diacetyl morphine/heroin/smack/
brown sugar, 171
presumptive tests, 171–172
thin-layer chromatography, 172
drugs/alcohol, in blood and urine, 
169–170
opium/crude morphine/poppy straw 
testing, 170–171
physical examination, 177
safety, 177
state-of-the-art analytical 
methods, 169
Forensic veterinary science and 
medicine
areas of, 236
bloodstains, 244–246
cases, animals in, 240–242
criminalistic, 237–239
cultural consideration, 242
development of, 236–237
entomology, 251–252
footprints, 247
hard surfaces, stains on, 245
legislation, 240
liquid samples, 246
marks, 246–247
odontology, 242–244
pathology, 249–251
soft surfaces, stains on, 245–246
toxicology, 247–249
Fraile’s method, 153
Free Lossless Audio Codec 
(FLAC), 161
Frequency, 161, 165
Frohde test, 172
Frye v. the United States, 73
G
Ganja, test for, 173
GAs, see Genetic algorithms
General Electric vs. Joiner, 73
Genetic algorithms (GAs), 128
Genital warts, 204
Gentian violet, 65
Globalization, in forensic sciences, 
136–137
Graphic equalizers, 164–165
Grayscale image, 268
GSR, see Gunshot residue
GSWs, see Gunshot wounds
Gunshot residue (GSR), 17
Gunshot wounds (GSWs), 42, 44, 49
H
Hair/fiber evidence, 13, 14
Hard surfaces, stains on, 245
Headphones, types of, 162
Hemocoel, 219
Hemolymph, 219
Hemospat™, 40
Heroin
detection times, 169
test for, 171–172
Herpes simplex virus, 204–205
Hertz (Hz), 165
Heteroplasmy, 100
High-pass filter, 164
High-velocity impact spatter (HVIS), 42
HIrisPlex system, 99
Histochemistry testing, 250
Histopathology testing, 250
HIV, 204
Homo sapiens, 60
HPV, see Human papillomavirus
HSL, see Hue, saturation and lightness
Hue, saturation and lightness (HSL), 275
Human–animal relationships, 242
Human Model procedure, 23
Human papillomavirus (HPV), 204
Human voice, 160
Hungarian red, 67
HVIS, see High-velocity impact spatter
Hydrochloric acid fuming, 63
Hymen, 187–188
anatomical variations of, 189
posterior RIM of, 197–198
types of, 188
Hymenal erythema, 189
Hymenal findings, 195
Hymenal injuries, 192
Hymenal orifice diameter, 197–198
Hyperpigmentation, 198
I
IABPA, see International Association of 
Bloodstain Pattern Analysts
Ideal biomakers, 239
Identification, 112, 121, 136
through soft tissues, 149–153
Identi-Kit system, 126
Illinois State Police Forensic Sciences 
Command Rules, 261
Image audit trail, 277
Immunohistochemistry testing, 250
Impeachment, 281
Imperforate hymen, 188
Incidental species, 223
1,2-Indanedione, 63
Individual identity test, 99
Insect(s), 15
anatomy, 219–220
life cycle
insect succession, 221
time of colonization, 220–223
nervous system, 220
on scene
collection and preservation, 227
packaging and shipment, 229
succession, 221
Instrument blank, 176
Internal anal sphincter, 190
International Association for 
Identification, 60
International Association of Bloodstain 
Pattern Analysts (IABPA), 36
International consideration, 242
International Criminal Police 
Organization (INTERPOL), 148
guidelines, 137
International Society of Forensic 
Genetics (ISFG), 93
INTERPOL, see International Criminal 
Police Organization
Investigator Argus X-12 QS, 98
Iodine fuming, 12, 63
Iodoform test, 175
IrisPlex system, 99
ISFG, see International Society of 
Forensic Genetics
J
JPEG, 273–274
K
Kastle-Meyer Test, 81–82, 82
Klein’s zone, 151
Kumho Tire v. Carmichael, 73
L
Lab color model, 275
Labia adhesion, 186
Labia, gentle separation of, 192
Labia majora, 186
Labia minora, 186
Lacerations, 193
Lactate Dehydrogenase Chemical 
(LDHC), 86
Latent fingerprint, 11, 23
Latent print examination
barrier filters, 71–72
blood reagents, 66–67
comparisons, 73–77

Index
287
description of, 59–60
development techniques, 62–66
history of, 60–61
human factors, 72–73
legal considerations and standards, 73
photography, 68–70
physiology, 61–62
Law Enforcement Assistance 
Administration (LEAA), 36
LCN, see Low copy number
LCV, see Leucocrystal violet
LDHC, see Lactate Dehydrogenase 
Chemical
LEAA, see Law Enforcement Assistance 
Administration
Legislation, 240
Leucocrystal violet (LCV), 67
Leucomalachite green reaction, 82
Light sources
ambient light, 271–272
mixed light, 272–273
monolights and speed light, 272
Likelihood ratio (LR), 104
Lineage test, 99
Linear pulse code modulation 
(LPCM), 161
Linea vestibularis, 187
Liquid blood, 80
Liquid samples, 246
Liquors, alcohol in, 175
Locard’s Exchange Principle, 106
Longitudinal internal vaginal ridges, 189
Lossless compressed file formats, 161
Lossy formats, 161–162
Low copy number (LCN), 102
Low-pass filter, 164
Low-velocity impact spatter (LVIS), 43
LPCM, see Linear pulse code 
modulation
LR, see Likelihood ratio
LSD, detection times, 169
Luminol, 82
LVIS, see Low-velocity impact spatter
M
MAAFS, see Mid-Atlantic Association 
of Forensic Scientists
Macro photography lighting, 68–70
MagnaBrush™, 11
Magnetic beads, 91
Manner of death, 216–217
Marquis test, 170, 172
Mass disasters, 147–149
Mass DNA screening, 90
Massive disasters, 241
Matching, 123
MDMA, detection times, 170
Mecke’s test, 172
Meconic acid, testing of, 170
Medicocriminal forensic entomology, 214
Medicolegal forensic entomology, 214
Medium-velocity impact spatter 
(MVIS), 43
Meteorological data, 225
Methadone, detection times, 170
Methamphetamine, detection times, 170
Methanol, test for, 175
Method blank, 176
Microscope examination, 172
Mid-Atlantic Association of Forensic 
Scientists (MAAFS), 257
Midline avascular area, 187
Midline raphe, 187
Mimicking sexual abuse, 199–200
Mini STRs, 93–95
Miscellaneous evidence collection, 18
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), 99–100
Mixed light, 272–273
Mobile terrestrial arthropod, 223
Modification, 176
Monolights, 272
Morphine, detection times, 170
mtDNA, see Mitochondrial DNA
Multipart prompts, 181
Mummified corpse, 139
MVIS, see Medium-velocity impact spatter
N
NAME members, 257
Napthalene black, blood reagent, 67
National Academy of Science, 72
National Criminal Intelligence DNA 
Database (NDNAD), 107
Natural disasters, 241–242
NDNAD, see National Criminal 
Intelligence DNA Database
Neisseria gonorrhoea (NG), 202–203
screening for, 203–204
Next-generation sequencing (NGS), 
100–101
NG, see Neisseria gonorrhoea
NICHD
forensic interview, phases of, 183
protocol, 183
Ninhydrin, 12, 63
Nitric acid test, 172
Noise-canceling headphones, 162
Noise reduction filters, 165
Non-accidental trauma, 238
Nonconsensual sexual intercourse, 193
Normalization, audio, 166
Notches, 189, 198
Nucleotides, 89
Nyquist-Shannon sampling frequency, 
161
O
OBIM, see Office of Biometric Identity 
Management
Oblique lighting, 68, 69
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA), 33
Odontograms, 143
Odontology, 242–244
Office of Biometric Identity 
Management (OBIM), 112
Open-back headphones, 162
Opium, testing, 170–171
Option-posing prompts, 181
Organic extraction, 91
OSHA, see Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration
Ostia, 219
Ovoviviparous, 220
P
Paint, 15
Palatal rugae, 150
Palatal rugoscopy, 150
Palatoscopy, 149–151, 151
Parasitology, 250
Patent fingerprint, 10
Paternity test, 104–106
Pathology, 249–251
PCA, see Principal component analysis
PCM, see Pulse code modulation
Peaks height ratio, 102
Perianal area, 190–191
Periurethral bands, 187
Personal identification, 90
Personal protective equipment (PPE), 4, 
38, 57
Phase, audio forensics, 161, 166
Phenolphthalein test, 81–82
Phenotypic identification, 99
Phloxine B, 67
Photo-anthropometry, 123
Photo-FIT system, 125, 126, 128
Photogrammetry, 123, 124
Physical examination, 177
Physical processing, fingerprinting, 
11–12
Pigmentation, 120
Plastic fingerprint, 11
PMI, see Postmortem interval
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 
91–92, 250
stain examination, 87
Poppy straw, testing, 170–171
Porphyroxine test, 170
Positive identification, 139
Posterior fourchette, 186
Posterior rim, of hymen, 197
Postmortem interval (PMI), 15
Postmortem movement, 216
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 29
anxiety, 30–32
avoidance and re-experiencing, 30
PPE, see Personal protective equipment
Precipitin test, 83

288
Index
Presumptive test, 18–19, 84–86, 171–172
Previous sexual activity, 193
Primary standard, 176
Prime lenses, 277
Principal component analysis (PCA), 114
Prone knee-chest position, 192
Pseudo holistic approaches, 128
PTSD, see Posttraumatic stress disorder
Pulse code modulation (PCM), 161, 166
Pupal case, 220
Pupiporous flies, 220
Puranen test, 85
Pyrex™, 13
Q
Quality assurance (QA), 106
Quality control (QC), 106
R
Radio frequency identification (RFID), 
148
Random man not excluded (RMNE), 105
Random match probability (RMP), 103
Rapid DNA analysis, 101
RAW
files, 273
process, 274
tonal range of, 274–275
rCRS, see Revised Cambridge Reference 
Sequence
Real cross-examination, 279
Real-time PCR, 91
Reexamination, 281
Revised Cambridge Reference Sequence 
(rCRS), 99
RFID, see Radio frequency 
identification
RGB
color model, 275
pixels, patchwork of, 274
RMNE, see Random man not excluded
RMP, see Random match probability
Root mean square (RMS), 166
Rugoscopy, 149–151
Rules of Ethics, 258
S
Saliva examination, 86–87
Sample rate, 161, 166
Scars, 121
Schiff’s reagent test, 175
Scientific Working Group on 
Bloodstain Pattern Analysis 
(SWGSTAIN), 38, 41, 47
Scott’s test, 174
Script vs. episodic memory, 180–181
Season of colonization, 216
Season of death, 217
Secondary standard, 176
Seminal fluid, 83–86
Septated hymen, 188
Sequenced bloodstains, 54
Sexual assault, 192–193
accidental anogenital injuries vs., 
194–195
evidence of, 197–199
Sexual chromosomes, forensic markers in
X-chromosome, 97
Y-chromosome, 95–97
Sexually transmitted infection, of child 
sexual abuse, 202
Short tandem repeats (STRs), 93, 94
mini STRs, 93–95
X STRs, 97
Y STRs, 95–97
Signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio, 166
Silver nitrate, 64
Single lenses, 219
Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), 
98–99
6-megapixel camera, 263
Skeletonized stain, 50
Smack, test for, 171–172
Small particle reagent (SPR), 12, 65
SNaPshot® reaction, 99
SNP, see Single-nucleotide 
polymorphism
S/N ratio, see Signal-to-noise ratio
Sodiumα-naphthyl phosphate test, 84–85
Soft surfaces, stains on, 245–246
Solvent, 176
SOPs, see Standard operating procedures
Sound-isolating earphones, 162
Sound wave, 166
Source monitoring errors, 182
Speakers, 162–163
Spectrography, voice, 161
Spectrophotometric estimation, 83
Speed light, 272
Spermatozoa, structure of, 84
Spin columns, 91
Spiracles, 219, 220
SPR, see Small particle reagent
Standard operating procedures (SOPs), 19
Sticky side powder, 65–66
Straddle injuries, 194
STRs, see Short tandem repeats
Sudan black, 66
Suggestive prompts, 181
Superimposition, 123, 124
Supine lithotomy position, 192
SWGSTAIN, see Scientific Working Group 
on Bloodstain Pattern Analysis
Syphilis, 204
T
Takayama test, 82
Tampons, 195
Taphonomy, 247
TASER devices, 17
Tattoos, 121
Teeth, 141–143
Teichmann’s test, 82–83
Tented lighting, 70
Test tube method, 173
Tetramethyl benzidine (TMB) test, 81
Thin-layer chromatography (TLC), 
85–86
benzodiazepine, 174–175
cannabis, 173
cocaine, test for, 174
diacetyl morphine/ heroin/smack/
brown sugar, 172
opium/crude morphine/poppy straw, 
testing, 170–171
Three-dimensional laser scanning 
systems, 9
Through-the-lens (TTL), 272
TIFF, capture vs., 273–274
Time of colonization (TOC), 215
calculation, 220–223
case study, 215
decomposition, important insects in, 
223
extension of, 216
insect succession and, 221
Time of neglect, 218
TOC, see Time of colonization
Toluidine blue, 192
Tonal range, of RAW, 274–275
Toxicology, 247–249
Transmitted lighting, 70, 71
Traster Marker, 151
Treponema pallidum, 204
Trichomonas vaginalis (TV), 205
Triketohydrindene hydrate, 63
TTL, see Through-the-lens
TV, see Trichomonas vaginalis
12-megapixel camera, 263–265
U
Underwater forensics
maintaining fingerprint records, 23
plumb and level methods, 22–23
special requirements, 24
training sessions, 23–24
Upsampling, 162
Urban area, of entomology, 213–214
Urethral prolapse, 187
V
Vagina
accidental impalement of, 194
anatomical variations of, 189
Vaginal columns, 189
Vaginosis, bacterial, 205
Venous congestion, 191
Verification, biometric technique, 112
Vestibular bands, 187

Index
289
Vestibule, erythema of, 187
Veterinary trichology, 246
Virology, 250
Voiceprints, 161
Voice spectrography, 161
Vulvar injuries, 192
W
WAV, see Waveform Audio File Format
Wave cast-off formation, mechanism of, 
41, 42
Waveform, 166
editors, 163–164
measurements, 161
Waveform Audio File Format 
(WAV), 161
Wavelength, audio forensics, 161
Weapon focus, 279
Witness testimony, types  
of, 279
World Health Organization 
(WHO), 137
X
X-chromosome, 97
Y
Y-chromosome, 95–97
Z
Zinc chloride, 64
Zoom lenses, 277
Zoonotic diseases, 238
Zoos, 241

