THE BUILDERS
April 18
AH sfde effects are effects.
We can never do merely one thing.
—First Law Of Ecology
Glare. Howling wind. A rope sliding upward in the
snow. Sharp-cut steps in the mountainside. His leg strain-
ing to take that next step. Hilan Forstil knew nothing
beyond that next step. He balanced on the dull edge of
unconsciousness, yet he took that next step. And the next,
He remembered this feeling from long ago. The feeling
was one of exhaustion—an exhaustion so deep that even
the thought of death did not bother him. The memory
came from a time over two decades in his past—from his
time m Nigeria, working among starving children.
Such exhaustion made one sloppy, he knew. And such
sloppmess was dangerous in struggles like this. The dan-
ger to himself didn t bother him—after all, he didn't care
if he died—but it disturbed him that an error here could
kill his rope partner,         ^
On the other hand, it was her faylt that they were here
at all. An image Hashed in his mind of Jan's face at then-
last rest stop. The Hush of her cheeks, the brilliant fury of
her blue eyes . . . her energy seemed too intense to be
healthy. Dimly, he remembered having had such energy
himself, standing at the base of the mountain. But the
mountain and its vertical miles of glacial white had con-
sumed him- It had not consumed her.
He wanted to curse her.
And he wanted to thank her. With every step he com-
pleted, he touched an inner power he had forgotten. He
had worked so hard the last two decades to forge the took
of external power; such tools seemed fragile now.
The rope slackened. Hilan breathed a sigh of relief and
slowed to match the speed of the rope. Keep the rope just
barely dragging the ground between us, Jan had explained
4                   Marc Stiegler
the day before, except during a—the rope yanked taut,
causing Hilan to stumble—switchback}
He peered up. Sure enough, the chiseled footprints
went on to his left for a short time, then veered back
sharply to the right. Jan was directly above, climbing to
the right with a cougar's enthusiasm. He couldn't go all the
way around the switchback even if he had the energy: but
if he continued to the left, the taut rope would drag Jan
back as well. He took one more pressure-breath and shak-
ily climbed straight up the mountain, shortcutting through
the switch.

Noticing the jerking motions of the rope, Jan stopped to
look back. Her mouth dropped open. "Hilan," she called
loudly, "you can't—"
Hilan looked up at her. Just as the snow yielded beneath
his foot He plunged through the snow bridge into the
crevasse beneath.
The rope snapped taut, bouncing him wildly on the
end. The plunge halted only a moment before he plum-
meted again and the rope slid farther over the edge. He
looked down into the shadowy cavern below, interested but
not afraid. The all-crushing tatigue numbed his mind; he just
didn't care. He contemplated his own emptiness, knowing
that his lack of fear should be the greatest cause for fear.
His descent slowed, then stopped. He swung lazily in
the endless, rocky fracture, listening to the sudden quiet.
A wheezing cough echoed down from above. Hilan pic-
tured Jan on the edge of the precipice, leaning into her ice
axe with all her strength to stop the fall. Both their lives
depended on her endurance.
The realization of her danger finally impelled him to
action. Miraculously, his ice axe yet dangled from his right
wrist. He pressed his lips together for an explosive series
of breaths—the whistling sound seemed almost natural
now—and wriggled his ice axe into his backpack straps.
He grasped the rope. The fatigue yielded to a last buildup
of adrenalin.
He climbed over halfway up the rope before the adren-
alin failed.
He dung to the rope, thinking about the danger to Jan.
BF he could not complete this ctunb, he had to save her.
DAVID'S SUNG                5
He still had his knife. He could cut the rope, freeing her
from his own fate. He would save enough strength to
complete that last act, if necessary. But he was not that
lost yet, not quite yet.
Shadows. Deadly quiet. A rope anchored in the snow.
His left arm stretching to grasp the next handhold. He
balanced on the dull edge of unconsciousness, yet he took
that next handhold. And the next.
The rope ended. Hilan reached over the lip of ice,
heaving himself out of the crevasse into the glare and the
howling wind.
The two-man celebration began with champagne. "A
toast to the Soviet Unioni" Jim Mayfield exclaimed, raising
his glass.
Earl Semmens raised his as well; the glasses tinkled in
midair. "A toast to peace," he offered.

"And above all, a toast to tomorrow's Galiup poll results."
Mayfield sipped the champagne. His eyes slid across the
floor, lingering on the emblem woven with rich blues and
golds into the carpet. It was his, at least for now. The emblem
was the official seal of the President of the United States.
He sat back down; the Secretary of State followed his lead.
Earl sat on the edge of his "chair, staring out the win-
dow. He spoke in rehearsal of his planned statement to
the press. 'Yes, this treaty is another potent lever against
the arms race. Now that we've curtailed the space-based
Ballistic Missile Defense work, all incentives for building
new missiles will disappear." He turned back to Mayfield,
and for a moment his pudgy features held lines of worry.
He tapped a nervous finger on the president's desk. "I
wish they hadn't instigated that. . . little incident in Hon-
duras just before the signing. God, they know how to goad
us!" He shivered, then resumed his nervous tapping. "Well,
we couldn't have done anything about that anyway, re-
gardless of treaties. And the treaty's more important." He
nodded his head, and his voice again sounded press-ready.
"Yes, the whole world can sleep more securely now that
the arms race in space has stopped."
Sometimes the elegant power of the Oval Office gave
Jim a sense of grandeur. Seated behind a desk of massive
6                    Marc Stiegler
proportions, a desk to dwarf even giants, he felt the ramifi-
cations of his decisions pulsing through the world. "Not
quite everybody will sleep more securely. Earl. Those
goddam contractors working on space weapons will have to
find an honest way to make a living." He rubbed his
hands. "We may balance the budget yet. Earl." He breathed
a sigh of exultation. "Wouldn't that make a hit on the
polls!"
The door from the Rose Garden swept open with smooth,
decisive authority. Even without looking, Mayfield knew
who it had to be—though he could not prevent himself
from shooting a frown toward the door.
Only one person other than himself entered this room
as if she owned it; Mayfield's Vice President, Nell Carson,
Mayfield smiled blandly, confident that his irritation re-
mained hidden. Watching her look back at him, Jim saw
that Nell had no intention of concealing her irritation. It
poisoned the joy of his celebration.
Sometimes the elegant power of the Oval Office gave
Tim a sense of claustrophobic choking. As Nell looked at
him, he felt a brief desire to plead that it wasn't his fault,
whatever had happened. His eyes returned involuntarily
to the emblem in the carpet; it reassured him.
Nell stepped to the center of the room to address both
men. She spoke with tight control that did not reveal her
gentle South Carolina accent. "Congratulations, Jim. You

have the record for the most treaties with the Soviet
Union in the history of American presidents. I have one
question."
Jim looked up into her face. searching for the Nell he
had known during the campaign—the Nell with the pa-
tient smiie who had charmed the crowds with her enthusi-
asm and warmth. She had been a terrific asset during the
campaign. When she spoke, the voters believed.
Unfortunately, the charming Nell had faded under the
weight of office. Now he could only see the Nell who
had devastated opponents with her incisive criticisms. Jim's
throat felt dry as he filled the silence. "Yes? What one
question do you have?"
"Now that you have set the presidential record, I was
wondering: Can you stop now?"
DAVID'S SUNG                7
Mayfield's smile turned gray, and his heart missed a
beat—something it did more often now than before, some-
thing he should check ... He excised the thought from
his mind, removing it with surgical perfection, and reluc-
tantly met her gaze, contemplating her question, looking
beyond it to her problem.
Nell Carson was the problem, he decided. She never
took a moment to look at the bright side. Perhaps that
explained the drawn lines in her face. During the cam-
paign, the only objection the media had raised about Nell
was that she was too young. She had looked too young. No
one said that any longer. Mayfield sighed. "Why do you
always complain about our successes? You know we needed
that treaty. We had to get that treaty. Our position with
the public was slipping.' He shrugged. "We have to de-
pend on treaties, not weapons, if we're going to have a
chance of dealing with our domestic problems.'
Nell looked into his eyes- It seemed Jim could hear his
words echoing back to him, amplified and clarified by
Nell's implicit interpretation. She asked, "Who are you
trying to convince?"
Mayfleld stared at her in amazement, "I'm convincing
the public, of course." Her hawkish glare made him shiver.
"If I didn't know better, I'd swear you were a Republicani"
A tight smile crossed her face. ""Perhaps I should be."
She leaned over Jim's desk. "Don't you see the problem
with what you've done? Six months ago, you made the
agreement on Global Consequences of Nuclear War. There
you agreed that, above a certain level of nuclear war, the
radiation and climate effects of a war would destroy the
attacker, even if the defender didn't shoot back. Now you
put a limit on Ballistic Missile Defense. Either one of
these treaties, all by itself, is okay. But when combined,
they form a terrible danger. Don't you see how these
separate agreements interact?"

She paused in her speech. A stiff creak announced Earl's
attempt to shift his chair away from her.
She did not relent. "Winning an all out war now sounds
believable. Without any missile defenses, but with an agreed
threshold for nuclear suicide, the first side to launch its
missiles is protected from retaliation—because the first
8                   Marc Stiegler
strike will deliver as many megatons of destruction as the
Earth can absorb. If the victim shoots back, he's destroy-
ing whatever survivors remain in his own country."
Mayfleld waved the objection aside. "Don't be boring;
we've discussed this a million times. The Russians don t
think that way. That would be tike attitude of a madman!"
"That would be the attitude of a terrorist," came Nell's
curt reply. "With strategies based on terror, only terrorists
have a chance of winning." Her eyes swept over both
men. Jim shivered.
Nell's mouth softened into a sad smile. "And I don't see
a single terrorist in this room. I don't even see anyone
willing to speak out about clear violations of national
boundaries—like the fiasco outside Yuscaran."
Jim looked speechlessly at Earl. He felt like cement
cracking under the weight of a speeding truck. "How did
you find out about that!*"
Nell laughed joylessly. "You sent me to Texas to give
Kurt McKenna his medal, remember? I have the clear-
ances, Jim, and under the circumstances, I had sufficient
need to know." She lifted her briefcase and thumped it
against the polished mahogany surface, making Jim wince.
With forceful snaps, she released the latches and removed
a flat-screen television with a tiny video player. "I think
you should see this for yourself, Jim."
He had no time to object before the tape rolled into action.
They were traveling down a twisting trail, cloaked in
jungle growth. It looked like a sticky, humid day, which
made Mayfield appreciate the cool comfort of the Oval
Office. He could hear tracks clanking in the background,
though the sound was muted. Ahead of them on the trail
was an armored vehicle. Mayfield wasn't sure, but he
thought it was probably a Bradley armored personnel car-
rier. He vaguely remembered authorizing a few for the
Hondurans.
Nell acted as commentator. "We're watching through
die gun cameras of a personnel carrier," she explained.
A dull explosion sounded, and the screen washed out in
a searing white flame. A scream came from very close by.

With a chill, Mayfield realized that there had been people
inside die machine now fuming into an, inferno.
DAVID'S SUNG                9
Nell spoke with dry, scientific precision. "They hit the
Bradley with a shaped charge. The penetrating explosion
hit the ammunition magazine. The brightness of the explo-
sion severely damaged our gun camera; the rest of this
tape has been computer enhanced."
The whiteout of the screen faded; a ghostly soft image
replaced it. Men scurried into the jungle as the second
Bradley disgorged its troops. The computer enhancement
kept the soldiers visible to Mayfield's untrained eye, though
he suspected that without the computer's intervention,
they would have disappeared in the heavy foliage. They all
looked like Honduran troops.
One Caucasian stood out by virtue of his uniform and
his pale blue eyes. He took off with astonishing speed,
loping over the fallen trees, hurrying away from the oth-
ers. Tie camera lurched as another explosion sounded,
muted, but somehow closer. A sound he had not noticed
before stopped—the sound of an engine thrumming. He
could not see it, but Mayfield realized that the Bradley
from which they watched the scene had been hit, though
the camera continued to roll.
The focus shifted to another ragged cluster of men with
machine guns, beyond the burning Bradley. Their seem-
ingly random pattern proved quite methodical. They en-
gaged the scattered Honduran troops one handful at a
time, overwhelming them piecemeal.
Something seemed wrong with this battle. Mayfield asked,
"Where's our air cover?"
"Our helicopters are old and tired, Jim. They're too
dangerous to use in battle."
"What about artillery support?"
"We were using our newest radios for communication.
They're very delicate, it turns out—oh, the boxes are
mil-spec and indestructible, but their frequencies wobble
and they get out of tune all the time. So nobody heard
about the ambush until it was over." She paused, then
ended. "I asked Kurt about it at the reception. He didn't
exactly answer me; I suspect he couldn't say what he
wanted to in civilized company. Instead he very po-
litely told me that he was getting out of the army—that he
intended to get as far away from it as he could go."
10 Marc SUegler
Only a couple of Honduran troops remained, hunched
in silent fear behind trees and rocks. Suddenly another
explosion sounded and half the enemy force fell to the
ground. The other half dived for cover. They started shoot-

ing in several different directions, though no targets were
visible. The gunfire achieved a syncopated rhythm, and
continued for a. time. One by one, however, the enemy
troops twitched as if kicked, then stopped firing.
When just a few enemy troops remained, a long, cam-
ouflaged blur leaped out of the brush. "Kurt McKenna?"
Mayfield asked. Nell just nodded.
A scuffle followed, then shooting, and Kurt spun down,
struck. One of the two surviving opponents lifted his pis-
tol, but McKenna rolled again, and the enemy with the
gun went down.
The computer enhancement zoomed in on this struggle
between the last two men—the one with the pale blue
eyes and the other with ... the other one also had pale
blue eyes!
"Who is that?" Mayfield demanded.
"That's the Russian who organized this little party. Didn't
you know? You authorized classifying this skirmish, so that
no one would find out about the Russian involvement."
"Oh my God." Mayfield had classified it because it was
too embarrassing, not because of any Russian involve-
ment. Perhaps he should have read tike report after all.
"To my knowledge, this is the first time Americans and
Soviets have met in combat in this decade."
It wasn't a fair fight—Kurt had lost the use of one arm
when he was shot earlier. Yet a few seconds later, he was
the only one left standing.
Nell shut off the tape. Her voice changed from analyti-
cal to commanding. "Jim, we can't sign any more treaties
like this last one."
Mayfield shuddered. But he couldn't let Nell Carson, or
even some incident in Central America, interfere with the
main task. The next election was only a year and a half
away. He leaned back in his chair. "Don't worry, Nell.
Everything's under control."
For just a moment, Nell's shoulders sagged. Then she
DAVID'S SUNG                11
straightened and headed for the door. "I'm counting on
ft," she said, leaving as abruptly as she had arrived.
After a long moment. President Mayfield turned back to
the Secretary and spoke quietly. Each relaxed into a smile.
EaH popped another mint in his mouth, and Mayfield
accepted one as well. The celebration continued.
They reached the glory of the mountain's peak. Hilan
reveled in the view; his joy seemed too great for a single

person—it bordered on reverence.
Below, sunlight chased itself up glacier-white slopes.
The streaks of brilliance followed his own path, up from the
clouds that clung low to die mountain's side. Above, a single
white wisp of cloud traced across deep blue skies. The blue
bad a sharpness that comes of air too thin to fill a man's lungs.
Earth lay across the horizon, beyond a pillowed carpet
of clouds. Only the grandest features revealed themselves
at this distance. The planet did not seem small, yet it
seemed conquerable, as this mountain had been. Hilan
realized with hope that indeed mankind had penetrated
the most dangerous places the planet offered. Yet he de-
spaired, remembering that now the descendants of those
explorers were themselves the greatest remaining threat,
Hilan had changed in the years since his service in
Nigeria. He had changed most during a trip there several
years later. Starvation no longer occurred frequently enough
to cause a global reaction, but it continued; malnutrition
hid in every shadow. The population had grown. Hilan
realized that for every ten children he had saved, eleven
would now die. Yes, Hilan and the others had held famine
at bay for a moment. But they had not changed the culture
that made famine possible- In some final analysis, his
efforts had ended in failure.
His friends had rejected his analysis. He had tried to
reject it as well, but he could not.
He had entered politics, believing that better solutions
to the problems of mankind would require the accurate
application of power. He did not yet know how to apply
mat power. Probably no one did. But for the moment, he
would work to consolidate the power, in preparation for the
day when he, or someone, learned how to use it.
12 Marc Stiegler
Jan led him down the slopes to a shallow depression.
Short ridges ringed it on three sides, protecting them
from a bitter wind as they made camp. She borrowed
his swiss army knife to slice open their freeze-dried
food pouches, then started pacing between the packs
and the stove to prepare dinner. Her cheeks glowed
with an energy that struck Hilan again as somehow
too fierce, too burning for a healthy woman. "Believe
me, it's much easier going down," she promised him.
"If this hadn't been such a great campsite, we could
have gone all the way down the mountain today with no
problem."
Hilan groaned softly and lay on his sleeping bag. Only
his eyes moved, watching Jan pace.
"So, are you happy you came along? I am." Jan turned
away in a fit of coughing. When she turned back, the
flush of her cheeks had faded. She handed him back his
knife.

Holding it, Hilan remembered his earlier desperate
thoughts to save Jan if he could not make it. "When I
stepped into that crevasse, I almost killed you. I wonder
whether it makes sense to rope people together—whether
it wouldn't be smarter to sacrifice the one who falls to
guarantee that someone survives,"
"Nonsense. Falls like that remind us why we wear ropes
and why we make everyone on the climbing team interde-
pendent in the first place. I'm just glad we responded
effectively to the crisis."
"Did we?" Hilan stared at the rips in his gloves, cut
during his climb up the rope. "You know, I was so tired
before we even reached that crevasse that I hardly noticed
the fall." Thinking about it, he was there again. "It was
really strange, just staring down at the rocks that would
kill me." His eyes unfocused. "I didn't react correctly at
all."
Jan laughed. "Hilan, you had the perfect reaction—
no reaction at all. I wouldn't worry about it."
Hilan grunted. "You're probably right. I'll miss die switch-
back over and over, each time reinforcing the lesson that
I learned. In fact, I'll learn the lesson far better than if I'd
DAVID'S SUNG                13
simply gotten scared when I fell. Itll make a great rein-
forced revelation. Sounds like a good example for you to
teach at your beloved Institute."
"Yes," Jan said softly, "an excellent example."
Hilan exhaled. The air rushed from his Tungs with the
easy freedom that reminded him how high up they were.
He had never thought of breathing as an effort, or of the
friction of the air upon his throat; now, in their absence, he
knew them.
"Jan." His muscles still hung in limp exhaustion, but his
thoughts raced. "Thank you for bringing me here. In my
role at home, I've welded myself so deeply to my senato-
rial image that sometimes I wonder whether I'm still here,
or whether I'm only an image. Now I know."
"I thought you'd like my mountain." She coughed. Hilan
studied her for a moment. Her flush from the climb had
faded. Now she seemed pale—as much too pale as she had
earlier seemed too flush. "I have a favor to ask of you."
He sighed. "You know how to exploit even a moment's
weakness. What do you want me to do—help you save the
worid?"
Jan gave him an expression of surprised pleasure that
would have fit well on an American in the Orient who
rounded a corner and ran headlong into an old high school

chum.
That reaction pleased Hilan immensely. Jan did not
understand him as well as he understood her.
Even among his old friends, Hilan had been surprised
by how rare and how out of place die people who person-
ally sought ways to save the world were. Even Hilan's wife
did not understand this fixation of his on die problems of
huge scale—questions of famine, of economic collapse, of
nuclear war. Jan, like himself, was one of diose very few
who Uiought in such terms on a daily basis.
But Jan was an even rarer breed of human being than
those who sought answers to die big questions—she had
found some answers.
She had not yet solved any of die big problems, but she
had begun to heal at least one medium-size one—she had
synthesized a therapy diat could usually cure die most
common American addiction: cigarette smoking.
14 Marc Stiegler
Jan continued. "I don't know whether the favor I'm
asking you will help save the world or not. Perhaps it will.
I wish I knew." Another cough punctuated the sentence.
"What I want you to do is talk with Nathan about the
Sling."
"The Sling?"
"Yes. It's a military research project."
Despite the exhaustion, and the stiflhess of his skin from
cold and exposure, Hilan managed to grimace. "God, I
hate the military," Again, the air left his lungs too fast. "I
wish we didn't need it."
Jan smothered a laugh. "Our mammoth military-industrial
complex isn't very American, is it? You know, the first act
of the American government after the Revolutionary War
was to disband its standing army. They sold the navy's
ships. America's forces were reduced to 80 men. none
above the rank of captain."
She stretched out on the sleeping bag beside him. "Even
today you can see the strength of the anti-military roots of
our country. How else could America engage in fierce
public debates over permission for advisers to carry side-
arms? Even at the heights of our military adventurism, an
astute observer can see that it's unnatural for us: we do it
so badly. We make far better businessmen than soldiers."
Hilan had never thought of it in quite this light before.
"Yet America wound up as the principal adversary of the
most powerful military force in human history." He thought
about the absurdity of the situation. "How did we get
ourselves into this position?" He shook his head. "Even
more important, how have we managed to pull it off for

such a long time?"
"For decades, we succeeded as a superpower by holding
the ultimate club. We succeeded because we had more,
and better, nuclear weapons." She shook her head. "But
that doesn't work anymore. How could we convince a
cold-eyed political pragmatist like Sipyagin that America
would use nuclear arms, knowing that the Soviets would
destroy us in turn? The nuclear threat served us well for a
long time, but its time has come to an end. No one
behoves we can use it anymore."
Hilan shifted on his bag, trying to burrow into it. The
DAVID'S SUNG                15
chilled air made the goose down warmth precious. "It's
impossible for anyone to believe that we'd use nukes as
long as Mayfield is the decision maker. Some people have
trouble believing he can use a letter opener, much less a
nuke." Hilan tried to say it without passion. President
Mayfield was a member of his own party, after all.
Jan nodded. "You know, both the Soviets and the Ameri-
cans go through cycles of confrontational behavior. You might
think the greatest danger looms when both countries reach
the peak of their aggression cycles at the same time. But that's
not true. The greatest danger occurs when the cycles go out
of phase—when the United States reaches one of its lowest
lows and the Soviet Union reaches one of its highest highs."
The cold of the glacial air reached Hilan's heart. "And
we've come to that moment in the cycle."
Jan didn't answer,
'So what's the Sling Project?"
Jan laughed at the compound of despair and hope in his
voice. "We make better businessmen than soldiers. We
must fight, then, as businessmen."
Hilan tried to snort, but it took too much effort. "A
division of businessmen wouldn't last very long against a
division of soldiers."
"No, of course not. We'd still "need soldiers. But we can
do with a lot fewer soldiers than some countries because
we have another strength; we have crossed the threshold
from one form of society to another. Our opponents live in
the Industrial Age. We stand on the brink of the Informa-
tion Age. We must build an Information Age system to
defend ourselves."
"And just how do we do that?"
Jan smiled at his limp form. "You look so exhausted—
and so curious at the same time. I think I'll leave you in
this state and let Nathan tell you the rest of the story."
Hilan groaned. "Very well. When would you like to

introduce us?"
Jan closed her eyes. "That may not work," she said. She
coughed again, and this time it racked her whole body.
Blood spattered the soft snow, a dark obscenity in the
evening sunlight. "Dammit," she muttered, "I better at
least get off the mountain."
16 Marc Stiegler
Hilan rose unsteadily to his knees. "What's wrong? What's
happening?"
"I'm really sorry, Hilan. The climb down may be harder
than I'd hoped."
"What!?"
Jan rose to her feet and put her hands on his shoulders.
"Hilan, you're a born crusader. In some ways you remind
me of Nathan." She looked away for a moment. "But I
haven't always marched to a crusader's rhythm. I was
quite content as a chain-smoking psychotherapist, until
three years ago. Then I had my reinforced revelation."
She coughed again. "I found out I had lung cancer."
Hilan had met Jan just a year ago, through another of
his rare crusader friends, who had just discovered the
Institute. He'd wondered briefly about her past, about
why she molded the Institute into a national resource that
did all the things it was famous for—from seminars on
mass media, to job matching, to weapon systems develop-
ment—but he hadn't thought about it enough. Now it was
obvious.
"The chemotherapy they have these days is quite ter-
rific. They can keep you alive and active, even while the
cancer is eating you up inside. Then the end comes quite
suddenly." She closed her eyes. "Leslie and Nathan both
insisted I shouldn't challenge the mountain this last time.
I guess they were right."
Hilan stared with helpless horror,
"Well find a hospital in the morning. Better get some
sleep—we'll start early."
The ache deep within his bones allowed him no other
response. He slept, but his sleep roiled with odd images:
images of Soviets, and cigarettes, and nuclear missiles.
Woven through them all were images of a man, dangling
in a crevasse, with only the strength of the rope and the
taut determination of his partner's straining muscles to
save him.
SNAP. In games of ball and racket, such as tennis,
the racket must cease to be a separate external object-
It must become one with the player—an extension of
his arm. The arm and the eye must also meld through

DAVID'S SUNG                17
the mediation of the mind. And though the mind controls
this connection, it too must submerge its separateness, its
awareness of self, into the union. Only the racket con-
nected directly to the eye plays outstanding tennis.
CLICK. With the acquisition of the flatcam video re-
corder, the news reporter develops a similar relationship
with his camera. With the tape riding quietly on his hip,
and the flat camera lens pinned on his lapel, individual
virtuosos can replace the old-style news teams. The cam-
era is almost invisible; the reporter is quite inconspicuous.
As he becomes less conspicuous, he becomes less inhibit-
ing to the people who are his targets. The reporter's eye
and the reporter's camera become a single device with
which to capture the images he will later clean and craft in
the lab. The lab supplies the magic. It is a place where
background noise and foreground lighting can be toned to
highlight the message, all by using powerful techniques of
Information Age filtering,
WHIR. Bill Hardie knows that he has been born in the
right moment of history—the beginning of the era of flatcam
journalism. He can see from the camera lens in his lapel—
not merely the lighting and the people, but the action, the
emotions, the sensations. He can zero in on those ele-
ments with the skill of an astronomer picking out galaxies
on the edge of the universe- Sometimes he can sense the
critical moment, allowing him to shift his attention before
the event, to capture it's very beginnings, rather than its
concluding passage.
JUMP. The only flaw in Bill's coverage is an occasional
jerldness to the image, a reflection of a certain anxious
impatience with real life. His analysis is too important to
wait on the sluggish motions of other men. Fortunately,
the jitter of his camera, like the noise of murmured voices
in the background, can be removed in the laboratory.
FOCUS. Bill recognizes the heavy burden his talent
places on him. He understands his mission in life. He
must broadcast truth in a pure form to all people. Just as
his computer filters the background noise that blurs the
conversation, he must filter out the foreground noise that
blurs the fundamental reality,
18 Marc Stiegler
BREAK. Bill frowns at the young geological engineer
from the Zetetic Institute up on the stage. The engineer
poses a serious problem for Bill. This engineer introduces
blaring noise into the foreground, drowning out the truth.
The truth is; The people of the State of Washington must
not let the United States dump its radioactive wastes
there. Nuclear power plants and radioactive wastes are
bad; this is the truth. Bill focuses his attention on the
nuances of the situation, to wring victory from every tiny
image as it happens.

SHADE. Three men sit spotlighted on the stage facing a
dimly lit auditorium. Cigarette smoke forms miniature
weather inversions here and there in the audience. A puff
of acrid blue haze blows across Bill's face; he shifts locations.
FOCUS. The spotlights create the mood of an interroga-
tion, with unseen prosecutors and accusers contemplating
the three men nearly blinded by the light. The Zetetic
engineer sits in the middle of the three, flanked by two
older men—directors from the Power Commission- These
directors are the ones who had hired the Zetetic Institute
to act as an impartial consultant, to assess the safety of a
radioactive waste storage facility near Hanford, Washington.
Why had they hired the Institute? They had known that
the Institute had a reputation for doing good engineering.
Equally important, the Institute had a reputation for pre-
senting that engineering smoothly in public.
Indeed, the opening of the discussion is dry and crisp,
almost too civilized; the Zetetic engineer simply presents
facts about the geological properties of the proposed waste
site. With careful clarity, he shows why it is a safe place to
put radioactives. Bill realizes the Power Commission has
taken a risk in hiring the Institute: Zetetics search dili-
gently for facts, and facts could go against the Power
Commission as easily as they could go in its favor,
The men of the Power Commission, in their dark blue
suits, with their tight, closed faces, mirror the audience's
hostility. They perform as perfect Establishment objects of
disdain. Had the engineer sat to the side rather than in
the middle of the trio, Bill would zoom on them and
construct a crisp image of Good versus Evil—the audience
versus the Power Commission.
DAVID'S SUNG                19
But the engineer sits in the middle, looking gentle,
even friendly, in his light blue suit and solid red tie. He
maintains an open smile and equally open eyes, appar-
ently oblivious to the emotional tension that stews amidst
the combatants. Only the careful precision of his words
hints that his understanding of the situation goes deep.
Bill will have to perform magic with the lighting and die
shading of the stage to make him look sinister. Even then,
Bill's success will be incomplete.
PAN. Ovals of pale white float in the darkness of the
auditorium: the faces of the concerned citizens who live
near Hanford. From here the questions spring, randomly.
in sharp tones of frustration and anger. One oval bobs
twice, then rises. It is a young woman with spiked hair
and mottled jeans. She asks, "How can we make them
shut those plants down if we let them dump their waste
products on our land?"
When the engineer responds to the woman's question,
his voice warms the room with its honesty. 'The best way

to eliminate nuclear power is, of course, to find a better
form of power, such as msion or solar power satellites.
Remember, if you just tell the Power Commission that
they can't build nuclear power plants, without telling them
what would be better, they'll probably build a coal-burning
plant. Is that really better?" The engineer shrugs. "That's
a separate study, of course."
ZOOM. For just a moment, the young man frowns. Bill
catches that expression, savoring it, knowing it will be
useful. "This is the safest place we can find to put the
wastes that already exist. In other words, if we put them
someplace else, it's more dangerous. Many of you are
concerned about how dangerous nuclear reactors are. Don't
you see that if you won't let the power companies use the
safest methods they can find, then you are creating a
self-fulfilling prophecy? Do you believe that you should
sabotage the reactors to show how dangerous they are?
That is exactly what a person does when he prevents
others from using safety precautions."
WHIR, WHIR, WHIR. This is beautiful! Bill can use
that bit about sabotage: it will make the engineer sound
hostile, despite the soft cheer of his voice.
20 Marc Stiegfcr
PAN. A middle-aged man with a beard and a faded
flannel shirt speaks, arms crossed, from a slouched posi-
tion in his seat. "We have the right to decide what to put
outside our town,"
SLIDE. The engineer nods. "That's true." His smile
freezes in position as he looks into the speaker's eyes.
"You have me right to decide. But living in a democracy is
not just a matter of rights and freedoms; it is also a matter
of responsibilities and duties. You have the right to shout
'Firel in a crowded theater. You have a duty to not
exercise that freedom.
"Similarly, here you have the right to decide. But you
have a duty to make that decision based on die most
careful, rational analysis of the facts that you can. You have
a duty not to decide based on a general hatred for the
Power Commission, as some people might. And you have
a duty not to decide on the basis of a love of high technol-
ogy, as other people might."
CUP. A voice from the darkness shouts, "It's not fair
that it all goes in our backyards."
ROLL. The engineer sighs. "Our society carries with it
a number of undesirable features. The only fairness we can
approach is to spread the unfaimess as fairly as we can.
Let them put the radioactives here; it's the best place. But
make them put the missile silos and the strip mines else-
where. If someone figures out another arrangement that's
as safe as putting the radioactives here, but that's more
fair, and that doesn't have any other even more serious
consequences, let's do that instead."

ZOOM. Another middle-aged man stands. This one wears
a suit that might have done justice to a member of the
Power Commission. "What about our property values?
When they put that radioactive dump in our backyards,
well be destroyed."
SUDE. Another nod comes from the engineer. "Of
course, if the Power Commission handles the waste prop-
erly, tile property values should not be affected. So to
encourage them, we recommend that the Commission be
required to pay the owner of a property tile difference
between the value of the land considering the presence of
the site, and the value of the land if the site weren't here,
DAVID'S SLING                 21
when he sells. We've subcontracted with a real estate
assessor to establish a set of baseline values." He glanced
sideways at the Commission men with a hint of amuse-
ment. "This was not the recommendation that the Com-
mission liked most."
PAN. An elderly lady rasps from the front, "What if
they don't handle the wastes properly? What if they make
a mistake?"
ZOOM. Sorrow masks the Zetetic's face for a moment.
"That's what we must prevent. As I've shown, there are a
wide variety of mistakes that the system can tolerate be-
cause the base rock of the area is fundamentally safe. And
the shipping containers are also safe from a wide variety of
human errors and natural calamities. But ultimately, even
this system must rely on human beings to not invent new
kinds of errors. So we asked ourselves the following ques-
tion: What mechanism could we use to inspire the opera-
tors of the site to seek out and correct unforeseen problems
before they become critical?"
The young man smiles as he contemplates the probing
analysis he has done on this problem. "Do you know how
the Romans guaranteed the quality of their bridges? In the
opening ceremony, the man who designed the bridge
floated on a raft underneath while the first carts passed
over. If the bridge collapsed, the builder of the bridge
went with it. This ritual guaranteed the construction of
many good bridges."
CUT. This story gets a short, murmured chuckle from
the audience, as if against their own will, they appreciate
the justice of the system.
SLIDE. The Zetetic engineer waves an open hand. "We
have a similar plan here, involving both a carrot and a stick.
For the stick, we recommend that the chief operating engin-
eer and the plant manager for the waste site be required
to live within twenty miles of the site during their tenure.
"We also recommend protection for the chief operating
engineer. If he finds grave hazards with the plant that he

cannot fix because of expense or politics, then he can blow
the whistle with security: The Power Commission will be
required to pay him five years' salary. Thus, the man in
the best position to know about new dangers has a 'para-
22 Marc Stickler
chute' to protect him from the people who have the most
to lose in Bxing the problem."
PAUSE. The audience seems struck by this approach to
guaranteeing safety. They don't know if it will work or not,
but it is at least different. Even Bill feels a stab of surprise,
He clenches his teeth with resolve, remembering that
even this novel idea does not change the basic truth.
FLASH. A woman in the back, with two children squirm-
ing beside her, speaks. "Are you telling us that the danger
from these radioactive wastes is zero?"
PAN. "Of course not," the engineer replies, leaving Bill
with a wave of relief. He can certainly use that reply for
some mileage. "What I'm telling you is that the danger
from die radioactive dump is less than the danger of
driving your car home tonight."
CUT. The discussion goes on, but to no purpose in Bill's
value system. Most of the people leave with the same
opinions they held upon arrival. But Bill knows that the
engineer, with his facts, has swayed some of those people
away from the truth. Herein Bill sees the significance of
his own life: He must bring those people back to the fold,
and convert others—enough others to defeat the damned
Zetetic Institute.
Indeed, the Institute, and its emphasis on facts repre-
sent a grave danger to more issues other than the Hanford
waste storage debate. Bill sees a task of greater scope
being him. Perhaps part of his purpose is to destroy the
purveyors of such facts, facts that by denying truth be-
come a travesty of truth.
CUT. CUT. CUT. CUT. The size of the editing job he
faces with this video shakes him; the Zetetic engineer has
been smooth indeed. The engineer qualifies as a politi-
cian, despite his early recitations on ground water, earth-
quakes, and mining costs. However, that smoothness does
not worry Bill unduly: after all, whoever gets the last word
wins the argument. And in news reporting, the editing
reporter always gets the last word.
WRAP.
Yuri Klimov decided that it was the ivory figurines that
lent the cold formality to the room. The shiny figurines
DAVID'S SUNG                23
glared at him from their perches in the shiny black book-
cases. Despite their carefully kept luster, however, they

were old. Age had worn them to soft curves in a thousand
little places meant for sharply carved angles. Age had
worn mem as age had worn the General Secretary himself,
seated across the mahogany table from Yurii.
General Secretary Sipyagin closed his eyes. Yurii feared
he might have dozed off, but his eyes opened again, in a
slow, blinking motion. His pallid skin folded into a smile.
"Delightful, Yurii. I am pleased you have found the Ameri-
cans easy to deal with."
Yurii shrugged. "Mayfield has little choice but to yield.
His people practically advertise their need for paper assur-
ances. All we need do is squeeze," he closed his fist ever
so gently, "and concessions flow forth." He smiled. "May-
field got into office by promising to relax worldwide ten-
sions. He must sign, and sign, and sign again to maintain
his position."
"Nevertheless, you handle him like a master. Now, a few
years ago when we tried negotiating with Keefer and his
henchmen, things were very different."
"The secret is to be able to think as the Americans
think—without losing our Soviet pragmatism." He shook
his head, and spoke with just a'hint of puzzlement. "They
do not think like us, you know."
Sipyagin coughed in a sound of disgust. "Yes. They
think like weak children."
Yurii opened his mouth to object, then closed it "Yes,
often like children."
"Well start a new missile program immediately. When
those crazy Americans were toying with space defenses it
was a bad investment to build missiles—who knew what
kind ofcountermeasures we might have to retrofit? At last,
we've been relieved of this burden of uncertainty."
Yurii smiled. "Yes, now we can sharpen our strategic
edge."
Sipyagin gurgled with laughter. "As if we needed to
sharpen it any more."
Yurii joined the laughter- It was wonderful, sharing a
joke with the General Secretary, despite bis infirmities.
Or perhaps because of them. "With this treaty, it will be
24 Marc SUegler
easy to maintain our strategic advantage. It might make
more sense at this point to start undermining their tactical
forces. I'll see what my men can do in the next round of
discussions."
Sipyagin nodded. "A marvelous idea." He turned away
to look at a stack of wrinkled papers by his side.

Clearly the General Secretary had dismissed him, but
Yurii had one more request. "Sir, there is one last thing I
would like to investigate in the strategic realm."
"Yes?"
"I question this whole concept of global consequences
for a nuclear war. I know that our modellers agree with
their modellers: you can set off just so many megatons
before the radiation releases and the climate effects are so
massive that they span the planet, no matter where they
get set off. But many of those modellers are soft civilians,
who want us to avoid nuclear warfare for their own rea-
sons. I can't help wondering if the threshold might be
higher than these people think. Simulation is a soft sci-
ence, as I'm sure you know. Its results should not be left
in the hands of biased civilians. If we knew that the
threshold were higher, we would have an enormous edge
over the Americans; we could continue ban-aging them
with nuclear weapons even after they had ceased fire.
Living in their fantasy world of nuclear danger, they would
foar killing their own survivors."
The General Secretary chuckled. "Control of a nuclear
war would belong completely to us then, wouldn't it? Very
well." He waved his hand—was it shaking?—toward the
door. Yurii felt Sipyagin's weary eyes follow him as he
swept through it.
Yurii breathed deeply. The air in the hall was stale, but
he felt refreshed nonetheless. Interviews with the General
Secretary always reminded him how wonderful it was to
be young and healthy.
May 26
In the Information Age, the first step to
sanity is HLTERinO. niter the informa-
tion; extract the knowledge.
—Zetetic Commentaries, Kira Evans
They held an early ceremony—early enough to discour-
age people from coming, early enough to complete quickly,
early enough to catch the morning dew before it evapo-
rated. Dampness still shimmered on the rocks and mark-
ers that dotted the cemetery.
"I am the resurrection and the life, saieth the Lord; He
that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he
live ..." the minister's voice droned on.
Leslie felt disconnected from the service, as though
watching through a telescope the odd behavior of an alien
culture. It left him calm—perhaps too calm. He had lost
too many people to be overwhelmed by the loss of one
more. He would not be overwhelmed this time, though
this time he had lost the most wonderful woman he had
ever known: his wife, Jan Evans. .

His mind skipped briefly across the toll death had taken
around him during the years. Leslie Evans had flown as an
Air Force fighter pilot. Even in peacetime, one fourth of
all fighter pilots never reached retirement age. How odd
for him to be attending Jan's funeral, rather than the other
way around. There had certainly been moments during
the last agonizing days of her life that he wished he could
have reversed tEeir positions, if only to give her a few
hours without pain.
Perhaps the crowning irony was that her impending
death had caused her to save his life. He too had been a
cigarette smoker, until Jan contracted lung cancer. Jan had
used him as her first guinea pig in her efforts to develop
better cures for smoking. His fingers twitched at the thought
of the cigarettes he had not touched for two years.
25
26 Marc Stiegler
tt. . . and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall
never die ..."
He could not have thanked her or loved her enough,
had she lived a thousand years.
He heard a sniffle to his right. From the comer of his
eye he watched his daughter, Kira, as she stared off to the
horizon. Despite her sniffle, she seemed more angry than
sad. Leslie knew the focus of her anger. He had watched
her carefully during these last few days. Her attitudes
reminded him of Jan in her youth. Kira had graduated
from Virginia Tech just in time to witness the last throes of
Jan's battle; now her graduation ceremony would seem
stale and pointless. Leslie reached out and took her hand
in his. She did not look at him, but her grip held surpris-
ing strength. Her nails dug into his hand. The pain seemed
more real, more in tune with the grief battering his mind,
than the words of the minister.
". . . Death will be swallowed up in victory . , ."
He saw Kira's face tighten with renewed anger. She was
not a person to sit on her emotions without acting, Leslie
worried about what she might do. She had engaged in
long sessions with the Zetetic computers since coming
home, searching for something. She had not tried to alter
any of the data bases, but two days ago, she had mentioned
that she had accepted a job with a small advertising firm.
When Leslie did his own data base search, he found that
this particular Brm had just won a big contract with the
largest tobacco company in die country. Leslie felt tired
every time he thought about what that might mean. And of
course, it wouldn't do him any good to confront her about it.
".. . When I consider thy Heaven, the work of thy fingers,
the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained ..."
Nathan might be able to talk to her about it. Kira and

her uncle had always had a special understanding. Leslie
shifted his head to look at Nathan Pilstrom.
Nathan gazed at the preacher with calm. clear eyes.
Nathan had not seen so many deaths as Leslie; he did not
share Leslie's numbness to human mortality. But Nathan
had his own sort of protection, a way of accepting the
immediate reality as the starting point for his thoughts. He
never dwelled on might-have-beens.
DAVID'S SUNG                27
Nathan himself seemed surprised at times by his own
stolid acceptance of events gone by. Even more surpris-
ing, his acceptance did not dull his enthusiasm for chang-
ing things as they might be tomorrow—things over which
he could still exercise control. He had a pragmatic, Zetetic
way of thinking. Nathan himself attributed his perspective
to Jan's influence, but Leslie knew that the seeds had
always been there. It seemed natural for Nathan to devise
new ways of viewing the world.
But it didn't seem quite as natural for him to run a
world-famous Institute. Jan had thrust him into that posi-
tion, her last and greatest effort. Leslie wondered if Na-
than might not harbor a mild irritation with Jan for sticking
him with that responsibility. Because of Jan, he now had
to deal with politics, and with politicians.
". . . Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, in whose
hands are the living and the dead: we give these thanks for
all Thy servants who have laid down their lives in the
service of our country ..."
Leslie looked far to his right to see Senator Hilan Forstil.
Forstil was the only politician he had met whom he hadn't
disliked on sight. He didn't understand his own lack of
hostility, Forstil seemed as phony as any of them. Jan had
assured him that Forstil was a straight shooter. Leslie took
her word for it as long as he didn't have to bet money.
In this moment, however, Leslie thought he saw what
Jan had meant. Of all the people at this funeral, Forstil
seemed most grief-stricken. He stood apart from the oth-
ers, speaking to no one, grappling with some deep per-
sonal loss.
And another person he didn't know—a young, serious,
clean-shaven man—also stood separate from the others-
Leslie was pretty sure he was Kurt McKenna, a kid just
out of Special Forces, recruited for the Institute by Jan.
He wondered how the gung-ho attitude of a ranger would
mesh with Zetetic philosophy; the Institute fought fanati-
cism with a zeal that itself bordered on the fanatical. Kurt
would no doubt set off new kinds of fireworks within the
ZI realm; Leslie hoped they would be healthy.
". . . grant to them Thy mercy, and the light of Thy
presence; and give us such a lively sense of Thy righteous

28 Marc Stiegler
will, that the work which Thou hast begun in them may be
perfected ..."
The ceremony ended. Leslie hugged his daughter tightly,
Nathan came up beside them, and Leslie and Kira opened
their arms to him as well. For a while the three of them
stood huddled by the grave. After an immeasurable time
they separated, reluctantly, like the fibers of a rope being
parted.
Until now, Leslie had kept his thoughts away from Jan
with scrupulous success- But images of her, accumulated for
almost twenty-five years, welled up in his mind. And
despite all the funerals of friends and pilots he had at-
tended, despite the calloused surface of his mind that
should have been inured to the tragic losses, he turned
away from everyone and slipped into the cemetery's groves
to walk alone with his grief.
ROLL. He dashes past the Institute with a flurry of
pleasure, confident in his strength. Bill is a runner, a
marathoner. He understands the pain that accompanies an
effort too great—a pain almost as great as the pleasure of
making that effort. For now, there is only pleasure.
The air melts as he passes, carrying away his perspira-
tion. A wind gusts against him, full in the face, twisting
through the curls of his hair. He presses against it, exul-
tant with die knowledge that the gust cannot obstruct his
passage. He continues, several laps across the entrance to
the Institute.
Thirty-five minutes. Five miles. A year before, he had
made similar runs in 32 minutes. A year before that, he
had made them in 30 minutes. The difference, he concludes,
is statistically insignificant. He feels as strong as he has ever
been. That is the truth, not to be confused with the fact.
Bill showers and dresses. Invigorated, he returns to the
Institute.
The Institute building shares no architectural theme
with the other structures in this industrial park. In the late
morning light the building glows a soft salmon color, its
gentle contours reaching out warmly to those who pass by.
The soft-gray windows contrast with the glaring mirrored
portals of other nearby buildings, suggesting that quality
DAVID'S SUNG                29
can nonetheless be quiet. This building seems somehow
friendlier than the others. Bill shakes his head and re-
members that this building houses his target.
To the left of the driveway stands a small bronze sign
with a curious emblem. An arrow points up at a 45 degree
angle, soaring over a pair of embellished steps. After a
moment of squinting in the brightness. Bill realizes the

two steps form the letters "ZI" in a script almost com-
pletely lost in the design.
A shadow falls across him. He is not yet psyched up for
confrontation; he steps to the side and looks at the man
who stopped next to him.
The man smiles and points at the sign. "The Zetetic
Institute invites you to take the next step."
Bill stares, his mouth suddenly dry. The man seems
familiar. He is tall, though not so tall as Bill. A relaxed
alertness sets the lines of his body, similar to the lines of
the building itself. The man's smile is sincere; his gray eyes
probe the wide-eyed awareness in Bill's own eyes. The
honesty in those eyes strikes a chord of guilt in Bill's mind.
The man raises an eyebrow. "Sorry if I surprised you.
It's just that you looked so unhappy, staring at our sign."
Bill frowns.
The man puts out his hand. Tm Nathan Pilstrom."
Nathan Pilstrom—Bill knows the name. He knows he
will remember why in a moment. Nathan Pilstrom grips
his hand firmly. The man seems disgustingly natural, the
caricature that gives the term nice a bad reputation. Bill
has never encountered a better facade.
Nathan leads him down through the courtyard, where a
pair of earth-colored toy robots hum to and fro. They seem
silly, hovering among the well-trimmed trees and shrubs.
Then he realizes that the robots are doing the trimming.
"So what's your interest in the Institute?"
Bill snaps back to awareness of the man beside him. His
throat still feels parched. His cover story resembles his
news stories: at its heart lies a vague form of the facts,
richly articulated, with statements that are not false. "I
saw one of your Zetetic engineers at a meeting near Hanford
recently. He really carved the audience to shreds, and so I
figured I should come and see if I can learn how he did it."
30 Marc Stiegler
Nathan stops; Bill turns to him. Nathan speaks with
distress, "You say he carved up the audience? Who was
it—do you remember?"
Bill stares, then shakes his head. A gust of wind sweeps
the street, throwing grit in Bill's eyes. He squints. "No, I
don't remember his name. But he sure won the argument."
"I'll have to find out who it was," Nathan mutters.
"Believe me, carving people up and winning arguments is
not what Zeteticism is all about. Zeteticism has more in
common with the martial arts—the true master avoids
confrontation; he does not seek it out."

Bill shrugs. "Well, the ZI guy seemed like a winner,
anyway." He grins, adding, "And the way your cult is
growing, I figure I'm better off on the inside than on the
outside."
"Our cult, hm? You've gotten too much of your informa-
tion from the television news people."
Bill's breathing halts—the bastard dares to defame Bill's
own profession! It takes a moment to find words that are
polite. He shakes his head. "Well, 'cult' might be the
wrong term. But you are the people who run the no-
smoking courses, right? And you're the ones who talk
about how the cosmetic industry makes people think they
need more specialized products just so they can sell more
junk. Right?
Nathan winces. "The press has a breathtaking capacity
for oversimplifying. You know that, right? Everyone knows
that. Then why does everyone forget it every time the
press says something?" Nathan's voice suggests frustration.
Yet his tone remains lighthearted. He accepts this oddity
of human behavior without cynicism or anger. "In answer,
we do run clinics on advertising and media manipulation,
and we do discuss the cosmetics industry. As for the
question of human wants and desires, we might ask a
question like this: Do people want more cosmetics, which
persuades the companies to invent more of them? Or do
the companies invent more of them, and persuade the
people they want more? Anyone who thinks the persua-
sions flow strictly one way or the other is not fully con-
nected to reality. There's a feedback loop here, almost as
delicately balanced as a regional ecology." His arms sweep
DAVID'S SLING                  31
as he declares, "We teach people to deal with the best
approximations of reality they can construct—and reality is
always far more complicated than the press coverage
suggests."
Watching that theatrical sweep of the arms. Bill remem-
bers why he knows the name Nathan Pilstrom. He stares
for a moment at the man smiling at him: Nathan Pilstrom
is the founder of the Zetetic Institute. Bill almost stumbles
as they step across the threshold into the Institute.
Meeting the founder so unexpectedly leaves him sur-
prised, yet the surprise drowns in the shock of his view
in this entranceway. His thoughts of Nathan swirl away,
swept aside as the walls now surrounding him imprint
themselves upon him. Bill gasps.
He has seen pictures of the Jewel Hall, but no picture
can capture it. Clusters of the world's finest gems blaze
across the walls, forming starry galaxies beyond price.
Bill's mouth hangs wide as he traces a series of emerald
droplets across the arching ceiling.

Nathan leads him to a central section of the wail. "Take
one," he oners.
"WhatPI"
Nathan rubs his hand across the wall. 'Take one."
Bill reaches for a black opal: could it be the Flame Queen?
His fingers close around it. He clutches it tight—and his
fingers close through the lustrous stone until they touch. A
faint sensation of electricity tingles through his hand.
Nathan chuckles. "As you apparently know, the Zetetic
Institute gives seminars and training on a wide variety of
topics. What you haven't seen yet is the connecting theme
behind all those topics." Nathan leads him forward again,
toward a far door. "The Zetetic theme is that in the
Information Age, correct information is the key resource.
Men must act in harmony with the best information they
have. We strive to develop ever better methods for coping
with the vast quantities of information that inundate us
every day." He spreads his arms to encompass the room.
"The Jewel Hall is encrusted not with jewels, but with
holograms. The holograms embody all the visual informa-
tion, all the beauty, of the jewels they pretend to be." He
laughed the deep, pleasant laugh of a grandfather who has
32 Marc Stiegler
just passed a secret down two generations. "And the infor-
mation that describes those jewels is all that's really im-
portant about them, isn't it? Would this display be any
more spectacular if the jewels contained minerals as well
as information?"
Bill shakes his head. "I guess not. It's incredible." A
thrill runs through his mind. This Zetetic comparison of
truth and materials makes the deepest sense to him—the
truth, as Bill creates it for his audiences, is more valuable
than any possible jewel.
"Congratulations on passing your first Zetetic test. Many
people feel tricked when we acquaint them with this room.
Actually, we offer just the opposite of a trick. We offer a
lesson—a lesson that does not hurt, that is valuable, and
that is not too expensive."
"I guess so." Bill still feels on the defensive. Yet he
begins to feel the thrill of the hunt as well. Nathan Pilstrom
makes a challenging target for his next report.
But Nathan steps through another door. Bill follows,
tense and excited. What lesson lies in the room beyond
the Jewel Hall?
He breathes a sigh of relief. A comfortingly normal
room greets him. Its shape suggests the gentle contours of
the overall building. A receptionist looks up at them.
Nathan taps a terminal on the side. "Take a look through

our catalog of offerings. I think you'll be surprised at the
number of ways that discriminating information can alter
your life. Do you smoke?"
Bill shakes his head.
"Perhaps you would be interested in ... no, probably
not. How about a seminar on separating fact from Huff in
newscasting?"
Damn this man! Bill frowns. "I don't think I need it."
Nathan stops. "My apologies. I don't mean to be pushy."
He shrugs. "Sometimes I'm as bad as the car salesman we
use as an example-"
The receptionist, fielding a buzz from the intercom,
interrupts. "Nathan, Senator Forstil has arrived."
He smiles at her warmly. "Thanks." He turns back to
Bill with a final comment. "If you don't have specific
needs for Zetetic methods, you should take the Sampler.
DAVID'S SUNG                33
It'll give you some idea of how we apply surprising ideas
to everyday problems."
"That sounds great." Yes, this is what Bill needs. Only
with a broad view of the Institute can he find the most
striking defects of the organization. The Sampler will be
perfect.
Bill watches Nathan depart with cruel amusement. So
Senator Forstil is involved with the Institute! He'll get
some mileage out of that.
Only an expert could have discerned the quiet struggle
in the soft-lit office. Nathan leaned against the edge of his
desk, his arms folded. His head drooped, as if he might
nod off at any moment. He seemed so casual, so cool.
But the expert would have spotted his twitch every time
a stray sound rattled down me hall. The expert would
have seen Nathan's lips draw to a short smile following
each twitch. It was a smile of forgiving laughter—Nathan
laughed at himself. He was very, very nervous about this
meeting with Senator Forstil.
How annoying Nathan found it, to be the founder and
president of an Institute dedicated to helping people over-
come unsanity, and stiU be subject himself to such irratio-
nal anxiety!
Still, denial of that anxiety wouFd mark an even lower
level of sanity. Nathan smiled at the anxiety and jumped at
every sound.
He let his eyes roam across the walls of his office.
People who associated him with the Information Age often

felt surprise at his choice of decorations. A number of
mementos seemed appropriate: a flow chart hung in one
corner, describing the first PEP program developed by
the Zetetic Corporation, The signatures of the PEP devel-
opment team members filled one comer of the chart. A
long, narrow, Escher print snaked across the wall behind
his desk.
But the works that dominated the room were the maps.
Age had broken off their edges, had yellowed the paper
and cracked the ink, but they were still readable-
Worse than the mars of aging were the defects in their
basic structure. All the maps had serious flaws; not one of
34 Marc Stiegler
them accurately represented the terrain it tried to depict.
The maps always reminded Nathan to remain hopeful for,
flawed as the maps were, men had achieved numerous
victories using them. Those who used maps wisely always
remembered the differences between the maps and their
terrains.
The old maps held no more flaws than the internal maps
modem men used to navigate through life—maps of in-
ferred deductions about other people's motives and plans.
The differences between those internal maps and external
realities contained lethal potentialities; yet wisdom could
prevail now as in the past.
Nathan jerked at a new sound. A light tread paused
briefly just outside his office. Nathan shifted forward as
the senator entered the room, and stared for a moment in
surprise. "Hie senator had been one of the silent mourners
at Jan's fimeral that morning, but the grief and mourning
had peeled away, like a molted skin. His expression now
belonged to a completely different person.
First analysis: short but snappy. His silvery gray hair
was swept back in precise curves. His mustache was neatly
trimmed, and his mouth gave no hint of pleasure or pain.
His expressionless gray suit fit him with the precision of
custom tailoring. A sharp streak of yellow crossed the face
of an otherwise somber silk tie, and a tiny gold pin with a
single diamond chip glinted on his lapel.
He gazed calmly at Nathan, as he analyzed Nathan in
turn.
First synthesis: Forstil projected an image of controlled
power—a power channeled to sharply denned purposes.
The illusion carried through to each detail of his appear-
ance with a perfection too great to be unintended—so
great it could partly fulfill its own prophecy.
The senator's meticulous illusion frustrated Nathan's need
for insight. What motivated this man? What were his
ethics? Would Nathan have to manipulate him, or would
education be enough? In this first meeting, Nathan didn't
have a choice: his own ethics demanded crisp honesty,

unless the senator himself revealed manipulative behavior.
Nathan had to try education.
Meanwhile, Nathan was sure the senator's calm blue
DAVID'S SUNG                35
eyes had seen more of him than he had seen of the
senator- Hilan had seen that Nathan was a soft touch for
truth. He knew Nathan preferred simple, open dealings.
Nathan smiled, and though the smile felt foolish, he con-
tinued. "Senator," he greeted the projection of power with
an outstretched hand, "what do you think of the Institute?"
They shook hands: again, nothing revealed. Senator
Forstil's face broke into a half-smile. "The Zetetic Insti-
tute," he rolled the words off his tongue, toying with the
sounds. "I've seen your building. Jan and I have discussed
some parts of Zetetic philosophy. But I know nothing
about your organization. What is a Zetetic Institute?"
Was there sarcasm there? Forstil gave no hint. "A good
question," Nathan replied, "but it has a difficult answer."
He pointed to the low table across from his desk. "Chair?**
Four chairs encircled die smoke-gray glass table. Two of
the chairs slunk low into the carpet; the other two dis-
played more austere lines, encouraging one to lean for-
ward into the conversation- The senator took one of these.
Nathan had at times taken a low seat when faced with
dangerous people, to give them a false sense of security.
He sighed, thinking about the number of times he had had
to use manipulative techniques, just to avoid being harmed
by other people's manipulations. He took the high seat
opposite me senator. Nathan suspected the senator was
not easily manipulated.
The senator's probable immunity was more surprising
than most people realized. The typical manipulator suc-
ceeds because he believes his own propaganda, and thus
becomes vulnerable to the propaganda of others. Jan's
analysis said this man doubted his own illusions.
Forstil watched him patiently. Nathan returned to the
senator's question; what is a Zetetic Institute? Jan had
surely described the Institute for him before, so this ques-
tion undoubtedly had qualities of a test, as well as a
request for information. His only possible response was
indirect—as unsatisfying as the description Jan herself had
surely given. "Let me describe the Institute in terms of
what it is not," Nathan began. "First, it is not a building,
or a collection of buildings. Most of the people who work
with the Institute work at home, wherever home may
36 Marc Stiegler
be—from a condo around the corner in the Hunter Woods
complex in Reston, Virginia, to an earth shelter outside
Bozeman, Montana.

"The Institute should not be viewed as a corporation,
though legally it is incorporated m the state of Virginia.
Only a handful of people work for the Institute full-time,
The others come and go, depending on particular con-
tracts and projects that interest them.
"The Institute is not a cult—" Nathan felt some deja vu,
having discussed this with the tall, angry man on the way
in "—though the people of the Institute share many atti-
tudes. behaviors, and slang expressions. It would be more
accurate to say we share a common meta-philosophy—a
philosophy about building your own philosophies. We are
eclectics, taking the best or most useful ideas we find,
wherever we find them, and weaving them into cloths of
many colors."
"Sounds like a quick way to mental breakdown," Forstil
observed. "Grabbing bits and pieces of ideas and lifestyles
without a consistent framework."
"Only if it becomes an obsession," Nathan replied eas-
ily. "Only if you grab bits and pieces indiscriminately. The
term 'zetetic' comes from the Greek word for 'skeptic.' A
healthy dose of skepticism is the first thing we teach
people who come here." Nathan frowned. He had not yet
communicated the ethos of the Institute. But what more
could he say? The Zetetic Institute could not be described
using Industrial Age terminology, any more than quantum
mechanics could be described with Aristotle's concepts of
waves and particles, or any more than the Tao could be
defined in terms of Western civilization.
But he had to answer, quickly and succinctly, for this
man. "If I were to be so foolish as to sum up what the
Institute is, rather than what it is not, I would say it is an
Information Age resource pool for solving Industrial Age
problems. Once the country makes the transition to a
fall-fledged Information Age society, the Institute will hope-
fully become a place to solve Information Age problems.
For the moment, however, the Industrial Age and its
institutions represent the important dangers to human
progress."
DAVID'S SLING                 37
Forstil gave him a barely perceptible nod, "And Indus-
trial Age problems include everything from cigarette smoke
to nuclear weapons."
Nathan relaxed. "Exactly."
"Very well." Hilan seemed to accept the basic idea of
die Zetetic Institute, despite the ambiguities. "Now, what
is a Sling?"
Nathan smiled; Forstil had moved to the central topic
with bracing efficiency. "The Sling is an Information Age
weapon for defeating Industrial Age armies. It may be the
only chance free societies have in a world where they must

compete with leaders of subjugated societies—leaders who
can be far more ruthless because they aren't shackled by
fickle popular opinion."
"That's fine rhetoric, Mr. Pilstrom. But what does it
mean?"
"Let me demonstrate." Nathan whirled out of his chair
and retrieved a keyboard from his desk. A color display in
the wall next to Hilan glowed with a three-dimensional,
skeletal, layout of an airplane. Forstil squinted at it. "Is it
a glider?"
"Almost." As Nathan spoke, a set of arrows highlighted
critical features. "The overall design comes from glider
technology, most distinctively1'in the wing shape. The
frame is built with high-strength composite fibers.
"That's where the resemblance to gliders ends, how-
ever. The tops of the wings are covered with amorphous
semiconductor solar cells for power, which drive the tail
prop as well as the on-board electronics. By optimal use of
wind currents and solar power, the SkyHunter can stay
airborne for months—until it wears out, in fact." Nathan
smiled, concentrating on his keyboard. The skeletal air-
craft grew skin; the background clarified into a mountain-
lined horizon; and the craft lifted into the air, until it
disappeared. "The SkyHunter contains no metal, so it is
radar-invisible. It has no engine flare, so it is infrared-
invisible. Paint it sky blue and cruise it at 30,000 feet, and
it is lightwave-invisible—a completely undetectable plat-
form."
The senator's voice sounded strained. "Is this room a
secure facility?"
38 Marc Stiegler
Nathan looked baffled for a moment, then laughed.
"None of this is classified, senator. This is a picture of the
WeatherWatch recon plane. It was designed by Lightcraft
Corporation and manufactured by Lockheed for meteorol-
ogists. They collect high-altitude weather data in the Arc-
tic for forecasting climate."
"You mean they built a stealth patrol plane by accident?"
"Yes," Nathan chuckled. "More or less. We have made
some substitutions to heighten the effect, such as the
materials for the solar arrays. The important mods, how-
ever, are down here." The view changed again, to the
underbelly, which sprouted clumps of thin fibers. "We
replaced the normal weather sensors with down-looking
optical and infrared detectors. And there is an anchor
point for bombs."
"How many bombs can a glider carry—two or three?
Hardly the killing power of a battleship." The senator
turned away from the screen to critique Nathan. "I'd
overlooked that problem. You'd need thousands of these

to stop an armored division."
Nathan shook his head. "Actually, we think it'd take
Aree or four SkyHunters to stop a division." As Forstil
objected. Nathan held up his hand to interrupt. "Remem-
ber, this is an information Age weapon. The most critical
part of the weapon cannot be seen in any picture. The
critical part is the information processing, the intelligence."
The wall display changed again—to an aerial scene of
forests, threaded by a delicate web of narrow roads. The
picture changed hue. The forest became a ghostly orange,
and bright dots of blue now stood out as they lumbered along
the gray streaks of road. "This is an infrared image," Nathan
explained. 'The blue dots are tanks." The view zoomed in
on a patch of green. Forms with the outlines of human beings
hustled, or paused, or lay on the ground. "The division com-
mand post, Nathan explained. The view zoomed one more
time, on a particular figure. He was surrounded by other
figures that came, listened for a time, then hurried away
again. The scene brought to mind a queen bee groomed by
her court of drones. "The commanding general,
The brilliant oranges and yellows of an explosion obliter-
ated the scene, making the senator jump back in his seat.
DAVID'S SLING                  39
Nathan spoke quietly, confidently. "The SkyHunter will
not drop its pitiful load of bombs on just anything, sena-
tor. It will cruise patiently in the sky, hunting only the
choicest prey. It does not hunt for the frail creatures of
blood and bone sent by the enemy to die in battle. It
hunts for the minds that command them. Senator, what
does a division do when it loses its commander?"
Hilan thought for a moment. "The soldiers continue on
to meet their current objectives."
"And then?"
The senator pursed his lips grudgingly. "They stop.
They wait for further instructions," He shook his head.
"But eventually, someone will get them organized again."
"By which time other SkyHunters will have destroyed
the regimental command posts that would receive the
orders, and the army headquarters that sent orders to the
division." Nathan leaned forward, "But you're right. One
SkyHunter cannot destroy a division, but it can stop one.
It can transform that division from a brutally effective
offensive machine into a frightened clutch of defenders,
who would be easy pickings for a conventional brigade one
fourth their size. * Nathan could see the recognition in
Hilan's eyes, Hilan's own subcommittee had recently esti-
mated the Russian advantage afong the German border to
be four to one.
After a long pause, Nathan continued. "We also have two
other Hunter platforms—one a ground-effect vehicle, the

other an orbital munitions dispenser. I can show you those
as well."
The senator shook his head. "Another time perhaps."
He frowned. "More important, I need to know why you
have to be the developers. Why not use the normal mili-
tary acquisition system?"
"Because the normal military acquisition system wouldn't
just acquire one—they'd buud one, from scratch. They'd
use military contractors to build a customized system that
might be twice as good, but which would take ten times as
long to develop and cost ten times as much to produce. It
would be so good that by the time they could field it, it
would be obsolete. They would not use commercially avail-
able systems, like the WeatherWatch airplane."
40 Marc Stiegler
As Nathan spoke, he grew more forcefal. No matter
how often he addressed this topic, he could never ap-
proach it with complete Zetetic composure. "Do you know
the story of the TACFIRE computer? It was designed to
control artillery barrages- Unfortunately, it took 25 years
to build. When they finally deployed it in the late '70s and
early '80s, TACFIRE computers cost six million dollars
apiece. During those 25 years, the technology changed to
the point where TACFIRE could hardly be called a com-
puter: it had the processing power of a six hundred dollar
Apple II computer. And TACFIRE could not even operate
wim some of the artillery systems that had evolved during
its 25-year development period." Nathan felt his voice
rising, took a deep breath for control. "Senator, the state
of the world scares me. The United States is in the throes
of confronting the end of the Industrial Age culture it
created. Meanwhile, the Russians grow more aggressive.
Senator, I don't think we can wait twenty years for the
American military to catch up with the civilian revolution
in technology. We need to be able to protect ourselves
better this year." Nathan stopped speaking, filled with
sudden futility. After all. Senator Forstil belonged to the
same party as President Mayfield.
But a shadow of tense worry broke through the senator's
projected image. "You're right," be replied quietly. A long
pause ensued; Nathan wondered if he should speak.
At last, Forstil continued. "I think I know why you
wanted to talk with me, why Jan wanted me to talk with
you. You've beard that various powerful people in the
military want this project taken away from the Defense
Nuclear Agency because they've given you a free hand.
They want the Sling put under FIREFORS, where it can
be controlled more effectively,"
Nathan nodded.
"Ill give it serious consideration. For the moment my sub-
committee will recommend against a transition to FIREFORS
control. But if the army decides to enforce such a move

itself, I cannot stop them. However," he smiled, and for
another moment his image of controlled power relaxed, this
time because his shark's smile seemed uncontrolled, "if the
army decides to move on its own, I shall counsel them."
DAVID'S SUNG               41
Nathan chuckled. "Thank you." They stood up, shook
hands, and Forstil turned to depart. As he reached the
door, he turned, puzzled. "One last thing."
"Yes?"
"Why do you call it the Sling?"
"Because David of Israel was the forerunner of the
Information Age warrior." Nathan leaned back against his
desk, returning to the position from which he had started
this encounter. "Senator, when David stood against the
Philistines, he faced the most heavily armed and armored
enemy of his day. David himself was unarmored, and
virtually unarmed. Yet, by the application of just a tiny
amount of force, precisely applied, he defeated Goliath."
"Defeated him with nothing but his sling," the senator
finished the analogy. "Moreover, he defeated the enemy
by striking at his command center." He touched his fore-
head, as if he could feel the blow of a slingshot stone
against his temple. "May our Sling work as well," was
Hilan's parting prayer.
"May we never need to test it," was Nathan's.
Far beneath Daniel Wilcox's office, the cherry blossoms
along the George Washington Parkway fluttered in a frenzy
of color. From here, high in the Wilcox-Morris Building
that dominated Rosslyn, the view took panoramic propor-
tions—two sheer walls of glass, floor to ceiling, enclosed
half the office. The sweeping view overcame the sense of
enclosure with the sense of open sky. Daniel's eyes crin-
kled with amusement as he watched the new advertising
executive, Kira Evans. She tried to shift her chair to look
across that panorama. Her efforts amused him because the
room had been designed so that he had the pleasure of
that view from his desk. Kira could turn her back on the
view, or she could turn her back on him; she could not
face both at the same time.
He considered shifting to the conference table to accom-
modate her, but it was more fan to watch her cope with
the problem. Besides, she had not earned such a view yet.
If she wanted the use of an office such as this, she would
have to take command of a corporate empire, as he had done.
42 Marc Sttegler
Even as he watched, Kira resolved the dilemma, lean-
ing forward, focusing her whole concentration on the job
at hand. Daniel returned his attention to the layouts she
bad brought him, shuffling through to his favorite adver-

tisement. This one ad suggested that Kira might indeed
get an office of her own with panoramic windows. The ad
was a beautifully Grafted full-page paste-up, carefully ex-
plaining why the tobacco industry wasn't at fault for the
rising incidence of smoking among children. He took a
drag off his cigarette, and blew the smoke into the faint
blue haze that swirled around him on its way to the air
conditioning vent. "This is great stuff," he congratulated
her. "An excellent utilization of our reborn plain-talk ad-
vertising strategy at work." He smiled. "I particularly like
your point about advertisements saying that cigarettes are
strictfy for grown-ups, not for kids.'
Kira rumbled with her cigarette, showing the same skill
a thirteen-year-old girl might show in handling a snake,
but she continued gamely. Clearly, she had gotten the
word: if you worked with the Wilcox-Morris Tobacco Com-
pany, you had to smoke with them as well. That policy was
strictly, strictly unofficial, of course. It would have been
technically legal to hire, fire, and promote on the basis of
smoking habits, but Daniel knew the consequences if he
started such a policy: the news media would nay him alive,
and legislation would follow. It was better to leave it
unstated. Kira was a good example of how effective such
unstated policies could be. She would get used to the
cigarette between her lips; she would get hooked on the
rush; she would become a good member of the team.
But not yet. His compliment on her advertisement had
not pleased her; she seemed disturbed with the explana-
tion that cigarette advertisements were strictly for adults.
"Thank you for the compliment," she said, with a sincere
smile that turned quickly to a frown. "But I'm afraid this
ad may not work the way we intended. Our adults-only
advertising may be the most effective kind of children's
advertising possible. After all, what could possibly be a
better way to get children started than telling them ifs for
grown-ups?"
Daniel waved the objection aside. "Nonsense. We're
DAVID'S SUNG               43
just being up-front and honest. Nobody can get angry at us
for that." From time to time, similar thoughts disturbed
Daniel himself. He would have to help Kira overcome the
sense of guilt, as he had himself. He would have to help
her look l)eyond the intellectual questions if she were to
mold herself into a useful tool.
Kira leaned forward in her chair as if to refresh the
argument, thought better of it, then sank glumly back. "I
suppose you're right."
'Of course I'm right." Daniel sought for something to
distract her from further contemplation of her guilt.
Kira had great talent, and, God knew, the tobacco com-
panies needed to cultivate every ounce of talent they could
find these days. The enemies were so numerous, the fields

of opportunities from which they needed to clear oppo-
nents were so vast, he needed to find a way to get Kira
involved as rapidly as possible. A little bit of quiet conspir-
acy might be just the ticket. People loved to work together
in conspiracies, to strike against great enemies, and Daniel
had need for a new conspiracy. "Do you fully understand
why we've recruited your agency?"
As Kira gave him a blank stare, Daniel came around his
desk to take a chair close to her- He sat inside the range of
the air conditioner; dry, cool air swished against his face.
"We recruited you because we Have such a continuing
problem with the media. They're constantly accusing us of
brainwashing people. We're looking to you, with your
young organization, for new ideas to combat this. "Hie
media is very effective at brainwashing people into think-
ing that we are the ones who do the brainwashing." He
shook his head. "How can we make people realize that the
media is more dangerous than the tobacco industry could
ever be?" He leaned closer. "The news media is a continu-
ing problem, but we've been dealing with them success-
firily for decades. However, a new problem's come up,
and this one could really destroy us."
He paused to let the tension build. Her eyes narrowed.
Finally she responded, in a whisper that matched his own.
"What?"
"Tne Zetetic Institute."
A dozen little shifts showed her surprise. He hand pressed
44 Marc Stiegler
against the table top, her breathing paused. "What?" she
asked for explanation in a low voice that pitched up in a
final question mark.
"The Zetetic Institute is our new problem." He waved
at a report sitting on his desk. "It's a network of project
group organizers and information salesmen. They're more
a cult than a corporation, but they've got their fingers in
just about every pie in America. And two years ago they
put their fingers into our pie."
Kira nodded- "I've heard of them. But I can't believe
they're dangerous to the Wilcox-Moms Corporation."
"So you've heard of them. Excellent." Her reaction to
the mention of the Institute didn't match up with just a
passing familiarity. She must have friends there. That
could be useful. "Do you know about the Zetetic anti-
smoking clinics? Those information salesmen have col-
lected all the anti-smoking techniques ever devised into a
single, consistent framework. Individually, those techniques
are all pretty ineffective. But the Institute developed a
method for matching techniques with individual strengths
and weaknesses- After the Institute gets done tailoring a
set for a particular person ..."

Kira had recovered her composure. She now seemed
eager, chough puzzled. "But the Institute is a tiny organi-
zation! How can they threaten Wilcox-Moms?"
"They can threaten us with their growth rate." Daniel
turned to his computer work station, tapped rapidly across
the keys, and spun the display so Kira could see it. "They've
shown exponential growth in the number of smoking clin-
ics they've run for the last two years. If we wait until
they're big enough to be a noticeable force, they'll be
within one year of destroying our cigarette sales in the
United States."
"What makes you think their growth curve won't flatten
out?"
Daniel took a last heady drag off his menthol, ground
out the stub, and lit a new one. He rose and started pacing
across the room. "Eventually it will. But we need to
flatten out their growth curve now, while they're still just
a wiggle in the market research. If we wait, they'll surely
cut into our bottom line." He turned at the end of the
DAVID'S SUNG                45
room to come back. The glowing tip of his second smoke
left a contrail that defined his previous path.
Kira pursed her Ups. "Do you want to run an advertis-
ing campaign against them? I can't believe it would be
effective. That would be like the Hershey Company run-
ning advertisements against dietitians who tell overweight
people to give up chocolate."
"Exactly. We can't use straightforward advertising. A
frontal confrontation is inappropriate in this situation. It's
similar to our problem with beating referenda. We should
probably build an organization Tike the Citizens For
Freedom—we used them to beat down legislation on no
smoking in public buildings. We need somebody who
seems unbiased—somebody who can complain about those
ZI kooks messing with the minds of our children."
Daniel saw from the look in Kira's eyes that he had been
too blunt in his analysis. He was not surprised when she
responded badly. "The Zetetics are a bit cultish, but they
aren't exactly kooks."
He backed off. "We might not need to go all the way to
building an organization to counter them. First, we should
try to exploit the media; after all, that's cheaper, and it's at
least as effective when it works."
Kira nodded. "Yes, that seemstike a sensible approach."
Daniel could see that she still held distaste for the idea of
fighting the Zetetic Institute, but he could also see that
she was challenged by the problems of manipulating the
media. "First, we need to find sharp newsmen who al-
ready distrust the Institute. That shouldn't be a problem;

there are newsmen who distrust everything. Then we
need to cultivate them and make sure they're successful,
without letting them know they're being helped."
Daniel gave her a satisfied clap of his bands. "Yes! And
we have some great ways of helping them. We have inside
information on just about every dark comer of society—
politicians, in particular. Our selected reporters will re-
ceive leaks to help them build their careers. And, of course,
die magazines and cable channels that depend on Wilcox-
Morris for advertising support will be particularly eager to
run their pieces."
These thoughts were obviously new to Kira; her eyes
46 Marc Stiegler
looked beyond him at the broad ramifications, She had an
open look, her face filled with an emotion he dimly re-
called from his childhood. It was the emotion that came
with a sense of wonder. "Of course. You have leverage all
over the country." Her wonder turned into a moment's
revelation, as she realized how much easier her job would
be, working with the tobacco industry,
Daniel shrugged. "Well, for what it's worth, we have all
the power that money can buy. There are limitations, of
course, on the power that money can buy, but there aren't
many things that can buy more power than money."
"So, would you like a list of candidate reporters?" Ex-
citement filled her voice. She clearly relished die idea of
using the media as much as Daniel did himself.
"Excellent." He stood up, concluding the meeting. "I
think we can do lots of business together."
Kira also stood up. "I agree. I'm quite confident that both
of our companies will profit from this link-up." She paused
at the door, and turned to him. "I still can't believe you
think the Zetetic Institute is worth bothering with."
Daniel's voice grew stem, "I've made my career out of
seeing where trouble will appear before anyone else could
see it. There're other sources of trouble for our business,
too—plenty of diem. But this is one we have to nip in the
bud. Believe me." He watched her depart, then snufled
out the remains of his second cigarette with methodical
care. The ventilation sucked away the odor of tobacco with
equally methodical efficiency—at least, it sucked away
enough of the odor so that a smoker could no longer detect
its presence.
Daniel stepped up to the great wall of glass, to look
outside and luxuriate in the gende springtime. For a mo-
ment, his mind flashed over the years of his life—from his
childhood on a tiny farm, to his first deals in die commodi-
ties market, to bis successes in stocks, and finally, his
takeover of one of the biggest companies in the world. At

each step, he had been involved widi die tobacco industry—
first, because he had been bom there; then, because to-
bacco was such a volatile commodity; and finally, because
the companies diat controlled the world's cigarette indus-
try were such cash cows.
DAVID'S SUNG                47
At each step he had lived die harrowing life of a man
whose survival depends on his interpretation of tiny indi-
cators of the future- He had lived diat life brilliandy.
Consequently, it did not surprise him diat Kira failed to
see inevitable dangers. Not even die corporate directors of
die huge conglomerates had seen die future as clearly as
he. Had diey been able to, they would have prevented his
conquest of their companies.
And now his alarms pounded widi every new bit of
information he received on die Zetetic Institute. Politi-
cians, he could control. Crowds of voters, he could manip-
ulate. News media, he could redirect. But an organization
dedicated to enhancing human rationality might be beyond
his influence.
He was playing with lightning here in odier ways as
well. Kira might hold divided loyalties if she had friends in
die Institute. Even more frightening was die danger that
his attack on the Institute could backfire. The Zetetic
Institute was, as Kira had noted, a tiny Uling today. By
bringing media attention to bear on it, he could be fueling
its growdi, even if all the attention were directed at its
oddities. A certain percentage of die people who enjoyed
going against the conventional wisdom would seek the
Institute out because of such notoriety. He frowned, won-
dering about Kira's failure to comment on Ulis danger.
But he knew that inaction led down a short patii to
disaster. And whatever the trudi or falsehood behind the
allegations diat cigarettes killed, Daniel knew a more im-
portant truth.
He remembered his modier, on her broken-down farm
in West Virginia, discing the soil with her broken-down
tractor. Tliat tractor had already taken two other fingers in
payment during half-successful attempts at repair. He re-
membered die hardness of living poor. He remembered
how old she had looked at the age of 35—older than Kira
Evans would look when she was 50.
Cigarettes were a minor part of die dangers of life.
Poverty was the real horror. Poverty killed. Looking down
upon die world from his steel-and-glass fortress, Daniel
swore diat never again would one he loved suffer from that
kind of poverty.
48 Marc SUegler
The Zetetic Institute would fall before him, as the oth-
ers had fallen in the past. As for the uncertainties of Kira,
he felt little concern. He had already set in motion some

of the types of plans they had discussed. His reporters
were already on the job.
As he watched, the snarl of traffic on the parkway broke
free, and started to flow as easily as the gentle Potomac
River that paralleled its course. The bright wall of cherry
blossoms was all that divided the flow of belching metal
from the flow of quiet water.
Major Vorontsov. The title sounded good when it pre-
ceded his name. It was quite a victory. Major Ivan
Vorontsov.
Ivan wondered why his victory tasted like the bitter
steel of a Kalashnikov; why his mood matched the gun-
metal gray of the weather outside his window, rather than
the bright sunshine that the weather bureau—his weather
bureau—had predicted for this day a week ago.
He had just received the promotion to major, making
him one of the youngest majors in the army. He had also
received an assignment—one that might well end his career.
They had ordered him to re-evaluate the predictions of
global consequences of a nuclear war. The purpose of the
re-evaluation was to "perform an analysis that allows the
Soviet Union to maintain an advantage in confrontations
with the United States."
Ivan was a good Russian. He was also pure Russian,
born in Kursk as the only child of wholly Russian parents.
As often happened with single children, he had learned
early how to talk with adults, though he had never quite
learned how to play with other children his own age. Also
like many single children, he believed his parents' beliefs
even more fiercely than his parents did. He loved his
homeland. He disliked Americans. And he hated Germans.
So when his time had come to serve in the army, to
protect the children of Russia and of the whole Soviet
Union from her enemies, he had accepted the duty proudly.
He stepped out of his office, quickly marched down the
hallway of the Military Meteorology building, and pushed
through the massive door into the streets of Novosibirsk.
DAVID'S SUNG                49
Bitter wind swept around him. He clenched his teeth
against the cold and headed for the officers' quarters.
The gunmetal sky showed no hint of sun. Would the
climatic effects of a nuclear war even be noticed here? He
could imagine that the sunbathers along the Black Sea
would be most affected, though he knew better.
Certainly, radioactive fallout from a war would affect all
the people he cared about. That included his childhood
friend Anna, and her three children, living so close to the
strategic targets in Sevastopol.

He remembered the day his parents had brought Anna
to stay. Her mother, Ivan knew, was always drunk, and
her father was . . . different. He remembered how help-
less Anna had been, yet how hopeiul, despite her help-
lessness. Ivan's parents loved her as they loved all
children—almost as much as they loved Ivan himself. And
though Ivan never did learn how to be friends with his
peers, he had learned from his parents the love of children.
How wasted their efforts would prove if Ivan let some
damn fool—either American or Russian—initiate a nuclear
exchange. Though Ivan loved his country's children, he
worried that Russia's leaders might not share that feeling.
He thought again of the sunny skies predicted for today.
How could men be so foolish as lo think they could know
the impact of a nuclear war on the fragile atmospherel The
work of climatology contained too much magic and too
little science for categorical assertions.
Within that guaranteed uncertainty lurked the great
danger. Ivan knew he could make the outcome of his
re-analysis match any result they wanted him to report.
With too-crisp clarity, he saw why they had chosen him
for this job. He was bright, ambitious, patriotic, and im-
pressionable, And he had a knack for technology—a knack
that compensated for his loner's attitude. He had the
credentials, and presumably, the malleability to give them
what they wanted.
He felt like a scientist in the days before the telescope,
instructed by the Church to prove that the Sun circled the
Earth. The truth could not be changed. But without in-
struments, truth could be distorted whenever convenient
for the leaders—or when necessary for the followers.
50 Marc Sttegler
Still, none of these games of distortion could change the
truth. And in the nuclear age, distorting the truth about
nuclear war endangered all the children, including the
adult children playing the game.
Ivan squeezed his eyes closed. Another gust of wind
slapped his face. His nostrils flared as he inhaled; the deep
breath of sharp, chilled air helped him make his decision.
He would gather the best scientists he could find. They
would study the consequences of nuclear war again. If the
earlier analysis had been provably hysterical, wonderful.
But the new Major Vorontsov would introduce no bias to
force the decision.
Ivan tramped onward against the last gusts of Siberian
winter, unswerving in his purpose.
Kira stepped from the elevator into the antiseptic beauty
of the Oeschlager Art Museum. She forced herself to slow

down as her high heels clicked across the slippery marble
floor. She turned, to step into the quiet elegance of the
displays- Soon she was surrounded by works that cost
thousands of hours of loving labor to construct. She needed
these moments, in this museum, to remember why she
had come to Wilcox-Morris. She needed these moments to
fuel her anger.
Her whole body itched from the taint of the Wilcox-
Morris Corporation. She wanted to run home to die shower,
to cleanse herself of it; yet she knew that that would not
help. Only her anger enabled her to continue.
The Oeschlager Museum sprawled over the first two
floors of the Wilcox Building. All costs of maintaining it,
and for collecting new works, came out of the advertising
budget of Wilcox-Morris. Thousands of people had died of
lung cancer, emphysema, and heart disease to support this
museum.
Kira stopped before a sculpture in silver and gold. In
the curves of die reflection she saw her mother's face—her
own face. Older people sometimes called her by her moth-
er's name, so strong was the resemblance. And despite her
fierce defense of herself as a separate person, Kira could
not deny the similarity. They shared the same cheekbones
when seen in profile, the same pout when angry, the same
DAVID'S SUNG               51
quick smile that puzzled people who missed the subtler
points of human comedy.
They had not shared the dark anger seething behind
Kira's eyes as she watched her reflection snake across the
surface of the silvery sculpture. Perhaps that was a differ-
ence in age more than anything else. Her mother had not
blamed the tobacco companies for her own death. In keep-
ing with her other views of human responsibility, )an had
blamed herself for taking chances that might lead to sui-
cide. Kira had a different point of view.
Uncle Nathan had the most complex view of blame,
though in some sense, it was also the simplest. Blame,
Uncle Nathan contended, was a concept without value in
either Industrial Age or Information Age societies. The
key question was not whom to blame, but rather, whose
behavior to modify so that the problem did not arise again.
All that analysis had led him to Jan's answer to smoking,
however; they agreed that the best solution lay in educat-
ing people to the danger and in teaching them how to
quit. Uncle Nathan further contended that this was the
only solution a free society could tolerate. Kira still felt
uncertain about whether he was right. Certainly, it would
not hurt to investigate other gossibilities. Know your en-
emy; he probably does not know himself, the Zetetic com-
mentary went. People did not usually pursue evil purposes
with thoughtful intent, though they might pursue evil
purposes while fiercely avoiding droughts about inten-

tions. The key lay in cultural engineering. Non-Zetetic
cultures were always designed to give men rationalizations
for not dunking about the inconsistencies of that culture.
Given the right cultural environment, you could shape die
adaptable human being to profoundly unsane purposes.
Like other creators of evil, Daniel Wilcox was not an
evil man. The tobacco culture had engineered him; now,
he was himself die chief engineer for the tobacco culture.
Still, he was not evil, though he was undoubtedly quite
rutiiless. He was not evil, though his hands were covered
with blood.
Kira looked about the room at the works of inspired
genius, at die painfully detailed craftsmanship, that were
also now covered widi blood.
52 Marc Stiegler
And she looked back at her own reflection. She too was
now covered with blood. She had used her own mind in
the creation of advertising that would attract children to
their deaths. She had done it in order to get close to the
source of power that drove the tobacco companies, so that
she might 6nd some way of destroying them. She had
done it for a good cause.
And she could rationalize that, had she not created
those ads, someone else would have, and they probably
would have done just as good a job. But rationalization was
not her purpose. She accepted her share of responsibility
for the deaths that might result from her action, as surely
as she accepted responsibility for the lives that might be
saved, if she found a way to destroy the cigarette empire.
That was her purpose in coming to Wilcox-Morris—to Bnd
some weakness, or set of weaknesses, with which she
could destroy the industry.
Based on her first meeting with Daniel Wilcox, she
questioned her ability to destroy him. He was too insightful;
surely he recognized her revulsion at cigarette smoking,
and her shock at the idea of attacking the Institute. She
had recovered fairly well at the end. She could even get
excited about using the news media, after having watched
them take periodic shots at her mother and her uncle for
years. She would certainly have no trouble composing a
list of potentially useful reporters—she could get them
from the Institute data base. She allowed herself a small
smile, thinking about how easily she could mold them
with the subtle power Wilcox afforded her.
Better yet, she realized that Wilcox's attack could be
turned to the Institute's benefit. Wilcox could give Uncle
Nathan a level of notoriety that poor Uncle Nathan would
never bring upon himself. Perhaps this was the key to
Wilcox's downfall.
And perhaps it was the key to her own downfall. Should
she have highlighted this possible backfire with Wilcox?

On impulse, she had concealed the thought from him, for
fear that he would then discard the whole plan. Now she
wasn't sure that had been wise. Surely he would think of that
on his own, and he would expect her to think of it as well.
She would have to be careful the next time she saw him.
DAVID'S SUNG                53
She stepped carefully across museum floors toward the
exit; her feet hurt in her new shoes. Two kinds of people
went by. Dawdlers drifted here, either for the art or for
the excuse it offered for not getting back to work. And
urgent men in business suits rushed by, heading for the
upper floors of the skyscraper.
The similarities between the Wilcox Building here in
Rosslyn and the ZI headquarters in Reston fascinated and
repelled her. Both structures projected images carefully
designed for public consumption—images of elegant re-
spectability, trustworthiness. The only real difference was
the ultimate purpose: the tobacco companies projected
trustworthiness so that they could betray the believers.
The Institute projected trustworthiness so that they could
teach the more malleable people how to be less malleable,
how to separate that image from the substance. One of the
most gratifying revelations in a Zetetic education was the
moment when you looked at the Institute itself and, clear-
eyed and laughing, separated the Institute's internal facts
from its projected fantasies. To achieve that moment of
revelation. Uncle Nathan said, the end justified the means.
Did the end justify the means? Kira didn't know. Uncle
Nathan had a pat answer to that, too. of course: the end
justifies the means as long as tne end is moral, and as long
as you account for all the side effects as parts of that end.
Somehow, the side effects in her efforts to penetrate the
Wilcox-Morris Corporation seemed too complicated to
calculate.
This was why she lingered in the museum. She could
not tell if her purpose here was moral or not. Until she
figured it out, her anger was all that could sustain her as
she plunged her hands into her work, defending the sales-
men of death.
June 11
History is a race between education and
catastrophe.
—H.Q. Wells
PAN. Bill Hardie enters a room of soft contours and
padded chairs. He glides to the corner, where he com-
mands a view of both participants and podium. He turns,
and the flatcam on his lapel sweeps the room.
ZOOM. A group of people emerge through the door-
way. The sizes and shapes vary, but all look like residents
of Fairfax County. They come to the headquarters of the

Zetetic Institute not because it is the headquarters, but
because it is handy. It wouldn't make sense for people to
come from great distances just for the Sampler. The curi-
ous investigator could find many places throughout the
country offering this seminar. The skeptical investigator
could obtain a condensed version of the Sampler on video-
tape for the cost of postage and handling.
FOCUS. A man of medium height in a medium blue
suit separates himself from the ragged line of people and
walks to the front of the room with a light step—conBdent
yet quiet. He sits on the edge of the desk, relaxed, pro-
jecting that relaxation to his audience. Even Bill feefs at
ease.
CUT. Everyone is seated now except Bill himself. Not-
ing a number of eyes upon him, including the lecturer's,
BU1 slides into a chair.
The lecturer stands and introduces himself. "Good eve-
ning, everyone. I am Dr. Hammond, and this is a quick
introduction to the Zetetic educational system."
Dr. Hammond shifts toward the audience as he warms
up. "The Zetetic educational system arose to fill a gap in
American society. The public schools teach our children
oceans of facts and ideas. The colleges bend more toward
teaching the theories that lie behind the uncovering of
54
DAVID'S SUNG
55
those facts. Meanwhile, vocational schools teach how to
create products of various flavors.
"But what do you do with all those facts? Worse, what
do you do with all those theories? How do they apply to
the everyday occurrences of life?"
Hammond's eyes harden; his voice booms. "How do you
extract the truth from a used car salesman? How do you
spot a lawyer whose interest is his own welfare, not yours?"
He steps forward. "Those are communication skills that
aren't well taught. Another class of skills that is left out of
most people's eduction is real business skills- America is
supposed to run on a free-enterprise system. But how
many people know how to operate in a free-enterprise
system? To start your own business, how do you identify a
market, make a business plan, acquire capital, design an
advertising campaign, write a contract? Does it really make
sense to leave the answers to these questions—the heart of
the American economic process—to students working on
MBAs? If it does, then we don't have a system of free
enterprise—we have a system of elite enterprise, because
only a handful of people understand what's required." He
smiles. "And there are other analytic skills that we see in
action, but that people rarely learn how to apply. For

example, there's a vast difference between accuracy and
precision. How many people here know the difference?"
BACK OFF. Bill frowns. A difference between accuracy
and precision? What difference could there be? Only a few
people raise their hands to suggest that they know.
Hammond looks around, unsurprised by the apparent
ignorance of the majority. "Usually only physicists pay
attention to the difference. But the difference is important
in everything from household budgets to airplane repairs.
Human beings have wasted vast quantities of effort through
the centuries, trying to increase their precision beyond
the level of their accuracy."
Hammond takes a deep breath. "You can find numerous
texts on subliminal cuing and impulse motivation—but
very little on how this information is used against you in
advertising. And no educational institution will tell you
that it's important for you to know.
"And everyone learns statistics—but how many people
56 Marc Stiegler
can tell the difference between newspaper articles that use
statistics to illuminate the truth, and articles that use them
to conceal it?"
CUT. Bill bristles with hostility. Bill Bnds it particularly
unnerving because, as Hammond makes his last state-
ment, he looks toward Bill himself with a slowly rising
eyebrow.
Hammond continues. "Nathan Pilstrom founded the In-
stitute over a decade ago. He started with the limited idea
of developing software that could teach some fundamentals
of Information Age problem-solving. The individual soft-
ware modules were called PEPs, or Personal Enhance-
ment Programs."
PAUSE. Bill shakes his head in surprise. He didn't
know the Zetetic Institute had created the PEPs. He'd
used a couple himself.
"Of course, the Zetetic movement didn't become widely
known until Nathan's sister, Jan Evans, synthesized anti-
smoking techniques from all over the world into a compre-
hensive package. That package could be adapted with a
high degree of success to each individual's therapy needs.
And that is perhaps the unique feature of Zeteticism: it
focuses on the methods used for customizing methods for
each individual set of needs and values. Zeteticism ex-
plores methods of method-selection."
PAN. Methods of method-selection indeed! Bill recog-
nizes the sound of hokum.
"So tonight we have a sampler for you—short discus-
sions of a number of aspects of life upon which Zetetic

ideas oner different perspectives. We'll lead off with a
littie experiment—something that you can all participate
in. We shall explore the meaning of rational thought,
irrational thought, and superrationaf thought: we shall play
the game of the Prisoner's Dilemma."
PAN. Men enter, wearing badges with the insignia of
the Institute, and escort groups of people away from the
lecture hall. Dr. Hammond walks over to Bill. "Let me
show you the way," he oners. His eyes follow Bill's face
like a biologist who has just spotted a delightfully rare but
disgusting insect. "That's a beautiful button on your collar
there. I've never seen one quite like it."
DAVID'S SUNG                57
He knows about the flatcami
"When the games are over, would you be interested in
a copy of our videotape? It would probably be easier to
edit"
CUT. Bill opens his mouth, then closes it. He shrugs.
"I'll roll my own if you don't mind."
Hammond tilts his head. "Suit yourself."
He escorts Bill to a small, antiseptic cubicle, chatting
constantly, probing occasionally into Bill's viewpoint. The
cubicle contains a beige computer terminal, a chair, noth-
ing else. Bill stops at the doorway. There is something odd
here—he inhales sharply.
Is there a scent of pine trees here, ever so subtle? He
looks hard at Hammond. "Is my reaction to this room a
part of the test?" he asks.
Hammond chuckles. "No. Mr. Hardie, this isn't a test.
We aren't interested in your reactions in any direct way.
Our purpose here is to give you an experience, so you can
see how theories apply to action, and so you can see
firsthand the importance of superrational thinking. We
think it's particularly important to introduce superrational
thinking to people such as yourself."
FOCUS. Bill does not ask what Hammond means when
he speaks of people "such as himself."
Hammond waves Bill into the single chair next to the
terminal. He explains the rules. "Here's the situation.
Every person from the class is sitting in a cubicle like this
one. Now, we're going to pair you up with one of these
people, and together you are going to be the Prisoners."
"Are you going to lock me in?"
Hammond shakes his head. "Of course not. But you are
on your honor not to enter another person's room. Not
that it matters; you won't have time to hunt for them all
over the Institute anyway."

"I see." Bill feels too warm, though the room is
comfortable.
"As prisoners, the two of you have been put in separate
rooms for interrogation. You have two choices: you can
confess to the crime, or you can deny involvement."
"Why would I want to confess?"
"Because when you confess, you turn state's evidence
58 Marc Stiegler
against the other guy. It's a betrayal as well as a confes-
sion. Then you get off with a quick parole, and the other
guy goes up the river.
'Of course, the other guy might decide to betray you as
well. Indeed, the worst thing that can happen to you is
that your partner confesses—betraying you—while you sit
here denying involvement."
"Then why should I ever do anything but betray the
other guy?"
"Because the only way either of you can get out scot
free is if you both deny involvement. Denying involve-
ment is a collaboration—a conspiracy as well as a denial.
So your best outcome is if you both conspire—but your
worst outcome is if you conspire while the other guy
betrays."
"So you're stuck with trusting this guy in another room
whom you can't trust."
"Yes, it's quite a dilemma, isn't it?"
Bill glares. "Why is this game part of the Sampler?"
Hammond shrugs. "The results of the Prisoner's Di-
lemma apply to many real-life situations. We'll discuss
some of the applications after we've analyzed the results of
the game. The game might seem silly now, but remember
that even obvious ideas need to be exercised before you
can truly own them. You can't get more out of this seminar
than you're willing to put in."
"But I can get a lot less than I put in."
"True enough. Life is generally like that—you must put
something in to get something out."
Bill growls, "Okay."
"Good. You'll play this game with ten randomly selected
people from the class. Then you'll play with them all
again. Well play ten rounds with each player and then
discuss the results. For every game, all you have to do is
punch either the Conspire button or the Betray button."

Hammond shoots him a quizzical look. "So how are you
going to play?"
Bill thinks about it for a long moment. "The only ratio-
nal thing to do is to betray the other guy," he states with
confidence. "You just can't take a chance on some random
human being."
DAVID'S SUNG               59
"I see your point." Hammond's smile again makes him
feel like a bug under a microscope. "We'll keep score by
adding up the years in jail you accumulate. Good luck.'
The door swished softly behind him.
Bill looks at the terminal, annoyed by this pointless
game that dooms all the players to lose. Surely, everyone
here is as rational as he is; if so, there will be an endless
series of betrayals.
The terminal comes to life, telling him he is matched
with partner number one, and that they have never played
together before. Bill stabs the Betray button.
In less than a minute Bill realizes that not everyone is
rational. Several people oner to Conspire in that first
round, and they take terrible punishments as Bill betrays
diem. Bill himself gets off lightly. In the second round, he
Bnds that the terminal gives him a description of his
history with his opponent. He stabs the Betray button
with a moment's regret—and realizes that when he thinks
of the other player as an opponent, he is creating a funda-
mental statement about his relationship.
Seeing himself paired with a player who had given him
a valuable Conspiracy the last time. Bill generously oners
a Conspiracy in return—but the bastard Betrays, leaving
Bill holding the bag. After a few more plays. Bill realizes
that these people don't trust him worth a damn. He
admits—with considerable reluctance—that he has given
them cause for suspicion. In self-defense, he reverts to a
constant stream of Betrayals.
On the third round, the handful of people to whom he
has offered Conspiracies in the second round come back
with Conspiracies for him. Of course, he has given up any
acts of mercy, zapping all players with Betrayals.
Meanwhile, two of the players have doggedly continued
to give him Conspiracies. It matters not that he Betrays
them again and again. On the fourth round he recipro-
cates, and they remain as solid partners till the last round
of the game. He gives up on the ones with whom he
seesaws back and forth from Betrayals to Conspiracies, and
switches to permanent Betrayals. They do the same.
At the end of ten rounds, he has accumulated over a
century in jail.
60 Marc Sttegler

Hammond pokes his head in. "How'd you do?" he asks.
FOCUS. Bill shrugs. "As well as anybody, I guess."
Back in the discussion room, Hammond disproves that
assessment. Several people do substantially better than
Bill. Hammond points out key features of the "winners."
The winners had three distinctive characteristics; They
were optimistic, offering to Conspire with untested part-
ners. They were just, never letting a Betrayal go without
response. And they were predictable in their responses, so
their partners knew what they would do at all times. With
sudden insight, Bill realizes that these people were the
ones with whom he had seesawed early in the game, his
stubborn Betrayals constituted a major part of their losses.
Of course he had shared their losses, since they soon
responded with Betrayals of their own.
"All in all, we have a very rational group here," Ham-
mond says with airy cheer. "Fortunately, I think we can
improve on that."
He continues. "I always feel sorry for people encounter-
ing the Prisoner's Dilemma for the first time. The Prison-
er s Dilemma hurts because there is no formula for success.
Intuitively, we suspect that the right answer is to Con-
spire, thus working together with the other prisoner for
mutual gain. And if we could talk with the other prisoner,
if we could communicate, we could make a good arrange-
ment. But looking at the situation without that ability to
communicate, we conclude that we must protect ourselves.
The merely rational mind inevitably derives a losing
formula."
Hammond leans forward and whispers, as if conspiring
with the members of the class in a secret fight with a
vicious universe. "But if you can step beyond rationality to
superrationality, then you can derive a winning formula.
The formula only works if your partners are superrational,
too—but at least it's a winning formula sometimes. It's
better than what happened to all of you in the Dilemma
you just faced," Hammond points at Bill. "What's the sum
of four plus three?"
SNAP- Bill looks up, startled. "Seven," he answers with-
out hesitation.
DAVID'S SUNG               61
"If another person in a different room were asked the
same question, would he give the same answer?"
Bill mutters. "Of course."
"So the two of you would be able to make that agree-
ment without communicating?"
"Sure," Bill snaps. "There's a formula for calculating the

right answer."
"And everybody knows the formula." Hammond looks
around the class. Some look puzzled; others look expectant.
Hammond continues. "Suppose some of the people didn't
know the formula. Then you couldn't guarantee that you
and the other person would get the same answer, could
you?" A shiver seems to sweep the room as many people
shake their heads,
"Okay, now suppose there were a formula for deciding
what to do in the Prisoner's Dilemma. No matter who you
were, if you applied the formula, you would get the right
answer, right? And if you knew that your partner knew the
formula, you wouldn't have to worry about the outcome:
you could both crank the formula and come out with the
right answer."
Hammond raises his arm and points to every person in
the class. "So the very assumption that there is a formula
tells us what the formula must bte, does it not? If there is a
formula, the formula says to Conspire, to cooperate with
the other prisoner." His arm descends in a human excla-
mation mark. "Bftt the formula only works if you know the
formula, and if you know that your partner knows the
formula, and if your partner knows that you know the
formula."
About a fourth of the faces in the class brighten immedi-
ately with understanding; others brighten more slowly as
they grasp the concept. Hammond drawls, "So you and
your partner must in some sense be superrational to suc-
ceed, for you must be not only rational enough to select
rationally among your individual choices, you must also be
rational enough to understand the meaning of rationality
for the group."
Hanunond's eyes shine with pleasure in revealing the
key to the game. "So the big question is, how do you find
out if the other guy is as superrational as you are? In the
62 Marc SUegler
Prisoner's Dilemma, there is one way to find out." He
spreads his arms in a gesture of martyrdom. "Assume your
partner knows the formula in the first round: Give him a
Conspiracy. If he knows the formula, he will also give you
a Conspiracy in that first round, and you will have found
each other.
"But if he doesn't give you a Conspiracy in that first
round, you know that he doesn't know the formula. He
may be rational as an individual, but he hasn't succeeded
in looking outside his own viewpoint—he hasn't achieved
superrationality, so you have to treat him accordingly. In
games where your partner is only rational, or worse yet,
irrational, you must betray him, for be will betray you."

Bill slides backward in his chair, amazed at the short yet
devious flow of this logic.
"Consequently, the only way to make games like the
Prisoner's Dilemma safe is to educate all the people who
might become your partners, so they can be as superra-
tional as you are. Only superrational people working to-
gether can win the Prisoner s Dilemma.' Hammond stands
triumphant before his newly baptized members of the
superrational. At least some of them are superrational,
anyway; Bill sees doubt on many faces. From those ex-
pressions, he knows which ones he would prefer to have as
partners.
Bill cheers for victorious superrational mind. He senses
tile same desire in other people around the room, but the
thoughts are too deep to accept just yet. He, and the
others, must chew on the idea of superrationality.
Hammond realizes this. "And with that, we'll take a
break. Think about situations in which this land of think-
ing might affect your life. We'll talk about applications in a
few minutes—applications in areas as diverse as office
politics and child-rearing." He paused. "And then, we'll
show everyone how to engage in a decision duel."
Jet lag gave Nathan a tremendous business advantage
when he flew west. He noted this with little pleasure,
sitting outside the Pelmour complex waiting for MDS
Software Associates to open its doors. Here in Mountain
View, California, it was not quite 8 A.M. His internal body
DAVID'S SUNG                63
clocks, still set on D.C. time, told him it was closer to 11
A.M. Everyone on this coast was still coping with morning,
injecting fresh caffeine into their bloodstreams. Nathan,
however, was almost ready for lunch.
The Pelmour complex was one of the dozens of office
clusters designed for the unique requirements of upstart
startup companies here in the heart of Silicon Valley. The
Silicon Valley entrepreneur could not begin life with merely
a great idea, a reasonable product, a decent business plan,
and a tight chunk of venture capital. The Silicon Valley
entrepreneur had to initiate his failure corporate empire
with the right style.
Much of that style was embodied in the building where
the entrepreneur began his life. He could not tool up in an
old warehouse, tainted by vanished crates of fruit once
plucked from orchard groves that blossomed in the days
before silicon. No one would believe he could succeed
from such a decrepit location; certainly, his business plan
was inadequate in scope.
Nor could he start life in an opulent penthouse office
overlooking the ocean. Such ostentation was allowed only
to those who had succeeded. Anyone who started in this

manner was just a pretender; his great new idea could
only be vaporware.           >-
The proper entrepreneur instinctively understood that
proper businesses started in two-story buildings: Ship-
ments came and went through the loading dock in back,
on the bottom floor. Customers came and went through
the door in front, on the top floor. Back in the '90s,
construction crews had built miles of ridges here in Moun-
tain View, to create enough cliff edges in which to embed
such proper two-story buildings.
The Pelmour complex was a long chain of these startup
company buildings, the entrepreneurial equivalent of a
tenement row. Nathan couldn't help chuckling as he
squinted down the stretch of bland sandstone building
fronts. Though he had started the Zetetic Corporation
outside Seattle, not San Francisco, he too had worked out
of one of these tenements for a time. Indeed, for Nathan,
the move to a Seattle tenement had been a step up; he
had written the first Personal Enhancement Program—the
64 Marc Stiegler
Advertising Immunity PEP—in the spare bedroom of a
friend in San Antonio. No real entrepreneur would have
considered working under such conditions. Only his friends
in San Antonio, and his sister Jan, had supported his
efforts at the time. Jan had always believed in him.
The doors of MDS Software Associates opened. Delilah
Lottspeich, the woman he had come to see, had a subcon-
tract with MDS Software. He walked along the curved
sidewalk to the front door. Few employees or subcontrac-
tors had arrived during the minutes before 8 o'clock; ei-
ther they arrived enthusiastically early, or they started
randomly late.
When he entered, he found people hurrying along be-
hind the receptionist; evidently, enthusiasm was the driver
here. Nathan neld a brief negotiation with the receptionist
before he persuaded one of the passing young men to
escort him back to Delilah's office.
Security was not as strict here as it usually was in
fledgling companies; the man waved at Delilah's office,
then disappeared behind a labyrinth of room dividers. The
whole office had the unnatural quiet that follows after the
discussions have worn down, when everyone can strive
toward well-understood goals. Only the soft click of keys,
and the softer sound of mouse buttons, broke the stillness.
A weak aroma of coffee came from the brewing station in
the comer.
Nathan stepped across the threshold of Delilah's office.
He did not announce himself. The mental gymnastics of a
programmer are too delicate to disturb lightly; he would
wait for the right moment.
She sat facing away from the door. unmoving. absorbed

in the computer display. Her hair spilled across her pale
shoulders, then cascaded down her back in a golden wave—a
frozen wave, like a waterfall turned to ice in mid-flight.
Touch it, and it might break.
The golden wave shimmered. Delilah twisted in her
seat, and Nathan knocked on the door- She swiveled to
face him.
Nathan's sense of watching a frozen waterfall did not
diminish. Her arms and neck were long and thin and
delicate. Her face held a cold, closed expression—the
DAVID'S SUNG               65
expression of someone who expects to be struck at any
moment.
Nathan gave her his wannest smile. "Delilah Lottspeich?
I'm Nathan Pilstrom. I called yesterday about a project we
need you on,"
"I remember," she snapped, her voice sharp with ten-
sion. "You wouldn't tell me what it was over the phone."
She smiled, moderating her tone, "But I bet it's some-
thing interesting. I've taken about half the Zetetic series
on Hars."
"Oh, nol" Nathan exclaimed, slapping his forehead with
mock dismay. "Then I don't stand a chance of manipulat-
ing you—unless you missed the course on Lying at a Job
Interview."
She didn't respond to the joke.
The Liars series included Lying with Statistics, a study
of economists; Lying with Facts, a study of news reporters;
Lying with Implications, covering advertising strategies;
and Lying with Words, on the fine art of politics. She
offered him the chair next to her work station. "Call me
Lila." As he sat down, she asked, "What's the Institute
working on?"
Nathan leaned forward on tile edge of the seat. "Have
you ever heard of the Sling project?'
"I don't think so."
"We're developing a way to limit the death and destruc-
tion caused by war.'
"Really." For a moment she lit up with excitement.
"What have you developed? A new method for negotiating
treaties?" Suspicion closed around her once more. "Wait a
minute. Why do you want a digital sensor specialist for
something like this—to verify compliance or something?

You don't need me for that."
"No, we don't need you for that." Nathan took a deep
breath. Just listening to her combination of hope and
suspicion, he could predict her reaction to the real project—
she would be horrified. "The Sling is a defensive system.
By using Information Age techniques, we can pick out key
elements in an enemy attack. By destroying those key
elements, we can stop the attack with a minimal cost of
life,"
66 Marc Stiegler
Her strident voice took on a pleading tone, hoping he
would yet allow her to disbelieve what she had just heard.
"Are you telling me that the Zetetic Institute now devel-
ops weapons?"
Nathan felt like he had been slapped. He sat very
straight, very open, as if offering the other cheek for yet
another blow. "Yes. We also develop weapons, Lila. If we
have to fight a war, it is terribly important that we fight it
the best way we know how, to end it quickly."
"You build machines to kill people? I can't believe iti"
But the vehemence in her voice suggested that she did
believe it. And she hated it.
"We build machines that kill people, yes." Nathan con-
tinued to speak as if to a rational person, though he
doubted that his mental map of rationality matched the
terrain he now faced. He had entered the room as one of
her heroes; he would leave as one of her enemies. "But
that's not the whole story. Just as we must accept some of
the responsibility for the men who die because of the
machines we build, so must we accept responsibility for
the men who do not die, who would have died had we not
built those machines."
She wheeled away from him. He had run out of time for
rational discussion.
He had one more avenue of approach available: he
could try manipulation. "Lila! You're a smart and sane
person. You don't make decisions because of slogans and
peer group prejudices—you make decisions because they
are right decisions, after fully examining the facts." He
had started his speech rapidly, with her name, to get her
attention. As he proceeded he slowed down, to let the
words set up a cognitive dissonance in her mind.
She now had two views of herself warring within her.
One view said that she must not listen, because she hated
war regardless of arguments. The other view said that she
must listen, because she believed in making right deci-
sions after hearing all the arguments. This conflict, this
cognitive dissonance, had to be resolved. If Nathan could
enhance her view of herself as a thinking person, she
would resolve the dissonance by listening to him objec-

DAVID'S SLING                 67
lively. She would become, for a short time, the smart and
sane person Nathan had told her she was.
This tactic assumed her emotional reactions clouded her
views. If reflexive emotions held her, then Nathan's new
words would appeal to her emotional belief in rational self.
Thus Nathan could manipulate her.
But if she were folly rational, the words he had just
offered would have no effect- She would weigh his words
about the Sling independently from his words about her as
a person. And that, too, would be wonderful; his purpose
was to get her to give him a fair hearing. Thus, his best
hope for success was that she was immune to his manipu-
lation.
Nathan's use of cognitive dissonance here presented the
only ethical use of manipulation that Nathan knew—
manipulation geared to making a person less easily manipu-
lated.
Small twitches of doubt broke the brittle lines of her
face; the cognitive dissonance held her in thrall, unresolved.
Nathan continued, "I'm glad you see as clearly as I do
the importance of carefiil thought. The lives of thousands
of people rest with your analysis of what I have to say." He
watched her face carefiilly, but could not tell if be was
winning. "The key to ending a war and saving lives is to
prevent people from ever going onto a battlefield. To
prevent that, we want to confuse the commanders who
order men into battle, to remove them from the picture.
Doesn't that make sense?"
"No!"
The intensity of her response had surprised her, Nathan
could see. Of course, her exclamation had not been an
answer to Nathan's question. It had been her answer to
herself. She bad resolved the dissonance. Nathan had
failed.
Nathan watched her turn back to her work station,
bringing up a page of test graphics. Having denied his
thoughts and facts, she now denied his existence.
Nathan did not know which parts of the Zetetic series
on liars Lila had taken, but he knew one part she had
missed—Lying with Your Own Preconceptions. The tough-
68
Marc Stiegler
est part of the series, it dealt with the lies people told to
themselves.
PAN. They step into another room. The room has the

contours of a small auditorium, though only the first two
tiers support ordered rows of seats. At the focal point of
the room. Bill confronts the largest computer display he
has ever seen—larger than the one in Houston for control-
ling spacecraft launches.
Hammond speaks. "This is the main screen upon which
the Institute carries out its largest and most important
decision duels. It's not used too often for that purpose.
What we're looking at now is one of our demonstration
duels—a duel held over a decade ago to determine the
merits of strategic defense."
PAN. Bill looks back at the display in fascination. The
colorful splashes that streak through the wall resolve, as he
approaches, into lines of text. With a few exceptions, the
entire screen holds only words, arrows, and rectangles,
The rectangles enclose and divide the text displays.
They stop at a console perched high above the audience;
clearly it is the display master controller. Hammond con-
tinues. "As you can see, the overall dueling area is divided
into three sections." He taps a track ball on the console,
and a pointing arrow zips across the screen. It circles the
left half of the screen, then the right, and finally runs up
and down the center band of gray. "Each duel pits a pair
of alternatives against one another. Often, the alternatives
are negations—one position in favor of some action, and
one position against that action. The left part of the screen
belongs to the proponent for the action, and the right half
belongs to the opponent. These two people are known as
the slant moderators. They have slanted viewpoints, of
course, and they actually act as moderators—anyone can
suggest ideas to them for presentation. Of course, no one
caMs them slant moderators. The nickname for slant mod-
erator is decision duelist."
The pointer continues to roam across the center band.
"The center is the 'third alternatives' area, where ideas
outside of for-or-against may be presented by either of the
duelists, or by anyone in the audience, hi the duel we have
DAVID'S SUNG               69
^    here, the third alternatives section remained closed—no
one came up with any striking ways to finesse the question."
The arrow shifts upward. Above the colored swirl of text
boxes stands a single line of text, a single phrase. It
dominates the screen, with thick letters black as asphalt.
The lettering seems so solid Bill wonders whether it is
part of the display, or whether it has been etched into the
surface in bas relief.
This one phrase running across the top overlaps all
three sections of the screen. Bill presumes that top line
describes the theme of the duel, the title of the topic
'    under discussion. Reading it now, he sees it does not.
Instead, this dark, ominous line—so striking and hypnotic,

as if sucking the light from the air—reads:
LET ACCURACY TRIUMPH OVER VICTORY
j       Despite the hypnotic pull. Bill tears his eyes away from
't    the words. They disturb him.
^      Hammond speaks, "It's easy to get wrapped up in one's
^    own point of view on a topic. After much study of the
' &    matter, we've concluded that you can't overemphasize the
f    need for objective search for rightness, as opposed to
>-    victory." He smiles. "As it happens, we keep records on
,    the duels written by certified slant moderators. We do not
keep our records based on who wins the duel. We keep
i    them based on whether the decision that comes out of the
n    duel is correct. Thus, a duelist can have a perfect record
'^    even if he 'loses' every time he moderates."
'      A dark-haired woman wearing a smart business suit
asks, "How do you know who's right? Sometimes it takes
years to find out, and sometimes you can never find out."
Hammond concurs. "You're quite right. We can't trace
i;    the correctness of all the duels, so not every duel yields a
,     record. However, we don't lose things just because it
takes a long time to determine the outcome. The memo-
ries of the Zetetic data bases are very long indeed. In fact,
the Zetetic data bases have started to free those of us who
work here from our own short-term concerns. Even if we
forget events and decisions as quickly as the news media
forget, the knowledge remains available for recall with
70
Marc Stiegier
only a slight effort. We have automated the tracking of all
the predictions of duelists, stock-brokers, crystal ball read-
ers, and economists. A couple of years of lucky hits do not
impress us." He snorts. "We also keep records of the
promises made by politicians. I'm sure no one would be
surprised by the results of that comparison."
Hammond leads them haUway down to the audience
area, where a pair of work stations sit in friendly proxim-
ity. The left work station display shows a section of the left
half of the main display—the proponent's half. Some early
duelist has scratched PRO into the edge of the desk top,
The right station shows a part of the right half of the
display—the opponent's half; another duelist long ago la-
beled it CON. Bill runs his finger over the rough cuts in
the desk top, amazed by the presence of such graffiti.
The cloth-covered arms of the work station chairs show
frays and dark stains. Bill wonders how many hundreds of
anxious decision duelists have sat in these chairs, rubbing
nervous hands over those arms.
"We also keep score on the development of third alter-

natives that are better than either of the listed alterna-
tives. In general, duels that settle on third alternatives
find the best answers of all."
The lecturer drones on, but his voice blends into the
scene as Bill watches the cursor on the main display flicker
from point to point.
Beneath the blinking warning are the titles: YES, A
USEFUL STRATEGIC DEFENSE CAN BE BUILT. And
NO, A USEFUL STRATEGIC DEFENSE CANNOT BE
BUILT. Beneath the titles are the assumptions, written in
cautionary amber. About a dozen assumptions show for
the PRO side, and another dozen on the CON side. On
the PRO side is the comment, "We assume we are dis-
cussing alternatives for getting high rates of Idll against
ICBMs. We are not discussing engineering absurdities
such as 'perfect' defenses."
Next to this assumption lies a picture of a button,
When the arrow touches the button, a farther discussion
of this assumption—why it is necessary—expands into view.
On the CON side, one three-part assumption stands
out. "A strategic defense system must pass three feasibility
DAVID'S SUNG                71
tests: It must be technically feasible. It must be economi-
cally feasible. It must be politically feasible."
Beneath die yellow assumption boxes are the opening
arguments. The first of these are the cute slogans with
much cleverness but little content, much favored by the
media. The duelists put them up even if they disagree
with them, just to get them out of the way. Appropriately,
here the coloration of the text seems playful—purples and
oranges and reds splashing about as though written with a
child s crayons.
A purple background marks off a quote on the PRO
side:
BUILD WEAPONS THAT KILL WEAPONS, NOT
WEAPONS THAT KILL PEOPLE.
The CON duelist colored it purple because the state-
ment has no meaningful content, only emotional appeal:
whether a weapon kills people directly or not is irrelevant;
what matters is whether the weapon increases or decreases
the odds that more or fewer people will die.
On the CON side. the PRO duelist had marked a
statement in red; PREVENT THE MILITARIZATION
OF SPACE. When Hammond's arrow touches this field,
an explanation window blossoms to explain the fetal flaw in
this reasoning. Space was already militarized: if a war
started, 10,000 nuclear warheads could fall through space

in the first half hour. Moreover, as with the purple com-
ment on the pro side, the important issue was not whether
a weapon was space-based—the question was its effect on
human life. The PRO duelist had placed another purple,
satirical statement on level with the PREVENT MILITA-
RIZATION slogan, connecting them with a thin line indi-
cating they were two different ways of saying the same
thing. The satirical alternative to PREVENT THE MIU-
TAMZATON OF SPACE was MAKE THE WORLD SAFE
FOR NUCLEAR WARHEADS.
Beneath the opening comments the words shrank in
size, becoming more densely packed as the two sides
parried back and forth with increasing verbosity. Both
sides agreed to the format described in the CON assump-
tions: first came discussion of technical feasibility, then
economic, then political.
72 Marc Stiegler
The technical feasibility debate ran to great lengths.
PRO constructed alternative after alternative, only to see
each one knocked down by CON. But PRO responded to
the CON objections, refining the alternatives to overcome
the objections one by one. Bill realizes that he sees the
evolution of a high-level design for strategic defense out-
lined before him.
Two-thirds of the way down the screen, the discussion
ends, the PRO side triumphant. They have constructed
over a hundred different approaches. CON has marked up
all but two with bright red fatal flaws, but those two
approaches seem capable of defense against words, and
maybe also missiles.
Then the debate on the economics begins. This is a
short discussion, surprisingly. Both sides agree upon a
single criterion for economic viability; Can the system
knock a missile down for less money than it costs to put a
missile up? If you can shoot them down for more than they
cost, then the defense is cheap; if you cannot, then the
whole thing is easily defeated by building more missiles. A
small amber button glows next to this agreement, which
expands to explain the underlying assumption that the
defender is not so much wealthier than the attacker that
he can afford an extravagant imbalance. A millionaire can
spend thousands of dollars protecting himself from a ten-
dollar pistol, for example, and easily afford it.
Here both sides invoke large windows filled with
spreadsheet calculations. Again, the PRO side shows one
possible way of keeping the costs within the economic
limit, while CON shows the other approach would fail.
Both sides note the inaccuracies in these forecasts, and the
size of the ranges. But only one successful approach is
needed. The strategic defense system has passed the eco-
nomic test.
Hammond explains that the political feasibility test is
where the CON duelist had focused his attention all along.

It is here that the brilliant thrust took place, the insight
that makes this a classic in decision dueling. For though
there are several approaches that are technically feasible,
and one of those is indeed economically feasible, there are
thousands of approaches that would fail. With brutal clar-
DAVID'S SUNG                73
ity the CON duelist demonstrates, with one military pro-
gram after another, that the American military development
system cannot select a solution that is better than medio-
cre- With the wings of the C-5, with the computers of
TACFIRE, with the armor of the Bradley, the CON duel-
ist demonstrates mediocre solutions that cost factors of two
and three times as much as good solutions should.
The PRO duelist concedes: given the American system
of military research and development, strategic defense is
a hopeless proposition,
"And as everyone here knows, this early decision duel
predicted the future quite accurately." Hammond sighs.
"This also demonstrates another fundamental consideration
of the decision duel—one that engineers all too often
forget: the critical importance of finding an approach that
can succeed, not only technically and economically, but
also politically. This engineering blind spot mirrors the
politician's tendency to forget technical viability. Politi-
cians live in a universe where reality seems to be con-
trolled by the perceptions of other politicians. In the heat
of finding an approach that he can get other politicians to
agree to, he forgets that there are laws he has no control
over."
Illey walk from the room. The warning in asphalt-black
from the top of the dueling display continues to etch itself
in Bill Hardie's mind.
CUT. After several more demonstrations of Zetetic net-
works and techniques, he shuts off his flatcam. There is
nothing in the Sampler to help him humiliate the Zetetic
Institute.
A man could easily starve, wandering the halls of the
Pentagon in search of an exit. The faceless, endless corri-
dors contain few distinguishing landmarks for the novice
explorer. And the corridors are truly endless—once aligned
on a ring, a person could veer gently at each pentagon-
comer and return eventually to the place whence he had
started. Of course, whether he recognized his starting
point or not was another matter.
Sitting at his mahogany desk in the heart of the great
building, Charles Somerset reflected on a story he had
74 Marc Sttegfer
once heard about wild turkeys. A wild turkey, when con-
fronted with a fence, would simply spread its wings and
leap the fence. But when confronted with a thick tree

trunk lying on its side, the turkey would run around the
log, that being an easier scheme. So the clever fanner
strung a low wire, the height of a tree trunk, in a large
circle. Instead of leaping, the turkey would run around the
edge of the wire to Bnd its end. By the time it returned to
its starting place, the turkey had quite forgotten it had
been there before. It would run, around and around, till it
collapsed in exhaustion.
Charles didn't know whether the system worked with
turkeys, but it certainly did with people in the Pentagon.
Dazed, dizzy, and defeated by the corridors, exhausted
Pentagon commanders could easily have their wings clipped
by the smart operator. For some projects, the clipping
took a lot of time and gentle nudging, but it yielded
results in the end.
For these reasons, Charles loved the Pentagon. The
dingy corridors did not dismay him. The hollow echo of air
conditioning, the sometimes painful squeal of old battered
chairs, the pounding rhythm of remodeling never quite
completed, the echoes of conversations that seemed to
linger in the hallways long after the speakers had de-
parted: all contributed to the sensation of Bghting under
hostile conditions. Such conditions made victories over the
maze of circles that much sweeter. Charles seldom noticed
that the endless circles had trapped even him. Only on
days like today did he feel encircled himself.
Today, he felt like a wagon train struggling against a
circle of Indian warriors. He had assembled a fine flock of
generals, colonels, and majors for the FIREFORS pro-
jects, not to mention the gaggles of civil servants and
defense contractors. But they had left a few stray turkeys
beyond the fence. Strays did not present an abnormality,
but when they started acting like an Indian war party, he
had to do something about it. Billions of dollars in
FIREFORS projects could be canceled if people started
concluding that the Sling Project, with a few paltry mil-
lions of dollars, could provide more capabilities at ludi-
crously less cost. Rumors had started already; an intense
DAVID'S SUNG                75
new school of treaty-loving budget-butchers waited for an
opening to storm the FIREFORS train. It was exhausting
to think about.
His glasses had slid down his nose during the morning's
toil. He pushed them back into place with a sigh.
Charles and his projects had met threats like the Sling
before. For over two decades, he had maintained a string
of perfect scores in political combat. No one had ever
canceled one of his projects. Why not? his opponents often
asked. For one thing, the projects were too important, he
explained. For another, the Defense Department already
had too much money invested in them to just throw them
away. This case was no different: hundreds of important
people had staked their reputations on FIREFORS by

putting money into it; no one wanted a handful of Zetetic
fanatics, funded with peanuts, to beat them.
Fortunately, enemies like the Sling Project bad many
vulnerabilities. Charles had merely to pick one and apply
the right formula. The Sling's dependence on commerical
hardware and software was such a vulnerability. Commer-
cial stuff might be cheaper, but it did not match the
military requirement. It could not be rugged enough, for
example. It could not survive an EMP blast, or a salt fog.
And cheaply built hodgepodges of commercial stuff were
not systems: they did not consider -the logistics, the train-
ing, or the maintenance that a full-scale development proj-
ect had to consider.
All these other considerations made military equipment
cost tens and hundreds of times as much as commercial
equipment. Ruggedization, logistics, training—these prob-
lems were responsible for the one little mar in the
FIREFORS record; in two decades of effort, not one
FIREFORS project had been completed. And of course
none had been canceled. So all continued on course to
their ever-more-distant deliveries, a fleet of juggernauts
on an endless but important voyage.
His desk remained neat throughout the voyage. A single
folder of papers to one side suggested to visitors that
Charles had concentrated all his efibrts on a single impor-
tant task, excommunicating all else to his filing cabinets,
and to his conference table.
76 Marc Stiegter
Charles did not keep the conference table nearly so
clean. Too often, unfriendly visitors came with the inten-
tion of spreading their accusatory documents across its
surface. So Charles kept a carefully disarrayed assortment
of materials there, organized to seem important, slightly
skewed to suggest that a disturbance would damage the
arrangement. Charles had plenty of space on his desk for
displays, if the displays showed favorable results.
A single sheet of paper now rested on the single folder
on his desk. It was the draft of a backchannel message      ,
from General Curtis to General Hicks, explaining why the      ;
Sling Project represented a dangerous duplication of ef-
fort, It suggested that control of the Sling Project should
move to the FIREFORS program office, where FIREFORS
could manage it more effectively.
The backchannel suggested tunneling the Sling Project
money into the common pool of FIREFORS fonds. Then
FIREFORS could build a system that included all the       s
good features of both the Sling and the FIREFORS
systems—though frankly. General Curtis felt confident that
FIREFORS projects already incorporated all the key fea-       ^
tures of the Sling system. After all, FIREFORS had been       f
working on these problems for twenty years; they had       f
experience. General Curtis recommended to General Hicks       ^

that he look at the latest revision of the requirements
document describing the FIREFORS products—Version
14.7. Thus General Hicks could see for himself that
FIREFORS had indeed covered all critical Sling elements,       i
Charles smiled, reading about Version 14.7. It had just
come off the presses that morning, thicker than Version
14.6 because of a new chapter describing additional vari-
ants of FIREFORS systems. The variants looked astonish-
ingly like the Sling Hunters. The only parts of the Sling       |
specifications omitted from the FIREFORS plan were the
parts on low cost and quick delivery,
Though the backchannel was from General Curtis, Cur-
tis had not written it; indeed, he had not yet seen it- But
Charles had spent the whole week warming him up to the
idea of such a message. The general would sign with only a
glance at the wording.
With a small hum of pleasure, Charles edited a few fine
DAVID'S SUNG                77
points in the message. His sharpened pencil stabbed against
the paper, slashing streaks of red across the words. It
seemed like a modem form of voodoo, wherein the slashes
could appear upon the spirits of the men working on the
Sling.
Charles hummed more loudly as he considered the dev-
astating potency of this form of black magic.
President Mayfield looked at his watch with eager antic-
ipation. The next step along the path to the next election
had been sealed. His heart skipped once in a while, but
only when he watched Nell Carson's puzzled expression
for too long.
She strode across the room, from the conference table
to the bookcase. Her eyes wandered aimlessly across the
rows of volumes. It seemed as though she believed the
answers to all her questions could be found here, but for
some reason she could not read.
Disdainful, Mayfield glanced at the books himself. First
he saw only a few books. With a mental step back, he saw
more: he saw all the shelves filled with books. Then he
remembered that this tiny collection represented a win-
dow into the main room of the Library of Congress; he saw
walls filled with shelves.      >-
In a moment of grander vision, he saw the rooms filled
with walls of shelves, beyond the main room in the Li-
brary of Congress. Then he saw the buildings filled with
rooms of shelves of books, beyond the main building. And
he saw how tiny a single human mind seemed, compared
to this enormous swirl of knowledge.
He lurched mentally to a horrible realization. In some
desperately important sense, both he and Nell were illiter-

ate. The answers to their questions might well lie within
the behemoth of human experience. Yet those answers
might as well not exist. For though both he and Nell could
read, they could not read fast enough.
They couldn't read fast enoughf His heart skipped a
beat. He needed to look away and think of something else,
but Nell's expression held him. He felt sure that Nell had
seen the rooms of walls of shelves as clearly as he had, yet
the vision did not frighten her. Only sorrow, and longing,
78 Marc Sttegfer
and puzzlement touched her expression as her reaching
fingers touched the books at random. The gesture seemed
so hopeless, yet the mind behind the gesture seemed so
hopeful.
She paced back to the table, her dress swishing grace-
fully as she moved. She paused at the table, reluctant to
sit. Yet she had no other purpose in this room; she re-
turned to her chair.
Elated, Mayfield saw that Nell Carson, the woman of
never-ending surety, was uncertain about their new treaty.
Mayfield shifted his gaze to Secretary of State Earl
Semmens, seated across the table from Nell. Earl's pos-
ture suggested that he expected Nell to strike him physi-
cally; he evidently did not recognize Nell's uncertainty.
Unable to resist this opportunity to gloat, Mayfield prod-
ded his vice president. "So, Ms. Carson, what do you
think of our new agreement?"
Hard nails clicked against smooth table top. She looked
up abruptly, straight into Mayfield's eyes. "I don't know."
Even now, though she was filled with doubts, she was
annoyingly certain of her uncertainty. "Normally, when
the Soviets sign a treaty, we already have indications of
their next plans. Of course, we always refuse to under-
stand those indications, but they're there nonetheless."
She paused. "This time, I can't see any indications."
"I can see that you can't see." Mayfield's ironic tone
showed his enjoyment of (his moment. "It couldn't be that
we've finally penetrated that impenetrable Soviet suspi-
cion, could it? It couldn't be that they've learned that
treaties are better than wars, could it?"
Nell sat frozen, unable to accept this view, yet unable to
refute it. Finally, she confessed, "It's possible, Jim. I can't
prove you're wrong, though I can show that it's highly
unlikely. They may have learned that treaties are better
than wars, but that is not the lesson we've been teaching.
We've been teaching them that having treaties and having
wars, when convenient, is the best of both worlds." Her
head tilted, as if listening for a clue. "My best guess is that
they have some ulterior motive for withdrawing troops from
Eastern Europe, though I have no idea what it might be."

DAVID'S SUNG                79
Mayfield glanced back at his watch again; it was almost
time.
Earl swiveled out of his defensive posture to confront
Nell for the first time, "Ulterior motive? Ill give you an
ulterior motive. The Soviet economy is creaking like an
old maid's vertebrae! They desperately need to put those
men back to work in the factories and the fields. They
have to become more productive—that's their motive!
This arms race is hurting them even more than it's hurting
us, and it's kiUing us! What more motive do you need?"
Nell looked ready to respond, but Mayfield interrupted
hurriedly. "Let's see what the rest of the country has to
say about my—our—new treaty." His finger stabbed the
squishy plastic button on his remote. The dull glow of a
television lit up amidst the bookshelves.
For a moment Mayfield thought he had turned on an
old movie—one about the gods of ancient Greece. The
man who smiled out at them from the TV screen could
easily pass as Apollo.
Nell whistled. "Whew! Who is that guy?"
Mayfield shrugged, "He's a new reporter for ABN. Some
of my constituents tell me he'll be the newscasting star of
the decade. They asked me to watch his spots. They say
he knows the nation's pulse better than anybody." Actu-
ally, Mayfield himself knew the nation's pulse best. That
had been proven repeatedly. Jim had an uncanny knack
for positioning himself within the public spotlight,
Nell asked, "What's this guy's name?"
"Uh, Bill Hardin, or something like that. He looks like
Apollo, doesn't he?"
"I've never seen a more perfect Neanderthal animal in
my life."
ZOOM. The Neanderthal Apollo wears a suit and tie
and speaks with the bland accent of the Midwest. "To-
night's top story, of course, is President Mayfield's latest
treaty with the Soviet Union. The new treaty, a remark-
able American coup at the negotiation table, is known as
the Mutual Force Reduction Agreement. It leads immedi-
ately to the withdrawal of several divisions of troops, both
American and Soviet, from the European theater. This
80 Marc Stiegler
will mean an immediate relaxation of tensions, and may
lead to even more impressive long-term troop withdrawals.'
Nell commented drily, "At least no one can accuse him
of pessimism."

"Shush," Mayfield chided.
FOCUS. "America may be witnessing the most signifi-
cant transition in world history: the transition from a
world of tense, sometimes violent conflict, to a world of
peace. President Mayfield has single-handedly propelled
this transition with his clockwork-like invention of new
ways to lower tensions, while maintaining the security of
both the United States and the Soviet Union. Indeed,
rumors have started circulating that President Mayfield
could become the next Nobel Peace Prize winner."
What an incredible ideal The Nobel Peace Prize! Again
he looked over at Nell, who stared Bxedly at the screen.
He felt a certain compassion for her, thinking how difficult
it must be for her to acknowledge the rightness of his long,
determined drive to peace. He felt flush with warm belief
in himself.
CUT. The scene shifts to a picture of angry civilians and
equally angry police, facing each other on a wide swath of
concrete. ' What incredible methods of persuasion did the
president use to make the Soviets agree to the Mutual
Force Reduction Agreement? He was able to arrange this
withdrawal of troops despite the ongoing unrest in East
Germany." Huddled groups of East Germans suddenly
break into motion. A few bricks fly, then the sound of
machine guns fills the air. The viewer can almost smeU the
gunpowder. "The only place in the world today where the
Soviets face worse trouble than here in East Germany is in
the city of Ashkhabad, near the Iranian border. Here
militant Muslim extremists press for religious and other
freedoms. The violence grows as Iranian smugglers con-
tinue supplying guns and training to militant protesters."
CUT. A diplomatic delegation comes into view. "Even
this conflict seems on the verge of resolution, however.
After years of reticence, the Iranian government has agreed
to work out a plan with the Soviet Union for controlling
these smugglers. We have reason to believe this negotia-
tion may have been arranged by President Mayfield as
DAVID'S SUNG
81
well. We believe he used his influence with Saudi Arabia,
which persuaded the King of Jordan to press the Ayatollah
of Iran for resolution of the issue."
Mayfield started to shake his head in denial of this last
twist in Hardie's analysis, then stopped. The rumor wasn't
true, of course; he had had no involvement with the
Soviet-Iran talks whatsoever. And though he would never
suggest that he had had something to do with it, such
rumors could thrust him even closer to the Peace Prize.
For now, it seemed silly to deny them.
He saw Nell contemplating him with her too-wide, sol-
emn blue eyes. Something about her demanded a reac-

tion. He thrust his chin forward, proud of the events he
had initiated. He wondered why she made him feel so
uncomfortable, why she made his heart speed up like a
rabbit's.
Nell rose to leave, having heard as much president-
worship as she could stand. "Congratulations," she offered
with apparent sincerity. She nodded at the news reporter
on the screen, then at Mayfield. "I hope you're both right.
I hope we don't regret this a month from now."
"Don't worry," Mayfield said as she left the White House
library room. "Next month we'll do something even better."
July 29
Filter first for substance, niter second for
significance.
These filters protect against advertising.
—Zetetic Commentaries
A long corridor connected the receptionist hub of the
Institute's main building to Leslie Evans's office. Nathan
walked that corridor often, but he never walked it without
a moment's pause near the beginning of the hall. Nathan
paused there now. He stood in the heart of the Sling
Project.
A tapestry of colorful lines and boxes filled the walls of
the corridor. For a child's eye the pattern would hold little
beauty, and less meaning. But to an engineer, this corridor-
filling PERT chart held as much truth as a man could bear
in a single encounter. And for an engineer, truth always
appeared intricately meshed with beauty. In some engi-
neering sense, the chart was beautiful.
Every task in the Sling Project had a box on the wall.
Lines of interdependency jagged across the spaces be-
tween the boxes—from boxes that could be completed
early, to boxes that could not be started until those early
boxes yielded completed products. For example, they had
to design the prototype SkyHunter before they could build
it. They had to build it before they could test it.
No single human mind could understand all the com-
plexities of all the components of the Sling Project. But in
this hall a person could at least grasp the outline of the
system as he walked from the accomplished past into the
dreamed-of future. The colors of the chart which described
the relation between accomplishment and dream, rippled
in an elastic dance with the passage of time.
Green-marked tasks were already completed. Nathan
had entered the hall from the past, from the beginning of
the project. He walked through a forest of greens for a
82

DAVID'S SLING                 83
long time, and his confidence grew. The Sling team had
already accomplished so much. He reached out and touched
a green box at random: SELECT BASE VEHICLE FOR
THE HOPPEBHUNTEB. There had been three alterna-
tives for the hopper—a commercial hovercraft and two
experimental walking platforms. The hovercraft had won
out in the selection because of its speed, despite its infe-
rior stability.
Pink marked the tasks now falling behind schedule. A
pink box was not necessarily a catastrophe. Pink tasks still
had slack time before they were needed for the next step
in the dance of interdependencies, but they were warn-
ings of potential trouble.
Nathan proceeded down the hall. Soon a light scattering
of pink mingled with the green. As Nathan walked closer
to the present, the pinks clustered more thickly, but they
did not yet dominate any part of the wall.
Simple black marked the tasks not yet started, not yet
needed- These tasks were the future—challenging, but
nevertheless achievable. Nathan stopped where the black
boxes collided with the pinks and greens. He stood in the
present. Reaching forward, he touched a tiny part of the
near future, when they would complete the design for the
Crowbar control surfaces. The "Crowbar was the projectile
dispensed from the HighHunter, a deceptively simple metal
bar that would simply fall to Earth from orbit and hit the
ground—or an enemy tank—with all the speed and energy
it gained in its meteoric flight. Black boxes such as this
one covered the rest of the corridor.
Red marked the results of a pink box that had festered
too long. Red marked disaster: a task that should already
have been completed—one that had to be completed im-
mediately. Every day the red box remained red, every day
its schedule slipped, the schedule for the whole wall of
tasks slipped, A single red box would ultimately distort the
whole wall—all the way out to the box for the completion
date. itself so far down the hall it disappeared from Na-
than's sight. Bed boxes represented the blood and sweat of
engineers who would work 24 hours a day to repair the
damage. Red boxes marked open wounds on the body of
the project.
84 Marc Stiegler
A single red box glared under Nathan's appraising gaze.
This box had triggered his meeting today with Leslie. He
touched it. The words inside described his own personal
failure. COMPLETE STAFFING OF THE SOFTWARE
DEVELOPMENT TEAM, the box reminded him. With
an abrupt turn, he hurried through the black future of the
Sling to Leslie's office.
He found Leslie glaring at a paper on his desk, listening
to his telephone in annoyed silence. When he spoke he

sounded like a miserly grouch. "And I'm telling you that
you've billed us twice and delivered the fracture analysis
zero times. Send us a copy of the originals and we'll talk
again." He listened a few more moments. "Right. Good-
bye." He mashed the telephone into its receiver. With an
abrupt change of tone to that of a comic straight man, he
asked Nathan, "Okay, guru, where's our software develop-
ment team?"
Nathan shook his head. "I'm sony, Les. I hate giving
excuses—and I'm not giving you one now. But I think
you'll find the problem I've run into interesting, even
though it sounds like I'm making excuses."
Leslie chuckled. "That's the best lead-in for an excuse
I've ever heard. Did they teach you that here at the ZI?"
Nathan made a face. "I've found that the software engi-
neers in the United States today fall into three broad
categories." He started ticking them off on his fingers.
"First, there are brilliant engineers who refuse to work on
military projects. Second, there are brilliant engineers
who can and will work on military projects. Unfortunately,
as nearly as I can figure from the Jobnet data bases, all of
them already are working on military projects. The coun-
try has sucked an awfal lot of people into this kind of
work." He waved his hand in a frustrated wipe at an
imaginary slate.
"Third there are engineers who are not brilliant. I've
got tabs on several solid pluggers who could do some of
our work, but no one who can make the Sling fly on
schedule."
Les brought his hand to his lips. Several years ago, the
motion would have ended with a puff from a thin cigarillo.
Tne cigarillo was gone—Jan had made him well—but his
DAVID'S SUNG               85
hand remembered, "I know the problem. I've fought it for
years." He sighed. "Joel Barton, the first man I worked for
after getting out of the Air Force, told me the real reason
why me Soviet Union would beat us, 'Les,' he said, 'they
have three times as many airplanes, four times as many
tanks, and five times as many men. But that isn't the real
problem- The real problem is that they have eight times as
many smart minds—physicists and engineers and such—
working on their military problems.' He clapped me on
the shoulder. 'Les, for us to keep up with them, you and I
and every other engineer in the United States who does
defense work will have to be eight times as productive as
one of theirs." He cleared his throat.
Nathan shook his head in mild disappointment. "For
shame, Les, do you want me to get up on one of my
soapboxes?" he asked. "There's another alternative. We
don't have to work eight times as hard, if we can harness
the strength of the commercial equipment that our non-
military engineers build." He smiled. "That way, we'll

only need to work twice as hard as their engineers." The
smile dropped. "But even working only twice as hard, I
fear we need star-quality people to complete the Sling."
"Unquestionably," Les agreed. "We'll need stars. The
schedule is tight, and the software will be the most diffi-
cult part to develop and test—it's' the only part that we
need to develop from scratch. To make schedule we'll
have to keep the software team small and fast. If the
team's too big, we'll run out of fuel at test time, when we
find out how many ways the team members misunder-
stood each other when they were building their individual
pieces."
Nathan had arrived tense; now the tension subsided as
he listened to Leslie's summation. Les understood the
problem as well as he did. "We'll do it with no more than
four people," Les continued. "We need one sensor
expert—a person whose specialty is transforming raw sig-
nals into clean images. He shouldn't just know how to
handle visual images, either. This person will need to
know the whole electromagnetic spectrum. And he'll have
some hellish signals to process—the Crowbars will need to
identify and lock on targets within seconds of hitting ter-
86
Marc Stiegler
minal velocity, just after coming out from their own little
clouds of superheated plasma."
Nathan plunked into the chair next to Leslie's desk.
"Bight. Next, we'll need an expert systems specialist—
someone who can analyze those images to decide what the
Hunter should do. For example, the SkyHunter needs to
look at a random collection of radar sites, communication
sites, and images of tents and vehicles. From that, it'll
have to figure out where the headquarters is. That's where
we need to make the machine think like a human military
expert."
"Our military expert is Kurt, right?" Leslie asked. When
Nathan nodded, Leslie continued with a frown. "Jan is still
doing a better job of running this project than we are."
"Yes." The conversation paused. For the first time since
Jan's death, Nathan took a close look around Leslie's office.
The little things had changed—the picture frames on his       ^
desk contained only images of Kira. The clutter had shifted,        ^
too. Antiquated microcomputers that Leslie had collected
in the comers of the room had gone away, opening sec-       ^
tions of wall that had not seen sunlight for years. Nathan's       |-
nose itched as he thought of the spumes of dust that must       ||
have risen from that machine graveyard.                       H
Though the piles of computers had disappeared, the       f
stacks of books had grown, filling a third large bookcase.        ^
The pictures on the walls remained the same—pictures of

jet fighters, transports, and surveillance aircraft that Leslie
had flown and developed before the Air Force had de-
cided to make him a general. The promotion had taken
him by surprise; he had not wanted it. He had rushed to
get out before they made him a totally political beast,
spending his life Grafting ways to defeat the internal sys-
tem rather than ways to meet the external threats.
Nathan continued the count of people they needed.
"Third, we need a person who blends robotics and comm
expertise—someone who can take the decisions made by
the expert and put them into action, moving the vehicle,
firing the gun, and so on."
"Sounds like a complete trio to me," Les replied. "Of
course, it might be nice if they all had compatible person-
alities while we're hiring stars. It would certainly make life
DAVID'S SUNG               87
easier, anyway. But I still only count three. Who's the
fourth person?"
Nathan laughed. "The fourth person is the vicious one,
the one whose purpose is to ruin your group dynamics.
He's the tester—by virtue of his creation of the simula-
tions, We can't smash up 10,000 hovercraft and airplanes
trying to test the software. Long before we ever put any of
this stuff in a real Hunter, we'll have to work out the bugs
by plugging into simulations. The sims will look, feel, and
taste like real Hunters, as far as the software is concerned."
Leslie wrinkled his nose. "Of course," He looked Na-
than in the eye. "So we need four people. How many of
them do we have now? Besides Kurt, that is."
Nathan sighed. "None of them. Though I do have a
couple of leads."
"So you found some candidates on the Jobnet after all."
"Not in the usual way." Nathan laughed. "I looked
through listings of people who used to be looking for jobs.
Out of those people, I looked for people who had found
short-term jobs. Hence, instead of a list of available peo-
ple, I have a list of people who will be available soon. I
doubt that anyone else has searched Jobnet looking for
people this way,"
Les snorted- He looked stem, and Nathan knew the Air
Force had taken a grievous loss when this man had refused
his promotion to general. "No one searches Jobnet with
the techniques you use, except the ones who take your
own classes on data manipulation and information filtering.
You, my friend, are creating a huge collection of competi-
tors for yourself. The Zetetic Institute is bound and deter-
mined to destroy its own advantage."
Nathan chuckled. "I wish that were the biggest problem
we faced."

"If you already have a list of prospects lined up, why'd
you come here to bother me?" Leslie asked.
Nathan leaned across Leslie's desk. "I'm bothering you
because one of my prospects is an old friend of yours.
Currently, he has a job that's barely more than a hobby.
He's networking the cash registers for a group of knitting
and stitchery shops. He's our comm and robotics man, if
you can win him over."
88 Marc Stiegler
"tfJ can win him over, huh? Who is this guy?"
Nathan removed a microfloppy from his inner suit pocket
and banded it to Leslie. "Amos Leung."
Leslie blinked. "Amos? Jesus, I haven't seen Amos in
over a decade. How did you know he worked for me?"
Nathan clapped his hands. "I didn't, actually. But 1
suspected. He worked on the Version G modifications to
the E-3 comm system while you were program manager. I
just guessed you might know him."
"Hmph. Well, Nathan, if you wanted a star. you'll get
one in Amos."
"If we can get him."
"Yeah." Leslie pursed his lips. "He's a great software
developer. But Jesus, he'll be a hard sell."
Nathan patted him on the shoulder. "I have great faith
in your powers of persuasion."
Leslie scowled.
"Is there anything else we should discuss before I go in
search of my next crisis?" Nathan asked.
"No—though you should know about FIKEFORS's lat-
est attempt on our lives."
The grim humor of Leslie's voice told Nathan they'd had
a close call. "What was it?"
Leslie told him about the backchannel message that
General Curtis had intended to send to General Hicks.
Fortunately, Curtis had mentioned the message to an old
friend of Leslie's, who had tipped Leslie off". Leslie had
discreetly arranged for other old friends to dissuade Curtis
from sending the message.
"Was that really all that dangerous—just a message from
one general to another?" Nathan asked in puzzlement.
"Well, it would have been a whole lot harder for us to
stop if it had been sent, that's for sure. Nathan, we're

gonna have to watch those guys like hawks. And we'd
better keep our noses clean. If FIREFORS gets a whiff
that something's going wrong, they'll be on us in a minute."
"Uke a bad cost overrun or something?"
"Yeah. That, or a bad schedule delay." He pulled a
miniature copy of the corridor PERT chart from deep
inside the paper clutter of his desk, and stabbed the small
dot of red amongst the greens and pinks. Nathan felt
DAVID'S SUNG               89
another shiver up his spine as he considered the possible
consequences,
Ivan leaned forward in his seat—the unpadded wooden
back hurt his spine—then realized how nervous he must
look in that pose. He sank back in the chair, only to lean
forward again.
As he fidgeted, he occasionally looked out the window
to watch children playing in the warmth of the summer
sun. Once in a while he yielded to the need to look back at
his commander, who now had to double as his executioner.
He could no longer hope that Colonel Savchenko, the
man who had given him the promotion and the project on
the consequences of nuclear war, had come here for any
other purpose.
He chided himself for ever hoping for anything else. He
remembered the gunmetal gray of the weather the day
this project had started, the unremitting clarity with which
he had known that his plans would lead to disaster. Yet
over the months, as the grays of Siberia yielded to white-
specked blues, Ivan too had yielded to brighter visions.
He had come to believe that his superiors would believe
him; he had deceived himself with hope that they would
be happy to have him disru'pt their dangerous self-
deceptions. His hope had peaked 'as he had framed the
summation of the report.
It was the summation that Colonel Savchenko now re-
read with weary gray eyes. Ivan could almost read it more
easily in his own mind than the colonel could read it in
wide bold type;
Thus we see that, despite the uncertainties, the best
available analyses of the effects of nuclear war all drive to
the same conclusion. Five gigatons of explosions would
cause a global disaster that would challenge the lives of
even the luckiest war survivors. Avoidance of such a nu-
clear exchange must be a primary goal of the Soviet Union,
even if it means concessions to foreign powers. Only if our
country faced certain extinction could we justify a strate-
gic battle that pressed the limits of global catastrophe.
Ivan stared at the colonel. A sunbeam of light through
the window threw his trenchantly wrinkled features into

90 Marc Stiegler
sharp relief. He gave Ivan a millimeter shake of his head.
"The wording in this summation is too strong. Indeed, you
overstep the bounds of analysis when you presume to
discuss global politics. Neither you nor I is in a position to
declare what the State must and must not do."
"Unfortunately, sir, the facts drive one to these conclu-
sions. Only a madman could decide that it's in the State's
best interest to destroy the entire human race. No matter
where you were, a major nuclear assault would be a disas-
ter of unprecedented proportions."
The colonel sighed. "This entire report is a disaster of
unprecedented proportions."
Ivan's fidgeting stopped. He sat very straight, very still.
"There is not a single false word in this report, sir. Every
page, every sentence, every word, contains as much truth
as science can currently produce."
"Yes, yes, I'm sure. It's a disaster nonetheless."
"I deeply regret that the truth contradicts the precon-
ceived notions some people may have had."
Savchenko looked up swiftly from the paper, to puzzle
over Ivan's expressionless face. "Do you regret it?" His
voice acquired the hard evenness of glare ice. "It makes
no difference. We have neither the time nor the money to
redo this effort from scratch without explaining what hap-
pened. And I'm sure you're right about the rigor of the
research. We would find it impossible to explain away this
verification of the current forecasts.
"However, the summation is neither factual nor even
logical. It must be rewritten. In fact, this whole document
needs to be interpreted carefully, as regards its impact on
global strategy. Your brief summation will be replaced by
an entire additional chapter." Ivan opened his mouth to
speak, but the colonel raised his hand for silence. "But
you will not write this last chapter, major. The final chap-
ter needs a more senior hand—someone with not only a
keen eye for the facts of the physical world, but with a
sensitivity for the intangibles of international relations as
well."
Ivan's mouth drew in a thin line.
"You, major, have a new assignment. An assignment in
Czechoslovakia." The colonel rolled his lips; his brow dark"
DAVID'S SUNG                91
ened in a moment of melancholy. "We have a cell of
tactical nuclear weapons effects analysts in the city of
Pizen. You will take charge of them. Your first task is to
develop a plan for the nuclear decapitation of the Ameri-

can VII Corps in the event of a drive to Stuttgart from
Cheb."
"Yes, sir." What a delicately molded axe they used on
himi Many officers would have fought for the chance to
serve in a foreign country. But those officers fought for the
prestigious command of combat troops. For an officer whose
greatest contributions lay in research, reassignment to the
borderlands spelled intellectual death. Ivan faced the hor-
ror of his own mortality—he could not live long enough to
erase this blackness from his record. He was young, yet
his career was already quite doomed.
The last moments of the meeting blurred in irrele-
vance. He found himself outside, walking alone in the
sunny warmth. He walked slowly, keeping careful control
over the mix of emotions Jangling in his mind.
The emotions separated out as he walked. Some floated
to the top; others sank away, perhaps to return later, but
gone for now. The emotion that rose to domination was a
feeling of deep happiness,
Happinessi His career had been destroyed. Still he felt
light—the lightness that comes with feeling your own power
when you know you are right. Had he protected his career
by producing something politically astute, but scientifi-
cally wrong, he would have regretted it forever. Instead,
he had done what was right. He had done his best. He
refused to apologize for it.
A second emotion floated there and increased the sensa-
tion of lightness. This was a feeling of relief—relief in
knowing he would not have to fight another political bat-
tle. They would never try to use him this way again- And
they would never again make him walk this treacherous
tightrope, trying to squeeze half-truths from the system.
He walked a broad avenue where honesty counted more.
As the last glimmers of horror dissolved in the warmth
of his happiness, Ivan realized how lucky he was. Most
men go through their whole lives uncertain of their own
92 Marc Stiegler
strength, never knowing whether they are cowards or
heroes. Ivan knew.
Two children sailed past on bright red bicycles, laugh-
ing into the wind. Ivan laughed too, a curiously mixed
laughter, both triumphant and defiant. The triumph was
internal—his personal victory in choosing to give his best.
The defiance was external, directed at those who dis-
dained his best, claiming it was not sufficient. His defiance
was anchored firmly in his unfounded belief that, ulti-
mately, the people who gave their best would prevail.
He suddenly saw how his superiors had made their
mistake in choosing him. Bright, ambitious Ivan seemed
like the perfect tool for twisting the truth. How could they

have known that cool, aloof Ivan, the loner with no family
and few friends, cared so much about children? In his
mind, he watched Anna and her three girls running.
There was a great irony in the freedom he gained from
his lack of family. Had he had children of his own, he
would have had to worry about preserving his career so
that he could give them a good home.
Instead, he had been the worst choice they could have
made for their purposes. He laughed again, this time with
pure defiance. The laughter, and the lightness of his own
power, sustained him all the way home.
Kurt straightened from his console. This desk work chal-
lenged even his powers of discipline. He ran a hand through
his thick blond hair and realized it needed cutting.
Meanwhile, outside the window of his office in the
Institute, a gentle summer day confronted him- The bright,
dry terrain reminded him that he should not be inside this
building- He should be outside, fighting the enemy in the
open. Dammit, this was no way to conduct a war.
He shook his head. No one else around here even
conceded that it was a war. Jan had never acknowledged
it, though she had come close; Leslie might think it now
and again, but never out loud; and Nathan . . . Kurt shook
his head thinking about Nathan. He was so philosophical,
how could he ever get anything done?
So far, Nathan's help had been zip. Kurt worked in
isolation from the world, almost isolated from the problem
DAVID'S SUNG               93
Jan had given him to solve—the problem of building expert
software to make decisions for the Hunters. The necessary
decisions covered a wide range of difficulties from deci-
sions as basic as. Where do I go?, to decisions as complex
as, How do I kill them before they kUl me?
Kurt knew a great deal about how to kill them before
they killed him. The survival instincts needed by the
Hunters bore a striking resemblance to the survival skills
needed by a lone Ranger behind enemy lines,
But the details differed in important ways- Kurt needed
more information to complete his mission. He, like the
combat expert system he was supposed to build, needed
to know what kinds of data he would get from the sensors
to make decisions. He also needed to know what kinds of
orders he could give to the Hunter's controls to carry
them out. At the moment, Kurt and his software were
commanders without either recon patrols or assault teams.
Nathan had agreed that Kurt had problems he couldn't
solve alone. Nathan was running as fast as he could, so he
said, to gather the rest of the men for the development
team. In the meantime, Nathan suggested that Kurt start

with the simplest of the three combat expert systems.
Of the HopperHunter, the SkyHunter, and the High-
Hunter, by far the simplest decision-making problem rested
with the HighHunter. The HighHunter consisted of two
parts—the container and the Crowbar. The container was
a tin can mounted on rockets, which carried the Hunter
into space, where it orbited until someone on the ground
needed close fire support. Then the tin can popped open.
Within the tin can, dozens of Crowbars lay packed
together. The Crowbars were the weapons of the High-
Hunter. Each Crowbar had a sensor tab near the tip, four
stubbed fins at the tail, and a tiny computer in the middle,
all built into a long shaft of solid steef. When the Hunter
canister popped open, the Crowbars fell. They fell twenty
miles, with violent velocity, torturing the air as they
screamed by.
As they fell, the sensor tab watched for targets—typically,
enemy tanks. The computer selected one. The fins touched
the air, twisting the Crowbar, guiding it to a final contact
with die target.
94 Marc Stiegler
The Crowbar contained no explosives—it didn't need
them. After falling twenty miles, the steel shaft could
crush any tank armor ever devised.
Kurt loved the concept of the Crowbar. It was simple—
simple enough to be brutally nigged—yet it was effective.
So Kurt had started with the Crowbar's decision-making
problem. At first it seemed so simple as to be unworthy of
solving: pick a tank at random and head for it. But that was
not quite so straightforward. It would be better to pick the
lead tank, to block the passage of the others. What if he
saw both tanks and personnel carriers—which should he
select? Should he just take one at random? Random selec-
tion had several advantages besides simplicity. And Lordy,
it was tricky figuring out how to fall at terminal velocity to
assure the Crowbar would slam into the vehicle you had
picked out.
Kurt understood why they needed him to carry out this
mission. They needed someone who could identify and
prioritize high-value targets. They also needed someone
who could identify and translate high-speed images.
They needed someone with a background like his, with
four years in Army Special Forces. And they needed some-
one with a background like his, with degrees in software
engineering and artificial intelligence.
He also understood why it might be difficult to enlist
the other people needed for the Sling Project. The Sling
required unusual combinations of talents.
A polite knock on his open door made Kurt whirl to his

feet. "Yes, sir, what can I do for you, sir?" he asked of
Nathan.
Nathan moved from the back-lighting of the corridor to
the front-lighting of the window. He looked uncomfort-
able. Kurt suspected he didn't like being called "sir."
though Kurt didn't understand why. It was just a form of
respect.
Nathan asked, "How would you like to join a discussion
about sensors? I have a sales team down the hall trying to
convince me that their near-infrared sensing fibers are the
best invention since the eyeball."
"I'd be happy to join your meeting if you think I'd be
useful."
DAVID'S SUNG               95
Nathan shrugged. "It'll impact your life more directly
than it'll impact mine," he said. "I can't help thinking
you'd have an interest in the outcome."
Kurt followed him down the corridor, keeping his eyes
straight ahead. The ceiling in this place still made him
uncomfortable: it curved smoothly, seamlessly, to become
the corridor walls—an absence of sharp edges that dis-
turbed him. He'd never worked in a building that seemed
so soft.
As they entered the room, three men rose to greet
them. Two of them could have been twins, in their crisp
white shirts and maroon ties; the third wore a powder-
blue shirt and sat away from the others. "Jack Arbor,"
"Gary Celenza," the twins offered. "Howdy, I'm Gene
Pickford, and I'm glad you gave us this opportunity to talk
with you," the third burst out.
A shiver rippled down Kurt's spine as he formally intro-
duced himself. He could almost smell them, they were so
clearly marked as contractor marketeers. The marketeers
from federal contractors represented one of the lowest
forms of life he had met while in the Army. The contrac-
tors with their magic potions, and the officers who believed
in the potions—these people endangered the field soldier
as much as any enemy-       '-
Only one land of man endangered the field soldier
more; the officer who demanded magic potions from the
contractors. Such officers rejected ideas based on what was
possible. They showed interest only in ideas based on
what was improbable. In their blind desire for something
better, they twisted the occasional honest contractor into a
marketeer. Anyone foolish enough to offer simple facts
found himself cast aside. And though those officers were a
minority, somehow they dominated the others: their tales
of hoped-for magic enthralled otherwise level-headed men,
Yet none of these kinds of men had first inspired Kurt to
start thinking about leaving the Army. Another group—

another derivative of this self-destroying game—made life
so unbearable that the insane battle by Yuscaran could
break him.
This group that had most upset him contained the men
who had seen too many magic potions evaporate. They
96 Marc Stiegler
were the jaded cynics who no longer believed in any
magic. The cynics stolidly performed their jobs today the
way they had performed them yesterday; they could not
be turned from their dead-end path by any force smaller
than a Idio of detonating cyclonite. Kurt had finally left the
Army to find a place where men judged new ideas on the
merits of the ideas themselves—a place where men could
be skeptical without being cynical.
After a lot of talk with no purpose, the loud man in
powder blue shoved his hand deep in his pocket and
tossed a shiny button on the table, where it skipped across
the surface like a flat stone on a still pool of water. As it
skittered toward the edge, Kurt clamped it to the table
top.
A thread trailed from the button, Kurt recognized the
connector through which the sensor transmitted its raw
readings. On close examination, the head of the button
resolved into thousands of circles, the tips of optical fibers.
The loud man spoke. "That's it. A whole infrared sensor
the size of a postage stamp."
Kurt saw Nathan raise an eyebrow. "Is the image pro-
cessing done right there in the sensor bundle?"
"A significant amount of the processing is done right
there."
Nathan's eyes moved from one marketeer to the next.
"What about the rest of the processing?"
One of the twins placed a gray box the size of a cigarette
pack on the table. "The rest is done here."
"Ah, that's more like it," Nathan said in soothing tones.
With adroit conversational fencing, Nathan coaxed from
them the sensor's specification. Kurt admired Nathan's
skill with the detached disinterest that an aerospace engi-
neer might have for the improvisations of a jazz musician.
These verbal fencing games were another part of the con-
tracting world Kurt didn't like and didn't understand. He
had always given other people straight answers; he ex-
pected them to reciprocate.
Nathan asked in the smooth tones of a potion seller,
"What lands of enhancements are you planning in the
future?"
The powder blue shirt answered, "We're looking into

DAVID'S SUNG                97
adding some extra synch bits on the transmitter to in-
crease reliability. So far, that's the only enhancement we've
heard more than one of our customers ask for. Of course,
we do custom work, too. Frankly, we make almost nothing
on the basic sensor; most of our profits come from the
customizations that our customers need. For a project like
yours, where you're planning to buy lots of basic units off
the shelf, that would work to your advantage." He tapped
the table next to the button. "And for the new Version D,
we have a special introductory price that undercuts even
our normal prices." For the first time in the conversation,
he turned from Nathan to look at Kurt. "What do you
think of our package here, Kurt?"
Kurt looked him in the eye. "If it meets its own spec, it
sounds like it might be a good choice for die SkyHunter,
Could we borrow one for testing?"
The man's smile turned to sorrow. "I'm afraid we're
having awful trouble just keeping that one to show around.
We're shipping as fast as they come off the Une. But 1*11
see what I can do."
Nathan thanked them, rising to show them to the door.
The marketeers took the hint, scooping up their samples
and departing with much fanfare. Nathan turned back to
Kurt. "So what did you think^of their psychology?" he
asked.
Walking back to his chair, Kurt looked at Nathan with
puzzlement. He almost stumbled as he realized that he
had just seen, in real life, one of the maneuvers he had
just learned about here at the Institute. The man in pow-
der blue had intentionally set up psychological distance
between himself and the others. His job was to create
ideas and alternatives for customers such as Nathan and
Kurt to consider. If the customers rejected an idea out of
hand, the other two marketeers would also reject it. If
Nathan or Kurt seemed interested, however, the twins in
crisp white would take it over as their own, adding their
weight of authority and numbers.
Kurt cradled his arm as if to protect it from another
bullet. "That psychological maneuvering is silly," he snorted
in disgust. "That land of stuff never persuades people to
buy things."
98 Marc Stiegler
Nathan looked at him with pleasure. "It certainly never
makes you buy things. But the technique does help them
push other people over the threshold.'
Kurt made a faint motion of acceptance of his boss's
words, though he didn't believe it for a moment. "Yes,
sir."

"I understand why you're skeptical, but 1 think I can
prove it to you. And you know what I like about that?
Kurt, if I prove it to you, you'll believe me."
"Of course."
"Have you ever noticed how many people aren't con-
vinced by proof?" Nathan switched back to talking about
the meeting. "Did anything else about those guys and
their sensor strike you?"
Kurt shrugged. "It seemed like a reasonable box to me."
"Yes, especially if they fix the comm problem."
"The comm problem?" Kurt shook his head. Had he
fallen asleep in the meeting?
"Yes, the comm problem that they're planning to fix
with their enhancement to the synch bits. His voice fell
off, as if talking to himself. "And we'll wait a bit for the
price to fall."
"What about the introductory oner?"
"Oh," Nathan waved his hand as if warding off a mos-
quito. "They always have introductory offers when they're
afraid the first production run won't sell out at the initial
high price." He laughed. "Of course, we'll have to figure
out what options we need to build in. I'm sure that, if they
make their money on the customizations, there's some-
thing fundamental missing from the basic box that needs
to be added. But we'll see."
Kurt shook his head again. "I didn't sleep through that
meeting, but I get the feeling I didn't hear the same words
you did."
Nathan nodded. "Though the guys with the suits didn't
fool you, Kurt, you are not immune to all forms of
marketing."
Kurt pulled away in disbelief. Nathan chuckled. "You
don't believe me. I'm not sure I want you to believe me,
actually. But ask yourself the following question, some-
time when you have an idle hour or two. Kurt, how did
DAVID'S SUNG               99
Jan persuade you to come to work on the Sling Project?
What compelling reason did she give to make you accept a
position where you'd once again have to deal with all the
things in the Army that you quit to escape from? How'd
she do it?"
Kurt left, but Nathan's questions went with him. Like
droplets leaking from a pipe that no one can fix, the
questions struck him gentiy, again and again, all after-
noon.

Again the blue haze swirled about Daniel, clinging to
him in short strands before it disappeared. Physicists often
visualized the electron as an incompressible point, sur-
rounded by a cloud of probabilities. At moments like this,
Daniel thought of himself as the incarnation of that vision.
His cloud of probabilities was the set of paths to success,
combined with the set of paths to failure. His incompress-
ible point was his purpose. His purpose at the moment
was to destroy the Zetetic Institute.
He spoke to Kira, setting the contrails of smoke to
spinning. "Hey, you've done a great job. I appreciate your
efforts. But it's clear that we missed a key point some-
where. Despite all your great efforts, the bottom line on
our campaign is a big null. It just isn't working."
Daniel watched Kira with admiration. She had not taken
the failure too personally. Her expression suggested a
more scientific astonishment—the puzzlement that comes
when an experiment invalidates previous research.
The failure had not been her fault. She had collected an
outstanding stable of usable newsmen. One had already
been lifted to national prominence in his crusade against
Zetetic quackery robbing people who want to give up
smoking, who are instead sold a barrel of worn and petty
philosophy. It was particularly nice since that reporter had
earlier spent his days defiling the tobacco industry. Sweet.
But all the work had been in vain. Despite Kira's best
efforts, despite his own best efforts, the Zetetic Institute
continued growing unreasonably. "We need a new ap-
proach. Or at least we need to figure out why our standard
approach isn't working. Frankly, I can't understand it."
Kira smiled in consolation, though she was as baffled as
100 Marc SUegler
he was. "I don't understand it either. You can't pick up a
paper without seeing an article about some bizarre Zetetic
ritual. Market research shows that half the people who
have heard of them think they're bom-again witches; the
other half think they're meditating pacifists." She shook
her head. When she spoke again, the lines of surprise
around her mouth had softened to a look of awe. "How can
the Institute get so much bad press and still thrive?"
Daniel inhaled through his mouth, tasting the hot ciga-
rette smoke as it rushed into his lungs. He offered his
most recent thoughts- "Could our attack have enhanced
their fame? Could such fame have counterbalanced the
success of our attack?"
Daniel watched her for a reaction of guilt. But she was
all business, from the concentration other eyes to the
glowing tip of her cigarette. With some amusement, Dan-
iel noted that she had developed some skill in holding her
cigarette, though she had not yet developed grace. She
nodded. "I thought about the dangers of making them

famous, of course. We tried to place our attacks in strate-
gic media centers. Our criticism appeared in places where
favorable things were already being said, so we could cut
off positive impressions near the root. So our campaign
shouldn't have increased the Institute's visibility much at
all." Kira looked out the window, across the landscape,
where thick green leaves shrouded the trees hugging the
Potomac. "Of course, we made the ZIs a little more fa-
mous. We can only point the journalists in a direction; we
can't quite control mem, so they always try to get wider
coverage for their stories than we need." She nodded to
the terminal on his desk. "If you're interested, we can
download a complete description of our actions and results."
Daniel retrieved a cordless terminal from his desk and
placed it on the conference table. "By all means, show me
the facts. Though maybe we should concentrate on the
background material, if you've got that; somewhere, there
must be a clue to what has gone wrong."
"Easier done than said."
Together, they studied the fact bases on the Zetetic
Institute. There were about 2,000 core Zetetics scattered
across the globe, and another 15,000 who were frequently
DAVID'S SUNG               101
connected with Zetetic projects. About 200,000 people had
had some significant contact with them, through educa-
tional seminars or therapy sessions such as the anti-smoking
clinics. "They're really a tiny organization," Kira commented.
"True," Daniel replied, "but look at all the things they
do." The Zetetic projects showed incomprehensible diver-
sity of purpose. They had commercial software programs,
educational seminars, consulting, and engineering and gov-
ernment contracting. The one thing all the projects had in
common was a kind of information-intensiveness—projects
for which the most important commodity was expertise.
Daniel shook his head. "I must confess that I can't see
anything about their diversity that could protect them
from a media attack. One of the few things they don't get
into is the media business."
"That's right," Kira said, almost with pride. "Even though
they're hip-deep in communication, they don't operate
any of the classical commercial broadcasting systems." She
paused. "My research suggests that they reject the philos-
ophy behind broadcast systems. Broadcasting treats its
viewers like empty cups, the broadcast sets out to fill the
empty cup. There's no give and take, no way of involving
the intellect, or the rationality, of the watcher." She chuck-
led. "From what I know of the Institute, that would never
do. The Institute's whole view oflife'is dynamic; they're as
interactively energetic as the conferencing networks they
operate."
Daniel stared at her with wide, delighted eyes. "I think

you've hit it!" He exhaled a puff of smoke, savoring the
tobacco aroma. "Their conferencing networks are the prob-
lem!" With the satisfaction of a physicist who has just
solved a particularly difficult equation, he brought up sta-
tistics on the Institute's communication networks. The
number of people who used these products far exceeded
the number who had had face-to-face contact with the
Institute and its philosophies. "Don't you see? The Zetetics
operate some of the largest commnets in the world—Jobnet,
among others." Jobnet was universally used for finding
people who could quickly plug into difficult or unusual
jobs. "Anybody who contacted the Institute through some-
thing as practical and mundane as Jobnet would surely
102 Marc Stiegler
discount media blasts as sensationalism. In a sense, the
Zetetic Institute uses word of mouth for all its important
contacts—but the word of mouth is multiplied a thousand-
fold by automation. Jesus!"
Kira's bright eyes acknowledged the accuracy of this
analysis. "I'm sure you're right." Again she disturbed him;
she didn't seem quite as pleased as she should have been.
"Though I'm not entirely sure what to do with the idea."
Daniel paused for a moment, to give Kira's creativity a
chance to flourish.
She sighed. "I suppose we could flood the networks
with the same kind of criticisms that we're flooding the
broadcasts with."
"Excellent."
Kira shrugged. "I'm not sure that it's excellent. We
could have a lot of trouble keeping an effective level of
pressure in the system, particufarly if they find out that
there is pressure. Are you familiar with die Zetetic spe-
cialty known as conference pruning?"
"No." Daniel sidled closer to Kira; she shifted her chair
slightly away. "Tell me about it."
'A conference pruner is a professional editor of network
bulletin boards and conferences. The Institute runs a cer-
tification system for pruners. A certified pruner sweeps
the texts on the net and categorizes all the statements into
three categories; opinion, fact, and falsehood. They label
the opinions with their implicit assumptions, circumscribe
the globality of the facts, and purge the falsehoods."
"Sounds like the kind of subjective decision-making that
we should be able to manipulate."
Kira sighed again. "I don't know. They take their certifi-
cation pretty seriously."
"I see. Perhaps a bit of outright bribery will do the

trick."
The idea of bribery shocked her, but only for a moment.
The shock faded into a look similar to the look of awe she
had had earlier, pondering the Institute's immunity to
media attack. "Of course. Surely some of them can be
bought." She looked at Daniel with bemusement. "I have
trouble remembering the sizes and kinds of resources
available to the Wilcox-Morris Corporation,"
DAVID'S SUNG               103
Kira's attitude toward unethical maneuvers matched his
own quite nicely. Interesting. "I understand your prob-
lem. Wilcox-Morris has so many resources that even I lose
track at times. But you'd better get comfortable with all of
them, Kira. We're in a fight for our lives with the people
who hate us, and we need to fight with every resource
available."
He started to rise, to terminate the meeting, but Kira
held up her hand. "What should we do with die media
blitz? Cancel it?"
"Not at all. It can't hurt, after all, as long as we're
discreet." He rubbed his hands together. "I almost wish I
could face off against Nathan Pilstrom myself, in public. It
would be great to pit my world view against his in a
showdown. I've read some of his writings; there are a lot
of inconsistencies in his philosophy. I just know I could
take him apart if I had the chance."
"Really?" Kira studied his face cautiously. "Are you
sure?"
His heart leaped into his throat for just a moment before
answering, "Quite sure."
"I might be able to arrange it."
"Excellent!" he cried. "We wouldn't want to try this
undertaking just yet, of course! that would certainly in-
crease his national visibility, as well as mine, and that's
dangerous to us from both directions." A good tobacco
baron needed to keep himself invisible if at all possible; he
wanted his opposition to stay the same way. "But if the
Institute keeps on growing, despite our sabotaging the
net, it may be an appropriate risk."
"I'll start laying the groundwork," Kira promised. With
that she left.
Daniel crushed out his cigarette as he looked across the
landscape. A jet wobbled down its landing path toward
National Airport. This airplane, like so many others that
had traveled the same path, seemed to scrape its belly
against the pointed tip of the Washington Monument, Of
course, this was just an illusion of the angle and the
distance; in reality, the plane never came near the
monument.

The Institute's dependency on networking raised sev-
104 Marc SHegfer
eral inspirational opportunities. Jobnet was the lynchpin.
As the controller of Jobnet, the Institute was eminently
qualified for quickly assembling teams of people with di-
verse specialties. Those specialists could be scattered all
over the country, or they could all live in the same condo
complex. It didn't make any difference; they could tele-
commute, in any case.
With succulent joy, Daniel realized that the entire Zetetic
organization was built around telecommuting. This infor-
mation gave him the power to totally destroy the Institute,
The unions had been lobbying for years to ban telecom-
muting; it made it damn difficult to unionize workers.
Until now, the tobacco companies had fought in favor of
telecommuting, more because the unions opposed it than
for any other reason. If it weakened the unions, it was fine
with Wilcox-Morris,
Daniel returned to his desk and ran his hand across the
smooth teak finish of the plaque hanging there. "I came, I
saw, I conquered," the plaque played back his motto.
Daniel had swallowed whole corporations that held to this
same belief. Could the Zetetic philosophy stop him?
Ah, how surprised the unions would be when the entire
tobacco industry tossed its support behind the ban on
telecommuting. Many organizations would fight them, of
course, not just the Institute. Other people telecommuted
as well. But the telecommuters had not formed the kind of
potent power blocks that the unions and tobacco industry
had. History would repeat. The unions had succeeded in
outlawing the sale of homemade clothing decades earlier,
when the invention of the personal sewing machine threat-
ened the textile factories. Now, with Daniel's help, the
unions should be able to crush personal computer owners
the way they had crushed personal sewing machine own-
ers in that earlier era. Daniel could not imagine the unions
and the tobacco corporations failing in a joint political
enterprise.
How stunned the Institute would be when drawn and
quartered by the collaboration! How sweet.
President Mayfield could not focus his attention on any
one part of the nightmare. He winced every time his heart
DAVID'S SUNG               105
started racing too hard. Sometimes the thumping ended in
a twisting spasm that made him want to clutch his chest.
He looked down at the Presidential Seal woven into the
carpet, but even that inspirational sight did not help calm
him. They faced the greatest crisis of public confidence in
his career.

His eyes shifted to Nell Carson, sitting in her usual
position in the far comer, wearing her usual look of distant
concern. She seemed relieved, almost happy, now that
she knew what form the Soviet deception would take.
He'd desperately wanted to exclude her from this meet-
ing, this moment of terrible embarrassment, but he couldn't-
Not only would she not let herself be excluded, but in
some sense, her rigid strength of character gave him a
secure feeling. She always disagreed with him, but she
never stabbed him in the back.
His eyes flickered to the television. He'd never before
let televisions into the Oval Office, but now he couldn't
bear to see the news without the reassurance this room
gave him. On the television his nightmare became vividly
real, yet manageable and bearable, because the terror
remained confined to the tiny screen. He thought about
the millions of other viewers watching this broadcast and
shuddered at the opinions they "were certainly forming.
CUT. The scene shifts to a lone town on a wide, rolling
•plain. Wheat grows in fields tended by men and women
wearing oddly assorted garments. The clothing is typical
of the styles of Iranian farmers.
Mayfield looked back at Nell, who continued to watch
the screen impassively. Desperate to see an expression he
understood, he turned next to Earl Semmens, seated near
the window with the pinched look of a poker player whose
bluff has been called. At least Earl showed the proper
level of shock and dismay. At least Earl shared the presi-
dent's outrage and indignation.
ZOOM. The camera soars over the fields to view gray
metal boxes against the horizon. Zooming still closer, the
gray boxes resolve into battle tanks: Russian T-70s. In
their wake, mashed pulp that was once wheat twists through
the tortured soil. BiU, Hardies voice speaks with studied
anger. "This is the most blatant use of brute force ever
106 Marc Stiegler
made in our time. Despite aU his long speeches about
peace, Soviet leader Sipyagin has once again shown us his
lustfor war."
Nell looked over at Mayfield for the first time. The
comers of her mouth curled in a sad smile. "Now we know
what they planned to gain from mutual force reduction."
CUT. FOCUS. Hardie's eyes seem to leap from the
camera, to look directly at Mayfield, "But not aU the fault
for this new aggression should be placed at the doorstep of
Sipyagin. it was our leadership that made it easy for the
Soviet army to amass sufficient forces for this attack." He
paused for effect, and his anger grew more apparent.
Our sources teU us that this invasion is being carried out
with the divisions released from Europe by the recent
Mutual Force Reduction Agreement. If we had not rushed

so foolishly into that agreement, this invasion could never
have taken place."
Mayfield clenched his teeth to keep from crying out at
the distant announcer. Still, he could not help trying to
defend himself. "Liar," he growled, "it's not true. I am not
responsible for that invasion." He turned to look at the
other people in the room. "How can he say that? A month
ago he thought the agreement was the best treaty we'd
ever made." Another image came to Mayfield; the image
of the Nobel Peace Prize that should have been his. The
image evaporated as he clung to it wistfully.
SOFTEN. The camera remains in the news room, fixed
on Bul Hardie's sober expression. "The Russian justifica-
tion for the attack is Iran's support for terrorists and
rebels in the southwestern provinces of the Soviet Union.
The Soviet invasion at dawn today started with the de-
struction of rebel bases within Iran. A Soviet spokesman
has assured the president officially that this is just a minor
police action, and the advance wiU terminate as soon as
Iran has been purged of militant anti-Soviet groups. Since
making the announcement, the fighting has spread rap-
idly." Hardie purses his lips. 'It would seem that the
longer the Soviets fight, the more anti-Soviet groups they
encounter."
Nell spoke softly, almost gently, as if she were on
Mayfield's side. He looked at her with startled eyes. "I'm
DAVID'S SUNG
107
sorry I didn't see it coming. I should have. You know, we
could have learned this from history. This is exactly how
they prepared for their Afghanistan invasion decades ago.
They made a big fanfare about pulling their troops out of
Europe—just to move them into position for an invasion."
The president shook his head helplessly. "What can we
say to the people?"
Nell sat very still for a moment, then nodded her head
as she said, "I don't know what to say, but I know what to
do. We should stop."
"Stop what?"
"Stop making dangerous treaties."
Mayfield's voice rose defensively. "That wasn't a dan-
gerous treaty. We needed to reduce die number of sol-
diers pointing guns at each other in Europe. It was a good
idea. It still is!" He leaned forward with a shrewd look.
"And besides, they didn't violate the treaty, did they? The
treaty worked. People should keep that in mind."
With an exhausted sigh, Nell agreed. "Yes, your treaty
worked. Frankly, I imagine they would have invaded Iran

even without the treaty. But, Jim, even though your treaty
worked, it didn't work the way you wanted it to. It didn't
make the world any safer. Did it?" Her mouth twisted in
distaste. "More to the point, it^didn't make us any more
popular, either."
Mayfield shook his head. "I don't get it. I know you
don't care about the next election. I don't understand that,
but I know it's true. All you care about is whether we set
them up to attack Iran. Yet, if you think they would have
attacked Iran anyway, why complain about our treaty?"
Nell blinked. "I'm not complaining about that treaty,
Jim. I'm worried about the next one."
The president's heart skipped again. He saw Earl look-
ing at Nell with the same shock he felt. "What do you
know about the next treaty?"
Nell laughed. "Only that you're working on one, Jim.
You're an addict." Her frustration came to the fore, spot-
lighted. "But don't you see that we have to be careful
about what we sign?"
"Of course we have to be careful. But we don't have to
be paranoid!"
108 Marc Stiegfer
Nell slumped back in her chair. Only the motion of her
foot swaying rhythmically suggested the energy still wait-
ing inside for a chance to act. "No, Jim, we don't dare be
paranoid either. That would be as bad as being naive."
"What do you want me to do?" Mayfield almost screamed.
Her foot stopped moving. "I'd like you to let Senator
Hilan Forstil review your next treaty before you sign it."
"What? That man's a warmonger!'
Nell leaned forward, speaking with carefully controlled
anger. "No, Jim. Hilan is not a warmonger. He's a hawk."
"What's the difference?"
"A warmonger is someone who wants to start wars. A
hawk is someone who bates war, who will avoid war with
fierce energy—but if forced into a war despite his best
efforts, knows that he has to win."
Mayfield felt his stomach tighten with revulsion. "That's
just what we don't need working our negotiations—someone
who has a vested interest in wrecking the treaty process.
Forstil would give the media the biggest leaks since Arken
published the radar signatures for Stealth bombers," He
rolled his eyes. "One little leak, and he turned billions of
dollars of airplanes into museum pieces. That was an im-
portant factor in our getting into office in the first place.
We can't let our treaty process be handled that way.'

Nell stared at him in disbelief- "Jim, Hilan is on your
side. Believe me."
He couldn't believe her, Forstil made him feel as un-
comfortable as Nell Carson did. He had no intention of
letting them gang up on him. "Let me think about it/' he
said to put her off. He shifted in his leather chair, unstick-
ing himself- He'd been sweating, despite the cool air that
bathed him from the air ducts behind his desk.
"1 thought you might say that." Nell rose from her
chair. For a moment her shoulders drooped, but with
another effort, she stood straight, a radiant vice president.
"Think about Hilan. Jim. He can help you." She departed.
Mayfield buried his face in his hands. Why couldn't
he have been president during a simpler time? He had
completed a longstanding presidential task during his
second year of office, yet no one had noticed: he had
the collection of portraits of president's wives. This task
DAVID'S SUNG               109
had been underway since the days of Kennedy. That could
have been his crowning achievement, if he'd lived in a
reasonable world.
Well, just as he'd gotten the news media to love him
yesterday, he'd get them to love him again tomorrow. A
few more treaties, and he'd see that Peace Prize once
more on the horizon.
A sonic boom and a crashing explosion made him open
his eyes; it was just the sound from the television.
The muggy July heat faded slowly in the twilight as Kira
bicycled down South Lakes Drive toward home. Only the
heat faded, however; the muggy humidity remained. It
did not help her think, and she had some thinking to do,
Uncle Nathan was coming to dinner. They would surely
play the game of wonders, and this time Kira intended to
win. It was about time she won: today was her twenty-
second birthday.
She shook her head to throw the stinging perspiration
away from her eyes, regretting her choice of the bicycle
for the day's commute to the Institute. At last she turned
left on Cabot and plunged downhill.
This section of the ride did not last long, but it was the
exhilaratingpart, Kira dropped fow in the saddle, building
up speed. The cool wind whipped across her face.
She veered right onto the uphill road spur that led to
her townhouse. She continued to coast, though her speed
dropped alarmingly. It was a matter of honor, to get afi the
way home from here without any more pedaling.
The bicycle bumped into the driveway, and Kira dis-

mounted just before it started to wobble. The humidity
closed in around her, displacing the cool wind. In that
moment, as the tropical heat returned, Kira had a small
revelation—she knew a winning strategy for Uncle Na-
than's game.
She hurried to the bathroom and took a quick, cool
shower, humming all the while at the thought of her
upcoming victory. As she returned to the living room,
however, her father interrupted her thoughts by thrusting
a shiny, gift-wrapped package in her arms. "Happy birth-
day," he bellowed, hugging her.
110 More Stiegler
Another package plopped on top of the first one. "Happy
birthday," Uncle Nathan echoed with a softer smile.
Wonderful aromas circulated from the kitchen. Even as
her nostrils Bared, however, a pot lid clattered against a
muffled explosion of air. Her father's face took on the
expression of a chemist who has just heard his carefully
prepared solution pop from its test tube and spatter against
the ceiling. He ran for the kitchen. "Hurry!" her uncle
called to him. Then, with a wink at Kira, he walked in the
same direction.
Putting her presents down, Kira went to watch the
hysteria. The kitchen looked like a child's playroom. Pots
and pans teetered precariously on every inch of table
space, and a fine film of flour coated the vertical surfaces.
Her father muttered curses as he twisted dials and punched
buttons. Uncle Nathan offered soothing sounds and gently
stirred the biggest pot—the one fall of chili. Kira could
see, amidst the carnage, the makings of a gigantic chili-
cheese pizza, a beautiful work of careful engineering.
Her father and uncle always cooked together for special
occasions, and they always left a mess best cleaned up with
a fire hose. Kira could remember her mother leaning
against the door at the edge of the inferno, shaking her
head, just as Kira leaned against the door now. At the
memory, Kira jerked away from the kitchen and went to
set the table. That, too, her mother had always done.
The game of wonders started without warning, as usual.
While her father sliced the pizza, her uncle held up his
fork for examination. Too casually, he turned it in the air
and said, "You know, this fork is made of stainless steel.
Do you realize how amazing it is for us to use stainless
steel for dinner this evening?"
Kira smiled as her father asked, "Why is it amazing?"
"You need chromium to make stainless steel. But chro-
mium is a rare metal. One of the few places left on Earth
where there's an abundance of chromium is on the ocean
floor, locked inside metallic nodules coughed up from
cracks deep inside the earth- So we send down special
robot submarines to scoop up the nodules, to extract the

chromium, to make the stainless steel, so that we can use
these forks to eat tonight."
DAVID'S SUNG
111
Her father had finished serving; he held his pizza in the
air and tapped the crust, "That's pretty amazing all right.
There's another amazing thing here, too. Did you know
that there was almost a terrible blight on the wheat fields
this year? If the blight had taken hold, we might not have
had the flour to make this pizza." He pointed at his glass
of water. "And we needed water to solve the problem."
Kira frowned. Her father had never realty liked the
game, it seemed to her; his efforts always seemed half-
hearted. But this wonder seemed unusually weak, even
for him. "So by watering the fields, the plants stayed
healthy enough to fight the disease, right?" she asked.
Her father reluctantly nodded. "That, too, but that wasn't
what I had in mind." He smiled. "We first spotted the
blight through satellite photos. Because the photos showed
the problem before it spread, we were able to protect
most of the fields. Well, the satellite got into position to
take those pictures by firing its rockets. And the rockets
used hydrogen for fuel. And of course we got the hydro-
gen for the fuel from water. And that's how we needed the
water to make it possible to have pizza tonight."
Kira laughed. "That's pretty amazing," she conceded.
"But there's another wonder here tonight as well. It's
amazing that we're living here at all. You know, Washing-
ton D.C, was built on a swamp. They had terrible trouble
with mosquitoes and yellow fever when they first put the
Capitol here. It's unfit for human habitation."
Uncle Nathan wet his finger and held it in the air.
"Doesn't feel too uncomfortable to me."
Kira smirked. "Of course not, silly. Our house is air
conditioned. If air conditioning hadn't been invented, we
wouldn't be here."
Nathan raised an eyebrow. "We'd certainly be less comfy,
anyway."
'No, we wouldn't be here by D.C. at all. Do you think
you could get so many bureaucrats to live in a swamp
without air conditioning? Certainly not. And if you couldn t
get that many bureaucrats together, the government couldn't
have grown into the big, powerful monstrosity it now is.
And if the government hadn't become an oversized dino-
saur, we wouldn't have had to move the Institute's head-
112 Marc Stiegler
quarters here. We'd live close to a center of business, like
Los Angeles or Houston, instead of living close to the

center of politics. Right?"
Her father whooped with laughter. Uncle Nathan shook
his head. "I think you've hit on the answer to the nation's
problems, Kira- If we ban the use of air conditioning in
America's capital, we can substantially reduce the burden
of government. I like it. And you're right: that's truly
amazing. Without air conditioning, we wouldn't be here.'
Kira flushed with the glow of victory. For as long as she
could remember, she had been trying to come up with a
more amazing wonder than her uncle. Yet the glow faded,
and Kira felt oddly disappointed. It took her a minute's
introspection to realize what was missing. Uncle Nathan
hadn't acknowledged that she had beaten him.
The glow returned as her understanding reached an
even deeper level. She hadn't really beaten her uncle. He
had never really beaten her.
The game of wonders was a cooperative one. It wasn't
a zero-sum game like baseball or football, wherein for
every winner there had to be a loser. Nobody had to lose
in the game of wonders. Everybody who felt the amaze-
ment, who ceased to take the little things for granted, was
a winner. As Nathan had said before, "It's not how you
play the game, but whether everybody wins or everybody
loses." Cooperative games made human beings more hu-
man, often, zero-sum games made them brutes.
The spicy flavor of the chili pizza filled her mouth; she
started listening to the ongoing conversation.
Nathan was speaking. "So our reputation seems to be
growing even faster than our seminars."
"What happened?" Kira asked.
Nathan turned to her. "I've been invited to the recep-
tion announcing a new book. Statesmanship and Politics.
It was written by Senator Larry Obata, a friend of Hilan
Forstil's. The announcement takes place at the Capitol, on
September 30."
"That's neat," Kira said. "Can I come, too?"
"I'll get you an invitation," Nathan promised. He sipped
at his orange juice, then continued, "So now you all know
my plans for the next couple of months. What're you up
DAVID'S SUNG
113
to, Kira?" His tone was even more casual than when he
had begun the game earlier.
Kira swallowed hard; her stomach turned into a cold
lump. "I'm doing some public relations work," she ex-
plained. "After all, that's what I got my degree in."

"Yes, I remember. You were going to develop advanced
Information Age advertising concepts—ads that could com-
pete with Madison Avenue without being misleading."
"Yeah, Well, I have some things to take care of first."
"Such as?"
Kira flushed, but she looked back at her uncle angrily.
"I have to protect you from the cigarette industry, for one
thing. And while I'm at it, I have to avenge my mother's
murder."
"I see." He watched her with the cautious disapproval
that was his strongest rebuke.
The sarcastic anger of her father's voice was a stronger
rebuke. "So you think you can waltz in as an advertising
agent and destroy one of the biggest, most powerful orga-
nizations on Earth?"
Kira shrugged. "I don't know. But I do know that they
might destroy you if I don't." She told them about Wilcox's
plans to flood the network conferences with anti-Zetetic
propaganda.
"Very clever," Nathan said. "What a brilliant ally Daniel
Wilcox would make if we could coax him into the Institute."
She shook her head. "Not very likely. Believe me, he's
ruthless."
"That doesn't necessarily make him bad. But you're
right." He sighed. "We must think of him in many ways as
an enemy."
"And he's talking about having a debate with you. Uncle
Nathan. He thinks he can take you apart."
"Really?" Nathan's eyes lit up.
Kira held up a cautionary finger. "He might not beat you
in the debate itself, but he might win in the news cover-
age that followed." She told them about the way Wilcox
was pulling the strings of the media. As she spoke, she
remembered her suspicions that Wilcox had other anti-
Zetetic plans that she didn't know about. She had been
building relationships with some of the programmers at
114 Marc Stiegler
Wilcox-Morris, trying to get access to more of the propri-
etary data bases, but she hadn't yet succeeded. As she
thought about it, her anxiety increased; she had to work
more quickly on those computers, and yet, she didn't
dare.
Summing up Wilcox's plans, she added a Bnal desperate
warning to her uncle while her father was out of the room.

"So you've got to be careful of what you say in public,
because you never know how hell twist it."
Nathan shook his head. "You're right, of course. Any-
thing I say can be used against me. But you're wrong, too.
I can't stop speaking. I can't stop trying to get people to
think about their worlds in different ways. You see that,
don't you?"
"I guess so." Kira slumped in her chair. "Well, be
careful, anyway."
"Of course."
Suddenly the lights went down, and her father came in
with a huge cake. Kira could tell they weren't too angry
about her work with Wilcox-Morris; they obeyed her when
she begged them to spare her their terrible, on-key rendi-
tion of "Happy Birthday,"
August 6
'Your two-color morality is pathetic " sneered
the Sophisticate. "The world isn't black and
white. /Yo one does pure good or pure bad.
It's all gray. Therefore, no one is better than
anyone else."
"I'm glad you see the flaws in two-color
morality," replied the Zetet "But knowing only
gray, you conclude that all grays are the same
shade. You mock the simplicity of the two-
color view, yet you replace it with a one-color
view. Can we not find a third, better alter-
native?"
—ZeteHc Commentaries
A gentle voice full of wistful humor sang to Leslie as he
stopped at the door to Amos Leung's house. "Good day,"
the disembodied voice of Amos. Leung said. "What is the
purpose of your visit?"
Leslie looked around the delicately articulated door frame
in search of the speaker. No electronics of any kind pre-
sented themselves. He saw fine lines that might have been
random scratches above the doorway arch. A casual ob-
server would have seen nothing else, but Leslie knew
Amos and his wife Florence well enough to know that
random scratchings would not have been permitted here.
He studied the lines, and they came together in patterns,
in tracings of birds and flowers. The subtle Grafting could
only be Flo's handiwork.
"I came to see an old friend," Leslie said to the empty
air, wondering whether the voice was really Amos's, or a
very good imitation rigged in the house computer circuits.
"An old friend," the voice repeated. "What is your
name, old friend?"

115
116 Marc Stiegler
The r's were too harsh, Leslie realized, for it to be
Amos's voice. Amos spoke with no trace of an accent,
though he softly rounded off all his consonants. The voice
belonged to the house, not the man. "Tell Amos that
Leslie Evans is looking for him."
"Of course."
When Nathan had recommended Amos for the Sling
Project, Leslie had been quite astonished- He had never
met anyone quite like Amos, before or since. He remem-
bered a conversation they had held while flying together
to McChord Airfield, perhaps fifteen years ago.
The plane had been dark; they had turned down the
lights for the movie watchers. "What do you do when
you're not building comm systems, Amos?" Leslie had
asked of this new fellow on the E-3 team, taking a short
puff on his cigarillo.
Amos was sitting quite still and erect in his chair; he had
made Leslie feel tall and awkward. Amos's Oriental fea-
tures remained impassive no matter what Leslie said, and
Leslie felt a periodic urge to grab him and shake him. He
knew that somewhere underneath Amos's masklike ex-
pression a laughing observer looked back.
A tiny crack appeared in the mask, and the beginnings of
a smile played at the corners of Amos's mouth. "Oh, when
I'm not building comm systems, I guess mostly I build
comm systems." He turned to Leslie and looked up into
his eyes, "You know the echoes people used to get on
MCI long-distance circuits? I became tired of these ech-
oes, so I called the company and told them how to fix
them,"
"Really." Leslie smiled, too, unsure of whether Amos
was pulling his leg.
"Yes." He held up his hand with the thumb and forefin-
ger spread apart. "All it takes is a component about this
size. It costs 75 cents in quantity."
"If it's so cheap to fix, why didn't MCI fix it without
your help? How could they not have known about it?"
"Because they thought they needed the same kind of
equipment Bell Telephone used." He spread his arms.
"Bell used huge devices to solve the same problem. They
cost thousands of dollars,"
DAVID'S SUNG
117

Leslie feared that Amos wasn't joking. "Did they use
your recommendation?"
The tiniest lift of an eyebrow suggested a mental shrug.
"Perhaps. At least, I no longer hear the echoes."
Leslie sat for a long time thinking about that. He reached
the end of his cigarillo and crushed it in the ashtray.
Amos spoke again—the first time he had initiated a step
in their conversation. "They called me several months
later to offer me a job, with a sizable increase in salary."
He paused, then added with peculiar emphasis, "Sizable."
"Why didn't you take it?"
"My job at present is satisfactory. I would not take
another position unless it took me nearer to my ideal."
"Which is?"
"I should like to teach, and do research, and create
products, all at the same time. Perhaps a part-time job as a
professor, and a part-time job as a consultant would work
well,"
"I see. Well, good luck in finding your ideal." And that
had been the end of the matter as far as Amos was
concerned.
As the door to Amos's house opened, Leslie found him-
self hoping that Amos had not yet found his ideal.
Amos stood before him, bare-chested, breathing slightly
harder than normal. No doubt he.had been working his
way through his exercises. "Hello," his soft voice sang
between breaths.
Again Leslie felt like a clumsy giant, just as he had felt
in the old days. He smiled at his old friend.
Was Amos an old friend? Leslie had always thought of
Amos as a friend, but he had never been quite sure how
Amos felt in return. Leslie held out his hand, with a
warm, "Howdy, Amos. You've got a beautiful house here."
Amos did not take his hand, so Leslie pointed up at the
tracings. "I particularly appreciate the artwork."
A shadow smile played at Amos's lips. "Come in. Let
me assure you the interior of our house is more beautiful
than the exterior."
"Thanks." He followed Amos to the living room; the
door closed automatically.
This room was all sloping contours, accented with patches
118 Marc Stiegler

of fine golden tapestry on cushions and drapes. The room
relaxed him; it reminded him in some ways of the furnish-
ings at the Institute. But the absence of chairs reminded
him of the differences. "How are the girls in your kungfu
classes, Amos?" Years ago, Amos had taught self-defense
for young women, he refused to work with boys. Leslie
remembered Amos's comment on the boys. "In America,
they all feel a need to be macho. They become dangerous
if taught advanced techniques."
"Quite well. I have a class of seven students now; three
are excellent beginners. They may become good one day,
if they have the interest."
A tiny woman appeared at the partition separating this
room from what looked like a breakfast nook. "Colonel
Evans!" she exclaimed. "How nice to see you."
Leslie turned to her with his broadest smile, "Flo," He
half-bowed. "It is truly wonderful to see you." If Amos
made Leslie feel like a giant, Flo made him feel like a
mountain. She came up to his waist and stopped there,
with a puckish smile and wide, happy eyes. But whereas
Amos made him feel like an obtuse goat that might chew
on the velvet coverings at any moment, Flo made him feel
graceful. At least if he chewed on the covers, he would do
so with dignity.
"Would you like Shanghai tea, colonel?" she asked.
"Wonderful, Flo. Thanks." She slipped softly out of
view.
He turned to Amos, who pointed at a cushion. "Please
sit down, old friend," he offered, coiling onto a cushion
himself. Leslie could not tell if Amos mocked him with the
phrase 'old friend' or not. "I presume you came on business."
Leslie collapsed into a sitting position. "Quite right.
You've always known me too wefl, Amos. I need your
help."
Amos watched him impassively.
"Have you heard of the Sling Project?"
"No."
"Urn. Well, let me tell you about it." Leslie launched
into an enthusiastic rendition about the Sling. He told of
the seed of Information Age understanding that Nathan
had begun with, and the gleam in the eye of a colonel in
DAVID'S SUNG               119
the Defense Nuclear Agency who had no charter to de-
velop such a non-nuclear system. He described how the
colonel had stretched the rules, then stretched them again
and again, until he could fund the development of Nathan's
idea. He told of his own involvement as the system's

integrator, and his desperate search for the people who
could make the software come together. He described his
need for an additional, special person, a person who could
". . . make the heart and the mind of the system come
together. That's you, Amos, if it's anyone in the world."
"Only if I accept the position."
"Well, yeah." The scent of warm tea reached him; Les-
lie turned his head to see Flo kneeling next to him, a cup
held out. He accepted with a jerky motion, feeling like the
clumsy giant despite Flo's gentle presence. "Amos, this is
important stuff we're working on. Don't you see that?"
"Yes, I suppose it is."
Leslie felt again the desire to shake Amos, to make him
come alive in the way of life that Leslie understood. For
Leslie, if something was important, then it was of course a
good thing to do. He had known that Amos didn't share
his values, but he didn't know what values Amos had
instead. "Listen, I don't know to what extent you achieved
your lifestyle and job goals. I rtemember you wanted an
arrangement that would let you spend one third of your
time teaching, one third doing research, and one third
creating products. Well, I can sort of offer you two of the
three. You'll be creating a product, but the product needs
you to incorporate a lot more current research ideas than
you'd usually see in a military development effort. And
you'll be working with other good people. You'll have to
meet Nathan; I think you'll like him."
"Yes, I believe he might be an interesting person."
Amos splayed his fingers in a gesture Leslie remembered
from years ago: a gesture that forewarned the listener of an
upcoming disappointment. "But I have already achieved
my goal. I am living it now."
Leslie clenched his teeth. How could he impose his will
on this man who epitomized the idea of an immovable
object? He certainly couldn't do it through force. "How
have you achieved your goal? I know about your consult-
120 Marc Stiegler
ing, but where do you do research? And who do you
teach, besides the girls and boys in your kung fil class?"
"I do my research here at home. I have a reasonably
sophisticated assemblage of equipment—better than many
universities." Remembering the equipment that Amos used
to have, Leslie could well believe it. "As for my teaching,
I have acquired a most apt pupil." He smiled sideways at
Flo with a surprising look of mischief. "Florence is fasci-
nated by computers, we have discovered. I believe she is
becoming a hacker."
Florence made a sound like a kitten laughing.
Leslie spread his arms to encompass both of them.

"That's terrific! We'll hire both of you! You can work as a
team right here at home. Well run the whole show through
the Zetetic Institute's DevelopNet—you've telecommuted
on team projects before, right?—and you'll have all three
parts of your life in place."
Amos shook his head. "I have the parts of my life in
place already. All you have offered me is an opportunity to
introduce chaos. You want to bring all the chaos of devel-
opment panic, integration hysteria, and debugging terror
into my life. What can you offer me so valuable that I
should break my tranquility?"
Now it was Leslie's turn to sit impassively for a mo-
ment. "Do you have grandchildren, Amos?"
"Yes. Two."
"Do you keep up with world events at all? You know,
one of the main reasons 1 had to come back to you is that
so many people in our country now refuse to have any-
thing to do with the ever-so-unpopular military-industrial
complex. How long do you think we can live our tranquil
lives in a place where the people consider the job of
defending themselves to be dirty?"
"I do not know."
"If our project succeeds, we may make it." He held up
his thumb and forefinger close together, the way Amos had
once held them to describe a 75-cent circuit. "We're that
close to entering the Information Age, and to developing a
whole different concept of what it means to be a society,
and what it means to defend yourself. That close—but not
dose enough, not yet." He clenched his fist. "I think it's
DAVID'S SLING                121
important for your grandchildren to make it all the way
into the Information Age, don't you?"
Amos sighed. "I suppose so."
Silence closed around them; Leslie was out of words.
Flo spoke. "Excuse me. Colonel Evans. Did you say
earlier that you were using the WeatherWatcher airplane?"
Leslie felt his neck muscles relax as he looked into Flo's
eyes. Her calming effect on him made him think of Jan
. . . no, this was Flo, a person whose beauty was pro-
foundly different from Jan's. "Yes, we're using the Weather-
Watcher as the underlying platform for the SkyHunter.
We modify it, of course."
"I see." She turned to Amos, and they exploded into
rapid conversation in Mandarin, which Leslie could not
follow,
Amos frowned. The mischievous look returned to his

face, then a look bordering on anger came and went. "Yes,
I suppose so." He turned to Leslie. "We will handle it
strictly with telecommuting? Flo and I can work here all
the time?"
Leslie straightened up on his cushion. He had thought
he was beaten, but apparently he had been wrong. "Yeah,
certainly. We'll work through telecommuting." He frowned.
"Well, almost certainly- I hate being so honest, but I'll
want to pull the team together into one location for testing."
"Time compression," Amos said. "I understand. Well,
we shall deal with that problem when the time comes."
He uncoiled from the cushion and slid out of the room.
Leslie sat dazed. Flo giggled, and he smiled at her.
"How did you manage that, Flo?"
"I told him it might help him talk to our daughter if he
accepted your job. He almost never gets to speak with
her; they have grown apart."
"What? How will working on the Sling help him with
his daughter?"
"Theresa is vice president of LightCraft Corporation.
She is responsible for the development of the Weather-
Watcher airplane."
Leslie laughed, then stopped abruptly, for it sounded
loud in the quiet of the house.
122 Marc Srtegfer
The doorbell rang promptly at ten o'clock; the guy with
the satellite photos had arrived. Lila stuffed her feet into a
pair of old sandals and plodded to the door. She steeled
herself for this contact, wishing he would leave the pass-
words to the data bases at the door and just leave her
alone. But the guy had insisted on seeing her. He had
been almost as mysterious as Nathan Pilstrom had been a
month ago.
Nathan Pilstrom. She shuddered at the memory. Na-
than had tainted her view of the Zetetic Institute. She had
thought of Nathan Pilstrom and the Zetetic Institute as
visionaries, leading to a better world, not as reactionary
warmongers,
She peered through the peephole at the visitor. The
visitor was a man, as she expected. The messages on
Jobnet had been signed with the name Kurt, though with
electronic mail, that didn't always guarantee the gender.
Her hand hesitated on the doorknob. She hated to deal
with men. Somehow, she always seemed to disappoint
them; certainly, they always disappointed her.
She jerked on the doorknob and faced Kurt McKenna.
Her face flushed with a first small shock of dislike.

He displayed all the features she found most unattractive
m men. He had a sternly chiseled face, with the beauty of a
sculpture. He held himself with a military straightness
that bespoke an inbred arrogance. His eyes were direct
and abrupt—eyes that wrote people off easily, never
giving them a second chance. Her dislike grew rapidly.
Her skin prickled as she felt her dislike reflected by
him; her vision wavered with the intensity of their reso-
nating emotion. She was sure she would soon hate him.
She didn't want to hate him. She hated hate. How had
this man done this to her? Why didn't he go away?
He stepped forward; she held her ground. "Ms. Lott-
speich. I have a job for you."
The words seemed normal, except for the forced preci-
sion of his speech. She considered closing the door on
him, but that would not be civilized. Unwilling to turn her
back on him, she stepped back and pointed to the chairs in
the corner of the living room that served as her office. "Sit
down."
DAVID'S SUNG               123
He did not share her fear of turning away; he swept
across the room and sat in her chair. Lila pursed her lips,
then realized he had not done it intentionally: he had no
way of telling from the careless way she had left the chairs,
which was which. Normally she made the choice clear for
people by escorting them.
The other chair had no arms. She twisted it around so
its back was to McKenna and sat down facing him, her
arms draped across the top of it. In this position she had
the solid mass of the chair between her and McKenna,
which made her feel better,
"Here." He dropped a packet on the table. "These are
pictures of northern Iran-'
"Iran!" She tore the packet open and rifiled the photos
with a practiced eye. They were fresh shots from the new
fall-spectrum, high-resolution French Spot IV satellite.
She smiled at the crisp detail, both optical and infrared.
She didn't get to handle good stuff like this too often,
though she was one of the best image analysts in the
world. Her genius paid off most effectively when recon-
structing the damaged pictures.
"Great photos, aren't they?"
The certainty in his voice made her recoil from his
arrogance, but he was right. Lila remained silent.
"Ten years ago those photos would have been so classi-
fied that the name of the classification would have been
classified. Today any schmuck can pick them up for the
price of a post card.'

"A post card?" She cast him a look of disgust. Hyperbole
didn't impress her.
"Well, the price of a book of post cards. Anyway, photos
like these sometimes mess things up for the men who
defend our country,"
She looked back at the pictures with a deeper apprecia-
tion. She smiled at the thought of the hawks in the military-
industrial complex bubbling with impotent anger. "What
do you want me to do with them?"
"We have indications that the Soviet army invading Iran
is destroying the wheat fields, as well as most of the other
crops. We need to know how extensive the damage is, and
how fast the damage is spreading."
124 Marc Stiegler
"You have several series of these photos, taken on dif-
ferent days?"
"Of course."
She pursed her lips at his quick dismissal of her ques-
tion, but he continued.
"We also need to know what the Soviets are doing that's
making such a mess, so that when we send relief, we can
send something to straighten it out. Otherwise, people
will starve." Kurt paused. "That's why we came to you.
It'll be tough figuring out the cause of the problem, even
with these photos. I understand you're the best."
Ordinarily Lila would have demurred, but this Mc-
Kenna provoked her. "Yes, I guess I am," she said with a
too-casual wave of the hand. She carefully replaced the
photos in their envelope. "I presume you have these stored
digitally somewhere that I can get at them, right? Cer-
tainly you didn't overlook such a critical yet tiny detail."
"I didn't." He reached into his pocket, pulling out a
credit card. "Use this. We'll pay for the time directly, and
all the photos are there. You can find their sort order in
the main directory." He rose to leave; she rose, too. She
didn't want to let him look down at her.
"We haven't discussed the fee yet," she said.
He stopped. "I know how expensive you are. I'll give
you a ten percent bonus, for having to work with me.'
She opened her mouth, closed it in stunned silence. He
felt the jarring hostility as strongly as she did.
She considered throwing the photos at him. Why bad
she let him into her apartment? Why hadn't she refused
his job? Knowing that people might starve if she failed,
she couldn't just throw him out. As much as she hated this

man, those people were more important. She vowed to
rise above him in this moral sense.
He stopped at the door. He seemed more relaxed, now
that he was leaving. "I take off tomorrow for D.C. The card
contains my phone number. If you have any questions
today, I'm at Rickey's Hyatt."
"When do you need my results?"
"Yesterday," he responded as he left.
She turned to her work station, to unlock the digitized
versions of McKenna's photos. A brief, suspicious baffle-
DAVID'S SUNG               125
ment crossed her mind. Why did this man care about
wheat fields in Iran? He belonged to the military-industrial
complex; she could smell it. He might care about the
Soviet tanks, finding ways to destroy them, but she was
sure he didn't care about those people. She should have
asked him while he was there, but she had been so eager
to get him out of her apartment she hadn't asked all her
questions. What did he really want from her? She would
ask him when she had to speak to him again.
With a shrug she opened the main directory McKenna
had given her on the new account.
Nathan stood outside Bair Drug and Hardware, watch-
ing the occasional car cruise down the main street of
Steilacoom. Here in the state of Washington, God had
ordained five months of deep blue skies to be shrouded by
seven months of slate gray clouds. The gray clouds kept
out the tourists who did not understand. The gray clouds
made the blue skies special for those who did understand:
Steilacoom was a bright jewel placed in a dull metal set-
ting. No one took the blue skies for granted in Steilacoom.
This month was a blue sky month.
Nathan walked down Lafayette Street to its intersection
with Wilkes. To his left he could see the haunted restau-
rant E.B. Rogers, facing away toward the water. A soft
breeze, made damp by the Sound, carried a message of
tranquility. Every comer of Steilacoom held this peaceful
tranquility, a tranquility that was hard to find in the fre-
netic Zetetic headquarters just outside the nation's capital.
Fortunately, Nathan carried his own tranquility within
him. He had held that inner tranquility ever since Jan first
taught him to feel relaxation, to always remember what it
feels like to be calm.
But an earlier Nathan Pilstrom had not found tranquility
so easily. In past decades, that earlier Nathan had sought
out the Steilacooms of the world, desperately trying to
internalize their calming influence. That Steilacoom seren-
ity always seemed so beautiful, like the still waters of
Puget Sound he could see now below the edge of the road.

Sometimes that earlier Nathan had succeeded in grasp-
126 Marc Stiegler
ing tranquility for a time, but always he had lost it again.
Finally, Jan and the Institute and he himself had devel-
oped new ways to train the mind to make those images
more permanent.
Remembering those earlier, anxiety-ridden days, he re-
alized how much he had in common with Juan Dante-
Cortez. Nathan leaned against Ban's clean siding and waited.
A battered blue Chevy swung by him into a parking
slot. The car door creaked open. A man Nathan barely
recognized stood up.
Nathan had met Juan once, a decade ago in the software
exhibition hall in Austin. Those had been heady times,
when the computer software industry exploded across the
world with the same Oare that microcomputers had carried
just a few years earlier. Nathan had been on the crest of
that wave with the first educational software from the
Zetetic Corporation. Juan had been there, too, a kid fresh
out of college with a copter flight simulation that left
experts gasping, wondering how he had cranked so much
detail out of such a small machine. Juan had never even
flown in a helicopter.
In those bygone days Juan had burned with the fever of
the industry. But his fever had burned deep inside, almost
invisible. He released that energy upon the world only
through the rapid, continuous movement of his eyes and
his hands. The rest of his body had seemed to be an
insulator, a soft fleshy covering to protect everything he
touched from the flame-hot temperatures inside himself.
Looking at Juan as he stepped from the old car, Nathan
could see that the fever had burned through. It had cooked
through his whole body, stripping the insulation, leaving a
lean, leathery remnant. His eyes watched Nathan calmly,
even carefully; his hands no longer swept in an unceasing
dance, but moved with care to close the door and sweep
back his thinning hair. Nathan wondered if he himself
looked so dramatically changed when Juan looked back at
him.
Slouched, Juan hardly seemed taller than Nathan him-
self. He maneuvered around the parked cars with long
strides. "Nathan," he said, with a shallow smile, "it's been
a long time."
DAVID'S SUNG               127
Nathan nodded his head. "Too long." He crooked his
head. "Hungry?"
"Of course.' Juan straightened up. "Bair's Drugstore is
a pretty strange place for a business meeting. It's perfect."

"I figured that most of your prospective employers might
not think of taking you to Bair's for lunch. That just shows
what fools they are—as you and I know, the best way to
soften up a programmer is to fill him with chocolate-
chocolate malted sodas before you lay on the Big Nasty."
He pushed on the old-fashioned drugstore door handle,
jiggling it in the middle of the motion to catch the jam
properly, and opened the door. Nathan and Juan may
have changed with time, but Bair's Drugstore had not.
This permanence was key to Steilacoom's tranquility.
"I hope you don't tell anybody else the secret of the
chocolate-chocolate malted soda," Juan replied with more
pep. "You could get me into a lot of trouble." After they
both chuckled, Juan continued, "And I hope you don't
have a Big Nasty for me with dessert."
"I don't know, Juan. You must tell me if it's nasty."
They sat at the round table across from the soda fountain,
next to the Franklin stove, and ordered turkey sandwiches
and chili. Apple pie would follow for dessert. And of
course they ordered chocolate-chocolate malted sodas.
The conversation drifted across the missing years. They
talked about the slump in the software market that had
followed the boom, the growth of the Zetetic Institute,
and the growth of Juan's company—Inferno, Inc. They
talked about the breakup of Inferno, and about Jan's death
and Juan's divorce. They did not talk about what either of
them bad done personally in the past year. They finished
the apple pie.
"How did you find your way to Steilacoom?" Nathan
asked as a first serious probe.
Juan answered by turning away, to squint into the sun-
shine pouring through Bair's front window. "I came here
to find my soul again."
Yes, Juan had a great deal in common with that earlier
Nathan Pilstrom. "Have you found it?"
Juan continued to stare into the sunshine with an ex-
128 Marc Stiegler
pression of yearning, as if he clung to the sunshine, but it
pushed him remorselessly away. "I don't know."
"Are you happy here?"
The leathery face relaxed into a wry smile. "I am con-
tent. Is that happiness?"
"If you ask the question, you know the answer. There's
more to happiness than being content. You have to have a
purpose, too—a worthwhile purpose."
A spasm rocked Juan's whole body. He turned back to

Nathan, and for the first time his eyes held some of their
old volcanic fire. "Do you know why I came to Steilacoom,
Nathan?"
Nathan knew, but he didn't dare explain how he knew.
"Tell me."
"It broke me, Nathan. Computer programming broke
me. You see, I'm a Method programmer."
"You're a what?"
"I'm a Method programmer." He paused. "You know
what a Method actor is, don't you? A Method actor lives
the part he plays—he becomes the person he is portray-
ing.' A mellow note entered his discussion. "A Method
programmer lives the program he writes—he becomes the
program he is creating." He shrugged. "One day I was
debugging ParaPower, a tool for running parallel simula-
tions of world economics. We could have used it for com-
paring alternative agricultural policies, and banking policies,
and military policies. It was going to revolutionize the job
of politics and statesmanship. It was ..." His eyes drifted;
another spasm shook him, until he focused again on the
sunshine. "I was tracing a fatal error through the simula-
tion's concurrencies." Again he looked hard at Nathan.
"The next thing I remember was a pillow on a hospital
bed. Six weeks had passed." He shrugged. "The medical
community finds me quite fascinating. They studied me at
great length. I seem to have a unique form of epilepsy,
triggered by the kind of creative, meticulous thinking I do
when I'm programming. It's different from any other kind
of thinking I've experienced. Do you know what I mean?"
Nathan nodded. "And yet, you're programming now,
And my friends at 9ID tell me you're doing a super job
with their budgeting system."
DAVID'S SUNG               129
Juan snorted. "Yeah. It's so boring I can hardly keep my
eyes open when I think about it." He closed his eyes as if
to prove the point. "You might think of me as an alcoholic
who. after going through a long period as a teetotaler, now
makes his living as a wine taster." He opened his eyes
again. "But you have to be careful not to like the wine too
much."
"I see." Nathan clenched his teeth. How important was
the Sling Project? He thought about the Information Age
that might yet be stillborn if the governments of the world
played their cards badly enough; he thought about the vast
destructiveness of Industrial Age weapons and about the
people who would die for no rational reason if another war
began. "Juan, I've come here to offer you a very fine wine.
But it has a purpose. Maybe the most important purpose
we've ever encountered."
Juan nodded- "Yeah."

"You can stay here in Steilacoom, in communion with
your soul, if you prefer. We'll run the project through
telecomm, of course."
"Of course we'll run telecomm—until the crunch at the
end, of course."
"Probably. The timelines are nasty, but we'll more than
likely stretch them." Nathan smiled innocently. "Who
knows? We might even make schedule."
"Nathan, only project managers believe those kinds of
fantasies." Juan sighed. "I suppose contentment would kill
me eventually, too. Just how much purpose have you got
this time?"
Nathan told him the purpose, and the method, of the
Sling.
Too often in the past months, Nathan had felt foolish
describing the plan, explaining why this could be the most
important project in the world, even though it was so tiny.
He knew he sounded like a crusader when he spoke of it:
he was a crusader. The sense of foolishness came when-
ever he talked to people who didn't care. It didn't upset
Nathan too much that they didn't care about the Sling; it
upset him that they didn't care about anything the way
Nathan cared about the Sling.
Despite all the mechanisms the Zetetic Institute had
130 Marc Stiegler
developed to help people cope with the Information Age
world—mechanisms to reduce stress, to adapt to contexts,
to reduce ego-involvement—the Institute had never found
a way to help people to care. Life without caring was a
shadow; the great moments of exhilaration came amidst
the battles that only a crusader could know. Yet so few
people accepted the risks, and those who did not care
came closest to caring only when telling the rare crusaders
that they were fools.
But Juan shared his crusader blood, fearful though he
must be of this particular mission. So Nathan shared his
vision freely, and found answers in Juan's sunken eyes.
He finished speaking, drained but excited, and waited
for Juan's response.
At last Juan answered. "So you want me to build the
simulations for the three Hunters. Every time someone
gets a module written and ready to test, I'll already have
the simulation tools on-line, ready to help them debug.
Every time I fail, they'll miss their deadlines."
Nathan started to agree, but Juan continued.

"And we can't miss the deadlines because they will be
the critical path. Somehow, that makes me the supercriti-
cal path, if there is such a thing." He bared his teeth as he
stared into the now-fading sunshine. His face held a defi-
ant look. It was not the expression of an animal that has
been cornered, but of a man who understands the choices,
knows the risks, and still accepts his purpose. "That's a
real screamer, Nathan." His eyes glistened for a moment,
looking at something only he could see. He blinked. When
he looked back at Nathan his eyes had the steady, smol-
dering look of a controlled fire. "I guess you know that I'll
do it.
"I guess I do. You know, the Institute has done a lot of
work to help people deal more effectively with reality. We
might have something that can help you travel from
Steilacoom without leaving your soul here. I'll send you
some info."
"Better do that, Nathan. Even if I never leave my
house. 111 still be traveling for you—inside the Sling,
inside every Hunter in the sky. Find a way for me to land
without crashing."
DAVID'S SUNG
131
A cloud crossed the sun, casting a brooding shadow
across the town of Steilacoom.
Daniel sat at his desk and watched the wide-panel televi-
sion display. He hummed a human purr.
FOCUS. "In addition to the con game the Zetetic Institute
plays with people who need help fighting their tobacco
habits, the Institute has become a major force in the
military-industrial complex." Bill Hardie's eyes cloud with
anger. "They've initiated the 'Sling Project,' a project to
seU cheap trinkets to the Army, pretending that these
trinkets nave value for defending the nation. How useful
are the Institute's machines?"
CUT. A gaunt hovercraft appears on the screen; some-
thing about the light makes it glitter like a fragile Christ-
inas tree ornament. "This is the so-caUed 'HopperHunter,'
designed to kiU tanks. You can imagine how long it would
survive on a battlefield where the tanks were allowed to
shoot back."
Daniel nodded his head in tribute to the newscaster.
How did he get that video footage? It was terrific. It
delighted him that Bill Hardie was one of his own cre-
ations, one of the delicately ripened fruits that now burst
with sweetness. If Bill ever found out that Wilcox-Morris
arranged the flurries of intense coverage whenever he
reported on the Zetetic Institute, it would make him
hysterical.
Daniel had certainly expended a lot of tender care to

ripen this fruit, particularly after Hardie's first visits to the
ZI headquarters. The damned Institute had poisoned all of
Daniel's nurturance, manipulating the reporter as skillfully
as Daniel himself. Wilcox-Morris had suddenly had to
prune Hardie's popularity back. His syndications had dwin-
dled dramatically, almost fatally. Daniel himself had ar-
ranged new opportunities for Hardie in remote places, just
to get him out of the Institute before the Zetetic rot
penetrated to his core.
If Bill found out how hard Wilcox-Morris had worked to
get him back on track, that, too, would make him hysteri-
cal. But Hardie didn't know. That, too, was sweet.
132 Marc Stiegler
ZOOM. The television whines with the sound of turbine
engines. The HopperHunter rises, wobbles, then crumples
on its side. "You can see how long it survives when it just
has to fight gravity."
CUT. Bill comes back into focus. "The greatest absurd-
ity of this is that the Army already has similar systems—
better systems—in development, under the auspices of the
FIREFORS agency. The Zetetic Institute has inspired the
Defense Department to another crude, inefficient duplica-
tion of effort."
Whewl Daniel loved this guy's fire; even he half-believed
the golden boy on the screen. Maybe he was doing the
whole world a service in destroying the Institute.
CUT. "In other news, the Senate finally passed a new
law banning many major forms of telecommuting. The
nation's unions have been fighting for this protection for
their workers for decades. They finally put together a
coalition of forces capable of pushing the ban through
against loud opposition."
Daniel chuckled. Did Hardie really believe that the
unions bad put together that coalition? Daniel had had a
devil of a time persuading them to accept his supporti
They didn't trust the Wilcox-Morris Corporation any more
than Daniel trusted the news media.
FOCUS. "Union leaders, and some corporate leaders as
well, have hailed this as a return to sanity for the econ-
omy. By forcing employers to offer a workplace, employ-
ees ww now be able to get government inspections that
assure fair and safe treatment. Thus, these workers will at
last receive the same protection that textile workers have
received since home manufacture of clothing for sale was
banned half a century ago."
Daniel added to the message a second part: the workers
will also be protected by the quick destruction of the
Zetetic Institute.
CUT. "This historic telecommuting ban starts on Octo-
ber 2."

Daniel heard a knock at the door. He flicked off the
television and said loudly, "Come on in, Kira."
Kira opened the door and strode quickly to her usual
place at the conference table. The weekly meetings had
DAVID'S SUNG               133
become a tradition; Daniel looked forward to them more
than he cared to admit. Bright minds were a rare and
precious commodity. For the most part, the tobacco in-
dustry needed obedience, not creativity, from its employees.
Daniel started the conversation. "Judging from the fig-
ures, our campaign to smear the Institute through their
own networks isn't working any better than our media
campaign."
"Yes." Kira lowered her eyes briefly in acknowledge-
ment other failure. "We set up a series of'artificial people'
—software agents—to log on to the Zetetic nets and enter
comments directed against the Institute. They dropped
quite a bit of stuff on the system in the first two weeks of
operation." She hesitated.
"And then?"
She frowned. "And then the Institute must have real-
ized that something odd was happening. The pruning rate
has gone up dramatically. And as nearly as we can tell, the
pruning is directed at our comments. I suspect the Insti-
tute has come up with a set of software agents whose
purpose is to recognize and box off anything written by
our software agents."
"I see." What a clever game this had become—the
battle between Wilcox-Morris an'H the Zetetic Institute for
control of the nets, for control of the soul of the country.
Point met counterpoint. "What if we release more agents—
just drown the Institute in our cash flow?"
"I can't believe that will work. Remember, the Institute
owns those conferencing nets. Every time we log on, they
make money. We can try it, but it's more likely to increase
their profits than anything else." She held up her hands
helplessly- "What surprises me a little bit is how fast they
caught on. I've ordered a quiet investigation downstairs
with our computer people. A frightening number of soft-
ware engineers and computer architects have close ties
with the Institute. Someone might have leaked the word."
She shrugged. "Or maybe not- The Zetetics are known for
a lot of things, but not for their stupidity in information
processing."
"Don't sweat it- We'll find another way." Daniel reached
134 Marc Stiegler
inside his coat for a cigarette, then stopped. He had stopped

smoking during these meetings.
Kira had followed his lead. He regretted the loss of
amusement watching Kira handle tobacco, but he did not
regret the loss of the opportunity to smoke.
Daniel smoked whenever he appeared in public, except
when he had to deal persuasively with anti-smoking fanat-
ics. Sometimes he smoked then, too, if he could afford the
pleasure of aggravating his enemies. But he never smoked
in private. Ironically, he had stopped smoking in private
shortly after buying up his first tobacco company for the
Wilcox empire. When he had acquired the company, he
had also acquired their private research documents on the
health hazards of smoking.
Tobacco companies had spent millions of dollars trying
to find favorable scientific ways to describe tobacco's ef-
fects. They had given up only after being struck in the
face, again and again, with proof that went far beyond
simple statistical correlations. The proof was still statistical,
—but the statistics were of the caliber of the physicist's
wave equations. They were statistics that allowed the re-
searcher to predict, for any given population, how many
people would die of cancer in a given year. All the re-
searcher needed was a base rate of death, and a descrip-
tion of how many people had been smoking for how long.
Cigarette smoking so strongly outweighed other variances
that additional factors merely put wiggles in the line. If
you knew how many people smoked, you knew how many
people died.
So Daniel no longer smoked in private. And with Kira,
he felt a bond. He counted his time with her as private
time. He enjoyed her company.
They talked at length about many other aspects of the
business, but Daniel's mind drifted. The Zetetic Institute
seemed determined not to go away; more drastic measures
were in order. The telecommuting ban should provide the
focal point.
As they finished, he said, "Do you remember saying
you could arrange a meeting for me with Nathan Pilstrom,
the president of the Institute?"
DAVID'S SLING                135
Kira froze in the act of packing her briefcase. "I said I
might be able to arrange it. Why?"
"I think the time has come. Any idea where he'll be
during the last week of September—someplace where I
could talk with him?"
Kira nodded very cautiously. "I might be able to get you
his schedule for the week. If I remember correctly, he's
supposed to attend a reception at the Capitol that week.
You could get invited as well. Or are you thinking of
arranging a broadcast debate? That'll be harder."

"No," he replied, perhaps more sharply than he should
have. Kira perked up at the intensity of his response. "I
just want to meet the fellow. Maybe we can cut a deal."
Kira's head bounced with a light laugh. "Optimist."
"Yes. Cockeyed, incurable, and romantic," Daniel agreed
gravely as he watched her leave.
Lila drove through the night, blind to the falling rain
and the danger other reckless speed. She had uncovered
the lies in McKenna's words; she had uncovered them
faster than he could have anticipated. He was still within
striking distance.
Despite his arrogant attitude, or because of it, she had
buried herself in his satellite photos moments after he left.
What was happening in northeastern Iran? At first Mc-
Kenna's claims seemed overblown. Some of the fields
were decaying, true enough. Some had been destroyed-
But considering the normal horror of war it was not un-
usual; in some macabre sense, it was even mild.
When she had turned to rates of destruction, she had
found that the decay was spreading faster than the de-
struction. These fields didnt suffer from artillery bom-
bardments or the crushing brutality of armored vehicles;
rather, they suffered from lack of attention. The decay
struck, oddly enough, around the small villages nestled in
the Elburz Mountains and diminished near the major cit-
ies like Meshed. Near Meshed, the outright destruction of
fields dominated.
Why were the fields unattended? This was the question
she and her computer had sought through image process-
ing. She had stretched the image contrasts. She had run
136 More Stiegfer
series upon series of density slices across the multiple
images. She had wrung hints of knowledge from each
operation, but no understanding. She felt as though she
were trying to reconstruct a jigsaw puzzle while viewing
the pieces through a microscope; her perspective had been
wrong.
The understanding came as a flash ofZetetic revelation—a
flash that had little to do with the images she was process-
ing. She had stopped, sick at the conclusion she had
drawn.
She could be wrong—she had prayed she was wrong—
but she had had few doubts. Why had the Belds decayed?
Because no one was tending them. Why was no one tend-
ing them? Because all die people had been killed. All of
them.
It had taken her a long time to build up the fortitude to

investigate why, and how, they had been murdered. She
would have preferred not to know. She had considered
logging off and forgetting everything. At the last, she had
been driven forward by the taunting image of McKenna's
sneer. With a cold, violent concentration, she had ana-
lyzed the photos with a whole different set of tools.
The satellite images did not just show Lila the colors of
the rainbow; they showed the whole spectrum from low
HF radio to high UV. She could not run full spectroscopic
analyses—the atmosphere blocked too much energy for
that—but she could run approximations. First she identi-
fied fluorine in the atmosphere—fluorine bundled in com-
pounds with carbon. With oxygen. With hydrogen. With
growing horror, she matched the spectrum against known
molecules until, late at night, she hit the tag.
The match had not been perfect, but it had been too
close for coincidence. The villages had been sprayed with
some derivative of Soman, a persistent nerve gas.
Why hadn't anybody reported this in the newspapers?
With more cold analysis, she understood that silence, too.
The murderers had been thorough in destroying those
isolated villages where rebels might breed, far from the
brutal controls imposed on the cities. The Soviets had
carefully left no witnesses.
DAVID'S SUNG               137
And Kurt McKenna had thrust this atrocity into her
face. Hating even the touch of the photos, she had scooped
them back into the envelope. And now she drove with
them to the Hyatt, to throw them back in his face as he
had thrown them at her.
Standing outside his hotel room, she realized she had
never felt true anger before. Nothing compared with this
feeling of anger, the surge of fury's power as she pounded
on his door. Her arm seemed a mere tool of force, to be
used to break anything that blocked her way.
The door opened slowly. She pushed on it with the
seemingly irresistible force of her anger, but the slow mo-
tion of the door seemed barely perturbed. A balancing
force controlled its motion, mocking her; Kurt McKenna.
She stepped across the threshold, invading his private
space, closing on him so she could feel his breath as she
screamed, "You bastard! You don't care about those peo-
ple! You knew what I'd find!"
A slight motion of his j'awline suggested the control he
exercised over his own feelings. "Three points, only one
correct. Yes, I am a bastard. But I do care about those
people—perhaps more than you do. And no, I didn't know
with certainty what you'd find. But you've told me, just by
being here. You found something even more terrible and
evil than me."

She stood with her fists clenched, not quite able to
pound on him as she had pounded on the door.
He glanced down, saw her stance, and smiled viciously.
"Violence? You wouldn't want to reduce yourself to my
level, would you? Or are you afraid that I would hit back?
You'd be right. I use violence against anyone who uses it
against me. Wouldn't you?"
"You bastard! You're as bad as they arel"
Now, in a flickering movement of his eyes, she saw an
anger even greater than hers, though not so hot: a cold,
killing anger. His anger consumed hers, sucking the fary
from her arms, turning it back with the slow pressure of
his breath on her face. Involuntarily, she stepped back.
His mouth worked a moment before he spoke, but his
voice remained steady. "You know better. I don't kill
138 Marc Stiegler
civilians. I kill people who Idll civilians." He paused, a
pause that shouted with anger. "You are the one who's as
bad as the people you hate. You don't really hate them.
You don't even hate what they do. What you hate, Ms.
Lottspeich, is knowing about what they do. If they would
just leave you out of it, so you didn't have to know, you
wouldn't hate anyone or anything."
She held her breath. That was ridiculous. And yet—she
felt her hands clenching and unclenching—was it true?
"And most of the people like you in America can get
away with it. After all, those soldiers can only touch you
over my dead body, and the dead bodies of all the other
fools like me who volunteer for the job. But you won't lift
a finger to help us. You're too good for us, aren't you?"
She wondered what he was referring to, in his peculiar
accusation. Then she realized: "Did Nathan Pilstrom send
you?"
McKenna snorted. "Not on your life. Nathan never
forces people to listen him, the way I forced you to listen
to me. He has a vision that he offers to everybody, but you
have to choose it of your own free will." His voice soft-
ened for a moment. "Perhaps he's right. Perhaps you
shouldn't force ideas down other people's throats.' Then
the anger returned. "Or perhaps I'm right, instead."
"Why didn't you take this thing—what was it, the Sling
Project—to one of your normal military contractors?"
Again Lila saw his jaws tighten. "They aren't my
contractors.
"My father told me stories about Vietnam. The way the
guns we were using—the M-16s—would jam in the mid-
dle of a fight and leave our troops unarmed. Do you know

why the M-16s jammed in Vietnam? Do you know why
people like me died because they couldn't shoot back? The
original, commercial gun they modified into the M-16
didn't jam. But the Army's ordnance bureaucracy wouldn't
allow a simple gun developed by someone else to become
the standard. Oh, no. They had to improve it. They im-
proved it enough so that it didn't work anymore." His
nostrils flared. "To prove the goodness of their goddam
bureaucracy, they crippled the men who had to fight—the
men who had enough people trying to kill them.
DAVID'S SUNG
139
"Those people in that bureaucracy had forgotten as thor-
oughly as you have. For too many of them, their contracts
are more important than any results they might produce."
He stopped speaking.
After a silence, Lila asked, "Why did you do this to
me?"
"Because you're the best. And right now, right here on
the Sling Project, we need the best." He pointed to the
packet of photos, the packet filled with atrocities. "We
need you, we need the best, because as ruthless as I am, I
am not as ruthless as they are."
She shuddered, threw the packet aside. And as it thud-
ded against the carpet, she saw how right he was. She
feared the knowledge of evil, not the evil itself.
A fear of knowledge did not mesh with her self-image.
Reluctantly, she reclaimed the packet from the floor.
Kurt continued. "Without your help, 1*11 have to kill
civilians, too. Maybe I won't kill civilians as efficiently as
they do, but I'll still kill them. When I shoot at soldiers
like the ones in Iran, I'll have to use such massive weap-
ons that the innocent bystanders won't have a chance,"
"You said you don't kill civilians," she jeered.
"I lied," he said. "But you can change me into a person
who's telling the truth."
They stood in rigid intensity, staring at one another, as
McKenna explained how to stop wholesale murder—not
by committing wholesale murder in return, but by com-
mitting selective murder of the men who gave the orders
to commit wholesale murder. It was still murder, of course.
But did it not count for something, that the number of
casualties might decrease a hundredfold?
As McKenna spoke, Lila felt her anger shift, ever so
slightly. Her anger no longer vented against McKenna's
harsh personality. Somehow, in his own distorted way, he
cared about people. Her anger now focused beyond him,
at those even worse than McKenna. Her anger struck at

the faceless creatures, certainly not men, who called
down the rain of death upon the helpless villagers in the
photos.
"Will you help me?" McKenna asked at last.
140 Marc Stiegler
Her focus returned to McKenna, her immediate enemy.
"Certainly not," she spat. With that she left. She ran
through the rain to her car, realizing as she struggled with
her keys that she still had McKenna's packet. With a
grunt, she Sung it into the car.
She drove almost blindly, trapped between the pitch-
black night and her own black thoughts. The road van-
ished, except within the narrow, gleaming spots of her
own headlights. Only occasionally could she glimpse the
white road markers that inscribed a safe path.
She would not, could not help McKenna. He stood for
everything she hated. No, not quite, she remembered.
There was something even more hateful beyond him.
She remembered Nathan sitting next to her a month
ago. He had been so open, his intentions naked to her, as
he tried to explain his purpose. She had cut him off too
abruptly. She had known that she was being unfair even at
the time; now she thought she understood why. She had
been afi-aid to listen, for fear that she might agree. She
had slapped him verbally and conceptually, but unlike
McKenna, he had not struck back. Yet she felt sure that his
conviction ran as deep as McKenna's-
She would not, could not help McKenna. But she could
certainly help Nathan.
She arrived home shaking from the fatigue of the stress-
ful drive and from the anger that still had no physical
outlet. She glanced at her watch; it was almost midnight.
She felt feverishly awake-
She dialed the phone. A voice gasped blearily, "Pilstrom
speaking," which reminded her that in D.C. it was close
to 3 A.M. She felt a perverse pleasure in waking him.
"Nathan, this is Lila Lottspeich. Do you still need an
image analyst on the Sling Project? Well, the next time
you're awake, mail me a contract." She heard him mutter-
ing from the other end of the continent. She said loudly,
"What? Yeah, I'm on the team. Goodnight." She smiled
as she hung up, though she now regretted zapping Nathan
in the middle of the night.
She smiled, thinking of the power she had to strike back
against the creatures who killed indiscriminately. Revenge.
DAVID'S SUNG               141
The feeling repelled her even as she reveled in it. Was she
now as bad as they were? Her friends would certainly

think so. They bated the military as much as she did.
Were those creatures as bad as she now thought? Doubt
nickered in her mind, but it could not stand against her
new conviction. She had uncovered their cruelty with her
own mind; she saw the blood staining their hands.
Another new sensation scared her even more deeply. In
all her years of passive objection to the military and all its
works, she had never felt so thrust into the center of a
conflict, so able to make a difference, so isolated in her
strength, yet so willing to fight with all that strength. She
had never felt so valiant.
As Lila lay down, to sleep with the secure joy of that
valor, she wondered how long the feeling would last. She
knew that if it wore off, this would be her last peaceful
sleep for a long time.
THE RULE-MAKERS
September 14
Filter third for reliability. This filter pro-
tects against politicians.
—Zetetic Commentaries
Nathan stewed quietly in the waiting room outside Charles
Somerset's office. The clatter of obsolete typewriters echoed
down the cold, plaster-cast hallways of the Pentagon. Na-
than wondered how people could work here, and how
they could think clearly in such a hostile environment.
One answer chilled him; perhaps they couldnt think clearly
here. Perhaps they couldn't think here at aH.
He closed his eyes, washing out the sounds and the
distractions, trying to wash the irritation from his mind as
well. He knew he would need his greatest powers of
perception for this meeting. Each of his few other at-
tempts to talk with FIREFORS people had met with ei-
ther curt civility or expansive emptiness, both well-designed
to prevent outsiders like Nathan from acquiring useful
information. Yet now the program manager of FIREFORS
had asked to see him. That could only mean an ambush,
What was the PM of FIREFORS planning?
He heard a door squeak on its hinges and opened his
eyes.
At first Nathan thought he was looking at a successful,
cultured street beggar, Charles wore a brown suit that
might have been slept in; clearly, it had been cut to hang
limply on its owner. His striped red tie sagged in a sloppy
knot near the collar. His eyeglasses had slid far down his
nose, and his hairline had receded far up his forehead.
Charles continued to open the door. His lethargic care
with the task kept pace with the slow slide of his eyeglasses;

his smile of greeting brightened in harmonic time with both.
His every movement seemed soggy except that of his
eyes. Beneath heavy lids, they darted across Nathan's face
and posture. "Welcome," Charles said with a voice of
144
DAVID'S SUNG               145
dispassionate amusement. With a moment's energetic ef-
fort, he raised his eyebrows. "Welcome to the team."
"Welcome to what team?" Nathan asked as he followed
the program manager through the door.
"Way, the FIREFORS team, of course."
Nathan studied the schizophrenic arrangement of books
and papers in the office while Charles's words sank in.
"What do you mean by that?"
"You're a member of the team now. My team." After
showing Nathan a chair next to the conference table, Charles
retrieved a single sheet of paper from his desk. "This is a
letter from General Hicks to General Curtis, authorizing
transfer of Sling Project oversight to FIREFORS. It was
mailed yesterday."
Charles Somerset had gained the power to destroy the
Sling. Nathan sensed Charles's condescending gaze upon
him. He realized that in some drab yet hideous fashion,
this moment qualified as a great victory for Charles.
"Of course, the letter probably won't penetrate the bu-
reaucracy to your contracting officer until tomorrow. But I
thought you should know about it as soon as possible. We
need to get a jump on the changes we'll have to make in
the Sling. We need to get it into line with the rest of our
projects."
Nathan looked up at him for a painful moment, then
accepted a copy of the letter—both to read it and to take a
moment to collect his thoughts.
There has been too much national coverage—the words
jumped at Nathan from a middle paragraph—of supposed
FIREFORS competition with the Sling Project. I agree
with you: it makes no difference whether the competition
is real or not. We must consolidate.
Nathan stared at the letter for a long time, to recover for
continuing the psychological game now underway. He knew
who he needed here; he needed Leslie. Leslie, with his
years of maneuvering through military politics, would have
known how to respond. But he would be out of town all week.
It probably didn't make any difference. The letter, the
change in organization, each was now &fait accompli. Had
it been possible for the Institute to do anything about it,

Somerset surely would not have offered the information.
146 Marc Stiegler
What Nathan really wanted to do was cut and run—just
leave the room and the Pentagon and Charles's smiling
face behind. But Charles was now in some sense both his
boss and his customer; however dangerous that might be,
he would only aggravate the danger by being nasty.
Charles scraped a chair across the floor to join him.
"You all right?" he asked with too much pleasure and too
little concern.
"Of course," Nathan said, straightening to look Charles
in the eye. "You realize that just because this letter has
been mailed, this isn't official yet. Since I share your
concerns about following proper procedures, I can't make
any commitments without authorization from my contract-
ing officer."
Charles seemed taken aback by the astuteness of this
response, but he recovered quickly. "No problem, it will
be official soon enough. I was just planning to give you
some general guidance now, anyway. We'll have a more
detailed discussion of the new directions after you talk
with DNA- And we'll get really explicit, down to the nitty
gritty, after a complete project review." Charles looked
wistful for a moment. "If we had our way, we would put a
stop work on the project temporarily, until our re-evaluation
is complete." He paused, a look of distaste crossing bis
face. "But we haven't been authorized to do that."
Nathan suppressed a smile; Charles's victory had not
been unconditional, anyway.
Charles waited for Nathan to respond. When no words
came forth, he continued on his own, more than willing to
handle the discussion solo. "As for our new general guid-
ance, I'd like to start with a little thing. We've read the
reports on the Sling. It looks like a fine piece of work,
although a little primitive, compared to what we've been
doing. One of the things we haven't seen anywhere is a
discussion of how the warheads in the HighHunter—you
call them Crowbars, I think—pick their targets."
Nathan frowned. "We're stdl working on the algorithm
for selecting important objects, such as commanders' tanks.
Is that what you mean?"
Charles mumbled something. From the uncertain sound
in his voice, Nathan suspected that Charles might not
DAVID'S SUNG               147
know what he meant himself. "What I'm driving at is, do
your Crowbars talk to each other, so they can guarantee
that they fall on different tanks? How do they know they
won't all hit the same one?"

"Ah, I see." Nathan nodded; Kurt had worried at that
question for a long time. "We thought about it, but we
decided we couldn t do that. There's not enough space in
the Crowbar for the comm and not enough time to figure
it out anyway. Each Crowbar will have a slightly different
set of parameters, so they are likely to pick different
targets.'
Charles shook his head, a slow pendulum with a catch in
it. "That isn't acceptable. The warheads must communi-
cate and guarantee that they don't conflict."
Nathan just stared for a moment. "But that would be
silly." He explained with a tone that softened the blunt-
ness of the words, "It's not only expensive, it's unneces-
sary as well. The idea is to put a lot of Crowbars up there,
and have a pile of them come down together, like hailstones.
If we get ten percent of them hitting the same thing, all we
have to do is launch ten percent more to start with."
The pendulum swung again. A grave look touched Som-
erset's darting eyes. "Listen- I know you're new to this
contracting business, but there'rfe some serious things you
need to learn. First of all, we've got to deal with the Bill
Hardies of the world. Think what it would sound like if he
reported on this: The Army is building a weapon that hits
itsetf almost as often as it hits the enemy.' " Charles looked
concerned, like a teacher speaking privately to a slow student.
"We aren't talking here about technical necessity, or econo-
mic sanity—we're talking about political survival in case the
news media get excited about us. Do you understand?"
Nathan considered that the last news campaign had
resulted in the letter he had just read, and he felt a surge
of understanding for Somerset's game. "Yes, I see your
point," he conceded. "You want to create a more workable
political design. But I still disagree with your conclusion—
because your political design is completely unworkable as
an engineering design. The problem you re addressing is
not a valid one upon which to make a political deci-
sion, because as engineers, we know a right answer."
148 Marc Stiegler
Charles grunted. "Maybe so, but I want to keep the
FIREFORS team funded." Getting no answer again, he
pointed out the corollary. "I want to keep you funded."
Nathan sighed. "What is your next point of general
guidance?"
"Since you're going to need a comm processor for the
new Crowbar-to-Crowbar communication, I'd like to
recommend—and frankly, we'll probably demand when
the time comes—that you use the AN/UYK 93 computer
for the job."
Nathan looked at him with puzzlement. "Isn't that com-
puter still under development?"

Charles smiled. "I'm glad you've heard of it. We've
been trying to get word around about it for some time.
This is my first indication that we've succeeded. Yes, it's
almost ready."
Disbelieving horror dried Nathan's throat. "How can
you expect us to use something that doesn't exist yet?"
Charles waved a hand, dismissing Nathan's concern.
"The spec's available."
"What if it doesn't meet our needs?"
The hand waved again. "No problem. We'll just change
the spec."
Nathan could think of no retorts that were sufficiently
irrational.
"And I hope that, for all your communication systems in
all these different Hunter platforms, you're using our JANEP
protocol family."
Nathan shook his head violently. "That would be crazy.
No one uses those protocols anymore. They're obsolete."
A stem expression molded Somerset's pliant features.
Nathan would not have guessed it would look so natural
there. "We use those protocols in all our products. You
must use them to stay compatible."
A stillness settled across the room—the stillness of a
battlefield after the carnage. "How can you expect to
succeed when half your system is 15 years obsolete, and
the other half is five years short of being born?" With a
stab of insight—the stab of a nail—Nathan remembered
Leslie's story of the Maneuver Control System.
MCS, as it was known to friends and enemies, was a
DAVID'S SUNG               149
computer system built for the Army back in the '70s and
'80s. The contractor had been required to use a computer
that was over ten years old, and a software toolkit that was
still under development—and wouldn't be ready for years.
The contract had been a great success: millions of dollars
had been spent on old hardware and futuristic software.
Only the less important third priority—the job of building
a Maneuver Control System—had felled, supping its sched-
ule year after year.
Somehow, the Defense Department always had deep
passions for the technologies of yesterday and the technol-
ogies of tomorrow. But they never tolerated the technolo-
gies of today. And tragically, the technologies of today
were the only technologies worth using—the only ones a
sane person would use to protect his society.
Charles removed his glasses. While he wiped them, he

delivered the final guideline. "One last thing. This busi-
ness of using commercial equipment has got to stop. Mili-
tary equipment has to be survivable. So every component
of the Sling Hunters has to be militarized."
Only the slightest move forward betrayed Nathan's de-
sire to leap across the conference table and strangle the
murderer of his child. "We can't do that! We haven't
anywhere near the resources for'that kind of undertaking,
even if it made sense- The whole idea of the Sling is to
build a family of disposable systems, like Dixie cups or
TOW missiles."
Charles nodded. "I think I see your confusion. Of course
you've never been able to think of militarizing your Hunt-
ers, because you didn't have the resources. That's where
FIREFORS can help you, even as you are helping us. If
the Sling Project is sufficiently important, we can get you
the money."
"But the Project would be doomed from the start! It
would be far too expensive to build in large quantities."
"That's for someone else to decide. We're only responsi-
ble for designing products to meet the military require-
ment. The financial problems with deployment are handled
elsewhere. Mr. Pilstrom, even if we wanted to worry
about the production cost, we aren't allowed to."
Nathan heard a hint of exhaustion in Somerset's voice—
150 Marc Stiegler
the exhaustion of a man who had once in his life worried
about problems beyond his current battle. He saw in
Charles the end product of bureaucracy: a basically good
man with one terrible fault. He had learned how to suc-
ceed in the distorted reality that bureaucracies create.
Charles continued, again willing to carry the conversa-
tion alone. "There's a second alternative. We do have
permission to use commercial components for subsystems
that aren't mission-critical."
Nathan listened with suspicion. "What does that mean,
not mission-critical?"
"A subsystem is mission-critical if the troops would be
unable to continue fighting without that subsystem. If the
subsystem is that critical, it must meet mil spec. Doesn't
that make sense? Something that critical must work
correctly."
Something didn't seem to fit quite right in that analysis,
but Nathan couldn't see the flaw at the moment. "I guess
it makes sense."
"But if the troops can continue to fight effectively with-
out it, then it's not mission-critical. Then you can make it
less rugged. You still have to make it more rugged than

average commercial stuff, of course, but you can bend the
spec. Charles looked eager—almost too eager—to help
solve this problem. "We could just declare the entire Sling
Project to be non-mission-critical, thus allowing us to make
it commercial. Considering your hostility to militarizing
die Hunters, that's probably our best bet."
How sincere Charles sounded when he used the term
"we"! Did Charles actually believe his statements about
"our" team? He might. Nathan shrugged- "That sounds
like an interesting alternative. But as I said earlier, I won't
make any commitments until this transfer of control is
official."
"Of course." Charles sighed, not angry, but perhaps
saddened by the vision of a lengthy educational process.
"No commitments," he agreed.
Kira's knuckles whitened on the steering wheel of her
car as she cursed the traffic jammed up before her. To her
left, through the blazing colors of the autumn leaves, she
DAVID'S SLING                151
could see the Potomac: a muddy soup with puddles of rock
jutting randomly into the gray air. To her right, above the
line of the trees, she could see a skyscraper jutting into
the equally gray skies. Even in the dull shadow of this
autumn twilight, the Wilcox-Morris Building had not lost
its silvery sheen. She could see Daniel's office perched
like an aerie at the pinnacle. She remembered looking
down from that office onto the Parkway, and feeling a
mixed sense of sympathy and superiority toward the men
and women trapped there.
Trapped! She was trapped by the Parkway, just as Dan-
iel would soon have the Zetetic Institute trapped. She had
finally penetrated the murky complexity of the Wilcox-
Morris data bases, and she knew why Daniel wanted to
meet Uncle Nathan. She knew who else would be there
when Daniel met him, and she knew the inevitable conse-
quences of that meeting.
She had to warn Uncle Nathan before he got to the
Capitol for Senator Obata's book announcement. If she
didn't—
Her leg drove against the clutch pedal as if that forward
pressure could somehow be translated into motion. But
neither her fury nor her determination could budge the
megatons of steel blocking her way.
Charles slid his glasses along his nose as he leaned back
in his judge's chair, stretching his legs beneath his desk.
He contemplated the amusing possibilities for his future
relationships with the Zetetic Institute.
He saw three potential futures. One, the most absurd,
was that the Institute would simply come back and tell
him that the Sling Project could not be run the way

Charles demanded. In that case, he could simply cancel
the project for cause and move the funding associated with
it to one of his other projects. Of course, the sums of
money he had picked up with the Sling Project were mere
niblets compared with the fortunes already invested in
FIREFORS, but every little bit helped.
The second possible future was that Nathan would agree
to militarize the Sling's Hunters. That might generate
some very interesting results. The Sling was popular in
152 Marc Stiegler
some circles, and Charles might well be able to soak up
considerable quantities of next year's Federal budget work-
ing on such a modified project. And though he had en-
joyed defeating the Institute in this small campaign, he
held no grudges against them. If they played along with
his goals as program manager of FIREFORS, he would be
delighted to hand them a few contracts.
Frankly, he didn't understand Nathan's hostility to build-
ing a bigger, more expensive system. How could you grow
a reputation in defense except by working on big projects?
And big projects, by definition, spent big sums of money.
Charles was not merely protecting and enriching his own
empire by changing the course of the Sling Project: he was
helping the Zetetic Institute as well! Certainly this second
possibility was most profitable to both the Institute and to
the FIREFORS office.
The third possible future was that Nathan would opt for
Ae commercial approach by declaring the Sling systems non-
mission-critical. This third possibility was most dangerous.
The Sling Hunters fulfilled many of the same functions as
other FIREFORS products, yet they would cost less than
a tenth as much. The budget-watchers could conclude that
the folly militarized systems weren't necessary, and then
the FIREFORS budget would be slashed to the bone.
Fortunately, Charles had a solution to that problem,
made possible by the very nature of the rules governing
non-mission-critical development. Since the commercial
version of the Sling would be non-mission-critical, that
meant it was less important than mission-critical projects.
So the next time Congress came sniffing around for budget
cuts, Charles would naturally supply the non-mission-critical
project—namely, the Sling—for the axe. By sacrificing this
tiny project to the blood suckers, he would be able to
protect his larger projects from the knife and could main-
tain his spending rates unimpaired.
So though the second possible future was most profit-
able, the third was most ironic: the Sling Project would
destroy itself to protect his comprehensive FIREFORS
projects—the very projects that the Sling had been de-
signed to destroy.
He almost hoped the third future would prevail-

DAVID'S SLING                153
PAN. His eyes and his camera capture the overblown
beauty of the men and women arriving in the Mansfield
room of the Capitol. The sweep of the high, ornately
carved walls enters his flatcam with sharp clarity; the
room's narrow width and length are lost in the growing
density of the crowd. Bill understands the purpose of this
room, so well suited to optical illusion; with just a handful
of people. Senator Obata's press men create the atmo-
sphere of a vast, tightly packed throng.
CUT. Bill catches a short glimpse of himself in a gold-
framed mirror above a brass serving table. He blends in
perfectly with the crowd. He watches his own smirk as it
reflects back from the mirror. No one could guess his
intentions. His flatcam, decorated in a simple gold design
that neatly camouflages its intricacy, nestles against a small
carnation in his lapel.
ZOOM. Senator Hilan Forstil arrives: at last, someone
of interest. With casual grace Bill follows as Forstil weaves
through the crowd. He stops to talk. Bill recognizes Forstil's
companion and smiles seeing his prey: Nathan Pilstrom.
FOCUS. Forstil says, "Nathan Pilstrom. I'm glad to see
you. How is the Sling Project?"
CLOSE AND HOLD. Pilstrom grimaces. "Things were
fine until early this afternoon. We nnally solved all our
staffing problems a few weeks ago, and we'd started to
catch up our schedule.
"But an hour ago I met Charles Somerset, the program
manager of FIREFORS, for the first time." He describes
the takeover of the Sling by FIREFORS with fatigued
anger. "We'll probably declare the project non-mission-
critical, so we can continue with our current design-"
Forstil nods. "You know, the FIREFORS position sounds
reasonable, as far as militarizing mission-critical items.
The essential systems need to be survivable."
"It sounded reasonable to me, too, until I discussed it
with Leslie Evans, who's in charge of the systems integra-
tion. He pointed out the flaw quite clearly." Pilstrom
settles himself into a professor's posture. "Suppose a func-
tion is mission-critical. But now suppose that the mil-spec
box for this function is so expensive that we can't build
154 Marc Stiegler
enough of them. Then, by definition, the more critical the
function is, the less likely we are to get it." Nathan rolls
his eyes. 'The Sling, in its unmilitarized form, can elimi-
nate the need for tactical nuclear weapons. Isn't that some-
how mission-critical?"
SLIDE. A short man standing nearby perks up. He
turns to Pilstrom. "Eliminate nuclear weapons? How?"

ROLL. Pilstrom assesses the man as he would assess a
delicate goblet, deciding how much information he may
pour into this container before it overflows. "There's a
long answer and a short answer. The short answer—an
answer so short that it's misleading—is that, if we want to
eliminate nuclear weapons, all we have to do is build a
better weapon."
FOCUS. The man's face falls-
ROLL. Pilstrom continues. "But that's not as horrible as
it sounds. Something few people understand is that nu-
clear bombs make lousy weapons."
The man's expression turns to curiosity, matching Sena-
tor Forstil's,
"Remember, the purpose of a weapon is not to obliter-
ate the countryside. The purpose is to stop the enemy.
But that's exactly the opposite of the effect of a nuclear
blast. Nukes are great for killing farmers for miles around.
But do you have any idea how difficult it is to kill a guy
driving a tank?"
The short man sputters, "But surely if you drop nukes
on a bunch of soldiers you kill a lot of them."
Pilstrom nods. "But fewer than you might think. A nuke
is better than ordinary bombs. But if you plant ordinary
bombs very carefully—if you increase the informational
content of those bombs, and nothing else—only a handiul
of those ordinary bombs would make a better weapon than
a nuclear bomb."
CUT. The gathering crowd around Pilstrom forces Bill
to shift position. The room is crammed with people, yet
somehow, the densest crowd rings around a small breath-
ing space occupied by Senator Forstil and Nathan Pilstrom.
Forstil speaks. "I grant all that. But I still don't see why
we couldn t make the Sling systems mil-spec."
"We shouldn't make the Sling systems mil-spec primar-
DAVID'S SUNG               155
ily because that's not the right path to survivability for this
system. There are at least two paths to making a system
survivable. One is to make it very tough: make it mil-spec.
The other alternative is to make it very cheap, so you can
make lots of copies. Though every case is different, Ameri-
can history suggests that the second alternative is as viable
as the first; indeed, the triumph of America has often
rested on the second alternative. Look at our tanks in
World War II. The Germans had better tanks, but the
American commercial economy had developed mass pro-
duction methods so powerful that we could pour tanks into
the field until we overwhelmed them. Similarly, the Ger-
man submarines sank four hundred ships in the last year of

the war—but America built seven hundredl We buried
them in our productivity."
BACK OFF. Nathan's voice breaks across the room with
a forceful confidence that damps out other voices. An eerie
silence hushes even the tinkling of the champagne glasses.
Bill feels suddenly conspicuous. He accepts a small hors
d'oeuvre sprinkled with caviar from the passing waiter.
He is not hungry, but he chews it drily and swallows. The
caviar leaves a salty aftertaste in his mouth.
ZOOM, "This power of the economy to work for Ameri-
ca's defense is the unique strength that made us inconquer-
able. It's the power that we've lost sight of. It is the power
that the Zetetic Institute is trying to restore with the Sling
Project—the vitality, the creativity, the effectiveness of
the best of our industry." His voice falls to the level of a
personal vow. "Societies built around the principles of war
have great difficulty learning to turn their swords into
plowshares. America, a society built around peace, must
always remember how to turn its plowshares into swords."
Another man in the crowd shifts forward just an inch
—the distance of a thrust jaw. "If you're so much in
love with our free enterprise system, why are you trying
to destroy it?"
Pilstrom turns in astonishment. "What do you mean?"
"The Zetetic Institute's the bunch of weirdos who're
trying to destroy advertising, isn't it?"
TURN. Bill suppresses a laugh. The man is repeating
words from one of his newscasts.
156 Marc Stiegler
ZOOM. Pilstrom gives a gentle rebuttal that twists Bill's
internal laughter to dismay. He replies, "You've heard too
many newscasters distorting the truth- We don't want to
destroy advertising. We want to destroy manipulative ad-
vertising. We want to eliminate the kind of advertising
that persuades the listener to buy in spite of the best
information, rather than because of it. We want people to
filter the informational content from commercial adver-
tising—and all too often, when an advertisement is run
through an informational filter, nothing is left.
"But there are many useful forms of advertising. Come
to the Institute, and we'll show you some examples. Good
advertising doesn't get enough good advertising these days."
PAUSE, the conversation stops. The crowd seems
suspended—not quite ready to abandon the play of strong
convictions, but not willing to wait for the conversation to
pick up again.
PAN. A tall, immaculately dressed man steps out of the
crowd, quickly, gracefully—a silent, defiant presence.

Bill studies the man. His camera captures the charm,
but his mind does not quite grasp its source. The man
stands with a relaxed straightness, as though looking down
from a great height. He is not as handsome as Bill himself;
the face is too narrow, the eyes too calculating for that. But
only the senator comes close to projecting so much presence,
and even for the senator, the projection is not effortless.
For this man it is inevitable, as natural as breathing.
The intruder speaks. "What you're doing to advertisers
isn't half as bad as what you're doing to our civil liberties."
ZOOM. Nathan looks completely baffled. "What do
you think we've done to your civil liberties?"
"For one thing, you're attacking our right to smoke."
Nathan laughs, though a nervous catch suggests he won-
ders if both the criticism and the response are too obvious.
"That would be an amazingly inaccurate analysis. Our
relationship to liberty is quite the opposite: we're restoring
people's rights- Two-thirds of the people who smoke don t
want to. We help them regain their right to choose. Ev-
eryone who comes to our clinics volunteers."
The tall man's eyes hold steady, filled with accusation.
"I'm speaking of the tens of thousands of men and women
DAVID'S SUNG
157
who depend upon the tobacco industry for their liveli-
hoods. You're depriving them of their freedom to earn a
living doing what they do best."
"People do their best when creating better ways to live,
and better ways to earn livings. Creating something better
takes some ingenuity, and a lot of hard work. But the
search for better ways to live has been a part of our society
since the beginning of the Industrial Age. We don't de-
prive anyone of their ability to create something better;
we enhance it."
"But you can't deny that the end of the tobacco industry
would devastate the economy of North Carolina."
"Yes, it would devastate North Carolina—but only if
every smoker quit smoking at the same time. No matter
what the Zetetic Institute does, that's an unlikely out-
come. We couldn't destroy North Carolina even if we
wanted to, which we don't."
"I know exactly how you'd do it. You'd destroy us ex-
actly the way you are destroying us. You would encourage
other anti-smoldng groups to attack us more violently,
with laws that restrict our freedom."

PAN. Something about the stranger has seemed wrong
to Bill since the beginning of the conversation. The stranger
speaks of the people who smoke as his own people, yet
Bill cannot imagine this graceful, commanding man with a
cigarette in his hand. The collision of his mind's image and
the camera's image gives Bill a moment of internal discord.
"Only people who don't hear the whole Zetetic message
react in that manner."
"But some of them do. Your lectures often fail—and
that's your fault as much as the listener's. So the vicious-
ness of the attacks on smokers rises every time your Insti-
tute speaks. Or do you deny your responsibility for inciting
those attacks?"
ZOOM. Bill realizes that the stranger has made a bril-
liant jab. Zetetics have a complex concept of responsi-
bility—so complex that it plays out as contusion in short
newscasts.
Nathan lowers his head. "No. We know that we can
never do just one thing. We accept partial responsibility
for creating the tension that promotes those attacks—just
158 Marc Stiegler
as we accept partial responsibility for the extra years of life
people earn when they stop smoldng."
SPLAT. A bright pink liquid smacks against Bill's face,
bHnding him. Gasping, he inhales the fragrance and tastes
the sweetness of the champagne punch.
WHUFF. Another rainburst of champagne plasters his
chest. It strikes his camera, drenching it with a short-
circuiting, rose-colored tint. Bill is crippled—rendered as
helpless as a quarterback struck in the gut by a hurtling
lineman. He can no longer pan or zoom or focus.
THUNK. A woman's head and shoulders press against
him. He blinks his eyes, clearing them so that he can see
the tackier. She leans against him, her face and hair bur-
ied against his chest. Her perfume has a subtle scent, yet
it reaches Bill despite the overpowering effervescence of
die champagne.
She lurches against him again, then straightens and
looks up at his astonished face. He sees blue eyes, too
beautiful to ignore; they remind Bill of the quiet blue of
die deep waters of Puget Sound. She steps back un-
steadily. Her hand rises to cover her mouth in embarrass-
ment; her other hand holds an empty glass. "I'm so sorry,"
the tipsy beauty apologizes. "Let me clean you off." She
closes on him again and commences to suck the cham-
pagne from his shirt.
He grabs her by the shoulders to thrust her away, but she
buries her nose deeper in his chest, close to his throat; he
weakens under the caress. Under the force of her forward

motion. Bill steps backward, clinging to her awkwardly.
The confrontation continues between Nathan Pilstrom
and the tall stranger. But it is beyond Bill's reach, now
that this woman has ruined bis flatcam. He looks around; a
new crowd grows around him, deciding that the Zetetic
Institute is not as interesting as a drunken woman and a
champagne-spattered man. With a sweeping glare he
strengthens his grip on the girl, turns, and half-carries her
from the room. Without his camera, there is no point in
staying anyway.
As they cross the entranceway, she utters a wicked
laugh. Her hands run around his waist, burrow deep in his
back pockets. "Did I get your attention?" she asks.
DAVID'S SLING                 159
Bill flushes; the air in the hall cools his forehead, but he
bums with heat from the woman's hands, from her mouth
upon his throat. He mutters incoherently. She replies
with a murmur that tingles against the delicate skin be-
neath bis ear lobe.
Who the hell is this person, anyway? Many women have
thrown themselves at him before, with his handsome face
and famous name; many more women would beg a night
with him in the future.
Some have been even more beautiful than this one,
though she is quite striking. He pushes her away; she
caresses his hands, running her fingertips lightly up his
forearm, bringing his fingers in contact with her neck, her
cheeks.
He shakes himself, determined to master the situation.
Though other lovers have been more beautiful, this one is
. . - special. Her wide green eyes beckon to him from
beneath lightly colored eyelids, a touch of makeup that is
perfect, as though this woman has studied him, has ana-
lyzed his desires, has created psychometric charts of his
behavior and now has come to lure him—but lure him
where? Away from the confrontation brewing inside? It's
too late to prevent the destruction of the Zetetic Insti-
tute—he has all the footage he needs. Besides, the woman
has already succeeded if that is her'purpose—he remem-
bers with a small wrenching feeling me destruction of his
flatcam.
Does she just want to lure him back to his apartment?
He asks her; she answers yes.
He takes her, with her maddening eyes and teasing
hands, back to his home. In the living room, her attack
upon his shirt renews; he is half-unbuttoned before he can
disengage to retreat to his bedroom and remove his flatcam.
He slips the tape into his video system, a vast complex of
the best equipment in the world.
He returns to her. Again the wrestling begins—but this

time the girl struggles with an opponent who is free to
respond to her every movement.
Now she weakens in turn. She escapes his arms and
hurries to the bedroom, promising a quick return. He
waits; the door opens; she strides out with a new and
160 Marc Stieg^er
sober awareness. Her dress covers her again with full
propriety; her eyes hold a cold glare- She utters a single
furious epithet, swings the front door of the apartment
wide, and leaves in a shattering slam of wooden door
against metal frame.
Bill lies still a moment, then, leaping to his feet, howls
in hopeless, helpless, farious frustration.
He calms himself. His life, his soul are not enmeshed
with the intricate peculiarities of die female mind. His
heart is in his flatcam. He returns to his bedroom to see
the material he has collected, with which to destroy the
Zetetic Institute.
The tape begins. Nothing. Nothing, Nothing. He howls
again and wrenches the tape from its drive. Yes, it is the
original.
With disbelief he replaces the tape and skips, faster and
faster, across its surface. It is blank. She has destroyed it.
She has cut out his heart.
His backup! Always upon returning home with fresh
video, he starts the backup recorder to cut a dupe. He
reaches for it now. With trembling fingers, he jabs the
buttons to begin its replay.
Words and images now to him: the Mansfield room and
the debates of Nathan Pilstrom,
The woman destroyed his tape, but she did not destroy
his newscast. He turns from the video player; the tape's
contents burn brightly in his brain without amplification.
Playing it in its entirety, the Zetetic Institute sounds he-
roic. But there are moments of value.
"To eliminate nuclear weapons, all we have to do is
build better weapons"—the words of a world-destroyer.
"Turn plowshares into swords"—the words of a war-
monger.
"Yes, it would devastate North Carolina"—the words of
an unfeeling theorizer.
"We accept partial responsibility for the attacks on
smokers"—the words of a fanatic-
Bill clenches his fist. He feels the harsh strength of the
crushing motion and smiles in satisfaction.

October 2
How emotionally entangled are you
with your point of view? Test yourself—
defend an opposing view, believing your
life depends upon it
—Zetetic Commentaries
Leslie paused at the beginning of the corridor. Nathan,
he knew, never walked this hall without taking a moment
to gaze at the PERT chart. The Sling Project's PERT chart
dominated the walls, burying the oak veneer beneath thou-
sands of modern hieroglyphics. Often Leslie passed it by
without a glance; but then, Leslie traveled the hall far
more often than Nathan.
When Leslie did pause amid the colorful lines and boxes,
be did so to study the individual branches, to prune and
tend and nurture them; the PERT chart was the incarna-
tion of his part of the project. He gave the chart the same
intense concentration that programmers gave to their soft-
ware. In such a manner, he concentrated upon the branches
this morning.
The green forest had grown with stately decorum, over-
running many of the boxes that had once glared pink or
even red with danger. The pink had settled into a thin
band creeping up one wall and down the other, separating
the green past from the uncolored, black-lined boxes of
future. The whole project raced against that pink band,
trying to turn it to green before it could reach farther into
the black. A program manager considered his forest's growth
acceptable as long as the band of pink did not thicken, as
long as it did not grow faster than the trailing green, and
as long as it did not turn red. For a moment, he postponed
his considerations of the meaning of the red.
The black future had become clearer; the first order of
business for the software team had been to break up the
major software tasks into exhaustive lists of carefully cir-
161
162 Marc Stiegler
cumscribed, well-defined subtasks. To define is to limit.
Leslie could hear Jan telling him the Zetetic comment, a
phrase stolen from Oscar Wilde. In the initial steps of a
project, when flights of creative fancy supplied the ideas
critical to success, you needed to be careful not to define
the problem too well, lest it limit the creative process. But
once those initial concepts had sparked together, fusing at
last into a clear vision, it became equally critical to define,
to limit, with ruthless vigor. You did not want to be
surprised halfway through the engineering that transformed
ideas into products.
Amos, Juan, Kurt, and Lila had done an excellent job in
defining the Sling Project's transformation path. They had

completed the details for the PERT chart. Sadly, this
brought to bear another Zetetic commentary on the
hghtning-speed Information Age: If it is complete, it must
be obsolete. Obsolescence occurred when the PEBT chart's
unbendingly factual description of the present offered no
hope of reaching the planned future. On the Sling, a
handful of urgent tasks already burned with the heat of a
forest fire, threatening to consume that future.
The red boxes told this story. The single red box that
had driven him and Nathan so hard to find Amos and Juan
and Lila now lay in tranquil green, but before its transmu-
tation, it had ignited speckles of new, bright fires.
Since Amos had started, he had put out many fires,
healing a number of the newer red boxes to forest green.
Other green boxes, representing the work of so many
people, might grow toward the pink in an impersonal race,
but the reds and pinks that dominated the software team's
future represented personal battles. Those battles would
take everything they had to give- They didn't have time to
fight the absurd political battles that FIREFORS now
demanded of them. They didn't have time to play absurd
games because of a ban on telecommuting.
Leslie couldn't believe that the politicians had really
pulled such a stupid stunt. Nathan had pointed out the
analogy to the home-based sewing industry and its de-
struction by the textile mills, but Leslie didn't buy it at
first. There were surely more telecommuters to fight this
ban today than there had been clothing makers to fight
DAVID'S SUNG
163
that earlier law. On the other hand, the telecommuters
were not organized as a political force. Sanity had no effect
on politicians unless it was concentrated in a power bloc.
The organized power blocs belonged to the older. Indus-
trial Age institutions, such as the tobacco companies.
Kira had uncovered the tobacco industry's sudden sup-
port for the ban only days before the congressional voting.
Hilan Forstil had called to alert them to the same problem
on the same day, furious and apologetic that he had been
kept in the dark so effectively by other members of Con-
gress up on the Hill. Leslie found it unbelievable that the
tobacco companies could wield so much power, but Kira
had described lists of senators, representatives, regulators,
newsmen, and others of influence whom the tobacco in-
dustry could in turn influence.
Of course, the tobacco industry had not implemented
this attack alone. The Institute had stepped on a surprising
number of toes, considering its tiny size, Nathan saw a
deeper meaning in the new attack: the Zetetic Institute
was the first power structure of the Information Age. It
had grown just large enough to attract the notice of the
Industrial Age power structures. The corporate oligarchies,

the unions, the news media, the government bureaucra-
cies—all the old institutions thatTield power—could see the
dark glimmers of their fading importance in a new society.
Their survival depended on the destruction of the Insti-
tute. Only extraordinary forces could deflect their opposi-
tion to the Information Age.
Too late, the Institute itself had become the rallying
point for the telecommuters. Kira had started organizing
opposition, with Hilan's help. A quick analysis had shown
that they could not prevent the ban from going into effect;
they could only hope to revoke the law before it dismem-
bered die telecommuting work force. With a chill, Leslie
understood why the laws against selling homemade cloth-
ing had never been reversed: when the unions broke the
home manufacturers in the first battle, they left no one
able to fight. Struggling to make a new livelihood, the
losers had no strength left over with which to fight the
politicians.
Now the Institute had to battle with the union/tobacco
164 Marc Stiegler
coalition, the FIREFORS bureaucracy, and the sheer tech-
nical difficulty of making the Sling work, all at the same
time. These simultaneous campaigns demanded more than
the Institute had to give.
In turn, Leslie and the Institute were demanding more
of Amos than he would agree to give. Amos had been testy
when Leslie had explained to him that he couldn't
telecommute on this first day of the ban. He had dis-
missed Leslie's careful explanations of how important it
was for Amos to drive to the Institute. He had complained
that the primitive nature of the Institute's equipment would
hideously impair his productivity, compared with what he
could achieve at home.
Finally, Amos had surrendered under the unrelenting
stream of Leslie's combination of apologies and pointed
reminders. The harshest point was that, if Amos did not
come in for work, there would soon be no Institute to
work for.
The Institute was the most closely scrutinized corpora-
tion in the country: over a dozen government regulators
would roam the halls to ensure that all the Zetetic workers
in the city were working on-site. Authorities throughout
the nation supervised Institute projects, ready to make
arrests and pass incredible fines for the least infraction of
the new laws. If they carried out the maximum legal
penalties, they could destroy the Institute in a few days,
Apparently, as the Institute grew stronger as the rallying
point for the telecommuters, it also grew more important as
a target for the opposition. Nathan's analysis seemed cor-
rect: the Institute now lay at the heart of the maelstrom.
As Leslie walked past the last of the red boxes on the

PERT chart, he thought again about Amos.
Amos had been as close to anger as Leslie had ever seen
him. The idea of driving through rush-hour traffic did not
suit him. "Amos, stay cool," Leslie had said. "In a couple
of weeks, this whole thing will calm down. When that
happens, you can call in sick every damn day of the week,
and work on 'hobbies' all the time. Then, when you com-
plete a program module, you come in for one day, and we
pay you a huge amount of money for that day's work. Your
'hobbies' will coincidentally look a great deal like stuff we
DAVID'S SLING                 165
need, but so what? We'll fight it in court." Amos offered to
be sick immediately, but Leslie answered. "I'm sorry, Amos,
we can't do it yet. Just hang in there for a couple of weeks.
Or rather, hang out here for a couple of weeks."
Leslie hurried to his office to watch for Amos's arrival.
When he reached his window, the view filled him with
horror.
Many people had spoken of the increase in traffic that
the ban on telecommuting would create. The intersection
at Sunrise Valley and South Lakes Drive had been a
nightmare for years, even in light traffic. In heavy traffic,
with ex-telecommuters who hadn't driven in rush hour for
years, the intersection filled with a swirling mob ofcrazies.
But this was not the ugliness on the scene that most
terrified Leslie. A mob of protesters packed the sidewalk
in front of the Institute's driveway. Had Leslie not come
in at an ungodly early hour of the morning, he would have
had to confront this mob himself. Reading the signs they
carried, he saw that they had come as a result of Bill
Hardie's news broadcast the night before. Hardie had
used clips from Senator Obata's reception—a series of
Nathan's statements ripped from context, like obscene
entrails ripped from the guts of a beautiful animal. Leslie
had seen only part of it; he could not stand to see facts
twisted with such expert malevolence.
Staring out the window, he felt overwhelmed by the
effect of that broadcast. What a tragic coincidence, that
the mob should block the entrance to the Institute on the
very day that the government inspectors started demand-
ing their presence! He called the police even though he
realized how futile it was: how could even the police
penetrate the tortured jam of steaming automobiles?
One of the cars ensnared in the traffic—a bright yellow
Toyota—dodged around the barriers and broke through
the throng, turned down the quiet lane toward the Insti-
tute, then slowed as it approached the Institute's drive-
way, as if planning to enter. But the mob apparently
dissuaded the driver, he accelerated past the crowd as
several fists shook after him.
By the time he disappeared around the corner, he had

accelerated to an insane speed. Whoever he was, he had
166 Marc Stiegler
superb reflexes, unbounded confidence, and a total disre-
gard for other drivers and legal restraints. Nuts like that
fellow made the road dangerous for everybody. It took
Leslie a moment to realize that the nut behind the wheel
was Amos Leung.
Leslie watched the crest of the hill over which the
Toyota had gone with odd confidence. Amos would surely
return.
A few moments later his solitary figure, small and dark,
eased over the hill with a fluid swiftness that blended with
the windblown movement of the bushes. His direction
shifted off to the right, Leslie realized that Amos was
heading for the rear doors of the Institute, away from the
mob. He almost made it, before someone in the mob
spotted him.
Part of the mob hurried to block his path. The speed
and efficiency of this small group surprised Leslie; then he
noticed that the hurrying men seemed different from the
main body of protesters. They were huskier, and they
moved more purposefully.
The combination of the ban and the mob didn't seem
like a coincidence anymore. Someone had planted thugs
here to ensure that the Institute couldn't meet the re-
quirements of the law.
What could he do? The building was mostly empty; he
could not assemble his own mob to counter the one outside.
But Kurt was here. He might qualify as a mob all by
himself. Leslie ran through the building yelling for him.
It took only a few gasping words to propel McKenna
into action. Leslie trailed after him and considered the
possible foolishness of this rescue effort. Of all the people
he knew, Amos was the one most capable of taking care of
himself.
Amos had grown up the son of a quiet, retired Chinese
master of arms. His training had started when he had
learned to stand. He had practiced every day with the
diligence and discipline of a Soviet gymnast—with shuriken,
with swords, with his bare hands. Leslie remembered a
story Amos had once told of a confrontation in a New York
subway. Three teenagers had encircled him. With his back
DAVID'S SLING                 167
to the wall, he had offered them his wallet, but they were
not interested. They drew knives.
Amos had considered disarming them, but their combi-
nation of numbers and weapons introduced a small risk to

himself. He had therefore decided to disable them. Sev-
eral minutes later, he had called the ambulance for them.
But outside the Institute he faced more than three
assailants. As Leslie burst out of the door, he saw that
Amos stood backed against a tree. He seemed impassive
and quiet; only the odd way he held himself suggested
danger to the knowing watcher. Someone reached for him.
Amos seemed to disappear. An invisibly fast force leaped
from where he had stood, a force that touched one thug
after another. You could see the progression of the force
by the roll of violent jerking across the crowd. The thugs
dropped in stunning succession. Leslie heard the soft,
soggy sound of human bodies falling.
The violent force paused for a moment; Amos appeared
where it had left off, reorienting himself. The remaining
thugs held their ground, but seemed dazed by the attack.
Amos disappeared again-
A gunshot barked. Amos reappeared, sliding across the
green grass. When the sliding stopped, Amos lay unmov-
ing, his face filled with the impassive calm Leslie had
known so often. Now, however,' his calmness seemed
unnatural.
Leslie returned to the building and called the police
again. A helicopter came to the rescue, filled with para-
medics. They arrived too late.
Kira stood before the flat dullness of the apartment door
and stared into the peephole. Of course, from her side of
the door, she could see nothing. But she had come for a
confrontation; let it start even now, before the door opened.
With an angry swing of her wrist, she raised the knocker
and struck home once, twice, three times.
She waited. Dull thudding suggested the motion of a
large man. When the sound stopped, she knew he had
come to the peephole, and that his confusion mounted with
every passing moment. She smiled disarmingly, and won-
dered whether the smile confused him even more.
168 Marc Stiegler
Click. The door sprang open in response to the strength
of a forceful man, a determined man. Bill Hardie stared
down at her with an astonishing display of teeth, halfway
between a smile of greeting and a snap of fangs. Though
he spoke softly, his voice blurred with the intensity of his
emotion. "You wiped my tape," he said.
"Yes." They stared at each other, fencers seeking an
opening. "Let me in," she said.
His eyes widened with amazement, then amusement.
His arms spanned the distance from the door to the door-
frame, blocking her entry. He crossed his legs into a more
casual stance. With this simple motion he declared how

little of his power he needed to deny her demand.
Kira stepped forward, crossing the threshold. Now, to
close the door, he would have to physically push her away.
Her eyes drew down from his half-mocking eyes, across
the dark tan of his throat, slightly mottled in color, to his
open shirt collar. She could see the lean lines of muscles
spreading across the exposed part of his chest; she could
sense their extension under the cotton of his shirt, down
his arms to the massive strength of his hands. He had
large hands—hands meant to lift great weights, to hold
and control the night of a ballerina.
She stepped forward again, a small step. She could feel
the slow, steady surge of his breath as he exhaled.
Her smile widened as she reached forward to press her
hands against him, to force him to accept her arrival. With
his amis spread wide, he was completely vulnerable, even
though he stood unyielding before her,
He did not let her touch him. With the snap of an
uncoiling spring. Bill whirled away. One hand still held
the door. His other hand turned up, offering her the
sweep of the living room. "Please, the apartment is yours,"
he said with a mocking lilt in his voice. "You can go
anywhere but the bedroom."
"I'm Qattered. I doubt that you make that offer to other
women who come here." She flipped her hair behind her
head and strode into the living room. He followed at a
distance, the hint of a swagger in his step.
She tossed her briefcase on one end of the couch and
turned to face him. She caught him watching her legs, the
DAVID'S SLING                169
firmness of her calves. For a moment, she allowed him to
enjoy the sight of her body. "I came to tell you what a jerk
you are."
His eyes flew up to her face in contempt. "What a jerk I
am? Should I remind you that you are the one who de-
stroyed my property?"
Kira pushed his comment aside with a wave of her
hand. "The way I deceived you is nothing compared to the
way you've deceived people all over the world."
"Really." He was mocking her again. He crossed his
arms. One shoulder dropped as he leaned toward her. He
made Kira think of a tree bowing into the wind. "I've
given them the truth!"
"You've given them perversions of the truth." Kira
warmed with anger at his sarcastic attitude. "You've twisted
the language from a means of helping people think, to a
weapon to shut the mind off- You've denied them the
undistorted facts needed to form intelligent opinions."

"Undistorted facts!" His arms broke apart, then slapped
against his legs as he snorted. "A newscast doesn't have
the time for undistorted facts, little girl. But that's okay,
because I give my audience something better: undistorted
truth- I collect all those facts of yours together and distill
them to find the truth. And then" I select the facts that best
present the truth, and give the people those facts. That's
the problem with you Zetetics—you are Zetetic, right?
You have this cockeyed idea that facts are more impor-
tant than truth."
"Unfortunately, there's a massive flaw in your definition
of truth. You don't understand that you can only extract
the truth from the facts by using an unbiased mind."
"An unbiased mind?" Bill rolled his eyeballs. "Your
Zetetics are biased all the time. Every one of your experts
wears his biases like a collar on a dog. You can't describe a
problem to them without hearing about their lists of start-
ing prejudices."
"But of course. A Zetetic expert is trained to recognize
his own biases, and state the assumptions that form the
basis of his arguments. And he is trained to know the one
form of bias that can be tolerated. It is the one form of bias
170 Marc Stiegler
that must be tolerated—the bias that makes good thinking
possible."
Kira watched Bill squeeze his Ups together as if he knew
that she was waiting for his cue, as if he knew that he
should not give it to her, as if he knew that he would give
it to her anyway. "And what is this one oh-so-important
bias?"
"The bias of extensive knowledge. The man who has
detailed knowledge about the ten alternatives under con-
sideration has the right—has the duty—to bias his opinion
based on that knowledge. The legitimate expert always has
a bias based on his information.'
"Sure, little girl. Just how do you tell whether he's
biased by his information or by his emotion?"
"There are at least two ways." She ticked the alterna-
tives off with her fingers. 'The Brst way is to have him tell
you all his information and to make your own decision
based on that. The second is to watch him as he gathers
new information. If his bias is based on information, it will
change as the information arrives. If his bias is based on
emotion, it won't change until he's faced with personal
destruction."
"And that's how you think I am, right? I won't change
my opinion until I'm faced with personal destruction?"
Mockingly he held his bands forward, clenched in the fists
of a boxer. "Do you plan to destroy me?"

"I don't know." She turned from him to open her brief-
case, and riffled through it for papers. The pause gave her
a chance to reflect on the meaning of her upcoming ac-
tions. Softly, sympathetically, she continued, "I came to
tell you that in addition to being a jerk, you're a stupid
jerk."
"Oh ho." Bob. Weave. "You almost got me that time.
You have a great vocabulary, did you know that?"
**Yes." Her moment of weakness, her sympathy, passed
easily. "And you're a dupe as well. A puppet. A puppet of
the Wilcox-Morris Corporation—the biggest tobacco com-
pany in the world."
Bill stopped waving his hands in the air. "What?"
She turned to the first page of a thick folder and started
reading. It was merely a list of undistorted facts; she left
DAVID'S SUNG
171
the truth to Bill to determine. The facts listed were the
names and positions of people who were invited to parties
and sporting events and special art exhibitions. People
from magazines and advertising agencies and television
stations—all the people who had even the least chance of
influencing decisions to give a special newscaster a special
chance.
The facts included a list of the special-interest groups
supported by Wilcox-Morris donations, with their news-
letters that suggested which newscasters might be most
interesting to listen to. It described pep taucs with em-
ployees of tobacco companies, in which certain programs
and articles received glowing praise, and where the em-
ployees heard that writing to the owners of those maga-
zines and TV stations to praise certain editorials might be
helpful to the survival of their companies, and the sur-
vival, therefore, of their jobs.
The facts included the dates when these campaigns of
hidden persuasion peaked: they matched the dates of Bill's
strongest attacks against the Zetetic Institute. The corre-
spondence formed a fascinating nonfactual but possibly
true study in coincidence.
Bill tore the folder from her hands and stared at the
mere facts for himself. His proud face took on the lines of
tortured anguish. She knew he wanted to tear the folder to
pieces and fling it in her face, but he could not quite do it.
His disrespect for facts did not run quite deep enough.
He spoke with the tense strength of a violin string
snapping. "None of this could make the difference. I had
to be able to make it without them; they didn't force
anybody to cover me."

"Yes, you poor fool." Kira shook her head. "You could
have made it on your own. That's what made you the
perfect dupe. They had to find someone with the talent to
become a great newscaster. Then all they had to do was
give him the chance—and make sure that he learned,
indirectly, that his chances came fastest when he did the
work they wanted done. They needed someone to attack
the Zetetic Institute. They found him."
She watched his jaw muscles swell and subside. She
softened again. She knew that she herself had played loose
172 Marc Stiegler
with the difference between fact and truth in this encoun-
ter. "Let me point out that I have Bed several times since
I arrived here." He jumped, as if afraid of the touch of her
words. "As a Zetetic scholar, I must point out the inaccu-
racies of my statements. It is not true that you are a jerk; it
is only true that you have acted like a jerk many times.
Nor is it true that you are stupid; you have only acted
stupid repeatedly. Nor is it true that you are a dupe; you
have the power to stop being a dupe, or an idiot, or a jerk,
any time you desire. All you have to do is choose to
think."
His eyes were upon her face, yet he did not see her.
For the first time, she noticed the scars on his knuckles,
and wondered what fights he had fought, what walls he
had beaten to take such hurts.
When she left, he still stood in the center of the room, a
tree that has been cracked in the middle, but that has not
quite broken-
December 8
America never remembers the past The
Soviet Union never forgets.
—Industrial Age Societies:
A Historical Perspective
Leslie stood outside the intricately etched doorway, re-
luctant even to make his presence known. He felt the eyes
of the kid behind him, and the eyes of the house in front
of him. None of it felt good.
This time the house did not sing to him with Amos
Leung's voice. He searched the porch for a doorbell,
found none. As he finished searching, the door opened.
Flo—beautiful, graceful Flo—appeared as a wraith. "Col-
onel Evans. You are quite punctual." She spoke with the
same melodious precision as always, but with little anima-
tion. "Please come in."

Les stepped to the side, motioning to Ronnie. "Thanks,
But first let me introduce Ronnie Dwyer. Ronnie just
finished his MS in computer science from RPI. We're
hoping he can help you with the comm problems."
Squeezing his hands together nervously, Ronnie stepped
forward and shook hands with Flo.
Flo smiled with good grace, saying, "I am pleased to
meet you."
Ronnie offered her a smile in return and mumbled
hello.
The living room in red and gold had not changed; only
the encompassing presence of Amos Leung was absent.
Leslie kicked one of the beautiful cushions accidentally.
The feeling of goatlike awkwardness that Amos always
brought upon him returned. He snorted.
"What did you say, Colonel Evans?" Flo asked.
"Nothing," Les replied. In some sense, Amos Leung's
presence remained.
"Would you care for some tea?"
173
174
Marc Stiegler
Les nodded, but Ronnie spoke rapidly. "No thanks. I
don't drink caffeine."
Les rolled his eyes; Flo just smiled at the boy. "1 see.
Do you drink water?"
"Uh, yeah."
Flo disappeared into the kitchen.
They sat in the quiet peace of Amos's living room for a
while. At length Ronnie whispered, "She's beautiful."
"She certainly is. She's also old enough to be your
mother."
"I guess so. Man, I wish I were here for some reason
other than because her husband ..."
The cup of tea appeared beside Leslie's cheek, giving off
a warm and luscious aroma. "Because my husband died?"
Flo finished the sentence.
Ronnie choked; Flo handed him his water.
"My husband was a wonderful man. It will be a great

challenge for us to complete our small project without
him." She turned away for a moment, then turned back.
"But we shall."
Ronnie jumped into the work at hand. "What exactly
was Dr. Leung working on at the end?"
"We had submitted part of the HopperHunter's obstacle-
dodging software to Mr. Dante-Cortez for testing."
"Have you gotten the results back?"
"Yes. It worked quite well." Flo did not notice the look
of shock on Ronnie's face; that kind of software could not
possibly work well on first test. Leslie easily guessed the
thoughts behind Ronnie's expression: No one writes code
that good. Flo continued, "Of course, we had planned to
make a few optimizations. The responsiveness of the simu-
lated Hopper lagged when approaching a ridge crest."
Ronnie sipped his water. "What land of documentation
do you have for this stuff?"
"I am the documentation," Flo sang. She pointed at her
head. "It is all here. That is why we will work together."
She turned to Leslie. "I am sorry I cannot complete this
task on my own. I did not ... quite . . . leam enough to
create new software by myself."
Leslie shook his head. "Of all the things to worry about,
DAVID'S SLING                175
Flo, that's not one of them. I think Ronniell fill the
missing part of this team quite effectively."
Leslie listened to the two new partners as they spoke
together. The contrast struck him as garish—perhaps sim-
ilar to die one Amos might have seen when Leslie himself
spoke with Florence.
They agreed that they would continue to work there in
Flo's home, since the development system Amos had built
was unique. Leslie shook his head in amazement. Ronnie
didn't belong here, in this house filled with Amos's pres-
ence, and surely Flo knew it. Her pain at the thought
must be terrific, yet it remained submerged when she
spoke. Only her gauntness and a heaviness in her walk
that few would notice revealed her sorrow.
Les yearned to take Flo into another room, to talk with
her, to reach inside and caress her mind. Her loss in Amos
paralleled his own loss in Jan.
He did not attempt to console her. He knew he could
not reach behind her smile and her bright eyes, for an
unyielding differentness sheltered her. Les realized that
the house could yield to Ronnie's strange presence. Flo
might even redecorate, an affirmation of the reality of her
loss. She would adapt, brilliantly, outside that inner

differentness.                 '-
hi the meantime, Les saw hope that this unlikely collab-
oration would work. For the Sling's sake, it had to: on the
PERT chart outside his office, a blood-red stream of boxes
carved a grim scar across the body of the Sling.
Yurii smiled. Despite the harsh snow outside, despite
the gentle crumbling of the General Secretary across the
table, he felt at peace with the world. "Weve been so
successful negotiating with the Americans, I can't think of
anything else we would want to take away from them."
Sipyagin wheezed, then commended him. "Yurii, you
have outdone yourself this time. I can hardly believe what
you've wrought myself, even though I have always firmly
believed the Americans had die desire to commit suicide.
How did you talk them into this incredible agreement?"
Yurii shrugged; when one's victory was as stupendous as
this, one could afford humility. "I confess it hardly took
176 Marc Sttegler
any effort on my part other than the suggestion. They
wanted to surrender the one area in which they have
always had the ability to overwhelm us."
"Can it be that, deep within their souls, the Americans
are afraid of their own technology? They must be, despite
their endless parade of shiny new gadgets."
"Perhaps." Yurii frowned. "And yet, I cannot quite be-
lieve it. Perhaps the American politicians are afraid of
technology. In some important sense, American technol-
ogy does not belong to them. It belongs to the engineers
who create it, and the businessmen who sell it," He shook
his head. "Or their attitude could simply be pragmatic.
For the past several decades, the American power to
create technical wonders has not helped their military
machine. Why, even in the late 1980s, they were using
radios from the Korean war—radios with vacuum tubes in
them! I heard reports about American attempts to build
computerized command and control systems, while they
were depending on those radios for communications. It
was laughable."
The General Secretary chuckled deep in his throat.
Yurii shrugged. "Despite their technical wizardry, the
Americans make clumsy weapons."
"Except for their airplanes."
Yurii nodded. "Yes, their airplanes and their subma-
rines are very good indeed. But even in those areas they
manage to hurt themselves. They build machines so ex-
pensive that even the Americans, wealthy as they are,
cannot afford many of them." He paused, refocusing on
the question of why the Americans had made their latest

agreement. "Perhaps this treaty reflects a new American
understanding of how poorly their technology has served
them. Perhaps they have recognized this ongoing failure,
and have resigned themselves to it. Perhaps they would
have carried out the terms of the treaty even without our
signing it." He smiled. "Well, our signing certainly has-
tened the process."
"Soon we'll have no strong enemies. It's time for us to
start identifying targets of opportunity."
Yurii gestured a warning. "I agree that we should iden-
tify some targets. But remember that from this time for-
DAVID'S SLING                177
ward, the longer we wait, the weaker the Americans will
become. Why spend blood when patience will achieve the
same goals?"
Sipyagin rolled his lips impatiently. "I suppose you're
right. And yet it would be beautifiil to conclude this
struggle in my lifetime." He paused. "And I guess I'm still
suspicious. Will the Americans really follow through on
this treaty? Even now I can't believe that they could act so
foolishly."
"I'd fear they were up to something myself, were it not
for the effectiveness of our information-gathering system.
We've already received confirmation of massive disman-
tlings in the American military effort."
"Really? What juicy tidbit has the KGB found for us
now?"
Yurii laughed. "The KGB is not our best information-
gathering system, my comrade. The American news media
have found out for us,"
"Ah, of course."
Yurii rose to push the American video cassette home
inside a Japanese VCR. How wonderfully thoughtful their
enemies were, to supply these delightful machines!
Up came the image of a popular TV newsman. Yurii
asked, "How's your English th«se days? I can play it direct
or in translation."
Sipyagin waved a languid hand. "Ill manage," he said.
ZOOM. The camera closes in on BtU Hardie's nut-brown
face. This newscaster had amused Yurii a number of times
before. This time, however, something seems different; the
wild fire in Hardie's wide eyes has cooled. "President
Mayfield claims to have pulled off yet another coup in the
frenetic realm of global negotiations. Restating his devo-
tion to American-Soviet harmony, today he announced his
latest treaty, the Smart Weapons Ban."

"This man is popular in the United States?" the General
Secretary asked.
"He was tremendously popular several months ago. He
seems to have lost some of his following recently."
"He doesn't quite have the glitter I expected."
Yurii nodded. "Don't worry, Tm sure they'll replace
him shortly. They always do."
178 Marc Stiegler
CUT. The scene shifts to East Berlin. A line of pickets
encounters a line of East German soldiers—soldiers who
supposedly aren't allowed in East Berlin because of the
Awed Accords signed after World War II, but who oper-
ate there nonetheless. Bills voice takes a note of forebod-
ing. "The signing of the Smart Weapons Ban strikes an
odd note, considering the accusations streaming between
East and West. The clashes between rioters and soldiers in
East Germany reached a new height today. In a major
demonstration in East Berlin, two people are reported
dead and several others wounded. The Soviet Union has
denounced West Germany and the United States for sup-
porting the riots. AU NATO countries have denied any
involvement or assistance to the protesters whatsoever."
The General Secretary grumbled, "We're going to have
to take sterner measures with those Germans."
CUT. "Despite the growing unrest, however. Soviet and
American diplomats agreed that smart weapons should be
banned from Europe and from other areas of likely
American/Soviet conflict. In this context, smart weapons
are defined to be weapons that use wholly internal guid-
ance systems to find their targets. Retired Air Force Strat-
egist Leslie Evans noted that this definition lets most of the
Soviet smart systems deploy anyway, since their comput-
ers are too bulky and expensive to be placed inside the
weapons themselves. However, Secretary of State Semsnens
hailed the treaty as 'an extraordinary victory, which will
freeze another expensive and counterproductive arms race
in its tracks.'"
Yurii shook his head again in wonder. The only conclu-
sion he could draw was that the United States had given
up. Though they retained their ICBMs, their bombers and
their subs, they had chosen to give up their superpower
status.
ZOOM. "Though the treaty does not explicitly ban the
research and development of smart weapons, the Adminis-
tration sees the treaty as an opportunity to close down
numerous military RSxD prefects. At the top of the hit list
is the largest and least productive RfxD agency in the
country, an agency that has spent over a billion doSars in
the past decade without ever bringing a weapon system

DAVID'S SLING
179
successfully through an operational test. The FIREFORS
program office, and the twenty major programs controlled
by it, wiU be dismantled as quickly as federal lawyers can
cancel the contracts. For various technical and legal
reasons, this process will not be completed until mid-
January. Economic Advisor Pelino has stated that 'the
Smart Weapons Ban has made possible extraordinary sav-
ings in the defense budget. These savings significantly
improve our chances of seeing our deficit reduced in this
decade.' " But pauses. "There are many ways to view the
gains and losses implicit in the Smart Weapons Treaty. A
representative of the Zetettc Institute has also pointed out
that—"
The stereo speakers hissed with static; the tape con-
tained just a short clip from a longer discussion.
The General Secretary gazed at the monitor with won-
der, "They're really doing it, aren't they?"
"Yes, they really are."
Kira stepped to the threshold of Hilan Forstil's office
and paused there, reluctant to disturb the senator. Then.
annoyed with herself for her timidity, she set her shoul-
ders and crossed the room to stand by Hilan's conference
table.
He rose as she entered, nodded abruptly, and stepped
around the desk to greet her. "Please come in, Ms. Ev-
ans," he offered with a wave of his hand. "I'm pleased to
meet you."
"You, too," Kira replied, though she wasn't sure she
meant it. As far as Kira was concerned, this man had
betrayed them. She had come here only because Uncle
Nathan had assured her that Senator Forstil was their key
man in Congress, and Kira couldn't deny that they needed
congressional help.
As they sat down together at the deeply polished ma-
hogany table, Kira searched for clues to Forstil's makeup.
She felt a small shock at the barrenness of the room; it
seemed politically unreasonable. No coffee mugs from con-
tractors rested on his desk, no personal mottos adorned
the walls. Even the books on the shelves were studiously
neutral: encyclopedias, dictionaries, and the works of Greek
180
Marc Stiegler
philosophers gave no clue as to his religious preferences,
or his attitude toward technology, or his thoughts on
telecommuting. Kira wondered if all senators had offices
so carefully devoid of opinion.

Hilan sat patiently while she completed this inspection
of his life. When she looked back at him, his expression
shifted, as though he feared that she might see him in a
moment of vulnerability: he had been looking at her with
open wonder, which changed under her gaze to a smile of
stiff amusement. Kira could guess the cause of the open
wonder: Hilan had been struck by her resemblance to her
mother. "Can I get you anything?" he asked.
"No, I guess not. Did Nathan tell you why I came
here?"
Hilan nodded- 'To help me strategize ways to defeat the
ban on telecommuting."
Kira shook her head; she had thought she was in charge-
She pursed her lips. but reminded herself that it didn't
make any difference who was in charge, unless they devel-
oped mutually exclusive plans. At the moment, she had no
plans at all, though she had a few ideas. "Yes," she said, "I
came to discuss the ban on telecommuting."
"Great. Why don't we start with a look at the congres-
sional votes on the original bill. That's usually a good
starting point for determining who has been pressured,
and who has to be pressured, to overturn the decision."
Kira nodded, her throat tight with surprise. She had
wanted to recommend starting with an analysis of the vote
herself, but had rejected the idea, fearing it would lead to
a nasty confrontation too soon. Now, he had suggested it
himself.
Hilan reached into a cabinet and withdrew a pair of flat-
panel terminals, revealing for the first time a familiarity
with technology. The sight and touch of the beige plastic
gave Kira a feeling of reassurance; the somber wood decor
of this office felt stifling and lifeless.
Hilan's voice took on a bright animation as he spoke
about the men and women whose voting records scrolled
down the screen. "Porter voted for it because the DAW is
very strong in bis district; he didn't have much choice.
Shepard must have been gotten by somebody; he's a fol-
DAVID'S SUNG
181
lower. We'll deal with that later. Somebody got to Burrell,
too, and that's more worrisome. Bun-ell's no wimp—
there had to be heavy pressure to get him. Besides that,
he's the leader of his own caucus; he's important."
Hilan went through the whole list of votes, cataloging
the senators and representatives according to their alle-
giances, their beliefs, and their weaknesses. They very
rarely looked into the data base behind the table of votes.
Hilan carried a data base in his mind almost as detailed

and reliable as the data bases Daniel Wilcox kept on-line.
Finally, the scrolling list crossed the name she had
feared. As Hilan skipped over it without comment, Kira
punched the PAUSE button. "Wait," she said. She pointed
at the name of the missing person—one of the most pow-
erful members of Congress, who had voted for the ban:
HILAN FORSTIL. "You haven't told me why you voted
against the Institute."
Hilan looked her in the eye, then looked away, the line
of his jaw set in anger at forces beyond his control. He
reached into his pocket and pulled out a Swiss army knife,
the kind often carried by backpackers. He rubbed the
smooth surface as if it somehow reassured him. Kira re-
membered her mother's story of Hilan and the crevasse
high in the mountains and she ^wondered about its effect
on him. He spoke quietly. "I voted against the Institute
because I didn't have a choice."
"Oh, really." Kira couldn't keep the sarcasm out of her
voice.
"Oh, really. The unions did an extraordinary job of
keeping me in the dark until they had enough votes mus-
tered to push the ban through despite me. They knew I
would oppose it." He described the sequence of meetings
and agreements contrived by the unions to put the plan in
place while still keeping him in the dark- His description
of the events was spotty. He still didn't have a perfect
understanding of how they had arranged it. "But I'm fairly
sure they can't do it again—at least, not the same way.'
He smiled wolfishly. "I've acquired a few more spies since
they put the ban into effect." He shrugged. 'Anyway,
when they brought me an accomplished fact, I was in no
position to oppose it. Since the resurgence of the unions in
182 Marc Stiegler
the last decide, they're an important force in my state as
well. I can't vote against them just on impulse."
When Hilan looked back at her after this speech, Kira
had the feeling of being under the scrutiny of an eagle. He
countered, "As far as working against the Institute is con-
cerned, I might ask you why you've chosen to go into
business expanding and improving Wilcox-Morris's adver-
tising campaign. I've seen some of your ads. They're very
effective."
The compliment felt like a slap on the face, Kira blushed,
though Hilan's question was no different from the question
she had asked herself. But now, at last, she had a powerful
answer. "I went to work with Wilcox-Morris to find the
missing pieces in the puzzle you just described. If you've
been wondering how the unions were able to work com-
pletely around you, I know the answer. They did it with
the help of the tobacco companies." Kira launched into an

analysis of the ban, as seen through the viewpoint of the
Wilcox-Morris political machine. She had collected a vast
quantity of detailed information from the Wilcox-Morris
computers since that fateful night when Wilcox had con-
fronted her uncle. She even knew the status of the investi-
gation of her own background—they had not yet traced
her connection with the Institute, because her mother's
role in Zeteticism wasn't common knowledge. Jan had
never stood in the limelight. Nathan, as founder and presi-
dent of the Institute, had always been the focus of publicity.
With short brushstrokes, Kira painted the details of the
anti-telecommuting picture that Hilan had sketched from
bis own sources. As she spoke, Hilan nodded as connec-
tions fell into place. Again, for just a few moments, his
face lit up with wonder. "Thank you," he said as she
finished. My worries are much lighter, since you've re-
moved these ambiguities." He frowned. "Now that we
know what happened, all we have to do is figure out how
to undo it." And so Hilan went over the list again. This
time it was shorter. They had thrown out all the people
who were not critical—all the followers. Some of the criti-
cal men could be won over with persuasion. Some could
not be won at all: they believed for their own philosophical
reasons in the need to cripple technology.
DAVID'S SUNG               183
Others could not be won for practical reasons- The
representatives from North Carolina, for example, had no
choice but to follow the tobacco line, and the men from
Michigan had no choice but to follow the unions. "They're
puppets," Hilan explained, "and we can't cut the strings."
He brightened. "I'm a puppet, too, of course, and so are
tile rest of the people on mis list who didn't really want to
vote for this ban. But we couldn't fight it because there
were too many people pulling our strings. Now we have to
find a way for you to pull our strings."
Kira laughed. "I already know how to pull your strings,"
she said. 'I'm going to use a pressure group—a voter
block of such size and power that you can't wiggle without
our consent."
Hilan chuckled. "Delightful! Where will your voter block
come from?"
"From the networks. I'm going to assemble the biggest
conference in history—an electronic one—and we're going
to show the unions, and the tobacco companies, and the
politicians who's got the biggest, toughest, meanest orga-
nization in the valleyl" Her eyes blazed.
Hilan sat entranced, watching her. "Kira, I intend to
help you."
Kira relaxed suddenly, surprised to find she had clenched
her fist. "Anyway, we have a lot of supporters available."
"Ah, but are your supporters in the right places?" They

matched up the members of the Zetetic networking com-
munity with the key members of Congress.
When they were done, they had composed a plan that
would give them a majority vote in Congress. Hilan shook
his head. "I don't see a way of getting a two-thirds major-
ity, and Jim Mayfield will veto our repeal in an eyeblink.
He trembles every time the lobbyists come to visit." His
voice grew cold and bright at the same time. "Kira, how
soon can you hold your conference?"
"When do you want it?"
The Congressional elections are a week away."
Kira looked puzzled, then realized what mat could mean.
"If we can form a constituency fast enough, we can over-
turn them."
Hilan smiled.
184 Marc Stiegler
Kira shot up in her seat. "We can show them just how
dangerous our lobby can be, with just a week of organiz-
ing. We'll teach Mayfield to tremble, all right.' She
laughed—the tense laugh of a race car driver before the
opening gun. "You know, the unions are against telecom-
muting because they're afraid mi make it more difficult
for them to organize. Well, they're about to find out that
the networks—the same systems that make telecommuting
possible—make organizing easier."
Hilan shook his head. "Being a puppet will never be the
same. Even I tremble at the thought of dangling at the
end of your strings, Kira Evans."
She twitched her nose. "I promise to be gentle," she
replied, rising from the table.
"Your mother would be very proud," he whispered as
she departed.
January 8
To predict the future, you must first suc-
cessfully predict the past
—Zetetic Commentaries
Black lettering blinked against white blankness. LET
ACCURACY TRIUMPH OVER VICTORY. The words
melted, then returned at the top of the wall-sized decision
duel display. For just a moment Nathan hated the words,
though he himself had penned them. He had too many
emotional attachments in this duel—attachments to the
survival of the Sling project on the one hand, and to the
survival of the Institute on the other. The beat of his own
heart outpaced the slow beat of the black letters. As more
letters appeared beneath the cautionary words, Nathan

could feel them printing, not upon the screen, but upon
his eyes, as though he himself were the display screen
upon which they would etch this duel.
Nathan slumped into the left-hand duelist's chair. Briefly,
his hands slid across the smooth-worn surfaces of trackball
and keyboard in a caressing touch. Never before had he
dueled for such high stakes; never before had the Institute
faced the danger of fading into oblivion.
The new words listed the duel topic and positions. On
the left was the position Nathan would defend; CONTINUE
THE SLING PROJECT, USING THE INSTITUTE'S OP-
ERATING CAPITAL. On the right glared the opposing
stance: STOP WORK ON THE SLING PROJECT.
As president of the Institute and the largest single stock-
holder, Nathan had the power to enforce his own opinion.
There was nothing in the Zetetic viewpoints that argued
against such unilateral action; in every decision, a single
individual ultimately makes the choice. But the very in-
tensity of Nathan's desires bound him to die decision duel
analysis; this decision had to be the best possible. If he
concluded that the duel had produced the wrong answer,
185
186 Marc Stiegler
he would disregard it—but that was the least likely possi-
ble outcome-
Duels did not always produce accurate decisions, of
course. The Institute recognized three broad classes of
decisions, and three broad methods of decision-making:
engineering decisions, political decisions, and unresolv-
able decisions. Engineering decisions were made by find-
ing the correct, or best, answer. This was the best
decision-making methodology whenever possible, but of-
ten, human affairs proved too ambiguous for this wholly
rational analysis.
Political decisions were made by building an answer of
consensus. In difficult cases, the consensus decision might
be to let one particular man make a decision, but that was
a form of consensus nevertheless. Because political deci-
sion systems could generate decisions in more situations
than engineering decision systems, political systems typi-
cally gained preeminence over engineering. For the most
part, this arrangement worked well—except that too often,
the politicians made political decisions in situations where
engineering applied, usually with tragic consequences. The
key question was, how do you decide whether to use
engineering or politics to decide? Politicians all too often
decided to use politics.
Zeteticism had recognized an important truth: the choice
between politics and engineering is always an engineering
decison. The decision duel technique made its most im-
portant contributions on issues that looked and tasted po-

litical. but which were actually engineering issues at heart.
Even politics, weak though it was, could fail as a decision-
making system. In cases where bitter opponents could not
achieve consensus, unresolvable decisions went to the last,
least accurate, decision-making method; selection by force.
Ultimately, any problem could be addressed by warfare. It
was inefficient, but it was also effective. All one had to do
was pursue the combat fiercely enough. Too often in hu-
man history, military leaders had forgotten that the deci-
sion to use force must be made politically, just as politicians
had forgotten that the decision to use politics must be
made through engineering.
Nathan adjusted the sound level of his earphone. As in
DAVID'S SUNG
187
all well-designed engineering discussions, the primary pro-
ponents welcomed good ideas from all sources. Anyone in
the Institute could participate in this duel by communicat-
ing with the duelists, who were moderators for their re-
spective viewpoints, not stand-alone combatants. Nathan
could receive recommendations verbally through the ear-
phones, or digitally through the small displays that accom-
panied his keyboard.
He knew the duel had attracted a large audience. The two
rows of observer chairs beneath the dueling stations had
filled before his own arrival. Behind him, on an even higher
tier, Nathan could sense the neutral moderator's anxiety as
he counted the number of nationwide taps coming into the
room. The boy had just received his duelist's certification,
and he was one of the brightest and youngest graduates.
Nathan hoped fervently that he would receive many third
alternatives from the audience, for Nathan disliked both of
die official alternatives. Of course, he disliked the opposing
viewpoint even more than the viewpoint he himself defended.
Though the oversize display held his gaze, Nathan caught
a movement from the comer of his eye as someone took
the right-hand dueling chair. He looked to see who had
been chosen to be his opposing partner. Some of the older
certified Zetetic duelists had bee& reluctant to duel with
him. On the other hand, some of the younger ones had
shown an exuberant enthusiasm to oppose him—the mod-
em equivalent of facing down a famous gunslinger.
With a small shock, Nathan saw that none of the exuber-
ant gunslingers had gotten the chance—his dueling part-
ner was Leslie Evans.
Les gave him a quick laugh. "Boo, Nathan."
Nathan stared, speechless, and Les continued- "Let ac-
curacy triumph."
Nathan smiled, and nodded. They turned to the main

display and started listing their assumptions, then their
opening remarks.
Nathan summarized his position in the opening: The
sacrifice of the Zetetic Institute could make sense if the
alternative were the sacrifice of the United States. The
United States was indeed in danger of sacrificing itself; it
was in danger of sacrificing all of Western civilization.
188 Marc Stiegler
This danger resulted from the rising risk of war. The
Soviet Union had, in the past several years, repeatedly
used violence as a successful tool in global politics. It had
become confident of both its own strength and of the
efficacy of war. Meanwhile, the United States had with-
drawn psychologically from the world, but it had not with-
drawn physically: it still had vast though ineffectual numbers
of troops stationed around the world. This combination
was explosive. America's nuclear Sword of Damocles was
all that caused aggressive nations to move cautiously in
their dealings with it- And many people, notably the Sovi-
ets, had started to believe that America dared not use its
nuclear weapons; a sword so powerful that it would de-
stroy the wielder as well as the intended victim.
Yet the U.S. had not forsaken that too-powerful sword.
It had created the worst possible combination of circum-
stances. The people of America knew that they would have
to resort to nuclear weapons in a military crisis, but no one
outside the U.S. really behoved the Americans would do
so. Any rational analysis suggested that the United States
could no longer rely on nuclear threats—it had to achieve
a consistent global position without them.
The question of whether America should bring its troops
home from all over the world and return to isolationism
was interesting but not relevant: the Institute could not
force the country to isolationism even if it was a good idea.
But the Institute could, through the development of the
Sling's Hunters, guarantee that America remained strong
enough to Bght a victorious war without nuclear weapons.
Leslie's response granted most of these points. He made
two other observations, however. First, whereas the fail-
ure to complete the Sling might be important in saving
America's future, failure to reinvest the Institute's funds in
its own business would certainly destroy the Institute.
They popped open spreadsheets on both sides of the
screen and projected the cost of continuing the Sling Proj-
ect. The directive that had eliminated the FIREFORS pro-
gram office had fortunately allowed for graduated shutdown.
Currently, the Sling Project still proceeded under govern-
ment funding, but that funding would end in one more week.
Nathan had weaseled the mid-January cutoff from Charles
DAVID'S SUNG

189
Somerset in November, during a meeting that had left
Nathan feeling sorry for the FIREFORS director. The
dismantling of FIREFORS was destroying Somerset; he
had seemed disoriented and lost. In semi-coherent sen-
tences, Somerset had revealed that he had no job pros-
pects, either government or private. He could not keep up
his mortgage payments; he was selling his house. The
woman whom he sometimes dated had left him permanently.
Nathan had urged him to enter the Institute, to find a new
orientation for his life, but Nathan doubted that Somerset
had even heard his words, much less considered them.
Numbers filled the cells of the spreadsheets, and with
each entry, the dusky red digits in the bottom line turned
more grim. Leslie was right: full-scale development of the
Sling would bankrupt the Institute within a year, despite
Kira's and Hilan's repeal of the ban on telecommuting.
Nathan paused a moment and smiled at the way the
Institute and the networking community had flexed their
political muscles for the first time. They had held their
million-person conference two days before the Congres-
sional elections. In those last two days, the pollsters and
the politicians fell, flattened by the steamroller of votes
that shifted across party lines, all in districts where stub-
born proponents of the ban held seats. The networking
community overthrew two sure-to-win incumbents, and
after the elections, the entire American political machine
understood a new force had arrived. Some politicians bowed
with horror, some bowed with pleasure, but all bowed.
Had that political power play failed, the Sling Project
would have bankrupted the Institute in three months. It
was a sobering vision.
Now Nathan described his plan for salvation of both the
Sling and the Institute; they would sell the Sling System
to the government after they had completed development.
Here Leslie drew up a scathing collection of counterex-
amples, drawing reams of data from the nationwide data
bases cross-connected to the duelists' network,
In peacetime, the American military almost never ac-
cepted advanced technology from outside the DOD's own
bureaucracies. His most devastating example came from
the 1980s. During that decade, the Northrop Corporation
190
Marc Stiegler
had spent millions of dollars to build the F-20. The con-
cept was that the F-20 should be operationally comparable
to the F-16, yet far cheaper. Northrop had succeeded.
But Northrop had failed. For years thereafter, the Air
Force bad successfully fought off all arguments to buy

even a handful of F-20s. Northrop, and the rest of the
industrial world, had learned the lesson: never try to
develop a product for the DOD unless the DOD paid for
it up front.
Illis was a lesson the Zetetic Institute could not ignore,
The United States government simply could not be trusted
to buy a better idea; indeed, it could be trusted to reject a
better idea.
The debate continued, but Nathan could not circumvent
Leslie's objections. They explored the reasons why partic-
ular projects and ideas died while waiting for the bureau-
cracies to recognize them. They developed part of a theory
of institutional blindness. But Leslie forced Nathan to
reject all strategies based on victory through bureaucratic
manipulation: the lesson of Northrop struck too deeply.
Nathan returned to the spreadsheet windows, developing
scaled-down rates of Sling development that allowed the
Institute to hold steady in the face of the tobacco compa-
nies' continued guerrilla warfare. The most reasonable
Sling Project plan slashed the software development team
in half and left no money for ongoing hardware prototyping.
It would take years, perhaps a decade, to complete the
project.
Nathan felt feverish. Though he had no engineering
explanation for his suspicions, he feared that the final clash
between the United States and the Soviet Union would
occur before the Sling could be ready. He tried to resign
himself to living with that fear.
The thick gray band running like a seam down the
center of the dueling screen split, as though the seam
itself had a seam. The split opened into a window of
reasonable size. The neutral moderator, who entered third
alternatives onto the display when he received them, must
have gotten a good idea from the audience.
The third alternative read, "Though the president has
banned all development of smart weapons, he has not
DAVID'S SUNG               191
banned all regular research and development throughout
the Defense Department. Many key men know how im-
portant it is to develop better methods of defending
ourselves."
Nathan heard Leslie chortle with delight as the names
of some of those key men rolled down the window. Fol-
lowing each name came a synopsis of the person's official
charters, and of his private agendas. "We can sell parts of
die SkyHunter development as research for recon planes.
We can sell parts of the HopperHunter as studies of
advanced personnel carriers. We can sell most of the
HighHunter as a new pop-up satellite launch vehicle."
The third alternative continued; "Most of the men who
fund these efforts will know our purpose. But they will,

through every act of omission possible, conceal the real
purpose from others. And even if enemies of the project
find out about our activities, they will be powerless to stop
us—every one of these small contracts will be perfectly
legitimate in its own terms."
Nathan raised a last objection, though he was confident
the creator of this third alternative could address it. "We
have no one who knows how to maneuver through these
political circles with the needed dexterity." Leslie made
die same point on the right halfLof the screen.
"Of course die Institute has die right person." The
response appeared on the center section.
Nadian shifted his attention to the front row of the
audience, where a balding man rose suddenly. He turned
to Natiian widi a maniacal smile pasted across his face—a
smile of defiance, of vengeance. Seeing him, Natiian re-
turned die defiance with a smile of his own.
The man stepped around die audience, and Nadian and
Leslie both rose to greet him. Nadian offered a nod of
gratitude—a salute of sorts—to dlis newest member of die
Zetetic Institute: "Welcome," he said. "Welcome to the
team."
"Thank you," Charles Somerset replied witii a quick,
surprised laugh.
THE WARRIORS
April 18
To win a war takes billions; to lose a war
takes all you've got
—Military aphorism
Nell studied President Mayfield with the professional
calm and human horror of a psychologist listening to the
confessions of a rapist. President Mayfield sat surrounded
by the most advanced array of image projectors, monitors,
and displays in the world. She could see that he refused to
believe any of them. He refused.
CUT. Bright orange flames flare across the screen as jet
fighters shriek from tree-top height in the background.
Exploding ammunition supplies pound in the foreground.
Through occasional gaps in the twisting smoke, the roofs
of a smaU German town appear, oddly solid and squat in
the red Ugftt of HeU.
Other cameras, computers, and panels sputtered terse
messages throughout the room, communicating both the
stupendous scale and meticulous detail of the slaughter.
Mayfield never glanced at them. The tiny yet terrifying
television screen hypnotized the presfdent, as similar screens
hypnotized millions of other men, women, and children
throughout the country.

CUT. The screen sweeps to a picture of But Hardie,
concerned yet calm. "We haw an extraordinary bulletin
for aS. our viewers. You just witnessed scenes from the
sneak attack launched by the Warsaw Pact against West-
ern Europe just minutes ago. It isn't World War III yet. It
isn't Armageddon. But it could be."
Nell sat apart from the president, in a part of the room
devoid of monitors. An invisible boundary separated the
information-gathering area from the decision-making area
of die White House Situation Room, like the boundary
that separates Ac audience from the performer, the spec-
tator from the athlete.
195
196
Marc Stiegler
ZOOM OUT. A high-altitude picture settles on the screen.
Brilliant thin lines overlay the photo, showing the national
boundaries of Europe. 'We have enhanced this image,
taken from the French Spot IV satellite, to highlight the
size of the attack. As you can see even from thousands of
miles away, virtually the entire Soviet, Czech, and East
German armies have mobilized and moved across the bor-
der into West Germany."
Flashes of terror and calm alternated in Nell's mind.
She dared not panic, she knew. She could bear to see the
displays and the images of war; these things were terrible
but not mindshattering. But she could not bear to see the
empty disbelief on Jim Mayfield's face. She looked away to
regain control of her pounding heart.
ZOOM IN. The image speeds past the viewer, reaching
into West Germany, expanding the view of the border
area. Now, brilliant pinpoints of light aU along the border
fight with the artificial overlay as the brightest parts of
the display. BtU drones on. "The thousands of small dots
you now see in West Germany are the flashes from artil-
lery blasts. Never in history have so many cannons fired
so continuously."
Nell stared at the tiny clots of death, fighting to remem-
ber that these blinding explosions came from mere con-
ventional explosives. She shuddered, thinking about how
those points of light would blossom if the armies started
using nukes.
CUT. "A Soviet spokesman stated that West German
agitation had incited the East German riots. Because the
Soviet Union could not get any satisfactory action from the
West German government, their only recourse was to
destroy the so-called 'infectious agents' themselves. The
spokesman pledged that all Soviet forces would stop at the
Rhine River. He further stated that Denmark had been
invaded, strictly for limited, tactical purposes, and that

those troops would be withdrawn as soon as the German
issue was resolved."
With carefully even breathing, Nell addressed the pres-
ident. "Jim. Jim, turn off the TV. We have decisions to
make."
Earl Semmens sat next to Nell, as if huddling close to a
DAVID'S SUNG
197
campfire. The Secretary of Defense had been excluded
from this meeting—a situation that might have struck Nell
as odd, except that Mayfield showed such active hostility
toward the man. She had wondered earlier why she her-
self had been summoned. Now she understood as May-
field followed her orders, clicking the TV off.
What else could she do to help in this situation? Jim
surely expected her to recommend drastic measures. Faced
with his unyielding platitudes for years, she had found
herself trapped in the role of unyielding hawk. She had
never succeeded in demonstrating for him the difference
between a hawk and a warmonger,
Now she had her opportunity. For once, Jim would be
pleasantly surprised to hear her agree with his anti-military,
anti-confrontational position. No matter how hideously the
Soviet forces scarred Europe, she knew as well as he did
that America dared not start a nuclear war.
With a twist of pain, Mayfield whimpered, "They can't
attack us. They can't."
Nell paused a moment, having difficulty accepting May-
field's rejection of reality. "Of course they can. They are."
"We have a treaty." The president's face flickered for
just a moment, from disbelief to hatred, then back.
"Jim, in the past, the Soviets, have attacked Czechoslo-
vakia, Afghanistan, and Poland—and, Jim, those places
were run by their friends." Nell realized she sounded like
the one-note warmonger again. How did Mayfield always
do this to her? With a shrug, she offered counterpoint. "Of
course, we did similar things in Vietnam. Treaties are
political tools. We've always known that." She stressed the
ending of her sentence with sudden worry: Mayfield had
always known that treaties were tools, hadn't he?
The soft, curved lines of Mayfield's mouth straightened.
"But we have a—" he stopped on a sob. "All our treaties.
They made life better for both of us. Why have they
thrown them away?"
Nell shook her head helplessly. "Germany, I guess. Jim,
we're dangerous to the Soviets, even when we don't do
anything. Just by existing, we create a constant threat to

their empire and their ideology."
His eyes wandered. "My God, what will the polls say?"
198 Marc Stiegler
he asked quietly. Sudden anger shattered his smooth face,
like a hurtled rock shattering a windshield. "They lied to
us."
Nell sighed. "Of course."
"We have to teach them not to lie."
Nell sat forward with new alertness. She had never seen
or heard Mayfield quite like this; this was no time for
surprising new behavior. Cautiously, she asked, "How,
Jim? How should we teach them?"
"Well nuke the mothers!"
"All-out nuclear war?" Nell shuddered in disbelief.
Mayfield looked her in the eye, then looked away. "No,
of course not. We'll shoot just one, just to let them know
we're serious. That'll look good."
Nell forced herself to breathe. From the corner of her
eye she could see that Semmens looked as scared as she
felt. "If we shoot just one, what will they do? They'll nuke
us back. At least one, probably more—to show us that
they're serious. You know that, Jim."
"We can't stand around as if we were helpless^' May-
field fumbled at his inner jacket pocket, brought out the
Gold Codes card. "Get Johnson." Johnson carried the
"football"—the device used to select among the many nu-
clear options.
Nell sat rooted in her chair. Semmens twitched several
times, then froze in numb paralysis. Nell spoke with the
overly calm voice of a nurse talking a suicidal patient back
from a seventh-story window ledge. "Jim. Jim, think about
what you're doing."
"No!" Mayfield leaped from his chair. "Don't you see
that that's what they're counting on? They expect us to
think so long and hard about all the possible consequences
that we'll be paralyzed with fear."
"Jim—"
"Shut up! We can't let them scare us now! We have
to—" As he swept across the room, the floor slipped
suddenly out from beneath him. His head thumped dully
against the shiny tiled floor.
"Jim!" Nell jumped from her chair, then knelt beside
the gasping president; Earl followed. "What's wrong?"

DAVID'S SUNG               199
His only answer was a pair of explosive gasps as his eyes
bulged from their sockets.
Through die shock, Nell realized that Mayfield had a
more serious problem than a bump on the head. She
remembered his periodic wince, his occasional clutch at
his chest, his fear of doctors. She flew toward the door.
"I'll get the doctor."
Earl rubbed Jim's head helplessly. "Jim!"
Another gasp. "Kill the mothers," Jim coughed.
Nell stopped in mid-flight. Images flashed in her mind,
each too brief to capture fully—a series of flashbulbs pop-
ping with stroboscopic speed.
She remembered her first trip to Washington—a trip by
bus from Bennettsville, South Carolina. It was her senior
year; this was the senior-class trip. She remembered her
friends' laughter as they danced through the traffic. They
formed a terrifying, uncontrolled weave of high-speed cars
and teenagers, running to reach the Tidal Basin amidst the
monuments. She remembered how she, too, had laughed
with her friends, walking beneath the trees clad in white
and pink blossoms, till they reached the bottom of the
white marble steps of the Jefferson Memorial. She remem-
bered her moment's pause there, and the hallowed still-
ness that grew deep within he».
She remembered her sober walk to the top of those
steps. She remembered standing by the statue of Jefferson
himself in the center of the dome. She remembered look-
ing up. High overhead, Jefferson's words encircled her,
suffusing through her as she read.
m:
With a nudge at her best friend. Lisa, she had pointed
to the beginning of the inscription. "Isn't that a great
thought?"
Lisa turned away from John, giggling. "What? Oh, yeah.
But ya know, I heard he owned slaves. I'll bet he didn't
even believe it when he said it."
"I'll bet be did believe it. I know I believe it," Nell
replied simply.
But Lisa had already rushed off after John. Nell stood
alone, turning slowly as her lips moved in a silent affirma-
tion of Jefferson's vow: I have sworn, upon the altar of
Cod, eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over
200
Marc Stiegler

the mind of twin. She had felt a bond across the centuries
to the man whose purpose she now shared.
The flashbulbs skipped across the years to her last con-
versation with a man she had once admired, a man who
had been her employer for many years.
Philip had told her about the contract for the National
Person Identification System for Egypt. Philip had just
won the contract, the biggest job in his company's history.
The success was doubly important because of a slight kink
in the company's current situation: they had just lost their
two other largest contracts. Egypt's ID system had saved
them from bankruptcy.
Nell had studied the happy, almost carefree lines of her
superior's face with resignation. "I will not work on this
job," she had told him.
"What?" Philip had continued to smile, still reveling in
the salvation of his company.
"I will not work on this job."
He had snapped his chair upright. "Why not?"
"Philip, it is immoral to build an ID card system for the
Egyptian government. If we help them track the move-
ments of all their citizens, you know what they'll use it
for—to clamp down on every person they don't like."
Philip had been an engineer; he had an engineer's hon-
esty. "Granted. But it wril also be used for good purposes,
like maintaining people's medical records so that in an
emergency, they can get proper treatment, no matter
where they are."
Nell shook her head. "With every invention, there are
both good and bad results. But the occasional good use of
this system comes nowhere near to compensating for the
thousands of abuses it will allow the government to com-
mit against its own citizens."
Philip had looked away to collect his arguments. "Nell,
you've worked with us on fundamentally evil things be-
fore. You've worked on weapons of tremendous destruc-
tive power. Why are you having this sudden attack of
morality?"
Nell had paused. "You know, I would not object to
developing weapons for the Egyptians. Weapons can be
used in two different ways: they can be used to harm a
DAVID'S SUNG               201
nation's citizens, but they can also be used to ward off
enemies, Philip, this ID card system can really only be
used for harm." She had sighed. "I'm not even sure we
should have a system like this in the United States. And
the Egyptian government is far more dangerous to its
citizens than our government is to us."
Phil had sat quietly. Nell could see that many words

came to him, but none of them quite fit.
"Philip, I'm sorry. But I took a vow many years ago."
Slowly, succinctly, Nell repeated the words of Jefferson.
"Philip, you're asking me to create the kind of system that
1 swore to destroy. You're asking me to increase the weight
of the burden I'm striving to throw down. I will not do it."
The Hashbulbs in Nell s mind winked out. She remem-
bered the man dying on the floor—the man who could
destroy the world; the man who now refused to think of
consequences.
Nell understood that you could pay too high a price in
the fight against tyranny. Why fight against tyranny, if the
people you vowed to free died in the process?
Slowly, with the syrupy grace of underwater ballet, Nell
turned back to the Secretary of State. "Let's get him some
water first." She spoke so slowly, it felt as though she was
in a movie shown from a projector that needed the speed
reset.
Earl looked up at her with pale horror. He opened his
mouth, but no words came as his expression transformed
with understanding. A single short gasp punctuated the
silence, then died. "Yes, water," he choked out.
With robotic precision, Nell stepped to the desk, re-
trieved the water pitcher, and went to the president's
side. His face and hands had turned a purplish gray. She
paused a moment, then said, "I don't think the water will
help. He needs a doctor."
"I think you're right."
Nell turned slowly, then picked up speed as she ran to
the door. "The president's having a heart attackl Get the
doctor!"
A dozen men hurried into action. Nell crossed quietly to
the place where the Gold Codes card lay on the tiled floor.
She picked it up.
202 Marc Stiegler
Pale blue skies, deep blue seas, and an occasional crest
of white foam greeted Admiral Billingham as he gazed
through his binoculars. The waters were as calm as they
ever got in the north Atlantic.
He turned slowly, observing the proper placement of
each ship in his Oeet: the frigates in the lead, the cruisers
port and starboard. Behind him, he knew, a similar pat-
tern held, though he could not see the ships from his
battle management center.
The binoculars themselves were anachronisms. He could
see his forces—not only die ships fore and aft, but the
aircraft as well—arrayed on the wall-sized, computerized

battle board. But the battle board only gave him facts; it
could not give him the feel of his fleet.
He glimpsed the Bre and smoke of an F-26 Cheetah
catapulting from the deck below before he returned to his
batUe analysis. His ship, the Nimitz, jerked ever so slightly
as she hurled the Cheetah into the light blue sky. A chin
ran through him. It was a beautiful day for a war.
The admiral still couldn't quite believe they were at war
with Russia, even though his fleet bad struck one of the
first naval blows. An Alfa-class submarine had come clip-
ping across SOSUS IV on a direct intercept course with
his flagship. It was a foolish thing to do; the Alfas were so
noisy you could track them halfway across the ocean.
Clearly, the sub's commander had counted on driving so
deep and fast that the American torpedoes could go nei-
ther deep enough nor fast enough to hurt him.
So Billingham had sent a pair of ancient, battered P3
patrol planes out, with half a dozen of the fast, new deep-
diving Mark n homing torpedoes. The submarine became
permanently quiet.
A soft bell sounded. Ensign Pletcher turned to him.
"Sir, the Brits have identified a regiment of Backfire bomb-
ers coming across the gap south of the Faeroe Islands. It
looks like they're coming toward us."
The admiral nodded. "Are the Brits going to take care of
them?"
"They don't know if they can, sir. They're scrambling
against a bomber attack on Heathrow right now."
DAVID'S SUNG               203
"I see. So the question is, which attack is a diversion?
Let's see what Batty recommends," he said. They turned
to the battle board.
Batty was the name of the on-board battle management
computer, die machine that ran everything in the room.
Over a hundred of the best software and engineering
minds in the United States had dedicated years to the task
of bringing Batty to life. Dozens of innovative products
benefiting both civilian and military projects could have
been developed by this unusually bright and energetic
team; instead, all efforts had gone to molding the Battle
Management System. If Batty proved ineffectual, a tre-
mendous national resource—the minds that had created
the system—would have been wasted.
But Batty had entered service as a spectacular success.
It had shown itself to be one of the rare miracles of
military technology. It was modern, it was efficient, it did
everything it was designed to do very well indeed. It was
even flexible. The developers had known from the start
that no commander would accept the advice or decisions

of a computer programmed by landlocked engineers. No
commander would agree with any "optimal" strategy cho-
sen by some military board of "experts."
So the designers wisely avoided that approach. Batty
had started operation with a clean slate. It had learned
strategy and tactics from Admiral Billingham himself. It
might not be as creative as the admiral when faced with
unique situations, but for the most part, it used the best
ideas the Admiral had ever devised.
When Billingham first met Batty, he had wondered why
anyone would bother to build such a perfect mimic. Why
not just let the admiral make his own decisions? But after
the second fleet exercise, Billingham understood the an-
swer. Batty was fast. Batty made the decisions in seconds
that Billingham would have made if he had had several
hours to game out the alternatives.
So together. Batty and Billingham had outmaneuvered
and outgunned the rest of the navy in exercises again and
again, though the competition was getting tougher as the
other carriers received Batty's sibling systems. Together,
Batty and Billingham seemed invincible.
204 Marc Stiegler
And now they had a real enemy to outgun. Enemy
bombers swept toward them at the speed of sound. Fortu-
nately, Batty worked at close to the speed of light.
Batty opened a conversation window on the battle board.
Recommendations appeared. The plan called for a soft
redeployment of the nine patrolling Cheetahs that formed
a loose circle around the fleet, shifting six of them east-
ward far enough to meet the attackers. But this would not
be enough of itself. Batty also recommended launching
four planes to intercept and chop up the regiment before
they reached this standard patrol. Batty listed out the
calculations that drove this conclusion, the probabilities of
kill, the radius of intercept, the radius of enemy missile
launch, the amount of time the patrol would have to fight
before the Backfires launched their missiles, the probabil-
ity of a successful hit on the Nimitz by one of those
missiles. BiUingham nodded in approval. After scrambling
four more fighters, it would take some time to lift addi-
tional aircraft against a second threat, but what kind of
threat could arise that suddenly? Even a second regiment
of Backfires passing by England couldn't get close enough
fast enough to be dangerous.
The four fighters lifted off and headed toward the bomb-
ers. They were still well out of range when the Backfires
mysteriously turned around and headed home. Pursuit
was out of me question; the interceptors were at the edge
of their range.
"Hal" Admiral BiUingham muttered. "Now the big ques-
tion is. were they gun-shy? Or were they a diversion?"

Ensign Fleteher looked over at him. "What was that, sir?"
"Never mind," the admiral replied.
Another soft bell sounded, this time a warning, rather
than an alert. Billingham looked up at the section of the
wall Batty now lit with new information. Admiral BuUngham,
Batty explained, recent satellite photos suggest that a regi-
ment ofBlackjack bombers has disappeared from their
airfield near Murmansk. These may be the bombers that
the Soviet Union recently modified for stealth missions. I
recommend sending a second E2 north to search for them.
"Yes!" Billingham yelled. "Ensign, launch that E2
immediately."
DAVID'S SLING                205
Fleteher looked up. "Yes, sir."
Billingham shook his head in amazement. The missing
Blackjacks were probably not part of a sneak attack on the
Nimitz; more likely, they were beating the hell out of
some poor Norwegian target. But had they not had Batty
watching with a world-girdling hookup to sensors and data,
such an attack could have been very dangerous. As it was,
Batty was already routing the Cheetahs back to their nor-
mal loitering positions. In minutes, the fleet would be
folly rearranged to meet such a Blackjack threat.
But even as they propped a second E2 early warning
airplane, another alert went off—a harsh bell of immediate
danger. The E2 circling overhead had just picked up some
dim reflections. They were almost certainly reflections
from the missing Russian airplanes.
How had they flown so far without being detected? The
admiral couldn't believe it. There were hundreds of sensor
systems on Iceland and Greenland that had a shot at them
as they came through the Denmark strait. He could see on
the map, even without Batty's new highlighting, that that
was their probable course.
The admiral now became a spectator. The enemy was
too close to be handled by human decision-making re-
flexes. Batty ordered more Cheetahs to veer to intercept-
ing paths while she brought the three closest patrol fighters
together for a combat run. As the additional interceptors
veered, however, Batty and BiUingham both knew that
additional interceptors were probably wasted. The Black-
jacks would be in range to launch their missiles before the
extra Cheetahs could arrive.
Furthermore, this detour for the Cheetahs would con-
sume foel. They could not return to the carrier; they
would nave to ditch in the ocean. Normally, such a waste
of fighters would seem insane.
But the Blaclqack's missiles gained terrific accuracy when
launched from closer range. Batty understood that the

enemy bombers had to be forced to launch from the
greatest possible distance. Otherwise, there would be no
carrier for any Cheetahs to return to.
The attacking patrol planes came into firing range. As
206 Marc Stiegler
the battle had moved out of Billingham's control a few
minutes earlier, it moved out of Batty's control now.
The Blackjacks would fire their missiles while cruising
well beyond the range of the fleet's surface-to-air missiles.
Hence, only the three Cheetahs would be able to shoot at
the bombers before they launched their attack. No new
strategies or tactics could alter the next series of events.
The whole encounter collapsed to a game one could play
with dice. With cold precision. Batty printed out the
results of the fight before the first shot was fired.
Number of Blackjacks: 24
Km rate/or the Cheetahs: 25%
Surviving Blackjacks: 18
Number of missiles per Blackjack: 6
Total missiles: 108
Kill rate for surface-to-air missiles against missiles: 7.5%
Surviving missiles: 100
Success rate for electronic counter-measures and decoys.-40%
Missiles on-target: 60
KsQ, rate for point-defense guns and rockets: 45%
Missile hits: 33
Probable number of hits required to incapacitate Nimitz:12
Probable number of hits required to sink Nimitz: 21
Percent overkill used to destroy Nimitz: 57%
Admiral Billingham saw at last a serious defect in the
Battle Management System computer. Batty couldn't sum-
marize the results in human terms; it couldn't understand
its own calculations-
Batty didn't realize that they would all die-
Within the hour, over five billion dollars, 40,000 man-
years of human labor, and 1,000 valiant American seamen
sank forever beneath the gently lapping waves.
April 22
The end of the Industrial Age saw the

creation of the largest, most effective kSl-
ing machine in history: the Soviet Army.
The individual rationalist would necessar-
ily run to escape, fortunately, free men
of the Industrial Age were not half so
rational as they were stubborn.
—industrial Age Societies
A Historical Perspective
Nathan looked at the president. She stood in sunlight,
feeing him. The bay windows to her left flooded the room
with brightness that splintered as it touched her shoulder,
that cascaded to the floor and returned, reflected in her
hazel eyes. It struck Nathan as unnatural that the Presi-
dent of the United States should be beautiful. Then it
struck him that nothing could be more natural.
Finally, he realized that much of her beauty was a
creation of his own mind. Her silhouette stretched too
long and thin. Her nose hooked'Just enough to please the
nation's cartoonists. At this moment', as she squinted past
the glare of sunlight to gaze back at Nathan, tense lines
radiated from the comers of her eyes. She was not, by
some objective scrutiny, beautiful.
Yet when she shook her head, loose strands of hair
waved gaily, in exuberant contrast to her tightly pulled
bun. And her voice, though serious, held confidence—the
confidence of a woman who sees a brighter future, for she
will make it brighter. "Mr. Pilstrom, the senator tells me
you have a bunch of wild ideas. He thinks some of them
might save Europe."
Nathan chuckled, crossing the room to avoid the sun-
shine's glare. "You have summarized the situation with
clarity. Madam President."
Her eyes narrowed for a moment; she was not yet
207
208 Marc Stiegler
accustomed to the honorific. She replied, "Hilan has told
me a bit about your Sling Hunters, just enough to tanta-
lize me. Frankly, they sound like excellent toys. The big
question is: can they work in combat?"
"I don't know. But I do know that our alternatives are
few and bleak."
'True enough." She gazed into the distance, as if at a
field filled with corpses. "It's too late to use tactical nu-
clear weapons to defend Germany. We'd kill more of our
own people than we'd kill of theirs. So in the absence of a
miracle, we have only two choices. We can surrender
Europe, or we can drop a nuke on the Soviet Union." Her
eyes shifted back to Nathan. "At least if we surrender
Europe, we know exactly how great the loss will be."

"Yes." The simple precision of her words pleased Na-
than. Obviously, she had learned in her own ways and her
own time how to filter the thousands of facts, theories,
opinions, and rumors that assaulted an American presi-
dent. She had extracted the fundamental points; only rele-
vance remained when she spoke.
Nathan tried to match her. "The third alternative is a
miracle—and the Sling is about the only magic box left.
Let me see what rabbits I can pull out for you." Nathan
inserted a videotape into the president's system and started
Ae simulations of Hunters in action. He gave her the
speech that he had once given Hilan Forstil.
Nell nodded with quick understanding from time to
time. At the end she held up two fingers. 'Two questions.
Clearly, your Hunters qualify as a potential miracle. But
are they miracle enough? Our forces are now scattered in
helpless little clusters; I'm not even sure we can get the
HopperHunters to the battlefield, because our logistics
collapsed along with the front lines. Our people no longer
know where the battlefield is. They are no longer sure
where they themselves are." She crossed to the empty
table by the bookshelves and sat down.
Nathan joined her. "I don't know if the Hunters are
enough of a miracle. They may no longer be adequate,
even assuming they perform brilliantly—and there will
surely be some problems when they first go into the field.
But let me point out that the Sling Project is the land of
DAVID'S SUNG               209
miracle that can make the difference. With the Sling sys-
tem, we are talking about a quantum leap—the transition
from an Industrial Age system to an Information Age sys-
tem. That jump is every bit as great as Ae jump that
mankind made in going from the Agricultural Age to the
Industrial Age.
"Let me draw an analogy. Suppose we could put a
single Industrial Age weapon into me middle of an Agri-
cultural Age battle. For example, suppose we dropped an
M60 tank into the Battle of Thermopylae. Who would win?"
Nell wrinkled her nose. "Whoever had the tank would win."
"Exactly." Nathan pounced on her words. "Even though
Ae Spartans were outnumbered by more Aan ten to one, if
they had that one Industrial Age weapon, they would win."
He tapped Ae table top. "Similarly, a single Informa-
tion Age weapon could decide any Industrial Age battle,
even in Ae face of a ten-times-more-powerful enemy.
What good is an army, if it does not know where to go?
What good is an army, if it can no longer process enough
information to make decisions? That is what an Informa-
tion Age weapon would do to an army. That is what Ae
Sling Project is all about." NaAan could feel his whole

body pulsing wiA Ae strengA of his convictions. He
realized he had lost control ofhis^enAusiasm, even as Nell
gestured in mock surrender.
"I see your point," she said. "My second question is Ae
more difficult of Ae two, however: can you complete Ae
project in time?"
' I don't know," Nathan answered with dull sorrow.
"We've collected Ae Sling team outside Ae Yakima Firing
Range to work as fast and as hard as they can."
"Does it make sense to add more people to the team? Is
Aere anyone—anyone in Ae country—whom you'd like to
have wiA you at Yakima?"
Nathan shook his head. "No, it's too late to add people."
He chuckled again and gazed at Nel] wiA pleasure. "Madam
President, I'm surprised that you're asking about adding
people, rather Aan demanding it. Most politicians and
businessmen don't understand how dangerous it is to add
technical staff at the last minute when you're creating a
new system. Adding people works so well when duplicat-
210 Marc Stiegler
ing copies of old systems that they find it difficult to
understand how harmful even the brightest added people
can be."
"I've worked with engineers before," Nell replied drily.
"I know they work best in small teams." Her eyes nar-
rowed. "And I know how much effort it takes to go from a
system that almost works to a system that does work."
Nathan nodded. "Exactly. So we return to the question,
can we be done in time?" He took a deep breath. "How
much time have we got? Good as my people are, deter-
mined and driven to succeed as they may be, I can't
believe we can have something useful in less than a week."
His voice shrank, fearing the answer to his next question.
"Do we have a week?"
Nell shrugged. "Perhaps. Even though we've been scat-
tered and mutilated, our men are still fighting. Jesus,
they're fighters." Her eyes glistened. Nathan remembered
the regular reports coming across the Atlantic of incredible
stands being made by once-ordinary soldiers. "Fortunately,
the Soviets are neither gods nor demons. They've made
mistakes, too." Her smile might have chilled an iceberg.
"At the beginning of the war, there were only a handful of
railroads that could carry heavy military supplies to Ger-
many from the Soviet Union. And their fuel came via the
oil pipelines that Europeans built for them 20 years ago.
Well, the railroads are wrecks now, as are the pipelines.
Supplies barely trickle across the border to their troops in
Germany. And their whole strategy is based on lots of
supplies,"
"So we have some time,"

"Only a little." Nell responded sharply to the sound of
relief in Nathan's voice. "Perhaps enough."
Nathan swallowed. "So you'll back the Sling Project?"
"Yes, granting one more condition." She closed her
eyes, and for a moment, the lines of worry lifted from her
face. Nathan stared raptly at the moment's vision of tran-
quility. When she opened her eyes again, they held laugh-
ter, the joy of a fond mother humoring a child. "The
commanders of our armed forces aren't very happy with
the idea of tossing an untried weapon into the middle of
the battlefield."
DAVID'S SUNG
211
"I can hardly blame them. I don't like the idea myself."
"I'm glad you see their point of view. Anyway, they're
willing to go along—they're willing to grasp at any straws
now—but they want the last chop on sending these things
to the field."
Nathan laughed. "I'm not surprised. Madam President,
the military organization is carefully designed to prevent
men from grasping at straws. The American military has
rarely achieved its victories with great strokes of bril-
liance. Few armies ever have. The failure of just one
brilliant stroke could cost you more than a dozen brilliant
strokes could gain. Cautious movements have historically
kept men alive longer; and if you kept your men alive long
enough, you usually won."
"I suppose so. Anyway, the major general we're sending
should be helpful as well. If he were just a judge and jury,
I wouldn't have let the Army foist him on you. He's a
brilliant tactician, I'm told, as well as an able program
manager. And he is very fair." She smiled. "Hes also a
skeptic about gadgetry. If the Sling passes his inspection,
we'll have a winner."
Nathan laughed at the propriety of having a skeptic pass
Judgment on a Zetetic project. "We'll do our best to keep
him entertained. I look forward to meeting him."
Nell laughed. "I suspect you're lying," she said, "but it's
a gallant lie, nonetheless." She rose, offering Nathan her
hand in dismissal. "I hope the next time we meet, we'll
have more pleasant prospects to discuss."
A mirror hung in the hall beyond the president's office.
Nathan saw his own reflection: a man with unwavering
eyes, with the alertness of a sometimes swift intelligence,
with a gentleness that might be construed as dignity. The
man he saw might well have trouble controlling flights of
fancy and impossible daydreams,

He shook his head at himself. How foolish he would have
to be to fall in love with the President of the United States.
With a last shake of his whole body, his mind returned
to other matters. He wondered how things were going in
Yaldma.
Leslie had started the day feverish with excitement. The
212 Marc Stiegler
Sling team would come together at last, in a heroic effort
to finish die Hunters, to end the war and save humanity
from nuclear holocaust. At last he was free of the politick-
ing that had wasted his time. At last he was free of the
endless negotiations that had wasted his energy, his beg-
ging for small sums of money to keep the project slogging
forward. Now those issues had been thrust aside, leaving
Leslie with only the technical problem of building the best
Hunters he knew how, in the shortest time he could
manage. Certainly the technical problems formed a formi-
dable array, but at least they were clear, understandable
problems—problems of a kind he knew he could solve.
Now, three hours later, Leslie stood by the vast picture
window of the airport terminal, alone and exhausted, the
taste of disappointment dry on his tongue.
The passengers from Seattle disembarked in ragged
groups. He recognized Juan Dante-Cortez immediately.
Though they had never met in person, they had held nu-
merous video conferences together. Leslie shuffled toward
the gate, forcing himself to move, though he barely had
enough enthusiasm and energy to stand. Leslie did not call
to the other members of the team to come meet Juan, though
they also waited in the terminal. Even without another intro-
duction, interpersonal frictions had already made the great
meeting of the Sling team a frightening failure.
Flo and Ronnie stood near the baggage conveyors, look-
ing uncomfortably out of place. Kurt and Lila stood at
another comer of die great room, within spitting distance
of one another, poised with the tension of wrestlers at the
beginning of a bout. Their bickering had started when Lila
had arrived and Kurt had picked up her bag to carry it for
her. She had made a rude comment. He had tossed his
own bag at her. telling her she could carry it as well if she
wished. Somehow, when the loud words ended, Kurt held
both bags. Leslie wondered if they enjoyed the antago-
nism in some way beyond his own comprehension.
What peculiarities would Juan bring to the group?
"Hi," Juan called to him, entering the building on the
tail of a gusting wind. "I'm glad to meet you at last. It's
always so odd having friends that you've never met, if you
know what I mean.'
DAVID'S SUNG

213
Leslie nodded, and opened his mouth to speak but
Juan rushed on. "Where's the rest of our team—I thought
we were all arriving more or less the same time—oh, there
they are." He had spotted Kurt and Lila in their comer,
With long strides that picked up speed, Juan whirled across
die room and stopped himself by throwing one arm around
Lila and one arm around Kurt. "Boo," he said saucily.
Leslie expected to see Juan get punched in the stomach
from both directions. Instead, Lila and Kurt stepped back
uncertainly, then smiled. "Where's Ronnie?" Juan asked
next. As he twisted his lanky frame around, Ronnie and
Flo were already walking toward him. "Howdy," Juan
said, offering a vigorous handshake to Ronnie and a gen-
der one for Flo. "So the gang's all here." He looked at
Leslie. "We ready to go?"
Rejuvenated by Juan's energy, Leslie pointed to the
Thunderbird Motel's shuttle waiting outside. "You bet."
Juan kept up a steady chatter until they boarded the
shuttle. Once in motion, however, he stopped suddenly, a
runner bitting the wall. He seemed totally spent, as if the
extra energy he had used in his arrival had cost him far more
than it might another man. By the time he stopped, however,
the icy mood had broken, and the other members of the
team were speaking eagerly about their plans. Besides
Leslie, only Lila watched Juan with 'questioning concern.
As they drove through Yaldma, Leslie looked around with
a surprising sense of warm contentment. He had not passed
through the town ofYakima in years—not since the days of
Interim FAAD, a combined Army/Air Force project that had
planned to use commercial equipment and that had been
killed several times by government bureaucracies.
Yaldma had not changed much. Sweet Evie's restaurant
still offered simple yet wonderful home-cooked meals; Les-
lie remembered the flavor of their roast beef gravy on
mashed potatoes from long ago.
Hie Thunderbird Motel still stood on the edge of civili-
zation: on one side of the motel, buildings and parking lots
crowded together, back to back. On the other side, a
scattered handful of worn storefronts quickly yielded to
barren sands.
Lesbe bad chosen Yakima as their meeting place for two
214 Marc Stiegler
reasons. First, since it was far away from everything, it
was a perfect place for them to wrap themselves totally
around their work. Second, and more particularly, it was
close to the Yakuna Firing Range. The Range, a rolling sea
of dunes and weeds, lay beyond the sands behind the
Thunderbird. On the Range, the Sling team could test the
Hunters to brutal effect.

The Thunderbird itself had not changed, either. When
they arrived, Leslie took the team straight to the Tieton
Room, a conference area that Leslie had commandeered
for their computers. Leslie had used this same room in the
same way almost twenty years earlier.
Kurt started tearing open boxes at a frenetic pace. "Did
you lose something?" Ula jeered.
Kurt stopped. He looked up and explained with cupped
words, "There's a continent full of men dying. As we
dawdle, they die."
Awkward silence touched them all. Juan moved first, to
grab a small box and throw it to Lila. "Let's do it!" he
shouted with enthusiasm. He himself turned to one of the
largest boxes and ripped its cover off, his thin muscles
springing like wires- In a moment, everyone was hip-deep
in the unpacking.
The mood lightened as empty boxes accumulated in the
center of the room, and everyone felt a sense of accom-
plishment. Juan stopped for a moment, staring at the label on
a work station he had just unpacked. "Haiku?" he asked.
Flo floated to his side. "That is mine," she explained.
"Amos and I, we named our machines. Each has a differ-
ent personality."
"I see." Juan turned the work station over to her to
finish unpacking.
Kurt straightened for a moment; even he seemed mel-
lower as their computers came to life. "That's a good idea.
We need to name all this equipment." Lila just looked at
him sarcastically. He went on, "After all, I can't imagine
Lila wanting to work on the same work station I am." His
voice dropped in pitch as he announced with wolfish de-
light, "I know how to name them."
Lila glanced up suspiciously, but continued unpacking,
as did Kurt.
DAVID'S SUNG
215
While others plugged in power cords and threw up
screen test patterns, Leslie quietly unrolled long sheets of
paper and draped them across the one bare wall that had
neither doors, windows, nor blackboards. He had not
brought the whole PERT chart; virtually the entire length
of the corridor to his office at the Institute was a sea of
green, and the green boxes of finished tasks no longer
mattered.
What mattered were the angry reds and the very recent
pale blues. Only a couple feet of chart remained sand-
wiched between the completed boxes and the final box—

the box that represented the completion of the Sling. No
pink boxes remained: they had all turned red. No black
boxes remained: the planned end date for the entire proj-
ect had also passed. But numerous blue boxes had grown
amidst the red.
Blue—the transparent blue of an editing marker—repre-
sented new and unplanned tasks hastily sketched on the
chart as the red failures forced the team to seek new paths
to success. They seemed to take up most of the space not
covered in red. In some places they replaced it, but every-
where they distorted the once straightforward sequence of
steps to the end.
But both red and blue boxes'-would fall to the team's
relentless efforts in the next week: With a momentary
tingle of triumph, Leslie changed one blue box to green:
the arrival of the team in Yakima was now complete.
They finished unwrapping the equipment. As Juan tossed
Ac empty cartons into the hall, Kurt ran around the room
with a labeling gun. "I'm naming the computers," he
proclaimed.
Leslie could all too easily imagine the breakdown of this
fragile team over who had rights to christen the equip-
ment. He spoke quickly. "Fine. Someone else can name
the HopperHunters and the SkyHunters, They'll arrive
shortly.
When the label maker had finished, Leslie scanned the
results. ALEXANDER, CAESAR, CHARLEMAGNE, NA-
POLEON, MAO. he read the raised lettering.
Kurt explained, "I've named them for the great con-
querors."
216 Marc Stiegler
Juan laughed—the awkward laughter of someone who
doesn't know what else to do. Lila glowered in silence.
Leslie sighed.
A bellboy came to the doorway. Ronnie was closest, so
the man spoke to him and left. Ronnie yelled, "All right!
The real stuffs here. Out in the parking lot."
They went around the comer, through the glass doors
that opened on the desert side of the Thunderbird- Only a
few cars dotted the parking lot, which was fortunate, be-
cause a very large glider consumed most of the space.
Beside it, a hovercraft rested on its metal skirt.
Bonnie spoke first. "This is great! We can start real
testing." He smiled at Juan. "We'll put you and your
simulations out of business real soon."
Juan smiled softly. "I certainly hope so."

Lila ran her hand down the side of the hovercraft. Only
a few openings for sensors and guns still needed filling
before it became a bona fide HopperHunter. "I'll name
the Hoppers," she said with a glance at Kurt. "I'll name
them for the flowers that grow over the graves of the
conquerors." She tapped the narrow head of die machine;
it echoed with a tinny sound. The flimsiness of the Hopper
armor reminded Leslie just how dependent the whole design
was on speed and maneuver- The armor seemed puny com-
pared to the stuff that covered the behemoths now roam-
ing Europe. He knew how the barefoot men who first used
pikes to defeat steel-clad medieval knights must have felt.
Lila continued, "I hereby christen thee Daffodil."
This time Kurt glowered at the ridiculousness of her
naming convention.
Juan spoke, oblivious to the hostility exchanged. "And
I'll name the SkyHunters. They qualify as birds, don't
they?" He pointed to the pale blue skin that covered the
Hunter's underside—a blue meant to render it less visible
from the ground. "I hereby christen thee the Bluebird."
Leslie couldn't help laughing. "Caesar, Daffodil, and
Bluebird. Yes, it sounds like a very American collection of
machines. Now all we have to do is make them work."
They remembered the reason they had come here, and
ran back to the Tieton room to start work in earnest.
April 24
Ready. Hre. Aim.
—Motto of Evolutionary System Engineer
Leslie sat in one of the Tieton Room's red naugahyde
chairs, his arms crossed over the long table before him.
He watched Juan roll over on the floor in a darkened
comer. It was noon; Juan had collapsed in that comer a
couple of hours ago for his first sleep since arriving.
Juan had not yet picked up his room key, and they had
been here for two days.
The rest of the team lay strewn across the room like
discarded toys. Empty styro cups and bags of corn chips
cluttered odd comers; they had not even taken the time to
hit the cafe here in the motel. A huge coffee maker domi-
nated the table by the door, supplied gratis by the staff of
the Thunderbird, The employees of the motel did not
know exactly what the team was doing. But they knew,
from the glowing computer displays and overhead lights
that burned all night, that the project had something to do
with the battle for Europe, and'that their efforts eclipsed
the importance of all else in Yakima^

Lila slouched in front of the work station GENGHIS,
staring numbly at the results of the latest simulation run.
Kurt leaned forward above her with wide-eyed alertness.
At least he seemed alert; a studious observer would have
noticed that his expression never changed, that he was
more a waxwork of alertness than a person.
Across the room, Flo shook her head periodically as if
warding off a close-hovering cloud of gnats. Ronnie's hands
trembled with the conflicting chemicals of his bloodstream:
he had been running strictly on caffeine since dinner the
night before.
Of the lot of them, Leslie sympathized most with Juan.
Bonnie's assertion that they wouldn't need Juan's simula-
tions much longer had proved premature. Within hours of
217
>
218 Marc Stiegler
their first live test, they had left Daffodil smoking at the
bottom of a sandblown valley near Squaw Creek. After a
quick survey, Leslie had determined that they could re-
place Daffodil more easily than they could fix her.
And now Bluebird lay in splinters against the side of the
hill north of Daffodil's last resting place. Bluebird's tail fin
jutted in the air in a grim caricature of a tombstone.
Everyone agreed it was too soon to unpack the replace-
ments, Hyacinth and Oriole: The software was so raw, so
wild, it would destroy the Hunters as fast as a computer
could load it.
So Juan's simulations became the lynchpin. The efforts
of the others spun about him: each time Kurt or Ronnie or
Lila threw a new fix into their software, Juan had to
already have his simulations refined to test the fix. In a
race where Kurt and Ronnie and Lila ran as a relay team,
Juan had to run alone, yet stay forever ahead. So far, he
had succeeded.
Juan rolled in agitated sleep. A streak of noontime sun,
sneaking through the shuttered blinds, struck him in the
eyes. He winced. Leslie hurried softly to the window, to
block the light, but Juan waved him away. "Never mind,"
he yawned. With a long, twisting stretch, he rose to a
sitting position. "It's time to get up anyway."
Leslie stamped his foot. "No, it's time for everyone to
get some sleep."
Kurt objected. "We have to solve this interoperability
problem."
Leslie frowned. "We'll solve it better after getting some
sleep. We need clear thoughts and fresh ideas, not long

hours."
Ufa's voice rang out in surprising agreement with Kurt.
"I for one won't be able to sleep until we figure out a
solution."
"What's wrong?" Juan asked. He rose to bis feet, a
feverish fascination now creeping across his face.
Leslie turned to him. "We seem to have found a funda-
mental problem in the design of the HopperHunter sys-
tem. It's a problem with the way the expert system and
the sensor system interoperate."
Juan looked across the room at Kurt and Lila, as if
DAVID'S SUNG               219
sharing Leslie's thought; if the expert system and the
sensor system worked together the way Kurt and Lila did,
they could expect the Hopper to explode. With a slow,
strained smile, he asked, "What's the nitty-gritty?"
Kurt went to the white board and grabbed an eraser. As
he was about to sweep a comer clean, Lila shrieked,
"Don't erase that!"
Kurt jerked back, leaving a slight smudge. "Sorry," he
said, in a sincere tone of apology.
Leslie almost smiled. The white board had replaced the
PEKT chart as the center of organization. Tasks rose and
fell too quickly to be tracked on the old, butchered rolls of
paper now coated with red and green and blue boxes.
Today the white board contained the lists of actions, par-
tially sorted by priority and difficulty. Interspersed with
the cryptic questions and answers were equally cryptic
comments, such as "DCIU 2 me too."
After careful study, Kurt picked a different part of the
board to erase. Under his hurried hand two similar com-
ments faded into oblivion; a crossed-out line, "The LKB is
dead," and a newer line that was not crossed out, "Long
live the LKB." LKB stood for "Last Known Bug."
Kurt listed descriptions of the interfaces between the
two subsystems, with Lila making occasional comments.
In looking around the room, Leslie realized everyone was
watching Kurt at the board. This was the first time since
arrival that they had all turned to the same question at the
same time. Leslie was afraid to breathe, afraid to do any-
thing that might break the mood: it was their first attempt
to solve a problem as a team.
After a few minutes of discussion, Leslie saw the signifi-
cance of the problem at a higher level. The sensor system
could not make analyses of its raw information based solely
on the discernible patterns. It needed some idea of the
possible meanings of those patterns before it could make a
definite match. It needed to understand more of the context.

The expert system understood the context. But whereas
the sensor system had been designed for fast processing,
the expert system had been designed for careful, meticu-
lous processing. If the expert system got involved with the
sensor analysis, the overall operation slowed down to the
220 Marc Stiegler
point where the decisions could not flow out as fast as the
Hopper needed them to avoid crashing. They needed a
compromise.
Leslie thought he might have an idea, but he decided to
let the team try to solve it first. One by one, Ronnie,
Kurt, Juan, and Lila each stepped to the board and offered
possibilities. Each tentative solution was shot down. A
morbid depression followed.
After a long pause, Leslie walked to the board. "How
about this?" he asked, and scrawled a series of detailed
modifications to the interface, using a purple marker. Mean-
while, he outlined his general idea—the overall concept of
the compromise he intended. His real purpose was not to
persuade them to use the detailed approach he now drew,
but to get them to think about a new, higher-level approach.
Kurt shook his head. "That won't work." He explained
why, and Lila nodded her head in agreement.
Leslie shrugged. "Oh, well." He stepped away from the
board.
He saw Flo whisper something in Ronnie's ear. Ronnie
shook his head. She waved her arm rapidly as she contin-
ued. Suddenly he brightened. "Wait a minute," he cried.
"What if we modify Leslie's interface like this?" He hus-
tled to the board and started writing, talking half incoher-
ently as he went.
Lila took her keyboard into her lap, muttering, "Yes,
yes." She started typing softly.
Kurt squinted at the board as if someone had written on
it in Greek—and indeed, Ronnie had used some Greek
symbols. "That might work," he concluded a few moments
later.
Juan slapped his forehead. "God, this is terrible," he
said. "God, this is terrific. God, what a pain this is going
to be to simulate!" He strode across the room to the
largest collection of displays and processor modules, in the
far comer—the simulation setup. He buried himself be-
hind the glow and hum of his machines.
Leslie smiled, though he really wanted to leap in the air
and shout with victory. A movement caught his eye from
the doorway. He turned to see Nathan leaning against it,
DAVID'S SLING                221

framed by the light from the corridor. He must have just
gotten in from D.C.
Leslie sneaked out of the room with Nathan; no one
noticed his absence. "You should've joined us," Leslie
said- "You were a pretty hot programmer yourself at one
time, if I remember correctly.'
Nathan shook his head. "I would not pit my skills against
yours." He smiled maliciously. "I wouldn't want to embar-
rass you." They exchanged low laughter. "Besides, you
clearly had everything under control. I never disturb a
master at work."
Leslie pointed toward the cafe. "You hungry? I am."
"Aren't you going to hang around to make sure they all
go off on the same track?"
Leslie shook his head vigorously. "In an hour or so I'll
go back to force everyone to get some sleep. But I've done
my part- They'll finish it. From here, it's just a matter of
sweat and enthusiasm." He gave Nathan a puzzled smile,
"That's the way we work with ensemble management,
remember?"
"Ouch! Cut to the bone with my own words!" Ensemble
management was an organizational style taught by the
Institute—a style well suited to Information Age projects.
"I'll buy the coffee,"           v
"No!" Leslie exclaimed. "No more coffee." He rubbed
his stomach. "I need some nutrition for a change."
"A wise choice," Nathan said. "We may need our strength.
The Army arrives this afternoon, in the form of a general.
General Kelvin."
"Good. He should keep you out of trouble," Leslie
offered with a wicked smile.
"Yes, sir!"
Nathan heard Kurt McKenna'a voice from the hallway,
accompanied by the pounding of two sets of feet approach-
ing the Tieton Room. Kurt s voice now held the same
unthinking respect that it had held during his first months
at the Institute. Nathan had finally broken him of that
habitual respect, though once in a while he felt a strange
desire to receive that blind obedience one more time.
Of course, he knew better. In the knowledge-oriented
222 Marc Stiegler
contexts of the Information Age, the blind obedience ob-
served in military management never served anyone well.
Every human endeavor required a different manage-

ment style. In the context of lethal battle, Zetetic ensem-
ble management would lead to tragedy. Similarly, in high
technology engineering, military organizational style could
only lead to failure.
In the respectful tone of Kurt's voice, Nathan heard the
fundamental driver behind generations of military research
and development catastrophes. In that voice, he heard the
form of his own impending conflict: the military, and no
doubt the military concept of management, had just ar-
rived in Yaldma.
Kurt led the general around the corner. Stars gleamed
upon his shoulders; his eyes swept the room as if he
owned the place. Nathan could feel himself growing hot,
just watching the man. Kurt introduced them. "General
Kelvin, Nathan Pilstrom."
They did not exactly shake hands in greeting: their grips
more closely resembled a wrestling match. As usual in
such pointless encounters, Nathan withdrew first. "So this
is the Sling Project, all neatly packed in one little room,"
Kelvin said, with dismissal in his voice.
"More or less," Nathan replied. "That's close enough for
a first approximation, anyway."
Kelvin jerked his head, pushing the warning aside. His
jaw clenched as he scanned the room. Nathan knew what
he saw: stacks of computer systems strewn about, matched
with the expressionless faces of programmers lost in the
glow of their display screens. Juan lay curled up like a cat
in the north comer, more or less obeying Leslie's earlier
orders to sleep. The others had napped shortly after lunch,
and they appeared more invigorated—enthusiastic zombies
fresh from the grave.
Even Nathan had difficulty believing that this scene
belonged in the Valkyrie's hall of heroic images. How
could these men and women, some almost adolescent,
shape the tools of victory? Thinking about this scene's im-
pact on the general gave Nathan a sour moment of
amusement.
Kelvin shifted his weight, preparing to step around Na-
DAVID'S SLING                223
than into the room, but Nathan also shifted, blocking him.
"General Kelvin, we're planning an alt-hands review around
five. Why don't you and I go around the corner for a cup
of coffee until then?"
The general's teeth clenched tighter, then went slack.
"All right."
As they struck out down the hall, Nathan tried to fore-
stall the general's caustic remarks. "I realize that that
room looks like a Kansas whirlwind hit it, but we have a
good team in there."

"I've seen better," Kelvin said.
They passed the registration desk and came upon a
young waitress at the entrance to the coffee shop- She
seated them in a booth on the outside edge of the cafe
area. According to Leslie, crowds of busy people usually
hurried back and forth through the motel lobby and the
restaurant, but now the Thunderbird had little business.
Since the beginning of the war, the Sling team had been
the only regular patrons. Part of the quiet was caused by
the general decline in the nation's travel; of course, the
principal cause was the Zetetic Institute's rental of the
entire motel. It had seemed the least obtrusive way to
ensure privacy.
Other than this unnatural quiet, you could not tell that a
national emergency existed. You certainly couldn't tell
that a war raged with such fary that it might destroy the
planet. A few resources had become scarce: only people
with military business could catch an airplane, and freeze-
dried food had disappeared from the backpacking stores.
But no shortages of normal foods or appliances had yet
occurred; indeed, the war would end for lack of partici-
pants before such an event could take place.
The young waitress looked like she was under severe
stress; Nathan suspected her boyfriend was now boarding
one of the planes packed with reinforcements for Europe.
Nathan spoke to Kelvin with an ironic edge in his voice.
"So you've seen better teams. I must say, you completed
your evaluation with amazing speed." Nathan looked straight
into the general's eyes, trying to let exactly the right
amount of anger shine through.
224
Marc Stiegler
Their eyes locked; this time Kelvin broke off the en-
gagement first. "You're right, that wasn't entirely fair."
"Thank you," Nathan answered.
"I still can't believe this Sling of yours will make the
difference-" He shook his head. "Dammit, we need tanks,
not gadgets." He pressed the tips of his straightened fin-
gers to his forehead, as if he could somehow drive home a
better solution to their problems. He gave up the attempt
as his coffee arrived.
While Kelvin idly stirred sugar into the steaming liquid,
Nathan asked, "Do you believe the only way to defeat
tanks is with more tanks?"
Kelvin paused. "It's the only method that has worked so
far. We've tried handheld TOW missile launchers. But if
somebody kills the man guiding the missile, the missile
crashes." He shuddered, "The Russians have gotten very

good at killing the man." Anger entered his eyes, and he
seemed suddenly to be much larger, "We lost thousands
of good men trying to make that tactic work. We can't
make that kind of mistake again."
Nathan nodded. "Never again. In some sense, the Rus-
sians are fighting the TOW missile with Information Age
techniques. They're killing the information-processing part
of the missile—the man who aims it."
Kelvin considered that for a moment. "I suppose so."
"Listen." Nathan pushed for a revelation in General
Kelvin's perspective. "We both know how easy it is to
prove that a project is a failure—it's as easy as proving that
a project is a success. To prove failure, list the weaknesses,
without mentioning any strengths. To prove success, list
the strengths without mentioning any weaknesses." He
brought his hand down in a chopping motion. "General,
we can't afford either of those two distortions to influence
our decisions here. In addition to showing you the strengths
of the Sling, I am committed to exposing for you every
flaw we can think of. It's a scary list But we would be
leading you, and the country, across a bridge made of
tissue paper if we didn't give you that list."
Nathan pointed his hand at the general. "But we need
something from you, too, for our honesty to work. You
can't just look at the list of problems and shut us down.
DAVID'S SUNG               225
You must help us find ways to make the system work
despite the problems."
A mischievous smile crossed Kelvin's lips. He shoved
the coffee aside. "Very well. Show me that it might work.
If you show me it might work, I'll believe you."
'Excellent." Nathan felt some tension relax in his neck
muscles. Kelvin's attitude was very Zetetic. At least be
understood his own prejudices.
Kelvin interrogated him at length about matters that
Nathan rarely had to discuss—not the flashy technology of
the Hunters, but questions whose answers could make the
difference between success and failure: What do the troops
have to know to operate a Hopper? What will they have to
feed it after a battle? How do they repair it when it
breaks?
"They don't repair it. General. They throw it away
when it breaks. It's disposable, like a razor blade or a
paper cup."
They argued the wisdom of this philosophy—it had great
strengths and great weaknesses.
When a break opened in the discussion, Nathan said,
"You haven't seen any of our Hunters in action, have you?

Let me show you our simulation runs." He rose.
Kelvin followed with a shake of his head. "Skip the
sims. Simulations always look convincing—they're the ulti-
mate tool for showing strengths while hiding weaknesses. I
don't believe them at all."
Nathan laughed. "In earlier times, people talked about
how good projects looked on paper. Now, they talk about
how good they look on simulation. And a simulation can
distort reality even more than paper, if abused with suffi-
cient skill." His tone hardened. "I assure you that Juan
does not build delusionary scenarios. He maintains a harsh-
ness in his sims that gets as close to reality as you can get.
If he isn't sure how brutal reality is, he makes the simula-
tion more brutal than reality could possibly be." He looked
over at the general. "Still, we can do better. I'll show you
live videotapes of Hunters in action. You'll see the real
machines at their finest—and at their worst."
"Much better."
"Well stop for Juan on the way up; he probably has the
226 Marc Stiegler
best overview of the strengths and idiosyncrasies of the
system. In some sense, Juan is each one of the Hunters:
he creates the simulations."
Nathan stepped back into the Tieton Room, to see Juan
at a work station again, his mouth hanging wide, his eyes
locked open. Nathan inhaled sharply, afraid of the trance-
like, epileptic quality of his stare.
But Juan blinked and started typing again.
In a whisper to avoid disturbing the others, Nathan
asked him, "Are you all right?"
"Sure," Juan muttered without looking up.
"Can I disturb you to come talk with General Kelvin for
a few minutes?"
He shrugged, a weary gesture. His eyes drooped. "Why
not? I'm not doing much good here." Smoothly flicking a
sequence of power buttons, he rose to follow Nathan.
"I'm planning to show him the tapes of the live tests in
the firing range, to give him a foel of how the Hunters
really work."
Juan screwed up his face with doubt. He looked at
Kelvin. "Are you sure you want that much truth, all at
once?"
Nathan watched Kelvin's jaw work in annoyance.

Juan continued. "Well, if you want even more reality,
we're going to go play pinball," he glanced at his watch,
"in about twenty minutes."
The general stared at Juan. "You're going to play what?"
"We're going to play pinball." He smiled with assumed
innocence. His weariness had disappeared in the renewed
twinkling of his eyes.
Nathan ended the impasse. "That's the local name for
running a live test. If you're not too tired from your
journey, come and watch a HopperHunter go nose to nose
with a Soviet battalion. The Soviets are fakes, of course,
but the Hunter is real," He couldn't resist a smile that
mirrored Juan's. "As for why we call it pinball, you'll
understand after you've seen the battle."
When Kelvin accepted the offer, Nathan turned back to
Juan. "Well meet you out on the Point."
He led the general out of the room, out of the Thunder-
DAVID'S SUNG               227
bird, and into the parking lot, to an Eagle Scout four-
wheel jeep.
Looking at the sad state of the jeep, Kelvin gasped, then
laughed. "You have been at war out here."
' Yes." Nathan knew what Kelvin meant: whenever Na-
than looked at the Eagle, he wondered what archaeologists
would think thousands of years from now, if they found
such a vehicle buried beneath the sands of Yakima.
With just a little more caked-on dirt, the Eagle would
have been buried right there in the parking lot. Sand
packed itself around the mirrors and the grill; the gold-
brown powder smeared across the window in a frosting
that would not melt or scrape away, "We've only been out
here two days, and our jeeps already look like sand dunes.
I suppose we could get someone to wash them, but it
wouldn't make any difference." Nathan sighed. Then, laugh-
ing, he said, "We signed a statement with Avis promising
that we wouldn't drive off-road. Of course, we didn't dis-
cuss our idea of a road, as opposed to their idea of a road."
He slapped the roof with joy. "Any old rut qualifies as a
road in the Yakima Firing Range."
"Why didn't you just buy the jeeps?" Kelvin demanded.
"Money isn't a problem."
"We may have to buy them in the end." Nathan shrugged.
"This seemed easier at the time. They rent jeeps at the
airport; they don't sell them."
They climbed into the Eagle and closed the doors,
unleashing spumes of dust. General Kelvin waved his
hand to clear the air, which only served to stir the dust

more thoroughly.
More of the fine powder adhered to Nathan's lungs with
every breath. He could smell it—the distinctive, gritty
smell of the desert. "You can't beat it," Nathan explained
with the fatalism of a priest giving last rites. "The best
strategy is to pretend that you like it." Keying the igni-
tion, he brought the engine coughing to life.
Kelvin snorted.
Nathan turned right onto North First Street, heading
toward 1-82. They drove in silence for a time. When
Kelvin spoke again, his voice seemed almost dreamy. "I'd
forgotten what Yakima was like."
228 Marc Sttegler
"So you've been here before," Nathan led him forward
in the discussion.
"I think everybody in the Army comes here sooner or
later." The general gazed around at the austere, rolling
beauty of the desert, with the look of a man coming home-
Nathan took advantage of the general's relaxed mood to
ask him about himself. Kelvin had a son in the Air Force in
Germany. He knew that his son had probably died in the
first hammering clashes of the war. If he was not dead, he
was a prisoner. The American aircraft, superior though
they were to their Soviet counterparts, had been hope-
lessly outnumbered. The Soviet swarm shot them down
over terrain that Soviet divisions quickly overran.
They passed Range Benchmark 1944, then started up
the hill that the Sling team used for observing the tests at
close band; they had dubbed it the Point. Before Nathan
and Kelvin reached the top, Nathan knew about General
Kelvin's frustrations with the modem Army, his occasional
disagreements with his daughter, and his resigned accep-
tance that he would never get a third star. "Of course, if
this war were to continue for a couple of years, I would
surely get promoted." He shook his head. "At that price,
I'd rather not."
Nathan pointed out, "If the Sling saves the day, you
might yet get your three stars, and without an endless
bloodbath."
They reached the Point. A van lumbered over the same
ruts their jeep had used. "Here come the troops," he said,
pointing at the brittle dinosaur struggling against the harsh
landscape. "We bring a lot of equipment with us on these
trips. Perhaps more than we can really afford."
'Leave the van here, and get duplicates of the equip-
ment," Kelvin ordered. "In fact, put two completely out-
fitted vans up here, for backup. We can't waste time
moving stuff around like that." He looked around. "It's not
like anyone was likely to steal it out here,"

"You're right. Everyone will be delighted to leave ev-
erything here,"
The van bounced onto the hilltop and stalled next to the
jeep. The door opened, and both Nathan and Kelvin
squeezed in with the rest of the Sling team. Nathan intro-
DAVID'S SLING                229
duced Kelvin to Lila and Ronnie; they had left Flo behind
at the Thmiderbird to sleep.
Juan clapped his hands. "Well, gang, let's do it," he
said, squeezing himself into the controller chair. Twin
monitors lit up and stereo speakers hissed. Nathan watched
Kelvin watch the screen.
The new HopperHunter, Hyacinth, came to life with
the whine of turbine engines. Dust clouds boiled across
the screen. Juan started a team monologue. "We're watch-
ing through Hyacinth's stereoscopic cameras. Of course,
the hopper's view is better than ours: its sensors run
through radar and infrared, not just optical wavelengths."
Juan's voice echoed oddly in the confined metal space.
On the speakers, the turbine's whine coughed; the dust
cloud parted before them as the hopper surged forward.
The dust cloud had been induced by Hyacinth's hovering-
Gaining speed, Hyacinth hurtled over the sagebrush,
dropped with sickening suddenness into a ravine, and
popped out again, all the while swiveling its camera from
side to side.
It came to the base of a mountain and started straight up,
with no noticeable loss of speed. Leslie spoke. "This ma-
neuver's really hard on the engines. The power team
performed a miracle, pumping her acceleration like that
without blowing the compressors.'
Hyacinth crested the mountain. The view opened on a
valley. Vast though it was, in comparison with the limitless
plains stretching beyond the next series of hills, it seemed
quite tiny. Kurt commented, "From here we get a quick
image of the enemy positions before going in."
The word "quick" got an odd punctuation mark from the
hopper itself, for it did not slow down as it reached the lip
of a precipice and plunged over. Nathan heard Kelvin
gasp, Nathan felt it, too; this part of the trip always left
him feeling queasy.
He wondered why no one else on this team shared his
motion sickness, as Ronnie explained eagerly, "We spent
almost a month fixing that leap so we wouldn't crash on
the way down." Indeed, Hyacinth had landed gently on a
ledge, one edge of its ground-effect skirt hanging over the
230 Marc Sttegler

side, then it plunged again, and again, in a fantastic series
of hops.
Kurt spoke in the brisk but respectful voice peculiar to a
soldier addressing a superior. "Sir, by coming up over the
cliff in this maneuver, our view of the battlefield doesn't
expose us to artillery fire." A slightly gloating expression
entered his eyes. "Of course, we're pretty hard to kill
even when they know exactly where we are, but why take
chances?"
Hyacinth had reached the floor of the valley now. The
camera jittered across the landscape as the hopper itself
jumped in a staccato dance, fast, slow, left, right, a
patternless modern baDet whose rhythm matched the beat
of hailstones against a roof. Tanks and cannons would
indeed have a very hard time lining up a shot on the
unpredictable hopper.
Ula muttered,' I'm sorry the image is so hard to follow.
the last time we came out here, I decided that we needed
to reset the transmitted image to show an averaged view,
after the second-stage image processing. But I forgot when
we got back to the motel.' She tumedto the general with
a shrug. "Next time it'll be easier to see what's happening,
I promise."
Despite the bouncing of the screen, they could see the
target on which the hopper now homed. A dozen troops
hustled across the exposed land, occasionally turning to
fire. It was easy to see which soldier was giving die orders,
and Hyacinth saw it even as Nathan did. A crosshair
appeared on the screen, and the image flashed bright red
for a moment. Meanwhile, the speakers roared with the
muffled sound of a machine gun.
Juan explained, "That was the hopper firing. Needless
to say, since those are real troops, we're using blanks.
Otherwise, we would have a very dead lieutenant out
there."
The hopper turned to the right, away from the troops it
had been approaching.
"What's wrong?" Kelvin asked. "Why isn't it finishing
off that platoon?"                                 -
Nathan smiled. "For shame. General. We have no in-
tention of wasting our limited ammunition on those men.
DAVID'S SUNG               231
Didn't you notice which single person we shot? The one
who gives the orders. The HopperHunter will leave those
men, leaderless, to stop, or to go on in confusion to defeat.
We can let them live—and we have to, because we don't
cany enough ammunition to kill every soldier we see."
Hyacinth hit a ravine and, dropping into its narrow
channel, accelerated in a new direction. "This is scary,"

Ronnie muttered. "It's a good thing my software drives
Hyacinth better than Kurt drives the van."
Juan nodded his head vigorously.
When the hopper popped out again, a formation of
tanks faced it.
Now they heard angry static from the speakers, Lila
said, "Those are the tank radios you're hearing."
"He general cleared his throat of dust, then asked hum-
bly, "Why aren't you shooting at them yet?"
Kurt answered this one. "Two reasons. First, we haven't
identified the commander yet. If we don't identify the
commander soon, we'll knock a couple of the front tanks
out, then listen for the new series of orders that'll let us
locate him." He wrapped his knuckles against the side of
the van. "There's a more fundamental reason why we can't
fire yet, however. Our gun can't penetrate their frontal
armor- We'll have to get in among them before we can be
effective." He grinned. "Imagine telling your troops that
they'd have to get in among the enemy tanks before fir-
ing." He grimaced. "I went in like that myself a couple of
times. It's no fan."
True to Kurt's words, as the hopper broke past the lead
tanks, the picture spun in a dizzy pirouette. The hopper
fired twice— a much louder, thudding sound than the ma-
chine gun fire earlier. The screen showed kills against the
first two tanks. Hyacinth spun and skittered as the speak-
ers burst with radio activity. With a purposeful lunge, the
hopper outflanked one more tank, fired, and raced away
from the cluster of enemy armor.
"I take it that last one we took out was the leader,"
Kelvin said drily. Nathan almost betrayed his excitement—
Kelvin had said we.
Juan scrutinized the alternate display, finely printed
with scrolling data. "Yeah, we picked out the right one all
232 Marc Stiegler
right. Magic!" A general murmur of pleasure arose in the
stale air of the van.
As they watched, twilight overtook the afternoon. Mot-
tled red glares and long shadows burnished the valley.
Nathan felt his own breathing take on a jerky rhythm.
"Did you guys plan this test to run into sunsetr
"Sure." Juans voice reflected the tension Nathan felt.
"I've never been in a war myself, but from what I've
heard, they don't go nine to five and then wait until the
lights come back on."
Hyacinth now coursed along an arrow's path, straight
toward a convoy of trucks. Kurt muttered, "Hit the lead."

The hopper continued its unveering flight that indeed
zeroed in on the lead truck. The crosshairs came up. The
Hopper spun, and fired into a shadow. "Damn, Kurt
muttered.
Believing itself to have completed its mission, the hop-
per bounced away—like a pinball, Nathan thought—toward
a clump of troops on the horizon.
Nathan's ears had filtered out the incessant whine of the
hopper's engine long before. But now the hum changed
tune, slowly coming down the scale from soprano to bari-
tone- As the tone dropped, so did the Hopper's speed;
meanwhile, the dust cloud boiled up across the screen, as
it caught up with the slowing vehicle.
Lila shook her head, her hair continuing to bounce after
she had stopped. "Double damn," she muttered. "It's the
dust. The engine filter's plugged full. And once we stop
like this in a cloud of the stuff, it plugs my sensors, too.
The dust is killing us."
Juan tried to push his chair back, but failed in the tight
clutter of people and equipment. "That's one of the things
we haven't any idea of how to fix: if we hover long enough,
the poor thing chokes to death,"
Nathan watched Kelvin's reaction to this discussion care-
fully: he frowned, then shrugged. "If we were fighting
a war in Egypt, that would cancel the project right there.
But we're fighting in Europe, in April. Do we have any
similar problems with mud?" Again Nathan hid his elation;
Kelvin had had two choices in the face of this apparently
insurmountable obstacle. He could clutch at it as a fatal
DAVID'S SUNG               233
flaw, using it as a rationale to end the program. Or he could
help in the search for solutions.
Juan replied, "No problems with mud to my knowl-
edge." He raised an eyebrow. "Of course, we haven't
tested it in mud the way we've tested it in dust."
The discussion continued for a while before everyone
agreed to finish the analysis back at the motel. Kelvin
made contributions in his own brusque way. They would
no longer drive out here in vans, jeeps, or otherwise:
Kelvin would commandeer helicopters for transport. A
platoon of technicians would man the Point at all times,
guaranteeing that the equipment was tuned and ready at a
moment's notice- And above all, they would get air condi-
tioners, with their own power generators, to keep the vans
cool when they were working. He announced that last
measure while wiping a thick line of perspiration from his
forehead.

Nathan slid the door back and stepped into the desert.
With twilight came cool air—too cool to stand in for long,
but perfect for someone stepping out of a van whose cabin
resembled a furnace. Though the Sling had not passed the
desert test this afternoon, it had passed the political test.
Nathan stood quietly, loving the simple joy of just breath-
ing the cool, dusty air, watching the sharp orange edge of
the sun put a crease in the bright blue sky.
April 29
Filter fourth for completeness. This filter
protects from the media.
—ZetetSc Commentaries
Nathan and Ae general crossed the street to Pioneer
Pies in silence. Nathan felt famished, but his latest tense
confrontation had left him unable to appreciate even the
thought of lemon creme pie.
The silence continued as they sat down in one of the
booths and ordered steak and fries. Nathan shifted several
times on the hard boards of die bench. Although the wood
decor of the restaurant was pleasing to the eye, and Ae
well-varnished surfaces were pleasing to Ae touch, Ae
wooden boards were not pleasing to the human back.
NeiAer Nathan nor Kelvin broke Ae silence. Instead, a
burst of static made Aem look up. A television, distinctly
out of place in this rustic setting, showed Aem a picture
that was sure to restart their argument from an hour ago.
FOCUS. Bill Hardies subdued voice speaks. "Yet an-
other heroic moment occurred in Heidelberg today. Rus-
sian forces fresh from overrunning Frankfurt fumed south
to destroy the fragments of the Third Armored Division."
Men and machines race across the autobahn bridge that
arches over the Neckar River.
PAN. To the north, clouds of smoke twist and rise from
the ground. Shells burst, spawning new smoke clouds. The
clouds and explosions seem to center on a single point, like
an unpracticed dart thrower closing in on a buus-eye. In
the distance, dozens of gfant engines of destruction slow
down as they approach that bull's-eye. Here and there
explosions appear among the attackers as well. Frequently,
when the smoke dears, only dead men and dead machines
remain.
ZOOM. The camera closes on the bulfs-eye. A gust
of wind blows the smoke away, and a lone Abrams tank
234
DAVID'S SLING                235
hugs the ground at the center of the fury, its turret
shifting smoothly, its cannon periodically spitting fire.
Shells pound upon it. Hardie speaks of the extraordinary

toughness of the Chobham armor plate. The turret contin-
ues to spin, blithely ignoring the hellfires unleashed.
PAN. The bridge is now quiet: the Americans have
completed their retreat, save the one vehicle left behind
to cover their movement. That one Abrams backs slowly
toward the bridge, enemy machines pressing ever closer.
FOCUS. The periodic flames from the Abrams cannon
cease. One sheU too many has struck it in a weakened
plate. Recognising the failure, the enemy rushes forward,
firing constantly. A larger, darker cloud rises from the
Abrams. It moves no longer. The dark cloud clears to
reveal an empty hulk, spotlighted by a series of explosions
that destroy the bridge.
FADE. "Unfortunately, individual acts of heroism
may have no significance. More significant than the suc-
cessful retreat across the Neckar is the French announce-
ment of a separate peace treaty with the Soviet Union.
The French armies now in Germany will return home
under banners of neutrality during the next 48 hours."
But gjmes a comprehensive Ust of the cities in Germany
and Denmark that have surrendered since his last report.
Kelvin turned red while viewing the newscast. As he turned
to Nathan, Ae pulse in his left temple Arobbed visibly.
Nathan watched him wiA concern. "We can't deploy
Aem yet," he said again, as if repetition would make his
point fasten itself in Kelvin's mind. "Just because Ae
Hunters passed Ae basic test doesn't mean Aey work. If
you deploy now, and we find anoAer hardware problem,
we're sunk."
"And if we deploy after all our troops are dead, we're
also sunk," Kelvin retorted, doggedly reiterating his position.
Seeing that it had become a confrontation of egos, Na-
Aan sat back in his chair and consciously relaxed his mind
and body. He concentrated on Ae amusing aspects of Ae
past 48 hours; Aough difficult to recall, amusement was a
salient feature of his situation. After all, two days ago,
Kelvin had been against deploying Ae Sling Hunters,
while Nathan had been in favor.
236 Marc Stiegler
The pinball game on the testing range had not brought
about this transformation by itself. Even discounting the
problems with desert sand, the hopper had failed: it had
fired at shadows rather than targets, for one thing. And
every member of the team had grown silent as they had
examined the detailed readouts of the battle: from the
sensing, through the decision-making, through the hover-
ing, there had been odd quirks in me hopper's behavior
that left the programmers puzzled and worried. The prob-
lems seemed more numerous than the successes.
Fortunately, they would not have to wait until all the

problems were fixed before they could deploy Hunters. As
Nathan had explained to Kelvin the day before, once they
were sure the hardware worked, they could build and ship
Hunters while they continued to work on the software. As
they made software improvements, they would download
the new versions by satellite link: it would be no different
from the way they loaded the test Hunters with new
software in Yakima.
Kelvin had not merely accepted the idea of deploying
the hardware before completing the software; he had or-
dered Leslie to start a ramp-up of all the factories involved
in Sling manufacture, to prepare the production lines for
peak output. They would immediately start manufacturing
and stockpiling Hunter subassemblies. That way. they could
run the first thousands of Hunters through production
almost instantly, and they would face bottlenecks only
with new parts demanded by the results of the testing.
Kelvin had gone on to ask about the software for all
three Hunters. "How long do you think it will take before
all the software bugs are out?"
Nathan had laughed. "It'll be years before aU the bugs
are out. We'll deploy before that, too."
"What about the SkyHunter and the HighHunter? Are
they ready, or are you testing them yet?"
"We've been alternately testing the SkyHunter and the
HopperHunter on the range," Nathan had explained. "Ba-
sically, they both work, except for the kinds of problems you
saw yesterday, where the Hopper started shooting at shadows.
Most of the problems with target recognition are shared by
both systems—fixing it in one will fix it in the other."
DAVID'S SUNG
237
"What about the HighHunter?"
"The HighHunter has nastier problems. We can't run a
full-up test of the HighHunter without shooting one into
orbit. Then we'd have to make it dispense its Crowbars
somewhere over Seattle, to make them drop here on the
Range. I don't know what our chances are of surprising the
Russians with the Hunters, but if we drop a HighHunter
out of orbit, they'll take a serious interest in everything
we're doing in Yakima."
Kelvin had growled—the sound of a mountain climber
who has just found frayed rope in his hands. "Damn. This
project is completely unclassified. I'm sure the Russians
know about it.'
"Actually, we're counting on it." A Zetetic observation
on institutions leaped to Nathan's mind: Organizations
never know anything. Rather, certain select individuals in
organizations knew certain things. By grouping selected

individuals together while dispersing others, the manipu-
lator could dominate the organization- "Certainly, individ-
ual Soviet officers know about different aspects of the
Sling. However, the Sling has never been important enough
to classify. So the Russians who know about it wouldn't
consider it to be important either. Our complete lack of
classification may have protected" us more than a Secret or
even a Top Secret clearance would nave. We're lost in the
noise.
Kelvin had looked doubtful. "I hope you're right."
"Yeah. So do I," Nathan had responded drily. "Anyway,
that chance of surprise prevents us from doing a mil test of
the HighHunter. We've dropped some Crowbars over the
range, but I'm not comfortable with the extent of our
testing. It's been far too incomplete. Well have to be alert
when the first HighHunters go into action." Kelvin had
seemed satisfied at that point; they had dropped die subject.
Now, sitting in Pioneer Pies with Kelvin on one side
and a terruying newscast on the other, Nathan understood
the driving force behind Kelvin's eagerness to get the
Hunters to Europe. He ate slowly; a cold lump grew in his
stomach.
Kelvin pressed his attack. "The Hopper flew across the
twilight and hit everything it was supposed to hit. It didn't
238 Marc Stiegler
hit anything it wasn't supposed to hit. It dodged around
enemy fire like a mosquito dodging a fist. Damn! And then
the Sky Hunter did the same thing." His eyes held a
tortured combination of pleading and commanding. '"Hie
hardware's fine." He clenched his fist, his tendons vibrat-
ing, and pressed it against the wooden table as if afraid he
might lose control otherwise. "We need those Hunters in
Europe now."
Nathan temporized. "Let's talk with the team before
we do anything hasty."
After an unhappy pause, Kelvin said, "All right."
They drove back to the Thunderbird.
They asked Lila first, "Is the hardware ready to ship?
Can we fix the rest of the problems in software?"
Lila pulled on her lip, twisting it in her fingers. "I don't
know. I guess so. I ... guess so. But we really ought to
test it more."
They asked Kurt. "Why not?" Kurt replied. "What we've
got works well enough to zap some of the bastards." He
paused. "It wouldn't hurt to test a bit more, though."
They asked Flo. "I believe all the equipment in the

control and communications parts of the Hunters—the
parts for which Ronnie and I are responsible—work ade-
quately correctly." A pair of creases marred the soft smooth-
ness of her forehead. "But I am sure Amos would advise
against sending them yet. Even if all the separate pieces
work correctly, we may be surprised when they work
together at cross-purposes." She shook her head. "This is
not a good idea."
They asked Ronnie. "Great. Get 'em over there. Any-
thing that goes wrong, we'll get around it with a software
kludge of one kind or another."
Finally, they asked Juan- They sat in Nathan's room,
Juan stretching his long legs across the bed, toying with a
microfloppy. As he spoke, he flipped the flat plastic square
back and forth with ever greater agitation. As he flipped it
one way, he seemed anxious; as he flipped it the other
way, he seemed amused. "So here we are again, Nathan,
on the verge of a beta test." Beta testing was a stage
commercial vendors usually went through with software.
During beta test, the vendor released the new product to
DAVID'S SLING
239
a carefully selected handful of customers who understood
Ae risks—and who knew enough to help the vendor fix
the last problems. The beta customer also knew how to
create his own, temporary work-arounds for outlandish
problems.
But no one in the middle of a war had the time or the
clarity of mind to produce novel solutions to outlandish
problems. Nathan smiled back at Juan. "Yes, Juan, it's
beta test time. Whom do we victimize this time?"
"No doubt the whole damn army." His head lolled, then
swept sideways in a slow shake. "But not yet," he whis-
pered desperately. "We aren't ready yet." He clenched
the floppy, then tossed it aside. "Listen. I know the Hunt-
ers better than anybody else here, Kurt, Ronnie, Flo, and
Lila may have developed the software, but when they test
their stuff, they test it against me. There is not a single
nuance of those machines that I don't understand as well
as they do. Nathan, it doesn't work yet. There are too
many things that nobody understands, even when it works
right, the way it did yesterday."
The general spoke. "What's wrong with it?"
Juan shrugged helplessly. "If I knew what was wrong, we'd
fix it. But we don't know. Christ, there's so much we
don't know."
"When wUl you know?" Kelvin asked, his words forming
bullets that made Nathan wince.
But Juan just smiled sadly. His shirt was open at the

collar; to Nathan it seemed to leave his throat exposed, "I
don't know when IT! know." The sinews in his throat
rippled, and he suddenly sat erect, a judge proclaiming a
verdict. "But I know I'll know when they're ready."
The general reacted, squaring his own shoulders. "We
can't wait forever."
"And you won't have to," As suddenly as he had straight-
ened, Juan coiled around the bed again. He reached into
his back pocket, pulling out his credit-card-size note com-
puter. "We may be close. Actually, I think we really are
close- Maybe, if we push all the way today, we can leam
everything we need to know." His right hand worked
silently over the palm-size touchpad as he studied the
240 Marc SUegler
testing schedule. "If things go well, we can pack about
three days of tests in by midnight."
"And then it'll be ready?" Kelvin demanded.
"And then we'll decide whether it's ready," Juan cor-
rected him.
They broke into two teams: Kurt, Lila, and Konnie ran
one test while Flo, Juan, and Nathan prepared the next.
The tests became ever more rigorous, ever more complex,
ever more ruthless—a series of gauntlets that no machine
could run successfully. Indeed, that was the point: "Test
to destruction," Juan explained cheerfully, "is the truest
form of analysis."
They tested Hyacinth to destruction before lunch. Once
too often. Hyacinth raced close to the ravine wall. A stone
outcropping appeared and the hopper smashed into it,
crumpling its ground-effect skirt, spinning out of control.
Hyacinth bounced along until the rocks turned it to rubble.
"Hardware or software?" Kelvin demanded.
The new van, permanently emplaced at the Point, re-
verberated with the rumble of air conditioning—a level of
cooling that kept the van so chill they had named it the
Refrigerator. Now everyone twisted to hear the verdict from
Ronnie and Florence. The van seemed stufiy, despite the
bracing air. "Well, I guess it's software," Bonnie muttered.
Florence quietly tapped at the keyboard, pointed out a
routine on the screen to Ronnie, who nodded. "That is
correct," Florence agreed. Her voice matched the cool-
ness of the van.
Juan frowned. "Why didn't we catch this software problem
in the simulations?" He, too, turned to reexamine his code.
While they reworked the sims and the hopper control
systems, they sent Oriole into the air.

The SkyHunter performed magnificently on one test.
They set up the second test series, and it dropped all its
bombs on shadows.
"Hardware or software?" Kelvin asked in a near-scream.
Lila shrugged. "I don't know. I don't know." She slumped
into the chair. Nathan and Kelvin left her alone with her
Oriole and Kurt's Caesar.
The wreckage of Hyacinth remained in the shallow grave
of the ravine and the next hopper in the test group took its
DAVID'S SUNG               241
place in the gauntlet. Marigold now scurried across the
plains and into combat with enemy bunkers—low, sloping
bulwarks of earth and concrete. Juan, Lila, and Flo watched
the patterns of fire and crossfire quietly—too quietly. So
quietly that Nathan sensed a problem. He looked around
the room and asked, "What's wrong?"
A sick look of exhaustion crossed Juan's features. "We
fixed it, we think. But we're still not sure why our fix
worked."
Kelvin started to turn purple. "You don't know?" He
looked from side to side, then back. "What about your
sim? What was wrong with it?"
Juan drew his long, elegant fingers down across his face,
to pause at his throat. His hand settled there to rest,
emphasfcring the slow, calming rhythm of his breathing.
"Nothing."
The general's eyes bugged out. "How can that be?"
No one answered. Nathan broke the deadlock. "Gen-
eral, let me assure you that the answers will not become
any clearer if you and I stand here pressuring everybody.
The worst enemy of anyone trying to find a subtle problem
is anxiety. Make them anxious enough by hounding them,
and they'll never find it." Nathan tapped Kelvin on the
shoulder. "Besides, we haven't breathed enough dust yet
today. Let's go outside and watch this "run with binoculars."
With a stiff turn, Kelvin followed him out of the Refrig-
erator, onto the wind-swept ridge overlooking the silica
mines. Nathan peered down over the valley and muttered,
"Where is everything?"
At this Kelvin laughed, a short release of tension. "You'd
be a terrible failure as a HopperHunter, Nathan Pilstrom.
Or as a forward observer." His index finger plucked points
out of the desert, commenting, "Bunker, arty, copter field,
bunker ..." His sure, precise pointing reminded Nathan
of the movements of programmers, pointing and clicking
on the software objects they controlled- With a touch of
revelation, Nathan saw General Kelvin in a new light: he
was a programmer of battlefields.

Kelvin stopped listing out objects, squinted, and held
his binoculars up to look at a far comer of the valley. "And
there's the hopper," he said with a lingering smile.
242 Marc Stiegler
Nathan held up his binoculars and watched the hopper's
crazy war dance across the field, leaving chaos wherever it
went. It seemed somehow more ridiculous when viewed
from this vantage point; before, they had always watched
the action through the hopper's own cameras. But their
new perspective also gave Nathan a striking view of the
hopper's effectiveness. When watching through the hop-
per's cameras, he never saw the reactions of the men to
the hopper's attacks. With the binoculars, Nathan could
linger to watch the consequences. The opposing troops
always stopped in confusion, melting from a tight team to
a loose rabble.
Kelvin echoed his thoughts. "Ridiculous," he muttered
about the Hunter, "but deadly."
Marigold completed the gauntlet with swift precision, a
surgeon carefully slicing tumors from dusty flesh. But
when Nathan returned to stick his head inside the Refrig-
erator, no one looked flush with success. "Well see what
the next round shows," Juan said with a grim, remote
expression.
So Nathan and the general took one of the helicopters to
the new site for SkyHunter tests. Ula had preceded them.
Squinting through the tornado of sand thrown up by their
landing, they could see her elation as she screwed a sensor
clump back into place.
Breaking from the copter cabin, Nathan ran through the
miniature sandstorm holding his breath, while tears formed
in his gritty eyes.
"I've got it," she yelled in triumph over the din of the
helicopter's blades and engine. "I can beat the shadows by
adding some extra interpolations on near-infrared bands.
All we need to do is switch a couple of our sensing fibers,
to get our sensitivity up."
No applause met her explanation. "Hardware problem?"
Kelvin asked with fear-filled violence.
Ula stepped back in confusion, not understanding Kel-
vin's harsh response. She'd expected people to be pleased
that they'd found the solution.
"Well, it's partly software for the interpretation, but
well need hardware mods as well."
Kelvin seemed frozen. Nathan took a deep breath and
DAVID'S SUNG

243
smiled brightly. "I'm delighted that you've found a fix.
Will your fix work with the Hoppers as well?"
Lila nodded. "Yeah, and it'll fix the problem in the
Crowbars, too. Even though we haven't seen it there yet,
we would have."
"Great. How long before we can get Oriole modified for
the new sensors?"
"Oriole's going to Hy home now. We'll be ready for
more testing by evening."
So Nathan and the general shuttled back to the Refrig-
erator. But when their helicopter arrived, the van was
empty. The Eagle Scout was gone. Kelvin spotted the
Eagle down in the valley. "They re all down there looking
at the Hopper that crashed—Hyacinth."
Nathan gazed through the binoculars and sagged. "That
isn't Hyacinth," he said. "That's Marigold." He swallowed
with disappointment. They had lost another Hopper in a
ravine wreck.
Eventually, the Eagle trundled back up the mountain-
side. Juan sat at the wheel, the shadows under his eyes
deeper than Nathan had ever seen them before.
He spoke with the exhaustion of a hospital attendant
who has watched a favorite patient enter the operating
room for the last time. "We know what the problem is. It's
not the software at all, and there wasn't a problem with
the sims. The problem is that the Hopper's hardware
doesn't meet spec- Its direction control gets sloppy at high
speeds."
"How long will it take to fix?*' Kelvin asked.
"I don't know." Juan pointed inside the van, where
Florence had already disappeared. "Flo's patching through
to Cameron Corporation right now."
Long minutes later. Flo announced they would have an
improved Hopper the next day. General Kelvin called
them back, to discuss the importance of the Hopper to the
nation, and the urgency of getting it today. But altering a
fundamental feature of the design was not something that
could be hastened by forceful orders from a high authority;
they could no more deliver a new machine today than they
could repeal the law of gravity.
They continued to test for the rest of the afternoon, but
244 Marc Stickler
the enthusiasm dropped as low as the safe speed for the
last Hopper. No other problems appeared, but it was a

pathetic group of developers that slumped in the Tieton
Room that evening. No hint of hopefulness could be seen
in the orange light of sunset.
Into this gloom Leslie Evans strode—and stopped, as
though hitting a wall. "Good God," he exclaimed, 'whose
funeral is this?"
Juan answered with a pale smile, despite the dark tan of
his face. "Yes, it's a funeral all right. Marigold's. And
Hyacinth's."
"Yeah, I heard there was some trouble," Les said. "I
happened to be at Cameron while General Kelvin was
chewing them out." He smiled. "They were agitated by
the importance of the problem, but they didn't know what
to do about it. So I calmed them down and we held an
engineering discussion. We figured out some short cuts for
putting together a single quicky prototype." He shrugged.
So they gave me an improved Hopper to bring with me.
Anyone interested in a little after-dinner testing?"
The gloom yielded to a few cautious gleams of hope,
Juan stood up and stretched. "You know, I've always been
a night person."
"Me, too," Lila agreed.
Kurt shook his head. "The firing range is a treacherous
place at night. I'd better come along, too, in case we need
to drive around once we get there.
"And I can drive a second jeep, if we need it," Kelvin
offered with a smile. "I know my way around here, too."
By nine in the evening they had the new Hopper,
Morning Glory, flying a pitch-black course. The Oriole,
with new sensors in place, joined it. One by one, they ran
the whole series of tests, with only the glimmer of the
Yaldma stars to fight by. By eleven, they had tried and
passed all the tests save one. "This last one is a real
cruncher," Juan explained, a mischievous glow in his eyes.
"I've got magnesium strobes all over the place. If the
Hunters can figure out what they're doing while getting
zapped by light like that, they may work on a real
battlefield."
Kurt objected. 'There's nothing like that on a battlefield."
DAVID'S SLING
245
Juan shrugged. "True. But there are many things on a
real battlefield that we can't try here. If the Hunters can
deal with this unanticipated problem, perhaps they can
deal with others."
Lila leered at Kurt. "What's wrong, Kurt? Afraid?" She
nodded to Juan. "Run it. We'll pass."

She radiated such certainty that Juan coughed back a
chuckle. "We shall see."
Across the velvet darkness, the starlight's twinkle re-
treated from shafts of seering white flashes. The flashes
burst against the hillsides, splintering in blinding reflec-
tions. Stepping outside, Nathan could dimly hear the whir
of Morning Glory, rising and falling in pitch with the busy
variations in speed and direction. Lila stepped out to join
him. "No effect," she said. "Morning Glory soaks up the
data when the lights flash, and flies blind between-times."
She laughed with exultation. "It works."
One by one the others joined them in the cold of a
desert midnight. The flashes made one last effort to con-
fuse the Hopper with a violent outpouring of light, then
sank into the blackness.
General Kelvin looked around the group. In the faint
glow from the Refrigerator's windows, Nathan could see
the heady excitement on everyoneJs faces. Everyone was
wide-eyed, despite the long day ana longer night: indeed,
the success tasted so sweet because of that long night,
Kelvin raised an eyebrow at Juan. "Well, mister, are we
ready?"
Nathan watched Juan's eyelids droop into the shadows.
"No, General, we're not ready." A smile twitched his lips,
and his eyes popped open with furious energy—a fury
directed not at the general, but rather at the universe that
found so many ways to twist and destroy human endeavor.
"But we shouldn't let that stop us. Tell somebody to build
us a couple thousand of these things."
They arrived back at the Thunderbird at two in the mom-
ing. It was Monday, though it did not feel like the beginning
of the week to anyone. No one was tired. Lila, Juan, and Kurt
dragged Ronnie and Florence oS to find some dancing music.
Nathan, Leslie, and Kelvin turned to the next problem.
246 Marc Stiegler
Leslie was tapping on the chair arm in Nathan's room,
obviously pleased with himself.
Kelvin almost glowered as he asked, "How mftq^days
will it take to get Hunters into Europe?"
"About one,' Leslie replied. His tapping fingers stopped.
"You know, historically, the United States has always won
its wars by use of a distinctively American form of brute
force: we have won, not because of the hi-tech of our
weapons, or the brilliance of our generals—with all due
respect. General. We have won because of the hi-tech of
our commercial industry—our ability to create huge quan-
tities of equipment in a short time, to drown the enemy in
planes and guns and tanks. How can you beat the Ameri-
cans, who build things faster than you can shoot them?"

Nathan didn't know the punch line yet, but he knew the
lead-in. 'To beat the Americans, you have to start and
finish the war so fast that they don't have time to build
anything."
Leslie nodded his thanks. "Right- Stomp 'em before
they can move." He looked back at Kelvin. "And that
strategy would have worked back in the '80's or the '90's.
There was no way we could've mobilized our industry in
time to respond to a surprise attack." He leaped up from
his seat, no longer able to control himself. "And today, we
still can't mobilize very fast to produce the specialized,
custom-built machines our Department of Defense calls
weapons. There are only two foundries in the nation that can
cast a tank hull. The rest were closed down by the Environ-
mental Protection Agency ages ago, because big foundries
were dirty foundries. The whole American economy de-
veloped new techniques and new products that didn't need
those kinds of foundries—everyone but the military."
Leslie paced faster as he spoke; the room seemed too
small to contain him. With his wide, alert eyes, his silver
hair, and his tone of authority, he looked like a renowned
scientist desperately trying to impart some fraction of his
wisdom to stow students. "But the Sling Project and the
last ten years of automation have revolutionized our ability
to respond to surprise attacks. In the past decade, America
has groped its way to a new form of industry. We made
the change just in time."
DAVID'S SUNG
247
Nathan saw the double meaning; he could see by Les-
lie's expression that it was intended. Nathan spoke. "Les-
lie's referring to just-in-time inventorying. In fully automated
manufacturing, the manufacturer keeps a minimum of stock
in-house. Instead, he links up through a computer network—
StockNet, for most companies, another one of the net-
works run by the Institute—to his customers and to the
companies who supply him his raw materials. As his cus-
tomers' orders increase, his own orders for more parts
automatically go out to his own suppliers. The whole se-
quence can ripple through an industrial network literally
at the speed of light."
Leslie nodded. "It allows dynamic reallocation of re-
sources on a scale that astounds even me, and I've been
working with it ever since retiring from the Air Force."
His eyes focused on the distance. "In about fifteen min-
utes, you will watch the most massive reallocation of re-
sources in the history of the world." He strode to Nathan's
room terminal. "And thanks to Nathan and the Zetetic
StockNet, we will have front-row seats."
General Kelvin sat in quiet disbelief. Nathan felt some
sympathy, though he had a dim idea of what would hap-
pen now. He had faith in Leslie's analysis: Garrett Tech-

nology, the tiny company that1'Leslie operated and that
was nominally in charge of systems integration for the
Sling, made most of its money by solving automated man-
ufacturing problems.
Leslie turned from the terminal. "General, we'll need
your authorization to hook into MAC." MAC, Nathan
knew, was the Military Airlift Command.
Kelvin grunted. "Very well—but it'll be hard to get
enough military aircraft to fly all our Hunters over there,"
Leslie raised an eyebrow, "Fortunately, we don't need
military aircraft. Even though commercial planes can't
carry heavy military equipment, they can carry Hunters.
We wouldn't normally involve MAC—except that MAC
has commandeered every plane in the country, whether
the military can use it or not."
"I see." General Kelvin sat down at the terminal and
worked at it for several minutes. "What next?" he asked.
"Now we watch," Leslie replied. "Nathan rattles on
248 Marc Stiegler
from time to time about turning our plowshares into swords.
We'll see it as it happens."
The display reflected traffic on StockNet, altered through
a query that eliminated every activity not directly related
to the production of parts for the Sling Project. The first
hit was with Cameron Corporation, for ten thousand
HopperHunters. A similar order went to Lightcraft for ten
thousand SkyHunters. Another order went to Space Plat-
forms, Inc., for a thousand HighHunters.
From there, a two-way funnel opened ever wider, Cam-
eron ordered fans, engines, and guns. UghtCraft ordered
motors, optical fibers, and solar cells. Space Platforms,
Inc., ordered nose cones, ceramic tail fins, and liquid
oxygen tanks. Everyone ordered microprocessors and opti-
cal sensor clusters.
The funnel reached farther and wider. To build those
parts, the suppliers for Cameron, UghtCraft, and Space
Platforms needed other things: wiring, connectors, spark
plugs, tubing.
The funnel opened on a flood: Those suppliers, in turn,
needed raw plastics, structural metal shapes, glass, rub-
ber, titanium, silicon putty.
By morning light, orders for ore had been issued by
refineries, to supply the foundries, to supply the small-
parts manufacturers, to supply the large-parts manufactur-
ers, to supply the subassemblers, to supply the assemblers
as the originally stockpiled assemblies were consumed.
Hiccups appeared- A cutting tool company fell behind,

and sent out orders for replacement parts for its lathes and
milling machines. Meanwhile, the operators of the Sling
network—men and women of Garrett Technologies whom
Leslie has gotten out of bed to help—intervened to spill
the overload onto other cutting tool plants-
A graphite-epoxy chemical stream broke down. Another
laminate-mixing facility was reprogrammed; the stream
continued.
As money and orders had flowed down through the
nerve system of the nation, now equipment and materials—
thousands of tons of it—flowed upward. This upward flow
convulsed the continent in a manner that the money and
DAVID'S SUNG
249
;?
!>
orders, flying with the speed of electricity through the
humming networks of cable and satellite link, had not.
The material flow required more than mere communica-
tion. This convulsion required trucks, vans, aircraft, and
railroad cars, for anything that could transport an engine
mount or a load of ball bearings from a factory. Another
spasm of orders shot across the nation, for truck drivers
and switch operators and pilots, to pump the blood back
through the nation's arteries.
And the convulsion of the transport system had its own
spinofis—new requirements for fuel, for oil filters, for
turbine rotors. And this had yet more spinoffs—so numer-
ous, so pervasive, that even the StockNet computers could
not track them in real time.
By lunch time, over half a billion dollars had passed
through the Sling Project—from the tip of the funnel
down, to touch over five million people. And tons of
materials pushed upwards to the tip of the runnel—to
Cameron, to LightCraft, to Space Platforms. The first
dozen production Hoppers spun off the line, into a
grueling—but short—quality assurance test. One was re-
jected.
By evening, the routes of hundreds of airplanes had
been bent into an arc that soared from continent to conti-
nent. Much of this arc already stood prepared to carry
men and machines of the regular Army, but now the
routes changed subtly; the cargoes changed drastically.
By midnight, the first SkyHunters lifted into the skies of
Germany. The first HopperHunters floated from their crates,
to whir on the edge of the battle zone. By midnight, the
greatest engine of creative production in human history—
die American economy—had transformed itself into an
instrument of war.

Of course, midnight is relative. By the time midnight
swept softly into Yakima, the gray skies of Germany had
already passed through the gunpowder-stained birth pains
of dawn, into morning.
Mayl
The purpose in conflict is not to destroy
your opponent, but to disarm him.
—Setetic Commentaries
Ivan stared stonily at the torn bodies of a farmer, his
wife, and his two children, without thinking- They were
Germans, he reminded himself.
Germans. All his life he had read about and heard about
the Germans. Germans were monsters—the builders of
Auschwitz and Dachau—murderers on a massive scale.
Occasionally, during the lessons and the lectures and the
broadcasts, he considered the anomaly that most of Ger-
many's crimes—and all their true atrocities—had occurred
over half a century earlier. But the thought always faded
quickly, a delicate snowflake in the burning horror of the
slaughter they had committed. Usually, Ivan wondered
why the Allies hadn't simply exterminated all the Germans
right after the war. It seemed justifiable to annihilate crea-
tures that showed such a thirst for annihilation themselves.
Smoke blew past, carrying the stench of charred flesh.
The farmhouse and its inhabitants had been in the center
of an assault exploitation path. Before sending the tanks
and the personnel carriers through, the Soviets had car-
peted the route with artillery fire to loll the silly German
soldiers with their silly handheld antitank missiles. In the
opening days of the battle, many men had cooked to death
in the armored confines of their vehicles as German and
American soldiers skewered them with a plethora of rock-
ets and missiles.
But the Russian artillerymen grew proficient at tiling
the areas of advance with suppressive fires. The German
foot soldiers with launchers had died. The problem had
disappeared. Of course, the improved effectiveness in kill-
ing scattered soldiers had improved their effectiveness in
killing farmers, too.
250
DAVID'S SUNG
251
Ivan's jeep drove on, but he could not escape the image
of the farmer's remains. Part of his mind remembered that
the farmer and his family were Germans, but another
part—the rational part of his mind, he now realized—
whispered that they were people little different from the
farmers outside of Kursk. And no part of his mind could

think of German children as Germans, German children
were just children.
He clenched his teeth. Mother of Russia, they were just
childreni How could his leaders justify this murder?
The 20th Guards Tank Army had crushed the German
n Corps several days ago, but rumors said that remnants
of the American VII Corps had reorganized here outside
Stuttgart.
Baffled admiration shook Ivan when he thought about
the Americans. Why did they fight with such ferocity? The
Germans he could understand; they fought for survival.
But the Americans? Why did they insist on fighting as
heroes? He sighed, guilt-ridden at his own thoughts. If he
felt horror at the execution of the Germans, whom he
hated, how would he feel about killing Americans, whom
he merely disliked? Well, they at least were combatants,
not children. He shrugged.
The sound of heavy artillery grew loud, then vibrant as
the earth shook with its violence. Ivan recognized a nearby
ridge as the vantage point he had been told to capture.
His lonely introspection faded, and his thoughts shifted
to his mission, to the troops he now commanded. He
wrenched the radio handset from its socket. "Lieutenant
Svetlanov, deploy your men along the left crest. Katso-
bashvili, center. Dig in— the rim is shallow there, and
you'll take the brunt if the Americans try to outflank our
armor. Krantz, you're to the right." Ivan still wasn't quite
sure how he had wound up as commander of an infantry
battalion. He was a scientist, dammit, not a soldier. But
the casualties on the first few days had left a desperate
need for officers, and he was an officer.
What he was npt was a leader. He lacked the charisma.
But as a scholar, he had a strong grasp of the theories of
warfare, and he was realistic enough to recognize and be
252 Marc Stiegler
wary of situations where pragmatic experience, not theory,
gave the solution.
He nodded to his jeep driver, Goga, and they bounced
over the rocks and craters to the left flank of the crest,
pulled up next to Svetlanov's jeep, and stepped out. With
a few long strides, Ivan reached the edge of the crest, to
peer out into the main battle area. The sound of artillery
turned deafening here, beyond the protection of the earthen
lip. Down below was a vision of Hell.
Through the gunpowder haze, Ivan could see Major
Shulgin's armor charge through the valley, oblivious to the
hail of Soviet shells through which they coursed. To die
far, far left, a clutch of American tanks huddled behind
whatever cover they could get, while to the right of Shulgin's
formation, a smaller group of tanks—possibly Abrains tanks,

he couldn't tell for sure—were entrenched in massive
bunkers. Though the entrenched tanks were few, they
would be harder to take out than the tank force at the far
left.
None of the Americans paid attention to the artillery,
any more than did the Russians. Save for a minuscule
chance of a direct hit, neither American nor Soviet artil-
lery posed any threat to armor; its sole purpose was to kill
exposed infantrymen—men such as those Ivan now com-
manded. Ivan thanked the fates that the artillery pounding
the battlefield was Russian, not American. He would have
already died had those fires been directed at his position.
Ivan could see—and hear, on the jeep radio that his
driver now cranked to full volume—Shulgin shifting his
forces to crush the more distant enemy first, before sweep-
ing around to encircle the entrenched position. Ivan pulled
out his binoculars to search the center of the overall Amer-
ican formation. Oddly, there was no one there.
And then there was someone there. Or something. Three
machines that looked like inverted cupcakes whirred for-
ward from behind the wreckage of a small brick house.
The machines moved so smoothly over the tortured pas-
tureland, they seemed to ride on air. Focusing his binocu-
lars, Ivan realized that they were riding on air. Hovercraft!
He noticed that they skittered when a shell exploded
DAVID'S SUNG
253
nearby, but they apparently had enough armor to deflect
shrapnel.
Ivan listened to the Soviet chatter. "Commander, we
have three targets bearing center."
"Teymuraz, right flank, hit those targets." Six Soviet
tanks peeled off to face the attacking hovercraft—the Ameri-
cans were attacking, despite the overwhelming odds!—but
even as they peeled, the odd vehicles zipped amongst the
Soviet tanks. Mother of Russia—those hovercraft could flyi
One of them swiveled, and the tank nearest it exploded.
Ivan thought it was Teymuraz's tank, the leader of the
six-tank combat group.
Shulgin didn't know what had happened yet. He had
other fish in his skillet. "Anatolii, center lead," he roared.
"Kiril, cover left. Hit the two M60s at—" Ivan heard the
beginnings of an explosion on the receiver, then silence.
The Americans had killed ShulginI
A handful of Soviet tanks hurtled along at the forefront
of the Soviet formation, moment by moment separating
themselves from the main group. Had Shulgin still been
there, he would have brought them back into line. But
now the Americans started moving, swinging to get clear
shots at the vulnerable side armor of the newly separated

strays. Ivan stood up. "Bring>'me the radio!" he cried.
Someone had to take control before things got out of hand.
There were ninety Soviet tanks down there—enough to
win this battle, even if they fought with no more discipline
than a mob. But the casualties would be terrific without
leadership.
Goga ran up, panting, with the bulky, ancient radio.
Ivan thumbed the transmitter. "This is Major Ivan Voront-
sov," he yelled into the handset. "Major Shulgin has been
killed. I will take command." He steadied his binoculars
on the leader of the strays. 'Tank YZ4, stop your group.
Wait for ADLT to come up on your flank."
A voice he didn't recognize came up. "Who are you?"
the voice demanded.
"This is Major Vorontsov, commander of the 4-35 Infan-
try battalion. Obey me! Major Shulgin is dead."
There was a moment of silence, then the voice began
again. "I think it's an American," the voice said. "Disre-
254 Marc Stiegler
gird the—" the voice ended in a sickening thump, the
same sound that had accompanied Shulgin's death.
The Americans had outflanked the Soviet lead tanks.
The Russians were quickly destroyed by tightly coordi-
nated fire. Ivan had an idea. "Lieutenant Kondrashin, this
is Vorontsov. Can you recognize my voice?"
The pause seemed to last a lifetime. Ivan looked at the
five remaining tanks of the group Shulgin had sent to
destroy the hovercraft. They had stopped in the middle of
the battlefield, uncertain what to do now that their quarry
had passed them. At last Kondrashin's voice spoke up.
"Yes, Major Vorontsov."
"Everyone stop!" Ivan screamed. They stopped, some
grudgingly, to conform with the others rather than in
prompt obedience to the disembodied radio voice.
Ivan surveyed the situation—quickly, quickly, a tank
that stops in the open is a dead tank—"L23Z, bear left
with your group. All tanks forward at 10 miles per hour.
RTY7, accelerate to 15 mph, to circle. Americans are
veering left. I repeat, left." Had Ivan's comrades not taken
his orders, they would already be passing to the right of
the American edge- They would be taking the same beat-
ing that had already killed their eager front line.
He could already foresee die next American step; the
Abrams tanks in the bunkers would come up from behind.
He had to divert them. He switched his radio to the
artillery net- 'This is Major Vorontsov, Move your sup-
pressive fires 1 kilometer south."
There was another long, hysterical discussion as Ivan

persuaded the artillery support personnel to take his or-
ders. At last, however, the fires moved away from the
woodland to the north of the Abrams position. ' Lieutenant
Katsobashvili, take companies B and C down into the
woods, and attack the American position," he pointed at
the partly concealed tanks, "there."
"Yes, sir."
"I'm sure there are American infantry there- You will
have quite a firefight before taking that position, but you
must succeed."
"Yes, sir." The lieutenant hurried away. Troops began
moving slowly over the crest.
DAVID'S SUNG
255
Too late. The small group of Abrams tanks on Shulgin's
right flank moved slowly out of their shelters, then charged
with ever-increasing speed toward the rear of the Soviet
tank formation. And the main group of Americans was
moving again, retreating, giving the Abrams time. The
Soviet formation, meanwhile, was breaking up again as it
moved. The two hovercraft continued to skitter through
their ranks, killing tanks seemingly at random. But those
random tanks always coincidentally blocked the move-
ments of others. Long lines of stragglers formed.
Suddenly, Ivan remembered that there had been three
hovercraft at the beginning. Now there were only two.
What had happened to die third one?
One of his men shouted, and started firing his Kalash-
nikov. Ivan tore away his binoculars and saw the third
hovercraft, breezing up the hill straight toward him. "Kill
that thingi" he shouted, pointing with his right arm.
An extraordinary force threw him backwards to the
ground. Pain exploded through his right shoulder. The
crack of a bullet's sonic boom deafened him. Goga stared
down at him in horror.
Ivan lay there, numb with shock, watching his driver's
face. It seemed almost amusing—that face, the wide, terri-
fied eyes. Ivan concentrated on that face because the
numbness that replaced the pain in his shoulder scared
him. It made him suspect that his arm might no longer be
attached there. He watched Goga's face with the greatest
concentration.
Goga looked up, and his terror exploded. With a choked
scream, he dived toward the jeep, sliding the last meter to
get behind it. Ivan felt a blast of air behind his head. The
roar of jet fans penetrated his deafened ears. A glint of
metal crept up on the comer of his vision. The American
hovercraft floated beside him.

Ivan's mind fragmented. One fragment screamed m pain.
Another fragment panicked with the suspicion that he had
lost his arm.
A third mental fragment trembled in terror of the ma-
chine that had shot him—the machine that would now kill
him.
256 Marc Stiegler
But one fragment watched the hovercraft, recording and
analyzing. This fragment felt a touch of awe.
The hovercraft must be a robot; it was too small, too
oddly shaped, to contain a person. It unerringly singled
out those who showed initiative and destroyed them. It
wasted no fire on mere soldiers, the poor lumps of meat
sent to die. Goga could have come out and danced before
it without fear, rather than quivering behind the futile
protection of the jeep.
Out of curiosity, Ivan moved his left hand toward his
grenade belt. The roar of the fans changed pitch, the
hovercraft swirled, and a strange, seven-barrel gun stared
at him. He recognized the weapon; it was an American
ultra-high-velocity gatling gun that fired armor-piercing
uranium-depleted bullets, used for killing tanks. It took
Ivan a moment to notice a much smaller machine gun
adjacent to the seven massive barrels; as he was still alive,
that was surely the weapon that had taken his arm.
Ivan considered reaching for a grenade. Earlier in his
life, he would have thought that reaching for the grenade
was the brave thing to do. But he had already proved his
bravery. He had proved it with the handful of words he
had written above his signature in the cold lands of Sibe-
ria. He didn't need to prove himself.
He did have to get word of this amazing machine home.
Surely it was a new, secret weapon, or he would have
heard of it before. He had to find a way to counter it.
One oddity of this machine puzzled him as he lay there
in a pool of blood and pain. Why did it sit over him as if
watching patiently for life? Why didn't it kill him?
Lila watched the broadcast from the HopperHunter with
terrified eyes. Nathan watched her and listened to her
short breaths. Nathan felt the horror himself, the thick-
ness in his mind that wanted to deny this scene any reality
beyond the flat panel display. Kurt's face showed the
concentration of a trapeze artist—a dynamic equilibrium of
horror and hatred, both submerged beneath the overrid-
ing engineering need to diagnose the events. The others
had retreated—some across the room, some within them-
selves.
DAVID'S SLING
257

A jet of blood spurted from the Russian's chest. Only
lines of pain put expression on his dead white skin. He
might once have have been a gardener, or a chess player,
or a writer.
He might once have been a gentle human being.
Kurt asked the question. "Okay, what's wrong with the
Hopper? Why hasn't it finished him off?"
Lila shivered. Her body turned from the violence, then
her shoulders, and finally her eyes. Her attention focused
on the program monitor- The computer went through its
steps in slow motion—logical deductions skipping from
certainty to certainty, all the certainties adding up to total
uncertainty. She hissed. "It's caught in an action loop,"
she said in a tone as pale as the man on the screen. Her
voice strengthened as she studied the problem. "I gave the
concept of being 'dead' pretty broad definition in the
Hopper's software. This man fits the definition most of the
time, but every once in a while he moves, and that shifts
the equations to conclude that he's alive. The Hopper
can't decide." Herjawline tightened as she turned to look
at Kurt. "I don't think we need to kill that man any more
than we already have, do you?"
Kurt, still on the tightrope, thought out loud. "Can we
break the action loop without killing him—and without
broadening the definition of death' even further?"
Ula coursed through the program again. "I'm doing it
now.
"Good." His voice rang with cold clarity. "You're right.
We don't need to kill him any more."
Lila trembled as she moved through the text on her
screen, cutting, pasting, rewriting. In a minute, the boxes
of text closed, and everyone turned back to the view of the
pale Soviet face. The pain in his face had receded, he now
looked back at the Hopper as if he could see through
it—through its satellite link—to Lila and Kurt. An expres-
sion of concentration masked his pain. He, too, felt horror
and hatred and a need to diagnose what had happened. It
struck Nathan that the Russian's face now mirrored Kurt's.
Tomorrow, these two men would hate the things they
had done. But today, they hated each other. Nathan vowed
silently that some day the Institute would find a way to
258 Marc Stiegler
prevent this twist of behavior, the twist that allowed and
perhaps even forced Premiers and Presidents to use hu-
man beings as weapons.
Lila whispered, "It's fixed." The picture whirled. With
its new definitions, the Hopper turned in search of an-

other leader to kill.
"I can't believe we're doing thisi" Lila screamed.
"What can't you believe—that we're killing them? Or
that we're letting that man on the screen live?" Kurt
mocked her. "Personally, I'd like to finish off the guy who
ordered that artillery barrage out there, and the soldier we
just saw was probably the one who did it." He turned from
her and spoke more to himself than to Lila. "But that
soldier's more useful to us alive. He's too incapacitated to
lead anymore, so he's not dangerous. And since he's dying,
it'll cost the Russians a tremendous effort to try to save
him. Better yet, if he dies despite their efforts, his death
will demoralize them, because he'll have died in their
hands."
Lila sat speechless, listening to this last blast of inhu-
manly cold, brutal logic. She ran from the room.
Kurt blinked his eyes slowly. "I spent some time in
Stuttgart when I was in the Army." His voice softened.
Abruptly, he grasped the dial and flicked through the
images from the Hoppers. He released the knob when the
picture focused on the ruins of a farmhouse and the charred
ruins of human beings. "I used to pass that farmhouse
every day. The man would frown—he didn't like Amer-
icans— but his daughter waved at me. She waved at all
the people who went by, smiling ..." Fury and pain
congealed in the lines of his neck and mouth as he marched
stiffly from the room.
Ivan continued to watch his murderer as it watched
him. For no apparent reason, the machine whirled again—
how delightfully nimble it was! So graceful and precise a
destroyer!—and sped toward the troops who had moved
halfway over the ridge toward the woodland. Again, the
machine proved its precision. A spit of flame came from it,
a short burst of fire. Lieutenant Katsobashvili spun to the
ground, very dead.
DAVID'S SLING
259
Ivan rolled over and crawled toward the jeep. "Goga,"
he whispered to his driver, "help me into the jeep. We
must get a report on this back to the general."
Goga poked his head around, then ran to assist him. He
looked like he was about to throw up. Ivan almost laughed.
Here was a man who had looked upon the burnt bodies of
helpless children without flinching, yet couldn't stomach
the sight of a one-armed comrade covered with blood.
One-armed! The thought made Ivan want to throw up,
too. He refused to think about it. He rationalized that he
would soon bleed to death, so the loss of his arm would
not be important.

As they bounced away to the nearest hospital, Ivan
looked back to see the first American soldiers come over
the hill Ivan's battalion was frozen with indecision. Most
of them, like his driver, had never been in combat before.
A few of them would fight and die. The rest would
surrender.
The pain and the shock slammed against his rationality
one more time. As Ivan slipped into unconsciousness, he
had one last insight—a thrilling insight that relaxed him,
and almost made him feel peaceful, despite his condition,
He realized that this new American weapon would not
hurt any children.
The SkyHunter floated on the breeze.
Floating on the breeze meant goodness. Not floating
meant endness. Not floating meant endness.
Recognition of a SAM-27 site meant more recognitions
of SAM-27s. It meant float in an out-spiraling helix with
radar detectors in full blossom. Recognition of three
SAM-27s meant conform a template to match them and
see die conformed location of the comsite. Finding the
conformed location of the comsite meant match the confor-
mation to the best nearby hill. Best and nearby meant look
up pattern definitions and calculate weighted value averages.
Finding the best hill match meant float over the hill
with radio detectors in full blossom. No contact meant
circle float. No contact meant circle float.
No contact for many minutes meant float over the second-
260 Marc Stiegler
best hill with radio detectors in lull blossom. No contact
meant circle float-
Contact meant comsite positively identified. Comsite
positively identified meant find the best nearby valley for
a division headquarters. Best and nearby meant pattern
matchmg with weighted averages. Finding the nearby val-
ley meant float over the valley with infrared and optical
detectors in fall blossom.
Infrared patterns of human beings in frenzied action,
concealed from optical vision by camouflage, meant divi-
sion headquarters. Division headquarters meant float over
target. Float over target meant—
Downdraft meant no float. No float meant endness.
Floating on the breeze meant goodness. No float meant
endness.
Safety meant altitude greater than 10,000 feet. Safety
meant continue to float. No safety meant point to error
block. Error block meant touch the satellite with radio
transmitter in full blossom. Error block meant connect to
the Thunderbird Motel in Yakima. Error block meant

dump all status checkpoints to Ronnie.
Nathan's eyes jerked at the sound of the alerter beep. It
took a few moments of reorientation to remember what the
beep meant: another malfunction had occurred in another
Hunter.
A shadow moved in the room's gloomy twilight. Bonnie
stumbled out of his chair and crossed the room to lean
over a glowing display of the image that Nathan recog-
nized: an image of the ground as seen from a SkyHunter-
Nathan walked softly up behind the boy and the com-
puter. Bonnie sighed and drooped his hand over the key-
board. The SkyHunter image slid to the side as chunks of
texts, lists of definitions in Modulog style, popped out.
Each Modulog definition held the meaning of another
definition, of an event, or of a pattern. Nathan recognized
all the words, and all the definitions. Each definition of
itself seemed quite reasonable, but Nathan had no idea
how reasonably they worked as a collection.
The problem with blocks of software resembled the
problem with teams of people. Like the people in the
DAVID'S SUNG
261
team, the definitions in the program had to be molded
into an organic whole. The organic whole had to make
sense beyond the disparate merits of the individuals. He
clenched his teeth as he thought about what this week,
and this day, had done to his team of individuals.
They now played a high-speed race—the race of his
team and their Hunters against the enemy killers. Creating
organic wholeness took time, but they had no time. In-
stead, they were transferring organic wholeness, from the
team to the programs. Every repair they made in response
to a Hunter failure expended some part of the integrity of
the team. As the team disintegrated, the Hunters became
more complete.
Did the team have enough cohesion left to correct the
Hunters? Were the Hunters still so raw and error-ridden
that they would take more than Nathan's people had to
give?
His voice barked as he asked Bonnie, "What is it?"
Bonnie jumped. "I don't know," he said shrilly.
Nathan shook his head. "Sorry. I didn't mean to shout
like that." He dragged his chair over and sat down. The
picture from the SkyHunter zigged again, a purposeful
motion rattled by random twists of air currents. The craft
continuously tweaked its control surfaces to capture every
wisp of available lift.

Looking below the image, Nathan saw the status indica-
tors. Despite its cleverness in using every twist of air, this
SkyHunter had dropped below the safe altitude of 10,000
feet. Flying that low, the glider might well be seen from
the ground, if someone looked in the right direction at the
right time, despite the coloration of the Hunter's lower
surfaces.
Nathan sat quietly, resisting the desire to ask more
questions until Bonnie had at least finished his inspection
of the situation. To reinforce his resolve, Nathan sidled his
chair back and away from the work station, far enough
away to remove himself from Bonnie's field of view.
Nathan watched the boy in sympathy, remembering the
times when he had been the man on the spot—the pro-
grammer who had to fix the problem because no one else
could. He remembered the annoyance of having people
262 Marc Stiegler
watch him; and smiled in sympathy with the men who had
been his supervisors. He now understood the exquisite
quality of their suffering. He also remembered how, after
a few moments of getting inside the problem, he would
forget their presence, as long as they were not obnoxious
with their questions.
Ronnie started idly tapping on the keyboard. The image
of forward motion stopped, then accelerated into reverse.
Nathan realized he was running back through the se-
quence of events that led to the moment when the Hunter
had called in its warning. He started the motion forward
again.
After a few minutes, Nathan started to see a pattern.
The glider seemed to be going through the same sequence
of steps, covering nearly the same path, over and over
again, each time at a lower altitude.
Ronnie gasped. Nathan opened his mouth, but was afraid
to speak. Fortunately, Ronnie broke into a half-muttered
expfanation, perhaps for himself as much for Nathan. "It
keeps coming around for the final overflight of the head-
quarters, but something distracts it. It's acting as if it has
forgotten where it was and what it was doing, then goes
back into the standard search pattern,"
"Which part of the code has the problem?" The term
"which part' was a euphemism; what Nathan really wanted
to know was, is it a problem in the code that Ronnie had
written? If it was, then Ronnie was the best person to try
to fix it, since he understood it. If not . . .
Ronnie waved his hands helplessly. "I'm not sure whose
code it is," he said, answering the real question. "It's not
Lila's problem. Something is going wrong between Kurt's
understanding of the tactical maneuvers and the plane's
execution of those maneuvers. So it could be Kurt's stuff,
or hopefully, mine." He pursed his lips. "Or it could be a

problem with the WeatherWatcher software—the mod-
ules supplied with the glider that tell it how to fly."
Nathan nodded. A certain irony colored the hopes of a
good software developer: you always hoped that the prob-
lem lay in your own part of the code, because if it didn't,
you'd have to call somebody else to fix it. Here, their only
hope of saving the SkyHunter was if the problem was
DAVID'S SLING
263
Ronnie's. If it was Kurt's, it would have to wait until
morning. Kurt needed sleep before he could solve the
problem, no matter how hard or long he might be willing
to work.
But the third possibility was most chilling. If there was a
bug in the LightCraft built-in software, they could not fix
it through their satellite link. The built-in software resided
in read-only memory; they could not repair it without
physically opening the Hunters up and installing new chips.
A snappy staccato of typing focused Nathan's attention.
The green light from the image of German forests bathed
Ronnie's face, giving him the look of a man suffering from
seasickness. Nathan looked closer, overcome by the suspi-
cion that Ronnie's sickly appearance came from more than
just the unnatural light.
"Ha," Ronnie grunted in a wan imitation of joy. "Got
it."
"How do you feel?" Nathan asked.
The staccato of the keyboard broke for a moment. "I'll
make it- I see the problem. There's a downdraft on the last
leg of the approach route to the Hunter's target. The
Hunter tracks very nicely until it hits the downdraft. But
the downdraft is strong enough to send an interrupt to the
flight control system, which n'eeds the highest priority to
maintain stability." He rolled his'eyes. "By the time the
flight control system ends its downdraft countermeasures,
everything else has been forgotten. The sensors go back to
looking for SAM sites, and it repeats. Of course, it repeats
at a lower altitude because it doesn't get to correct entirely
for the downdraft."
"But the flight control system must do that fairly fre-
quently. Why haven't we seen this problem before?*
Ronnie shook his head. "It only forgets if it's in the
middle of switching contexts from tactical analysis to the
attack run. At that time, there are just enough things to
remember that it has to forget something. Unfortunately,
it forgets the wrong things." The staccato stopped. They
watched a quick simulation of the revised software on the
programming display, then downloaded to the SkyHunter
so far away- "I wonder how many other stupid little prob-

lems like that there are," Ronnie murmured.
264 Marc Stiegler
"At least we fixed that Hunter before any Russians saw
it. I wonder how their air defense guys missed it?"
Ronnie bent over, clearly unwell. He looked quizzically
at Nathan, then winced. "Are you kidding? It's midnight
over there. How can they see anything at all?"
Nathan was moving to Ronnie's side even as he thought
about the time zone difference. Of course! The image from
the SkyHunter was an enhanced night view. It probably
would have crashed before the Russians saw it,
"We need to get you to bed," Nathan said, taking Ron-
nie by the arm. By now, Ronnie was shivering.
Florence appeared out of nowhere. "Take this," she
ordered him, a pill in one hand and a cup of water in the
other. Ronnie obeyed, wobbling over to his chair. "You'll
keep on getting worse until you start taking care of your-
self. You know that, don't you?"
Ronnie chuckled. "Right, ma. Whatever you say."
Florence shook her head at Nathan. "I've got him," she
said.
"Apparently," Nathan agreed as they headed out the
door.
Infrared patterns of human beings in frenzied action,
concealed from optical vision by camouflage, meant divi-
sion headquarters. Division headquarters meant float over
target. Float over target meant select aimpoint, Aimpoint
selected meant bomb release- Bomb rack empty meant fly
home.
The SkyHunter did not notice that the frenzied human
activity below became even more frenzied after the bomb-
ing—even hysterical. The "SkyHunter did not realize that
the pre-bombing activity had been organized and purpose-
fill, nor did it realize that the new hysterical activity had
lost both organization and purpose. Kurt, however, would
have understood it completely.
Soon, the regiment headquarters below the division
would understand the difference also. Those regiments
would understand when they stopped to await futher or-
ders, and none issued forth.
Frozen in place, they would realize how vulnerable they
were without the authority to move. Their understanding
DAVID'S SUNG
265

would fade as the fearful hysteria swept their own head-
quarters. The hysteria would freeze ever more units across
an ever wider front. They would remain frozen for a long
time.
The Third Shock Army will be the heroes of the next
war.
Captain Townsend heard the words clearly, spoken in a
low, confident, sad voice. For a moment, the voice seemed
so clear it might have been real. He was back in tactical
nuke school: he craned his neck up to see Colonel Schnei-
der, the tall American instructor, as he spoke the words.
The British Army of the Rhine has the toughest sons of
bitches in NATO. But there aren't enough of them. And
they have the worst equipment. And the North German
Plain is completely indefensible. And the Soviet Third
Shock Army has the toughest sons of bitches in the Soviet
Union.
Captain Townsend nodded imperceptibly to the tall
American so far away in space and time. Colonel Schnei-
der had known what would happen.
The Third Shock Army will have a road race amongst
themselves to see who gets to tfw Rhine first.
Captain Townsend stared impassively toward the dawn-
He could not yet hear the vehicles in the road race. His
nostrils flared. But he could feel them, there on the hori-
zon, shrouded in fog and smoke.
A bird chirped from somewhere in the camouflage net-
ting. The lively sound seemed unnatural in this land of the
dead. The silence that followed also seemed unnatural.
Hell should not be quiet.
The clanking of treads and the roar of diesels murmured
from far away. The members of the road race were gearing
up for full daylight speed. In an hour or so, they would
circumvent the minefields and the barricades thrown up
by British engineers in the wee hours. Then the Soviet
racers would charge across Townsend's position. Over my
dead body, Townsend swore to himself. He smiled for the
first time that morning, recognizing the truth in his thoughts.
His army was running out of ammunition and out of terri-
266 Marc Stiegler
tory to Bght across. They might retreat from here, but
they would not find another place to make a stand.
He wondered if it was proper to thank God for Chobham
armor. Too many people he had known—people he dared
not think of as friends, not now—had died in their foxholes
and their simple metal boxes when the Soviets launched
their assault with a gray whistling rain of artillery shells.
The theoreticians had counted on the foot soldiers, hidden
in the brick buildings of the little towns of Germany. With

shoulder-held missile launchers, they were to have coun-
tered the thousands of tons of Russian steel.
But the Russians had developed bad habits early in the
game. They tended to go around the little towns when
possible. They tended to pound the little towns into park-
ing lots when necessary. The soldiers on foot disappeared.
Only those clothed in Chobham armor, like Townsend,
remained.
Townsend looked in all directions from his perch on the
top of his tank on the top of a low rise. He saw virtually no
defenders anywhere. This caused him to smile again. The
defenders were few, true enough, but not so few as it
appeared. The Third Shock Army would spend several
unpleasant hours here before the road race resumed.
The clanking grew louder. A gray carpet separated itself
from the gray dawn. The carpet crawled across the plain,
spilling around the villages in fluid swirls.
German towns are separated by a distance of approxi-
mately two kilotons, Townsend heard nuclear weapons
expert Colonel Schneider say. You can't kill any tanks
without Jailing lots and lots of people,
The desire to live welled up in Townsend's mind, and
for a moment, he yearned to throw nukes across that gray
metal carpet- A sob grew and faded in his throat. With
nukes, he could stop this assault, but he knew that such a
defense would mean Soviet retaliation. He, Captain
Townsend, would still die in the end, after condemning
untold thousands of civilians to burning deaths.
A flicker in the comer of his eye made him look up and
beyond his invisible army. A spattering of fireworks smeared
across the sky, felling. As he watched, the sparks nickered
and died. The projectiles that now advanced along the
DAVID'S SUNG
267
fireworks' course could not be seen, but the captain could
intuit their presence, as earlier he could sense the pres-
ence of the Soviet tanks. He had never heard of an artil-
lery or aerial bombardment quite like this before, but he
understood its purpose. He visualized the graceful arc of
the bombs' flight paths. They would fall on him and his
troops. Even with small warheads they would do great
damage.
Captain Townsend looked back wistfully at the approach-
ing Third Shock Army. With chilling certainty he knew
that the road race would cross his position unimpeded.
Blood pumped through Nathan's head in dizzying cir-
cles. He wanted to stop the rush.
He wanted to stop the world. He wanted to do any-

thing, be anyone, go anywhere, as long as he did not have
to be here now. He glanced across the room's occupants
with wild eyes; Leslie, Florence, and Juan looked back
with the same wild desire to escape.
The first ten HighHunters had dispensed their Crow-
bars over the North German Plain to break the galloping
Soviet Third Shock Army. With engineering precision, the
Crowbars selected and targete^ themselves upon their
chosen victims. But the targets were not elements of the
Soviet Army. Every Crowbar hurtled now toward a vehi-
cle that belonged to the British Army of the Rhine. The
Crowbars were quite indifferent to the agony of the ob-
servers in Yakima.
"Anyone have an idea of where the problem lies?" Na-
than asked with surprising calm.
Leslie displayed no more panic than did Nathan. "I'm
sure it's in Lilas stuff." He turned from the work station.
"Ill go get her. I hope she's recovered enough to take care
of this." As he crossed the room his pace picked up, until
he bore through the doorway at a dead run. Nathan looked
back at the imagery from one of the Crowbars. A stolid
British captain rested his arms on the turret of the tank
that this Crowbar bad selected for destruction. Nathan sat
down at the work station, brought up the Crowbar soft-
ware, and stared at the code he had no hope of fixing.
"I wish I were there," he muttered.
268 Marc Stiegler
Juan stood at his shoulder. "Where?"
Nathan pointed at the British captain. "I wish I were
there, and that they were here." He clenched his Sst. "At
least that would be just. This Basco is mine."
A smile flickered across Juan's mouth. "I heard a Zetetic
lecturer once. He said that 'J115*3*36 exists only to the
extent that Men have the power to create it.' " Juan's eyes
darkened. "Would you really trade places with those men?"
"Of course." Nathan looked away. "But I don't have the
power." He looked back to see Juan staring at the screen,
eyes glistening.
"Damn you," he whispered. "I hate altruists." A mo-
ment later he commented, "Lila can't fix the problem."
Nathan looked at him.
"She'll get rattled by the pressure." He reached past
Nathan to pound out a terse request for the computer.
When it responded, he continued, "We have not quite six
minutes left to fix it."
"Can we just clear the Crowbar memories, make them
miss everything and dig up the ground a bit?" Nathan

asked.
Juan shrugged. "Then the Brits will die anyway, won't
they? They're hopelessly outnumbered." His eyes defocus-
sed. "I know this stuff as well as Lila does."
Nathan sat very still. "I know."
Juan's voice grew airier, more distant "t know its re-
sponse to every kind of touch." He caressed the monitor,
His eyes closed, and his voice filled with authority. "Please
give me the chair."
Nathan stood aside; Juan sank into the chair. He rolled
dose to the screen. His hands moved across the keyboard;
the display changed, and kept on changing as Juan bur-
rowed into the heart of the Hunter, The display changed
faster—so fast that Nathan could not even scan the con-
tents before they disappeared. Yet when he looked back at
Juan, he had the eerie sensation that Juan had read every
flashing symbol with full understanding. Nathan knew that
he himself was not quite so brilliant a programmer as
Juan, but nevertheless, he knew what was happening in
Juan's mind as he read the sheets of computer displays.
Even at the incomprehensible speed with which Juan
DAVID'S SUNG               269
now soared—through the Modulog meanings, and the rela-
tion diagrams, and the truth tables, and the switches in
the Crowbar's programming—his speed fell far short of the
speed of the computers themselves. But Juan brought
something into the heart of the Crowbar that no computer
had—an understanding of the purpose of the Crowbar and
its software. At each step, on each decision, Juan now
asked of himself, "Yes, this works. But does it achieve the
purpose?"
Thousands of such decisions rolled across die screen;
thousands of times Juan asked himself that question and
§ reduced a reluctant answer of "Yes." But sometimes the
edsion, having assured Juan that the program worked
correctly on some larger scale, allowed him to skip across
the thousands of decisions that went into that larger deci-
sion. And so he jumped and cut across the landscape of
the Hunter's soul, pouncing at each stop with the same
ftirious question: "Do you achieve your purpose?" Soon it
became difficult to tell who answered the question—whether
it was the soul of the Hunter, or the soul of Juan
Dante-Cortez.
Nathan shook himself to break the thread of his trance.
He realized thit Juan would not break his connection to
the compittef so easily, Juan sat immobile, his breathing
so shallow as to be unnoticeable, his eyes unblinking.
Only his fingers moved, in tiny jerks that clicked on the

keyboard.
Footsteps sounded. Nathan whirled and waved Leslie
and Lila to silence. He tiptoed up to them. "Juan's trying
to fix it. I think our best bet is to leave him alone." He saw
Lila looking past him and taking in Juan's autistic appear-
ance. Juan s mouth hung open now, and saliva drooled
from his chin. Still the screens of the work station flick-
ered, perhaps even faster than before.
Nathan turned to Lila. "The only thing we can do for
Juan is call the hospital. He'll need the same treatment
now," his voice broke, "as he did five years ago."
A burst of clicking made Nathan turn back to Juan. He
saw the image from the HighHunter blur as it shifted
across the German landscape. It wobbled for a moment,
then locked on a new shape: the shape of a Soviet tank.
270 Marc Stickler
Nathan started to smile, until he heard Juan gurgling. The
sound was not quite human.
Captain Townsend could not relax his back muscles as
he watched the Soviet army approach. He sensed as a
steady pressure the unseen bombs approaching him from
the rear. That sneak attack would deprive him of this last
chance to remind the enemy that Brits were not easily
defeated. If only the bombs had been launched a few
minutes later. . . . The Soviet tanks were close enough
now that he could make out their individual features. In
just a few minutes, Captain Townsend's last battle would
begin.
Suddenly, he felt the release of pressure. Had his in-
stincts failed him? He looked to the sky, expecting to be
struck at any moment by the descending killers.
Instead, the sky filled with noise: not explosions, just
noise. It was the sound of a thousand tiny sonic booms.
Now explosions bellowed, unmistakably the sound of
tank ammunition erupting in flame. The explosions came
from the Soviet battle line. Little sparks fell en masse and
sent huge gouts of flame shooting back into the sky. Cap-
tain Townsend's eyes widened with a feojsng he had not
known for days; the feeling of hope,    '  -1'
The gray metal carpet stopped moving. Columns of
vehicles blocked up behind the burning remains of the
victims. The captain smiled in a way that was happy yet
unpleasant. The scattered lead tanks of the Third Shock
Army, die ones who sped forward ahead of the broken and
dying, would be easy pickings. And the followers, now
threading their way painfully through the field of wreck-
age, would be easier still-
Nathan stood at the doorway to the Tieton Room. It felt
different; for the first time in two weeks, it was empty. He
realized the extent of the ravages his small team had made

on the order and neatness of the room. The red and gold
chairs faced in all directions, a random scattering thrown
about as by a tornado. Paper, cables, and used ribbons
remained as the waste products from the computers; cups,
DAVID'S SUNG
napkins, and junk food wrappers remained as testament to
the absent human beings. It looked like a war zone,
Nathan corrected himself: it had been a war zone. The
emptiness testified to the vicious effectiveness of the com-
bat. Not one of Nathan's soldiers had escaped unscathed;
they had suffered heavy damage in the battle. He won-
dered whether they had won their war. Days might pass
before they knew.
He shuddered. At least, in the Battle of the Thunder-
bird Motel, the combatants had only been wounded. The
team might never work closely together as a unit again,
but the individuals would go on. Most would join new
teams. Hopefully, those new teams would concentrate on
tools to build a new world, rather than tools to destroy an
old one.
He turned out the light and headed to his room for a
long sleep.
May 7
Engineering is the implementation of sci-
ence; politics is the implementation of
faith.
—ZeteUc Commentaries
Nathan remembered her last words to him—luxurious
words, terribly out of place in the nightmare they had
been living: "I hope the next time we meet, we will have
more pleasant matters to discuss."
How prophetic her words had been; how much they had
needed her prophecy to come true. Nathan smiled at Nell
Carson, seated across the table from him, and wondered
whether Nell saw how much more his smile meant than
just a friendly expression.
The office seemed less stark now, though nothing in the
room itself had changed. Nell smiled back at him as if she,
too, remembered their last meeting, as if she took equal
pleasure in remembering this shared secret. Other people
shared the table with them today, Hilan among them. Yet
in Nathan's tunneled vision, there were just two people
here, together savoring the absence of horror.
How wondrously different everything now seemed, just
two weeks into the future!
"The war is far from over," a worried voice to his left

complained. The voice belonged to an admiral.
Reluctantly, yielding with the stubbornness of cold tafiy
in warm hands, Nathan acknowledged the accuracy of the
admiral's words. The war had ground to a halt—a very
different thing from a war that had ended. The Soviet
armies, still overwhelming in size, formed turgid lumps
throughout Germany and Denmark. Some had reached
the Rhine; they were now starving for supplies from the
backup troops who no longer knew where they were- But
malnourished as they were, they remained wholly unas-
sailable to the pathetic remnants of NATO forces still able
to move as organized units.
272
DAVID'S SUNG
273
"He's right," an army general agreed with someone else
whom Nathan had not quite heard. "We won't be able to
drive them out of Germany unless Operation Steel Bridge
succeeds."
Nathan blinked his eyes. Operation Steel Bridge was,
very simply, having every ship the United States could lay
its hands on cross the Atlantic as fast as it could. As it
turned out, that meant that many of them had left at about
the same time, so that a scattered crazy-quilt of ships now
sailed more or less together, forming the largest fleet in
the history of the world. They were also probably the least
organized.
The lack of cohesion was planned. The Navy had learned
its lesson on the first day of the war, when it lost eight
aircraft carriers and their battle groups: ships that sail
together, sink together. So the Steel Bridge moved at
random; it would be difficult indeed to sink so many ships.
Nathan asked with some surprise, "Is Operation Steel
Bridge m jeopardy? Do the Russians have enough subma-
rines to find and sink that many ships at the same time?"
The admiral smiled. "Certainly not. In fact, the Rus-
sians don't have any submarines at all anymore."
Nathan stared at the man, who stared back with growing
pleasure. Nathan asked, "No submarines at all?"
The admiral shrugged. "There are' a couple in drydock-
But they lost everything that was at sea,' His look har-
dened. "Maybe our aircraft carriers are obsolete, but our
submarines are a damn sight better than theirs are," The
smile returned, "Rather, ours are a damn sight better than
theirs used to be."
Nathan shook his head. "Then how can they stop our
fleet?"
The admiral rolled his eyes, growing silent.

Nell sat forward in her chair. As Nathan's eyes returned
to her, she explained, "Both sides are pretty well ex-
hausted out there. They destroyed our surface fleet; we
destroyed their undersea fleet. They destroyed most of
our air bases around the Atlantic basin, and shot up most
of our aircraft; but now we have SkyHunters harassing
their air bases, so they can't fly their bombers either."
Her eyes widened in frustrated amazement. "So all
274 Marc SUegler
that's left is our submarine fleet and their surface fleet.
That would be fine, except," and now her eyes narrowed
with deep worry, "for some reason, our subs can't get
close to their ships without, uh, disappearing. The Rus-
sians seem to have introduced something new themselves
in the last couple of weeks. Anyway, their ships seem
invincible to our submarines at the moment."
She looked away. When she looked back, not only her
eyes, but the eyes of all the people at the table, fell upon
him. With a small twist of her head she asked, "So how
would the Information Age answer this problem?"
Nathan saw himself suddenly in a new role amongst
these most powerful people—that of magician, the man
who plucked new methods and ideas from a mystical, su-
pernatural world. He had joked about magic with Nell in
their last meeting; since then, he had succeeded as only a
magician could,
Over the long run, such a magical role would lead to
catastrophe. He was no magician; no supernatural powers
could be brought to bear on crises of human making.
Indeed, he and Jan had designed the Zetetic educational
system to guarantee skepticism about the powers of magi-
cians, whether they be called priests or scientists or states-
men or simply experts.
Still, Nathan had to admit it was a heady experience,
having the most powerful people m the world look to him
for salvation. It was particularly heady, since he had a
salvation waiting in his bag. And for better or worse, the
form of this salvation smacked of magic. What a fantastic
irony he had here, acting as a magician when his deepest
principles denied the concept of magici
Uke all magic, of course, an important part of seeing
the trick was state of mind- Nathan could see the answer
to this problem almost without thinking, not because he
was smarter than anyone else at the table, but because he
had had more practice with thinking in terms of the Sling
Project and the various Hunters. "Clearly, we can solve
this problem by developing a SeaHunter.' He pursed his
lips, then nodded. "We'll build a variation of the High-
Hunter. Instead of loading the missile with small Crow-
bars for killing tanks, we'll design a larger Crowbar—longer,

DAVID'S SUNG
275
maybe wider, maybe with a new shape for penetrating
ship armor. 1 presume we know where the Russian ships
are?"
Nell smiled. "Of course. Just as well as they know
where our ships are."
Nathan smiled in response. "Then we can drop Crow-
bars all over them."
The eyes in the room shifted as people began mur-
muring among themselves about the tasks they would
need to undertake to make the SeaHunter work. Nathan
continued to smile at Nell. As at the beginning of the
meeting, it seemed as if they were alone. With a sudden
zest, Nathan walked to the bay window and looked out
across the Mall. He heard Nell giving orders, questions
asked and answered, the rapid motion of men who knew
that the lives of other men depended on their success.
He did not hear Nell's approach. Suddenly, she was
standing just to his left, sharing with him the view of the
city in spring. Her voice seemed distracted. "We'll win
this battle. I just hope . . ." her voice trailed off.
"You just hope that the Soviets are smart enough not to
throw nukes at us. They'll face the same situation we faced
when we thought about throwing nukes at them."
"Exactly." Nell turned toliim. "Are you a licensed
telepath, or do you just guess wefl?"
Nathan shook his head, resisting his desire to turn from
the window, to savor her appreciation of him. "I do more
guessing, though my guessing is well directed. A terribly
important part of success in any age—industrial, informa-
tion, or whatever—is being able to see the situation from
other people's viewpoints. In the middle of a world war, a
president has a very limited set of things to worry about or
to hope for." At last, he turned to her. "You're chained to
the position you occupy; for the moment, you dare not
think thoughts other than the thoughts of a president."
It was her turn to look away. Nathan noticed the sleep-
less circles under her eyes as she nodded. "You're right
about that. I can't afford to think about anything else."
"Nell Carson, when this war's over, I'd like to meet
you. At that time, please leave the president here in the
276 Marc Stiegler
office." When she looked startled, he continued, "I pre-
dict that that will mean dinner in about a week."
She studied him thoughtfully, a chess player sizing up a

fellow player, then burst into laughter. "Very well. If
the war is over, dinner in about a week,"
On his way out, Nathan looked in the mirror again. Again
he shook his head at himself and his dreams of Nell Carson.
Ivan felt amazement that he was still alive. The past
three days seemed like shadows in his memory—a feverish
blur of hospitals and soldiers, screams of pain, and his own
semi-coherent explanations of the importance of what he
had seen. His last clear memory was of himself, mangled
and bloody, bouncing down the road in a jeep while an
American hovercraft executed his best officer.
Given that he was still alive, however, he understood
why they had brought him to this odd little room filled
with ivory figurines. Few of the bright, observant officers
who had encountered the hovercraft in combat lived to tell
of it, and none were in good shape. And certainly none of
those normal line officers had the technological background
to appreciate what they had seen- He was here to tell
General Secretary Sipyagin how to fight the new American
hovercraft and win the war.
Ivan sat in his wheelchair and listened. The doctor
whispered to the Premier, softly, so that Ivan couldn't
hear. No doubt they were discussing Ivan's arm.
Ivan chuckled inwardly at their whispered conference. Part
of his mind knew, or at least was pretty sure, that he had
lost his right arm. Other parts of his mind, though, could
still feel that arm out there, as strong and potent as ever.
He knew better than to try to flex his fingers. And he knew
better than to look. He would deal with that another time.
The General Secretary sat at the far end of the table,
looking left and right, but rarely at Ivan himself. The man
to the General Secretary's right, whom Ivan did not recog-
nize, stared at Ivan with an intensity that verged on ha-
tred. Other men filled the table, presumably Politburo
and Central Committee members, but Ivan felt the power
of those eyes upon him, and knew that the man next to the
General Secretary would make the decisions.
DAVID'S SUNG
277
Yet that man would not do the talking. One of the oldest
members of the council spoke first. "Major Vorontsov we
understand you've encountered the new American weapon."
"Yes, sir." Ivan's speech came slow and fuzzy, but he
tried to put some force behind it. "The hovercraft—they
tell me the Americans call it a HopperHunter—is a re-
markable machine. It is as graceful and precise as it is
lethal." He described the way it singled out leaders and
killed them. "I've made some recommendations for de-
ceiving the machines, by having our officers act more like

ordinary soldiers. We should be able to confuse the Hop-
pers by making it appear that there are no leaders. But I
doubt that my countenneasures will be very effective.
Indeed, I doubt that my recommendations will even get to
the troops."
"Why not?" one of the faceless men asked.
"Who will forward the information, with half our com-
mand posts destroyed?" With exhausted admiration, Ivan
contemplated the American attacks he bad learned about
just an hour ago. A mysterious destruction was consuming
the Soviet command posts. Not coincidentally, this bru-
tally effective elimination of Soviet generals had started
the same day Ivan had encountered me first Hoppers.
No survivors could yet identify the cause of the explo-
sions that wreaked havoc on critical Soviet headquarters.
No one had seen any aircraft, nor had they heard anything
that might be a Hopper. Someone had suggested they
were mines, but how could even the crafty Americans
plant and detonate mines with such precision!*
And the destruction of the Third Shock Army from
outer space was just incrediblel "I have no idea how to
combat the weapon that no one can see."
^      "They must be using Hoppers somehow to destroy our
^    command posts. Hoppers traveling deep behind our lines."
,1      Ivan was too weak to shake his head. He wanted to yell
^    at the stupid creature who had spoken; instead, he whis-
pered. "No, sir. The Hoppers use turbine engines. Ad-
<    vanced turbines, possibly ceramic, but turbines nonetheless.
^:.   I heard them. They could not possibly carry enough fuel
to travel that far. And even if they could go the distance,
they could not escape detection. They might destroy the
278 Marc Stiegler
headquarters, but anyone who got out alive would know
how it had happened." He licked his lips. His only idea for
the cause seemed crazy, but. . . "My best thought is that
our CPs are under attack from invisible airplanes. Nonme-
tallic, perhaps, high enough and small enough to be diffi-
cult to see. Perhaps they are using gliders so they cannot
be heard."
No one laughed. Another man cleared his throat. "We
had reports of such a craft before the ban on smart weap-
ons. It is under investigation."
So, he had surmised correctly! Ivan's virtuosity here
would help him in the inevitable Bnal argument of this
meeting. That final argument was one that Ivan had to
win, although he faced the most powerful men of the
Soviet Union.
Another voice asked hysterically, "Are these Hoppers
invulnerable to our firepower? Why can't we destroy them?"
Ivan responded patiently. "In fact, comrades, we do

have weapons that can destroy them, but those weapons
are few and scattered. The Hoppers move too fast for our
heavy cannons to take aim. And they are armored well
enough to deflect hits from our heavy machine guns. How-
ever, I believe our older anti-aircraft guns, with 20mm or
40mm rapidfire cannon, could be very effective. But how
do we get word to the troops, to the scattered few who
have this equipment?"
Another man—a soldier, this one—spoke. "We must
use nuclear weapons to combat this threat," he stated.
"We can destroy these things with sufficient firepower.
We can still win on a nuclear battlefield."
With these words the final argument, the one Ivan had
feared, had begun.
No one in the room objected. Fools!
The room seemed cold, and yet Ivan could feel perspi-
ration beading on his brow. To brush it aside, he brought
up his right arm—but no arm moved to his command.
His arm! He almost screamed as the delicate balance of
his mind collapsed. He'd lost his arm, he'd lost his arm—
the thought twisted up in his throat, and it hurt so much
he couldn't breathe.
But he could not deal with this now! He bit through his
DAVID'S SUNG
279
up, and the pain and the taste of blood shifted his mental
gears again.
He carefully clenched his left fist. He had to stop these
madmen, with their nuclear terrors. His eyes widened, a
feverish anger filling them. "No!" he told them. "If you
behove nuclear firepower can defeat the Americans, then
you believe a lie." He pointed at die general who had
spoken. "Where will you drop your bombs? Quickly, for
me Hoppers are moving!'*
The general sat stunned for a moment, then smiled. "I
will drop them in Germany." Still no one laughed.
Ivan drove onward. "Then give me the coordinates,
General, to within a meter. That is what we need to
launch a weapon. And then you must tell me who will
issue the launch orders, with our commanders dead. The
orders must go out quickly, before the targets can move.
Otherwise, comrades, our nuclear weapons will be no more
effective than our artillery." He described the way the
artillery shells fell around the battling tanks, which re-
mained oblivious to the massive shelling because they
never landed on them, only near them. ' You could drop
thousands of bombs on Germany, you could kill millions of
farmers and children, you could destroy life all over the

planet, without stopping a single Hopper. Artillery only
works well when combined with tightly integrated recon-
naissance, decision-making, and action. Even the ultimate
artillery shell, the nuclear bomb, is worthless without a
well-defined target."
The hysterical voice spoke again. "How can they be
doing this to us?" he cried. "We destroyed their command
and control in the first three days of war. How can they go
on fighting?"
Ivan relaxed, and smiled at the second-rate Politburo
bureaucrat who had given him his opening. "Thank you,
sir, for that question. They can fight on without orders
because they are defenders. It takes far less command and
control sophistication to defend your position—just shoot
at anything that shoots at you. The attacker, however,
must orchestrate every move. Without good direction, an
attacker's forces can even wind up attacking each other,
rather than the enemy." A number effaces looked up in
280 Marc Stiegler
surprised anger, as if he had spoken of something obscene
that had already happened. Had he hit home again? Were
the Warsaw Pact allies deserting them? It made no differ-
ence. '*Tliis leads me to suggest the one way left that we
can still achieve victory."
That certainly got their interest! He doubted they would
like his suggestion, however. 'To defeat the American
weapons that destroy attackers, we must become defend-
ers," He paused to let them puzzle over that for a mo-
ment, "We must advance our troops back to their permanent
fortifications in East Germany and Czechoslovakia. We
must make this move while we still have such superior
numbers and strength that we can defend ourselves.'
Retreat. He hadn't used that word, but he could see it
twisting the faces around him in anger.
"Thank you for your analysis and your opinions, Major,"
the powerful man by the Premier said. "Now your doctors
want you to rest. You are dismissed." He nodded, and
someone turned his wheelchair to the door.
A sense of deja vu flickered through Ivan's mind. He
had no regrets about his actions in this meeting. As in his
study a year earlier on nuclear war, he had done his best.
Perhaps this time it would make a difference.
Yurii rubbed his temples as the door closed behind
Major Ivan Vorontsov.
General Ramius cleared his throat. "That man should be
shot," he muttered. "It's treasonous to speak of surrender."
"He did not speak of surrender," Yevschenko responded
mildly. "He spoke of retreat. He spoke as a man who has
been there and knows whereof he speaks."

Pultiy, who seemed calmer now that the lowly but
insightful major was gone, chimed in, "He speaks plainly,
like a man who has accepted death, but who has not lost
hope."
They paused. Yurii started directing the meeting toward
the conclusion he had drawn, based on Vorontsov's analy-
sis. "Major Vorontsov's greatest failing is that he speaks
the truth- Unless we come up with a better alternative
than any so feu- proposed, gentlemen, we must follow his
advice. We already have a bloody future ahead of us in
DAVID'S SUNG
281
resubjugating the Poles." The Polish Army had started an
unauthorized retreat. The trouble had begun when the
Third Shock Army disappeared in a God-like barrage of
fire and brimstone, just as they were about to destroy the
last units of the British Army. Even Yurii felt haunted by
the mystical horror of it. He sympathized with the Poles,
even as he planned a hideous punishment.
General Ramius spoke again. "We could make a strate-
gic nuclear strike. That would show the Americans that
we're serious, and it would tell them to hold their posi-
tions. We would form a new national boundary based on
current troop locations."
The discussion that followed paralleled discussions that
had been held in the White House just weeks before. The
Soviet discussion was not the same. The values important
enough to affect decisions in a free society are not the
values of importance in a police state.
But the conclusion was the same: nuclear missiles were
too crude to operate as instruments of politics. The risks
were too great.
Yurii summed up. "We could have risked it had May-
field been alive, but Nell Carson is in charge now. She is
too clever to be predictable. And being unpredictable, she
is dangerous." His eyes swept (he room. "Are there any
other suggestions?" He paused, but not long enough to
allow others to open any new discussions. "Then the major
was correct. We must return to the original borders." He
glanced at Sipyagin, whose labored breathing filled the
silence. "And we will need to negotiate with the Ameri-
cans. to make sure they don't press their advantage into
our territory. In order to be credible in this endeavor,
comrades, we must reshuffle the highest echelons of the
government."
The General Secretary's heavy breathing stopped.
"What?"
Yurii smiled without compassion. For a moment he felt
an icy pleasure at the justice he would now serve on die

General Secretary.
Yurii thought about the decrepit men sitting here in this
decrepit room with venomous hostility. They hadn't been
able to wait. For decades, the Soviet Union had waited
282 Marc SUegler
while America's strength slowly but surely deteriorated.
In just another decade, the Americans would have with-
drawn from Europe completely, without any further moves
on Russia's part at all. The waiting had almost been over.
But the little old men wanted to see that day of victory
in their own lifetimes. They couldn't wait. They had to
hurry the process just a little bit too much.
During die first heady weeks of the war, it had seemed
that they had been right to finish the job quickly, and
Yurii had been wrong. But the perverse American capacity
for losing all the battles and still winning the war had
shown through at last. Now the whole Soviet empire would
pay the price for the impatience of these fools. He spoke
to Sipyagin. "Sir, the American propaganda blames you for
starting this war- If you remain in power, the Americans
will continue to fight. They will fight to destroy you,
believing that as long as you have power, we might try this
again.
"But if we install a new leader, they can then deceive
themselves into believing that our government has top-
pled. Our new secretary will be a peacemaker. The Amer-
ican news media will herald him as a savior."
An anonymous voice spoke quickly, with heavy irony.
"No doubt the new General Secretary should be someone
who helped the Americans sign away their defenses with
numerous treaties."
Another anonymous voice snorted.
Yurii swept the room with his eyes but could not tell
who had taken those shots. Whoever they were, they
already realized how dangerous their outburst had been.
Yurii could identify them later. For the moment he
returned his attention to Sipyagin, who was searching the
room for supporters. No one volunteered. "We must pon-
der this carefully," Sipyagin said, stalling for time.
"Of course," Yurii conceded. "But we must ponder it
quickly. We must decide before the Americans reach our
Pact borders—before they work themselves into such a
frenzy of victory that they fear nothing. We must hunyl"
A number of logical flaws gaped in Yurii's analysis, but no
one would object. Emotions now drove the decision-making
process, emotions of fear and embarassment at this terri-
DAVID'S SUNG               283

ble calamity. This pathetic roomful of almost-conquerors
needed a scapegoat and a viable successor.
Sipyagin understood this as well as Yurii. Yurii contin-
ued to watch as he searched the room for alternate choices
for tile new leader. Yurii knew, with smug confidence,
what his senile mentor would find: only one man in this
room still had the youthfal vitality to make a good General
Secretary for the Soviet Union.
In the end, Yurii won by default. He issued orders for
the Army, described the necessary propaganda for the
newspapers, and adjourned the meeting.
When the last of the old guard had left, Yurii returned
to his old office to contemplate the mixed tastes of his own
personal victory and his country's overwhelming defeat.
If Mayfield hadn't died, the whole Soviet plan would
have succeeded. Of that, Yurii was certain. If Mayfield
had had a vice president as malleable as Mayfield himself,
that too would have allowed Sipyagin's premature con-
quest of Europe to work. How had Mayfield wound up
with a she-fiend for a successor?
Carson's second in command was Avery Fauike, the
American Speaker of the House, a pudding of a man. He
would have been a proper Mayfield running mate. Yuri
could have used FauBce very nicely -
For a moment, Yurii dreamed of Nell Carson's death,
and the succession of another pathetic creature to Ameri-
ca's helm. He could still wrest victory from this terrible
position! A simple assassination would give him triumph.
But the risks would be incredible. If the assassination
failed, or if the Americans found out that he had instigated
the attempt, the repercussions could destroy the whole
planet. With a last lingering farewell, he put the fantasy
aside. Too much reality required his immediate attention.
THE DUELISTS
May 15
May the pens of diplomats never again
ruin what the people have attained with
such exertion.
—General Blucher after the Battle of Waterloo
She was toying with him, Nathan realized. She played
with her drink as she played with him.
At considerable cost in time and effort, Nathan had
brought two Pritzbe's strawberry shortcakes from the sub-
urbs of Reston, so they could share this unusual drink here
in the private, third-story dining room of the White House.
The strawberry shortcake was a deceiving alcoholic liquid
with a creamy consistency and a mellow hint of amaretto
blended in. Like many shortcake drinkers, Nell now swirled

her straw in rhythmic patterns, mixing the pink and white
layers.
Nathan continued the banter. "So you've selected the
new vice president- You're honest enough to tell me that
you've made the decision, but you're cruel enough not to
tell me who it is, is that the situation?"
She raised her eyebrows with an innocent sip at the
shortcake. "Oh, I suppose you could put it that way."
Nathan harrumphed in response. The room seemed too
quiet in comparison with the hubbub of Fritzbe's, where
he normally drank shortcakes. Nathan didn't really miss
the hubbub too much, the collage of engineers and law-
yers and teenagers that seemed like a carefully orches-
trated accident. But here alone with Nell. his heart pounded
loudly, and he wondered if Nell could hear it in the
stillness of the room.
If Nell insisted on toying with him, he would try to
reciprocate. "Very well, then, I won't tell you about the
person who most recently converted to Zeteticism."
;;Who is it?"
"I said I wouldn't tell you."
287
288 Marc Stiegler
"I see." Nell smiled at him with an expression of mischief.
It occurred to Nathan that Nell seemed to grow younger
every time they met. She no longer frowned with a look
that reminded one of battered steel. Tonight, she had let
her hair fall free; it was longer than he had realized. She
took references to herself as "Madam President" in stride.
Now that the Soviet armies had withdrawn to their old
stations within the Warsaw Pact, she could afford to be
graceful, not hardened. "Do you like to dance?" Nathan
found himself asking.
Nell dropped her straw with a sudden laugh. "Some-
times," she said, "But not generally when I'm running a
country." She raised another eyebrow. "Actually, even as
president, the opportunity arises occasionally, as long as
I'm not also running a world war."
"Good point- Though I suspect the dancing style at
presidential functions is a bit sedate."
Nell nodded. "I'm afraid so." She paused. "So what will
you be doing now that we no longer need the Zetetic
Institute to save the world?"
"We're reorganizing." Nathan paused to take another
cool sip of the rich strawberry, cream, and amaretto con-
coction. "Though the news media haven't given the Insti-

tute much credit for our victory in the Flameout, enough
people have heard about us to quintuple the size of our
seminars." After the SeaHunters liad destroyed the Soviet
fleet, and after their armies had left Germany and Den-
mark, the news media had given the War a name that
suited its events: the Flameout. It had been a brief, fierce,
and ultimately irrelevant engagement. When it was over,
nothing had changed that the news media could describe
as significant.
"Are there any seminars I should take?"
Nathan smiled. "I would prefer to tutor you individually."
"Hahirilbet."
"First, I'd teach you about best-case and worst-case
event preparation. On an ordinary day, an ordinary person
only prepares for the most probable future, thus leaving
himself open to disaster, should the future turn out
differently."
Nell sighed. In the length of her breath, Nathan could
DAVID'S SLING                ^go
hear a hundred arguments, a thousand discussions that
might have prevented the Flameout. "I know all about the
importance of preparing for different possible futures " she
said. "It's more depressing than I'm ready to deal with at
the moment."
Nathan shook his head. "Ah, but there's what you're
missing, Nell. All those possible futures shouldn't be de-
pressing. Because, in addition to preparing for the worst,
you must also prepare for the best." Hardly believing what
he was doing, he reached out his hand to her chin, to lift
her head, to force her to look at him. "Often, the critical
preparation for worst-case is to recognize the possibility.
That way, if the worst occurs, you only need to deal
with the problem, rather than having to deal with your
shock at me same time. And that—" he felt his voice rising
"—is when the sense of wonder returns."
"The sense of wonder?" Nell stared at him as though he
spoke Gaelic.
"Yes, the sense of wonder that so many of us have lost."
Nathan leaned forward, preparing his explanation as he
had done so many times before. "Don't you see the conse-
quences of preparing for only the most likely future? Most
of the time, that most likely future will come true, and
how do you react to it? 'Of course,' you say, taldng it/or
granted. But if you have recognized the worst possibili-
ties—if you have accepted them with your whole mind—
then when the 'normal' future comes to pass, you can say,
'How wonderful! How special and beautiful this moment
is.' "
Nell leaned back against the wooden back of her seat as

Nathan leaned forward. She asked, "I guess you take your
sense of wonder pretty seriously, don't you?"
Nathan retreated with a short laugh. "Yeah, I guess I
do. Somehow, my sense of wonder has stayed intact through-
out my life, as if it were an automatic response. Most
people claim they enjoy watching sunsets. Yet, if they
enjoy it so much, why do they do it so rarely? I can take
pleasure in even simpler things. Every time an airplane
takes off to ride on a puff of wind, every time a photograph
gives us a window on a scene from the past, every time
you throw a light switch, each one of these things is
290 Marc Stickler
wondrous. And though we can't take time to appreciate
these things every time we touch them, does that mean we
should never take the time for appreciation?" He laughed,
and held up his hands as if to cast a blessing. "Think of the
universe as a supersaturated solution of wonder. Every
once in a while the wonder crystallizes out in some beauti-
ful form—in the shape of a tree, or a flower, or a sky-
scraper. Or in the shape of a special woman who is presi-
dent. " Realizing he'd said too much—indeed, he'd inten-
tionally said too much—he brought his hands down quickly
and continued. "You know, the people of America—even
most of the poor—are the richest, the most comfortable,
the best educated, and the most potent people ever to live
on Earth. How could we acquire so many things and still
not be happy? What did we fail to acquire?" He held his
finger to his forehead, "We failed to acquire minds capable
of appreciating our acquisitions. We failed to expand our
sense of wonder."
The light struck Nell's features harshly; for a moment,
she seemed pale, even meek. "I see that. You're right;
I've lost many things in my life," she half-whispered.
With a shake she looked back at Nathan. "Perhaps there
are some things to leam from the Zetetic Institute. Were
you serious about wanting to tutor me? Ill make you a
deal- You do the tutoring on Zeteticism, I'll tutor you on
slow dancing. It would be wonderful to have someone to
dance with the next time I'm forced to attend a ballroom
affair."
"I'd like that very much—almost as much as I would
like to know who the new vice president is."
Her laughter released her tension as much as it ex-
pressed her pleasure. "You'll know in just a few hours.
Just like everyone else."
"Fiendish. I suppose I'll survive."
"Actually, you're the most likely person in me country
to guess who the next vice president will be. But that's the
only hint I'll give you."

' I can guess? Well, let's toast to him, whoever he is."
Nathan raised his empty glass.
Nell shot him a look of mock disappointment. "A toast
to hum? Why do you think I chose a man?"
DAVID'S SUNG               291
Nathan looked at the president with amused delight.
"The women's coup d'etat has begun. I was afraid that
once we let women into office, we'd never get them out
again." He raised his glass in a toast. "To the coup. To all
that's fair in love and war."
"Let us drink particularly to all that's fair in love," she
replied, raising her eyebrow. "I prefer love to war, don't
you?"
Nathan nodded his agreement; the lump in his throat
made it impossible for him to speak.
Nathan bad spent his life building families out of the
friends he met along the road. Many, many people re-
spected and admired him, but love had never quite worked
out. He was too remote, somehow, peering into a distance
where they couldn't, or wouldn't, quite fouow.
Nell made him feel happy in ways he had never known
before. His sense of wonder grew stronger.
SNAP. Bill's hands shake. He casually slides them be-
neath the table, to prevent the audience from seeing his
weakness. He is presenting the most terrifying double-
feature story in the history of journalism. He wonders
whether he should discuss this material on the air or not.
For mankind's sake, he must try^not to create nrispercep-
tions in the minds of his viewers. The safest short-term
action would be to say nothing, thus creating no misper-
ceptions at all. Yet for mankind's sake, he must spread the
information he has gathered, creating correct understand-
ings. The only long-term safety lay in communicating only
correct perceptions.
Bill digs his fingers into his thighs, and still the trembling
continues. He knows he will fail.
CLICK. "Good evening, ladies and gentlemen," he tells
the camera that represents over 50 million viewers. "For
those of you who have not heard, an assassination attempt
has been made on President Carson. Tonight we have
exclusive film showing the assassin in the act. We also
have an exclusive story on Soviet planning documents that
suggest a possible Soviet link to the assassination attempt."
CUT. The recording of events earlier that day unfolds.
A striking woman in royal blue steps gracefully across the
292 Marc Stiegler
front of a crowded room to the podium. Her silk scarf

flutters ever so slightly with the speed of her motion.
The room, noisy before, now breaks into cheers and clap-
ping. She turns. She is Nell Carson, here to announce the
selection of Ae new vice president-
WHIR. Her voice rises and falls, pauses and rushes. She
speaks of the difficulty of making the decision, and the
marvelous qualities of the man finally chosen. Her eyes
shine, her voice sings, but not even Nell Carson can make
this standard speech come to life. "—That's why I'm pleased
to announce the new vice president, Hilan Forstill
PAN. Bill's camera, impatient with the ceremony, drifts
across the audience to a stocky man—a man who might
once have had glowing health, but who now has tight
twists of tension across his face and a gaunt look, as if he
has not slept for days. He reaches into the shadow of his
pocket to retrieve a darker shadow.
ZOOM. The darker shadow now held in the man's pale
hand resolves. It has the shape of a pistol.
CLICK. FLASH. CUT. The man fires twice. President
Carson jerks across the stage. A dozen men move rapidly,
identifying themselves by their speed and organization as
Secret Service Agents.
FLASH. The gaunt man turns his pistol sideways. Look-
ing peaceful at last, he fires once more, striking himself in
the temple.
CUT. The newscast returns to Bill's somber image. Bill
tells the audience what is known about Ted Muhhnan, the
assassin. Though Bill speaks at length, the sum of his
words is, we know almost nothing about this man.
ZOOM. "Why did he shoot the president? We don't
know- But the most terrifying suggestions come from sources
outside the United States." Bill holds up the document he
had received less than a day earlier, from one of his
contacts in the Soviet Union. In bold red letters, the
English translation of the title slashes diagonally across the
cover: A Revised Assessment of the Global Consequences
of Nuclear War.
"What does this document have to do with the attack
on President Carson?" Bill riffles the pages, stopping on
the final chapter, the Summary. "This document has two
DAVID'S SUNG               293
different Summaries. The first summary, written by the
analysts who conducted the study, reflects on the logical
consequences of the dangers of nuclear war," Bill takes a
deep breath, a shaky pause. "However, that summary
angered members of the Politburo, so it was rewritten to
reflect the thinking of men in power in the Soviet Union.
The man who authorized this study—and who presumably
had the summary rewritten to agree with his own thinking—
was Yurii Klimov. the new Soviet General Secretary."

Bill clears his throat. With the somber tone of a judge,
he reads. "As this revised analysis shows, the global conse-
quences of nuclear war remain grave, even under the most
optimistic assumptions. However, this danger need not
deprive the Soviet Union of opportunities to exercise its
strength. Indeed, this unassailable vindication of the dan-
gers of war can work to our advantage. We can count on
the threat of global disaster to paralyze enemies—particu-
larly enemies who already show indecisiveness. Chief among
these indecisive opponents is the American President: Jim
Mayfield demonstrates the archetypical set of traits we
would desire to see in an American leader.
"With Mayfield in office, we can apply force with mini-
mal restraint. Some graduation in scale is still necessary,
but we see no reason not to use'troops in Iran to resolve
the religious tensions there. If Mayfield responds weakly
to our invasion of Iran, as we we are certain that he will,
we may then calm the chronic East German uprisings with
an invasion of West Germany. Thus we would continue
the successful strategy we initiated in Afghanistan decades
ago."
ZOOM. Bill looks up at the camera, "Either by coinci-
dence or by intent, this summary describes the Soviet
Union's activities for the last year. Now listen to what the
summary says about Nell Carson."
SCAN. He returns to his somber recitation. "Of course,
we must match our steps to the mood of the American
President. If Nell Carson succeeded President Mayfield,
for example, we would have to move with greater caution,
due to her unpredictability." Bill licks his lips. "Other
potential American leaders can be categorized easily into
these two types: the indecisive and the unpredictable. We
's
•fe-
294 Marc Stiegler
have composed such a list of American leaders here to
encourage further discussion of the timing and intensity of
our future geopolitical moves."
CLICK, Bill blinks slowly for the camera. His tone
changes; he is done reading. He waves his hands in an
impatient gesture, and synopsizes. "The 'unpredictable'
men and women include both Nell Carson and Hilan
Forstil. And the 'indecisive' list includes both Jim May-
field and the Speaker Of the House, Avery Faulke. Ladies
and gentlemen, until the selection of Hilan Forstil as our
new vice president this afternoon, Faulke was the next
man in line for the presidency."
CLOSE. CLOSE. "The men who wrote this summary
believed that they could manipulate Faulke, but that they
could not manipulate either President Carson or the new
Acting President, Hilan Forstil. Did the Soviet Union

instigate this attack on our president in the hopes of
putting Faulke into power before the selection of a new
vice president? It would be very dangerous for us to
disregard the possibility if it is true. But it would be
equally dangerous for us to believe it, if it is false."
His trembling stops. He presses on with his best Zetetic
assessment of die facts, trying hard to avoid truths that
might not be real.
Jet turbines hummed with their fiery power just beyond
the confines of the curved metal walls of Nathan's prison.
Recycled air frm the nozzle overhead blew dry and cold
across his face, stealing the moisture from his throat and
his eyes. He swallowed a little wetness, while his mind fell
into itself. He angrily pondered the current absurdity. He
sat in an airplane, performing lazy circles at 30,000 feet,
while Nell lay unconscious in Walter Reed Hospital.
He blinked in the face of the air nozzle, then twisted
out of its way. He joined Hilan in watching Bill Hardie on
one of the monitors, moaning softly as the story built an
array of evidence that the Soviet Union had ordered Nell's
murder.
"That idioti" Hilan muttered at the close of the broad-
cast. "What's he trying to do, start another war?" The
engine hum quietly emphasized the danger. They were
DAVID'S SUNG
295
sailing somewhere over the middle of the United States,
in case the assassination was the first step in some grander
plan. Nathan focused on Hilan again, forcing himself to
mink of Hilan in his new role: Acting President Forstil,
Nathan shook his head. "You can tell he's trying to make
a Zetetic presentation, but he still has a lot to learn.
Meanwhile, even if Hardie were a perfect Zetetic com-
mentator, he is speaking to a non-Zetetic audience. Both
me speaker and the listener must know how to play then-
parts, or the communication will fail anyway. By the end
of this broadcast, half the people in the country will think
it was all a Communist plot."
Hilan shook his head. "And the worst part of it is that
they may be right."
Nathan started to object, but Hilan continued. "Ted
Muhlman was a Communist party member for several
years, though he left over a decade ago. In the past couple
of years, he's been in and out of mental institutions, suffer-
ing from grandiose fantasies. Was he Communist or was
he crazy? Or perhaps a little of both? Did the KGB whis-
per in his ear, egging him on? And that ceramic pistol he
slipped through the metal detectors—you can't pick one of
those up from a Sears catalog. How did he get one?" Hilan
closed his eyes. "And if the Russians realty did pull this

stunt, what do we do about it? Put out a contract on
Klimov?"
Nathan shook his head sharply. "Not He might push the
button if we did that."
Hilan threw his hands in the air helplessly, "So we just
do nothing." He threw his head back into the high air-
plane seat. "It just doesn't pay to be a superpower. '
Nathan rolled his eyes. All he could think of was Nell.
All he wanted to know was that she would be all right. But
these thoughts had nothing to do with the crisis they now
faced. "We must keep a clear perspective on what has
happened here." He started ticking off the key points.
"First of all, we'll probably never know if the Soviets
ordered it or not." NeU! his thoughts screamed. If they did
this, I want to feiU them. "Second, it almost doesn't make a
difference whether they were behind the attack or not.
There's a more frightening, more basic problem here: if
296 Marc Stiegler
that Revised Assessment of the Global Consequences of
Nuclear War really reflects Soviet policy, the Russians are
willing to risk nuclear war any time a weak man occupies
the White House." Thank God, Nell, that you were there,
that you were strong! Will you ever be there again? Will
you ever be strong again? "Hilan—President Forstil—for
every Nell Carson in U.S. politics, there is also a Jim
Mayfield. For every Hilan Forstil, there is an Avery Fauflce.
If that Soviet Doctrine remains in force when another man
like Mayfieid becomes president, we'll go through this
nightmare again. There will be more Irans, more Afghani-
stans, more—*'
"No!" Hilan trembled. "There has to be another choice."
Nathan asked, "Is that document real?"
Hilan exhaled slowly. "As nearly as the CIA can tell.
The Soviet government apparently created that doctrine."
He smiled. "Of course, as I'm sure you'd point out, just
because a government bureaucracy creates a document
doesn't mean that particular individuals know about it.
Nor does it mean that particular individuals agree with it,
or that they would necessarily follow it." He quoted the
Zetetic line, "Institutions do not know anything; only indi-
viduals have knowledge." He shrugged. "Unfortunately,
that summary predicted recent events perfectly. And it
was commissioned by Yurii Klimov himself, shortly after
he entered the Politburo. It may not be Soviet doctrine,
but it's probably Klimov's doctrine," Hilan grimaced like
a trapped animal. "Jesus, he's younger than Gorbachev
was when he came to power. Klimov could be in charge
for decades." He pounded the arm of his chair with his
fist. "And there's nothing we can do about it. There's no
way to protect ourselves from Klimov, except to elect an
unbroken succession of strong presidents. And we'U cer-
tainly fail to do that."

The plane bounced as it hit an air pocket. They climbed,
then leveled off. Nathan felt his throat growing even drier,
knowing what he would now offer. "We do have another
alternative. I know another choice—an Information Age
choice—that is so dangerous, so frightening," he paused,
lost for words, and finally smiled, "so incredible, that it
scares even me."
DAVID'S SUNG               297
Hilan looked at him questioningly.
"We know that the HighHunter is a flexible yet reliable
weapon. We built it with small Crowbars that killed tanks.
Next we built it with larger Crowbars that killed ships.
Now we can build a bigger one, a specially designed one,
that kills hardened missile silos."
Hilan continued to stare.
"All the Russian submarines were wiped out in the war.
Tlie bomber fields are soft targets, easy to destroy. The
mobile missiles on railroad cars have been tracked with
near-perfection for years. Only the missiles in hardened
silos are invulnerable to existing weapons—and we can
destroy those with a new Crowbar, a SiloHunter- In prin-
ciple, we can kill every Russian missile capable of reaching
the United States. We can disarm diem as a nuclear
power."
"A preemptive first strike?"
Nathan nodded. "A wnnuclear preemptive first strike.
No exploding warheads. There might not be any human
casualties at all."
"But if something goes wrong, if they still have a few
missiles afterwards, if Klimov decides to shoot them rather
than lose them, we could end up with a whole planet
covered with casualties."
"Yes."
The hum of engines tightened around the silence, as two
frightened men stared at one another. Nathan spoke. "I
wasn't necessarily recommending this as a course of ac-
tion. I was pointing it out as an alternative—one that we
won't have for long. The Russians are already studying the
HighHunters, and the significance of the Flameout. They'll
figure out the dangers of a SiloHunter, and there are a
number of ways they can protect tfaeir silos, once they're
alerted."
Hilan laughed—the laughter of a man on the verge of
tears. "It certainly does put all our eggs in one basket,
doesn't it?" He continued very softly. "But the alternative,
to pray that we never have a president like Mayfield
again, is like putting all your eggs into a basket with no
bottom. Jesus, what an awful choice." He held his head in

his hands. And then Hilan Forstil, a man who had made
298 Marc Sttegler
his life a demonstration of power and confidence, moaned
like a small child. "I don't know. I don't know." He
reached in his pocket and pulled out a small swiss army
knife. He played with it as he spoke, more to himself than
to Nathan. "You know, ever since I made that trip with
Jan, I've been different. Whenever I face a crisis so diffi-
cult that I can't imagine how to cope with it, I remember
that I am a nan who has climbed a MOUNTAIN. What
obstacle can challenge a man who can do such things?" He
breathed deeply, and once again he was the president.
The airplane started a gentle descent. An aide appeared
at Hilan's side. "Mr. President, there have been no follow-
ups to the assassination. With your permission, we'll re-
turn to base."
Hilan nodded. "Very well." He smiled at Nathan. "I
presume you're off to see how Nell's doing."
Nathan smiled back, despite his surprise. Had his
thoughts of Nell been that obvious? "Of course. I just
hope they let me in; I'm not exactly family or anything."
"TheyU let you in. You'll go as my envoy."
Nathan nodded bis thanks. "I have something for you as
well." He fumbled for a pen and paper, wrote down a
telephone number and a password. "There's going to be a
decision duel tonight, an important one. One of our best
students is dueling for his certification. Join it." He stressed
the words.
Reluctantly, Hilan nodded. "I presume there's a partic-
ular reason for this?"
"Of course." Nathan smiled mischievously. "Isn't Acre
always?"
Jessie Webler looked at the dueling screen with both
pleasure and disappointment. He sat in the left-hand duel-
ist's chair, like a chess master preparing for the world
championship, suspicious that his opponent was leaving
him alone during this quiet pre-game time specifically to
increase his anxiety.
Such a chess-playing opponent would have smiled, for
the psychological impact of the waiting was clearly taking
its toll. Jessie played with the computer's trackball for a
moment with rapid, exacting movements. Next he sat
DAVID'S SUNG               299
quite still, relaxed and unfocused. Finally, he sat as though
staring into a dark shadow where monsters dwelled, while
he pulled at his moustache in short jerks. His moustache
had several bare patches as a consequence, exposing the

chocolate-brown skin beneath.
As he shifted between relaxation, playful rolling of the
trackball, and anxious tugging at his upper lip, Jessie
recognized the swirl of emotions rolling within him. Some-
times, he confessed to himself, he felt the silly yet danger-
ous anxiety of a student taking his final exam. Jessie found
this anxiety unacceptable, though understandable: it was
his final exam. He was about to begin his certification
duel. The statement he defended hung on the main screen,
immutable and self-evident: NO SITUATION CAN JUS-
TIFY A PREEMPTIVE FIRST STRIKE AGAINST THE
SOVIET UNION.
Pleasure, disappointment, and anxiety. His pleasure came
from his confidence that he would win this duel. His
disappointment came from his confidence that it would be
an easy victory. His anxiety came from a suspicion that
perhaps his immutable statement was too obvious. Per-
haps the answer was so obvious as to be wrong.
The pleasure and the disappointment seemed like natu-
ral echoes of Jessie's whole life^Throughout school he had
been top in his class, always enjoying his successes, yet
always a little saddened by how easily they came to him.
Some people accused him of arrogance, though he didn't
feel arrogant inside. Other people accused him of bril-
liance, though he didn't feel brilliant, either. Indeed, he
worried about people's definition of brilliance. Jessie made
mistakes all the time. If he himself qualified as a brilliant
man, despite his regular failures, what of the others? If a
fellow who made mistakes as frequently as Jessie did could
qualify as the cream of the human crop, did mankind
really have enough smarts to survive? Pondering this ques-
tion, Ac anxiety seemed natural to Jessie as well.
When he had first encountered the Zetetic Institute,
the concept of the decision duel had staggered him with
its elegance. Jessie recognized it immediately as a belated
but correct response to human gullibility, derived from
research performed in the '60s and '70s. In those long-ago
300
Marc Stiegler
experiments, psychologists had uncovered several critical
facts, facts that no one acknowledged at the time, though
they seemed obvious upon reflection.
The researchers had studied jurors in court trials. One
group of jurors attended the trial in the usual way: they sat
in the courtroom, watching the defendants, the accusers,
the lawyers, and the judge. They watched the whites and
the blacks and the men and the women, with blond hair
and black hair and blue eyes and brown, wearing pinstripe
suits and t-shirts, supported by lawyers both flashy and
quiet. The psychologists discovered that the jurors made
incorrect judgments with disturbing frequency.

So the second group of jurors did not see me trial; they
heard it. They heard the voices of the defendants and the
accusers and the lawyers and the judges. They heard the
Southern accents and the Boston accents and the ghetto
accents. They still made errors, but not so many.
So the third group of jurors did not even hear the trial:
they read it. They read the transcripts of defendants and
accusers and lawyers and judges. Even dull, dry tran-
scripts did not erase all distinguishing marks from the men
and women in the courtroom: the college grads and the
high school dropouts still used different words and differ-
ent expressions. And the jurors still made errors. But they
made fewer errors than either of the other two groups.
When Jessie first heard about those dusty experiments
and their obvious results, he wondered why America had
not responded with a prompt and efficient transformation
of the court system. Surely, decisions on human imprison-
ment were important enough to demand the most accurate
possible decision-making processes!
But the court system had not changed, not even over
decades of intervening time. Indeed, the results of those
studies had quietly disappeared into history, remembered
by almost no one. It was through this quiet human forget-
falness that Jessie encountered another of the most fright-
ening features of the human psyche: men tend to remember
facts that support the beliefs they already hold. They
forget facts that contradict those beliefs.
Zetetic training recognized this flaw of human memory,
DAVID'S SUNG
301
and fought to overcome it. The battle continued unrelent-
ingly; the progress came slowly, with pain.
The rules of science had uplifted human behavior when
studying repeatable, logical problems. Similarly, the rules
of the decision duel had uplifted human behavior when
faced with passion-filled problems. In the decision duel,
only the words on the screen counted, not die race or
creed of the duelist. And no disturbing fact, no tiny but
fatal flaw in an argument, could be forgotten: the arrows
linking the argument to the counterargument were as
immutable as the quantifiable facts supporting both positions.
Motion caught his eye. He looked up, and Brad Foster
leered at him.
Jessie blinked, and Brad's leer softened into a smile,
though his expression did not change; only Jessie's inter-
pretation of the smile had altered. Brad had received his
certification just a few months ago, yet already he was
famous. He had lost only one duel in school, when he
himself had supplied his opposing partner with the critical

insight that made Brad's whole argument collapse in smoke
and dust. He had already established a reputation as a
valuable duelist for making corporate reorganization deci-
sions, though insufficient time had passed to assess the
accuracy of his dueling analyses. JBrad was the latest in the
line of star duelists that included KipiHendrix, Will Barloh,
and Nathan Pilstrom.
Brad saluted him. "May accuracy triumph over victory."
He spoke the duelist's creed in a monotone so perfectly
without emotion that it expressed, in its perfect intensity,
the depth of his commitment to his words.
Jessie's throat seemed suddenly dry; he nodded his
agreement.
The work station beeped softly; Jessie jumped at the
sound. It marked the beginning of the duel.
The demands of the duel moved to the forefront of his
thoughts. Jessie outlined all the obvious disadvantages to a
first strike. First of all, it could end all human life, particu-
larly if the Soviets were able to launch their missiles
before ours landed.
Regardless of whether the Soviets were able to shoot
back or not, the resulting global effects could severely
302 Marc Stiegler
damage our nation, even with a relatively tame "surgical"
preemption- What could possibly justify such a risk?
Jessie glanced at Brad again. Brad was brilliant, no
doubt about it. Jessie could see it in the way Brad im-
mersed himself in his screen, his total concentration, a
pale scholar with a thatch of kinky black hair that only
emphasized his ghosdy complexion, Jessie felt like he was
wrestling a wraith. He might find himself grabbing the
words of his opponent again and again, yet he came away
each time empty-handed.
Brad tossed a standard scenario up on the main screen:
what if we knew beforehand that the Soviet Union was
about to make a first strike against us? Would it not then
make sense to try to prevent such an attack with an attack
of our own?
Jessie rattled off a list of problems with this supposition.
He summed up his objections by observing that. no mat-
ter how many subtle indicators flared up, we couldn't
know a Soviet attack would occur until the attack was
underway. By then it would be too late for us to make a
strike that got their missiles before firing.
And shooting without that absolute certainty still en-
tailed all the basic risks. Even if our attack succeeded,
America would face the radiation and climatic conse-
quences. Again, the risks in acting prematurely over-

whelmed the risks in not acting at all. Jessie noted that
this logic had surely been followed by both the American
President and the Soviet General Secretary during the
Flameout, and both leaders had come to Jessie's conclu-
sion. Jessie winced as the other duelist flipped this state-
ment to red with a polite explanation: it made no differ-
ence what decisions others had made on the matter, or
how many people had shared a consensus on the matter;
the question was whether or not they were right.
Despite this gaffe, Jessie's viewpoint remained unassail-
able. His opposing partner continued to delineate scenes
and hypotheses, but all were easily countered. Once he
caught Jessie off guard: what if the Soviet Union started
assassinating our leaders?
Jessie felt unexpected anger, not at Brad, but at the
world at large. Nell Carson was still in die hospital; she
DAVID'S SUNG               303
had not yet recovered consciousness. How could that kind of
thing happen? What if the Russians really had tried to kill
her? Colored with anger, an attack on the Soviet Union
did seem justified.
But he could not write on the main screen in the color
of anger, when translated to the screen, the color of anger
seemed tinted with the color of foolishness. He responded,
noting that a counter-assassination might be a reasonable
response. But even under this provocation, they could not
justify risking the whole world: no one man or woman
could be worth avenging at the cost of a planet.
Brad seemed stalled, as Jessie had expected, Jessie
watched Brad frown at his terminal, disturbed by his
inability to budge the verdict now growing on the main
screen.
The warm joy of victory washed over Jessie. He rejected
it, remembering, even now, that the real victory was not
in winning, but in finding tile right answer. He concen-
trated on tile hard clack of the keys, the rubbery grip of
the trackball.
Brad smiled. He held his hand to his earphone and
studied a comer of his screen, as though he were receiving
a stunning idea from one of the members of the audience.
That someone could be right dtere, one of die clutch of
viewers in the dueling chamber, a continent away.
What novel suggestion could Brad be receiving?
Brad sat quiedy for several seconds, his eyes focused on
infinity. Suddenly his fingers moved, die only part of his
body not bound by his concentration. Words formed on
the screen. Jessie gasped as he read diem.
Suppose die preemptive strike did not use nuclear weap-

ons? Suppose diat, in addition to having reasonable cer-
tainty that die Soviets would one day make a preemptive
first strike of dieir own, America also had a nonnuclear
system witti which to try a preemption of diat Soviet
preemption?
A nonnuclear preemptive strike—what a concept! It
triggered Jessie to reflect on die questions of nuclear
standoff more deeply, more clearly ttian ever before. His
mind raced widi ideas diat had swirled in his subconscious
ever since learning the topic of his certification duel. One
304 Marc Stiegier
particular thought stream rose above the rest, to take
flight. For the first time, he consciously considered the
problem of nuclear war from the point of view of game
theory. As his thoughts became clear, he started typing,
but he did not type new points or counterpoints into the
window defending his position. His understanding was on
a larger scale. He requested space in the neutral modera-
tor's part of the screen. The gray bar down the middle of
the screen split, and the area of third alternatives, of new
ideas, opened wide.
The strategic nuclear problem was very similar to the
Prisoner's Dilemma, he realized. If the other prisoner
chose to betray you by firing his missiles, he went through
purgatory while you went through hell. If both prisoners
chose betrayal, your own position was approximately the
same, though at least you had the vindictive pride of
dunking you got them back.
The two-prisoner game was simpler than the global
nuclear problem, but it was a good place to start. In such a
game, the best outcome occurred it
1) both prisoners believed in the other's honesty, and
2) if both played honestly, by never firing their missiles.
Given this mutual honesty, die next step was obvious:
dismantle all the missiles. After all, neidier prisoner would
ever file his missiles anyway.
But mutual honesty only worked if bodi parties were
superrational. If either party was merely rational, die cor-
rect answer, even for die superrational player, was be-
trayal. Betrayal, in this variant of the Dilemma, meant an
immediate, preemptive first strike, before the opposing
partner made his own preemptive first strike.
What was wrong widi dlis analysis? Jessie looked at his
conclusion in horror. Neidier America nor die Soviet Union
was superrational; the right answer, dien, was to attack!
Somediing had to be wrong with this analysis.
Somediing was wrong. The analogy to die Prisoner's

Dilemma was not perfect. The participants in die game
had a chance to make a second, follow-up decision: if die
preemptive first strike was not completely successful, die
betrayed party could betray his opposing partner later,
DAVID'S SUNG              305
^    after assessing die betrayal. Only dlis risk of delayed be-
trayal kept die merely-rational players away from holocaust.
He had been typing his ideas as diey came to him.
Brad, reading Jessie s digression, also waxed philosophical,
typing more fresh thoughts in die opening for third alter-
natives. How ironic diat the two superpowers should look,
from die game theory viewpoint, so much like prisoners!
They were prisoners, of course, of their own weapons. The
nuclear weapon itself, and the hysteria surrounding it,
were die guards of die prison that held America and
Russia captive. Every day diese captors made men face
die questions. Today, wiU they strike us today? Today,
must we strike them today?
What was the purpose of die diousands of nuclear
warheads in American and Soviet arsenals? Even an irra-
tional person could understand that a hundred such war-
heads could destroy a national civilization. The only reason
^.   for having diousands was die danger diat die opponent
might try to use his warheads to destroy your warheads.
America needed diousands because die Soviets had thou-
sands; the Soviets needed diousands because the Ameri-
cans had diousands. If each side had just a hundred apiece,
die weapons would achieve die same threatening purpose,
as long as the warheads were protected well enough so
diat die enemy couldn't destroy dienl.
Jessie observed diat if the Soviets were superrational—if
we knew that they were superrational—then we could
initiate a slow, unilateral disarmament. The superrational
Soviets would follow widi dieir own disarmament immedi-
ately, recognizing that diey no longer needed the extra
missiles, and that die superrational Americans would not
continue the disarmament unless die Soviets diemselves
came along on die journey back to sanity. They could both
disarm down to the point where global catastrophe was no
longer possible. They would not disarm entirely, since
Uiere were odier nuclear contestants in die world, con-
trolled by otiier non-superrational groups. But everyone
would breathe more easily -
Brad drove back to the main point, however: if die
\    Soviets were merely rational, if we had strong reason to
fear a preemptive strike from diem, if we had a nonnu-
306
Marc Stieg^er
dear preemptive strike option available to us, should we

not use it?
Jessie looked at this new scenario with wonder. Given
such a choice, he realized, his earlier decision lost its firm
roots. Neither betrayal nor honesty was clearly right. The
question ceased to be an engineering problem, with a
clear right or wrong answer: it could only be treated as a
politicaf decision.
The colors of the main screen changed, red-lined flaws
and green-lined deductions trading hues with stroboscopic
speed. The new colors showed that in this nonnuclear
first-strike scenario, the structure of the earlier argument
collapsed. Of course, this didn't mean that a preemptive
strike was right; it merely meant that a preemptive strike
wasn't provably wrong.
Together, Jessie and Brad built tentative formulas for
trading off right versus wrong subscenarios for undertaking
a nonnuclear strike, depending on the estimated probabil-
ity that the opponent was planning a strike, and the reli-
ability of the attack systems. These new factors were no
more quantifiable than the basic question, but they were
more discrete, and less passion-provoking than the pri-
mary question—the question of when it might be justified
to start a nuclear war,
"Iney continued for a long time, lost in the ramifications
of the possibilities they uncovered at high speed. At some
time during the frenzy of analysis, a pale hand reached
down and slapped the trackball, freezing both the cursor
and Jessie's spinning thoughts, "Congratulations," Brad
said with the same smile he had had earlier. "Welcome,"
They shook hands.
The duel ended in victorious accuracy; Jessie received
his certification.
May 20-21
We mark the beginning of the Informa-
tion Age with the implementation of the
Porstil Doctrine. Many aspects of an In-
formation Age existed before that time.
But in the implementation of the Forstil
Doctrine, the information Age asserted
its ascendancy. Through this Doctrine,
mankind learned not that knowledge is
power, but that knowledge wisely used
can be superior to power.
Of course, we do not demark the Infor-
mation Age with President forsffFs an-
nouncement of the Doctrine itself, but with
the Hight that followed.
—Bill Hardie, The Rise and Fall of the
Zetetic Institute

A forest infested with termites. "The American war-making
machine made Yurii think of such a forest.
The Soviet Union had known the true strengths and
weaknesses of the American army better than the Ameri-
cans themselves. KGB spies everywhere, even in the heart
of the American weapon development system, saw every-
thing, reported every major pulse. Yet in the forest of
American military development, they missed the termites.
The Americans even nurtured their termites, like the
ragtag group of the Sling Project. Here were termites that
could fell forests even tougher than the dense wood of the
American military-industrial complex. How could even the
KGB track so many termites? They couldn't, until the
termites, the projects, appeared on the front pages of tile
American newspapers. Since the end of the so-called Flame-
out, Yurii had read all about the Hunters of the Sling
307
308
Marc Sttegler
Project in the New York Times. Like the rest of the world,
he acquired information that should have been top secret,
The Americans bad even supplied high-resolution photos,
the very best, in the silly paper) Americans were crazy
beyond comprehension.
Yurii rocked in his chair, then stopped as a squeak from
the springs disturbed him. For a moment he yearned for
the good old days, when General Secretary Sipyagin had
ruled—correction, the days when Citizen Sipyagin had
ruled. Yurii reminded himself that he was General Secre-
tary now.
The burden weighed more heavily than he had ex-
pected- As Sipyagin's closest advisor, the job of General
Secretary had looked little more difficult than advising,
and it seemed to have fewer frustrations- But he realized
now that this simplicity had been an illusion—an illusion
only possible because the General Secretary had had no
plans of his own to drive through the bureaucracy. In-
stead, he had had independent, vigorous advisors, such as
Yurii himself, generating and herding plans through the
system. If Yurii were content to let the other advisors
continue their wayward performances, things would remain
the same. But Yurii was most definitely not content to do so.
Even the office seemed smaller now, though it bad a
new, uncluttered look: the ivory figurines, the bookcases,
and much of the furniture had left with Citizen Sipyagin.
Barren planes of plaster and woodwork reminded visitors
of the newness of the Soviet high command- Still, Yurii
had enhanced the office in a technological sense: a large,
Hat computer display rose at an angle out of one side of the
desk, and a teleconference screen coated one wall with its
plain black surface. The blackness of the screen reminded

Yurii of the unfathomably murky American thinking.
The video monitor across the room also made him think
of the Americans, for he had seen images of the American
Minuteman silos on the screen just the day before. Men
had pulled back die silo covers on missile after missile: 120
in all, according to the bean counters who tracked such
data- Only Americans could let all those missiles lie naked
in the sunlight, exposed to nuclear destruction from Yurii's
DAVID'S SUNG               309
own missiles. They were even exposed to the ignoble
attacks of birds, spattering their droppings across the nose
cones. It seemed disrespectful to the hellish power bound
within those silos.
Agonized, Yurii thrust the open-silo mystery aside, for
other mysteries also blurred the future of his nation. Yurii
glared at the American rocket launch reports again. The
Americans continued to toss those damnable HighHunters
into space at a phenomenal rate. Why? Could they be
planning to destroy all of Russia's tanks and trucks, the
way they destroyed her ships?
His mouth became a hard line. He could not allow that-
Without her armor, Russia would become naked to the
vengeful spirit of Polish, Czech, and Chinese hatred. Such
a destructive move would require a nuclear retaliation.
Was the new president, Forstil, so blind that he couldn't
see that? Did Yurii himself have to tell the American such
an obvious truth, bluntly, so that no terrible, world-engulfing
error could occur? Forstil wearied him as much as the
strong-willed bureaucrats in his own country. He could
see no moment of calm sailing anywhere on his horizon.
Exhausting as these possibilities seemed, they did not
disturb him so much as other possible explanations of the
surge of American HighHunters. Yurii had reports, very
reliable reports, of profoundly disquieting modifications to
the HighHunter Crowbars. The reports said these missiles
were larger, and even more massive, than the ones used
to destroy the Soviet Navy.
For a moment, Yurii snarled as his senior military-
technology analysts had snarled, staring at these reports.
Why would the Americans change a weapon that already
overwhelmed everything else on the planet? General
Mangasarian had recommended an immediate spaceplane
launch to open up one of those demon canisters and look
at the new Crowbars. Yurii had rejected the idea. Hilan
Forstil was every bit as unpredictable as Carson; a
spaceplane assault on a HighHunter might trigger crazi-
ness, like a rain of HighHunters on Russia's spaceplane
launching platforms. He could envision the effects a hun-
dred ship-killing Crowbars would have on a delicate gantry.
310 Marc Sttegler
Was that the purpose of the new HighHunter—to de-      •?

stroy Russia's space program by destroying her rocket      ^
launchers? To blind mem by destroying their ability to      *
launch spy satellites, so that they could no longer watch      ^
the American missile silos?                                  t
No, that made no sense either. The old Crowbars were      ^
perfectly capable of knocking out the satellite launchers.
More benign explanations for the new Crowbars abound-      „
ed. Priorities had changed for the United States with the      £,
start of the war, and then again with the introduction of     . i,
the Hunters, but now those priorities had returned to      |
normal. Like a balloon that had deformed under the pres-      |
sure of a rigid finger, the military had returned to its old      ^
shape now that the finger of war had been removed. The      ^
grand American military-industrial complex had captured
the contracts to build the new HighHunters. The grand
American bureaucrats were back in charge—the same ones
who had "improved" their naval aircraft so much that they
could barely lumber off the catapult. The new Crowbar
could be just such an improvement—a new version de-
signed to officialize the weapon with the stamp of point-
lessness. Who could be sure—the new Crowbar might not
even be able to kill a tank! It couldn't kill tanks as effec-
tively, anyway: since the new Crowbar was much larger,
you couldn't put enough of them into a Hunter to stop an
assault.
Despite this reassuring possibility, Yurii worried that he
had missed the key point someplace, though he felt close
. . . With a rush of pleasure, he realized that he knew one
person who couid unravel the mystery of the American
Crowbars.
He remembered the black day when the Soviet advance
in Europe had ground to a halt. He remembered the
crippled major who had spoken to them so boldly of that
first Sling attack. That major had the gift for understanding
technology and its consequences. He would look at these
facts, and he would know—
A discreet knock at his door interrupted his train of
thought. "Yes?" Yurii snapped with poorly disguised frus-
tration. These continuous interruptions represented an-
other flaw in the support system for the Soviet General
DAVID'S SUNG               311
Secretary: how could you even complete a thought be-
tween interruptions? No wonder the old goat Sipyagin had
had such trouble keeping his attention focused!
General Mangasarian leaned into the room. "Have you
heard about the newest crazy American plan?"
"What?"
Swaggering into the room now that he had Yurii's puz-
zled interest, Mangasarian waved a video cassette in the
air. "President Forstiljust made a speech. Nothing new in

that—but he explicitly wants you to see it." His voice
turned exultant. '"We may have won the war."
"What?!"
Mangasarian loaded the tape in the Chairman's deck. "I
hope you enjoy it."
Yurii turned to watch the tape.
The image flickered for a moment, then settled on a
scene Yurii had seen before. The emblem of the American
Presidential Seal glared from the podium in the fore-
ground; the muted blue wall faded into the background.
Trapped between these two extremes, between the bold
and me bland, stood the most powerful man in the world.
A week ago, the American President had been the sec-
ond most powerful person in the world. Yurii ground his
teeth in quiet fury.
The presidential face had changed so many times in the
recent past—from Mayfield's face of a plastic puppet to
Carson's face of a schoolteacher, and now to Forstil's face
of a ... Yurii's thought stumbled. Forstil had a look of
stone, carved by lashing sea spray. An unyielding confi-
dence lay upon him—the confidence of one who might not
always win, but who always gave everything he knew how
to give. And because he knew how much he had given, he
had no guilt, no matter what the outcome.
This guiltless image of a president spoke. "Good mom-
ing, people of the world. I have good news today—news
even better than the end of the recent war between NATO
and the Warsaw Pact. Today I am here to tell you about
America's plans to make the whole world safer." He paused,
eyes glistening. "At least some of you have been watching
us with baffled suspicion as we have called our Trident
313 Marc Stiegler
submarines into port. Even more of you have wondered
about our motives as you have watched us blow back the
seals on ten percent of our missiles, exposing them to the
eyes of any nation with a scanning satellite."
The stony face softened with a smile that seemed to
surprise the president himself. "Some of you have won-
dered, What are those Americans doing, this time?" His
smile held a healing joy, "Well, wonder no longer.
"We Americans have set forth on a unilateral reduction
in nuclear arsenals." The camera zoomed out, to encom-
pass both the president and a television monitor. The
monitor held scenes of sabotage of such grandeur as a
KGB agent might dream of in his wildest fantasies.
An American soldier stepped to the edge of a Minute-
man III silo and peered into the half-light of the deep
shaft. With a theatrical flourish, the soldier fondled a

grenade, pulled the ring, and dropped it over the edge. A
flash of light, and a short puff of smoke, announced the
end of the grenade, and the end of the life of the missile
now damaged beyond flight repair. Yurii's eyes bulged.
Forstil continued to speak, as though nothing unusual
had happened. "As you can see, we are destroying these
missiles and their silos. We will be destroying ten percent
of our strategic nuclear forces every month for the next
nine months, reducing our nuclear stockpiles to one tenth
their current size."
The camera zoomed back in on a now-radiant president.
"General Secretary Klimov, I urge you to launch a recon-
naissance satellite of your own an hour from now, so you
can see for yourself our sincerity and dedication to the
plan of unilateral disarmament."
Yurii stared at the president with a complete loss of
comprehension. Forstil's country had just won an extraor-
dinary victory, yet now Forstil was going to throw it all
away! It seemed insane—but then, Yurii remembered that
Americans had thrown world domination away before, af-
ter World War II, when they had discharged over three-
fourths of their men from the Army. Within a few short
months of achieving total victory, they had enfeebled a
military force of twelve million men down to a pathetic
collection of less than two million soldiers.
DAVID'S SLING
313
Of course, at that time, the Americans had depended on
a trick gadget to ensure their ascendancy: the new nuclear
bomb, their precious monopoly.
Forstil continued speaking. "How can we dare to dis-
mantle our defenses in this way? The answer is simple. In
the past few weeks, we have proved an important concept.
We have proved that reliance on brute power does not
strengthen its holder, it weakens. The nuclear forces of
both the U.S. and the Soviet Union endanger us more
than they protect us. For if we were so foolish as to use
them, even if no one lived to fire back at us, we would still
be hurting ourselves} Just the fallout and weather changes
would hurt our own citizens. Does that make sense? Of
course not. It is absurd-
"Henceforth, the United States shall depend on nonnu-
clear. Information Age weapons to defend itself. We will
retain a small nuclear force: even in the Information Age,
brute force remains dangerous if not counterbalanced. But
this force will be the minimum necessary. We will never
need enough firepower to destroy an aggressor's civiliza-
tion more than once." He paused. "Perhaps the foil ab-
surdity of our Industrial Age arsenal can be seen in the
extent to which it exceeds that need. We must leam to
defend ourselves with rational means, before the irrational
destroys us all."

Yurii found himself gripping his chair with wild excite-
ment, an excitement like lightning, that jerked him up-
right and discharged through him to the ground. So this
was the purpose of the HighHunters flooding the skyi
Forstil thought they could become the new trick gadget,
the next-generation solution to cheap security that would
replace the nuclear bomb in their thinking.
As the excitement discharged, Yurii relaxed in his chair.
His worries and fears about America's Crowbars had been
discharged swiftly and painlessly by the American President.
Of course, Forstil hadn't promised to destroy America's
whole arsenal. America would not be at the unquestioned
mercy of Yurii's missiles, but they would be so close. . . .
If the Americans really did reduce their nuclear stockpile
to one or two hundred missiles, a preemptive first strike
became quite possible ... no, the submarines would still
314
Marc Stiegler
pose a problem. Nevertheless, Yurii felt sure this would
work to Russia's advantage.
Yurii jerked in his seat as Forstil used his name again.
"We of America have now taken the first, largest step
toward making our planet a safe place to live. I now ask
General Secretary Klimov to join us in our casting aside of
self-destroying weapons. In a few months, the Soviet Union
will be the only country in the world able to bring down
nuclear devastation upon Soviet land. Join us in protecting
your own country." It seemed as though Forstil's eyes
locked with Yurii s, despite the distance in both time and
space. "Ine weary shock of Russia's recent humiliation
pressed upon Yurii with a desire to stop struggling, to do
as the president suggested, to dismantle his own nuclear
forces.
But that would mean throwing away a huge lever, even
as it was put into his hands. Yurii grimaced. Such an
abdication of advantage could not be considered.
Not all Soviet citizens would agree with his opinion. No
doubt this broadcast was penetrating Soviet airspace, reach-
ing his people despite the Army's efforts to jam it. Oh,
well. The Pravda discussion of Forstil's speech would re-
quire careful editing. And perhaps it might make sense in
the upcoming months to destroy a token number of Soviet
missiles. Illey could eliminate a few obsolete weapons and
thereby solidify American public opinion behind Forstil's
new course. Yes, he could see considerable merit in that
plan.
The tape ended. Yurii savored the victory for a moment,
then reflected on his suspicions. Could this be some kind

of hoax? With a quick phone call, he orbited a satellite to
watch the Americans destroy their own missiles.
Two hours later, he knew without doubt the extent of
the American insanity. The 120 missiles in exposed silos
had been destroyed—utterly, unquestionably, and irrevo-
cably.
It was fanny how, in a quiet, darkened room, one could
be crushed with a sense of terror. Hilan had lived several
nights in an exact duplicate of this room in the Pentagon.
DAVID'S SLING
315
This war room where he now stood lay buried under
Mount Weather, Virginia.
Though he had spent some time in that Pentagon war
room, most of his mental images of this room came from
trips made in dreams and nightmares—trips through
thoughtworks, wherein he sweated his way across burning
visions of Armageddon.
The reality now seemed inconsequential compared to
those nightmares. Here, methodical discipline muffled the
raw emotional undertone: the light and glare of the hot-
line telecomm with Moscow lay in the Current Actions
Center, behind Ae glass-walled control area where techni-
cians swarmed. Here, separated from the clatter, Hilan sat
at the long table with the Joint Chiefs and a variety of
aides. Of course, no windows broke the walls of this quiet
place buried beneath a mountain; the wall-sized display
screen at the far end supplied a more relevant contact with
the external world.
Hilan looked up at the display again. He did not shiver.
As calm as this setting seemed, he wondered how calm he
himself appeared. Any calm he might project was pure
facade: He felt like a self-contained nuclear burst, the
detonation surging in his body, trapped within the author-
ity of his black pinstripe suit.
The war room would have been a dangerous place to
hold this meeting before the war for Europe, now known
as the Flameout. Before the Flameout, Soviet submarines
cruised within six minutes of an attack on Washington—six
minutes from obliterating the war room in the Pentagon.
Had the subs not been destroyed already, the fragile plan
Hilan would now execute could not exist.
The long table held too many faces. Hilan picked out the
key ones, unconsciously. Foremost was General Hansen of
the Air Force, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He
was a tall man, prone to sudden-breaking smiles, with
silver hair. He had been a fighter pilot, and he still wore
the ostentatious watch that was once so popular among the
flyers. He sat serenely at the far end of the table-

Soft light came from the ceiling, eliminating shadows. A
couple of people smoked; the ventilation drew away the
smoke with brisk efficiency.
316 Marc Sfiegfor
"Hie display wall was an oversized version of the screen
used by the Zetetics to hold decision duels. The technol-
ogy here was more primitive, Hilan realized: the software
for the display did not allow such flexible zooming and
windowing. The absence of powerful software explained
why they needed the entire wall for this setup. Despite
the huge display, however, the commander in chief had
less access to useful information than did a second-year
physics student probing the atom for the first time. Plenty
of information would come across that display, but little of
it would be useful.
What did Hansen think of the plan they had come here
to execute? Hansen might be turning purple inside, but
that was submerged here. He was a soldier's soldier, calmly
competent. He had objected to the plan at first as too
risky. But a day's reflection, and the weight of the ideas.
had made him a believer. He would never bet everything
on a single turn of the wheel, he had said. But here the
alternative was to bet everything on the turn of the wheel,
not once, but many times—every time a weak president
confronted Yurii Klimov.
General Hansen evoked in Hilan a sense of security—a
delusionary feeling, to be sure. But Hilan had by now
listened to too many Zetetic lectures to deny the delusion-
ary feeling: those who refuse to admit their own prejudices
wiU remain forever enslaved by them.
Hilan turned away from Hansen to look at the lower
left-hand comer of the display. In that corner, photos of
the Soviet Union flicked methodically from scene to scene-
Over 300 SkyHunters were sending those pictures of criti-
cal targets. A checklist adjacent to the images marked off
the targets as, SkyHunter by SkyHunter, they accounted
for each and every one.
Tlie photos showed the sites of deeply buried headquar-
ters, and buildings cast with meters of reinforced con-
crete. They seemed impregnable. But the targets being
assessed were not the buried and reinforced buildings.
The targets were the thin, delicate antennae serving those
mighty bunkers. The men would survive, and in a few
hours, they would reestablish communication with the
DAVID'S SUNG               317
world. But for several precious hours, they would be blind
and mute. By the time they recovered, there would be no
missiles or bombers to command.
The words to begin a war seemed so simple. An Air
Force captain announced: "Ready to dispense,'

Hilan closed his eyes for a moment, then looked into
the captain's. He held his breath, as if waiting for someone
else to make the decision, knowing that no one else could.
In this last moment before sending humanity hurtling
toward clear survival or clear destruction, Hilan did not
think about the careful rope of logical thinking that had led
him here. He had inspected it from every possible direc-
tion, examined every fiber, every mar in its surface, every
kink in its depths. The rope had kinks; it could snap; the
world could fall from it. But he had examined the other
ropes at hand with equal care, and though the rope he had
chosen might snap, the others were even more likely to
break. The logic of the rope fibers rested in a corner of his
mind, but did not command his attention.
Nor did he think of his wife in Washington, his children
in New Haven, or his aunt in Cincinnati. Earlier, he had
fantasized about moving them to places of safety in case
the rope broke. But without the rope, no place could
prove safe. If he would not risk^his own family, what kind
of fool would he be to risk all mankind? His family, he had
decided in his earlier analysis, would be among the
hostages he would hold over himself to make sure his deci-
sion was the right one. He had moved himself beneath the
mountain mostly for the proximity to the hot line.
He did not think of the Zetetic Institute, or Nathan
Pilstrom, who had devised this ingenious solution to the
problem of thermonuclear missiles. Nathan had presented
him with this dilemma. But he did not fall into the trap of
laying all the blame for the future on the people who first
saw that such a future was possible. Some of the blame—or
some of the credit—did belong to them, but at this mo-
ment, neither blame nor credit seemed important.
He did not think of Yurii Klimov, or the possible out-
comes of this evening's efforts. He had thought about the
outcomes too much already, and he would need to think
318 Marc Stiegfer
about them again soon anyway. Nothing could be gained
by wrapping up his mind in a tight coil around the hideous
possibilities that might ensue; he would need a dear mind
to deal with whatever possibilities did materialize.
None of these people or events could capture his atten-
tion. Bather, a simple feeling held him, now that the
decision-making was over, and only the actions to solidify
the thought-stuff remained. It was a feeling of relief.
One way or another, the terrible uncertainty would end
by morning. The terror that had hung over his whole life,
over the lives of all the other people in America and
Russia and the rest of the world, would fade into history.
"Do it," he nodded to the officer.
They watched the display.

The HighHunter dispenser carried its own camera, and
through this viewpoint, the roomful of generals, admirals,
and presidential advisors saw a thousand tiny points of
light come to life above the Soviet night sky. Tne points
streaked along majestic arcs, with the grace granted by
gravity's guiding hand.
The captain who had initiated the dispensing of the
SiloHunters muttered in awe, "It's like snow—or maybe
sleet."
General Hansen, boss of the Joint Chiefs ofStaflC grunted.
"A sleet of steel, falling through the night."
A murmur rose around the room. Admiral Jenson
frowned, along with General Plunket of the Army. Neither
of them liked today's mission, and Hilan agreed with their
anxiety completely.
The camera view switched to an optically amplified im-
age, which came from a reconnaissance satellite. It focused
on the fate of a simple disc of concrete, thousands of miles
away from both the satellite and the watchers.
The fall thickness of the Earth's atmosphere shimmered
above the disc, making it seem to waver, insubstantial and
anemic. Its grayish-white substance seemed more like a
ghost than an implacable enemy—something that would
swish away with the wave of a hand.
A streak of light cut the image and struck the ghost,
shattering the illusion of both. The streak disappeared as
quickly as it had come, leaving a shallow, darkened pit in
DAVID'S SUNG               319
the platter, beneath a pale cloud of dusty shadows. A
Crowbar had hit the silo cover.
Another streak of light cut the image, then disappeared
from the far edge of the picture; a miss.
Another streak of light hurtled down, and dug a second
pit into the disc's surface: a hit.
Another one missed.
Another struck, near midpoint between the other two
hits. Now the whole surface of the disc disappeared under
a rubble cloud that settled a moment later. The hair-thin
fractures left by the first two hits, too fine to be seen even
with the crystal-precise instruments of the recon satellite,
now showed clearly in the chewed surface of the silo
cover.
But that cover still held intact; no hole yet penetrated
its fall depth to the terror lurking beneath. This silo re-
quired at least two more hits to falfill the mission—one to
clear the broken shield, one to fall cleanly into the pit, to

brush the monster missile with kinetic destruction. Only
one more Crowbar fell toward that target, however. Help-
less, Hilan watched as the last streak of light crossed, and
missed.
They had allotted six shots of sleet for each suo—two to
break the cover, one to break the missile, one to miss, and
two more just for safety. Here three had missed, and four
had been needed to break the cover. The failure was too
painful to feel: the agony numbed the mind, rather than
piercing it.
The room seemed silent because Hilan could no longer
hear anything, beyond the pounding of his ears. His mind
raced in the kind of circle he had most feared. Destroyed^
he thought, the whole world wQl be destroyed.
The rushing sound of his own blood filled his ears. He
focused his mind on his own breathing, and let his eye-
sight fade against the muted tones of the wood-paneled
walls, cutting off his vision along with his hearing. He
breathed.
After a long moment (he didn't know how long, and he
dared not think about how few moments he had in which
to think), he searched for alternatives to avert total de-
struction. Certainly, the Soviets would know that if they
320 Marc Stiegler
released their missiles at this juncture, Hilan would retali-
ate. Even now, a spasm launch of missiles was not in the
Soviet interest. But if Hilan could not offer them an
alternative—something that would satisfy the human need
for revenge—they might choose a convulsive retaliation,
despite their own interests.
What could he offer them? He had thought about this,
along with Nathan and a dozen other men he respected,
for hours on end. But none of die alternatives they had
devised satisfied him. He could offer to dismantle more
American missiles, and he could offer to do it faster, over
the course of a couple of days, instead of months. He felt
sure this would not satisfy them, however.
He could offer them a city; one free shot against a city of
their choosing. He almost lost control of his panic as he
thought of this. Total destruction. The thought cycled in
his mind again. But he forced himself to examine this
hideous option. He felt sure it would appease the Soviets,
It was better than the destruction of aD civilization. Yet
when Hilan thought of the millions of innocent people, his
mind rebelled. Those people were not responsible for
Hilan's actions. Hilan would stand firm on simply disarm-
ing the U.S., and hope that the Soviets accepted it, before
he would make an offer like that.

Of course, if the Soviets chose to undertake such an
incremental punishment, by obliterating one city without
Milan's consent, what would he do? He agonized over this,
and the alternatives they had collected for responding to
this scenario, before admitting it was of secondary impor-
tance right now; he still needed to invent an adequate way
to appease the Soviets. He needed a way to make sure
that me Soviets knew the United States had been pun-
ished—a punishment great enough to make American pres-
idents know never to try this stunt again, but one that did
not require the murder of innocent people.
A punishment that would not harm innocent people. He
faced a crisis here so difficult that he couldn't imagine a
way of coping with it. Without thinking, he reached for
the knife mat had accompanied him up me mountain. He
paused, contemplating the knife, the mountain, and the
crevasse. He felt calmer.
DAVID'S SUNG               321
And then he felt hopefal, for he realized that there was
a punishment he coufd allow the Soviets to impose that
involved no innocent victims. It was a third alternative, one
he had thought of once before, dangling by a rope in a
deep and deadly crevasse.
The strangled voice of a junior officer penetrated Hilan's
meditation. "Thank God," he said. "The rest of them are
getting through."
Hilan looked up to see another silo-attack sequence on
the board. This time, the pattern of sleet struck with silent
precision; a dead-center hit, that left visible cracks in the
silo cover; a second hit, that left broken concrete rocks in
its wake; a third hit that speared through the opening, to
cut through the nose cone of the missile like a meat
cleaver; and another hit that cleared most of the rubble
from above before piercing the missile to its core in a
second mortal blow. This second hit struck the ftiel sup-
ply. A burst of light and fire spit back into the night from
which the sleet had come, then settled to a glowing em-
ber, deep in the shaft of what had once been a missile silo.
Hilan drew a long, shuddering breath.
General Hansen asked, with the tone of an order, "What's
the ratio of kills to misses?" He leaned forward, squinting
one eye at the numbers froftdng in one comer of the
display- "About 20 to I?"
The officer in charge of the display nodded. "Yes, sir."
Hansen looked back at die president. "Good, but not as
good as we had hoped. And not good enough, Mr. Presi-
dent. The Russians have over 2,000 missiles. If one in
twenty survives, they still have over a hundred of them."
Hilan nodded. "Not enough to destroy die world, but
enough to destroy die United States." How did this change

Hilan's analysis? Certainly, it made an all-out Soviet attack
even less rational from die Soviet point of view: diey could
not doubt, in these circumstances, that the U.S. could and
would retaliate. Even so, Hilan's earlier analysis remained
valid. He still needed to offer die Russians a sane way to
punish the Americans.
He rose from die table widi stiff precision. "I believe it
is time to negotiate wid» Klimov." He walked past die
322 Marc Stiegler
glass control area to sit down with the hot line display
system, confident that Klimov would be with him shortly.
Yurii began a painful ascent from deep slumber at the
sound of mad, pounding boots. "Sir, we are under attack."
"What?" Light pounded against Yurii's closed eyelids;
he winced.
And then he was in a helicopter, his robe flapping as he
dressed in the dark, in the cramped space, in the scream-
ing noise of the rotor, in the heart-tightening fear that
wormed through his soggy thoughts.
As he grew older, Yurii had more trouble waking at odd
hours. A moment of empathy for the retired General
Secretary hovered on the edge of his mind, then vanished
as his mind focused on the terror of the situation. We are
under attack.
But Forstil had just initiated the destruction of his own
missilesi Could that have been a ruse? Somehow, Hilan
Forstil had seemed too sincere, in that American sort of
way, to devise a trick of such scale.
Finally dressed, he set his shoulders and listened to the
situation report. It was, in some bizarre sense, not as bad
as he had feared. The information was fragmentary—the
primary communications systems had been knocked out
with superb efficiency—but apparently no nuclear weap-
ons had been used in the attack. Just prior to the strike,
the radars had noted the breakup of the new HighHunters,
with (he oversized Crowbars. Now that it was too late,
Yurii understood the new weapon and its purpose. Ah, the
accuracy of hindsight!
The brieBng ended too quickly, with too few facts. Yurii
retreated to the hot-line room with an army of translators,
though Yurii understood English as well as many of them.
Hilan Forstil was waiting for him. The quality of the
picture was uncanny; Yurii had not seen the system since
the new high-resolution cameras had been installed. Forstil
sat close by at a table; if Yurii focused on the oversized
screen, it seemed that Hilan was with him, in Moscow,
rather than half a world away.

"Greetings," the president said. "I've been expecting
DAVID'S SLING                323
you." He smiled, the sad, stern smile of a doctor who has
only precarious news for his patient's family.
Yurii glared at him, a flood of anger welling up that he
barely contained by his awareness of the chasm between
them—a chasm large enough to swallow them both. "You
have stripped me of communications. I can talk to no one
but you."
Hilan looked back calmly, his face suffused with sincer-
ity. "Really? I would like to believe you. Heaven knows
we tried our best to destroy all your communication sys-
tems. However, I doubt that we succeeded. General Sec-
retary, the Soviet Union has a lot of communication
systems."
A feeling of near-amusement struck Yurii; in fact, the
president was right. Yurii still had other assets, though
coordinating them to carry out a plan remained problematic.
Forstil spoke again. "But though we failed to take away
all your communications, I suspect that I know more about
your current status than you do. Let me bring you up to
date; your submarines are gone, all of them. Your bomb"
ers are gone as well; the handful you have in the air are
under observation, and if they try to move in our direc-
tion, we will destroy them quickly, even easily."
Forstil paused, to look away at-a display that was hidden
from Yurii's camera. "Your intermediate-range missiles have
been reduced in number along the European front, though
a considerable number remain. Of course, they aren't
relevant now, since they can't reach the United States.
Your forces along the Chinese border remain intact."
Hilan smiled almost mischievously, knowing that these
were not the critical statistics. "Your land-based missiles
have taken the most severe damage. Most of them have
been destroyed. But you do have about a hundred ICBMs
left."
Yurii nodded. His own people could account for about
30 operational systems; something on the order of a hun-
dred seemed reasonable. Of course, the American Presi-
dent could be lying. Forstil could be giving him either a
high estimate or a low one, depending on his purpose.
Certainly, Forstil had had more time to consider this
324 Marc Stiegler
situation. Yurii was sure the president had used that anal-
ysis time well.
Yet the man seemed so open and willing to share infor-
mation. Could Yurii use that? "President Forstil, your

estimate is lower than our analysis suggests. Which hun-
dred missiles are the ones you think are still operational?"
The president leaned forward, suddenly very serious.
"We can't afford to play games here. General Secretary.
We have a planet to save.'
For a moment, Yurii couldn't control his anger. "You
have attacked the sovereign territory of the Soviet UnionI
We can destroy your whole civilization I"
Forstil's sorrow returned, "Yes, you can. Of course, we
can destroy yours, as well." He licked his lips. "Please
remember that little harm has come to your people. The
United States will, of course, pay retribution to the fami-
lies of the men who have lost their lives. Frankly, I don't
expect that to involve many claims."
Indeed, to Yurii's knowledge, only two men had died in
the attack. One had been wounded. "You have destroyed
billions of dollars of investment in our defenses!"
"We will destroy a similar set of investments in our
nation. We have already started, as you well know. And
we were the only reason you needed all that hardware in
the first place."
"Your trivial destruction of a few Minutemen is a ruse
and a hoax, designed to trick us into lying still while you
grasp world dominancel"
Forstil shook his head. "Yurii Klimov, you are the mo?t
astute General Secretary the Soviet Union has had in a
long time. And you are the most sophisticated analyst of
Americans ever to hold your office. You have studied me.
I am destroying the American strategic missile force. Soon
we will have no more missiles than you have today. Klimov,
I have no reason to lie to you on this matter. What value
would more than a hundred nuclear missiles have? What
value did they ever have? Have you personally slept any
better with thousands of these monsters than you did
before? I can't believe it."
The open weariness of the American struck Yurii with
surprise. Even more surprising, Yurii recognized the same
DAVID'S SUNG               325
feeling within himself—a weariness with the wrestling match
he had conducted all his life, under the shadow of nuclear
terror that was insane in its intensity. He looked away for
a moment as he realized that, one way or another, that
shadow that had haunted him would now become lighter.
A feeling of optimism followed. He began to believe
that the American would destroy most of the American
missile force, as surely as he had destroyed Russia's. Yurii
started to tell the president that the Soviet Union had
planned to follow America's lead and reduce its nuclear
force, but cut off his own words. The president was right;

this was not a time for games.
Still, his anger remained. His country had been at-
tacked!
He wanted to launch a counterstnke, to destroy the
American ICBM silos in return- This course of action
seemed like proper justice. But he did not have enough
missiles, even if he had the command and control systems
to arrange it. Besides, the Americans would destroy those
silos for him.
He glared at the president again. Forstil, he realized,
had been studying him intently these past few moments.
Yurii suddenly despised the high-resolution television sys-
tem that betrayed his every movement to the American.
He fought a desire to order the camera shut off, sensing
that such a reduction in personal contact was the first step
to oblivion. Yet oblivion seemed inevitable. What recourse
did he have, but to strike back at America's cities? He had
to respond to this attack! What else could he do, other
than destroy American cities?
Hilan Forstil seemed to read his thought. "This is a
personal confrontation. General Secretary, no matter how
it affects the world. You must not blame the United States
for the destruction of your missiles. The United States did
not initiate this attack against you- I did." The president
seemed to grow in presence. The sincerity in his eyes
reached out, convincing. "Blame me. If you feel you must
punish someone, punish me."
"Very well. President Forstil. I shall blame you." His
face twisted with fary, "But how do I punish you?"
"With my hand. With yours." Now the president opened
326 Marc Stiegler
his right hand; it contained a bright red swiss army knife.
With hypnotic, casual grace, Forstil opened the blade and
brought it to his own throat.
A gasp arose from somewhere off-camera. Forstil frowned
at the sound, then turned back to Yurii. "Kill no innocent
people, Yurii Klimov. Kill only those who are to blame. In
killing them, you will get your message across most effec-
tively. Let this nightmare end with the guilty."
Yurii stared at the knife. The steel blade flickered in the
light, clean and precise in its deadly intent. It seemed so
small, yet so perfectly lethal—truly, a proper mate to the
surgical Hunters that had excised the Soviet arsenal. Ex-
cept that this surgical weapon was under Yurii's control— At
least, Forstil claimed that it was under Yurii's control.
Control. Control of the environment. Control of the
self. No man reached the pinnacle of Soviet power without
understanding control. He believed Forstil; he believed

that he himself, not the American, controlled the knife.
And he wondered, did he control the knife, or did the
knife control him? Yurii could not take his eyes away from
it.
His eyes slid reluctantly down to the smooth plastic
handle, held in a firm but easy grip. Yurii had an identical
knife in bis own desk. For a moment this thought gave
him a sense of kinship with the president. He could feel
the smooth surface sliding between his own fingers, tap-
ping a fingernail against its unyielding strength.
Afraid of too close an empathy, he jerked up to look at
the American President. And here he found a break in his
rapport with the man who offered his life: Forstil looked
back with steady eyes—eyes that held no trace of guilt or
fear.
It provoked Yurii to another outburst. "You launched a
sneak attack against usi Without discussion, without warn-
ing!" he screamed, trying to extract some admission of
guilt. "Of all the people in history, you most deserve to
die for starting tins holocaust!"
"Yurii Klimov." The president's voice was soft, almost a
whisper. "If our positions had been reversed, what would
you nave done?"
If he had had the chance to so cleanly neutralize Amer-
DAVID'S SUNG               327
ica, what would he have done? The answer struck him like
shards of ice flung in his face. He suddenly saw generosity
in Hilan Forstil's actions.
The president was speaking again. "Frankly, it doesn't
make any difference what you might have done. I am the
one who did it. General Secretary, the vengeance you
seek, in your belief that it is justice, is in your hands. It is
yours for just the slightest motion." The knife tip pressed
against yielding flesh.
Yurii had the American totally in his power. To kill this
man would indeed send a potent message to anyone fool-
ish enough to think about this stunt again. Yet, the thought
continued to haunt him, what would I have done in the
same situation?
He must have moved his head, for he saw the presi-
dent's hand grip more firmly, a last tension before plung-
ing the knife home.
Yurii leaped up. "No!" he shouted. "I will not take your
miserable life."
The president's fingers relaxed, though for a long mo-
ment his expression remained the same, as if not quite
believing his reprieve. Then he smiled, that same sorrow-

ful smile. "Thank you." He looked to the side, and his
smile became wider, yet also more sorrow-filled. "And
now it no longer makes any difference,"
Yurii looked at the president, puzzled, until Forstil
explained- "A second wave of SiloHunters just struck the
Soviet Union. General Secretary, your country no longer
has a strategic nuclear force."
Yurii stood very still. "Will you still destroy your missiles?"
Forstil nodded. "Why not? They're pointless now
anyway."
Curiosity overcame his deeper concerns. "Tell me. Pres-
ident Forstil, would you really have used that knife, know-
ing you only had to hold out for a few minutes before I was
reduced to impotence?"
Again Forstil nodded. "I always keep my word, Yurii
Klimov."
A new emotion struck him now that it was all over: the
sense of loss—a loss that gave way to bitterness. "Well,
328 Marc SUegler
you did not need the knife. And now, instead of death,
you have earned world domination."
The president burst into laughter. It swelled, growing
almost hysterical in its release of tension, then disap-
peared as quickly as it had risen. "So it might seem to you.
And indeed, in some bizarre sense, I have great power
over all the nations of the world except one. I might
control the world, Yurii Klimov, but I can't control my
own people, I think you'll find this leaves me with no
more world control than you have." He paused reflec-
tively, "But one thing I can assure you. Your own country,
the Soviet Union, is safer now than it was just an hour ago.
I'm sure you don't believe me now, but in time you will.
Sleep well, General Secretary, knowing that from this
night forward, sleep will be much easier for everyone."
The screen darkened to black.
Yurii stared at the blank screen for a long time, wonder-
ing if the American spoke the truth. Maybe, in ways he
could just begin to see, Forstil might be right,
May 25
The engineer breaks a large problem
into many small problems, each of which
he can solve. The bureaucrat takes many
small problems and rolls them together
to form a large problem that no one can
solve.
—Zetetic Commentaries

The smell of antiseptics tainted the air.
Leslie hated illness and death. But even more, he hated
hospitals, as embodiments of these disasters. He recog-
nized the danger of this emotional reaction. In Zetetic
terms—in terms stolen from the general semanticists, who
had stolen it from the earlier German philosophers—it was
a reificotion. It was the mapping of an idea (death) onto a
real-life object (the hospital) that did not quite correspond
correctly. It was a perfect example of a mental map that
did not correspond to the actual terrain. Mistakes like this
led inevitably to horrible fates, such as the fate that had
befallen Jim Mayfield.
Even recognizing his erroneous reiScation, Leslie hated
hospitals. It was hard to act with wisdom as great as your
understanding.
Lila led the way through the hospital; a ragtag collection
of software engineers followed her hasty footsteps. Leslie's
eyes glistened as he reflected on the upcoming meeting of
the Sling software team. He knew it would be the last one.
Partings seemed to be an inevitable defect of the Infor-
mation Age. The rapidly networked project teams quickly
achieved their purposes, and the rumllment of those pur-
poses led to an equally rapid breakup.
Leslie knew what would happen next. He had come to
this point many times on projects in the past. All the team
members would swear to get together in the future. All of
329
330 Marc Stiegler
them would electronically send mail to one another at
slowly lengthening intervals. None of them would know
exactly when the spirit of the team had slipped away,
though all would understand eventually that the spirit had
indeed gone. Of the members of the Sung team, only
Leslie would know that the Sling spirit had slipped away
with the end of this last meeting.
But for today, for this moment of triumph, their shared
accomplishment transcended the petty failings of individ-
ual human beings. Lila even smiled at Kurt as she opened
the door to Juan's room; Kurt smiled back as he stepped
through. Flo and Ronnie followed. Leslie entered last, so
that he could quietly occupy a comer. He slipped his bag
from his shoulder and smiled as he remembered the bag s
contents.
Juan had trouble focusing his eyes. He squinted and
blinked often, but he greeted everyone with a wiry laugh.
"Good God! Is the whole town of Yaldma here?"
Lila shook back her hair, "Not quite. Only all the peo-
ple who had to find bugs in your software." She grasped

his hand for a lingering moment. Perhaps this sliver of the
team, Juan and Lila, would go on together beyond the end
of the Sung.
Lila held a gift-wrapped package in her left hand. "Na-
than's sorry he couldn't make it. He's with the president,
waiting to hear about Nell Carson. They're operating on
her again today." She held the package out to Juan. "He
told me to give you this." She frowned. "He said you
should practice with it."
"Sounds ominous." Juan took the package- A tremor ran
across his shoulders, and he grunted, "It better not be a
computer, that's all I can say.
"It's not a bomb," Kurt offered. "I listened to it care-
fully before I got into the car with it."
Juan unwrapped the box slowly, savoring the surprise.
Suddenly it fell apart, and a wine bottle fell into his bands.
Juan scrutinized die label. "Fume Blanc." Juan's grin took
on Cheshire proportions. "A fine wine. It would be wasted
on an alcoholic, but it's perfect for a wine taster."
An awkward silence followed for a moment. Juan asked,
"So what's everybody doing now?"
r~~
DAVID'S SUNG               331
After a moment's emptiness, Ronnie spoke up. "Well,
you know Lightcraft Corporation—the people who make
the WeatherWatcher? They want to improve the handling
of their planes in mountainous areas." He glanced sidelong
at Flo. "We're considering putting a bid on it."
Flo nodded. "Yes." A deep amusement surfaced around
her eyes. "We may find ourselves working for my daughter."
Kurt spoke next. "And I'H probably go to work for the
Institute, as an employee rather than as a subcontractor,
They aren't quite sure what they'll do with me yet." He
shrugged. "Im not quite sure what 111 do with them,
either. Except I'll fight the Army bureaucrats—the ones I
tried to leave behind a year ago.' He rolled his eyes, then
turned serious. "But I have another message from Na-
than." He drew an envelope from his pocket. "I'm not
sure what it is, but he wanted me to read it to everybody."
He ripped the envelope apart and started reading Na-
than's words. "I'm sorry I couldn't make it to today's meet-
ing of the Sling team. But frankly, I'm not too sorry; I hate
endings. And anyone who reflects too long on the comple-
tion of this project will miss a moment of true wonder,
The end of the Sling Project is the beginning of more
futures than we can imagine.
"But before we move into those beginnings, I want to
discuss the meaning of our success; I'm sure some of you

have asked yourselves, how long will the success we cre-
ated here last?" A shudder passed through the whole
group, as if everyone had indeed asked themselves this
question. "If you wonder, then I want you to remember
this.
"Our success has brought the human mind directly into
service in the defense of ourselves and our friends. In the
heart of each Hunter there dwells a small part of each of
our minds. Within each Hunter small extensions of our
souls watch unceasingly, protecting us from all men and
nations who don't believe mat freedom is important. Hence-
forth, those extensions of our souls will protect us for as
long as such protection is necessary, for as long as men
live who do not respect the rights of others. And so, for
those who have given of their souls—for Lila, and Kurt,
and Leslie, and Juan, and Ronnie, and Flo, and—" Kurt's
332 Marc Stiegler
voice broke, to continue in a whisper "—and for Amos,
the free men of the world give their thanks."
Leslie lost the thread of the conversation. Though the
message had been for everyone, Nathan had nevertheless
found his way home to the source of Leslie's own disquiet.
He had not thought of the Sling that way—as a permanent
melding of the souls of the team. The cooperative spirit
he had thought they would lose now lived within the
circuits of die Hunters they had stationed around die
world. The spirit had not died; it had merely faded from
view. What they had created would indeed continue on,
until replaced by something better. That was as it should be.
His sorrow lifted. At a lull in the conversation, he
stepped forward, opening his bag. "There's an important
part of the job we haven't completed yet," he said with
mock sternness.
The room grew quiet as he pulled items from the bag: a
steel pan, a cigarette lighter, a bottle of Jim Beam bour-
bon, and a folded roll of paper. He cleared his throat,
taking on the tone of an announcer. "The time has come,"
he said quietly, "for Ae honorable tradition of the PERT
chart burning."
Juan understood first. "Beautiful! Thanks for remem-
bering."
With solemn care, Leslie unraveled the paper. It was a
miniature of the PERT chart that had filled the hall in the
Zetetic Institute. One important change had been made:
green—die green of successful completion—now covered
every box on every path. The pinks and reds and blues
still marked all the twisting roadblocks they had met along
the way—a commemoration of the pain they had shared
along the path, a chapter of history rendered in wordless
color. But green boxes had grown around the red, encas-
ing every disaster in healing tones. The green had seeped

aUthe way to the final box, the ending milestone that held
the words, "SLING COMPLETE."
Leslie placed the chart in the pan and whetted it with
die bourbon. Twisting one end into a wick, he lighted die
alcohol and die paper. A bluish flame flickered from the
obsolete chart, and smoky aroma tinged die antiseptic
smell of the room.
DAVID'S SUNG               333
Laughter and idle chatter grew loud. Eventually the
chatter softened as, one by one, the people who had built
die Sling departed. Soon only Juan, Lila, and he himself
remained. He wished die two of them well and departed.
Leaving, he rejoiced at dlis quiet dissolution of a great
team. He would have liked die Sling team to continue
indefinitely, but die Institute's teachings reminded him of
die consequences of that alternative; any attempt to drive
a team beyond its natural life would lead to die creation of
an institution. Once die culture had hardened into the
rigid torpor of bureaucracy, ttlis travesty of a team would
feed upon die bright cooperative light that had created it,
until the light died, leaving a cold emptiness darker dian
die absence of light.
Well, die future Nadian had mentioned in his note had
already arrived. Leslie had a new contract widi die L-5
Corporation, a chance to help build die SpaceRing. And
die SpaceRing project would require a team. His mind
filled widi die questions and issues he needed to resolve
before he could bring diat team together.
Kira stood before die flat dullness of the apartment door
and stared into die peephole. Of course, from her side of
die door, she could see nothing. But she had come here
planning to feign disorder and confiise the enemy; let the
confusion start even now, before the door opened. Her
effort to invoke confusion had worked die last time; she
wondered if it would work again. With a light flick of her
wrist, she raised die knocker and tapped in a bright rhythm.
She waited. Dull diuds from inside suggested the move-
ments of a large man. When die sound stopped, she knew
he had come to die peephole and diat his confusion mounted
widi every passing moment. She smiled for him.
Bill flung die door aside. His eyes gleamed. His smile
reminded Kira of an engineer who has completed the careful,
painstaking analysis of what he needs to do, who can now
dirow himself headlong into the completion of his project.
Kira smiled in response to that engineer's smile, dien
stopped as she remembered that Bill was not an engineer.
He always threw himself headlong, too often widiout mak-
ing die painstaking analysis diat must precede flight.
334 Marc Stiegfer

He stood with all his weight on one leg, his head tossed
to the side, the tawny curls of his hair touching the door's
edge. He watched her with simple pleasure.
Let me in," she said. He did not yield. She stepped
forward.
Laughing, with inseparably quick movements, his head
came up, his left leg pinned the door, and he released his
handhold upon it. He reached out with both arms and
grasped Kira around the waist. Before she could object, he
turned and carried her into the living room.
Kira twisted against the strength of his bands, a futile
effort that nonetheless had the proper effect; he chose to
release her. She took two steps, turned, and confronted
her adversary, fully aware of the flushed heat on her face.
"The last time I saw you, you looked crumpled because
you'd found out what a dupe you had been. You look
happier now."
'I've had what you Zetetics call a 'revelation.' After that
day when you came here to destroy me, I spent a week
figuring out what to do next. Now I know." A large fist
smacked down against an equally large palm. "I know who
to get. Daniel Wilcox is dead meat."
"I see." The thought of Bill rampaging against the to-
bacco industry thrilled and scared her at the same time. It
thrilled her because it would save lives, but it scared her
as an act of vengeance for her mother. Bill planned to
attack Wilcox only for vengeance- She continued coolly.
"So you're going to make the same kind of vicious, dis-
torted attack on him that you made on us."
He opened his mouth to say yes, realized her purpose,
and pressed his lips together. "Actually, I may not have
to," he said.
"Oh? Why not?"
Uncertainty wavered in his eyes. "Daniel Wilcox seems
bent on destroying himself. He's making some strange
business deals." His glance turned conspiratorial. "What
do you know about it?"
Kira shrugged. "I don't know anything about his plans
anymore. I've retired from the agency handling Wilcox-
Morris." She considered telling him about her more re-
cent activities—the new political campaigns to protect the
DAVID'S SUNG               335
Institute and the Information Age, campaigns for which
she now wanted Bill's help. "I think Wilcox has found out
who I am."
"Really? Well, / know who you are."
Kira laughed. "Really? Who am I? Is this a guessing

game?"
"You're a woman with so many emotional biases about
the Zetetic Institute that I'm overwhelmed by the hypoc-
risy of your last lecture to me."
"I see. I guess you do know who I am." She started to
defend herself, then stopped. "It's possible that my emo-
tional involvement has prejudiced my view of the Insti-
tute. I can't judge it. Can you?"
His eyes glittered. She had thrown herself open to his
judgment, and now he held the power to strike at her ego.
But the same shred of intellectual honesty that in the
last analysis had not allowed him to deny die facts sur-
rounding his comet-like rise to success did not now allow
him to bruise her unjustly. "Probably not."
She gave a short laugh, as if to acknowledge his
weakness—a weakness she knew as a virtue. With the ease
of perfect security, she threw herself onto his couch. She
lay back, half-closing her eyes, Jier hands clasped behind
her head. "You have anything to drink in this place?"
"I have scotch. I have orange juice. Which would you
prefer?" -
"Your choice. Whichever one you're having."
After a moment's pause, he muttered, "Orange juice."
He went into the kitchen.
Kira chuckled at his decision not to bring out the scotch.
She figured that he figured that he would need all his wits
to continue this verbal duel. "Do you know Charles Som-
erset?" she yelled at him through the room dividers.
"He's the project manager of FIREFORS, right? Or
rather, he used to be; FIREFORS no longer exists."
"Right. Well, he's come to the Institute, and we've
found out that he has a rare and spectacular talent. He has
a sixth sense for subliminal advertising."
"What does that mean?" Bill returned with two huge
glasses. He sat down on the couch, just close enough to
make Kira aware of his nearness.
336 Marc Sttegler
"It means that he can detect, with his conscious mind,
the suggestive signals that advertisers use to get at a
person's subconscious." She slurped at her orange juice,
making more noise than she needed to. "He says he can
smell it. Yesterday he smelled it in a literal sense. He was
shopping in some department store, and he could tell that
something odd was happening. The shoppers were just a
little too intent on their purchases- Several other Zetetics
were looking around, puzzled; they could feel it, too. Well,

after analyzing his sensations for a bit, Charles realized
that someone had filled the store with 'new car smell.' Not
too much—not enough so that people could recognize
it—but enough to tingle somewhere deep inside. Charles
was the only one who figured it out." She nodded. "You
should come to the Institute, too. Who knows? Even you
might have a talent."
Bill growled, then mumbled something.
"What?" Kira asked.
"I said, I have been to the Institute. I'm working on
developing a Zetetic form ofnewscasting."
"I see. I ve noticed that your newscasts seem less ridicu-
lous lately. Of course, you have a long way to go." Kira
had known before coming here that Bill was enrolled at
the Institute. He had made great progress, in fits and
starts. It seemed somehow inappropriate for her to com-
pliment him, but her intellectual honesty was too great to
leave it at that. "Actually, I'm delighted with some of your
recent stuff. In fact, I'm worried about you—a Zetetic
newscasting style would still be a ratings disaster, even though
there are more Zetetic viewers every day. You'll have to be
careful for a few more years, until we have a large enough
group to form a significant sector of the audience."
She watched Bill shift his position, again and again,
unable to suppress his drive to action. She considered his
qualifications. He was smart, he was witty, he was too
handsome, and he was passionate about anyone or any-
tiling with whom he got involved, hi short, he had poten-
tial. The only question was, could he be trained? She
would have to work on that.
The newscast that had been murmuring in the back-
ground suddenly became the focus of Bill's attention. "Yes,"
DAVID'S SUNG               337
a military spokesman was saying, "the Hunters that helped
our boys win the war were actually developed under the
auspices of the Army's regular research and development
system. So were the enhanced HighHunters used on the
Night of Steel Sleet. Contrary to the media's distorted
versions of the recent past, the Sling Project did not
expose flaws in the Defense Department's policies—it dem-
onstrated the health and vitality of those policies."
Bill leaped from the sofa. "Liars and fools." he screamed.
"The Zetetic Institute saved your asses. The Institute is
the real hero of the war." He sat down, muttering, "The
Army is riddled with deadbeats. We have to get rid of
them."
Kira thought about the intricacies of the facts that came
closer to the truth. Yes, there were many deadbeats in the
Army, and incompetents, and politicians without regard
for anything but their next promotion. But there were also

the thousands of men who stood and fought with their
tanks, with their rifles, with their knives, and finally, with
their bare bands, in the face of a seemingly invincible
enemy. Those men were the heroes. Even the Institute
could not build a machine to replace human courage-
But these points were too subtle for Bill's current frame
of mind. Kira took a deep breath. His training would
require long, patient hours.
Fortunately, she suspected she would enjoy it.
Daniel stepped close to the wall of glass. Outside, dark
grays swirled through white clouds, hovering above trees
stripped by winter. The winter had passed, but spring had
not quite arrived. Daniel wondered if he would see an-
other spring from the top floor of the Wilcox Building. In a
rare gesture of fatigue, he exhaled sharply,
The warm moisture of his breath condensed on the
glass. He drew his finger through the tiny droplets, leav-
ing a trail that ended with his fingerprint. As the droplets
evaporated, his fingerprint faded as well, disappearing into
the past with the winter.
The Zetetic Institute had won. No one knew it yet. Not
even the Zetetics themselves grasped the significance of
their victory. No doubt Nathan Pilstrom could grasp what
338 Marc Stiegler
had happened easily enough. But equally without doubt,
Nathan had had too many other concerns lately to take the
time to deduce all the ramifications of recent events,
Daniel remembered worrying that his campaign against
the Institute might make the Institute famous. He need
not have worried. The men and women of the Institute
had their own ways of achieving respect and prestige
without him. Their fame now transcended any silly discus-
sions of cigarettes and health. It rested with their roles as
American heroes.
His nostrils flared. More condensation from his breath
on the window blurred his view of the Potomac. Thinking
about the latest flip-flop of the news media, he felt a
sensation similar to the feeling of being jilted by a woman.
He had invested so much time and creative energy into
molding those news people into an effective, focused tool.
For a brief time, their energies had all pointed in the same
direction—in an attack on Zeteticism.
And now, with the fickleness of a woman, they had
turned their energies in reverse, lavishing incredible praise
upon Zetetics, imbuing the Zetetic view of life with mirac-
ulous powers.
This belief in the invincible perfection of Zetetic disci-
pline would bring people into the anti-smoldng clinics in
swarms. The swarms would grow so vast that the Institute
might be overwhelmed. Daniel had a moment's warm

vision of an Institute growing so fast that the instructional
quality deteriorated, driving the success rates down, caus-
ing yet another backlash from the fickle newspeople.
He suspected, however, that Nathan was too shrewd to
make that land of mistake, Nathan, he realized, was not
interested in growth; he was interested in efiectiveness-
As often happened with effective people, growth came as a
natural consequence.
Eventually, of course, the news media would backlash
against Nathan anyway. The Institute was not perfect; its
people, for all their enthusiasm and rationality, were nev-
ertheless j'ust people. Indeed, Daniel realized with a smile,
the Institute's own philosophy militated against an image
of spotless perfection. The Institute would be the first to
rebut the glowing praise.
DAVID'S SUNG               339
But the luster of the Institute would not wear off soon
enough to help the tobacco industry. A tidal wave of
smokers would kick the habit. They would convince their
friends to follow them in an even greater wave. Tobacco
would soon lose a major source of its profitability. The
foreign sales would continue, but Daniel had little interest
in riding a dying horse,
He reached into his pocket for a cigarette, thus breaking
his own rule never to smoke in private. Reneging on this
commitment to himself now seemed appropriate, since the
very basis of the commitment would soon become irrele-
vant: this would be his last smoke. He lit up, in memoriam.
The flavor filled his mouth and lungs.
What had gone wrong in his battle with the Institute?
He worked this question over and over again in his mind.
Slowly, oh so slowly, he drove to one conclusion: His loss
had been inevitable with the coming of the Information Age.
He felt a bit surprised that he had not seen it coming
sooner. He was the master at forecasting the future, after
all. But he forgave himself. After all, the changes caused
by the Information Revolution had not been readable in
the nuances of life, in subtle twists of the road. Rather, the
Information Age had struck everywhere with a steady,
evenly applied pressure. It did not affect the road so much
as it affected the very terrain upon which the road was
laid. He had been so enmeshed in the change he could not
see it, for he had been one of the principle users of the
new information-rich terrain.
For years, every step he had taken in the defense of his
industry had been based on advanced information process-
ing. His sales projections; his political projections; his
vulnerability projections; his data bases of men, women,
corporations, laws, unions, and farmers; his strategies for
campaigns against voters and reporters and networks—all
stemmed from the central revolution. For years he had
been fighting the Zetetic Institute and its forebears on

their own turf, without realizing it.
Had he realized it, he would have cut and run long ago.
He never fought on turf of his enemy's choosing, as Na-
than had observed in their encounter in the Mansfield
Room in the Capitol.
340 Marc Stiegler
Taking a drag on his cigarette, he savored the long
history of success he had had in Bghting on his own turf
He had never argued health issues when Bghting anti-
smoking referenda. He had always argued on freedom or
money issues—issues such as, how much would it cost to
implement the low? In his favorite campaign, his forces
had spread the word that a certain California Proposition
would cost twenty million dollars to implement. The oppo-
sition had carefully analyzed his figures and found a inas-
sive error: it would only cost twenty thousand dollars.
He laughed at the memory even now, decades later.
Fools! Once they started arguing about the price, the real
numbers ceased to make a difference. Daniel swamped his
enemies with commercial air time; people heard over and
over again that the new law would cost millions. They
heard it so often that in the end, the voters ridiculed the
calculations made by his enemies, even though his ene-
mies had been correct! Sweet.
But he had fought the Information Age Zetetics on then-
own terrain, on the terrain of information processing. This
time it would be his turn to play the fool, unless he moved
fast. The tight little world of me Wilcox-Morris Corpora-
tion would start crumbling in just a few months. He would
have to ease his fortune out slowly, lest he cause panic.
Even with care he would take a loss. He expected that his
assets would drop below the magic billion-dollar threshold
before the end of the afiair.
But the tobacco industry would serve him well one last
time, before he departed forever. Disasters could be very
profitable for those who could see them coming. He would
sell Wilcox-Morris stock short; that would make a tidy
profit. Better yet, if he could cause a precipitous collapse
in the industry, he could buy options with leverage that
could get him a factor ten improvement in yield. Such a
collapse could lift his worth into the multiple billions-
But the Institute would not precipitate such a fall. The
Institute's focus on gradual success did not mesh with the
creation of sudden catastrophes. Extra effort would have to
be invested to make his vision real. He, Daniel Wilcox,
would have to arrange the sudden collapse of the tobacco
industry.
DAVID'S SLING                341
He would start in California, with a new series of re-
strictions on smoking. Once California had shown the way,
he had great confidence that he could leverage his per-
sonal anti-smokmg organization into the other leading states.

The rest would follow on their own. With a bit of hustle,
he could brutalize the Wilcox-Morris profit margins six
months from now.
Daniel hummed a little cigarette commercial jingle as
he turned from the window. Change yields opportunity,
he remembered one of Nathan's little sayings. And oppor-
tunity yields change. Daniel could navigate the terrain of
the Information Age, now that he had corrected the major
flaw in his map. Profits beckoned in every direction. He
had a sweet vision of one day buying up the Zetetic
Institute itself. It was, after all, a corporate entity, with
shares of stock for sale. What better property could he
hold in a world where information was power?
On his way out the door, he paused at the trash can to
toss out his cigarette stub. He reached into his pocket and
pulled out his last pack of Wilcox-Morris cigarettes, run-
ning a finger over the embossed emblem that bore his
name. The touch was almost a caress.
With no farther hesitation, Daniel crushed the pack until
shreds of weed regurgitated froiri it. He felt a great relief as
he dumped the shreds into the trash. Smoking was a filthy
habit; the world would be far better off without it.
Nathan had lived this nightmare exactly one year be-
fore. He remembered waking in the middle of the night at
a chance sound, the terror of a ringing telephone, the
horror of waiting. One year ago he had waited, knowing
that soon the ringing telephone would end with a polite
voice telling him to come to the hospital, telling him that
Jan had finally escaped from the agony of dying by passing
through death.
Now he waited again. This time the outcome was not
quite so certain; even now the doctors were trying a
radical new surgery, a technique devised during a Zetetic
brainstorming conference just a month earlier. There was
a chance, delicate as a snowflake, that Nell might survive.
Still, the ringing of the telephone frightened him.
342 Marc Stiegler
He waited in different surroundings. Entering the Blue
Room, he joined Hilan Forstil in this vigil. Nathan hefted
the small metal disk concealed in his right hand and tried
to smile. Sunlight through the bay windows made it warm
here; the air tasted dry.
Nathan watched as Hilan stared out the window, shift-
ing his weight from side to side, left, right, left. "Mr.
President," Nathan addressed him.
Hilan turned. His lips pursed tightly, other than mat,
he looked calm.
Nathan continued. "I have something for you. A medal."
He opened his hand and waved the dingy metal disk,
dangling from a rainbow-colored ribbon.

Hilan looked puzzled. "Tsk, Nathan, You know I can't
accept gifts. It's in the Constitution."
Nathan chuckled. "I suspect they 11 make an exception
for this one. After all, we had to make an exception, too, to
give it to you." He held out the disk. Hilan reluctantly
took it. His puzzlement grew.
The disk was made of an undistinguished alloy of com-
mon metals, a gray monotone. It looked like a Boston
subway token, save for two words inlaid in silver. The
words "Rationality Token" flashed against the dull metal
background.
Hilan flipped it over several times. "A rationality token?
Just what is a rationality token?"
"It's a tradition," Nathan explained. "A Zetetic tradition
that goes back before the birth of Zeteticism." He smiled.
At least for a few moments, tins story would take his mind
off Nell and Jan. "Years and years ago, a friend of mine
noticed an odd thing when he went to meetings with large
groups of government bureaucrats. He would take a list of
questions to each meeting, and put forth each question to
me assembled body. He found mat for each question, one
bureaucrat in me room would have something rational and
intelligent to say about me question; the rest would an-
swer either with a magician's verbal handwaving, or with
statements that were internally inconsistent, or with state-
ments that had no apparent connection to the topic.
"Oddly, for each question, a ttsfferent bureaucrat gave
the rational response. It seemed as though a law of nature
DAVID'S SUNG
343
was in effect that prevented more than one bureaucrat
from being rational at one time. And you could never
predict beforehand which lucky bureaucrat could answer a
particular question rationally,
"So my friend developed me theory of the Rationality
Token. In this theory, a roomful of bureaucrats shares a
angle rationality token. Whoever holds the token can act
intelligently, but no one else can. And the bureaucrats
pass the token around, secretly, in between questions,"
Hilan thought about this for a moment, then pointed at
the Rationality Token disc in Nathan's hand. If you go
around handing out too many rationality tokens, you could
find yourself violating this natural law.
Nathan clapped his hands. "Exactly! After sitting through
these kinds of meetings for several years, my friend no-
ticed that, scattered amongst me bureaucrats who shared
tokens, there were special people. These special people
were always rational, on all questions. My friend expanded

his theory to include the notion that some people carried
their own rationality tokens with them wherever they
went, and as such were not bound by the laws that gov-
erned the others,"
Nathan took the token in his hands, and slid the ribbon
around Hilan's head so that the token dangled on his
chest. "We established the decision duel to train people to
such heights of rationality that they could always carry
their own tokens. At the graduation ceremony we give the
graduates their very own Rationality Tokens. As you can
see, the token is not only useful for rationality; it is also
good for a single trip on the Boston subway in case of
emergency."
Hilan laughed. "But I'm not a certified decision duelist."
"No. But someone clearly displayed mil rationality in a
decision duel that took place the day before the Night of
Steel Sleet. Someone devised an insightful third alterna-
tive—an alternative of preemptive mutual arms reduction.
I would like you to hold his token for him until we find
him, whoever he was."
Hilan nodded. "I see." His hand closed over the token,
clenching it. "Thank you. I'm glad you think I did the
right thing." Tension flowed across his features. He turned
344 Marc Stiegler
his back to Nathan, staring out the window across the
south lawn of the Ellipse. Sunshine poured in, outlining
Hilan as a lonely figure.
Hilan shook his head as if to toss off an evil spirit. "I
remember walking past Blair House, where Ronald Reagan
was staying, the day before his first inauguration. It was
cold and damp, a typical Washington winter day." He
turned to face Nathan, though he still looked back into the
past. "The street was lined with bleachers. Scattered through
the bleachers were desolate, sad people, all staring at Blair
House. Those people didn't know Ronald Reagan, but
they knew he would be different from Jimmy Carter. They
had no rational reason for believing that Reagan's arrival
would improve their individual lives, but they still stared
at the house. They seemed to think that if they could just
catch a glimpse of the new president, the vision could
change them. Those sad, desolate people stared at the
windows of Riair House with hope." He laughed. "And
you know what? I wanted to join them."
He sighed. "They're out there now, watching for a
glimpse of me. They love me without question. The gam-
ble I played with their lives paid off, and now they believe
I can do no wrong. I hope it lasts, at least long enough for
me to keep my word with Khmov. I've accelerated the
schedule for dismantling our missile silos. I hope that in
the long run, what I've done helps the people who watch
presidents from the bleachers with their sad but hopeful
eyes."

Nathan nodded. "At least they know that you have
changed their lives."
"Have I? You know, the Russians and Americans might
have worked out a peaceful world without the Night of
Steel Sleet. As it is, the world may be safe for democracy,
but it certainly isn't safe from hate. When I initiated that
Night, I increased the hate. The Russians hate us more
now than ever before. We'll probably never know whether
I made the right decision."
Nathan shrugged. "Your solution might not have been
optimal," he conceded, "But at least it was effective. Too
many of the people who have shaped the world have never
even achieved mat much." Nathan snorted. "I'm already
DAVID'S SUNG
345
annoyed when I think about the historians a hundred
years from now. Some damn fool will look back on our
story—the story of the birth of the Information Age—and
prattle about the sweeping inevitability of our victory.
Idiots!"
Hilan laughed. He moved out of the sunlight. "Cer-
tainly no Zetetic would develop or believe such an unsane
view of history." His smile held just a hint of mocking
amusement. "And surely the Zetetic Institute will destroy
all the bureaucracies and rule the worid."
"Nol" Nathan was surprised by his own vehemence. He
softened his tone. "At least, I hope not. I designed the
Institute as a temporary structure, a scafiold, on our way
to new and better Information Age organizations. Most of
me good in Zetetic philosophy should be absorbed by me
school system, and maybe the corporations. Zeteticism as
such would men disappear, because it would be the norm.
It would cease to be distinguishable from the background
of normal society. If the Institute continued on indefi-
nitely, then we would merely have created another insti-
tution. We would have tailed."
Hilan waved his hand expansively. "Do you believe that
only teachers can leam from you? Then what about my
institution, Nathan? What about my bureaucracy, the United
States government?"
Nathan looked into the distance. "I believe you are
obsolete, Mr. President."
"Beallyl And who will replace me?"
Nathan shook his bead. "No one will replace you, Hilan.
It's the office you occupy, as head of a nation-state, that
will be replaced,"
"What will replace it?"

Nathan's forehead creased in concentration. "I don't
know. I can't see it yet." Tears glittered in his eyes.
"Perhaps Jan would have known. She often saw the future
more dearly than I, though she never tried to look too
far." He shrugged. "When the time comes, I'm sure some-
one will know. It may not be our problem. Not all the
ramifications of the Information Age will settle out in our
lifetimes."
"Tnank heavens! We already have too much to do."
346 Marc Stiegler
The telephone rang. The sound swept Nathan's mind
with electric terror. Was this the call from the polite men
from the hospital? Was it over? Was it too late?
He had never told Nell he loved her. He had been a
coward, insufficiently self-assured to think of himself as a
proper consort for a Madam President. Had she felt the
same? Why had he waited?
Hilan's steps sounded soft as he walked across the room
to pick up the obscenely ringing instrument. Hilan's tense
impassivity turned to a serious frown as he listened, then
changed to mischievous humor. "Thank you. Well be
right over." He hung up and beaded for the door. "I think
you'll want to come with me," he said over his shoulder to
Nathan.
"Who was it?" Nathan's pulse pounded as he asked.
"Well, it seems my obsolescence has already caught up
with me. I'm about to be evicted from the White House.'
He opened the door to let Nathan go through first, "ft
seems that Nell has just regained consciousness. They
think she'll be fine."
Nathan froze. Then his eyes widened, and joyful warmth
suffused his whole body. "A miracle," he said simply. It
was funny, Nathan noted, that even he himself could
sometimes take the goodness of the world for granted.
Even he needed an occasional miracle.
He had never lost his sense of wonder, despite the loss
of Jan and the jeopardy of Nell. But with Nell's return
from danger, every detail of his universe shined brighter.
He appreciated the air he breathed, the scent of Washing-
ton springtime, the metallic polish of the limousine that
stopped for them, the texture of the leather seat, the quiet
rumble of the engine, the pressure of acceleration, the
glow of the green light, the blue sky, the soft clouds, the
antiseptic smell of the hospital, the bright white of the
walls, the cold metal of the bed rails, the warm smile on
Nell's face.
He lingered Acre, in the wonder of Nell's smile, for a
very long time.

DAVID'S SLING
now available
i n
Hypertext
Now the story of the Sling Project is one of [he world1', firsi
hypertext novels. The disk ver'.iMn includes:
Pictures and Animation
Notes and Details about the men, machines, and places
described in the novel
Read the sfory in different ways, from different points of view:
Nalhan PUstrom
Nell Carson
Hi!an Por<li[
Kira F^vans
Flip at the toiwh of a button from discussion to discussion iiboul:
Strategy and TaclL's
Zetelic philosophy
The Military-Industrial Complex
For Information About Both Mac
and IBM PC Hypertext Versions,
Call:  (800) 624-2232 ext. 653

