
Marketing 
Communications

At Pearson, we have a simple mission: to help people
make more of their lives through learning.
We combine innovative learning technology with trusted
content and educational expertise to provide engaging
and eﬀective learning experiences that serve people
wherever and whenever they are learning.
From classroom to boardroom, our curriculum materials, digital
learning tools and testing programmes help to educate millions
of people worldwide – more than any other private enterprise.
Every day our work helps learning ﬂourish, and
wherever learning ﬂourishes, so do people.
To learn more, please visit us at www.pearson.com/uk

Marketing 
Communications
Sixth Edition
Patrick De Pelsmacker  Maggie Geuens  Joeri Van den Bergh
A European Perspective
Harlow, England • London • New York • Boston • San Francisco • Toronto • Sydney • Dubai • Singapore • Hong Kong 
Tokyo • Seoul • Taipei • New Delhi • Cape Town • São Paulo • Mexico City • Madrid • Amsterdam • Munich • Paris • Milan

PEARSON EDUCATION LIMITED
KAO Two, KAO Park
Harlow, CM17 9NA
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (0)1279 623623
Fax: +44 (0)1279 431059
Web: www.pearson.com/uk
First published 2001 (print)
Second edition published 2004 (print)
Third edition published 2007 (print)
Fourth edition published 2010 (print)
Fifth edition published 2013 (print and electronic)
Sixth edition published 2017 (print and electronic)
© Pearson Education Limited 2001, 2004, 2007, 2010 (print)
© Pearson Education Limited 2013, 2017 (print and electronic)
The rights of Patrick De Pelsmacker, Maggie Geuens and Joeri Van den Bergh to be identified as authors of 
this work have been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
The print publication is protected by copyright. Prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a 
retrieval system, distribution or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
recording or otherwise, permission should be obtained from the publisher or, where applicable, a licence 
permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom should be obtained from the Copyright Licensing 
Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
The ePublication is protected by copyright and must not be copied, reproduced, transferred, distributed, 
leased, licensed or publicly performed or used in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by 
the publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was purchased, or as strictly 
permitted by applicable copyright law. Any unauthorised distribution or use of this text may be a direct 
infringement of the authors’ and the publishers’ rights and those responsible may be liable in law 
accordingly.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark in this 
text does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such trademarks, nor 
does the use of such trademarks imply any affiliation with or endorsement of this book by such owners.
Pearson Education is not responsible for the content of third-party internet sites.
ISBN:	978-1-292-13576-2 (print)
	
978-1-292-13579-3 (PDF)
	
978-1-292-13580-9 (eText)
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for the print edition is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for the print edition is available from the Library of Congress
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
17  16  15  14  13
Print edition typeset in 10/12 pt Sabon MT Pro by SPi Global.
Printed and bound in Slovakia by Neografia.
NOTE THAT ANY PAGE CROSS REFERENCES REFER TO THE PRINT EDITION

Contents
Further reading	
69
Case 2: Barco, projecting the magic	
69
References	
74
 3  How marketing  
communications work	
78
Chapter outline	
78
Chapter objectives	
78
Introduction	
79
Hierarchy-of-effects models	
79
Attitude formation and change	
82
High elaboration likelihood, cognitive attitude  
formation	
90
Low elaboration likelihood, cognitive attitude  
formation	
98
High elaboration likelihood, affective attitude  
formation	
101
Low elaboration likelihood, affective attitude  
formation	
101
High elaboration likelihood, behavioural attitude 
formation	
107
Low elaboration likelihood, behavioural attitude 
formation	
109
How communications work in the digital age	
110
Summary	
112
Review questions	
112
Further reading	
113
Case 3: Club Med: a ‘true creator of happiness’  
fights non-consideration	
113
References	
119
 4  Marketing communications  
planning	
125
Chapter outline	
125
Chapter objectives	
126
Introduction	
126
The integrated communications plan	
127
Situation analysis	
127
Segmenting, targeting and positioning	
129
Market segmentation	
130
About the authors	
ix
Preface	
xi
Authors’ acknowledgements	
xiii
Publisher’s acknowledgements	
xiv
List of acronyms	
xviii
 1  Integrated communications	
1
Chapter outline	
1
Chapter objectives	
1
Introduction	
2
Marketing and the instruments of the marketing mix	
2
The communications mix	
3
Integration of marketing communications	
6
Integrating marketing communications across  
cultures	
13
Standardisation or adaptation	
14
Integration of corporate communications	
20
Factors leading to integrated marketing and  
corporate communications	
26
Levels of integration	
29
Barriers to integrated communications	
30
Summary	
32
Review questions	
32
Further reading	
32
Case 1: Walking the walk: how Walkers proved  
it can make any sandwich more exciting	
33
References	
38
 2  Branding	
42
Chapter outline	
42
Chapter objectives	
42
Introduction	
43
Brands	
43
Successful brands	
47
Brand strategies	
49
Brand portfolio	
57
Brand equity	
58
Benefits of branding	
64
Marketing communications and brand equity	
65
Summary	
68
Review questions	
68
 v

vi     Contents
The social media revolution	
294
Relationship marketing and the Internet	
309
Summary	
310
Review questions	
311
Further reading	
311
Case 6: VIER ‘Stalker’	
312
References	
313
 7  Media planning	
320
Chapter outline	
320
Chapter objectives	
320
Introduction	
321
The media planning process	
321
Media objectives	
322
Selecting media	
335
Media context	
345
Summary	
349
Review questions	
349
Further reading	
350
Case 7: Maes: a challenger brand with more  
character	
350
References	
356
 8  Brand activation	
359
Chapter outline	
359
Chapter objectives	
359
Introduction	
360
Sales promotions	
360
Consumer promotions	
365
Trade promotions	
375
Point-of-purchase communications	
377
Brand experience	
387
Summary	
394
Review questions	
394
Further reading	
395
Case 8: Get your parcel! The Belgian Post taps  
into the e-commerce market	
395
References	
400
 9  Direct marketing	
405
Chapter outline	
405
Chapter objectives	
405
Introduction	
406
Direct marketing as a marketing communications 
technique	
406
Objectives and target groups	
408
Direct marketing media and tools	
411
Database marketing	
419
Relationship marketing	
424
Summary	
427
Review questions	
427
Further reading	
427
Requirements for effective segmentation	
144
Marketing communications objectives	
147
Stages in the product life cycle and marketing 
communications objectives	
161
Campaign budget	
165
How the communications budget affects campaign  
results	
165
Communications budgeting methods	
168
Factors influencing budgets	
174
Budgeting for new brands or products	
176
Communication strategies	
176
Communication tactics: tools and touchpoints	
186
Control and evaluation	
186
Summary	
187
Review questions	
187
Further reading	
188
Case 4: Yellow Pages: an old-fashioned brand that is 
being revived through a ground-breaking  
campaign	
189
References	
195
 5  Advertising	
200
Chapter outline	
200
Chapter objectives	
200
Introduction	
201
Types of advertising	
201
Creative platform	
203
Advertising appeals	
208
Rational appeals	
209
Emotional appeals	
214
Endorsers	
222
Campaign implementation	
229
Advertising in a business-to-business context	
230
Advertising in a cross-cultural environment	
232
How advertising works: strong and weak theory	
241
Causes and consequences of irritation evoked by 
advertising	
242
Advertising and brand confusion	
244
Summary	
246
Review questions	
247
Further reading	
247
Case 5: How white knights embody the natural  
force of milk	
248
References	
252
 6  Online communication	
260
Chapter outline	
260
Chapter objectives	
260
Introduction	
261
The growing importance of online media	
261
Online communications objectives	
263
Online communication tools	
263
Mobile marketing	
286
Interactive television	
291

Contents     vii
Summary	
511
Review questions	
511
Further reading	
511
Case 12: FISA – Batibouw: how to calculate the 
effectiveness of a trade show	
512
References	
517
 13  Measuring campaign  
effectiveness	
518
Chapter outline	
518
Chapter objectives	
519
Introduction	
519
Advertising research	
519
Pre-testing of advertising	
520
Post-testing of advertising	
527
Advertising campaign evaluation research	
529
Measuring online advertising effectiveness	
536
Sales promotions effectiveness	
539
Direct marketing effectiveness	
541
Public relations effectiveness	
544
Sponsorship effectiveness	
545
Exhibition and trade show effectiveness	
546
Summary	
550
Review questions	
550
Further reading	
551
Case 13: Win for Life: reviving and repositioning  
a scratch game	
551
References	
555
 14  Ethical issues in  
marketing communications	
557
Chapter outline	
557
Chapter objectives	
557
Introduction	
558
Ethics and marketing communications	
558
Ethical decision-making models and rules	
561
Unethical marketing communications practices	
562
Unethical use of marketing communications  
instruments	
572
Regulation of marketing communications practices	
575
Corporate social responsibility	
580
Summary	
585
Review questions	
586
Further reading	
586
Case 14: Pampers and UNICEF: helping protect  
babies together	
587
References	
592
Glossary	
597
Index	
610
Case 9: Lotus Bakeries and Lotus Friends: applying 
e-CRM in an FMCG market	
428
References	
432
 10  Public relations	
434
Chapter outline	
434
Chapter objectives	
434
Introduction	
435
Public relations as a communications tool	
435
Target groups, objectives and tasks	
439
Instruments and channels	
446
Budgets	
450
Communications in times of crisis	
451
Summary	
454
Review questions	
455
Further reading	
455
Case 10: The Global Fund’s Born HIV Free campaign	 455
References	
465
 11  Sponsorship	
466
Chapter outline	
466
Chapter objectives	
466
Introduction	
467
Sponsorship: what it is and what it is not	
467
How sponsorship works	
468
The growing importance of sponsorship	
469
Target groups	
471
Objectives	
472
Types of sponsorship	
474
Branded entertainment	
481
Sponsorship selection criteria	
486
Budgets	
487
Summary	
489
Review questions	
490
Further reading	
490
Case 11: Carrefour: setting up convenience stores  
at music festivals	
490
References	
494
 12  Exhibitions and trade fairs	
498
Chapter outline	
498
Chapter objectives	
498
Introduction	
499
Types of exhibitions and trade fairs	
499
The role of exhibitions in marketing communications	 501
Objectives and target groups	
501
Planning an exhibition	
506
Limitations of fairs and exhibitions	
509
Online trade shows	
510

viii   contEntS
Companion Website
For open-access student resources speciﬁ cally written
to complement this textbook and support your learning,
please visit www.pearsoned.co.uk/depelsmacker
Lecturer Resources
For password-protected online resources tailored to support
the use of this textbook in teaching, please visit
www.pearsoned.co.uk/depelsmacker
ON THE
WEBSITE

﻿     ix
About the authors
Patrick De Pelsmacker (b. 1957) holds a PhD in Economics (University of Ghent, Belgium). He is 
Professor of Marketing at the University of Antwerp, Belgium and part-time Professor of Marketing 
at the University of Ghent. He is a regular guest lecturer at various institutes, such as the Institute of 
Business Studies (Moscow, Russia) and the University of Lugano (Lugano, Switzerland). He also has 
teaching experience in management and marketing programmes in France, Denmark, Poland, the 
Netherlands, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Vietnam, Italy, the Czech Republic, Hungary and 
Romania. He has undertaken numerous in-company training and consultancy assignments.
His field of interest is in marketing research techniques, consumer behaviour and marketing 
communications. He has co-authored textbooks on marketing communications and marketing 
research techniques, and has written over one hundred articles in various journals, including 
Applied Economics, International Journal of Research in Marketing, Journal of Advertising, Psychology 
and Marketing, International Journal of Advertising, Journal of Marketing Communications, Advances 
in Consumer Research, Journal of Business Ethics, Journal of Consumer Affairs, Journal of International 
Consumer Marketing, International Marketing Review, Marketing Letters, Journal of Business Research, 
Journal of Advertising Research, Cyberpsychology, Behaviour and Social Networking, Accident Analysis 
and Prevention, Journal of Environmental Psychology, Sustainability, Journal of Service Management, 
Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, International Journal of Market Research, Journal of Social 
Marketing, Journal of Marketing Management, International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 
Substance Use and Misuse, Journal of Health Psychology, Journal of Drug Issues, Journal of Health 
Communication, European Journal of Marketing, Journal of Marketing Trends, Media Psychology, 
Health Communication, Journal of Business and Psychology, Journal of Interactive Advertising, Sex 
Roles, Journal of Interactive Marketing, Educational and Psychological Measurements and Psychological 
Reports. He has contributed to more than eighty book chapters and over sixty research reports and 
working papers on various marketing-related topics.
Maggie Geuens (b. 1969) studied Business Engineering at the University of Antwerp (Belgium), 
where she also obtained a PhD degree in Applied Economics. Afterwards she worked as an assistant 
professor at the Free University of Brussels and the Vlerick Business School. Currently she is 
Professor of Marketing at Ghent University. Maggie teaches courses such as Marketing Management, 
Strategic Brand Communications, and Consumer Behaviour. She has teaching experience in 
Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, Kazakhstan, Russia and Vietnam.
Her main field of research interest is in advertising, branding and consumer behaviour. In these 
interest fields she has published in top-tier journals in the field such as Journal of Consumer Research, 
International Journal of Research in Marketing, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Journal 
of Advertising and International Journal of Advertising. She is a member of the editorial board of 
Journal of Marketing, International Journal of Marketing Research, Journal of Advertising, International 
Journal of Advertising, Journal of Business Research and Journal of Marketing Communications. 
Joeri Van den Bergh (b. 1971) holds a Master’s degree in Marketing (University of Ghent and the 
Vlerick Leuven Gent Management School). He started his career as a researcher at the Marketing 
Communication Research Centre, and later became senior researcher, involved in the activities of 
this Centre, as well as the Kids and Teens Marketing Centre, and the Senior Consumer Marketing 
Centre. He is co-founder and managing partner of InSites Consulting, a global new generation 
research agency with offices in New York, London, Rotterdam and Ghent. He is author of the AMA 
 ix

x     About the authors
awarded book on branding to generation Y & Z, How Cool Brands Stay Hot, and the forthcoming 
book on consumer trends, Futures. As a NextGen expert and speaker he gets regularly invited to 
global marketing and research conferences and in-company trainings. Joeri received the academic 
nomination Fellow of the Hogenheuvel College at the Department of Applied Economics, KU 
Leuven, and was elected Master Marketer by STIMA in 2012.
His main field of interest is consumer psychology, online marketing communications trends, and 
children, kids and youth marketing. He has published in journals including International Journal of 
Advertising and Journal of International Consumer Marketing, and contributes to the Wiley Blackwell 
Encyclopedia of Consumption and Consumer Studies as well as various other books and publications.

﻿     xi
Preface
Marketing communications are not only one of the most visible and widely discussed instruments 
of the marketing mix, with an overwhelming impact on both society and business, they are also one 
of the most fascinating. Every private consumer and business executive is exposed to advertising. 
They make use of sales promotions, are approached by sales persons, visit trade fairs and exhibi-
tions, buy famous or not so famous brands, are a target of public relations activity, are exposed to 
sponsorship efforts, receive direct mail, telemarketing or research calls and visit stores in which no 
stone is left unturned to influence their buying behaviour. Furthermore, almost every consumer is 
a regular user of the Internet.
Marketing executives constantly face the challenge of integrating their promotional effort into 
strategic management and marketing plans. They must integrate the various instruments of the 
marketing communications mix, build successful brands, try to find out how marketing communi-
cations can be instrumental in achieving company objectives, and how they can be applied in 
specific marketing situations.
Following the success of the first five editions, this sixth edition of Marketing Communications:  
A European Perspective continues to offer a comprehensive overview of the cornerstones, tech-
niques and applications of marketing communications in a European context.
The market
This text is geared to undergraduate and postgraduate students who have attended introductory 
courses in marketing, and who want to extend their knowledge to various aspects of marketing 
communications. The text can also be used by marketing communications professionals who want 
an overview of the whole field and may find inspiration and new angles to their marketing com-
munications practice in the many examples, cases and research results that are covered in this text.
Organisation
The text is organised as follows. Chapter 1 provides a global overview of marketing communications 
and discusses the crucial topic of the integration of marketing communications activity. One of the 
major objectives of marketing communications is to build and maintain strong brands. Branding is 
covered in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 discusses the groundwork of all marketing communications activity. 
It is devoted to the intriguing question of how communications influence consumers. In Chapter 4 
the different steps in the marketing communications plan are covered: the definition of target groups, 
objectives, and budgeting issues.
Chapters 5–13 cover the marketing communications instruments: advertising (5), online 
­communications (6), media planning (7), brand activation (8), direct marketing (9), public relations 
(10), sponsorship (11), and exhibitions and trade fairs (12). Chapter 13 deals with market-
ing ­communications research. In Chapter 14 the increasingly important ethical side of marketing 
­communications is discussed.
 xi

xii     Preface
Pedagogy
To help reinforce key learning points, each chapter includes the following:
● Chapter Outline, which presents the contents of the chapter graphically.
● Chapter Objectives, Summaries and Review Questions and references to interview videos assist 
the reader in understanding the important elements and help test one’s knowledge.
● Main text organised in sections and sub-sections to help students digest and retain the informa-
tion.
● Tables, figures, outlines and other illustrative material help the reader grasp the essential facts.
● Separate highlights throughout the text cover extended examples, mini-cases, interesting 
research results or more technical issues.
● Suggested further readings offer the opportunity to refer to other, more specialised or specific 
sources of information on many subjects.
● An extensive European or global case study.
Distinctive characteristics
● This is not just a text about advertising, supplemented by a brief discussion of the other instru-
ments of the marketing mix. Although advertising-related topics are thoroughly discussed, this 
text is comprehensive in that it covers all instruments of the marketing communications mix.
● The text has a consistent European focus. Although research results and examples from other 
parts of the world are covered, the main focus is the application of marketing communications 
concepts in a European environment.
● Every chapter contains an extensive European or global case study in a wide variety of industries, 
markets and countries. Most of these cases contain original and in-depth material, often provided 
by the marketing executives of the brands and companies discussed. Challenging case questions 
are designed to encourage the reader to apply the concepts from the chapter to the solution of 
the case at hand. Furthermore, many of these cases can be used with more than one chapter.
● A number of chapters focus extensively on particularly important and/or relatively new fields of 
interest related to marketing communications. This is the case for the chapters on branding, how 
communications work, brand activation, online communications and ethics.
● Throughout the text, numerous examples, case studies and research results from various coun-
tries, industries and markets are given, to illustrate and make the concepts as practice-orientated 
as possible.
New to the sixth edition
The structure of the sixth edition of this text and the order of the chapters have been rearranged for 
a more logical flow. Case studies, vignettes, examples, end-of-chapter cases and references have 
been updated and new material has been added to every chapter. These include, amongst others, 
company case materials about Colora, Milk, Telenet, Belgian Post, InSites Consulting and Marcel 
Dorel, and research insights about integrated marketing communications, new advertising formats 
and tools, brand placement, cross-cultural advertising adaptation, buzz marketing, brand globalness, 
two-sided messages, emotions in advertising, children and new advertising formats, advertising 
media mix optimisation, responses to online reviews, culture and advertising, self-identity and  
eco-friendly consumer behaviour, media multitasking, and gender stereotyping.
The chapter on online communications has been thoroughly updated and extended and 
includes a large section on social media communications, to reflect the most recent evolutions and 
best-practice applications in this fast-growing area.
Finally, we are proud to offer instructor and student support materials on our website: http://
www.pearsoned.co.uk/depelsmacker. Visit this site to find valuable teaching and learning materials 
on Marketing Communications.

﻿     xiii
Authors’ 
acknowledgements
While we assume full responsibility for the content of the whole text, important parts of it could not 
have been written without the help and support of numerous people. We would particularly like to 
thank the following people, and hope we have not forgotten anyone:
Guy Geerts (Darwin BBDO)
Koen Helsen, Lieven Bertier (Barco)
Isabel Raes
Bert Denis (TBWA)
Claudia Gonzalez, Christine Edier (Unicef)
Nigel Lawrence (Dunnhumby)
Luc Suykens, Nicolas Frèrejean, Nada Dugas (Procter & Gamble)
Marc Frederix (National Lottery Belgium)
Lars Vervoort, Tine Nelissen (Carrefour Belgium)
Alain Heureux (IAB Europe)
Jorgen Nygaard Andreassen (Fedma)
Dennis Claus (R/GA New York)
Maarten Lagae (Landor)
Steven Huyers (VIER)
Loes Hendryckx
A number of reviewers: Paul Copley, University of Northumbria; Claude Pecheux, Les Facultés 
Universitaires Catholiques de Mons; Jane Underhill, University of Northumbria; Tania Van den 
Bergh, Arteveldehogeschool, Flanders, Belgium
Finally, we would like to thank Pearson Education for supporting and publishing the sixth edition of 
this text. In particular we thank the following: Eileen Srebernik, Acquisitions Editor; Tim Parker, 
Project Editor; Kelly Miller, Text Designer and Kay Holman, Project Controller.
 xiii

xiv     ﻿
Publisher’s 
acknowledgements
We are grateful to the following for permission to reproduce copyright material:
Figures
Figure on page 11 from A method for the selection of appropriate business-to-business integrated 
marketing communications mixes, Journal of Marketing Communications, Vol. 8 (1), pp. 1–18 
(Garber, L.L. and Dotson, M.J. 2002), Copyright © 2002 Routledge, reproduced by permission of the 
publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com) and the author; Figure 1.1 adapted 
from A response to 'theoretical concept or management fashion?', Journal of Advertising Research, 
Vol. 40(5), pp. 17–21 (Shultz, D.E. and Kitchen, P.J. 2000), © Copyright Advertising Research 
Foundation 2000; Figure 1.2 from Integrated marketing communication and the evolution of mar-
keting thought, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 37 (3), pp. 155–62 (Hutton, J.H. 1996), Copyright © 
1996 Published by Elsevier Inc., Used with permission from Elsevier. Permission conveyed through 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.; Figure 1.3 from Determinants of the corporate identity construct: 
A review of the literature, Journal of Marketing Communications, Vol. 9 (4), pp. 195–220 (Melewar, 
T.C. 2003), Copyright © 2003 Routledge, reprinted by permission of the publisher (Taylor & Francis 
Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com) and the author; Figure 2.1 from PLMA Yearbook 2012; Figure 2.3 
from Unravelling Brand Value: a conceptual model on consumer and producer-based brand value, 
Erasmus Universiteit/Rotterdam School of Management (Riezebos, R. 1995) p. 19, Figure 7, 
Copyright © 1995 by Rik Riezebos, Rotterdam; Figure 3.1 after How advertising works: A planning 
model, Journal of Advertising Research, Vol. 20 (5), pp. 27–33 (Vaughn, R. 1980), www.warc.com/jar; 
Figure 3.3 after The Elaboration Likelihood Model of Persuasion, Advances in Experimental Social 
Psychology, Vol. 19, pp. 123–205 (Petty, R.E. and Cacioppo, J.T. 1986), Copyright © 1986 Academic 
Press Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Used with permission from Academic Press. 
Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.; Figure 3.6 after The role of attitude 
toward the ad as a mediator of advertising effectiveness: a test of competing explanations, Journal 
of Marketing Research, Vol. 23, p. 131 (MacKenzie, S.B., Lutz, R.J. and Belch, G.E. 1986), American 
Marketing Association; Figure 3.8 adapted from A new model for measuring advertising effective-
ness, Journal of Advertising Research, Vol. 42 (March/April), pp. 23–31 (Hall, B.F. 2002), www.warc​
.com/jar; Figure 4.2 from Recycling the family life cycle: A proposal for redefinition, Advances in 
Consumer Research, Vol. 9, pp. 271–6, Figure 1 (Gilly, M. and Enis, B. 1982), Association for Consumer 
Research, republished with permission of Association of Consumer Research, permission conveyed 
through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. ; Figure 4.5 from Defining Advertising Goals for Measured 
Advertising Results, New York: Association of National Advertisers (Colley, R.H. 1961); Figures 4.11, 
4.12 after Ad spending: growing market share, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 68 (1), pp. 44–8 
(Schroer, J. 1990), Copyright © 1990 Harvard Business Publishing, all rights reserved, reprinted by 
permission of Harvard Business Review; Figure on page 270 from Measuring the effectiveness of 
online advertising, Study conducted by PwC for IAB France and the SRI (2010) p. 13; Figure on page 
270 from Measuring the effectiveness of online advertising, Study conducted by PwC for IAB France 
and the SRI (2010) p. 22; Figure 7.5 from JFC Informatique & Media, Paris, France (2003); Figure 8.2 
from Shopping and Saving Strategies around the World, The Nielsen Company (2011) http://www​
.nielsen.com/content/corporate/us/en/insights/reports-downloads/2011/global-shopping-survey-
oct-2011.html; Figure 9.2 after The Loyalty Effect: The hidden force behind growth, profits and last-
 xiv

ing value (Reichheld, F.F. 2001) Copyright © 2001 by the Harvard Business Publishing Corporation, 
all rights reserved, reprinted by permission of Harvard Business Review Press; Figure 9.4 from 
Development of addressed mail items in the five largest European markets, The Boston Consulting 
Group, as found at http://www.post.at/gb2009/en/Postmarkt_Europa.php; Figures 9.7, 9.8 from 
Annual Report 2011, Lotus Bakeries p. 33; Figure 9.9 from Annual Report 2011, Lotus Bakeries p. 11; 
Figures 11.1, 11.4 adapted from sponsorship.com; Figures 12.3, 12.4 from Geert Maes, CEO, FISA; 
Figure 13.7 from InSites Consulting, www.insites-consulting.com; Figure 13.11 from The misman-
agement of customer loyalty, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 80 (7), pp. 86–94 (Reinartz, W. and 
Kumar, V. 2002), Copyright © 2002 by the Harvard Business Publishing, all rights reserved, reprinted 
by permission of Harvard Business Review; Figure 14.2 from Statistics Report 2010: European trends 
in advertising complaints, copy advice and pre-clearance, European Advertising Standards Alliance 
(EASA) (2010) p. 11, Figure 1, http://www.easa-alliance.org/, European Advertising Standards 
Alliance—The single voice for advertising self-regulation; Figure 14.3 from Statistics Report 2010: 
European trends in advertising complaints, copy advice and pre-clearance, European Advertising 
Standards Alliance (EASA) (2010) p. 28, Figure 13, http://www.easa-alliance.org/, European 
Advertising Standards Alliance - The single voice for advertising self-regulation; Figure 14.4 from 
Statistics Report 2010: European trends in advertising complaints, copy advice and pre-clearance, 
European Advertising Standards Alliance (EASA) (2010) p. 25, Figure 9, http://www.easa-alliance.
org/, European Advertising Standards Alliance—The single voice for advertising self-regulation
Tables
Table 1.3 adapted from W.F. van Raaij, Integratie van Communicatie: vanuit de Zender of vanuit de 
Ontvanger’ (Integration of Communication: Starting from the Sender or the Receiver?), in Effectiviteit 
in Communicatie management (Effectiveness in Communication Management), pp. 169–84 
(Damoiseaux, V.M.G., van Ruler, A.A. and Weisink, A. (eds)), Deventer: Samson, ISBN: 9014058411, 
9789014058412; Table 1.5 from Duncan, T. and Caywood, C. ‘The Concept, Process and Evolution 
of Integrated Marketing Communication’, in, Integrated Communication: Synergy of Pervasive Voices, 
pp. 13–34 (Thorson, E. and Moore, J. (eds) 1996), Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 
Reproduced by permission of Taylor and Francis Group, LLC, a division of Informa plc; Table 4.7 
after Ad spending: maintaining market share, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 68 (1), pp. 38–43 (Jones, 
J.P. 1990), Copyright © 1990 Harvard Business Publishing, all rights reserved, reprinted by permis-
sion of Harvard Business Review; Table 6.1 from Users of the world, unite! The challenges and 
opportunities of social media, Business Horizons, Vol. 53 (1), pp. 59–68 (Kaplan, A.M. and Haenlein, 
M. 2010), p. 62. Copyright © 2009 Elsevier, Business horizons by Indiana University Reproduced 
with permission of Elsevier Inc. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.; 
Table 12.2 after Selecting and evaluating trade shows, Industrial Marketing Management, Vol. 21 (4), 
pp. 335–41 (Shoham, A. 1992), Copyright © 1992, Elsevier, Used with permission from Elsevier. 
Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.; Table 13.1 after Integrated Marketing 
Communications, Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall (Pickton, D. and Broderick, A. 2001) p. 523, 
Copyright © Pearson Education Limited 2001
Text
Extracts on page 6, page 7 from Integrated Marketing Communication: Putting it Together and 
Making it Work, Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Business Books (Schultz, D.E., Tannenbaum, S.I. and 
Lauterborn, R.F.) © 1993 by NTC Publishing Group, republished with permission of McGraw-Hill 
Education, permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.; Extracts on page 6, page 
7 from Integrated Marketing Communication: Putting it Together and Making it Work, Lincolnwood, 
IL: NTC Business Books (Schultz, D.E., Tannenbaum, S.I. and Lauterborn, R.F.) © 1993 by NTC 
Publishing Group, Extracts on pages 6 and 7 from Integrated Marketing Communication: Putting it 
Together and Making it Work, Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Business Books (Schultz, D.E.,Tannenbaum, S.I. 
and Lauterborn, R.F.) © 1993 by NTC Publishing Group, republished with permission of McGraw-
Hill Education, permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.; Extract on page 7 
Publisher’s acknowledgements     xv

from Integrated Marketing Communications: A Survey of National Consumer Goods Advertisers, 
American Association of Advertising Agencies, Inc. (Caywood, C., Schultz, D. and Wang, P. 1991), 
Extract on page 7 from Integrated Marketing Communications: A Survey of National Consumer 
Goods Advertisers, American Association of Advertising Agencies, Inc. (Caywood, C., Schultz, D. and 
Wang, P. 1991); Extract on page 43 from American Marketing Association; Box on page 44 from 
Brand Meaning, New York: Routledge (Batey, M. 2008) p. 3, Copyright © 2008 by Mark Batey, 
Reproduced by permission of Taylor and Francis Group LLC, a division of Informa plc; Box on pages 
53–4 adapted from Which advertising cues cause consumers to perceive brands as more global? A 
conjoint analysis, International Marketing Review, Vol. 32 (6), pp. 606–626 (De Meulenaer, S., Dens, 
N. and De Pelsmacker, P. 2015), Copyright © 2015, Emerald Group Publishing Limited; Quote on 
page 105 from Practicing existential consumption: The lived meaning of sexuality in advertising, 
Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 22, pp. 740–5 (Elliott, R. and Ritson, M. 1995), republished with 
permission of Association of Consumer Research, permission conveyed through Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. ; Box on pages 83–4 after Promoting dental hygiene to children: comparing 
traditional and interactive media following threat appeals, Journal of Health Communication, Vol. 19 
(5), pp. 561–576 (Panic K., Cauberghe V. and De Pelsmacker P. 2014), Copyright © 2014, Reproduced 
by permission of Taylor & Francis LLC, http://www.tandfonline.com; Box on pages 87–9 after 
Involvement, tolerance for ambiguity, and type of service moderate the effectiveness of probability 
marker usage in service advertising, Journal of Advertising, Vol. 43 (2), pp. 196–209 (Banks, I.B. and 
De Pelsmacker, P. 2014), Copyright © 2014, Reproduced by permission of the American Academy 
of Advertising, http://www.aaoa.wildapricot.org; Box on page 131 adapted from CACI Ltd., CACI 
Limited; Extract on page 185 from Top-level agency creatives look at advertising creativity then and 
now, Journal of Advertising, Vol 27 (2), pp. 1–15 (Reid, L.N., King, K. and DeLorme, D.E 1998), 
Copyright © 1998 Routledge, reproduced by permission of the American Academy of Advertising, 
www.aaoa.wildapricot.org and the author; Extract on page 185 from Quote by Charles Mingus; Box 
on pages 140–1 from InSites Consulting 2008 lifestyle segmentation of Dutch youngsters for MTV 
Networks, Rotterdam, InSites Consulting (Van den Bergh, J. and Verhaeghe A. 2008); Box on pages 
179–181 adapted from Developing different types of anticipated experience positioning for electric 
cars, Advances in Advertising Research, Vol. IV, pp. 233–43 (Moons, I. and De Pelsmacker, P. 2013), 
Copyright © 2013, Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, with permission of Springer; Box on pages 
217–9 after Affect is an Important Factor in Processing Alzheimer Disease Awareness Messages, 
Advances in Advertising Research, Vol. 2, pp. 55–73 (Lewi, M. and De Pelsmacker, P. 2011), © Gabler 
Verlag/Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden GmbH 2011, with permission of Springer; Extract on page 
263 after Using Internet Marketing Tactics to Support FMCG Brands: An Overview of Lessons Learned 
(De Wulf, K., Van den Bergh, J., Vergult, C. and De Boek, F. 2003) White Paper published by InSites 
Consulting, http://www.insites-consulting.com; Box on pages 324–5 after Advergames: The impact 
of brand prominence and game repetition on brand responses, Journal of Advertising, Vol. 39 (1), 
pp. 5–18 (Cauberghe, V. and De Pelsmacker, P. 2010), Copyright © 2010, Reproduced by permission 
of the American Academy of Advertising, http://www.aaoa.wildapricot.org; Box on pages 328–9 
after Can't see the forest for the trees? The effect of media multitasking on cognitive processing 
style, Media Psychology, Vol. 18 (4), pp. 425–450 (Kazakova, S., Cauberghe, V., Pandelaere, M. and 
De Pelsmacker, P. 2015), Copyright © 2015, Reproduced by permission of Taylor & Francis LLC, 
http://www.tandfonline.com; Extract on page 437 from Chartered Institute of Public Relations 
(CIPR), https://www.cipr.co.uk/; Box on page 441 after Public relations research priorities: a Delphi 
study, Journal of Communication Management, Vol. 12 (2), pp. 104–123 (Watson, T. 2008); Box on 
page 484 adapted from Brand placement repetition in a fictional text, International Journal of 
Advertising: The Review of Marketing Communications, 10 May, pp. 1–22 (Avramova, Y., De 
Pelsmacker, P. and Dens, N. 2016), Copyright © 2016 Routledge, reproduced by permission of the 
publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com); Box on page 579 after Code of 
Conduct (2006), ACC; Box on pages 580–2 after Positive and negative antecedents of purchasing 
eco-friendly products: A comparison between green and non-green consumers, Journal of Business 
Ethics, Vol. 134 (2), pp. 229–247 (Barbarossa, C. and De Pelsmacker, P.), © Springer Science+Business 
Media Dordrecht 2014, with permission of Springer
xvi     Publisher’s acknowledgements

Publisher’s acknowledgements     xvii
Picture Credits
The publisher would like to thank the following for their kind permission to reproduce their pho-
tographs:
(Key: b-bottom; c-centre; l-left; r-right; t-top)
Alamy Stock Photo: Alex Segre 369, Anthony Hatley 361, Michael Dwyer 139; AMV BBDO: 215; 
Reproduced with permission of Barco: 72; Courtesy of Kraft Heinz Foods Company and its affiliates:  
/ Henry Diltz / Corbis via Getty Images / Getty Images 155; Reproduced with permission of De Lijn, 
Belgium.: 207; Reproduced with permission by FISA, Belgium.: 512; Getty Images: China Photos 445, 
Chinafoto Press 14, Paul Ellis 559, Getty Images / Staff 477b, Guinness 477t, Max Nash / AFP 99, 
Mike Clarke / AFP 55, Ethan Miller 138, Scott Olson 444, Tony Savino / Corbis 202, Oli Scarff 366, 
Charley Gallay / Stringer 568; Grey Communications Group Ltd: 225; J. WALTER THOMPSON 
BRUSSELS: 151; Reproduced with permission of Nissan: 206; Pampers : 588, 589, 588, 589; Recticel: 
231; Rex Shutterstock: Crollalanza 184; © The Absolut Company AB. Used under permission from 
The Absolut Company AB. ABSOLUT® VODKA. ABSOLUT COUNTRY OF SWEDEN VODKA & LOGO, 
ABSOLUT, ABSOLUT BOTTLE DESIGN AND ABSOLUT CALLIGRAPHY ARE TRADEMARKS OWNED 
BY THE ABSOLUT COMPANY AB: Vincent Dixon 17; The Global Fund: 456, 460, 456, 460; 
Reproduced by permission of V.F. Corporation: AMV BBDO 186
All other images © Pearson Education

xviii     ﻿
ABC	
Audit Bureau of Circulations
ACC	
Association of Communication Companies
AIM	
Affect Infusion Model
AIO	
activities, interests and opinions
ANOVA	
analysis of variance
ATR	
awareness trial reinforcement
B2B	
business-to-business
B2C	
business-to-consumer
BOGOF	
buy one get one free
BPS	
Brand Personality Scale
CARU	
Children’s Advertising Review Unit
CEEMEA	
Central and Eastern Europe, Middle East and Africa
CEIR	
Centre for Exhibition Industry Research
CEO	
chief executive officer
CPM	
cost per thousand
CPM-TM	
CPM in target market
CPT	
cost per thousand
CRM	
customer relationship marketing
CSR	
corporate social responsibility
CTLC	
Community-based Technology and Learning Centres
CTR	
click-through rate
DAGMAR	
Defining Advertising Goals for Measured Advertising Results
DAR	
Day After Recall
DEA	
data envelopment analysis
DM	
direct mail
DOSS	
degree of overall similarity of strategy
DRTV	
direct response television
EASA	
European Advertising Standards Alliance
EDLP	
everyday low prices
ELM	
Elaboration Likelihood Model
EMEA	
Europe, the Middle East and Africa
ERP	
effective rating points
ESP	
emotional selling proposition
FCB	
Foote–Cone–Belding
FMCG	
fast-moving consumer goods
GRP	
gross rating points
HILO	
high–low
HSM	
Heuristic–Systematic Model
HTML	
Hypertext Mark-up Language
IAB	
Interactive Advertising Bureaux
IAT	
Implicit Association Test
ICC	
International Chamber of Commerce
IMC	
integrated marketing communications
IP	 	
Internet Protocol
List of acronyms
 xviii

JEP	
Jury of Ethical Practices
LNG	
liquefied natural gas
MAO	
motivation, ability and opportunity
MC	
marketing communications
MMA	
Mobile Marketing Association
MMORPG	
massively multiplayer online role-playing game
MNT	
mother and newborn tetanus
MPU	
Mid-Page Unit
MUSH	
Municipal, University, Social, Hospital
NGO	
non-governmental organisation
OOH	
out-of-home
OTS	
opportunity to see
PBC	
perceived behavioural control
PEOU	
personalised ease of use
PI	 	
product involvement
PKM	
Persuasion Knowledge Model
PLC	
product life cycle
PMT	
Protection Motivation Theory
POP	
point-of-purchase
POPAI	
Point-of-Purchase Advertising Institute
POS	
point-of-sales
PPC	
pay per click
PR		
public relations
PU		
perceived usefulness
PURL	
personalised website (URL)
RE		
Reading Ease
RFID	
radio frequency identification
RFM	
recency–frequency–monetary value
RNR	
Radio News Release
ROI	
return on investment
RQ	
Relationship Quality
RSS	
Really Simple Syndication
SEA	
search engine advertising
SEM	
search engine marketing
SEO	
search engine optimisation
SMS	
Sports Marketing Surveys; Short Message Service
SOM	
share of market
SOV	
share of voice
SRC	
self-reference criterion
SRO	
self-regulatory organisation
STAS	
Short-Term Advertising Strength
STP	
segmenting–targeting–positioning
SWOT	
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats
TAM	
Technology Acceptance Model
TOMA	
Top-of-Mind Awareness
TORA	
Theory of Reasoned Action
TPB	
Theory of Planned Behaviour
UGC	
user-generated content
USP	
unique selling proposition
VNR	
Video News Release
VOD	
video-on-demand
WAP	
Wireless Application Protocol
WFA	
World Federation of Advertisers
WFL	
Win for Life
WOM	
word of mouth
List of acronyms     xix


Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Situate marketing communications in the marketing mix
● Get an overview of the instruments of the marketing communications mix
● Understand what integrated (cross-cultural) marketing and corporate 
communications mean, and their organisational implications
● Learn the factors leading to integrated communications
● Get an overview of the different levels of integration
● Understand why fully integrated communications are not easily implemented
● Get an overview of the essential steps in the marketing communications plan
Chapter outline 
Chapter 1
Integrated communications
 1

2     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Product
(Customer need)
Price
(Cost to the customer)
Place
(Convenience)
Promotion
(Communication)
Benefits
List price
Channels
Advertising
Features
Discounts
Logistics
Public relations
Options
Credit terms
Inventory
Sponsorship
Quality
Payment periods
Transport
Brand activation
Design
Incentives
Assortments
Direct marketing
Branding
Locations
Point-of-purchase
Packaging
Exhibitions and trade fairs
Services
Personal selling
Warranties
Online communication
Table 1.1  Instruments of the marketing mix
Introduction
The integration of the various instruments of the marketing mix is one of the major prin-
ciples of sound marketing strategy. Obviously, this integration principle also applies to the 
various instruments of the communications mix. In fact, integrated communications have 
been practised by good marketing communicators for decades. Why, then, has the concept 
of ‘integrated marketing communications’ (IMC) in recent years developed into one of the 
basic new trends in marketing communications? Is IMC really fundamentally new? Or is 
it an old idea which has rarely, if ever, been realised? In other words, is it something every-
body agrees on which should have been activated years ago, but for all kinds of practical 
reasons was not? Or is it nothing more than traditional marketing and advertising dressed 
up in fancy words and a new language?1 Whatever the case, the integration of the vari-
ous instruments of the communications mix is favourably influenced and necessitated by a 
number of important trends in marketing today. At the same time, barriers to change, and 
to the successful implementation of IMC, remain strong. The latter may explain why such 
an obvious concept as IMC, leading to a more homogeneous and therefore more effective 
communications effort, has not been put into practice much earlier. As a result, integrated 
communications have a number of practical and organisational consequences that influ-
ence the way in which communicators organise their communications function, the way in 
which they deal with communications consultants such as PR and advertising agencies and, 
indeed, the way in which communications consultants organise themselves.
Marketing and the instruments of the marketing mix
Marketing is the process of planning and executing the conception, pricing, promotion and 
distribution of ideas, goods and services to create and exchange value, and satisfy individual 
and organisational objectives.2
Given the marketing objectives and goals, the target segments and the market position that 
has to be defended, the tools of the marketing plan have to be decided upon. The marketer 
has a number of tools to hand: the instruments of the marketing mix. Traditionally, these 
instruments are divided into four categories, called the 4 Ps or the 4 Cs of the marketing 
mix. Some of the tools of the marketing mix are shown in Table 1.1.

THE COMMUNICATIONS MIX     3
The product tool consists of three layers. The core product is the unique benefit that is 
being marketed. In fact it is the position, the unique place in the mind of the consumer, that 
will be focused upon. Often the brand is a summary, a visualisation of this core benefit and 
all the associations it leads to. The core product has to be translated into a tangible product. 
Product features, a certain level of quality, the available options, design and packaging are 
important instruments by which a core benefit can be made tangible. Finally, the augmented 
product gives the tangible product more value and more customer appeal. The augmented 
product can be defined as the ‘service layer’ on top of the tangible product. It includes ele-
ments such as prompt delivery, installation service, after-sales service and management of 
complaints.
Price is the only marketing instrument that does not cost anything, but provides the 
resources to spend on production and marketing activities. The list price is the ‘official’ price 
of a product. However, discounts and incentives of all kinds can be used to make the product 
more attractive. Systems of down payments and payment periods, combined with attrac-
tive interest rates, can also be used to make the offering more attractive and ensure that the 
immediate budget constraint is less of a problem for the consumer. The price instrument is 
an ambiguous tool. On the one hand, price cuts are an effective way to attract consumers. 
On the other, price cuts mean losing margin and profit. Furthermore, the customer gets used 
to discounts and may gradually be educated to buy on price and be a brand-switcher. The 
regular use of the price instrument is incompatible with building a strong position and a 
strong brand on the basis of product characteristics or benefits. Therefore good marketing 
can be defined as avoiding the price tool as much as possible.
By means of place or distribution, the company manages the process of bringing the 
product from the production site to the customer. This involves transporting the product, 
keeping an inventory, selecting wholesalers and retailers, deciding on which types of outlet 
the product will be distributed in, and the assortment of products to be offered in the various 
outlets. Distribution strategy also implies maintaining co-operation between the company 
and the distribution channel, and finding new ways to distribute products, such as infomer-
cials (programme-length advertising and selling) and e-commerce.
Promotion or marketing communications (MC) are the fourth and most visible instruments 
of the marketing mix. They involve all instruments by means of which the company com-
municates with its target groups and stakeholders to promote its products or the company 
as a whole. The instruments of the communications mix are introduced in the next section.
The communications mix
Often advertising is considered a synonym for marketing communications because it is the 
most visible tool of the communications mix. But, of course, a large variety of communi-
cations instruments exist, each with their own typical characteristics, strengths and weak-
nesses. Marketing communications is a process through which organisations and audiences 
engage with one another. Organisations convey messages that are of significant value to cus-
tomers and stakeholders, and these audiences are encouraged to offer cognitive, attitudinal 
and behavioural responses. Marketing communications can inform and persuade audiences, 
they can differentiate the offering from one company or brand from those of others, and 
they can reinforce the relationship between an organisation and its audiences.3 The tools of 
the communications mix were presented in the last column of Table 1.1.
Advertising is non-personal mass communications using mass media (such as TV, radio, news-
papers, magazines, billboards, banners on websites, pre-roll ads in online videos, etc.), the con-
tent of which is determined and paid for by a clearly identified sender (the company).
Brand activation is the integration of all available communications means in a creative 
platform in order to activate consumers by stimulating interest, initiating trial and eventually 

4     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
securing consumer loyalty. It is a tool used to build brands through interaction with target 
audiences as it helps increase frequency, consumption and penetration of the brand. It is 
a marketing process of bringing a brand to life through creating brand experience. Offer-
ing car buyers to do a test drive is a form of brand activation. Sales promotions, as a part 
of brand activation, are sales-stimulating campaigns, such as price cuts, coupons, loyalty 
programmes, competitions, free samples, etc. Point-of-purchase communications are com-
munications at the point of purchase or point of sales (i.e. the shop). It includes several 
communications tools such as displays, advertising within the shop, merchandising, article 
presentations, store layout, etc.
Online communications offer new ways to communicate interactively with customers and 
stakeholders via the Internet and mobile devices. Online banners, pre-roll video ads, and 
advertising on social media are examples of online communications.
Direct marketing communications are a personal and direct way to communicate with 
customers and potential clients or prospects. Personalised brochures and leaflets (with feed-
back potential), direct mailings, telemarketing actions, direct response advertising, etc., are 
possible ways of using direct marketing communications.
Sponsorship implies that the sponsor provides funds, goods, services and/or know-how. 
The sponsored organisation will help the sponsor with communications objectives such 
as building brand awareness or reinforcing brand or corporate image. Sports, arts, media, 
education, science and social projects and institutions, and TV programmes, can be spon-
sored. Events are often linked to sponsorship. A company can sponsor an event or organise 
its own events, for instance for its sales team, its clients and prospects, its personnel, its 
distribution network, etc.
Public relations consist of all the communications a company instigates with its audiences 
or stakeholders. Stakeholders are groups of individuals or organisations with whom the 
company wants to create goodwill. Press releases and conferences, some of the major public 
relations tools, should generate publicity. Publicity is impersonal mass communications in 
mass media, but it is not paid for by a company and the content is written by journalists 
(which means that negative publicity is also possible).
Exhibitions and trade fairs are, particularly in business-to-business and industrial mar-
kets, of great importance for contacting prospects, users and purchasers.
Marketing communications try to influence or persuade the (potential) consumer by con-
veying a message. This message transfer may be directed to certain known and individually 
addressed persons, in which case it is called personal communications. The message transfer 
may also be directed to a number of receivers who cannot be identified, using mass media to 
reach a broad audience. This is called mass communications. Personal communications are 
mainly direct and interactive marketing actions and personal selling. All other promotional 
tools are mass communications. Table 1.2 compares personal and mass marketing commu-
nications using different criteria. This comparison does of course generalise. The practical 
implications of the selection mix depend on the situation and the creative implementation 
and execution of the communications instruments. For instance, a bad mail shot could also 
lead to higher selective perception and lower attributed attention.
Another way of categorising marketing communications instruments is to differentiate 
between theme or image communications and action communications.
In image or theme communications the advertiser tries to tell the target group something 
about the brand or products and services offered. The goal of image communications could 
be to improve relations with target groups, increase customer satisfaction or reinforce brand 
awareness and brand preference. This might eventually lead to a positive influence on the 
(buying) behaviour of the target group. Theme communications are also known as above-the-
line communications, as opposed to below-the-line or action communications. This difference 
(the line) refers to the fee an advertising agency used to earn. All above-the-line promotional 
tools used to lead to a 15% commission fee on media space purchased. Consequently, above-
the-line communications are synonymous with mass media advertising (TV, radio, magazines, 
newspapers, cinema, billboards, etc.). Below-the-line or action communications tools were 

THE COMMUNICATIONS MIX     5
communications instruments for which the 15% rule was not applicable. This terminology 
has since lost its importance because most agencies now charge a fixed fee or hourly fee rather 
than using the commission system.
Action communications seek to influence the buying behaviour of target groups and to 
persuade the consumer to purchase the product. The primary goal is to stimulate purchases. 
In practice, theme and action campaigns are not always that easy to distinguish. Sometimes 
the primary goal of advertising is to sell, as in advertisements announcing promotions or 
direct response ads. Visits from sales teams may also have the purpose of creating goodwill 
rather than selling. Theme promotions such as sampling gadgets to increase brand aware-
ness are also used.
Personal communications
Mass communications
Reach of big audience
Speed
Slow
Fast
Costs/reached person
High
Low
Influence on individual
Attention value
High
Low
Selective perception
Relatively lower
High
Comprehension
High
Moderate–low
Feedback
Direction
Two-way
One-way
Speed of feedback
High
Low
Measuring effectiveness
Accurate
Difficult
Table 1.2  Personal versus mass marketing communications
Europay International and its local partners market the Eurocard/MasterCard all across Europe. All countries differ 
in terms of the relative strength of the Eurocard/MasterCard, its target audiences and its major marketing objectives. 
For example, in Central Europe, the main objective is to introduce the concept of credit cards; in Germany to moti-
vate and capture first-time card applicants; in France to maintain market share. This has meant that locally generated 
campaign and media strategies and tactics have been applied throughout the years. In 2000, a global campaign was 
launched to build brand awareness and to create a stronger emotional bond with the target audiences. This image-
building campaign was intended to differentiate an essentially generic brand with well-known functional qualities 
from its competitors. The European-wide target group for the campaign was defined as people who use their credit 
cards intelligently and responsibly, essentially to achieve good things in their lives for their families, their friends, 
their colleagues and themselves. Eurocard/MasterCard users are supposed to be more family-orientated, more in 
line with values of personal balance and harmony, rather than hedonistic and materialistic. The basic selling idea is 
‘Eurocard/MasterCard: the best way to pay for everything that matters’. The creative expression is: ‘There are some 
things that money can’t buy – for everything else there’s Eurocard/MasterCard.’
TV advertising has been used to launch, consolidate and leverage the concept of higher-level emotional values 
throughout Europe. The concept has been leveraged across all media and has also been used in below-the-line 
Business Insight
Eurocard/MasterCard: imbuing a well-known brand with richer emotional qualities

6     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Integration of marketing communications
Integrated marketing communications (IMC) is an old idea that emerged in the eighties and 
the nineties of the previous century, but is still (and increasingly) relevant today. Already 
back in 1993, Don Schultz, one of the founding fathers of the IMC idea, and his colleagues, 
defined it as follows:5
IMC is the process of developing and implementing various forms of persuasive commu-
nication programs with customers and prospects over time. The goal of IMC is to influence 
or directly affect the behaviour of the selected audience. IMC considers all sources of brand 
or company contacts which a customer or prospect has with the product or the service 
as potential delivery channels for future messages. Further, IMC makes use of all forms of 
communication which are relevant to the customer or prospect, and to which they might 
be receptive.
At the core of this definition is the idea that IMC starts from the customer point of view, 
and works backwards to develop effective communication. It is aimed at developing both 
attitudes and behaviour, and it is using all possible touchpoints with the customer. This 
multiple touchpoint perspective is sometimes referred to as ‘360 degrees communication’.
Since then IMC have been defined in a number of ways, stressing various aspects, benefits 
and organisational consequences of IMC. Duncan states that IMC is:6
A process for managing customer relationships that drive brand value. It is a cross-functional 
process for creating and nourishing profitable relationships with customers and other stake-
holders by strategically controlling or influencing all messages sent to these groups and 
encouraging data-driven, purposeful dialogue with them.
In this definition, again the focus is on customer-orientedness and building dialogues 
and relationships between brands and customers, stakeholders and prospects. Further, this 
definition again emphasises the use of multiple touchpoints and communication methods to 
support this dialogue. A particular feature of Duncan’s definition is that it stresses the need 
for customer insights: IMC is data-driven, and thus based on detailed customer information.
IMC is not just a way of communicating, it is or should become a strategic business 
process.7 This means that the IMC idea permeates all levels of a company, and is the 
driving force behind the focus of a company: not just promoting products, but taking a 
customer-centred view and operationalising it for profitable brand building. This is rep-
resented in Figure 1.1. Over the last decades, many companies have been working on the 
basic level of the IMC pyramid, the tactical co-ordination of marketing communication. 
However, a true IMC philosophy implies that companies work their way through the next 
stages, in such a way that the focus of the company is building, monitoring and measur-
ing the profitability of well-integrated marketing communications (top of the pyramid). 
In fact, for IMC to become the prime business driver, companies should first adopt this 
campaigns. Eurocard/MasterCard was a sponsor of the UEFA Euro 2000 and the UEFA Champions League soccer 
competitions. In all countries, the campaign was extended into various other media. For instance, in France, print 
and outdoor advertising have become a key part of the media schedule; in the UK, cinema and national press 
were added; in Italy, radio and press were used. Both in Italy and Germany, an Internet site was set up, linked to 
the sponsorship of the Champions League. Research indicates that consumers value the campaign as sensitive and 
intelligent. It is considered to be advertising that clearly understands people as individuals and addresses them in an 
adult and positive manner. After the advertising campaign, unprompted brand awareness in nine European markets 
had increased by 3% to 37%. Unprompted advertising awareness had moved up from 5% to 11%.4

INTEGRATION OF MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS     7
return-on-marketing-communications perspective, and develop their operations accordingly. 
Indeed, the essential characteristic of IMC is that marketing communications are built on 
deep customer insights and profitable customer relationships. In other words, the focus of a 
company should be to learn to know target markets thoroughly, and build marketing com-
munications programmes that are profitable. This profitability should be monitored closely. 
ROMI (return on marketing communications) thus becomes of crucial importance. Only 
then is IMC strategically and financially integrated.
This book focuses on the bottom of the pyramid. From that perspective and putting it 
very generally, IMC:
is a new way of looking at the whole, where once we saw only parts such as advertising, pub-
lic relations, sales promotion, purchasing, employee communication, and so forth, to look 
at it the way the consumer sees it – as a flow of information from indistinguishable sources.8
It is the integration of specialised communications functions that previously operated 
with varying degrees of autonomy. It is seamless, through-the-line communications.9 The 
American Association of Advertising Agencies uses the following definition of IMC:
a concept of marketing communication planning that recognises the added value of a 
comprehensive plan that evaluates the strategic roles of a variety of communication disci-
plines, e.g. general advertising, direct response, sales promotion and public relations – and 
combines these disciplines to provide clarity, consistency and maximum communication 
impact.10
The various definitions incorporate the same core idea: communications instruments that 
traditionally have been used independently of each other are combined in such a way that 
a synergetic effect is reached, and the resulting communications effort becomes ‘seamless’ 
or homogeneous. The major benefit of IMC is that a consistent set of messages is conveyed 
to all target audiences by means of all available forms of contact and message channels. 
Communications should become more effective and efficient as a result of the consistency 
and the synergetic effect between tools and messages. In other words, IMC have an added 
value when compared with traditional marketing communications.11
Two principles are important when designing and implementing an integrated market-
ing communications mix, namely consistency and synergy. Marketing instruments have to 
be combined in such a way that the company’s offering is consistently marketed. In other 
Figure 1.1  Stages in IMC development
Source: Kitchen, P. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2004) Integrated Marketing Communications: A Primer. London and New York: Routledge 
from Shultz, D.E. and Kitchen, P.J. (2000) ‘A response to ‘theoretical concept or management fashion?’’, Journal of Advertising Research, 
40(5), 17-21 © Copyright Advertising Research Foundation 2000..

8     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
To reinforce its claim ‘We bring brighter mornings’, juice brand Tropicana developed a full-round integrated market-
ing communications campaign. On its website it explains the healthiness of its orange juice. As a juicy, delicious, 
nourishing orange only needs water and bright sunshine, Tropicana claims its juice is actually a bit of sunshine 
which brings mornings to life with a nutritious boost. Why? Because ‘brighter mornings develop into brighter days’. 
This message is also stressed in its TV commercials. To further bring the message alive, Tropicana organised several 
events in which it literally brought sunshine to people in the farthest reaches of Canada, but also in a more iconic 
place, Trafalgar Square in London. The event in London was on the same day that the TV campaign kicked off. A giant 
helium sun was installed which was 30 000 times bigger than a football, had a surface area of 200 m2 and weighed 
over 2500 kg. The internal light source of the Trafalgar sun produced the equivalent of 60 000 light bulbs: 4 million 
lumens of light. The sun rose an hour earlier than normal sunrise and set three hours later than normal sunset, giv-
ing people in London four additional hours of sunlight. Next to delivering this unique brand experience to people, 
informing them on the website and bringing the message in advertisements, the claim that a glass of Tropicana tastes 
delicious and energises your day was reinforced by digital and point-of-purchase communications, free samples, a 
PR campaign, a movie on YouTube, and a Facebook action.
Who would not believe that if Tropicana can bring sunshine to the darkest places of Canada and light up London 
like this, it would not be able to bring a little bit of sunshine to your breakfast table?12
Business Insight
Brighter mornings for brighter days
words, all marketing instruments have to work in the same direction, and not conflict with 
each other. The second important principle is synergy. Marketing mix instruments have to be 
designed in such a way that the effects of the tools are mutually reinforcing. Sales staff will 
be more successful if their activities are supported by public relations activity or advertising 
campaigns. The effect of sponsorship will be multiplied if combined with sales promotion 
activity and public relations campaigns generating media exposure of the sponsored event. 
Advertising campaigns that activate consumers via online channels can be more impactful. 
Successful marketing communications depend on a well-integrated, synergetic and interac-
tive marketing mix.
The rationale behind this new way of looking at marketing communications – and cer-
tainly the most relevant issue in the whole IMC discussion – is the consumer’s point of 
view. The consumer does not recognise the subtle differences between advertising, spon-
sorship, direct mailing, sales promotions, events or trade fairs. To him or her, these are all 
very similar and indistinguishable ways that a company employs to persuade people to 
buy its products. Therefore, it is very confusing and less persuasive to be confronted with 
inconsistent messages. Consumers may be more sensitive to commonalities and discrepan-
cies among messages than to the specific communications vehicles used to transmit them.13 
IMC may therefore also be defined from the customer’s point of view. It is in the field of 
communications where the receiver is offered sources, messages, instruments and media in 
such a way that an added value is created in terms of a faster or better comprehension of  
the communication. Integration occurs at the consumer or perceiver level. It is the task of the 
communicator to facilitate this integration at the consumer level by presenting the messages 
in an integrated way.14 In fact, there is a need to manage each point of contact between the 
consumer and the product or organisation.15 In Figure 1.2, an overview is given of various 
elements of the communications mix, and the potentially integrating role of marketing 
communications.16

INTEGRATION OF MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS     9
Companies are increasingly investing in brand placement, the (paid) incorporation of brands in media content. For 
example, Volkswagen invested $200 million in 2005 to have their cars placed in diverse NBC productions,17 while 
brand placement investments in the 2013 Superman film Man of Steel were around $170 million.18 Between 2006 
and 2011, the global brand placement industry achieved a compound annual growth rate of 12.6% and in 2014 it 
was estimated to be worth $8.25 billion.19
Almost all extant studies treat brand placement in isolation from other forms of marketing communications.20 
As a result, previous research does not accurately capture the current marketing communications environment. 
Brand placement is increasingly used as a communication tool in a broader promotional strategy.21 For example, 
the Dutch beer brand Heineken set up a promotional campaign around its appearance in the 2012 James Bond 
film Skyfall. Heineken broadcast commercials featuring Bond and hosted sponsored events both before and after 
the movie premiered. Another example is Coca-Cola’s long-standing promotional agreement with American Idols, 
which combines in-programme placements with sponsorship messages.
In a Belgian study, the effectiveness of brand placement in a television programme, sponsorship messages and 
their combination was investigated by means of two field studies. Study 1 measured the responses of a panel of view-
ers (n = 7629) to 19 real-life advertising campaigns for 15 brands that ran across 8 entertainment shows on Belgian 
commercial television. The majority of the programmes were local talent competitions (singing, cooking, dancing 
contests), with the exception of ‘Sofie’s Kitchen’, which is an instructive cooking show (cf. ‘Nigella’s Kitchen’). Study 1 
allowed viewers to assess brand placement and sponsorship messages as they operate in the real world. For each 
of the 19 campaigns, a quota sample was collected from the consumer panel of a Belgian market research agency. 
Respondents were contacted one day after the final episode of a certain show was broadcast, and given a week to 
complete the survey. Each sample was collected using a quota sampling procedure, in order to be representative 
of the television network’s viewer profile.
Study 2 replicated the findings from Study 1 by means of a naturalistic experiment (n = 334). A between-
subject experiment was set up that consisted of four different experimental conditions. Participants were invited 
to a studio at Belgium’s leading commercial television network, which was converted to a viewing theatre, to 
watch a 44-minute episode of the Flemish version of the reality cooking show ‘Masterchef’ (the episode was not 
previously aired on television). The viewing theatre was equipped with a large screen and comfortable seats. 
The episode was interrupted by one commercial break of 5 minutes, which contained 10 commercials of 30 
seconds for brands that are not competitors of the test brand (i.e. Bosto, a brand of rice). In the first condition 
(programme sponsorship message plus brand placement), viewers were exposed to an episode that included 
a clear 5-second brand placement (i.e. a participant uses a box of the test brand’s rice to prepare a dish) plus 
two sponsorship messages for the test brand (i.e. a 5-second animated video that showed rice grains falling 
out of a box with the statement ‘It’s raining culinary talent with Bosto and Masterchef’), one at the start of the 
programme and one after the commercial break. Viewers in the second condition were exposed to the brand 
placement only. The third group was exposed to the sponsorship messages only. The fourth group was a control 
group that saw the episode without brand placement or sponsorship messages. Episodes without brand place-
ment (i.e. conditions 3 and 4) were edited by the production department of the cooperating television network, 
who subtly blurred the rice package so that viewers could not derive the test brand. In the conditions that do 
not contain sponsorship messages for the test brand (i.e. conditions 2 and 4), these messages were replaced 
by sponsorship messages for a brand that is unrelated to the programme context (i.e. Kleenex tissues). This was 
done to keep the exposure time constant across conditions, and to make the viewing experience as realistic as 
possible. All other branded products that appeared in the episode were visually blurred, so that they could not 
be recognised. After watching the episodes, participants completed a questionnaire measuring brand recall 
and brand attitude.
Research insight
How to brand entertainment: the effectiveness of combining television brand place-
ment with sponsorship messages

10     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
The results of the studies demonstrate that sponsorship messages and brand placements can be synergistic 
advertising formats, in that their combination can boost brand recall compared to either sponsorship messages 
or brand placement only. Even though sponsorship messages are generally more explicit than brand placements, 
and are shown stand-alone, so that they offer a higher opportunity for processing, Study 2 shows that brand 
recall is significantly higher for brand placements than for sponsorship messages. This can be attributed to the 
increased relevance brand placements benefit from by being embedded in a meaningful context.22 Contrary to 
effects for brand recall, there was no evidence of a synergistic effect on brand attitude when sponsorship mes-
sages and brand placement were combined, either positive or negative. In general, brand attitudes also did not 
improve very much over the control groups. A potential reason for this could be that most of the brands included 
are well-established brands. Other studies also report little or no attitudinal effects for highly familiar brands.23 
For established brands, it is harder to boost brand attitude than for unestablished brands, even by a season-long 
campaign in an entertainment programme. Therefore, even a minor improvement may be considered a substan-
tive and meaningful campaign result.
Brand managers seeking to boost their brand awareness should invest in a campaign which contains both brand 
placements and sponsorship messages, as their combination generates a positive synergistic effect. Even though 
the recall scores after a time delay in Study 2 are much lower than the immediate measures in the experimental 
setting of Study 1, this positive synergistic effect subsides. Moreover, it is important to note that this increase in 
awareness is not accompanied by a decrease in brand attitude. Departing from the findings of previous research, 
one could argue that the increased prominence inherent to a combined campaign could have adverse attitudinal 
effects due to the activation of viewers’ persuasion knowledge, or tedium with increased repetition.24 However, 
the results of both studies indicate there is no negative attitudinal impact of combining programme sponsorship 
with brand placement.
Figure 1.2  The marketing mix and integrated marketing communications
Source: Based on Hutton, J.H. (1996) ‘Integrated marketing communication and the evolution of marketing thought’, Journal of 
­Business Research, 37(3), 155–62.

INTEGRATION OF MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS     11
IMC do not happen automatically. All the elements of the communications mix have to be 
carefully planned in such a way that they form a consistent and coherent integrated commu-
nications plan. As a consequence, IMC can only be implemented successfully if there is also a 
strategic integration of the various departments that are responsible for parts of the commu-
nications function. Indeed, advertising, public relations, sales promotions and personal selling 
in most companies are traditionally managed by separate divisions that seldom communicate 
with each other, let alone take account of each other’s priorities or integrate their efforts. 
Successful IMC rest on the existence of one communications manager who has the authority 
to supervise and integrate all the specialised communications functions of the organisation. 
Often this will imply a radical change in the structure of the organisation, and that may be 
the most important reason why IMC have not been implemented in most companies.
In a study of the perception of US motor carrier marketing managers, 192 respondents were asked to report for which 
communications functions they used each of the marketing communications tools they employed. The subjects 
framed five communications functions as the steps of the individual-level new product adoption model. Sixteen mar-
keting communications tools were mentioned. The map below was generated by means of correspondence analysis 
on the basis of the number of times a communications tool was assigned to a specific communications function. 
It is a graphical representation of how appropriate the marketing managers perceive the role of each tool in each 
stage of the new product adoption process. The horizontal axis of the map primarily represents the various stages 
in the adoption process. All mass communications tools are clustered on the left-hand side of the map, close to the 
first stages of the adoption process (awareness and interest). Internet and email are positioned close to the interest 
and evaluation stages. Telemarketing is more closely associated with generating trials while personal selling is more 
closely associated with gaining adoption. Although IMC advocate consistency in all the communications tools used, 
each tool still has a specific role to play in the communications strategy accompanying the launch of a new product.25
Research insight
Perception of IMC in the US motor carrier industry
Source: Garber, L.L. and Dotson, M.J. (2002) ‘A method for the selection of appropriate business-to-business integrated marketing communications 
mixes’, Journal of Marketing Communications, 8(1), 1–18.
In Table 1.3, some major differences between ‘classic’ communications and integrated 
communications are summarised.26 In this overview, the focus is on the changing nature 
of communications and the changing attitude of the consumer. Both necessitate a seamless 
integration of communications instruments. Traditional communications strategies are based 
on mass media delivering generalised transaction-orientated messages. Integrated communi-
cations are much more personalised, customer-orientated, relationship-based and interactive. 

12     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
They are aimed not only at changing awareness and attitudes, but also at directly influencing 
behaviour. Integration is not synonymous with relationship marketing, satisfaction manage-
ment or interactive communications. These principles may well be put in practice by means 
of a ‘classic’ communications strategy. However, by means of integrated communications the 
key objectives of modern marketing can be reached much more effectively.
In each of the chapters on communication instruments attention will be devoted to con-
sistency and synergy in integrating communications instruments.
Classic communications
Integrated communications
Aimed at acquisition
Aimed at retention, relationship management
Mass communications
Selective communications
Monologue
Dialogue
Information is sent
Information is requested
Information provision
Information – self-service
Sender takes initiative
Receiver takes initiative
Persuasive ‘hold up’
Provide information
Effect through repetition
Effect through relevance
Offensive
Defensive
Hard sell
Soft sell
Salience of brand
Confidence in brand
Classic communications
Integrated communications
Transaction-orientated
Relationship-orientated
Attitude change
Satisfaction
Modern: linear, massive
Postmodern: cyclical, fragmented
Classical communication tools
Digital technology
Local markets
Globalisation
Table 1.3  Classic and integrated communications
Integrating the various tools can lead to synergies in a number of ways. Here are some examples:
● The sales team have an easier job if their product or company is well known as a result of sponsorship or advertising.
● In-store or point-of-purchase communications that are consistent with advertising are much more effective.
● A promotional campaign that is supported by advertising is generally more successful.
● Direct mailing is more effective when prepared by an awareness-increasing advertising campaign and supported 
by a sales promotion campaign.
● Public relations, corporate advertising and sponsorship can have synergetic effects on company image building.
● Websites will be more frequently visited when announced in mass media advertising.
● Social media campaigns will be more effective when accompanied by offline advertising or brand activation campaigns.
● Advertising for a trade show will be more effective if an incentive to visit the stand is offered.
Business Insight
Combining marketing communications tools to create synergies
Source: W.F. van Raaij, ‘Integratie van Communicatie: vanuit de Zender of vanuit de Ontvanger’ (Integration of Communication: 
Starting from the Sender or the Receiver?), in Damoiseaux, V.M.G., van Ruler, A.A. and Weisink, A. (eds), Effectiviteit in Communicatie 
management (Effectiveness in Communication Management), 169-84 Deventer: Samson, ISBN: 9014058411, 9789014058412

INTEGRATING MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS ACROSS CULTURES     13
Integrating marketing communications across cultures
More and more companies are operating internationally. Following this trend, international 
communications have also grown enormously. International marketing communications 
management differs from domestic communications management in that one has to operate 
in a different environment with different demographic, economic, geographic, technologi-
cal, political and legal conditions. Cultural and legal differences between a company and 
its foreign marketplace can cause many problems and difficulties. The translation from the 
message strategy ‘what to say’ into a creative strategy ‘how to say it’ is even more challeng-
ing in international marketing communications than it is in domestic communications. 
Different cultural components can have a major impact on international communications 
campaigns. Different regulations regarding communications instruments are also important. 
Furthermore, marketing communications have to consider differences in media availabil-
ity and the popularity of different media. Due to differences in the international market-
ing environment, a company has to consider the major question: to what extent should it 
localise (adapt) or globalise (standardise or integrate) its marketing communications across 
different cultures?
Cultural differences are among the most important factors that impact international mar-
keting communications. Hofstede27 describes culture as the ‘collective programming of the 
mind which distinguishes the members of one group or category of people from those of 
another’. In order to succeed in international communications, marketing communications 
managers have to understand these cultural differences. The reason for this is that, since con-
sumers grow up in a certain culture and are used to that culture’s values and beliefs, they will 
respond differently to marketing communications.28 Often, marketers and marketing com-
munications executives fall victim to the self-reference criterion. The self-reference criterion 
refers to our unconscious tendency to refer everything to our own cultural values.29 People 
often expect that foreigners have the same values, same interests, etc., as they do themselves, 
and if this is not the case, they consider their own habits, values, etc., to be superior. In order 
to be able to understand other cultures, the marketer has to try to avoid the self-reference 
mistake, and not take for granted everything he or she is used to. The impact of culture on 
advertising will be more extensively discussed later (see Chapter 5).
China is becoming an increasingly important market for many companies. However, marketers have to take into 
account Chinese habits and sensitivities. To increase the number of visitors in Hong Kong Disneyland, the dresses of 
Mickey and Minnie Mouse were adapted. An American–Chinese designer developed a frivolous cherry-red dress for 
Minnie and a suit for Mickey that reminds many of the traditional Mao outfit. In that way, the management hopes 
to appeal more to local culture and to attract more visitors from mainland China.30
The French car maker Citroën placed an advertisement in the Spanish newspaper El Pais featuring the Chinese 
leader Mao Zedong. The text said: ‘it is true, we are the leaders. But revolution never stops at Citroën.’ The Chinese 
protested because they found the ad insulting, and Citroën had to withdraw it.31
Business Insight
Marketing and the Chinese

14     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Photo 1.1 H&M: A global brand
Source: Getty Images: Chinafoto Press.
Standardisation or adaptation
Once a company decides to go international, one of the most important strategic decisions 
to be made is to what extent a global or cross-culturally integrated marketing strategy in the 
foreign market(s) must be followed. A standardised campaign can be defined as a campaign 
that is run in different countries, using the same concept, setting, theme, appeal and mes-
sage, with the possible exception of translations (Photo 1.1). A local approach (localisation 
or adaptation) implies that elements of the communications strategy are adapted to local 
circumstances.32

STANDARDISATION OR ADAPTATION     15
An important question is how consumers respond to the localisation vs globalisation 
of executional elements of marketing communications (i.e. visual or verbal) and branding 
(e.g. the brand name).33 Globalisation or standardisation of advertising generally leads to 
cost reduction through economies of scale.34 It might lead to huge savings in manufactur-
ing costs, personnel costs and communications costs. Not only can the price of the com-
munications programme be reduced, but also the quality can be enhanced. Really good 
creative ideas are scarce. Global campaigns offer the advantage of globally exploiting a 
great creative idea. Other advantages are that global campaigns make things simpler for the 
company in the sense that co-ordination and control of the communications programme in 
the different countries become easier. Moreover, a global image can be created across dif-
ferent parts of the world. Brands that have communicated globally include: Nivea, Martini, 
L’Oréal, Xerox, Parker pens, etc. Additionally, globalised advertising can help to create a 
strong global brand identity. The perception of brand globalness is often associated with 
prestige and quality, which benefits purchase intention.35 For this reason, some authors36 
advocate the idea that a high degree of advertising globalisation works well for a multina-
tional company.
However, the majority of studies seem to support the effectiveness of advertising locali-
sation or adaptation.37 The differences between nations’ and consumers’ tastes around the 
world do not guarantee that the same ad can be similarly effective in all the countries.38 
Localising an advertisement therefore often increases self-brand congruity, which makes 
the ad and the brand more appealing to local consumers. Therefore, often the interna-
tional marketer will have to adapt or localise his or her marketing mix to a different 
foreign environment. People living in different cultures differ in their beliefs, previous 
experiences, attitudes, values, etc. Different values might lead to different needs and dif-
ferent consumption behaviour. Even in cases where consumers’ needs are homogeneous, 
this does not automatically mean that people want to satisfy these needs in a similar 
way. Nescafé, for example, offers more than 100 varieties since consumers in different 
countries prefer different blends and flavours. Komatsu enlarged the door handles of its 
mechanical shovels for the Finnish market because Finnish workers often wear gloves 
against the cold.39
Since the majority of Chinese consumers are not familiar with the Roman alphabet, the first requirement when 
international companies enter the Chinese market is to choose a proper Chinese name. This is not an easy task 
and a company has several possibilities. First of all, the brand name can be directly translated. In this case, the 
Chinese name sounds like the original name, but has no specific meaning in Chinese. This strategy is followed by 
Nike, for example. Secondly, the company can opt for free translation. In this case, the name is translated according 
to its meaning, but has no phonetic link with the original brand name. Schindler, for example, sounds like ‘Xunda’ 
in Chinese and means ‘quick arrive’. Finally, the company can go for a mixed translation. This is the most popular 
alternative and results in a name that both sounds like the original brand name and has a meaning in Chinese. For 
example, Gucci’s Chinese name sounds like ‘Guzi’ and means ‘Classic looks’, while Nivea sounds like ‘Niweiya’ and 
means ‘Girl keep elegance’.
Business Insight
The Chinese image of global brands

16     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Often, the best way to approach international markets is not to adhere to one of the 
extreme strategies of globalisation or localisation, but to opt for a ‘global commitment 
to a local vision’,41 or in other words to ‘think global, but act local’ (glocalisation). If the 
brand positioning is a good one, the brand should be rolled out in most countries. Also, 
an excellent creative idea can work nearly everywhere. However, advertisers should always 
look at the creative idea through the eyes of the locals. Even the best ideas might need some 
adaptation in execution to get into the mindset of local people or to respect their cultural 
values.42 An example would be to work out a global creative idea, but to adapt the advertis-
ing so that local presenters, experts or celebrities are employed, or that reference is made to 
local history or national symbols: Big Ben in London, the Eiffel Tower in Paris, the Atomium 
in Brussels, the gondolas in Venice (Photo 1.2). Coca-Cola records radio spots in about 40 
languages and uses 140 different music backgrounds.43 Goodyear and Kraft develop a pool 
of ads from which each country selects the most appropriate one.44 Miele runs campaigns 
with a different pay-off line. In Germany, Spain and Switzerland Miele is ‘a decision for 
life’, in Austria Miele is ‘reliability for many years’, and in the Netherlands, Belgium, the 
USA and Canada ‘there is no better one’.45 Glocalised advertising campaigns often combine 
global elements, such as a global brand name and positioning, with local elements, such as 
wording or a local celebrity endorser.46
Besides deciding on the translation method, a company also has to decide on the sound of the new name. 
Every Chinese syllable can be pronounced with four different intonations. So, a two-syllable name can have 16 
different tone combinations, having an impact not only on the ease of pronunciation but also on the connota-
tions. Next, different combinations of characters have to be selected. Although different combinations can have 
the same pronunciation, they have completely different meanings. For example, Ford sounds like ‘Fute’ in Chinese 
and can have two different meanings: ‘happiness’ and ‘bending over’. Since neither really fits Ford, it opted for a 
direct translation without a meaning. Ford’s competitors fared better and have strong meanings. BMW is renamed 
as a ‘horse’, which in Chinese legend is connected with speed. Citroën is a ‘dragon’, referring to power, and Rover 
is a ‘tiger’, which is linked with prestige. So, it is important to realise that by giving the brand a Chinese name, 
not only is a local name given, but also a local image and a local identity, which can be very different from the 
original one. Only 7% of Chinese names have an almost identical meaning to the original one. A good example 
here is Volkswagen, for which the Chinese name means ‘the masses’ or ‘the people’. More than 50% of Chinese 
names have a positive connotation that is absent in the original name. For example, Polaroid does not have a real 
meaning in the Roman language but its Chinese name ‘Shoot get instant photos’ accurately describes Polaroid’s 
benefits. About 12% have a different connotation. Examples here are Yahoo!, which in Chinese means ‘elegant tiger’, 
and Lux soap, which is called ‘strong man’. It is interesting to note that Lux is pronounced with exactly the same 
sound and tone in Taiwan but has a different meaning. In Taiwan, Lux refers to ‘beauty’, a meaning that fits the brand 
better. However, when Lux entered the Chinese market in the 1980s, ‘beauty’ was not an acceptable name since it 
referred to ‘decadent bourgeois aesthetics’ under the orthodox communist doctrine. Another example of different 
meanings in Chinese and Taiwanese is Johnson & Johnson. It is called ‘strong life’ in China and ‘tender/delicate life’ 
in Taiwan. The company opted for ‘strong life’ in China because, in view of the ‘one-child’ policy, parents would 
rather have strong than delicate babies.
The foregoing illustrates that obtaining a global image is not always easy. For 2 million Chinese consumers, 
BMW is not ‘the ultimate driving machine’ but ‘a treasure horse’. If the same image is not possible, try to go 
for a meaningful name since it enhances image and association formation. Moreover, if possible, emphasise 
a Western image rather than a local image in the new name, since the Chinese regard Western products very 
favourably.40

STANDARDISATION OR ADAPTATION     17
The success of international advertising partly depends on the degree of advertising adaptation to the local envi-
ronment of the targeted markets. The levels of advertising adaptation have been defined on a continuum ranging 
from worldwide standardisation (globalisation) to complete adaptation (localisation) with hybrid approaches (glo-
calisation) in between.47 Advertising standardisation uses a uniform advertising strategy across different countries.48 
This approach can reinforce a brand’s global identity and lead to cost reduction through economies of scale.49 On 
the other hand, the differences between nations’ and consumers’ tastes around the world encourage marketers to 
tailor (adapt) their advertising to local cultures and tastes.50 A number of studies reveal that (at least some degree 
of) advertising adaptation to local culture can benefit consumers’ attitudes and purchase intentions51 and, more 
generally, that brands that signal connections to a person’s home country lead to more positive brand evaluations.52
Through an online survey, 405 respondents from three countries, Belgium (136), India (131) and Iran (138), were 
randomly assigned to one of three advertising strategies. In each country, three different ads were prepared for a 
fictitious brand of home cinema systems (TFX), manipulated by two executional elements, i.e. the celebrity endorser 
Research insight
Openness to foreign markets and consumer responses to different degrees of 
­advertising adaptation
Photo 1.2  Absolut Vodka: think 
global, act local
Source: The Absolut Company: Vincent Dixon.

18     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
and advertising copy. Both elements were either fully adapted (local celebrity and advertising copy) to the context 
of the three nations (adaptation strategy) or standardised (international celebrity and advertising copy (standardisa-
tion strategy)). In addition, a glocalisation strategy was created by combining a local celebrity with an international 
advertising copy. This hybrid strategy is a strategy that is often used in international advertising.53 To manipulate 
the advertising copy, the language, the location and the website domain were locally adapted or internationally 
standardised. The international advertising copy was drafted in English, mentioning three international metropolitan 
cities and referring to a website ‘ tfx.com’. The localised advertising copy was in Hindi for India, in Farsi for Iran and 
in Dutch for Belgium, naming three metropolitan cities of each country (e.g. for India: Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkota) 
and referring to websites with adapted domains of each country (e.g. for India: ‘tfx.in’).
The three countries have different levels of openness to foreign markets. To measure a nation’s openness to 
foreign markets, the KOF index of globalisation54 was used. The KOF index measures the social aspect of openness 
by data on personal contact (i.e. outgoing telephone traffic, inflow and outflow of goods and services (transfers), 
international tourism, foreign population), information flow (i.e. telephone mainlines, Internet hosts, Internet users, 
cable television, daily newspapers, radios) and cultural proximity (i.e. the amount of contact of the individuals of a 
nation with multinational companies like McDonald’s). The economic aspect of openness is measured by data on 
actual flows (i.e. trade, foreign direct investment, portfolio investment, income payments to foreign nationals) and 
data on economic restrictions (i.e. import barriers, mean tariff rate, taxes on international trade). The political aspect 
of openness is measured by data on political engagement with other countries (i.e. embassies in country, member-
ship of international organisations, participation in UN Security Council missions). The KOF index scores countries 
on a 0–100 scale.55 On the basis of these scores, Belgium is extremely open to foreign markets (KOF = 91.61, rank 
2nd/191). India scores a moderate 50.41 (rank 112th/191). Iran has a low KOF score of 41.27 (rank 156th/191).
For each of these countries it was investigated how consumers react to different levels of advertising adaptation 
in terms of brand attitudes. The individuals’ ethnocentrism, age group, gender and level of education was controlled. 
The basic conclusion is that full adaptation of advertising is a viable option in any country, regardless of its openness 
to foreign markets, but for different reasons. Societies isolated from the values and norms of global culture (with low 
openness to foreign markets) consider foreign values and norms as perceptually distant.56 In these societies, ads with 
international elements, either glocalised or standardised, are less positively received than completely adapted ad 
appeals. In societies with a moderate openness to foreign markets, individuals have some contact with foreign cul-
tures and evaluate ads on the basis of their congruency with their own local culture. As a result, advertising requires 
at least a link to the local culture, through glocalisation or complete adaptation. In these countries, standardisation 
of advertising is a suboptimal strategy, but full adaptation is not necessary. In societies with a high openness to 
foreign markets, individuals have frequent contact with the norms and values of other cultures. In a country with 
a high openness to foreign markets, consumer responses do not differ significantly from one degree of advertise-
ment adaptation to another. Although the full adaptation of advertising appeals to the cultural environment of the 
targeted society has long been considered to be an effective strategy,57 the results of the present study show that 
glocalisation (partial standardisation) is as effective in moderately to highly open countries, while full standardisation 
can be equally effective for a nation with high level of openness to foreign markets.
For decades, Unilever adapted both its ‘brand hardware’ and ‘software’ to local markets. Due to cost considera-
tions, local Unilever companies are no longer allowed to adapt the brand hardware, consisting of product formula, 
packaging and product range. However, a brand’s software, such as the brand name, advertising, PR and event mar-
keting, is still localised. For example, although standardised products are used, Unilever decided to retain different 
BUSINESS INSIGHT
Globalising and standardising at Unilever and Procter & Gamble

STANDARDISATION OR ADAPTATION     19
Some product categories seem to lend themselves better to a global approach than others. 
Some products can be sold to similar target groups across countries. This boils down to global 
segmentation or finding groups of consumers that share similar opinions, values, interests, etc., 
across borders instead of looking for different target groups in different countries. Young peo-
ple or people with a higher education, for example, are very similar, whether they are French, 
Italian, German, Belgian or American. The reason for this is that these groups, in general, are 
more open-minded, less culturally bound, more receptive to international media, make more 
use of international media, have more international contacts and/or go abroad more often. 
This factor explains the success of MTV, Calvin Klein and Dell computers. Products that can 
be sold on the basis of image appeals are also more suited for global communications.
Images, visual messages and international music lend themselves more to standardisation 
than a spoken or written message. Examples of successful campaigns in this category are 
Marlboro, Levi’s, Coca-Cola, Martini, Smirnoff vodka, perfume ads and airline campaigns. 
Luxury products are targeted at upper-class people who buy the product for the status it brings. 
Because only the status and no product information needs to be communicated, these appeals 
are easier to standardise. Although innovative, high-tech products, such as the latest computers, 
the latest software, etc., need an informational appeal, these products seem to be used every-
where in the same way, which can justify a global appeal. Products with a country-of-origin 
appeal can be more easily globalised. Belgium is famous for its chocolate, France for its wine, 
Japan for its technology, Germany for its durability, Switzerland for its watches. Products that 
use a country-of-origin positioning may well be advertised by means of a global approach.
brand names for its fabric softener in each country (Lenor in the UK, Kuschelweich in Germany, Coccolino in Italy, 
Mimosin in Spain, Snuggle in the USA and Robijn in Belgium). Also, the Coccolino teddy used in the Italian market 
and the puppets Darren and Lisa used for the UK market were retained because the cloth puppets and teddy have 
been used for years and connect well with local people. Dumping them would be throwing away valuable brand 
equity. Moreover, cost savings that can be achieved by standardising brand hardware are much higher than can be 
achieved by globalising an advertisement campaign.
Similar reasoning is followed by Unilever’s competitor, Procter & Gamble. It learned the hard way that globali-
sation is not always the way to go. Changing the name of the Mexican soap brand Escuda into Safeguard led to a 
serious sales decrease. After the name was changed back to Escuda again, sales went back up. Since then, P&G has 
been thinking of the hard points it wants to keep consistent across regions. For example, the machine used to make 
Bounty has to be standardised, but the brand name, the colours, etc., can be adapted to meet local needs, as can 
the advertising. For Pampers, for example, widely varied copy is used for the Middle Eastern, Latin American and 
South African campaigns.58
The expansion of multinational companies into international markets has resulted in a large literature on position-
ing strategies in different cultures or markets.59 An important question is to what degree branding and marketing 
communications in these markets should be standardised (globalisation), locally adapted (localisation) or glocalised. 
The latter refers to ‘global localisation’,60 a global brand identity strategy that allows for country-specific flexibility in 
communications mix decisions. India, with a population of more than 1 billion people, which is growing at 1.41% 
per year, is one of the booming markets of the twenty-first century. Moreover, the increasing purchasing power of 
Research insight
Glocalisation is the best branding strategy in India

20     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Integration of corporate communications
Corporate communications is the total integrated approach to the communications activity 
generated by all functional departments of a company, targeted at all company stakehold-
ers, and aimed at establishing and maintaining the link between strategic objectives, the 
corporate identity and the corporate image in line.67 Corporate communications have three 
main objectives:
1.	 To establish joint strategic starting points of the organisation that will have to be trans-
lated into consistent communications; in other words, to define a corporate identity that 
is in line with corporate strategy.
2.	 To reduce the gap between the desired identity and the image of the company (corporate 
image) that exists with its target groups.
3.	 To organise and control the implementation of all the communications efforts of a com-
pany, in line with the two above-mentioned principles.
In an organisation, corporate communications have to be integrated with marketing com-
munications. All communications efforts, whether for the benefit of the whole company and 
Indian consumers at the rate of 7.2% in 2010–11 indicates the ability of these consumers to purchase high-quality 
products in the near future. The liberalisation of the Indian market from 1991 onwards, and the growth of domestic 
demand, have provided the prerequisites for the entrance of multinational companies into this market.61 Success 
in such a lucrative market needs proper understanding of effective communications and branding strategies. For 
international companies, India is therefore a very relevant context to study these strategies.
In a sample of 327 Indian consumers, the effectiveness of communications and branding strategies (globalisation, 
glocalisation and localisation) was studied by assessing the effect of different types of endorsers and types of brand 
communications and their interaction on consumer responses.62
Three types of endorsers were studied: an unknown Indian model, a local (Indian) celebrity and a global celebrity. 
In an advertisement they were each combined with a global and a local brand communication for a home cinema 
system. Brand globalness was manipulated by globalising or localising all the written elements (websites, names of 
cities, language used, etc.) of the ads except the brand name. The experimental conditions represent globalisation or 
complete standardisation (combination of a global endorser and a global brand), localisation or complete adaptation 
(combination of a local model or celebrity and a global brand) and glocalisation (combination of a local model or 
celebrity and a global brand; combination of a global celebrity and a local brand).
Previous studies of standardisation and adaptation of communications strategies reveal that both standardisation 
and localisation are able to positively affect a consumer’s attitudes and purchase intention towards advertised prod-
ucts. On the one hand, it has been reported that adapted or localised messages are more persuasive and result more 
often in positive attitudes than global ones.63 On the other hand, other studies show that brands that are perceived 
as global can create associations of wide availability and recognition which strongly affect a consumer’s decision to 
purchase such brands through brand prestige and brand quality.64 India is an ethnocentric country.65 It can therefore 
be expected that these ethnocentric tendencies lead to preference of local elements in brand advertising. On the 
other hand, Indians are status conscious.66 If global elements in the ad create a perception of brand globalness, they 
may lead to more positive attitudes and a higher purchase intention than localised brands.
Testing the six ads (three types of endorsers with two types of brands) reveals that a glocalisation strategy  
(a combination of a global brand with a local endorser) engenders the most positive consumer responses over com-
plete globalisation (a combination of a global brand and a global endorser). Moreover, highly ethnocentric Indians 
prefer both glocalisation and localisation (a combination of a local brand and a local endorser) over globalisation, 
while the attitudes and purchasing intentions of Indians who scored low on ethnocentrism do not differ for any of 
the strategies.

INTEGRATION OF CORPORATE COMMUNICATIONS     21
all types of stakeholders, or to support the marketing of the company’s products towards 
customers and potential customers, should be consistent and synergetic, and aim at com-
municating the same company values and propositions to all.
Corporate vision and mission, culture, personality and identity
Corporate communications can be defined as the visualisation of corporate identity. To 
understand what the core concept of corporate identity means, its link with a number of 
related concepts has to be discussed. This is presented in Figure 1.3.68
Just as individuals have personalities and identities, so do organisations. Corporate per-
sonality refers to the values held by personnel within the organisation. It is defined as the 
collective, commonly shared understanding of the organisation’s distinctive values and char-
acteristics. It encompasses corporate philosophy, mission, strategy and principles, and as 
such is a major component of the corporate identity or even its main determining factor.69 
Corporate identity is the set of meanings by which a company allows itself to be known 
and through which it allows people to describe, remember and relate to it. It is the way the 
company chooses to present itself to its relevant target audiences by means of symbolism, 
communications and behaviour. It is the tangible manifestation, the visual statement, of the 
personality (shared values) or corporate culture of an organisation. Corporate identity is 
what the company is, what it does and how it does it. It relates to the products and brands a 
company offers, how they are distributed, how the company communicates with the public 
or stakeholders, and how the company behaves.70
Corporate personality and corporate identity are derived from strategic priorities, cor-
porate culture, corporate structure and industry identity. Corporate culture is ‘the deeper 
level of basic assumptions and beliefs that are shared by members of an organisation, that 
operate unconsciously and define in a basic “taken-for-granted” fashion an organisation’s 
view of itself and its environment’.71 Put more simply, corporate culture can be defined as 
‘the way we do things around here’. It is determined by factors such as the corporate phi-
losophy, values, mission, principles, guidelines, history, the founder of the company and 
the country of origin.72 Corporate culture consists of a number of levels. The first level 
includes the physical aspects of the company, such as the atmospherics of the building (look 
and style) and the way visitors are treated. The second level consists of the values held by 
employees, such as the importance of honesty in doing business, the service-mindedness of 
the sales staff and the responsiveness to customer complaints. The third level is achieved 
when ­everyone in the company develops a firm belief in the corporate culture characteristics, 
and behaves accordingly without questioning them. This third level is sometimes considered 
to be synonymous with corporate personality.
Figure 1.3  Corporate strategy, culture, personality, and corporate identity and its components
Source: Melewar, T.C. (2003) ‘Determinants of the corporate identity construct: a review of the literature’, Journal of Marketing Com-
munications, 9(4), 195–220.

22     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
One of the obvious ways to show commitment to your own company and its products and services is not to buy, 
use or wear competitive brands. Word has it that Bill Gates from Microsoft forbids his wife to buy big competitor 
Apple’s iPhone. CEOs from Belgian companies seem to agree. Jef Colruyt, the CEO of one of the largest retailers in 
Belgium that carries his name, says he buys 99% of what he needs in his own supermarkets. The products he cannot 
find in his own shops, like fresh lobster, he buys at the local fish store, and not in a competitive supermarket, and he 
expects the same from his family. The CEO of the outdoor supermarket chain AS Adventure occasionally enters a 
store of his biggest competitor, Decathlon, but says it feels like cheating. Barbara Torfs, CEO of the shoe store chain 
Torfs, only wears shoes from her own brand and expects other family members to do the same. Wearing other shoes 
at family parties is barely tolerated and regarded as blasphemy, she says. Anthony Vanherpe, CEO of Panos (a chain 
of take-out sandwich shops), says he eats at competitors Délifrance once or twice a year to monitor the competi-
tion in terms of product assortment, marketing and look and feel, but wouldn’t appreciate it if his family did the 
same.73 CEOs buying and using their own products is a strong and obvious sign of commitment that can enhance 
corporate identity and reputation.
Business Insight
CEOs and their families don’t buy their competitors’ products
Corporate identity is also determined by corporate strategy. Long-term strategic objec-
tives will determine and shape the desired corporate personality: the company’s mission 
will reflect the desired personality and corporate culture; positioning decisions will reflect 
the priorities that companies hold as to their chosen personality. On the other hand, the 
corporate personality will also determine the strategic options. Corporate culture and cor-
porate personality are a very persistent part of the internal company environment, and as 
such cannot be changed overnight. Corporate strategy will always to a certain extent have 
to be based on the most persistent elements of the corporate personality, or at least take 
them into account.
Corporate identity is also influenced by industry identity and corporate structure. Industry 
identity involves underlying economic and technical characteristics of an industry, such as 
industry size, growth, competitiveness, culture and technology levels. A strong generic or 
industry-wide identity (e.g. the banking industry) often forces companies to have similar 
strategies and missions. Corporate structure consists of organisational structure and brand 
structure. Organisational structure is concerned with the lines of communication and report-
ing responsibilities within the organisation. It relates to the degree of centralisation and 
decentralisation, and often has a major influence on brand structure (see also Chapter 2).
Obviously, the choice of a specific type of corporate identity will have a great impact on 
brand strategy, marketing and corporate communications.
Corporate identity is communicated through corporate communications, corporate 
design, and corporate behaviour. Corporate communications, but also marketing commu-
nications, have to be based on, and be consistent with, the important elements of the corpo-
rate identity of the company. For instance, companies that are committed challengers in the 
markets in which they operate will be more aggressive communicators, maybe using more 
direct guerrilla types of marketing and thus communications strategies involving head-on 
sales promotion and comparative advertising techniques. Also the principles of value mar-
keters, like The Body Shop, will be reflected in all their communications efforts. Sponsorship 
will be used to link the company’s image to environmental causes such as wildlife concerns, 
and in-store communications techniques will be used to convey the message of avoiding 
waste by recycling and simple, low-cost packaging.

INTEGRATION OF CORPORATE COMMUNICATIONS     23
Building and maintaining a corporate identity is more than just consistently using the 
traditional tools to communicate a company’s core elements. Everything it does, and all 
the material it uses, should be an integral part of the effort to convey a homogeneous and 
consistent identity. Corporate symbolism or corporate design, more specifically a consistent 
house style on business cards, letterheads, vehicles, gifts, clothes, equipment, packaging, etc., 
is an integral part of the corporate identity, or at least of the way in which it is made visible.
The company name, logo and slogan are vital elements of the house style of a company and important elements of 
corporate design. They are the visualisation of the corporate identity.
Logos and slogans should have a number of characteristics, which are outlined as follows.
A logo should be the long-term visualisation of the company’s strategy. One logo and one slogan should be used 
for the whole company. The slogan should be a perfect summary of the company’s identity.
Logos and slogans have to be distinctive. They are tools of differentiation between the company and its competi-
tors. As a result, slogans that are relevant but too general should be avoided, as well as logos that are too similar to 
the ones used by the competition. The same goes for company names, for that matter. Often, images and colours 
are much more important factors in recognising a logo or a brand and attributing it to the correct product than the 
verbal elements of a brand (the brand name).
Additionally, slogans should be relevant for the consumer, otherwise they will not be able to contribute to the 
development of a distinctive corporate image.
The logo and slogan should be timeless, but modifiable. All too often, logos refer to a short-term objective, or to 
an issue that seemed important at the time the logo was designed, but loses all its relevance after some time. Since 
logos and slogans should visualise the long-term image of a company, they should have a timeless capacity that 
allows them to be used for a long period of time. Having said that, the perception of what is beautiful changes over 
time. Logos should be modifiable in that the corporate design should be adaptable to changing aesthetic preferences 
over time, without radically altering the whole house style.
Slogans, but especially logos, should be usable in all circumstances and in all communications instruments and 
tools. This includes advertisements, mailings and annual reports, but also business cards, letterheads, envelopes, 
brochures, trucks, walls, films, ties, pens, press releases, etc. They should be equally distinctive on a business card 
and on a large truck. The company should be able to combine them with other logos, to include them in commu-
nications tools with different colours, with all kinds of letter formats and shapes.
Corporate design is not just a matter of logos and slogans. Here are a number of examples in which intelligent 
design has contributed to the corporate or brand identity:
● the shape of the container (Toilet Duck, Absolut Vodka);
● a distinctive opening device (Grolsch beer);
● the packaging material (Ferrero Rocher, Absolut Vodka);
● the colour of the packaging (Marlboro);
● the use of a personality (KFC and Colonel Sanders, the Marlboro cowboy).
Business Insight
The visualisation of the corporate identity: logos and slogans

24     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Besides communications and corporate design, corporate behaviour is also an important 
factor in making the corporate identity visible. The saying ‘actions speak louder than words’ 
is very applicable to corporate identity issues. The way in which the employees of a McDon-
ald’s restaurant behave is an integral part of the corporate identity of the company. The 
self-proclaimed customer-friendliness of a bank (e.g. by means of an advertising campaign) 
may be completely destroyed by behaviour that is inconsistent with this principle. A min-
eral water, using ‘purity’ as its main selling proposition, cannot afford actions that may be 
perceived as a threat to this purity, e.g. manufacturing processes involving potentially toxic 
chemicals or a lack of hygiene during the bottling process. Internal marketing, and internal 
communications as a part of it, will be extremely important in convincing and training staff 
to develop behaviour that is consistent with the desired corporate identity.
Paying attention to the corporate identity is of growing importance for a number of reasons:
● The business environment is undergoing rapid changes, altering the structure and the stra-
tegic direction of companies. Mergers, acquisitions, changing competitive environments, 
etc., change the nature of markets in radical ways. Corporate identity should therefore 
be constantly monitored and reviewed, along with the rapidly changing strategies.
● It is increasingly difficult for companies to differentiate themselves and their products 
from each other. Developing a distinctive corporate identity can be of crucial importance 
in developing a unique market position.
● Companies tend to become more global, and hence the danger of inconsistent communi-
cations by the various business units becomes greater. Developing a common corporate 
identity can be the basis of a more consistent communications strategy.
● Important economies of scale can be achieved by ensuring that all forms of communica-
tion by a company are consistent with one another. A good starting point is the develop-
ment of a common base, i.e. a common corporate identity that is based on well-defined 
strategic options.
● A well-established corporate identity can lead to increased motivation of the company’s 
own employees. Feeling ‘part of a family’ may stimulate them to do a better job.
● A corporate identity that is communicated convincingly creates confidence and goodwill 
with external target groups of stakeholders. Shareholders and investors may have more 
confidence, relations with the government may be better, higher-quality employees may 
be attracted, and the general public may have a more favourable attitude.
Corporate image and corporate reputation
The corporate image is the stakeholder’s perception of the way an organisation presents itself. 
It is the result of the interaction of all experiences, beliefs, feelings, knowledge and impres-
sions of each stakeholder about an organisation. It is a subjective and multidimensional 
impression of the organisation. The corporate identity resides in the organisation, but the 
corporate image resides in the heads of the stakeholders.74 The corporate image is not always 
consistent with the desired corporate identity; in other words, an image gap may exist.
Corporate reputation is the evaluation or esteem in which an organisation’s image is 
held. It is based on experience with the company and/or exposure to communications, 
behaviour and symbolism. While corporate image can be quite transient and short term in 
nature, corporate reputation is more firmly embedded in the mind of an individual. Images 
may change, but the corporate reputation is not easily altered in the short run. It implies 
credibility, trustworthiness, reliability and responsibility.75 It refers to how stakeholders view 
and believe in the core identity and image components of the company.
The corporate image is influenced by a number of factors, the corporate identity and its 
communication being only two of them. These factors are presented in Figure 1.4.76
Corporate identity or corporate culture and corporate strategy are important determin-
ing factors or cornerstones of the corporate image, as well as marketing and external cor-
porate communications. But the company’s employees also play an important role. Their 

INTEGRATION OF CORPORATE COMMUNICATIONS     25
communications with external target groups and their behaviour in their contacts with these 
groups will to a large extent determine how the company is perceived. Therefore, internal 
communications are very important to corporate identity building and corporate communi-
cations. Misfits between the perception of the employees and the desired corporate identity 
may therefore lead to an undesirable image gap.
Besides a company’s own staff, other intermediate audiences, such as the distribution 
channel or advertising agencies, may have an influence on the corporate image. Finally, real-
ity is an important factor: product experience is, to put it in operant conditioning terms,  
a powerful reinforcer or punisher in the development of a corporate image.
What is the value of a positive corporate image?
● It gives the company authority and is the basis for success and continuity.
● Consumers buy products, often not just because of their intrinsic quality, but also 
because of the reputation and the value the consumers attach to the company marketing  
the products. A positive corporate image creates an emotional surplus, which can be a 
more persistent long-term competitive advantage than any specific product characteristic.
● A positive corporate image is particularly important for companies whose customers are 
not deeply involved in the product category. Such customers will base their buying deci-
sions on limited information, such as the impression they have of the company’s value. 
But even when the customer is highly involved, but does not have the capability of judging 
the value of the company’s offerings (because the available information is too complex, 
or product quality is difficult to assess, as in the case of services), the corporate image 
can be the decisive factor in the customer’s decision.
● It creates a surplus of goodwill which avoids or diminishes problems with government, 
pressure groups, consumer organisations, etc., in times of crisis.
● It supports the company in attracting more easily the people who are crucial for its suc-
cess, such as investors, analysts, employees and partners.
Integrated corporate communications should take all these considerations into account.
Figure 1.4  Factors influencing the corporate image
Source: Based on Dowling, G.R. (1986) ‘Managing your corporate images’, Industrial Marketing Management, 15, 109–15.

26     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Factors leading to integrated marketing and corporate communications
A number of important changes and trends have created the need and urge to integrate mar-
keting and corporate communications and to facilitate them. Table 1.4 lists key IMC drivers.
There is a widespread belief that mass media communications are becoming increasingly 
less effective. Communications clutter, resulting from increasing advertising pressure, leads 
to increased irritation and advertising avoidance behaviour and to a situation in which 
advertising in traditional, undifferentiated and impersonalised media is less and less capable 
of attracting attention, let alone of convincing consumers. As a result of more and more 
advertisers claiming media time and space, mass media are increasingly expensive. Further-
more, traditional mass media communications are primarily capable of stimulating aware-
ness and attitudes, but much less of stimulating or directly influencing demand. The need 
for marketing strategies influencing behaviour directly has further eroded the attractiveness 
of traditional mass media. Using more media and more channels and tools to reach the 
consumer effectively increases the need for integration of these tools.
There is an increased cost awareness and a need for more cost-effective and efficient mar-
keting. The time horizon of companies has become more short-term-orientated. As a result, 
there is a greater need for directly effective marketing strategies and for instruments the 
effectiveness of which can be assessed and can be assessed instantaneously. There is, in other 
words, a growing need for increased levels of accountability. Consequently, mass media are 
supplemented with, or replaced by, other communications tools with allegedly more impact, 
that focus much more on influencing the behaviour of individual consumers directly, and the 
effectiveness of which can be measured precisely, such as direct marketing and interactive 
online marketing communications. Adding more and more diversified tools to the communi-
cations mix leads to more media being used and more fragmented media, and increases the 
need for integration of marketing communications. This evolution has led to the concept of 
Loss of faith in mass media advertising
More emphasis on brand activation
Media cost inflation
Need for more impact
Need for more cost-effectiveness and efficiency
Media fragmentation
Audience fragmentation
Increased reliance on highly targeted communications methods
Increasing need for customer focus
Digital information and database technology
Low levels of brand differentiation
Higher need for brand equity building
Increased need for greater levels of accountability
Online and social media communications, mobile communications
Greater levels of audience communications literacy
Overlapping audiences
More complex decision-making units
Need to build more customer loyalty
Move towards relationship marketing
Globalisation of marketing strategies
Table 1.4  Key drivers of integrated communications

FACTORS LEADING TO INTEGRATED MARKETING AND CORPORATE COMMUNICATIONS     27
360 degrees communication. Marketing communications should try to create as many touch 
points as possible with the target group, by means of a consistent and synergetic use of as 
many communication tools and instruments as possible. As a spin-off from this integration 
of fragmented communications tools, it becomes less and less relevant to measure the effect 
of one single element in the communications mix, such as advertising. The measurement 
of communications effectiveness will have to focus on techniques such as monitoring and 
tracking, which assess the effectiveness of a total campaign at the brand level.
Branded content
Consumers react increasingly cynically to traditional advertising, and pay less and less attention to it. Therefore, 
advertisers try to ‘hide’ commercial messages in media content. This is called ‘advertainment’ or ‘branded content’. 
Product placement in movies and shows on TV is one example. And this is even practised in books: Fay Weldon 
got a lot of criticism because she was paid to mention the luxury brand Bulgari in one of her books. Brands are also 
integrated in computer games. Some computer games are even specifically developed to promote a brand. They 
are called ‘advergames’. ‘Plugs’ are media formats in which celebrities are paid to talk about a brand.77
Entire TV programmes can be produced to promote a brand or a company. In the TV format Project Runway, 
candidates have to design their own fashion clothing products and are judged by a professional jury. At the end of 
a series of ten programmes, there is a winner, who gets the resources to develop his or her own clothing line. The 
local Belgian version of this format (called De Designers) was largely financed by JBC, a fashion retailer. In return, JBC 
could appoint one of the members of the jury and received a lot of visibility and brand mention. The winner could 
design his or her fashion clothing line which would then be sold in JBC stores. Also the Belgian electricity producer 
Electrabel financed a programme, Under high voltage XL in which families participated in experiments to reduce 
their electricity consumption.78
The Belgian cinema group Kinepolis experiments with scent marketing. During the Axe Instinct commercial the 
deodorant is blown into the theatre through the ventilation system. Similar campaigns for Dove and Magnum ice 
cream are planned.79
Some companies experiment with personalised branded content. The German game producer Software Enter-
tainment develops games in which the brands placed are adapted to the individual’s preference. For instance, in a 
car game, Ford can be replaced by BMW if the player appears to be a BMW fan. Also, interactive brand placement is 
possible. If the viewer watches a programme on a digital platform, and an actor drinks a bottle of beer, for instance 
by clicking on the bottle, the viewer can enter an advertising message, a promotion offer, or a Wikipedia-like envi-
ronment in which comments of other users can be read and own comments can be added.80
Buzz marketing
Word of mouth has always been important in steering the behaviour of people, but it has become increasingly 
important also in people’s buying behaviour. More than two-thirds of all consumer buying behaviour is influenced 
by word-of-mouth advertising.81 People look for others they can relate and aspire to. Traditionally, media figures, 
celebrities, sports heroes, etc., play an important role in commercial communications. But recently, consumers 
seem to relate more to ‘ordinary’ people than to celebrities. This is the origin of buzz marketing. The essence of 
buzz marketing is the fact that the spontaneous networks that make up our society constitute the most effective 
way to meaningfully reach people and influence consumers. Buzz marketing is aimed at spreading the message 
through the personal network of consumers. It is ‘organised word of mouth’. Buzz marketing works on the basis of 
the principle ‘give them something to talk about’. It works on the basis of individuals who like to receive messages 
Business Insight
Non-traditional forms of marketing communications

28     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Audiences and markets tend to become more and more fragmented, making mass media 
less effective and increasing the need for more specialised and fragmented media. Com-
munications tend to become customised for narrower and narrower markets, and customer 
contact is established by means of multimedia methods. There is an increasing reliance on 
highly targeted communications methods, such as database techniques and boutique chan-
nel (highly targeted) advertising. IMC are about coordinating multiple and diverse tools 
targeted at multiple and diverse audiences.
Most markets in well-developed countries are mature. This means that a lot of products 
and brands are of similar quality. Low levels of brand differentiation increase the need to 
make the difference by means of communications. Therefore, some argue ‘that the basic 
reason for [the increased attention for] integrated marketing communications is that mar-
keting communications will be the only sustainable competitive advantage of marketing 
organisations [...] into the twenty-first century’.82
Mainly as a result of technological evolutions and innovations, new marketing and mar-
keting communications tools are becoming available. Scanning and database technology 
allow more in-depth knowledge of the consumer and, especially, a more personalised and 
direct approach to the consumer. Interactive media, such as the Internet, have contributed 
to a situation in which the relationship between the sender and the receiver of messages 
is less unidirectional. Social media and mobile applications have profoundly changed  
the way companies communicate with their stakeholders. Direct marketing and direct 
response communications also lead to a situation in which communications become more 
and more receiver-directed.83 Together with increased communications literacy on the part 
of the consumer, this leads to a market situation in which much of the power is at the receiv-
ing end, i.e. the receiving consumer decides what he or she will be exposed to and how he 
or she will react to it. Indeed, the marketing situation has gradually shifted from a situation 
in which all the power of knowledge and control was in the hands of the manufacturer to a 
market in which the retailers are the strongest party. Today the balance is shifting towards 
a market in which the consumer is the most powerful agent. In fact, one could argue that 
integration is mainly technology-driven. New technologies and applications, such as the 
Internet, make the consumer less accessible, and force companies into a more integrated 
approach towards a fragmented and increasingly interactive communications situation 
which will make marketing communications more credible and more convincing.
Organisations are increasingly communicating with multiple audiences and stakehold-
ers. Many of these stakeholders overlap. An employee may be a shareholder, a community 
leader may be a supplier, members of stakeholder groups are target customers, and all of 
them are exposed to different media. Furthermore, decision-making units in many of these 
and like to spread the word. What do people want to talk about? Here are the six magic buttons of buzz marketing: 
Play with taboos: intimacies, sex; talk about the extraordinary; look for the unusual, but keep the link with the brand; 
give people something to laugh about that makes them enjoy and talk about it to others; bring a story with a special 
angle; keep it ‘secret’, people like to talk about secrets. Buzz is not something that just happens to companies, it can 
be organised. A typical example of buzz marketing is blogging (weblogging): individuals who give their opinion in 
real time on Internet diaries.
Stealth advertising
Stealth advertising is a marketing activity in which the commercial content is hidden. For instance, people are paid 
to go to trendy bars and to promote a new drink by offering it to other visitors, without saying that they work for the 
company that launched it. For instance, Sony Ericsson, Wal-Mart and Procter & Gamble have used this technique 
in the past to support the launch of a new product, to improve their image, or to build a stronger connection with 
their customers (see Chapter 14 on ethical issues for more details).

LEVELS OF INTEGRATION     29
stakeholder groups are increasingly complex, implying that they have to be reached by 
means of different communications tools and channels. It is not necessary to give exactly 
the same message to all these audiences; on the contrary, messages will have to be adapted to 
the stakeholders’ needs. Nevertheless, it is very important not to convey contradictory mes-
sages. Consistent communications have to reflect the mission, corporate identity and core 
propositions of the organisation to all target groups. Integrated communications provide a 
mechanism for identifying and avoiding message conflicts when communicating with these 
overlapping and complex target groups.
One of the trends in marketing today is the increasing importance of building customer 
loyalty instead of attracting and seducing new customers. This trend towards relationship 
marketing implies a much more ‘soft sell’ approach. IMC focus upon building a long-term 
relationship with target groups by means of consistent interactive communications, rather 
than aggressively persuading the consumer to buy a company’s products.
Finally, markets are becoming increasingly global. Phenomena such as the Internet, but 
also the globalisation of mass media and the increasing exposure of consumers and stake-
holders to international communication stimuli, increase the need for consistency in every-
thing the company communicates in all countries in which it markets its products.84
Levels of integration
Companies cannot be expected to integrate their communications efforts fully overnight. 
Several stages or levels of integration can be distinguished. In Table 1.5 seven categories or 
levels of integration are distinguished.
The first five levels imply the integration of the communications effort mainly at the 
consumer or marketing communications level. The first two levels focus on conveying the 
same image and brand awareness through all the marketing communications tools. The next 
step is the functional integration of all the tools (advertising, sales promotions, sponsorship) 
into one marketing communications department. In the fourth stage, the marketing tools 
and the marketing PR function are co-ordinated. Finally, in the fifth stage marketing com-
munications and marketing PR are functionally integrated into one system through which 
harmonised and consistent messages are conveyed to all actual and potential consumers. 
In the last two stages, corporate communications and marketing communications efforts 
are integrated into one system. Indeed, companies communicate not only with (potential) 
customers, but with all stakeholders. In fully integrated communications messages, tools, 
instruments and media, targeted to all stakeholders, are co-ordinated and eventually inte-
grated into a comprehensive system of consistent relationship marketing.85
Another way of looking at integration levels implies four stages.86 First of all, the com-
pany can define an integrated mission, i.e. the basic values and objectives of the company, 
● Awareness
● Image integration
● Functional integration
● Co-ordinated integration
● Consumer-based integration
● Stakeholder-based integration
● Relationship management integration
Source: Duncan, T. and Caywood, C. (1996) ‘The concept, process and evolution of integrated marketing communication’, in Thorson, 
E. and Moore, J. (eds), Integrated Communication: Synergy of Persuasive Voices. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 13–34.
Table 1.5  Levels of integration

30     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Figure 1.5  Barriers to integrated communications
which are based on the corporate identity. From this basic mission a number of propositions 
are derived, i.e. concrete propositions to the target groups. A ‘one-voice’ approach implies 
the consistent integration of mission and propositions. Propositions can be creatively trans-
lated into concepts or messages with a certain content and format. A concept can be a 
theme, a core message, a specific style or a slogan. The fourth level is the integration of 
execution. This implies uniformity in layout, design, typography, logo, colours, visual trig-
gers and other elements of the house style. Successful IMC imply that a ‘one-voice’ approach 
is developed, which serves as a starting point for integrated concepts and execution.
Evidently, a company’s communications are more than communicating with marketing 
target groups. A variety of other audiences and stakeholders need to be considered too. In 
the next integration stage, all communications to all target groups are harmonised. In a truly 
integrated communications environment, corporate identity definition, corporate reputa-
tion and image-building, stakeholder communications and marketing communications are 
fully integrated. The integration of marketing communications in an international company 
is not complete until it is achieved across national and international boundaries.
Barriers to integrated communications
IMC are far from a reality in most companies. A number of strong barriers prevent IMC 
being implemented quickly and efficiently. They are listed in Figure 1.5.
Over many years, companies have grown used to extreme specialisation in marketing 
communications. The various instruments of the communications mix are managed by 
separate individuals or departments. Traditionally, strategic power is the exclusive domain 
of advertising, PR is largely reactive and sales promotion and personal selling are mainly 
tactical. Specialisation is rewarded and highly regarded, and the need for, or benefits of, 
integration are overlooked.
The various instruments of the communications mix have traditionally been managed by 
different organisational entities as discrete activities. Financial structures and frameworks 
have been in place for many years.87 Often the idea of IMC is incompatible with traditional 
hierarchical and brand management structures. These structures may or may not be changed 
easily. Ideally, IMC can best be effected when all communications activities are physically 

BARRIERS TO INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS     31
integrated into one department. But people are generally conservative and reluctant to 
change. Turf wars and ego problems are important barriers to IMC. The parochialism of 
managers and their fear of budget cutbacks in their areas of control, and of reductions in 
authority and power, lead to defending the status quo. PR departments especially are reluc-
tant to integrate because they often consider IMC as the encroachment of ad people on PR 
professionals and a form of marketing imperialism.88
In April 2012, consultant Deepblue presented its Communication Agency Tracking study in which the role of Bel-
gian agencies in IMC is highlighted by advertisers.89 The study was based on 56 depth interviews and 170 online 
interviews. It contained four main parts: personal perceptions regarding the evolution of the latest communica-
tions business trends in the market; how the communications practices have evolved and how they are likely to 
keep evolving; the advertisers’ opinion on the roles of communications agencies; and the advertisers’ evaluation of 
agency performance.
The advertisers find that agencies adapted themselves well to the evolution of advertisers’ needs and that creativity 
has become more relevant and is more deeply linked with the business objectives of the advertisers. The structure of 
agencies facilitates a better use of specialised and diversified skills and agencies are capable of initiating new trends 
and making advertisers activate new marketing solutions. However, they also note a number of weaknesses. Indus-
try fragmentation among mainstream and specialised agencies makes it increasingly difficult to judge the agencies’ 
added value. Agencies tend to overestimate their capability of establishing or managing integrated communications 
strategies and plans. The agency–advertiser relationship is weakened by a lack of (human) resources, managers’ avail-
ability and account stability. Impact models to justify the return on investment of campaign activities are usually poor.
The vast majority of the interviewees consider the ‘360°’ claim of agencies as merely a marketing label. A 360° or 
‘full service’ agency is an ‘ideal concept’ that can, however, not be realised in the market. They consider it a waste 
of time for one single agency to ensure the capabilities to deliver a true 360° communications plan. These attempts 
only lead to excessive increases of fees on the basis of the 360° promise. There is a manifest lack of consistency in 
the co-ordination of 360° plans. Agencies usually give priorities to the service they feel most comfortable with. On 
top of that, there is a marked difference in how to operationalise the 360° concept itself. Agencies think that 360° 
means that every communications touchpoint should be used to reach the consumer, while advertisers prefer to 
embrace all opportunities and touchpoints, but then select the best options. According to the latter, integration of 
a few touchpoints is better than merely using as many touchpoints as possible. Agencies should better and more 
honestly position themselves on the basis of their unique skills and not pretend they are experts in all communica-
tions tools and tactics.
In 2012, 33% of communications budgets were still invested in traditional above-the-line advertising, and another 
21% in below-the-line with point-of-sales and 10% in below-the-line without POS. Another 19% were invested in 
digital/online communications. These especially are expected to increase moderately to strongly (66% of respond-
ents), while less than 30% of the respondents predict that investments in the other tools are going to increase.
According to advertisers, the top priorities of an agency manager should be to position the agency and its added 
value more clearly, to engage in the advertiser’s environment and marketing vision, and to create a structure based 
on areas of expertise, i.e. clearly establish a structure of units of specialisation. Moreover, agencies should invest in 
a better knowledge of their customers (advertisers), in better strategic planning and internal organisation, and in 
better methods to measure return on investment and remuneration schedules based on ROI. The ideal commu-
nications agency should focus on ROI, think out of the box (surprise consumers, go beyond traditional codes, go 
beyond traditional channels), have a long-term vision, focus on a realistic 360° approach, listen to advertisers and 
understand them, and maintain a correct balance between strategy and creation.
Business Insight
IMC and the role of communication agencies

32     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Review questions
	 1.	 Give a brief overview of the instruments of the communications mix.
	 2.	 What are the main concerns in a cross-cultural communications context?
	 3.	 What are integrated communications and in what way do they differ from ‘classic’ 
communications?
	 4.	 How do corporate strategy, culture and personality influence corporate identity?
	 5.	 How does corporate identity influence corporate communication?
	 6.	 What factors have to be taken into account in corporate image management, and what 
is the role of communications?
	 7.	 What are the factors that reinforce the need for integrated communications, and how can 
the latter provide an answer to contemporary marketing communications problems?
	 8.	 What are the levels of integration a company can go through?
	 9.	 What are the barriers to integrated marketing communications?
If not all communications activities of a company are integrated into one department, at 
least the sharing of information, the communications across divisions and the co-ordination 
of all communications activities have to be organised. Often, the combination of lack of 
internal communication and the perceived complexity of planning and co-ordination are 
important barriers to the organisation of IMC.
Finally, the functional specialisation of external communications agencies and their frag-
mentation in overspecialised disciplines make the full integration of communications even 
more cumbersome.
Summary
Integrated communications are the integration of formerly specialised communications 
functions into one organisational system that conveys a consistent set of messages to all 
target audiences. Integrated marketing and corporate communications manage each point 
of contact between the consumer or other target groups and the product or the organisation. 
Several key drivers of IMC can be identified, such as loss of faith in mass media advertising, 
the need for enhanced cost-effectiveness, media and target audience fragmentation and over-
lap, more complex decision-making units, the need to build customer loyalty, relationship 
marketing and, last but not least, the evolution of technology. Integrating the marketing 
effort is not an easy process. Companies evolve only gradually to a truly integrated com-
munications system. This slow evolution is caused by a number of important barriers to 
integration, such as the functional specialisation in companies, existing structures, the lack 
of internal communications and the perceived complexity of planning and co-ordination.
Further reading
Argenti, P. (2009) Corporate Communication. Maidenhead: McGraw-Hill.
Argenti, P. (2009) Digital Strategies for Powerful Corporate Communication. McGraw-Hill 
Education (India).
De Mooij, M. (2013) Global Marketing and Advertising: Understanding Cultural Paradoxes, 
2nd edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

CASE 1     33
Hofstede, G. (2003) Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviours, Institutions 
and Organisations Across Nations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kitchen, P.J. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2005) Integrated Marketing Communication: A Primer. 
London: Routledge.
Kitchen, P.J., De Pelsmacker, P., Schultz, D.E. and Eagle, L. (eds) (2006) A Reader in Market-
ing Communications. London: Routledge.
Mueller, B. (2010) Dynamics of International Advertising: Theoretical and Practical Perspec-
tives. New York: Peter Lang.
Usunier, J.C. and Lee, J.A. (2013) Marketing Across Cultures. Harlow: Pearson Education.
Corporate Reputation Review, http://www.palgrave-journals.com/crr/index.html.
International Marketing Review, http://www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/products/​
journals/journals.htm?id=imr
Journal of International Marketing, http://journalofinternationalmarketing.com/
CASE 1:
Walking the walk: how Walkers proved it can make any sandwich  
more exciting
A new approach for a snack that has only 
been communicating new flavours and 
prize promotions for years
Walkers is the top crisp brand in the UK, enjoyed by over 
10 million people every day. In recent times, the brand’s 
marketing approach has focused on the development of 
limited edition flavours and price promotions. These have 
been very successful at delivering short-term sales spikes, 
but often have not delivered a sustained uplift. The brand 
had lost its momentum in recent years. In 2002, new fla-
vours sales were £20 million; in 2007 they were down to 
£6.7 million.
In 2009, Walkers identified a new opportunity for growth 
in the profitable ‘singles’ segment of the business. Research 
showed that many consumers already had a latent appre-
ciation of a benefit: 60% of them agreed a packet of Walk-
ers would improve their lunchtime sandwich. Yet only 12% 
of sandwiches were eaten with an accompanying bag of 
crisps at lunch. There was a huge opportunity to increase 
this ­figure – getting more people to make a habit out of 
the dual purchase of sandwich + Walkers at lunch. Not an 
easy task when the average lunch break is only 27 minutes, 
and people’s decision process seems to be limited to their 
choice of sandwich, making it very easy to forget about 
crisps. It was clear that two things stood in the way: mental 
availability (saliency – they were not thinking of the two 
together at the crucial moment); and physical availability 
(crisps were not sitting near enough to sandwiches in-store).
AMV BBDO’s communications objective was to help 
Walkers meet its ‘singles’ segment revenue growth target of 
15%. A campaign was developed with two main objectives:
1.	 Take the favourable but latent association between crisps 
and sandwiches and make it top of mind, prompting 
consumers to think about the two at lunchtime.
2.	 Encourage retailers to site Walkers next to their sand-
wiches in store.
Success would mean capturing the imagination of four 
key audiences:
● The Great British public, including sub-groups who 
required differing depths of engagement.
● Journalists, who needed to be attracted by a story they 
could not resist writing about, in order to get a greater 
return from the campaign budget.
● The Walkers sales force, who needed emboldening in 
their crucial task of securing incremental merchandising 
near to sandwich chillers.
● The people responsible for buying at the UK’s biggest 
supermarkets.

34     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Figure 1.6  The 2010 key business challenge
The key business challenge is summarised in Figure 1.6.
and AMV BBDO set up to prepare and distribute content in 
near real time. This was made possible by having journalists 
embedded, and video editing and social media activation 
teams on site, along with all key decision-makers. Walkers also 
invited along the buyers from the UK’s biggest supermarkets to 
enjoy the event. Capturing their imaginations would be key to 
persuading them to site Walkers next to sandwiches in-store.
At its basic level, the communications model was this: 
the events would generate content, which would then be 
released through a focused set of channels, according to 
a phasing plan designed to maximise the campaign’s buzz 
creation and longevity.
Teamwork in action
The nature of this campaign, the need for rapid distribu-
tion of event coverage and total synchronicity between TV, 
online and PR channels, meant that tight collaboration was 
a fundamental requirement for success. The various par-
ties involved – PepsiCo, AMV BBDO (core idea and creative 
direction), Freud (PR), OMD (media planning and buying), 
Jigsaw (website production) and TRA (video seeding and 
social media activation) worked as a true team, character-
ised by a fluid exchange of information, ideas and decisions. 
The boundaries between disciplines were often blurred. To 
build on the natural spread of news that was expected to 
occur once the events started happening, the team put in 
place a range of dedicated resources to ensure speed and 
flexibility in how they managed the campaign unfolding:
● Round the clock a social media team fuelled and responded 
to conservations, some of which were initiated by local res-
idents as soon as the afternoon of the first day of shooting.
● A PR team, located on site, were able to facilitate live 
event reporting opportunities for the embedded jour-
nalists, including interviews with the celebrities. The 
instant news flows that resulted helped maximise the 
‘live’ impact of the campaign.
● A video/TV editing team, located on site and in London, 
were able quickly to deliver content ready for distribu-
tion while other filming activity was still taking place. All 
approvers were on call to allow rapid turnround and sign-
off, with TV stations lined up for last minute play-out.
Phasing plan and content distribution 
strategy
The phasing plan involved three discrete stages, 
tease S reveal S extend, and was guided by two princi-
ples: (1) surprise – reflecting the nature of the core idea; 
(2) the tactics used by major motion pictures (preview with 
trailers S reveal the feature-length version S offer ‘DVD’ 
extras for those who want to engage more deeply).
In phase 1, teaser stories from the embedded journal-
ists in Sandwich were in the papers the very next day. And 
The creative idea
To ensure the message was registered, Walkers and AMV 
BBDO felt it required a different style of approach. Their 
ambition was to surprise: to get consumers saying ‘Walkers 
did what?!?!’ The basic idea behind the campaign was to 
prove Walkers can make any sandwich more exciting, even 
the town of Sandwich, Kent. Through a series of surprise 
events over three days, Walkers and AMV BBDO turned the 
sleepy town of Sandwich into the most exciting town in the 
UK. Each event featured a celebrity fulfilling a typical com-
munity role: JLS (a British band who won second place in 
the fifth season of the British talent show The X Factor) took 
the sixth-form college assembly; Frank Lampard, a famous 
football player, coached the college football team; Jenson 
Button, the Formula One driver, got behind the wheel of a 
black cab; Marco Pierre White, a British celebrity chef and 
TV personality, sold gourmet sandwiches from a market 
stall; Pamela Anderson, the movie star, pulled pints at the 
local pub; while the British comedian Al Murray hosted a 
quiz. There was something for everyone.
The idea was to capture the genuine surprise and excite-
ment of the locals on film, and to produce TV commercials 
and online video content. To ensure reactions were genuine, 
a great deal of effort went into keeping the plans under wraps, 
and the events were filmed unscripted and unrehearsed. 
Regional media were engaged before and during the campaign 
to ensure they were taken on the journey with Walkers and felt 
part of the proceedings. To build on the natural spread of news 
that would occur once the events started happening, Walkers 

CASE 1     35
just 24 hours later, 10-second teaser adverts were broad-
cast on TV and released online, creating the opportunity for 
viewers exposed to both the news stories and the adverts 
to connect the dots. After just a further five days, the reveal 
phase began, with full feature stories in the press and the 
release of a 60-second advert, again on TV and online. The 
extend phase then comprised the steady release of 26 pieces 
of video content across the Web, and housed on the cam-
paign’s YouTube channel, which functioned as the content 
hub. Catering for audience members who seek a deeper 
level of engagement, the content was also made available 
on an immersive website at walkers.co.uk. The site featured 
a 3-D town of Sandwich, within which the content could 
be discovered. All the TV ads pointed to the website; all the 
online videos linked to the YouTube channel content hub.
The campaign was conceived with PR-‘ability’ at its 
heart. There was a high degree of both integration and 
synchronisation between it and the other channels used. 
Throughout the phases, PR collateral ran across print, online 
and broadcast news media, and comprised event features, 
profile pieces and bespoke daily webisodes from behind 
the scenes. Involving a cross-section of talent allowed the 
team to tap into a vast range of publications catering to 
different passions, e.g. sport and music.
‘Online’ encompasses a bundle of channels all by 
itself, and required a sub-set of principles. The team leant 
towards a decentralised approach to content release, seed-
ing the videos widely and encouraging their free circulation 
around the Web. Particular videos were, however, focused 
towards the relevant communities, for instance those pas-
sionate about football got more of the videos featuring 
Frank Lampard. The resulting appreciation and advocacy 
from JLS’s fan base was especially strong. The majority of 
the total video views actually came from the long tail of 
small video-hosting sites that were seeded to, not from 
YouTube (Figure 1.7).
Supplementing the above seeding approach, the team 
used paid rich media display to boost the reach of the videos, 
Figure 1.7  Division of total video views across websites

36     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
Figure 1.8  Communications activities under each phase
and got the celebrities to point their Twitter fans in the direc-
tion of the campaign’s YouTube content hub, to see them 
surprising the Sandwich locals. The team also benefited from 
indirect reach (earned media) both instantly and as the cam-
paign progressed, the latter because of the general sharing of 
the videos amongst friends, the former because some of the 
Sandwich locals shared user-generated photos and videos 
on Facebook directly from their mobile phones, and because 
of the work of the on-site social media team, who were post-
ing photos and starting conversations from the word ‘go’.
Figure 1.8 summarises the activities under each phase. 
Figure 1.9 shows the 360° integrated marketing communi-
cations logic behind the campaign.
A short video summary of the campaign can be viewed 
at http://digital.151awards.com/awards/WalkersSandwich/
Assets/AH107542_Walkers_Sandwich_CYBER_B01.mov.
Results
The campaign turned out to be very successful in many 
respects and engaged all the target groups of the campaign.
The Great British public:
● ranked third in Adwatch, with a modest TV spend of 
£960 000;
● 80% ‘enjoyed watching it a lot’ (Millward Brown post-
test, vs UK norm of 65%);
● the campaign channel was the most popular sponsored 
channel on YouTube throughout March (YouTube);
● the campaign resulted in 1.7 million complete video 
views, equivalent to 3.3 million minutes in viewing time.
The impact of the campaign is illustrated by the follow-
ing quotes from the Sandwich locals:
● ‘It’s something they will remember for the rest of their 
lives’ (Veronica Gomez, Headmistress, Sandwich Sixth 
Form Technical College);
● ‘Thanks for making my little town of Sandwich more 
exciting!! I had a fab week meeting all the celebs espe-
cially bumping into JLS on my lunch break :) come back 
again soon x’ (carolinerose99, Walkers Sandwich You-
Tube channel);
● ‘We couldn’t believe it when Frank [Lampard] came over 
and pulled his hood down . . . There was quite a lot of 
pressure for the goalie in that game!’ (Daniel Langiano, 
Sandwich Tech Football Team);
● ‘I didn’t know what to do up there, so I just hugged them 
and started singing with them . . . They all kissed me 
on the cheek. Afterwards I texted everyone to tell them!’ 
(Stephanie, Sandwich Tech student).
Also management and journalists were impressed:
● Jason Richards, VP of Sales, PepsiCo UK said: ‘The unique 
and exciting nature of the campaign really captured the 

CASE 1     37
imagination of our sales teams and our customers, lead-
ing to fantastic execution of Walkers meal deals across 
multiple channels’;
● ‘Sandwich was such a brilliant idea. At one point I feared 
for my life as a small group of girls suddenly grew into a 
mob as word got out that the hottest boys in pop were 
actually in the sleepy town!’ (Now Magazine);
The results of the campaign were impressive:
● 350 pieces of coverage across press, TV and online;
● £3.3 million advertising equivalent value generated;
● 10 000 new meal deals activated (PepsiCo) as illustrated 
by the following table:
● won a Gold ‘Direct Lion’ and Silver ‘Promo & Activation 
Lion’ at Cannes.
It landed its message and built the saliency of the favour-
able link between sandwiches and Walkers:
● ‘Makes my sandwich more enjoyable’ +18pts (Millward 
Brown tracking).
It helped Walkers to grow its revenue from the ‘singles’ 
segment by 26%, beating the target of 15%. But even more 
telling was the increase in singles-segment value share, 
which went up by 6%, against a background of overall seg-
ment decline in 2009.
Questions
1.	 Describe and assess the problem identification of Walk-
ers and AMV BBDO, and the solution they propose in 
terms of objectives, target groups and creative ideas.
2.	 Describe the main components of the campaign. Was 
the campaign well integrated, consistent and synergetic? 
Could other instruments have been used, or the same 
instruments in a different way? Which ones and how?
3.	 Explore the various campaign results. Do you think the 
campaign was successful?
4.	 Suppose you were responsible for a follow-up campaign. 
What changes would you make compared with the pre-
vious campaign and why?
Figure 1.9  The 360° integrated marketing communications logic behind the campaign
Tesco
Addition of permanent stackers at front of store
JS
Meal deals back on at front of store
Co-op
Walkers replaces McCoys in meal deal
Asda
Box at front of store
Morrisons
Walkers launches meal deals
Impulse
Meal deals secured with strong POS support
The campaign helped build the sense that Walkers is a 
modern, innovative brand:
● Walkers’ highest ever result for ‘would talk about with 
friends’ (Millward Brown post-test, 50% vs the UK norm 
of 29%);
Sources: Marketing Society Awards for Excellence 2011, category M: 360° Marketing, Client: PepsiCo, Agency: Abbott Mead Vickers BBDO, Authors: George 
Roberts and Tom White (AMV), Adam Warner (PepsiCo), Guy Geerts, Darwin BBDO Belgium.

References
1	 Schultz, D.E. (1996) ‘The inevitability of integrated com-
munication’, Journal of Business Research, 37, 139–46.
2	 American Marketing Association (1985).
3	 Fill, C. (2013) Marketing Communications. Brands, Expe-
riences and Participation. London: Pearson Education.
4	 Euro Effie (2001) Berlin: Gesamtverband Werbeagenturen 
GWA eV, http://www.euro-effie.com.
5	 Schultz, D.E., Tannenbaum, S.I. and Lauterborn, R.F. 
(1992) Integrated Marketing Communication: Putting it 
Together and Making it Work. Lincolnwood, IL: NTC 
Business Books.
6	 Duncan, T. (2002) IMC: Using Advertising and Promo-
tion to Build Brands. McGraw-Hill: Boston, MA.
7	 Kitchen, P. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2004) Integrated Mar-
keting Communications: A Primer. London and New 
York: Routledge.
8	 Schultz, D.E., Tannenbaum, S.I. and Lauterborn, R.F. 
(1992) Integrated Marketing Communication: Putting it 
Together and Making it Work. Lincolnwood, IL: NTC 
Business Books.
9	 Duncan, T.R. and Everett, S.E. (1993) ‘Client percep-
tions of integrated marketing communication’, Journal 
of Advertising Research (May/June), 30–9.
10	 Caywood, C., Schultz, D. and Wang, P. (1991) Integrated 
Marketing Communications: A Survey of  National 
Consumer Goods Advertisers. American Association of 
Advertising Agencies, Inc. 
11	 Payne, A. and Holt, S. (2001) ‘Diagnosing customer 
value: integrating the value process and relationship mar-
keting’, British Journal of Management, 12, 159–82.
12	 Brady, S. (2012) ‘Here comes the sun: Tropicana wakes up 
London’, http://www.brandchannel.com/search_result.
asp?cx=000980657010496705841%3Avvjr5rsv4ws&cof=​
FORID%3A10&ie=UTF-8&q=tropicana+sun; http://
www.tropicana.ca/EN/brighter.php (accessed July 2012).
13	 Englis, B.G. and Solomon, M.R. (1996) ‘Using consump-
tion constellations to develop integrated communication 
strategies’, Journal of Business Research, 37, 183–91.
14	 Schultz, D.E. (1996) ‘The inevitability of integrated com-
munication’, Journal of Business Research, 37, 139–46.
15	 Englis, B.G. and Solomon, M.R. (1996) ‘Using consump-
tion constellations to develop integrated communication 
strategies’, Journal of Business Research, 37, 183–91.
16	 Hutton, J.H. (1996) ‘Integrated marketing communica-
tion and evolution of marketing thought’, Journal of 
Business Research, 37, 155–62.
17	 Ives, N. (2005) ‘Volkswagen product placement on 
NBC’, The New York Times, http://www.nytimes​
.com/2005/01/13/business/media/13adco.html?_r=0 
(accessed 20 January 2013).
18	 Bignel, P. and Dunne, L. (2013) ‘Superman is already a 
$170m brand superhero as Man of Steel tops the prod-
uct placement charts’, The Independent, http://www.
independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/
superman-is-already-a-170m-brand-superhero-as-man-
of-steel-tops-the-product-placement-charts-8651215.
html (accessed 20 December 2013).
19	 PQ Media (2012) Global Product Placement Spending 
Forecast 2012–2016.
20	 Brennan, I. and Babin, L.A. (2004) ‘Brand placement 
recognition: the influence of presentation mode and 
brand familiarity’, Journal of  Promotion Manage-
ment, 10 (1/2), 185–202; De Gregorio, F. and Sung, Y. 
(2010) ‘Understanding attitudes toward and behaviors in 
response to product placement: a consumer socialization 
framework’, Journal of Advertising, 39(1), 83–96; Rus-
sell, C.A. (2002) ‘Investigating the effectiveness of prod-
uct placements in television shows: the role of modality 
and plot connection congruence on brand memory and 
attitude’, Journal of Consumer Research, 29(3), 306–
318; Van Reijmersdal, E.A., Smit, E.G. and Neijens, P.C. 
(2010) ‘How media factors affect audience responses to 
brand placement’, International Journal of Advertising, 
21(2), 279–302.
21	 PQ Media (2012) Global Product Placement Spending 
Forecast 2012–2016.
22	 Bhatnagar, N., Aksoy, L. and Malkoc, S.A. (2004) 
‘Embedding brands within media content: the impact 
of message, media, and consumer characteristics on 
placement efficiency’, in L.J. Shrum (ed.), The Psychol-
ogy of Entertainment Media: Blurring the Lines between 
Entertainment and Persuasion. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum, 99–116.
23	 Dens, N. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2010) ‘Consumer 
response to different advertising appeals for new prod-
ucts: the moderating influence of branding strategy and 
product category involvement’, Journal of Brand Man-
agement, 18(1), 50–65; Lau, K.C. and Phau, I. (2007) 
‘Extending symbolic brands using their personality: 
examining antecedents and implications towards brand 
image fit and brand dilution’, Psychology & Marketing, 
24(5), 421–444.
24	 Cowley, E. and Barron, C. (2008) ‘When product place-
ment goes wrong: the effects of program liking and 
placement prominence’, Journal of Advertising, 37(1), 
89–98; Dens, N., De Pelsmacker, P., Wouters, M. and 
Purnawirawan, N. (2012) ‘Do you like what you recog-
nize? the effects of brand placement prominence and 
movie plot connection on brand attitude as mediated by 
recognition’, Journal of Advertising, 41(3), 35–53.
25	 Garber, L.G. and Dotson, M.J. (2002) ‘A method for the 
selection of appropriate business-to-business integrated 
marketing communications mixes’, Journal of Market-
ing Communications, 8(1), 1–18.
26	 Based on: van Raaij, W.F. (1998) ‘Integratie van Commu-
nicatie: vanuit de zender of vanuit de Ontvanger?’ (‘Inte-
gration of Communication: Starting from the sender or 
the receiver?’), in Damoiseaux, V.M.G., van Ruler, A.A. 
38     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS

REFERENCES     39
38	 Fastoso, F. and Whitelock, J.L. (2010) ‘Regionaliza-
tion vs globalization in advertising research: insights 
from five decades of academic study’, Journal of Inter-
national Management, 16(1), 32–42; Rugman, A.M. 
(2003) ‘Regional strategy and the demise of globali-
zation’, Journal of  International Management, 9(4), 
409–17.
39	 Kotler, P., Armstrong, G., Saunders, J. and Wong, V. 
(2001), Principes van Marketing, Schoonhoven: Aca-
demic Service.
40	 Fan, Y. (2002) ‘The national image of global brands’, 
Brand Management, 9(3), 180–92.
41	 Keegan, W.J. (2002) Global Marketing Management, 7th 
edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
42	 White, R. (2000) ‘International advertising: how far can 
it fly?’, in Jones, J.P. (ed.), International Advertising. 
Realities and Myths. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 29–40.
43	 Keegan, W.J. (2002) Global Marketing Management, 7th 
edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
44	 Kotler, P. (2003) Marketing Management, 11th edition. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
45	 Rijkens, R. (1992) European Advertising Strategies: The 
Profiles and Policies of Multinational Companies Oper-
ating in Europe. London: Cassell.
46	 Matusitz, J. (2010) ‘Disneyland Paris: a case analysis 
demonstrating how glocalization works’, Journal of 
Strategic Marketing, 18(3), 223–37.
47	 Merz, M.A., He, Y. and Alden, D.L. (2008) ‘A categoriza-
tion approach to analyzing the global consumer culture 
debate’, International Marketing Review, 25(2), 166–182.
48	 Kitchen, P.J. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2004) Integrated Mar-
keting Communication: A Primer. London: Routledge.
49	 Akaka, M.A. and Alden, D.L. (2010) ‘Global brand 
positioning and perceptions: International advertising 
and global consumer culture’, International Journal of 
Advertising, 29(1), 37–56; Zou, S. and Volz, Y.Z. (2010) 
‘An integrated theory of global advertising: an appli-
cation of the GMS theory’, International Journal of 
Advertising, 29(1), 57–84.
50	 Fastoso, F. and Whitelock, J. (2010) ‘Regionalization vs 
globalization in advertising research: insights from five 
decades of academic study’, Journal of International 
Management, 16(1), 32–42.
51	 Butt, M.M. and de Run, E.C. (2011) ‘Do target and non-
target ethnic group adolescents process advertisements 
differently?’, Australasian Marketing Journal (AMJ), 
19(2), 77–84.
52	 Liu, S.S. and Johnson, K.F. (2005) ‘The automatic coun-
try-of-origin effects on brand judgments’, Journal of 
Advertising, 34(1), 87–97; Verlegh, P.W.J. and Steenkamp, 
J.-B.E.M. (1999) ‘Review and meta-analysis of country-
of-origin research’, Journal of Economic Psychology, 
20(5), 521–546.
53	 Ford, J.B., Mueller, B. and Taylor, C.R. (2011) ‘The 
tension between strategy and execution: challenges for 
international advertising research’, Journal of Advertis-
ing Research, 51(March suppl.), 27–44.
and Weisink, A. (eds), Effectiviteit in Communicatie-
management (Effectiveness in Communication Manage-
ment). Deventer: Samson, 169–84.
27	 Hofstede, G. (1991) Cultures and Organizations: Soft-
ware of the Mind. London: McGraw-Hill.
28	 Zhang, Y. and Gelb, B.D. (1996) ‘Matching advertising 
appeals to culture: the influence of products’ use condi-
tions’, Journal of Advertising, 25(3), 29–46.
29	 Lee, J.A. (1966) ‘Cultural analysis in overseas opera-
tions’, Harvard Business Review (March–April), 106–14.
30	 De Morgen, 23 January 2008.
31	 De Morgen, 17 January 2008.
32	 Akaka, M.A. and Alden, D.A. (2010) ‘Global brand 
positioning and perceptions: International advertising 
and global consumer culture’, International Journal 
of Advertising, 29(1), 37–56; Griffith, D.A. and Yalcin-
kaya, G. (2010) ‘Resource-advantage theory: a founda-
tion for new insights into global advertising research’, 
International Journal of  Advertising, 29(1), 15–36; 
Zou, S. and Volz, Y.Z. (2010) ‘An integrated theory of 
global advertising: an application of the GMS theory’, 
International Journal of  Advertising, 29(1), 57–84; 
Hornikx, J. and O’Keefe, D.J. (2009) ‘Adapting con-
sumer advertising appeals to cultural values’, Com-
munication Yearbook 33, 39–71; Wei, Y. and Yu, C. 
(2012) ‘How do reference groups influence self-brand 
connections among Chinese consumers?’, Journal of 
Advertising, 41(2), 39–54.
33	 Nijssen, E.J. and Douglas, S.P. (2011) ‘Consumer world-
mindedness and attitudes toward product positioning 
in advertising: an examination of global versus foreign 
versus local positioning’, Journal of International Mar-
keting, 19(3), 113–33.
34	 Schilke, O., Reimann, M. and Thomas, J.S. (2009) ‘When 
does international marketing standardization matter to 
firm performance?’, Journal of International Marketing, 
17(4), 24–46.
35	 Dogerlioglu-Demir, K. and Tansuhaj, P. (2011) ‘Global 
vs local brand perceptions among Thais and Turks’, Asia 
Pacific Journal of Marketing and Logistics, 23(5), 667–83; 
Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M., Batra, J. and Alden, D.L. (2003) 
‘How perceived brand globalness creates brand value’, 
Journal of International Business Studies, 33(1), 35–47.
36	 Akaka, M.A. and Alden, D.L. (2010)’ Global brand 
positioning and perceptions: International advertising 
and global consumer culture’, International Journal of 
Advertising, 29(1), 37–56; Zou, S. and Volz, Y.Z. (2010) 
‘An integrated theory of global advertising: an appli-
cation of the GMS theory’, International Journal of 
Advertising, 29(1), 57–84.
37	 Chao, P., Wührer, G. and Werani, T. (2005) ‘Celebrity and 
foreign brand name as moderators of country-of-origin 
effects’, International Journal of Advertising, 24(2), 173–
92; Fastoso, F. and Whitelock, J. (2010) ‘Regionalization 
vs globalization in advertising research: insights from five 
decades of academic study’, Journal of International 
Management, 16(1), 32–42.

40     CHAPTER 1  INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
64	 Demir, K.D. and Tansuhaj, P. (2011) ‘Global vs. local 
brand perceptions among Thais and Turks’, Asia Pacific 
Journal of Marketing and Logistics, 23(5), 667–683; 
Özsomer, A. and Altaras, S. (2008) ‘Global brand pur-
chase likelihood: a critical synthesis and an integrated 
conceptual framework’, Journal of International Mar-
keting, 16(4), 1–28; Johansson, J.K. and Ronkainen, I.A. 
(2005) ‘The esteem of global brands’, Journal of Brand 
Management, 12(5), 339–54; Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M, 
Batra, R. and Alden, D.L. (2003) ‘How perceived brand 
globalness creates brand value’, Journal of International 
Business Studies, 33(1), 35–47.
65	 Upadhyay, Y. and Singh, S.K. (2006) ‘Preference for 
domestic goods: a study of consumer ethnocentrism’, 
Vision: The Journal of Business Perspective, 10(3), 59–68.
66	 Ramaswamy, V., Alden, D.L., Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M. and 
Ramachander, S. (2000) ‘Effects of brand local and non-
local origin on consumer attitudes in developing coun-
tries’, Journal of Consumer Psychology, 9(2), 83–95.
67	 Jackson, P. (1987) Corporate Communications for Man-
agers. London: Pitman.
68	 Melewar, T.C. (2003) ‘Determinants of the corporate 
identity construct: a review of the literature’, Journal of 
Marketing Communications, 9(4), 195–220.
69	 Cornelissen, J. and Harris, P. (1999) Two Perspectives on 
Corporate Identity: As the Expression of the Corporate 
Personality and as the Essential Self, ICCIS Working 
Paper Series. Glasgow: University of Strathclyde.
70	 Olins, W. (1990) Corporate Identity: Making Business 
Strategy Visible through Design. London: Thames & 
Hudson.
71	 Schein, E.H. (1984) ‘Coming to a new awareness of cor-
porate culture’, Sloan Management Review, 25(winter), 
3–16.
72	 Melewar, T.C. (2003) ‘Determinants of the corporate 
identity construct: a review of the literature’, Journal of 
Marketing Communications, 9(4), 195–220.
73	 Het Nieuwsblad, 5 March 2009.
74	 Cornelissen, J. and Harris, P. (1999) Two Perspectives on 
Corporate Identity: As the Expression of the Corporate 
Personality and as the Essential Self, ICCIS Working 
Paper Series. Glasgow: University of Strathclyde.
75	 Fombrun, C. (1996) Reputation: Realising Value from 
the Corporate Image, Harvard, MA: Harvard Business 
School Press.
76	 Dowling, G.R. (1986) ‘Managing your corporate images’, 
Industrial Marketing Management, 15, 109–15.
77	 Roehm, L., Roehm, H. Jr and Boone, D. (2004) ‘Plugs 
vs. placements: a comparison of alternatives for within-
program brand exposure’, Psychology and Marketing, 
21(1), 17–28.
78	 De Morgen, 20 February 2008.
79	 De Morgen, 18 March 2009.
80	 De Morgen, 12 October 2007.
81	 Mees, M. (2006) ‘Buzz marketing or bullshit marketing’, in 
Van Tilborgh, C. and Duyk, R. (eds), Management Jaar-
boek. Brussels: Vlaamse Management Associatie, 123–9.
54	 Dreher, A. (2006) ‘Does globalization affect growth? 
Evidence from a new index of globalization’, Applied 
Economics, 38(10), 1091–1110; Machida, S. (2012) 
‘Does globalization render people more ethnocen-
tric? Globalization and people’s views on cultures’, 
American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 71(2), 
436–469.
55	 Dreher, A., Gaston, N. and Martens, P. (2012) ‘KOF 
index of globalization’, http://globalization.kof.ethz.ch/
static/pdf/rankings_2012.pdf.
56	 Wei, Y. and Yu, C. (2012) ‘How do reference groups influ-
ence self-brand connections among Chinese consum-
ers?’, Journal of Advertising, 41(2), 39–54.
57	 Butt, M.M. and de Run, E.C. (2011) ‘Do target and 
non-target ethnic group adolescents process advertise-
ments differently?’, Australasian Marketing Journal 
(AMJ), 19(2), 77–84; Fastoso, F. and Whitelock, J. (2010) 
‘Regionalization vs globalization in advertising research: 
insights from five decades of academic study’, Journal of 
International Management, 16(1), 32–42.
58	 Taylor, D. (2003) ‘An Italian teddy weakens global brand 
logic’, Marketing, 27 February, 18; Neff, J. (2002) ‘P&G 
flexes muscle for global branding’, Advertising Age, 73 
(22), 53.
59	 Akaka, M.A. and Alden, D.L. (2010) ‘Global brand 
positioning and perceptions: International advertising 
and global consumer culture’, International Journal of 
Advertising, 29(1), 37–56; Griffith, D.A. and Yalcinkaya, 
G. (2010) ‘Resource-advantage theory: a foundation for 
new insights into global advertising research’, Interna-
tional Journal of Advertising, 29(1), 15–36; Zou, S. and 
Volz, Y.Z. (2010) ‘An integrated theory of global adver-
tising: an application of the GMS theory’, International 
Journal of Advertising, 29(1), 57–84.
60	 Sinclair, J. and Wilken, R. (2009) ‘Strategic regionali-
zation in marketing campaigns: beyond the standardi-
zation/glocalization debate’, Continuum: Journal of 
Media & Cultural Studies, 23(2), 147–57.
61	 Nag, B. (2011) ‘Trade liberalization and international 
production networks: experience of the Indian automo-
tive sector’, Fighting Irrelevance: The Role of Regional 
Trade Agreements in International Production Net-
works in Asia – A Study of Asia-Pacific Research and 
Training Network on Trade. ESCAP. United Nations 
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the 
Pacific.
62	 Rajabi, M., Dens, N. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2012) 
‘Endorser type and brand globalness effects in India: 
think global or act local?’, Proceedings of  the 2012 
EMAC Conference, Lisbon.
63	 Butt, M.M. and de Run, E.C. (2010) ‘Ethnic advertis-
ing: adolescents’ attitudes towards target and non-target 
advertisements’, Young Consumers: Insight and Ideas for 
Responsible Marketers, 11(3), 189–203; Noriega, J. and 
Blair, E. (2008) ‘Advertising to bilinguals: does the lan-
guage of advertising influence the nature of thoughts?’, 
Journal of Marketing, 72(5), 69–83.

REFERENCES     41
in Thorson, E. and Moore, J. (eds), Integrated Commu-
nication; Synergy of Persuasive Voices. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 13–34.
86	 van Raaij, W.F. (1997) ‘Globalisation of marketing com-
munication?’, Journal of  Economic Psychology, 18, 
259–70.
87	 For a discussion of the structural relationship between 
PR and advertising departments in organisations, see 
Grunig, J.A. and Grunig, L.A. (1998) ‘The relationship 
between public relations and marketing in excellent 
organisations: evidence from the IABC study’, Journal 
of Marketing Communications, 4(3), 141–62.
88	 Hutton, J.H. (1996) ‘Integrated marketing communica-
tion and the evolution of marketing thought’, Journal of 
Business Research, 37, 155–62.
89	 Deepblue (2012) Communication Agency Tracking.
82	 Schultz, D.E., Tannenbaum, S.I. and Lauterborn, R.F. 
(1992) Integrated Marketing Communications: Putting 
it Together and Making it Work. Lincolnwood, IL: NTC 
Business Books.
83	 Low, G.S. (2000) ‘Correlates of integrated marketing 
communications’, Journal of Advertising, 40, 27–39; 
Liechty, J., Ramaswamy, V. and Cohen, S.H. (2001) 
‘Choice menus for mass customisation: an experimental 
approach for analysing customer demand with an appli-
cation to a web-based information service’, Journal of 
Marketing Research, 38, 183–96.
84	 Schultz, D.E. and Kitchen, P.J. (2000) Communicat-
ing Globally: An Integrated Marketing Approach. 
Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Business Books.
85	 Duncan, T. and Caywood, C. (1996) ‘The concept, process 
and evolution of integrated marketing communication’, 

Chapter 2
Branding
Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Understand the various aspects of branding
● Learn about the characteristics of successful brands
● Make the distinction between major types of brand strategies and their advantages 
and disadvantages
● Form an idea of the composition of a brand portfolio
● Understand the concept of brand value or brand equity and its major components
● Assess the benefits of branding for the consumer and the manufacturer
● Get an overview of how marketing communications contribute to brand strength
Chapter outline
42

BRANDS     43
Introduction
Since the early days of marketing, brands have always been important. Consistent and 
long-term investment in brand awareness and brand image resulted in famous brands that 
survived the storms of changing marketing environments and were powerful instruments 
of marketing strategy. Later, the pressure for short-term results and the changing power 
balance between manufacturers and retailers has led to a situation in which patient and 
long-term investment in brand value no longer seems to be a priority. Short-term profit 
goals seem to be at least as important as long-term investments in goodwill. However, 
the value of brands in modern marketing strategy, and the important role of marketing 
communications in building and maintaining brand value, are still recognised. Brands 
are powerful instruments of strategic marketing and important vehicles on the road to 
­long-term profitability.
What is a good brand? What are suitable branding strategies? Why are brands so impor-
tant, and for whom? What is the value of a brand (often referred to as brand equity)? What 
is a brand portfolio and what different functions can brands fulfil in a portfolio? And, last 
but not least, what is the role of marketing communications in building and supporting 
brands?
Brands
The American Marketing Association defines a brand as ‘a name, term, sign, symbol or 
design, or a combination of these, intended to identify the goods or services of one seller 
or group of sellers, and to differentiate them from those of a competitor’. Defined like this, 
a brand is a set of verbal and/or visual cues, and as such it is a part of a product’s tangible 
features. A brand name is that part of a brand that can be spoken, including letters, words 
and numbers, like BMW, Danone or HP. A brand mark is the element of a brand that can-
not be spoken, often a symbol, design or specific packaging, like the Mercedes logo or the 
Absolut Vodka bottle. A trademark is the legal designation indicating that the owner has 
exclusive use of the brand.
Other definitions emphasise different key elements of a brand that go beyond the pure 
constituting brand elements. For instance, a brand has been defined as ‘an identifiable prod-
uct, service, person or place augmented in such a way that a buyer or user perceives relevant, 
unique added value which matches their needs quite closely’,1 or as ‘a set of attributes that 
have a meaning or image and produce associations with the product when a person is consid-
ering that brand or product,’2 or ‘user imagery the brand has in terms of people’s cognitive 
and affective disposition to the brand’.3 These definition basically describe a brand from 
the customer’s point of view: as a web of meaningful and valuable cognitive and affective 
associations. Keller defines a brand as an identifier that adds either rational and tangible 
dimensions (related to product performance) or symbolic, emotional and intangible dimen-
sions (related to what the brand represents) that differentiate it from other products designed 
to fulfil the same need.4 Brand associations are, in other words, intrinsic (functional: shape, 
taste, performance, price . . .) and extrinsic (imagery, lifestyle, symbolism, personality). 
Intrinsic dimensions are also called brand skills, whereas extrinsic dimensions are sometimes 
referred to as brand charisma. As to the latter, brands are used by consumers as a means of 
self-expression, to express their actual, desired or ideal self. Consumers also develop relation-
ships with brands; there is attachment, interdependence, intimacy, commitment, love, and 
hence loyalty. This relationship is an essential element of branding and brand value.

44     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
Brand names, as well as other brand elements such as logos, URLs, symbols, char-
acters, spokespeople, jingles, packages and signages, should be memorable, meaning-
ful, likeable, adaptable, transferable and protectable.6 A good brand name is easy for 
customers to say, spell and recall. Excellent examples are Dell, Bic, Nokia and Ford. 
To enhance brand recognition and avoid brand confusion, a brand name should also 
be distinctive and be able to differentiate the product from the competition. Besides 
being memorable, it is an advantage that brand elements are meaningful; for example, 
Mr Clean cleaning product, Vanish stain remover, Head & Shoulders shampoo and 
Newsweek magazine reinforce an attribute or benefit association related to the brand 
positioning. Brand elements should also be tested on their visual and/or verbal lik-
ability or, in other words, on their aesthetic appeal. Over time, brand elements may 
lose their appeal, calling for an update. As a consequence, logos, symbols, characters 
and even brand names often have to be adapted. Texaco, Nike and Michelin are just 
a few examples of brands that updated their logo/character over time. Preferably a 
brand is transferable both across product categories and geographic boundaries. The 
more specific the brand name, the more difficult it may be to extend the brand to 
other product categories. Nivea could easily extend its brand to the shampoo, skin care 
and other markets, but it will be difficult for Head & Shoulders to extend its sham-
poo brand into skin care. To build a successful global brand, the brand name should 
be easy to pronounce in different languages. This is not the case for the soft drink 
brand Mountain Dew in many non-English-speaking countries nor the Polish vodka 
brand Wyborowa in non-Polish-speaking countries. Global brand names also have to 
be culture- or language-neutral in the sense that they do not evoke strange or undesir-
able connotations in foreign languages. Kodak, Mars and IBM are good examples of 
this linguistic neutrality. On the other hand, the Rolls-Royce Silver Mist model name 
sounds strange in Germany (where Mist means manure), as does the Finnish defroster 
Super-Piss in certain European countries, and the toilet paper brand Kräpp in English-
speaking parts of the world. Other examples are the Spanish bread brand Bimbo that 
is associated with an attractive, unintelligent lady in English; the Dutch bread brand 
Bums reminds English-speaking people of a person’s backside and German-speaking 
people of sex; the Egyptian airline company Misair is not appealing to French-speaking 
consumers because misère means misery to them.7 Finally, a brand should be available 
A brand can be defined as ‘a cluster of meanings’, or a cluster of associations concerning attributes, benefits and 
values. These associations are created or enhanced by every contact or experience the consumer has with the brand. 
Batey describes the difference between a brand and a product as follows:5
Research insight
A brand is a bundle of meanings
Product
Brand
You buy a product for what it does
You choose a brand for what it means
A product sits on retailers’ shelves
A brand exists in consumers’ minds
A product can quickly be outdated
A brand is timeless
A product can be copied by a competitor
A brand is unique

BRANDS     45
and easy to protect through registration. Therefore, no generic words should be used. 
Really successful brand names often become household names, i.e. the brand name is 
used to indicate the product category in which it was a pioneer. Examples are Xerox, 
Aspirin and Hoover.
Three categories of brands can be distinguished:
1.	 Manufacturer brands are developed and marketed by manufacturers of the product. They 
are supported by integrated marketing, including pricing, distribution and communica-
tions. Levi’s, Danone and BMW are examples of manufacturer brands.
2.	 Own-label brands (also called private label brands, store or dealer brands) are developed 
and marketed by wholesalers or retailers. There is no link between the manufacturer 
and the brand. Retailers develop own-label brands to gain more power. It enables them 
to enhance their store image, generate higher margins and be more independent of the 
manufacturers of premium brands. Originally, they only competed on the basis of a price 
benefit compared with manufacturer brands. St Michael (Marks & Spencer, UK), Clever 
(Billa, Austria) and Derby (Delhaize, Belgium) are examples of such store brands. Now, 
however, most European retailers have adopted sub-branding strategies.9 For example, 
a three-tier strategy concerning quality consists of the regular private label, a price-
aggressive budget or value label (e.g. No. 1 from Carrefour) and a quality-focused 
­premium label (e.g. Tesco’s Finest, Albert Heijn’s Excellent, Safeway’s Select). Further, 
several retailers have thematic private labels, such as a health and wellness sub-brand 
(e.g. Tesco Organic, Loblaw’s President’s Choice Green, Carrefour Bio), an ethical sub-
brand (e.g. Axfood’s Aware fair trade label, Wal-Mart’s Sam’s Choice fair trade and 
Rainforest Alliance label), and a culinary sub-brand (e.g. Fior Fiore from Coop Italia, 
De Nuestra Terra from Carrefour Spain). In many product categories, own-label brands 
pose a serious threat to well-established manufacturer brands. Some retailers are using 
their own-label brands as the key element in their marketing strategy, and support their 
own brand with a limited number of well-established manufacturer brands to optimise 
their store image and consumer traffic. In Europe, private label brands hold high market 
shares as Figure 2.1 shows.
Research indicates that a country’s private label share goes up during economic down-
turns and shrinks when the economy is flourishing. However, consumers switch more 
extensively to store brands during recession times than they switch back to national 
brands in a subsequent recovery.10 Indeed, recent Nielsen results indicate that 60% of 
In 1862, Don Facundo Bacardi bought a small tin-roofed distillery in Santiago de Cuba. When his wife first stepped 
in the distillery, she saw a colony of fruit bats living in the roofing. For the local people, bats represented good for-
tune, health and family unity. She suggested that her husband take the bat as the trademark for his rum. Because 
of high levels of illiteracy at the time, a strong, distinctive, memorable and likeable trademark was very important 
to identify and sell the product. The bat fulfilled all these criteria. Positive word-of-mouth reports of the excellent 
rum soon spread and the bat made it easy for consumers to find the right product. More importantly, in line with 
local beliefs and traditions, local storytellers reinforced positive brand associations by claiming that the bat brought 
good fortune to the drink and gave it magical powers. Magic or not, the company had good fortune and, more than 
140 years later, Bacardi’s bat is one of the best-known trademarks worldwide.8
Business insight
Bacardi’s good fortune bat

46     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
European shoppers say they buy more private label products during the current economic 
downturn and 92% agree to continue buying them as the economy recovers.11
As a consequence, brand manufacturers have to take the competition of private 
labels seriously at all times. Six strategic options can be chosen: (1) increase distance 
from private labels through innovation; (2) increase distance from private labels by 
investing in brand equity (offer ‘more value for money’ by stressing brand image, chang-
ing packaging, etc.); (3) reduce the price gap; (4) introduce a value-flanker as a me-too 
strategy; (5) wait and do nothing; and (6) produce (premium) private labels. A study in 
the Netherlands shows that the best strategy for national brands might be to react by 
investing in innovations and brand image. This is preferred to ‘wait and do nothing’, 
although the latter may sometimes be effective (e.g. wait until the company is ready 
to come up with the next innovation). Producing private labels may also be a viable 
option, especially in product categories with high private label market shares or many 
possibilities for technological differentiation. Producing private labels for retailers has 
the advantage that it strengthens the ties with the retailer. Furthermore, it can also 
be very profitable for the company if it has excess capacity. Finally, companies seem 
to react to the competition with private labels in a subtler way than to other brands. 
Decreasing the distance from private labels by price reductions and value-flankers is 
less used. Obviously the latter would sour the relationship with the retailer. Further-
more, it often also seems to have a detrimental impact on the company’s and market 
profitability.12
3.	 Generic brands indicate the product category. In fact, the concept is a contradiction 
in terms. Generics are in fact brandless products. They are usually sold at the ­lowest 
prices. In pharmaceutical products, generics are quite successful. The end of the 
legal protection of a patent allows the introduction of generics at lower prices. Depend-
ing upon the country, generics account for a substantial share of ­pharmaceutical 
­product sales.
Figure 2.1  Private label shares in Europe
Source: PLMA Yearbook 2012.

SUCCESSFUL BRANDS     47
Successful brands
Giving a product a brand name does not always guarantee success. Successful brands have 
to meet a number of conditions:13
● Successful brands are differentiated. Consumers clearly perceive them as having unique 
benefits and being different from the competition.
● Top brands are positioned on quality and added value. Superior product quality is a 
prerequisite for successful branding. Often it is not only the product that is superior but 
also the additional service which is less easily copied by competitors.
● Leading brands continually innovate to answer changing consumer tastes and to keep 
ahead of the competition.
A leading position can only be sustained by having full support and complete commitment 
of both management and employees.14 Remember that every brand contact matters: how a 
call to a helpdesk is answered, what happens when advice is sought or when a complaint is 
raised, etc. A company’s employees and the engagement they show to the brand has never 
before been more important. Especially in service branding, internal marketing (i.e. train-
ing and communicating with internal staff to convince them of the basic strategic priorities 
and keep them tuned to the brand promise) is vital. The success of a bank, an airline or a 
restaurant largely depends upon the motivation and quality of the service provider (bank 
clerk, steward or waiter) to satisfy the customer.
Brands cannot become success stories without long-term, consistent communications 
support, making customers aware of their uniqueness and keeping the brand’s value trust-
worthy. Both long-term support and the significant contribution of communications are 
important. Successful brands are not built overnight. Long-term communications, and more 
particularly advertising support, are a key factor in the development of successful brands. 
As already mentioned, brand managers are often tempted to cut investments in brands to 
increase short-term profitability, thereby affecting the long-term profit potential.
A brand that clearly understood the fact that successful brands need to be differentiated and have high quality 
is Hyundai. In its early days, Hyundai was perceived as a lower-quality brand. Taking Japanese automakers as an 
example, Hyundai seriously invested in quality and kept making its cars better and better. In the late 1990s, Hyundai 
surprised the industry by offering the best automobile warranty in the industry, a safety net that created consumer 
confidence. As an extension of this value-building strategy, Hyundai introduced Hyundai Assurance Plus early 
in 2009. While other brands were competing on price discounts, Hyundai offered its customers peace of mind. 
Hyundai’s Assurance Plus assured the customers that if they lose their income, Hyundai would make instalment 
payments for three months while they got back on their feet. If this was not enough time, Hyundai would take back 
the car. The company broadly defined income loss as involuntary unemployment, physical disability, self-employed 
personal bankruptcy, accidental death, etc. Hyundai was not the automaker that enjoyed highest market share or 
highest awareness, but its value-adding programme did set the brand apart and had a positive impact on sales. 
After the introduction of Assurance Plus, Hyundai’s sales were up 14% as compared with the same period one year 
before. In fact, it realised the highest sales increase in the industry, and was one of only three automakers to make 
Business insight
Building a strong brand

48     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
Table 2.1 gives an overview of Interbrand’s 2014 ranking of the world’s 30 most valuable 
brands. Winners in this ranking are Facebook (29), Ikea (26) and Amazon (15), which 
respectively gained 86%, 26% and 25% in brand value as compared with 2013. The biggest 
losers in the list were Gillette (18), Louis Vuitton (19), Intel (12) and IBM (4) which saw their 
brand value decline by respectively 9%, 9%, 8% and 8%.17
Rank
Brand
Value $M
% Change vs 2015
1
Apple
178,119
+5
2
Google
133,252
+11
3
Coca-Cola
73,102
-7
4
Microsoft
72,795
+8
5
Toyota
53,580
+9
6
IBM
52,500
-19
7
Samsung
51,808
+14
8
Amazon
50,338
+33
9
Mercedes-Benz
43,490
+18
10
General Electric
43,130
+2
11
BMW
41,535
+12
12
McDonalds
39,381
-1
13
Disney
38,790
+6
14
Intel
36,952
+4
15
Facebook
32,593
+48
16
Cisco
30,948
+4
17
Oracle
26,552
-3
18
Nike
25,034
+9
19
Louis Vuitton
23,948
+8
20
H&M
22,681
+2
21
Honda
22,106
-4
22
SAP
21,293
+13
23
Pepsi
20,265
+3
24
Gillette
19,950
-10
25
American Express
18,358
-3
26
IKEA
17,834
+8
27
Zara
16,766
-19
28
Pampers
16,134
+6
29
UPS
15,333
+5
30
Budweiser
15,099
+8
Source: Adapted from Interbrand, Best Global Brands 2014, http://interbrand.com/best-brands/best-global-brands/2016/ranking/ 
(accessed 23 October 2016).
Table 2.1  Top 30 brands worldwide (2016)
an increase at all.15 Also, in the following years Hyundai made sure to keep on investing in quality and innovative 
designs, leading to a consistent increase in brand value. In 2011, its brand value increased no less than 19% as 
compared with 2010.16

BRAND STRATEGIES     49
Brand strategies
A brand strategy starts with the decision whether or not to put a brand name on a prod-
uct. It can be argued that, for some product categories, branding is not essential and may 
even be useless. This is especially true for undifferentiated and homogeneous products. 
Since branding is an essential element in pull marketing strategies, the products for which 
a push strategy is indicated have less need of formal branding. The latter may be the 
case for industrial products such as steel and raw materials, or complex machinery like 
transmission equipment or capacitors. However, except for generics, hardly any brandless 
consumer product can be imagined, although in some consumer product categories such 
as fresh fruit, vegetables, meat and bread, branded goods are the exception rather than 
the rule, although also in these product categories branding is on the rise. Marketers can-
not live with undifferentiated products and will always look for extra marketable value. A 
brand is an excellent vehicle by means of which a product can be differentiated from the 
competition.
Once the decision to go for branded products has been taken, a company must decide on 
its overall brand strategy. This strategy will also guide the branding of new product intro-
ductions. Figure 2.2 shows the basic brand strategies. First of all, a product can be given one 
brand name, or several (mostly two) brands can be used to position it. In the case of one 
brand name, four different strategies can be followed. Sticking to existing product categories 
and using the same brand name for all new product introductions in a product category is 
called line extension. This strategy is used very frequently. Examples are Magnum’s flavours 
Temptation Chocolate and Strawberry White, or Kellogg’s Special K Chocolate delight and 
Fruit & Yogurt cereals. Marketers may want to expand the variety of their offerings, try to 
accommodate the needs of new consumer segments, react to successful competitive prod-
ucts, crowd the product space and deter competitive entry, enhance the image of the parent 
brand or try to command more shelf space from retailers. Overall, it improves the competi-
tive position of the brand by offering consumers more variety, as a result of which they are 
not inclined to look to competitive brands to satisfy their needs. Moreover, there seem to 
be strong spillover effects from advertising the line extension on choice of the parent brand. 
Advertising of Yoplait non-fat yoghurt, for example, increased sales of Yoplait yoghurt even 
more than advertising of Yoplait yoghurt itself.19 Line extension strategies have a number of 
In 2008, Brandchannel organised a brand poll in which 4310 consumers from several countries participated. The 
consumers were asked to vote for the brands that had most impact on them. Apple came out as an absolute win-
ner. Apple was judged top in (1) offering the best retail environment, (2) having produced the most innovative and 
enticing packaging, (3) being able to rebound from a crisis and (4) being the most inspiring brand. This may not be 
too surprising: Apple’s iPods, iPhone and MacBook bridged the gap between being cool and being a mass product. 
Moreover, Apple Genius bars exceeded customers’ expectations of what after-sales service can be. With its iPad, 
Apple moved on in the same direction, further creating innovative products that seamlessly fit in with people’s 
lifestyles. In 2012 Apple came out as the most valuable brand in Millward Brown Optimor’s BrandZ™ survey. The 
second most valuable brand was Google, whereas the fastest-growing brands were Facebook and Baidu (i.e. China’s 
Google); 30% of the BrandZ top 100 brands were technology brands.18
Business insight
Most impactful and fast-growing brands

50     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
obvious advantages. The favourable image of the brand is carried over to the new products 
that are marketed with the same brand name, and the past communications investments in 
the brand are more efficiently used to market more products. However, a line extension also 
has a number of disadvantages, the most important of which is the loss of clear position-
ing.20 Another disadvantage is the risk of cannibalisation. A new product may cannibalise 
the company’s other products instead of taking market share away from the competition, 
the net result of which could be that the line extension is not very profitable. An unsuccessful 
extension can also harm sales of the parent brand.21 Finally, too many line extensions can 
lead to over-choice, confusing consumers about which option would be ideal for them, the 
end result of which could be that consumers put off their choice or become less satisfied with 
their final choice (with too many options around, choosing means losing . . .).22
Take some angry birds, green pigs and a castle, program a game, and cash in. That seems to be the story behind 
the immensely popular ‘Angry Birds’. ‘Angry Birds’ was developed by Rovio, a small Finnish developer of computer 
games, and started its career in 2009 as an iPhone game. The concept is simple, but also bizarre. With a catapult 
you shoot angry birds to a castle in which pigs that stole the birds’ eggs are hiding. In mid-2011 the game had been 
downloaded 700 million times and played by 30 million people worldwide. The new ‘Angry Birds Space’ in which 
the birds circle around planets was downloaded 20 million times within a week after its launch.
In 2010 Zynga, the company that developed and marketed, among others, ‘Farmville’, offered $2 billion for 
Rovio, but the owners refused. Their plan is to become ‘much bigger than Disney’. They made a series of ani-
mated ‘Angry Birds’ cartoons of 212 –3 minutes each and released a full movie in 2016. Moreover, they opened  
the first Angry Birds Amusement Park in Tampere, Finland, and plan to open more of them across the globe. 
The game is also available on Facebook where different kinds of players are reached. Rovio and Samsung agreed 
Business insight
Angry Birds conquer the skies
Figure 2.2  Basic brand strategies

BRAND STRATEGIES     51
Brand extension, or brand stretching, occurs when an existing brand is used to mar-
ket products in a different product category. Examples are Harley-Davidson footwear, 
Armani underwear, Godiva ice cream and Nesquik cereals. The basic rationale behind 
brand extensions is the same as the one behind line extensions, i.e. limiting the risk of 
failure of new product introductions by capitalising upon the image and reputation of 
a successful existing brand, and at the same time trying to save the huge advertising 
expenses of launching a totally new brand. Research indicates that brand extensions 
tend to be more effective than new brand introductions in the sense that they capture 
more market share and require less advertising.24 However, the risks of brand extensions 
are great. First of all, if the brand image does not fit well with the new product category 
or the new market segments the new introduction may not be successful.25 This parent 
brand – extension fit can be effectuated on the basis of different dimensions. It can be 
product-category related, for instance a snack brand extending into the related category 
of ice cream, or it can be symbolic, for instance transferring the parent brand person-
ality to a new product in a different product category. For instance, Harley Davidson 
transferred its lifestyle and personality associations to deodorants for men. Sometimes 
extensions fail because of lack of fit. Bic tried to launch a low-price ­perfume and failed. 
The same thing happened when the company launched Bic underwear. These new prod-
ucts could not effectively be linked to the traditional Bic values. Probably the two prod-
uct categories were not functional enough and too affect-laden to be easily associated 
with the very functional Bic brand. Research, however, shows that an incongruent brand 
extension can overcome initial negative responses if the extension is backed by sufficient 
advertising support. Respondents who were exposed to an ad for an extension five times 
responded significantly more positively (or less negatively) than respondents who saw 
the ad only once.26 Furthermore, other studies show that some individuals are more 
sensitive to incongruent extensions than others. Consumers from East Asian countries 
and females, for example, are more likely to seek a connection and consequently respond 
more positively to moderate incongruent extensions than Western consumers and 
males.27 Secondly, there is the risk of brand dilution. This occurs when the brand name 
is used for so many different product categories that the brand personality becomes 
fuzzy and the brand’s value deteriorates.28 If Virgin had not continuously articulated 
the abstract and symbolic characteristics of its origin (i.e. fun, hip and subversive) in all 
its products, it could have been detrimental to use the brand name Virgin for products  
so fundamentally different as airlines, compact discs and soft drinks. By stressing 
its abstract characteristics, Virgin seems to become virtually product ­independent, 
­embodying a mere brand concept or image.29
to install the game on Samsung TV sets. In 2010 about 25 million plush birds were sold. The brand is the most 
­counterfeited one in China.
What is the successful recipe behind the game? First of all, the game is based on a well-known and popular idea: 
conquer a castle. The weird birds are the heroes of the game and therefore lend themselves to all kinds of exten-
sions, such as movies, cartoons, amusement parks and merchandising. Once a critical mass of players picked up 
the game, it featured in the top lists of downloaded apps, and therefore got a lot of visibility and momentum. With 
the increasing penetration of smartphones, so-called ‘casual games’ have become a huge market. Casual games are 
simple games that people play on mobile devices as an easy and short pastime.
Will the success of ‘Angry Birds’ continue? Analysts predict that, like any other fad, it will continue to be successful 
for some years, and also because of its extensions into other activities and products, but will then fade away and be 
replaced by the then latest thing. Others believe that, since ‘Angry Birds’ is now part of the lives of so many people, 
it will continue to appeal to the nostalgic feelings of these players for a long time.23

52     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
A special case of extension strategies is corporate branding. In this case, the name of 
the company is used for all the company’s products. This strategy is often used by service 
companies like banks and insurance companies for which the reputation and the endorse-
ment of a reliable company is very important. For the same reason, it is also very valuable 
for high-technology products. Potential customers have more faith in a long-established 
and experienced company with a good reputation, which will be able to offer consistent 
high-quality support in the future. Corporate branding is very similar to the other exten-
sion strategies and therefore has the same advantages and disadvantages. One additional 
disadvantage is that a corporate branding strategy is relatively inflexible. Specific niches that 
are not associated with the corporate reputation cannot be efficiently targeted on the basis 
of a corporate branding strategy.31
In the mid-1990s, Samsung Electronics Co. was still a lower-end consumer electronics producer bringing its product 
onto the market under a handful of brand names including Wiseview, Tantus and Yepp. To move up the value chain, 
the company had to build a stronger identity. Therefore, the company got rid of its other brands and invested in 
building a strong corporate brand. Next, it focused on better quality, a nicer design and innovation. To be visible to 
users 24 hours a day, seven days a week, the company chose first to focus on a new line of mobile phones and digital 
TVs. These are also products with which consumers are more likely to form a strong bond. Building a strong image in 
these categories opens doors to other categories. Samsung’s strategy is clearly paying off. Currently Samsung holds 
17th place in the Best Global Brands ranking, leaving Sony behind in overall brand value in 35th place. Samsung 
has become the clear leader in flat-panel TVs and continues its focus on mobile devices. Through a strong flagship 
brand strategy around Galaxy smartphones and tablet devices under the Android platform, Samsung hopes to gain 
a strong foothold in the market. Also in other markets, such as digital appliances, digital imaging, IT solutions, B2B, 
and especially semiconductors, Samsung continuously offers innovative and relevant solutions.32
Business insight
Samsung, the new electronics giant
A survey on brand extensions in which branding and marketing professionals could vote for the best and worst brand 
extensions showed that key factors for successful extensions are a strong brand and a loyal consumer. Moreover, 
the most successful extensions came from ‘companies that really know their customers, and know the limitations 
of their brands even more so’. Winners were, among others, Coppertone, extending its suncare brand to sunglasses, 
and Mr Clean Performance Car Washes. Burger King men’s apparel and Kellogg’s hip-hop streetwear won the votes 
for worst brand extensions.30
Business insight
Brand extension losers and winners
A brand strategy in which different brands are used for products or product ranges in 
the same product category is called multi-branding. This is frequently used by companies 
like Procter & Gamble and Mars. Procter & Gamble, for instance, has a number of differ-
ent detergent brands. However, the traditional multi-branding companies also use brand 

BRAND STRATEGIES     53
stretching. For instance, Fairy and Dreft are brands used in both dishwashing liquids and 
laundry detergents. The advocates of multi-branding argue that this strategy permits finer 
segmentation and positioning. Each brand is fully capable of building its own personality 
and perceived benefit and of appealing to the specific segment it is targeted at. The obvious 
disadvantage of this strategy is that individual brands cannot benefit from the leveraging 
effect of existing brands.
Companies using the multi-branding strategy will also be inclined to use new brands 
when they introduce a product in a new product category. But introducing new brands may 
also be called for when none of the company’s brands is suitable for use in the new product 
category. For instance, Toyota established a new name for its luxury car range, the Lexus.
Western brand thinking has mainly been shaped by Procter & Gamble, Unilever, Henkel 
and Mars. The key feature here was differentiation: every possible segment should be ser-
viced with a new brand. Japanese brand thinking, on the other hand, used to focus on har-
mony and loyalty: trust, authenticity, credibility and expertise is based on the company and 
the values it stands for. Therefore, all products refer to the company and are not stand-alone 
items.33 In the 1990s, some claimed that the corporate brand would be the only successful 
option for brand building in the future.34 However, this does not appear to be true, at least 
not as far as fast-moving consumer goods are concerned. Comparing brand strategies of the 
20 top suppliers of UK grocery retailers (involving about 400 products) between 1994 and 
2004 showed a significant drop in the use of corporate brands to the advantage of mixed 
brands. More than 60% of the products used some form of mixed branding in 2004. The 
researchers assume that the reason for the recent shift away from corporate brands can be 
sought in risk avoidance (inspired by recent scandals that broke brands like Enron), the need 
for precise targeting and the benefits of mixed branding.35
When a company introduces a product abroad, it can also choose between an extension 
or a ‘new brand’ strategy. If the existing brand has the required global characteristics, is 
already known in the new country, or if the company is committed to building global brands 
(Photo 2.1), a global strategy will be used. Globalisation increases the value of the brand 
(see below) and enables the company to benefit from transnational efficiencies in advertising, 
since TV channels targeted at consumer segments in different countries, such as Eurosport 
and MTV, increase the ‘footprint’ of ads broadcast through these channels. Examples of 
global brands are Coca-Cola, Nike and Gillette. Global brands can range from being glob-
ally consistent to locally adapted. Gillette is consistent around the world because men’s 
shaving needs are, worldwide, more or less the same. YouTube can be situated in the middle 
of the continuum: it has global reach, but pursues a localisation strategy because it realises 
that people sharing the same culture will be more likely to share content. McDonald’s is 
locally adapted: it does use the same logo and colours, but adapts its service and products to 
fit local needs. For example, it is an upscale delivery service in Brazil, offers teriyaki chicken 
strips in Japan, and its German coffee shops are better than Starbucks.36
Consumers see a global brand as a key symbol of quality, prestige, a global myth for being trendy and modern, and 
even a stamp for social responsibility.37 What is crucial for a successful positioning as a global brand is understanding 
how consumers’ perceptions of globalness are formed.38
In 2014 a study was conducted to investigate the relative importance of peripheral (i.e. spokesperson and brand 
logo) and central advertising cues (i.e. brand name and advertising text) in determining perceived brand globalness.39 
Research insight
Which advertising cues cause consumers to perceive brands as more global?

54     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
By means of conjoint analysis, the study tested which advertising cues were especially important to stimulate per-
ceived brand globalness. Conjoint analysis allowed the relative importance of brand attributes or advertising cues 
for the formation of perceived brand globalness to be estimated. The technique consisted of showing participants 
a controlled set of advertisements, varying in cues. By analysing how respondents scored each of these advertise-
ments, the implicit valuation (utilities or part-worths) of the individual cues making up the advertisements could be 
determined. The study conducted two separate conjoint analyses for two products: chocolates (low involvement) 
and computers (high involvement). The study was conducted by means of an online survey in two samples consist-
ing of 100 unique respondents from the Netherlands for each product category (chocolates and computers) (44% 
men, average age: 47 years).
Following the semiotics framework,40 four attributes were manipulated. The first attribute was the advertising 
text, which consists of the slogan, the website suffix and an availability statement. Three levels of this attribute were 
defined: local positioning, mixed and global positioning. The local positioning contained a Dutch slogan (‘The best 
chocolate thanks to the best local ingredients’ and ‘The power of a network. Across the Netherlands’), a local web-
site suffix ‘.nl’, and stated that the product was ‘available in the Netherlands’. The global positioning consisted of a 
global slogan (‘The best chocolate thanks to the best ingredients around the world’ and ‘The power of a network. 
Across the world’), a global website suffix ‘.com’ and stated ‘available across the world’. The mixed level combined a 
local slogan with a global website suffix and global availability. The second attribute was the brand name, for which 
two levels were defined: local positioning (a Dutch brand name with an explicit reference to the Netherlands (the 
country under study), ‘Chocolade van Oranje’ and ‘NL Computer’) and global positioning (an English brand name, 
‘Candy Colours’ and ‘Worldwide Computers’). The third attribute, the spokesperson, was manipulated at two levels: 
local positioning (national celebrity, Lieke van Lexmond) and global positioning (international celebrity, Penelope 
Cruz). Both spokespersons were well-known actresses. In addition, a pretest showed that these two women did not 
differ significantly in terms of attractiveness, trustworthiness, likeability, expertise and fit with the product. Finally, 
the fourth attribute was the brand logo, for which two levels were defined: local positioning (a crown to symbolise 
the Dutch monarchy) and global positioning (a globe). Participants were exposed to eight advertisements (in a ran-
domised order) reflecting various combinations of levels of the four brand attributes, and had to indicate perceived 
brand globalness. They were instructed to score the eight advertisements independently from each other, thus not 
taking into account the previous version they had seen.
As expected, overall, the global positioning levels of all four attributes corresponded with higher perceived brand 
globalness. Advertising text was found to be the most important cue in signalling brand globalness (importance: 
40.1%). The importance rating of the spokesperson was 28.8%, that of the brand name 24.0%. With 7.2%, the brand 
logo was the least important cue. Computers were more highly involving than chocolates. The conjoint analyses 
showed that advertising text was the most important cue to signal globalness for both product types. For the low 
involvement product, this was followed by the spokesperson, then the brand logo and lastly the brand name. For 
the high involvement product, in terms of relative importance, the advertising text was followed by the brand 
name, the spokesperson and the brand logo respectively. The advertising text was approximately equally important 
for a low involvement product, chocolates (41.3%) and for a high involvement product, computers (39.0%). The 
brand name was relatively much more important for computers (35.6%) than for chocolates (11.5%). However, the 
spokesperson was relatively more important for chocolates (34.9%) than for a computer (23.1%). Also the brand 
logo was relatively more important for chocolates (12.3%) than for computers (2.4%). In terms of the Elaboration 
Likelihood Model, the spokesperson and the logo can be considered peripheral cues, while the advertising text and 
the brand name are central cues.
The results showed that, although the advertising text was the most important attribute to signal brand globalness 
for both product categories, peripheral cues such as the logo and the spokesperson were more important for the low 
involvement product category (chocolates) than for the high involvement category (computers), while the central 
brand name cue was much more important for computers than for chocolates.41
Local brands often have a long tradition in specific countries and are often market lead-
ers in their home country. Thumbs Up is the leading soft drink in India leaving Coca-Cola 
behind; Efes Pilsen and Cola Turka are leading in Turkey; Valentine is a more powerful paint 
brand in France than Dulux; Dreft is a powerful detergent brand and Côte d’Or a very 

BRAND STRATEGIES     55
Photo 2.1  HSBC: A global brand with a local touch
Source: Getty Images: AFP.
attractive chocolate brand in Belgium and the Netherlands; Larios was leader in the Span-
ish gin market when it was bought by Pernod-Ricard. DBS has a 30% market share in the 
Norwegian bicycle sector while Crescent accounts for 20% of the Swedish bicycle sector 
and Kildamoës has 15% of the Danish market. Local brands benefit, among other things, 
from (1) the deep-rooted and powerful bond that has been established with local consumers 
(i.e. consumers often buy the brand their parents bought), (2) being perfectly adapted to 
unique local tastes or needs, (3) local operational and logistical advantages and (4) strong 
community ties. These local brands are very attractive for global companies, and more and 
more global companies extend their brand portfolio with local brands.42
A recent study indicates that whether consumers prefer a local brand such as Mecca Cola 
(France) or Fei-Chang (China) above a global brand such as Pepsi or Coca-Cola depends 
on whether they are global- or local-minded. The tendency towards a global or local mind-
set is related to people’s desire to be different (local) versus similar to others (global). 

56     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
Consequently, companies benefit from positioning their products in a way compatible with 
the mindset of their target group.43
Companies can also opt for dual branding strategies. Three categories of dual strate-
gies can be distinguished. In endorsement branding two brand names of the same com-
pany are used, one of them serving as a quality label or endorsement.44 In fact, this 
strategy can be situated somewhere between an extension and a multi-brand strategy, 
and combines the advantages of both, although the disadvantages of the two combined 
strategies should be taken into account. An example is Kellogg’s (Cornflakes, Rice 
Krispies, Coco Pops, etc.).
With ingredient branding, a brand of a basic ingredient of the product is mentioned next 
to the actual product’s brand name. Examples are Intel, Nutrasweet, Woolmark, Gore-Tex 
and Tetrapak. The advantages are that both brands can benefit from the synergy effects of 
combining the two strong brands. Furthermore, communications costs can be shared. A 
prerequisite for ingredient branding is that the ingredient has to be essential, differentiating 
and of consistently high quality.45
Finally, in co-branding, two or more brands are simultaneously presented on one prod-
uct. Co-branding can range from advertising multiple brands in one ad (e.g. featuring 
Shell and Ferrari together) to co-developing a product (e.g. Philips and Inbev who came 
up with the Perfect Draft, or Braun and Oral B launching an electric toothbrush). Form-
ing an alliance may be driven, for example, by the desire to leverage positive brand equity 
of the partner brand (e.g. LG working together with Prada to launch an exquisitely 
designed phone), to share or decrease advertising or development costs (e.g. Coca-Cola 
and Heinz Plant Bottle™ partnership in which Coca-Cola is partly reimbursed for its 
development costs of the Plant Bottle whereas Heinz can use the bottle without having 
any development costs) or to gain access to new markets or distribution channels (e.g. the 
Belgian women’s magazine Libelle which asked the apparel retailer E5 to launch jointly 
a women’s collection, giving Libelle access to the fashion market and to the outlets of 
E5). Obviously, the combination should result in a perfect perceptual fit, from a product 
or image point of view.46
To differentiate itself from the competition, HTC decided to put the spotlight on the audio features of its 
smartphones. To this end, HTC invested $300 million in Beats™ Electronics LLC, the company that redefined 
the audio market with its iconic Beats by Dr Dre™ audio experience. This resulted in the superb Beats ear-
buds being packed with HTC’s Android smartphones. Unfortunately, this branding alliance did not give HTC 
the expected advantages. Consumers simply do not buy a smartphone for its premium earphones. Further, 
including the premium accessory forced HTC to raise prices while competitors offered similar smart phones 
at lower prices. Therefore, despite the major investment in Beats, HTC decided that the iconic Beats Audio 
earbuds for several of its models will no longer be included in the box. However, the partnership may take a 
step forward with the acquisition of Mog, a music subscription service that has a catalogue of over 14 million 
tracks that subscribers can listen to on a computer and Android devices. This would allow HTC and Beats to 
challenge the likes of iTunes and Spotify and to stick to a premium audio differentiation in comparison with 
competitive smartphones.47
Business insight
HTC with a Beats experience

BRAND PORTFOLIO     57
Brand portfolio
Building a strong brand is one thing, sustaining brand equity in the long run is something 
else. Besides a well-balanced marketing programme and continuous and consistent inte-
grated marketing communications support, it may be necessary to adapt the brand port-
folio over time. A brand portfolio can be defined as the set of all brands and brand lines 
that a company possesses. The rationale behind every brand portfolio should be threefold. 
First of all, a company should try to maximise market coverage in the sense that different 
market segments can be serviced. Secondly, brand overlap has to be minimised in such a 
way that brands are not competing among themselves. Furthermore, some overlap may be 
necessary, or as the CEO of Liz Claiborne put it: ‘Cannibalization is inevitable, but it’s 
much better to steal market share from yourself than to sit back and let somebody else 
do it.’48 Thirdly, every brand in the brand portfolio should have an added value for the 
company. For example, in 2000 Unilever decided to trim its brand portfolio from about 
1600 to 400 leading brands. Two criteria were used to select the leading brands: (1) brand 
appeal, meaning the appeal of the brand to the consumer and how well the brand meets 
the expected consumer needs over five to ten years; and (2) prospects for sustained growth, 
indicating the brand potential to justify significant investments in technology, innovation 
and brand communications. Focusing on the 400 brands with a positive growth rate (such 
as Dove, Lipton, Magnum, Calvin Klein) allowed Unilever to reduce overheads and to focus 
resources where they were most effective.49
Brands in a portfolio usually serve different functions and can be classified as bastion, 
flanker, fighter and prestige brands (see Figure 2.3). Bastion brands provide most profit for 
the company, often follow a premium price strategy, are characterised by a high level of 
psycho-social meaning and are generally considered as high-performance brands. In order 
to protect bastion brands, flanker, fighter or prestige brands can be introduced. A flanker 
brand follows a similar price–profit ratio as the bastion brand, is also characterised by a high 
psycho-social meaning and perceived performance level, but usually appeals to a different, 
smaller market segment (niche). Fighter brands are sold at a lower price, situated between the 
price of the bastion and discount brands. Their quality perception is usually lower than that 
Figure 2.3  A brand portfolio model
Source: Riezebos 1995, cited in Riezebos, R. (2003) Brand Management. Harlow: Financial Times/Pearson Education.

58     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
The German company Adidas-Salomon bought Reebok in 2005 for €3.1 billion, 34% on top of Reebok’s shares. It 
was clear why Adidas-Salomon was willing to pay such a surplus. Nike was number 1, Adidas number 2 and Reebok 
number 3; consequently it would be easier to compete with Nike if Adidas and Reebok joined forces. With Reebok, 
Adidas hoped to close the gap with Nike in the USA. Nike held a market share of 36%, Adidas 8.9% and Reebok 12.2% 
of the US market. Furthermore, Reebok had already made great strides in emerging markets such as China, Korea 
and Malaysia. Reebok was not only complementary to Adidas concerning geographic markets and foreign distribu-
tion channels, but also complementary in terms of market segments. Reebok was, for example, much stronger than 
Adidas in basketball, football, hockey and fashion/athletic segments. As a result, the acquisition looked like a perfect 
fit and certainly justified the money that has been paid for it.55
Business insight
Building a strategic brand portfolio
of the bastion and flanker brands. Prestige brands are high-quality, luxury brands targeted 
at a smaller segment, looking for status and high psycho-social meaning.50
Procter & Gamble’s shampoo bastion brand is Pantène, while Head & Shoulders can be 
considered as a flanker brand. Philip Morris introduced Basic as a fighter brand to protect 
Marlboro, just as Procter & Gamble launched Bonux to protect Dash, and the Volkswagen 
Group acquired Seat and Skoda to safeguard Volkswagen. Finally, Toyota and Nissan have 
Lexus and Infinity as prestige brands.51
Brand equity
In the previous sections it has been argued that brands are valuable assets for marketing. 
Brand equity is a concept that is used to indicate the value of a brand. It is the value added 
to a product by virtue of its brand name.52 In fact, a distinction should be made between 
consumer brand equity and financial brand equity.53 The latter refers to the financial value of 
the brand for the company, the former to the underlying customer- and marketing-related 
components of brand equity. In practice, the concept of brand equity is used to describe 
both. Economically speaking, the value of a brand is the sum of all discounted future income 
streams attributable to the brand.
Financial brand equity
When looking at the balance sheet of companies marketing branded products, one generally 
finds only buildings, machines and inventories there. Seldom is the goodwill built up in well-
known brands shown. However, whenever a company is involved in mergers or acquisitions, 
the financial value of the brand portfolio becomes of great importance. Some say that the 
brand portfolio is the most valuable asset of a company. John Stuart, former president of 
Quaker Oats, illustrated this by stating: ‘If we were to split up the company, you can have 
all the buildings, I will take the brands. I am sure I will be more successful than you.’ As a 
result, huge amounts of money are paid for brand portfolios. Nestlé took over Rowntree 
(KitKat, After Eight, Rolo) for $4.5 billion, while analysts estimated the value at $3 billion. 
Similarly, the physical assets of Jaguar represented only 16% of the price Ford paid for it.54 
This brand value can also easily change (see Table 2.1).

BRAND EQUITY     59
How can the financial brand value be calculated? Different calculation methods exist. 
Interbrand, one of the leading brand valuation companies, uses four criteria:56
● A financial analysis to identify business earnings.
● A market analysis to determine what proportion of those earnings is attributable to the 
brand (‘branding index’).
● A brand analysis, to find out how strong the brand is in the perception of consumers 
(‘brand strength score’).
● A legal analysis, to establish how well a brand is legally protected.
Using these four categories, experts determine financial brand equity. In Table 2.2 an 
example is given of the importance of the brand (branding index), relative to other assets, in 
a number of industries.57 Especially in consumer product companies, the brand accounts for 
a large part of the business earnings. In IT and pharmaceutical companies, other intangibles, 
such as patents and the quality of personnel, are relatively more important. In industrial 
sectors, tangible assets play a major role. Obviously these percentages are only averages, and 
the situation may be significantly different from one company to the next. The higher the 
branding index or the importance of a brand for a company, the more branding strategy and 
brand support in terms of marketing communications will be important for the company’s 
economic success.
Another important aspect of the brand valuation system is the brand strength score. 
This is based on seven criteria with different weights. They are summarised in Table 2.3. 
Industry
Tangibles
Brand
Other intangibles
Utilities
70
0
30
Industrial
70
5
25
Pharmaceutical
40
10
50
Retail
70
15
15
Info tech
30
20
50
Automotive
50
30
20
Financial services
20
30
50
Food and drink
40
55
5
Luxury goods
25
70
5
Source: Perrier, R. (1997) Brand Valuation. London: Premier Books and Interbrand Group.
Table 2.2  The relative importance of brands (%)
Factor
Relative importance (%)
Leadership
25
Internationality
25
Stability
15
Market
10
Trend
10
Support
10
Protection
5
Source: Perrier, R. (1997) Brand Valuation. London: Premier Books and Interbrand Group.
Table 2.3  The brand strength index

60     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
The most important criteria are leadership and internationality (each accounting for 25% 
of the score). Obviously, a leading brand is generally a more stable and valuable property. 
Additionally, brands that have proved to be successful in different countries are assumed to 
be a more stable and robust asset. Customer loyalty accounts for 15%. Strong brands are 
brands with a loyal customer base. Brands that have been supported consistently by market-
ing investments, that show an increasing long-term trend and that are in markets in which 
branding is relatively important are also assumed to be more valuable. Finally, the value of 
well-protected brands is, of course, more secure.
Consumer brand equity
For a marketer, consumer brand equity is more important than financial brand value. 
The former type of brand equity, representing the ‘marketing value’ of a brand, can be 
measured in different ways, all of them trying to capture the extent to which the brand 
gives the product extra marketing strength. Figure 2.4 presents the components of con-
sumer brand equity.58 Each of the brand equity factors is determined and influenced 
by marketing communications strategy, and leads to a number of benefits. These are 
discussed in the following sections. In this section, the components of brand equity are 
looked at more closely.
A well-known brand is more valuable than an unknown brand. Consumers have 
more faith in a well-known brand. A distinction can be made between deep and broad 
brand awareness. Deep brand awareness means that the brand comes to mind easily and 
enjoys high top-of-mind awareness. Broad brand awareness refers to the fact that the 
brand comes to mind often, in different usage situations.59 Deep and broad awareness 
are necessary to penetrate the consideration set of consumers. The more a brand is in 
the consideration set of consumers, the greater the chance that it will be purchased and 
that consumers will become loyal to it.60 Furthermore, brand awareness leads to more 
interest and processing of advertising for the brand, thereby enhancing the effectiveness 
of marketing communications.61 Brand awareness is more than just being aware of the 
Figure 2.4  Components of consumer brand equity
Source: Based on Aaker, D.A. (1996) Building Strong Brands. New York: Free Press.

BRAND EQUITY     61
fact that the brand exists. It also includes knowing what the product stands for, and its 
attributes and characteristics, such as the brand logo, the manufacturing company, func-
tional, situational and symbolic characteristics, price, quality, performance and advertis-
ing characteristics.
Performance refers to the extent to which the product meets the customer’s utilitarian, 
aesthetic and economic needs and wants.62 The utilitarian needs are largely grasped by the 
attributes and the benefits that the product provides (number of calories, customer friendli-
ness, number of flights a day, a smooth shave, etc.). Besides attributes and benefits, there are 
also other dimensions that differentiate the brand and determine a brand’s performance. A 
nice style and design can be important to fulfil the consumer’s aesthetic needs (think of how 
Apple changed the computer landscape by introducing colours and frivolous designs). Price 
is important because consumers may infer from the price whether the product is cheap or 
expensive, and whether they can trust it or not. Perceived quality is the consumer’s subjective 
judgement about a product’s overall quality, its excellence and superiority relative to alter-
natives.63 Quality and superiority are extremely important because they largely determine 
brand purchase.64
Brand imagery65 is related to how well the brand fulfils consumers’ psychological and 
social needs. It refers to how consumers think about a brand in an abstract way rather than 
to what consumers believe the brand really does. Brand imagery pertains to intangible brand 
aspects that can become linked to the brand by customer experience, marketing communi-
cations, word of mouth, etc. A first intangible association that consumers can make with a 
brand is user image. For example, the stereotypical user of Oil of Olay is seen as ‘a pretty, 
down-to-earth, solid, female citizen’.66 It goes without saying that a brand’s user image 
should correspond to the target group’s actual or ideal self to be effective.67 A second type 
of intangible association pertains to usage imagery. Usage imagery indicates which usage 
situations consumers associate with a brand or product. For example, most consumers 
would think that it is more appropriate to drink a soft drink in the afternoon or evening than 
at breakfast. Likewise, a smoking jacket would be highly unsuitable to visit an amusement 
park, but has a perfect fit with a gala party. Private label products may also be perfect for 
private use, but not for gift giving.
McDonald’s has focused on kids and families for many years. In response to the greying of the population and an 
expanding older market, McDonald’s tried to capture the more adult audience. To this end, the company launched 
the Deluxe line, ‘hamburgers for adults’, with a sophisticated, grown-up taste. The line included the Fish Fillet Deluxe, 
Grilled Chicken Deluxe, Crispy Chicken Deluxe and as flagship the Arch Deluxe. The new line was launched by a 
$100 million ad campaign. Both the products and the campaign were very different from what people expected 
and were used to from McDonald’s. The ads showed kids looking puzzled at the complex hamburger and making 
‘yucky faces’. Ronald was even shown in ‘adult’ activities like golf and pool. McDonald’s key values and key consumer 
associations are friendliness, cleanliness, consistency, simplicity and convenience. That is what people expect to 
get from McDonald’s and that is the reason why they go to McDonald’s – not to get a sophisticated burger at a high 
price. McDonald’s gradually discontinued the line and currently only a few sandwiches (such as Chicken McGrill) 
are still available. It is estimated that McDonald’s lost about $300 million in research, production and marketing for 
the Deluxe line. The Deluxe line is considered as one of the biggest marketing flops in history, on the same level 
as New Coke.68
Business insight
Arch Deluxe: an expensive McFlop

62     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
As a third type of intangible associations, brands can also have a symbolic meaning 
or a personality. Brand personality can be defined as the set of ‘human personality traits 
that are both applicable to and relevant for brands’.69 A brand’s personality is stronger 
if its elements are deliberately co-ordinated and if the personality is kept consistent over 
time. In 1997, Jennifer Aaker developed the Brand Personality Scale (BPS) to measure 
a brand’s personality.70 The BPS distinguishes five personality dimensions: (1) sincerity 
(down-to-earth, honest, wholesome and cheerful), (2) excitement (daring, spirited, imagi-
native and up-to-date), (3) competence (reliable, intelligent and successful), (4) sophisti-
cation (upper class and charming) and (5) ruggedness (outdoorsy and tough). In her US 
study, MTV scored highly on excitement, CNN on competence, Levi’s on ruggedness, 
Revlon on sophistication and Campbell on sincerity. However, in a later cross-cultural 
study in Japan and Spain, only three of the five factors emerged. Furthermore, Aaker did 
include not only personality items in her scale, but also user characteristics such as male, 
female, upper class, Western, etc. To solve the foregoing shortcomings, a new scale was 
developed and it proved to be robust in the USA and the ten different European countries 
in which it was tested. The new measure also consists of five dimensions, but shows more 
affinity with the Big Five of human personality than Aaker’s dimensions do: (1) respon-
sibility (down-to-earth, stable, responsible), (2) activity (active, dynamic, innovative), (3) 
aggressiveness (aggressive, bold), (4) simplicity (ordinary, simple) and (5) emotionality 
(romantic, sentimental).71 In the current competitive environment, engineering brand 
symbolism and a brand personality are becoming more important. The success of Lego, 
for example, is linked not only to its physical attributes, being the simple and distinctive 
Lego bricks, but also to the psychological meaning of a company committed to fostering 
creative imagination.72
Finally, brand feelings or consumers’ emotional responses to the brand are an impor-
tant element of brand equity. For example, warmth, fun, excitement, self-respect, social 
approval and security are considered as important types of brand-building feelings.73 
These feelings may have become associated to the brand by means of its marketing com-
munications programme or the experiences the consumer had with the brand. They may 
also stem from the attributes or benefits consumers associate with the brand. The relation 
between attributes and consumers’ end-values/feelings can be revealed by the ‘means–end 
chain’. The structure of the ‘ladder’ of meanings that a brand can deliver is often pre-
sented as a ‘means–end chain’, with six levels (associations) (Table 2.4).74 First of all, a 
brand suggests a number of both concrete and abstract attributes. Concrete attributes can 
be the Absolut Vodka bottle or the lubricating strip on a Gillette razor. Abstract attributes 
Concrete 
attributes
Abstract 
attributes
Functional 
benefits
Psycho-social 
benefits
Instrumental 
values
End-values
Bacardi 
Breezer
Less alcohol
Filling
I drink less 
alcohol
I avoid the 
negatives of 
alcohol
I am more able 
to socialise 
and can really 
enjoy my 
friends
I get the 
feeling  
I belong to the 
group
50 cl cola can
Too much to 
drink
Cola gets 
warm
I cannot drink 
it all
I throw it away
I am wasting 
money
I feel 
irresponsible
Spicy Doritos
Flavour
Strong taste
I eat less
I don’t get fat
I maintain a 
good figure
I feel good 
about myself
Source: Based on Reynolds, T.J. and Gutman, J. (2001), ‘Laddering theory, method, analysis, and interpretation’, in Reynolds, T.J. and Olson, J.C. (eds), Understanding 
Consumer Decision Making: The Means-End Approach to Marketing and Advertising Strategy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 25–62.
Table 2.4  Means–end chains and brand association structures

BRAND EQUITY     63
can be the level of technology in a Saab car or the good taste of Danone yoghurt. These 
attributes lead to functional and psycho-social benefits. A functional benefit of Elsève 
hairspray is that you avoid sticky hair. The psycho-social benefit of Nespresso coffee may 
be that guests feel happy and have more fun drinking it. Finally, brands are also associated 
with instrumental and end-values. Using Dolce and Gabbana perfume may enable you to 
impress others (instrumental values), leading to a higher level of self-esteem (end-value). 
The concept of means–end chains is derived from the fact that the attributes (means) lead 
to benefits, which eventually lead to values (ends). For instance, Dorito crisps are made 
of corn and have a special flavour; as a result, they are tasty and guests have more fun 
and enjoy visiting you, which makes you a good host, leading to the desired end-value 
of higher self-esteem. The final goal of consumption and brand choice is to satisfy end-
value needs.
In assessing brand association structures, not only should the evoked associations be 
measured, but also their desirability, strength and uniqueness,75 i.e. the extent to which 
customers value the associations they make, and the extent to which the brand is perceived 
to be the only one that evokes that particular set of associations.
Other assets also determine brand equity, such as the number of stores carrying the 
brand, the percentage of people that have easy access to the brand, shelf space, patents and 
trademarks, quality of staff, labels, etc.
The first four factors of brand equity do not imply any real behaviour on the part of the 
consumer. Evidently, real brand strength will be translated into consumers buying the brand 
and being loyal to it. Behind every powerful brand stands a group of loyal consumers. In 
fact, the real company asset is brand loyalty, not the brand itself. Different levels of loyalty 
can be distinguished (Figure 2.5). Evidently, a strong brand implies that as many custom-
ers as possible are satisfied, committed buyers. Not only will committed buyers repurchase 
the brand, but also they will actively promote your brand to others and function as real 
ambassadors. Striving for customer loyalty is also a cost-saving strategy. Research indicates 
that the cost of attracting new customers can be as much as six times greater than the cost 
of retaining existing customers.76 One way to retain loyal customers and committed buyers 
is to address marketing programmes in such a way that consumers are offered an experi-
ence instead of a product. For example, marketers and consumers can jointly build brand 
Figure 2.5  The loyalty pyramid

64     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
communities where brand experiences can be built and/or shared. A brand community is 
‘a specialised, non-geographically bound community, based on a structured set of social 
relationships among users of a brand’.77 Jeep, for example, organises brand fests such as 
Jeep Jamborees (regional rallies focusing on off-road trail driving), Camp Jeep (national 
rally offering lifestyle and product-related activities) and Jeep 101 (off-road driving course), 
all attracting a wide range of Jeep owners and their friends. Even Jeep owners who come to 
the event with a feeling of being different from the others seem to leave the event believing 
they belong to a broader community. Brand communities also exist for Harley-Davidson 
(Harley Owner Groups, HOGs) and Apple. By managing their communities in the right way, 
companies can build fierce loyalty, enhance marketing efficiency and increase their brand’s 
equity.78 Certainly, customers who feel they belong to a brand community will remain brand 
loyal. Moreover, the experiences gathered by means of the brand community increase word 
of mouth, leading to many friends also buying the brand.
Benefits of branding
Strong brands have a number of benefits for the company, the retailer and the consumer.79 
They help the consumer to locate and identify products and evaluate their quality. This 
makes it easier for the consumer to develop attitudes and expectations. A brand name serves 
as a shorthand label for a large bundle of associations and the whole brand personality. 
Branding makes shopping more efficient in that it reduces the amount of decision-making 
time required and the perceived risk of purchase, as a result of the fact that a brand promises 
a constant level of quality. It gives consumers the ability to assess quickly the value and qual-
ity of new products by association with a well-known brand name. Furthermore, the con-
sumer derives a psychological reward, since some brands, like Rolex or Lexus, are regarded 
as status symbols. Finally, branding increases the innovation potential of manufacturers, 
thus leading to more variety and consumer choice.
Retailers also benefit from strong brands because they improve the image of the store, and 
as a result attract customers. Strong brands often result in lower selling costs and a higher 
inventory turnover. Furthermore, retailers benefit from the marketing support the brand 
gets, by means of advertising, sales promotion and in-store communications.
Last but not least, manufacturers benefit greatly from high-equity brands.80 In Table 2.5, 
the benefits for the manufacturer are summarised per brand equity component. High brand 
awareness puts the brand in the evoked set of many consumers, and may even give it a promi-
nent place in this evoked set. The more a brand is in the evoked set of consumers, the more 
probable it becomes that the consumer is going to buy it. Promotional support is facilitated.
Well-known brands are also capable of developing favourable attitudes and perceptions 
more easily, again leading to more sales. Additionally, well-known brands can lead to more 
interest and trust by retailers, resulting in easier access to the distribution channel. Well-
known brands also increase the power of the manufacturer over the retailer. As already 
mentioned, a brand name serves as a shorthand signal for favourable brand associations. 
Brand awareness also gives the company and the brand a sense of trustworthiness and the 
image of commitment.
Good product performance and higher perceived quality give the consumer a good reason 
to buy the product, but also the right user image or brand personality induces people to 
buy the product. Higher perceived quality as well as a positive brand personality and higher 
customer loyalty give the company the opportunity of charging a premium price. Further-
more, it protects the company against future price competition. Positive brand imagery, 
strong brand-evoked feelings, good performance and high-quality perceptions enable the 
manufacturer to create a differential advantage, to build up a defence against the competi-
tion and to target and position products in a more sophisticated way. The same brand equity 

MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS AND BRAND EQUITY     65
components also give the manufacturer an efficient base for line or brand extensions. The 
image and personality of the brand are easily carried over to the new product, giving it a 
head start. An extensive set of brand associations helps the consumer retrieve information 
from memory, thus facilitating the purchasing process and biasing it towards the brand.
A strong brand is capable of fostering brand loyalty. It is a vehicle in forging stable relation-
ships between the consumer and the manufacturer. It reduces the marketing cost, because 
it is cheaper to retain an existing loyal customer than to win over a new one. Brand loyalty 
leads to more support from the distribution channel and makes the company less vulnerable 
to competitive action. Overall, the most important consequence of possessing strong brands 
is that it can generate higher and more stable sales and profits.
Marketing communications and brand equity
Marketing communications are the voice of a brand. In general, the role of marketing commu-
nications is to inform, persuade and remind consumers of the brand essence and associations, to 
engage consumers in a dialogue and to build relationships, or even a brand community. Market-
ing communications play a vital role in building, maintaining and ­developing brands.
A number of communications tools can be used to build and reinforce brand equity. 
­Others, however, should be avoided or used carefully. Taking a long-term perspective of brand 
management, managerial efforts can be classified in two types of activities: brand-building 
and brand-harming activities.81 High advertising spending and investing in corporate social 
responsibility initiatives are examples of brand-building activities. Frequent use of price pro-
motions, on the other hand, dilutes the brand in the long run and can therefore be classified as 
a brand-harming activity. Indeed, price cuts and other types of immediate material incentives 
may reduce the quality perception of brands and the potential of the brand to command a 
Brand equity components
Benefits
Brand awareness
● Brand in evoked set
● Influence on attitude and perceptions
● Anchor for associations
● Signal of substance/commitment
Product performance/perceived quality
● Price premium
● Differentiation/positioning
● Reason to buy
● Channel member interest
● Brand extension potential
Imagery associations (user type, brand 
personality, history, feelings)
● Differentiation/positioning
● High price premium
● Memory retrieval potential
● Reason to buy
● Brand extension potential
High brand loyalty
● Reduced marketing costs
● Trade leverage
● Attracting new customers
● Time to respond to competitive threats
Table 2.5  Brand equity components and branding benefits

66     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
premium price. On the other hand, loyalty promotions may serve both as a reward for loyal 
customers and as a means of enhancing the loyalty-creating effect of brand strength with 
new customers.
Direct mailings used in a ‘junk mail’ way could also harm the brand. A beautiful and 
convincing image campaign may be completely overturned and destroyed by frequent, 
straightforward, hard sell direct mailing campaigns. On the other hand, public relations, 
if well handled, and corporate image-building can be valuable brand-building activities for 
corporate brands. McDonald’s did not open a restaurant in Moscow because of its immedi-
ate profit potential. The worldwide coverage of the event in the media gave it massive free 
publicity and positioned the company as very international and forward-looking. On the 
other hand, Perrier reacted so clumsily to the problem of ­benzene in its mineral water that 
the image of the brand was seriously damaged. Consistent corporate identity and corporate 
image-building through packaging and design add to building and maintaining the long-
term network of associations, one of the factors of brand equity.82
Corporate identity-building can lead to powerful associations between colours or symbols and brand names. Con-
sider the following examples:
● Golden arches symbolise McDonald’s.
● The circle with the triangular star is Mercedes.
● Three stripes on a shoe is Adidas.
● A stylised lion is the ING Bank.
● IBM owns dark blue in business machines.
● Red is Coca-Cola and blue is Pepsi in the soft drink market.
● In batteries, bronze and black is Duracell.
Business insight
Colours and symbols as brand-building tools
Marketing communications are crucial contributors to brand equity in several ways. A 
first step in brand-building is creating deep and broad brand awareness.83 Deep awareness 
means that the brand is strongly linked with its product category and enjoys high top-of-
mind awareness. Frequent advertising using slogans, baselines or jingles that make reference 
to the product category help to build top-of-mind awareness. British Airways, for example, 
used as a baseline ‘the world’s favourite airline’. Broad awareness refers to the fact that con-
sumers easily think of the brand in different situations. When Febreze was launched, P&G 
used ads showing that the product could be used to prevent bad odours in laundry, in shoes, 
in curtains, in carpets, in cars, etc., which stimulated broad awareness. Once a brand node 
is well established in memory, it is easier to create additional links. Therefore, focusing on 
brand meaning or brand image comes in only after brand awareness has been established. 
Also for building brand image, advertising is an excellent tool. Brand image communications 
can focus on product performance (stressing ingredients, attributes, benefits such as product 
reliability, product durability, service, style, price, etc.) or on imagery (who is the typical user, 
when and where can the product be used, brand personality and brand values, brand history, 

MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS AND BRAND EQUITY     67
feelings, etc.). Miele, for example, works more on performance than on imagery, stressing the 
durability of its products. Coke Zero ads show that the product is meant for men, whereas 
Coke Light ads have always made clear that females are the target users. In general, print, 
factual ads are better for performance-building, and TV and cinema advertising are more 
suited to build imagery. For more on specific advertising types (e.g. emotional ads, demon-
strations, etc.), see Chapter 5.
To form a rich network of associations around a brand, it is advisable to alternate performance and imagery 
communications. For example, when the Belgian airline Brussels Airlines was founded, it used print ads to 
create performance. The performance ads stressed how convenient it is to book a Brussels Airlines ticket, its 
cheap price, etc. Further, TV ads and viral marketing were used to create imagery. For example, the passion-
ate personality of the airline was shown in an emotional TV ad where the ground crew hurried up to form the 
sentence ‘Mr Jones, it’s a boy’ when the passenger could not be reached by phone because the flight had just 
taken off. This same ad was used in viral marketing allowing consumers to adapt the ‘it’s a boy’ message and 
send it to their partner, friends, etc.
Business insight
Alternating performance and imagery communications
Also, when a brand has been on the market for a long time, investing in communica-
tions that strengthen deep and broad awareness, and that reinforce brand performance 
and imagery, remains necessary.84 For example, for many brands, enhancing the breadth of 
awareness is an important basis for future growth. If consumers choose Special K cereals 
not only for breakfast, but also as a snack in the afternoon, this can seriously drive up sales 
volume. Also, when a brand node is not regularly accessed it will become less likely that it 
is activated in purchase situations.
Although advertising is the key tool of marketing communications when it comes 
to building and sustaining strong brands, it is not the only tool that can or should be 
used. In the spirit of integrated marketing communications (see Chapter 1), differ-
ent ­communication tools should be mixed and matched to reach an optimal effect. Red 
Bull, for example, invested more in below- than above-the-line communications to support 
its brand.85 It used buzz or rumour marketing (e.g. one of the product’s ingredients, tau-
rine, was not allowed at first in the EU; this created a forbidden fruit effect: What would the 
product be like? Would it really give an energy boost? Would it be harmful?, etc.), outdoor 
marketing (e.g. Minis driving in the city with a big can of Red Bull installed on the vehicle, 
hiring youngsters to put empty cans in discotheques and trendy places), point-of-purchase 
materials (e.g. Red Bull insisted on having its own fridge in discotheques and fancy clubs), 
and sampling in colleges and universities to create awareness. Its TV ads also served to 
build awareness, but added a humorous touch at the same time which helped to convey the 
brand personality. Sponsoring of extreme sports events and sports athletes helped to build 
credibility that the brand indeed revitalises the body. Fuel nozzles in petrol stations broad-
ened brand awareness and reminded people that Red Bull is not only about energising the 
body, but also the mind. No doubt, the combined effect of all these communications tools 

68     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
on Red Bull’s brand equity was higher than any single communications tool could have 
generated. In current times, social media should also not be forgotten. Involving customers 
and potential customers, providing them with both interesting and fun information, and 
having them generate unexpected or cool experiences are crucial to build a bond, make 
them revisit the web page and have them not only press the ‘I like’ button but talk about 
the brand to other people.
In the next chapter and the chapters on specific communications tools, these issues will 
be explored in more depth.
Summary
A brand is a bundle of meanings; it adds either rational and tangible aspects or symbolic, 
emotional and intangible dimensions to a product that differentiate it from competitive prod-
ucts. Brand names should be memorable, meaningful, likeable, adaptable, transferable and 
protectable. There are different categories of brands. To compete with manufacturer brands, 
distributors introduce own-label brands and generic products. Successful brands have a num-
ber of common characteristics. The products are original, of good quality and differentiated 
from the competition, and the brand is supported by the management, employees and charac-
terised by additional service and integrated communications support in a long-term perspec-
tive. Companies can choose different strategies for their brands. Besides co-branding with 
other brands, an extension or multi-brand strategy can be adopted. Also corporate branding, 
i.e. using the same company name for all company products, is a possibility. Not only does 
brand equity have to be built, but also it has to be sustained over time. In this respect, the 
brand portfolio may have to be adapted once in a while. It is important that the portfolio 
maximises market coverage, minimises brand overlap and is efficiently composed. To protect 
the main brand (bastion brand), flanker, fighter and prestige brands may be useful. Brand 
strength is measured on the basis of a number of factors, such as leadership, internationality 
and stability. The marketing value of a brand, or brand equity, is composed of five factors: 
brand awareness; product performance and perceived quality; imagery associations and brand 
feelings; high brand loyalty; and other assets such as legal protection and a good distribution 
network. Strong brands lead to a number of benefits for the company, the consumer and the 
retailer. Brand equity is developed and supported by means of consistent, long-term, inte-
grated marketing communications. It is important to build deep and broad awareness first 
before creating a positive image.
Review questions
	 1.	 What is a brand? What are the characteristics of a good brand? What types of brand can 
be distinguished?
	 2.	 What are the characteristics of successful brands?
	 3.	 What are the benefits and disadvantages of line and brand stretching versus multi-branding?  
What are the implications of the two types of strategy for marketing communications?
	 4.	 What is a brand portfolio and what different functions can the composing brands serve?
	 5.	 What is brand equity and what are its main components?
	 6.	 How can marketing communications influence brand equity?
	 7.	 What are the benefits of strong brands for the consumer and for the manufacturer?

Case 2     69
Further reading
Aaker, D. (2011) Brand Relevance: Making Competitors Irrelevant. New York: Wiley.
Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Strategic Brand Management: A European 
Perspective, 2nd edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
Kumar, N. and Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M. (2007) Private Label Strategy. Harvard, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press.
Laforet, S. (2010) Managing Brands: A Contemporary Perspective. Maidenhead: 
McGraw-Hill.
Journal of Brand Management, http://www.palgrave-journals.com/bm/index.html.
Journal of Product and Brand Management, http://www.emeraldinsight.com.
Case 2:
Barco, projecting the magic
Barco was founded in Belgium in 1934 by Lucien De Puydt, 
who specialised in the assembly of radios with American 
components. He called the company ‘The Belgian-American 
Radio Corporation’, or Barco. In the 1940s, Barco picked up 
with an innovation in communication technology, namely 
television. From the 1960s onwards, Barco started to diver-
sify into different industries. Today, Barco is a world leader 
concerning visualisation solutions for a variety of selected 
professional markets, such as control rooms, defence and 
aerospace, digital cinema, health care, media and entertain-
ment, and simulation and virtual reality. These markets are 
served by Barco’s four main divisions: Entertainment, Health-
care, Control Rooms & Simulation, and Defence & Aerospace. 
Worldwide, Barco has about 3500 employees and its sales 
amounted to about €1.041 billion in 2011. The latter denotes 
a sharp increase of €400 million in just two years.
Barco is present in more than 90 countries and is vis-
ible almost everywhere: screens at pop concerts and 
sports events, screens in aircraft, projectors in movie 
theatres, screens in hospitals, screens for company pres-
entations, screens to monitor industry processes, etc. 
For example, U2, Madonna and Bon Jovi all use Barco 
screens for their concert tours; Barco’s screens are used 
for the Eurovision Song Contest; six times in a row Barco 
has been the exclusive partner of the Berlin Interna-
tional Film Festival; Barco was omnipresent at the Shang-
hai World Expo; China uses Barco to help monitor the 
country’s electricity network; Barco ensures the safety of 
a million travellers on the Sao Paulo metro; Delhi’s police 
surveillance centre relies on Barco; major hospitals all 
around the world use Barco equipment. However, since 
Barco is active in business-to-business markets, hardly 
any consumer knows the company. Consequently, Barco 
is one of the world’s best-kept secrets.
To become more visible and to build a stronger brand, 
Barco adopted a corporate branding strategy in 2010, which 
has clearly paid off as its recent success in digital cinema 
shows. In the following paragraphs, we describe Barco’s 
strategic and branding orientation of the past and at pre-
sent and how this brand focus helped it to gain leadership 
in digital cinema.
The Barco brand: past and present
Barco used to adhere to a product orientation, firmly believing  
that high-quality products and technologies would automat-
ically result in market success. Concerning brand identity, the 
following elements were considered as core building blocks: 
quality, reliability, technological advantage, performance and 
being the category reference. As many of Barco’s employees 
are engineers, such a product orientation was largely sup-
ported by managers and personnel alike. Moreover, since 
Barco’s products had easily ‘sold themselves’ in the past, 
Barco was convinced that customers’ perceptions matched 

70     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
its own beliefs. Although high-quality products and tech-
nologies are obviously important, unfortunately they cannot 
make Barco unique since they can be easily copied. Further, 
even in a high-tech B2B environment, high quality is not 
the only thing that matters. An image study in 2002 made 
this painfully clear to Barco. The study showed that Barco 
was perceived as company-centred, technical, technology-
driven, purely factual without an emotional link, not contain-
ing a ‘feelgood’ factor or possessing much likeability. In short, 
a rather distant and boring brand. Some customers even said 
they just bought Barco because there was not yet a competi-
tor for some of the products, adding ‘as soon as an alternative 
comes onto the market, we will buy from them’. No need to 
stress that this was an unpleasant message for Barco.
As well as these image problems, each division appeared 
to have its own ‘look and feel’ and communicated in differ-
ent ways to the customers: different colours were used; the 
corporate slogan ‘Innovators in Image Processing’ was used 
by some but not all divisions; company presentations were 
made in completely different templates, etc. The divisions 
not only looked different, but also felt as if they belonged to 
different companies. For example, when a customer asked 
for information about projectors at a show where LCD 
screens were on display, an employee simply answered, ‘Oh, 
that’s not us, you need to talk to the Barco projector guys’, 
without trying to help the customer.
Barco responded with a corporate branding programme 
to give the company ‘one face’ and to move from a product-
orientated company towards a customer-orientated com-
pany. To this end, first a unified vision and mission were 
spelt out that explicitly incorporated the customer-orien-
tation aspect. Barco’s vision is that, as imaging is revolution-
ising the world, accurate processing and display of visual 
information have become critical in the business world. 
This inherent complexity demands user-friendly solutions. 
In line with this vision, Barco’s mission is ‘to create value 
through the design and delivery of user-friendly imaging 
solutions to selected professional markets on a global basis’.
Building further on the vision and mission, four general 
principles were articulated underlying the new branding 
strategy.
Principle 1: One brand
Barco is the one powerbrand across all segments and catego-
ries in all divisions. Sub-brands can be installed, but only in 
a secondary role to support the Barco brand. One logo, one 
baseline, one website, one overall look and feel are installed.
Principle 2: One company
The corporate brand defines the end promise of all products, 
in all markets, segments and product categories. The branding 
strategy needs to be applied in all divisions and all markets, so 
that it is clear, for example, that it is Barco and not the division 
Control Rooms & Simulation that is launching a new product.
Principle 3: Customer centred
The new branding strategy is driven and inspired by Barco’s 
customers. It is based on customer insights, customer lan-
guage, customer decision processes and customer buying 
behaviour.
Principle 4: Focus on Barco strategy
The branding strategy is an important contributor to Barco’s 
mid-term and long-term corporate objectives. An impor-
tant objective of Barco is to be number one or a strong 
number two in all the markets it serves.
Rucci, Kirn and Quinn (1998) demonstrated that the 
engagement and commitment of employees towards the 
brand and the company have a significant impact on how they 
treat customers and, consequently, on customers’ perceptions 
and business performance. They showed that companies that 
were rated by their employees as a great place to work wit-
nessed a 25% growth in share and dividend returns compared 
with 6.3% for other companies. Keeping this in mind, Barco 
continuously delivered important efforts to involve employ-
ees in each of the brand process steps. Further, to reinforce 
the brand story and to increase employee commitment, an 
internal ‘to be one’ branding programme was installed con-
sisting of the following internal brand identity guidelines:
‘to be one’: Internal brand identity guidelines
One team
Barco has a team of 3500 dedicated professionals
One vision
Barco leads the way in digital visualisation for professionals
One image
Barco stands for innovation, quality and customer intimacy
One culture
Barco shares a common set of strong values: accountability, customer focus, 
innovation, integrity, team spirit, trust
One goal
Barco aims for global leadership in all its target markets
One future
Barco continuously invests in new technologies
One billion
Barco is a €1 billion revenue company

Case 2     71
According to an employee survey, Barco managed to 
keep high employee engagement after the brand redi-
rections. For example, 72% of the employees agree or 
strongly agree that they feel proud to work for Barco,  
65% feel motivated to go beyond their formal job 
responsibilities, 71% feel their job provides them with 
the opportunity to do challenging and interesting work,  
73% agree they are treated with respect as individuals, 
and 89% agree that the people in their team are com-
mitted to delivering high-quality products and services. 
These findings are also reflected in the fact that CRF Insti-
tute (an independent company specialising in interna-
tional working conditions research) named Barco as one 
of Belgium’s ‘Top Employers’ in 2011.
Next, it was time for Barco to practise what it preached. 
The marketing communications campaigns for digital cin-
ema projectors launched in 2010 was the first test case of 
the new strategy.
Digital cinema: from challenger  
to market leader
Barco launched the first digital projector in 1999. Shortly 
afterwards, the first generation of digital cinema projec-
tors followed. However, the market was not very interested 
at that time. The main reason was that, for conventional 
projection, movie studios pay the costs of the film reels 
whereas, for digital projection, the movie theatres them-
selves had to bear the huge costs of the expensive digital 
projectors, with studios saving on distribution costs (a film 
reel costs up to $1000 a theatre). With the launch of the 
3-D movie Avatar, demand took off. At that time, there 
were four digital projector manufacturers in the market: 
Christie (the historic market leader in the cinema market), 
Sony (strong consumer brand holding a dominant market 
position from cameras to movie production), NEC (strong 
consumer brand) and, as an underdog, Barco. Initially, all 
offerings were technology-focused, with none of the com-
panies having a clear technological advantage as most 
players – except Sony – used the same chipset from Texas 
Instruments. Sony had an advantage as it had access to 4K 
resolution technology (i.e. an image size of 4096 * 2160 
pixels as compared with 2K or 2048 * 1080 resolution for 
the other companies). However, digital cinema was not 
driven by resolution but by 3-D. For 3-D there is 80% light 
loss, therefore brightness is more important than resolu-
tion. As Barco was strong in brightness, it held a competitive 
advantage here. In contrast to the other three players, it did 
not focus on the technical advantage though, but built a 
brand-centred campaign. To strengthen the link between 
Barco and digital cinema, the central element of the cam-
paign was a stinger movie which was shown at tradeshows, 
at customer demonstrations, in Barco offices and, most 
important of all, in cinema theatres before the main movie. 
In line with the new branding strategy, Barco looked at what 
its technology could do for the end-user. Therefore, the 
stinger movie showed the magic of cinema as experienced 
by a young boy and fireflies were used as a metaphor for 
the light Barco was bringing. The headline was ‘Projecting 
the magic’. Instead of overwhelming potential customers 
with the exact technological details, the movie stressed the 
result of the extra brightness and focused on emotion.
The stinger movie was not the only tool Barco used. 
To maximise the impact of the campaign and to ensure 
all target groups were reached, the stinger movie was 
accompanied by an integrated marketing communications 
campaign. To this end, Barco also made use of the following 
marketing communications tools:
● Direct mailing to Film Echo magazine subscribers
● Ads in various trade press worldwide
● Dedicated website: www.projectingthemagic.com
● Online advertising (Manice, Cinema Today)
● Barco quarterly digital cinema e-newsletter
● Video on YouTube
● Social media: Twitter, Facebook (screensaver and 
wallpaper)
● Presence and screenings at tradeshows (e.g. Showest, 
USA; Cinema Expo, the Netherlands)
● Press release announcing the new projector range.
The tradeshows were very important for Barco, resulting 
in more than 1000 visitors a day. Importantly, it was able to 
reach the whole industry at only four key tradeshows and 
to generate 1200 leads, of which 250 were qualified. The 
online campaign resulted in 6500 web visitors with more 
than 34 000 page views. The stinger on YouTube resulted 
in more than 2400 views with more than 800 downloads 
of source files from barco.com. E-blasts had a read rate of 
47% and a click-through rate of 23% (as compared with an 
industry average of 1%). But, most importantly, Barco cre-
ated massive credibility in the industry.
How did the competitors try to counter Barco’s attack? 
Sony played even more on 4K and Christie copied Sony 
by announcing 4K projectors as well, even though Texas 
Instruments would not have the chip for 4K ready. However, 
according to industry specialists, 4K is nothing more than 
a marketing hype and brightness is more important as far 
as 3-D projection is concerned. Barco would soon have 4K 
projectors ready, but did not want to compromise the sales 
of its 2K projectors. To this end, Barco responded to Christie 
and Sony in a three-phased approach: (1) a viral campaign; 
(2) the launch of the 4K projector at the opening night of 
Cinemark; and (3) a Guinness world record. For the viral 
campaign, Barco hired Peter Knight, a freelance projection-
ist and valued guest writer in industry magazines. He trav-
elled from Europe to Orlando (where Barco will later launch  

72     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
which are probably more important than pure 
­resolution as they are perceived by the human eye 
first.
I started this quest not knowing much about 4K, 
and what I have discovered is that where 4K is con-
cerned, you need to look at much more than just 
resolution and even the image on the screen. You 
its 4K projector) and interviewed key stakeholders in the 
industry on the value of 4K. Every day he reported his find-
ings on www.the4Kdiaries.com and Twitter. The 4K diaries 
website received 2250 visitors. Examples of posts are:
Indeed, there is more to image quality than resolu-
tion. There are other things to consider as Michael 
Karagosian explained, such as colour and contrast, 
Source: Reproduced with permission of Barco.

Case 2     73
has for this industry). According to a customer loyalty study 
conducted by an independent research firm in 2011, Barco’s 
secured loyalists in the digital cinema industry grew from 
33% in 2009 to 55% in 2011, a customer loyalty mark that 
is 12 points above the industry benchmark. Barco’s image 
proved to be the most impactful loyalty driver in the digital 
cinema market with products achieving third place (in other 
industries served by Barco, products consistently form the 
top loyalty driver) (see also Figure 2.6). Nevertheless, Barco 
needs to keep on improving its projectors and that is exactly 
what it does. Right now, it already has a projector that pro-
duces 55 000 lumens of light. Barco also incorporated laser 
technology into the light engines and integrated media 
servers and theatre management systems software to offer 
its customers the capability of integrated systems. By con-
sistently putting customers’ needs first, Barco has become 
a more customer-orientated (and less a mere product- 
orientated) company.
Thirdly, in terms of in-house confidence the cam-
paign was also a big success. ‘Projecting the magic’ was 
the first campaign for a specific product that Barco 
launched after the new branding strategy was installed. 
The smooth co-operation between the different divi-
sional, regional and corporate Barco teams was seen as 
one of the success factors of the campaign. The spec-
tacular results reinforced the company’s belief that ‘to 
be one’ was the right way to go and recognised the new 
Corporate Marketing organisation as an important spar-
ring partner for other divisions. In this sense, the cam-
paign also resulted in a significant motivational boost 
for all Barco’s employees.
To conclude, in a couple of years Barco managed to move 
from a merely technology-focused to a more customer-
focused organisation. Technology remains important, but, 
need to consider the whole cinema going experience 
as a concept which could provide additional revenue 
for cinema owners.
For the launch of Barco’s 4K projector, the company 
managed to get established parties in the industry as 
sponsors. This enhanced Barco’s credibility even more as 
it was not just Barco who was announcing a new digi-
tal cinema projector, but the whole industry. Third and 
most importantly, Barco managed to get a new category 
inserted in the Guinness Book of World Records: the bright-
est projector. Barco set a new record in this category with 
43 000 lumens of light (as compared with 20 000 lumens 
for competitive brands), which is comparable with the 
combined light output of about 1700 regular flashlights. 
From then on, Barco started advertising with the slogan 
‘brightest projector on the planet’. Christie and Sony did 
not respond.
What about the results? Firstly, in terms of sales, the 
campaign supported Barco’s rapid market expansion and 
boosted the company’s image in the cinema market. Barco 
became industry leader with a 40% market share and 25 000 
projectors installed by the end of 2011. Importantly, Barco 
obtained these spectacular results with a modest budget 
of about €400 000. Approximately half of the budget was 
spent on tradeshow participation, 35% on advertising and 
a modest 15% on campaign creation and collateral. Further 
recognition of the campaign was the LACP Spotlight Award 
Barco received (LACP is a global communications competi-
tion) and inclusion by MLC (Marketing Leadership Council) 
in its top 50 of B2B campaigns.
Secondly, Barco displayed one consistent and recognisa-
ble brand image in the digital cinema sector (and not differ-
ent images for the different types of projectors the company 
Figure 2.6  Drivers of performance and impact

74     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
3.	 Currently Barco is active in several markets. Would you 
advise Barco to do more brand extensions in the future? 
Would you advise it to focus on fewer markets?
4.	 What are the major strengths of the Barco brand?
5.	 Do you think Barco has a high Brand Strength Index? 
What about its customer brand equity?
6.	 What communications tools does Barco use in its 
‘­Projecting the magic’ campaign? Do you think this was 
a good choice? Why (not)? What else would you suggest, 
if any?
7.	 To what extent is the campaign in line with the principles 
of the new branding strategy?
unlike in the past, one face for the whole organisation and 
one brand image in terms of providing the right customer 
solution in all its markets have become important as well. 
By following the ‘one brand’, ‘one company’, ‘customer cen-
tred’ and ‘focus on Barco’s mid-term and long-term strat-
egy’, the ‘Projecting the magic’ campaign for digital cinema 
became a big success.
Questions
1.	 What branding strategy did Barco use in the past? Which 
one is it currently using?
2.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of the cur-
rent branding strategy?
Sources: Based on information provided by Koen Helsen, VP Corporate Marketing, and Lieven Bertier, Brand & e-Marketing Manager, Annual Report 2009, 
2010 and 2011, www.barco.com; Rucci, A.J., Kirn, S.P. and Quinn, R.T. (1998) ‘The Employee–customer profit chain at Sears’, Harvard Business Review, 76(1), 82; 
the 2010 Employee Survey (HayGroup), and the Customer Loyalty 2011 Study, Focus on Digital Cinema (Synovate).
References
1	 De Chernatony, L. and McDonald, M. (1998) Creat-
ing Powerful Brands in Consumer Service and Indus-
trial Markets. Oxford: Butterworth–Heinemann/CIM 
association.
2	 Pickton, D. and Broderick, A. (2005) Integrated Market-
ing Communications. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice 
Hall.
3	 Dahlen, M., Lange, F. and Smith, T. (2010) Marketing Com-
munications: A Brand Narrative Approach. Chichester: 
John Wiley.
4	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
5	 Batey, M. (2008) Brand Meaning. New York: Routledge.
6	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
7	 Riezebos, R. (2003) Brand Management. Harlow: Finan-
cial Times/Pearson Education.
8	 Batey, M. (2008) Brand Meaning. New York: Routledge.
9	 de Jong, K. (2007) Private Labels in Europe. Vught: Inter-
national Private Label Consult; Kumar, N. and Steen-
kamp, J.-B.E.M (2007) Private Label Strategy. Harvard, 
MA: Harvard Business School Press.
10	 Lamey, L., De Leersnyder, B., De Kimpe, M. and Steen-
kamp, J.-B.E.M. (2007) ‘How business cycles contribute 
to private-label success: evidence from the United States 
and Europe’, Journal of Marketing, 71 (January), 1–15.
11	 ‘Private label today’, http://www.plmainternational.com/
en/private_label_en.htm (accessed July 2012).
12	 Verhoef, P.C., Nijssen, E.J. and Sloot, L.M. (2002) ‘Stra-
tegic reactions of national brand manufacturers towards 
private labels: an empirical study in the Netherlands’, 
European Journal of Marketing, 36(11), 1309–26.
13	 Doyle, P. (2008) Value-based Marketing, 2nd edition. 
Chichester: Wiley; Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, 
M. (2012) Strategic Brand Management: A European Per-
spective, 2nd edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
14	 Interbrand, Best Global Brands 2008, http://www. 
interbrand.com/images/BGB_reports/BGB_2008_
EURO_Format.pdf (accessed June 2009); de Cherna-
tony, L. (2006) From Brand Vision to Brand Evaluation. 
Oxford: Butterworth–Heinemann; Tellis, G.J. and 
Golder, P.N. (1996) ‘First to market, first to fail? Real 
causes of enduring market leadership’, MIT Sloan Man-
agement Review, 37(2), 65–75.
15	 Thompson, J. (2009) Brandchannel’s 2009 brandjunkie 
awards results, http://www.brandchannel.com/features_
effect.asp?pf_id=470 (accessed June 2009); Interbrand, 
Best Global Brands 2008, http://www.interbrand.com/
images/BGB_reports/BGB_2008_EURO_Format.pdf 
(accessed 9 April 2009); Silverstein, B. (2009) Marketing 
Strategies that Build Value, April, http://www.brand-
channel.com/features_effect.asp?pf_id=472 (accessed 
June 2009).
16	 Interbrand, Best Global Brands 2011, http://www 
.interbrand.com/nl/best-global-brands/best-global-
brands-2008/best-global-brands-2011.aspx (accessed 
July 2012).
17	 Interbrand, Best Global Brands 2014, http://bestglobal 
brands.com/2014/ranking/ (accessed 29 July 2015).
18	 Millward Brown (2012) ‘BrandZ™ top 100 most valu-
able global brands’, http://www.millwardbrown.com/
BrandZ/Top_100_Global_Brands.aspx (accessed July 
2012).
19	 Balachander, S. and Ghose, S. (2003) ‘Reciprocal Spill-
over Effects: A Strategic Benefit of Brand Extensions’, 
Journal of Marketing, 67(1), 4–13.

REFERENCES     75
33	 Kapferer, J.N. (2000) (Re)Inventing the Brand: Can Top 
Brands Survive the New Market Realities? London: 
Kogan Page; Tanaka, H. (1993) ‘Branding in Japan’, in 
Aaker, D.A. and Biel, A.L. (eds), Brand Equity and Adver-
tising: Advertising’s Role in Building Strong Brands. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 51–66.
34	 King, S. (1991) ‘Brand-building in the 1990s’, Journal of 
Marketing Management, 7(3), 3–13.
35	 Laforet, S. and Saunders, J. (2005) ‘Managing brand 
portfolios: how strategies have changed’, Journal of 
Advertising Research (September), 314–27.
36	 Hollis, N. (2008) The Global Brand. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
37	 Holt, D.B., Quelch, J.A. and Taylor, E.L. (2004) ‘How global 
brands compete’, Harvard Business Review, 82(9), 68–75; 
Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M., Batra, R. and Alden, D.L. (2003) 
‘How perceived brand globalness creates brand value’, Jour-
nal of International Business Studies, 33(1), 35–47.
38	 Akaka, M.A. and Alden, D.L. (2010) ‘Global brand 
positioning and perceptions: International advertising 
and global consumer culture’, International Journal of 
Advertising, 29(1), 37–56.
39	 Alden, D.L., Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M. and Batra, R. (1999) 
‘Brand positioning through advertising in Asia, North 
America, and Europe: the role of global consumer cul-
ture’, Journal of Marketing, 63(1), 75–87.
40	 Alden, D.L., Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M. and Batra, R. (1999) 
‘Brand positioning through advertising in Asia, North 
America, and Europe: the role of global consumer cul-
ture’, Journal of Marketing, 63(1), 75–87.
41	 De Meulenaer, S., Dens, N. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2015) 
‘Which advertising cues cause consumers to perceive 
brands as more global? A conjoint analysis’, Interna-
tional Marketing Review, Vol. 32 (6) pp. 606–626.
42	 Hollis, N. (2008) The Global Brand. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan; Kapferer, J.N. (2001) (Re)Inventing the 
Brand: Can Top Brands Survive the New Market Reali-
ties? London: Kogan Page.
43	 Zhang, Y. and Khare, A. (2009) ‘The impact of acces-
sible identities on the evaluation of global versus local 
products’, Journal of Consumer Research, 36 (October), 
524–37.
44	 Riezebos, R. (2003) Brand Management: A Theoretical and 
Practical Approach. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
45	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
46	 Geylani, T., Inman, J.J. and ter Hofstede, F. (2008) ‘Image 
reinforcement or impairment: the effects of co-branding 
on attribute uncertainty’, Marketing Science, 27(4) 730–
44; Geuens, M., Pêcheux, C., Vermeir, I. and Faseur, T. 
(2008) ‘Co-branding in advertising: the issue of category 
and image fit’, Latin-American Advances in Consumer 
Research, 133–34; Simonin, B.L. and Ruth, J.A. (1998) 
‘Is a company known by the company it keeps? Assess-
ing the spillover effects of brand alliances on consumer 
brand attitudes’, Journal of Marketing Research, 35(2), 
30–42.
20	 Ries, A. and Trout, J. (2002) The 22 Immutable Laws of 
Marketing. New York: HarperCollins.
21	 Swaminathan, V., Fox, R.J. and Reddy, S.K. (2001) ‘The 
impact of brand extension introduction on choice’, Jour-
nal of Marketing, 65(4), 1–15.
22	 Goedertier, F., Geskens, K., Weijters, B. and Geuens, M. 
(2012) ‘Increasing choice satisfaction through goal-based 
labeling’, Marketing Letters, 23(1), 119–36; Iyengar, S.S. 
and Lepper, M.R. (2000) ‘When choice is demotivat-
ing: can one desire too much of a good thing?’, Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(6), 995–1006; 
Reutskaja, E. and Hogarth, R.M. (2009) ‘Satisfaction 
in choice as a function of the number of alternatives: 
when ‘goods satiate’ ’, Psychology and Marketing, 26(3), 
197–203; Schwartz, B. (2004) The Paradox of Choice: 
Why More Is Less. New York: HarperCollins.
23	 De Standaard, 3 April 2012.
24	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press; Smith, D.C. and 
Park, C.W. (1992) ‘The effects of brand extensions on 
market share and advertising efficiency’, Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 29 (August), 296–313.
25	 Ahluwalia, R. (2008) ‘How far can a brand stretch? 
Understanding the role of self-construal’, Journal of 
Marketing Research, 45 (June), 337–50; Grime, I., Dia-
mantopoulos, A. and Smith, G. (2002) ‘Consumer evalu-
ations of extensions and their effects on the core brand: 
key issues and research propositions’, European Journal 
of Marketing, 36(11), 1415–38.
26	 Lane, V.R. (2000) ‘The impact of ad repetition and ad 
content on consumer perceptions of incongruent exten-
sions’, Journal of Marketing, 64 (April), 80–91.
27	 Ahluwalia, R. (2008) ‘How far can a brand stretch? 
Understanding the role of self-construal’, Journal of 
Marketing Research, 45 (June), 337–50.
28	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
29	 Berthon, P., Holbrook, M.B. and Hulbert, J.M. (2003) 
‘Understanding and managing the brand space’, MIT 
Sloan Management Review, 44(2), 49–54.
30	 Tischler, L. (2009) Best and Worst Brand Extensions  
of  2008, 30 January, http://www.fastcompany.com/ 
blog/linda-tischler/design-times/best-and-worst-brand-
extensions-2008 (accessed June 2009).
31	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
32	 Berner, R. and Kiley, D. (2005) ‘Global brands: Interbrand 
rank the companies that best built their images – and 
made them stick’, Business Week, 1 August, 86–9; Inter-
brand, Best Global Brands 2008, http://www.interbrand 
.com/images/BGB_reports/BGB_2008_EURO_Format.
pdf (accessed June 2009); Interbrand, Best Global Brands 
2011, http://www.interbrand.com/nl/best-global-brands/
best-global-brands-2008/best-global-brands-2011.aspx 
(accessed July 2012).

76     CHAPTER 2  BRANDING
60	 Keller, L.K. (1993) ‘Conceptualizing, measuring and 
managing customer based brand equity’, Journal of 
Marketing, 57(1), 1–22.
61	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Geuens, M. (1999) ‘The advertising 
effectiveness of different levels of intensity of humour 
and warmth and the moderating role of top of mind 
awareness and degree of product use’, Journal of Mar-
keting Communication, 5, 113–29.
62	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) ­Strategic 
Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd edi-
tion. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
63	 Aaker, D.A. (1996) Building Strong Brands. New York: 
Free Press.
64	 Kotler, P. and Armstrong, G. (2010) Principles of Mar-
keting, 13th edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall.
65	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
66	 Plummer, J.T. (2000) ‘How personality makes a differ-
ence’, Journal of Advertising Research, 40 (November/
December), 79–83.
67	 Solomon, M.R., Bamossy, G., Askegaard, S. and Hogg, 
M.K. (2007) Consumer Behaviour: A European Perspec-
tive, 3rd edition. Harlow: Pearson Education.
68	 Haig, M. (2005) Brand Failures: The Truth About the 100 
Biggest Branding Mistakes of all Time. London: Kogan 
Page; Horowitz, A., Athitakis, M. and Lasswell, M. (2004) 
The Dumbest Moments in Business History. New York: 
Portfolio; http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arch_Deluxe 
(accessed June 2009).
69	 Azoulay, A. and Kapferer, N.N. (2003) ‘Do brand per-
sonality scales really measure brand personality?’, Brand 
Management, 11 (November), 143–55.
70	 Aaker, J.L. (1997) ‘Dimensions of brand personality’, 
Journal of Marketing Research, 63 (August), 347–56.
71	 Geuens, M., Weijters, B. and De Wulf, K. (2009) ‘A new 
measure of brand personality’, International Journal of 
Research in Marketing, 26(2), 97–107.
72	 Anonymous (2002) ‘Branding @ Lego, McDonald’s and 
JCB’, Strategic Direction, 18(10), 7–9.
73	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
74	 Reynolds, T.J. and Olson, J.C. (2001) Understanding 
Consumer Decision Making: The Means–End Approach 
to Marketing and Advertising Strategy. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
75	 Keller, K.L. (2008) Building, Measuring, and Managing 
Brand Equity, 3rd edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pren-
tice Hall.
76	 Dekimpe, M.G., Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M., Mellens, M. and 
Vandenabeele, P. (1997) ‘Decline and variability in brand 
loyalty’, International Journal of Research in Marketing, 
11(3), 261–74.
77	 Muniz, A. and O’Guinn, T. (2001) ‘Brand community’, 
Journal of Consumer Research, 27 (March), 412–32.
47	 Alan, F. (2012) ‘HTC executive says it plans to drop 
Beats Audio headphones from some smartphone boxes’, 
http://www.phonearena.com/news/HTC-executive-
says-it-plans-to-drop-Beats-Audio-headphones-from-
some-smartphone-boxes_id28864 (accessed July 2012); 
Olivarez-Giles, N. (2012) ‘HTC and Beats to Take 
on Spotify, iTunes to Boost Phone Sales?’, LA Times, 
http://articles.latimes.com/2012/feb/15/business/la-fi-
tn-htc-beats-music-streaming-service-rumor-20120215 
(accessed July 2012); Sadewo, B. (2012) ‘HTC and Beats 
Audio set to acquire music subscription service Mog?’, 
http://www.androidauthority.com/htc-and-beats-audio-
set-to-acquire-music-subscription-service-mog-65757/ 
(accessed July 2012); Sullivan, M. (2012) ‘Beats Audio 
(HTC) acquisition of MOG all but done, sources say’, 
PCWorld, http://www.pcworld.com/article/252298/
beats_audio_htc_acquisition_of_mog_all_but_done_
sources_say.html (accessed July 2012).
48	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
49	 www.unilever.com/pressreleases/2000/EnglishNews_988.
asp (accessed July 2009); see also ‘Unilever slashes its 
brand portfolio from 1600 to 400’, Eurofood, 7 Octo-
ber 1999, http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0DQA/
is_1999_Oct_7/ai_56904871/ (accessed July 2009).
50	 Riezebos, R. (2003) Brand Management: A Theoreti-
cal and Practical Approach. Harlow: Financial Times/­
Prentice Hall.
51	 Riezebos, R. (2003) Brand Management: A Theoreti-
cal and Practical Approach. Harlow: Financial Times/­
Prentice Hall.
52	 Yoo, B., Donthu, N. and Lee, S. (2000) ‘An examination of 
selected marketing mix elements and brand equity’, Jour-
nal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 28, 195–212.
53	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
54	 Batey, M. (2008) Brand Meaning. New York: Routledge.
55	 Kiley, D. (2005) ‘Reebok and Adidas: a good fit’, Busi-
nessWeek, 4 August, http://www.businessweek.com/
bwdaily/dnflash/aug2005/nf2005084_8340.htm (accessed 
June 2009).
56	 Interbrand, Best Global Brands 2011, http://www 
.interbrand.com/nl/best-global-brands/best-global-
brands-2008/best-global-brands-2011.aspx (accessed 
July 2012); Perrier, R. (1997) Brand Valuation. London: 
Premier Books and Interbrand Group.
57	 Perrier, R. (1997) Brand Valuation. London: Premier 
Books and Interbrand Group.
58	 Based on: Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) 
Strategic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 
2nd edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press; Aaker, D.A. 
(1996) Building Strong Brands. New York: Free Press.
59	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Strategic 
Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd edition. 
Harlow: Financial Times Press.

REFERENCES     77
82	 Biel, A.L. (1993) ‘Converting image into equity’, in Aaker, 
D.A. and Biel, A.L. (eds), Brand Equity and Advertising: 
Advertising’s Role in Building Strong Brands. Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 67–82.
83	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
84	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
85	 Keller, K.L., Aperia, T. and Georgson, M. (2012) Stra-
tegic Brand Management: A European Perspective, 2nd 
edition. Harlow: Financial Times Press.
78	 Fournier, S. and Lee, L. (2009) ‘Getting brand communi-
ties right’, Harvard Business Review, 87(4), 105–111.
79	 Webster, F.E. (2000) ‘Understanding the relationships 
among brands, consumers and resellers’, Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, 28(1), 17–23.
80	 Brassington, F. and Pettitt, S. (2003) Principles of Mar-
keting. London: Pitman; Keller, K.L. (2008) Building, 
Measuring, and Managing Brand Equity, 3rd edition. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
81	 Yoo, B., Donthu, N. and Lee, S. (2000) ‘An examination 
of selected marketing mix elements and brand equity’, 
Journal of  the Academy of  Marketing Science, 28, 
195–212.

Chapter 3
How marketing communications work
Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Get an idea of how hierarchy-of-effects models describe how communications work
● Understand the importance of attitude formation in the consumer persuasion process
● Distinguish the basic types of attitude formation and change processes and marketing 
communications models
● Learn about the importance of elaboration likelihood and cognitive, affective and 
behavioural processes for marketing communications
Chapter outline
78

HIERARCHY-OF-EFFECTS MODELS     79
Introduction
Often it is hard to predict how a consumer will respond to marketing communications or 
how someone will process a communications message. Several factors have an impact on 
this: consumer goals, characteristics of the product type, the situation the consumer is in 
(hurried or distracted by others, for example), involvement in the product category and 
social, psychological or cultural factors. In this chapter an overview of the different ways in 
which a consumer might process marketing communications is given. One type of explana-
tory framework that has dominated the marketing communications literature for decades is 
the hierarchy-of-effects models. Later, modifications of these models were presented, and the 
focus has shifted towards attitude formation models of response to marketing communica-
tions. Consumer involvement and cognitive, affective and behavioural aspects of message 
processing have been studied intensively. One thing we have learnt so far is that no single 
theory can explain it all. Some models are applicable in some situations for some kinds of 
people and for some categories of products. The digital revolution has changed marketing 
communications in that consumers have partly taken over brand communications and inter-
act with each other on an unprecedented massive scale. Because of this complexity, it is not 
surprising that marketing communications do not always work as they should.
Hierarchy-of-effects models
Hierarchy-of-effects models1 are some of the oldest marketing communications models. The first 
was published in 1898, and their influence on marketing thought remained important until the 
1980s. In general, a hierarchy-of-effects model assumes that things have to happen in a certain 
order, implying that the earlier effects form necessary conditions in order for the later effects to 
occur.2 According to these models, consumers go through three different stages in responding 
to marketing communications, namely a cognitive, an affective and a conative stage, or a think–
feel–do sequence. During the cognitive stage consumers engage in mental (thinking) processes 
which lead to awareness and knowledge of the brand communicated. In the affective stage 
emotional or evaluative responses occur which are associated with the advertised brand and 
attitudes towards the brand are formed. A difference with the previous stage is that consumers 
may become aware and gather information continuously and effortlessly, while affective reac-
tions may only be formed when the need for an evaluation arises. The conative or behavioural 
stage refers to undertaking actions with respect to the advertised brand, such as buying it.
Consumers are assumed to go through the three stages in a well-defined sequence. The 
majority of the hierarchy models claim a cognitive–affective–conative sequence. In other 
words, consumers should first learn or become aware of a brand such as Fitnesse breakfast 
cereal, for instance. Afterwards they develop affective responses or form an attitude towards 
Fitnesse, which might be that Fitnesse is tasty and healthy. Finally, this feeling or attitude 
makes the consumers want to buy Fitnesse. The task of marketing communications is then 
to lead the consumers through these successive stages. Table 3.1 gives some examples of 
hierarchy models that follow this traditional sequence. The Lavidge and Steiner model is 
the one most frequently referred to in the literature.
However, a lot of disagreement exists regarding the sequence of the different stages, and 
several researchers have developed alternative models. An example is the low-involvement hier-
archy-of-effects model according to which consumers, after frequent exposure to ­marketing 
messages, might buy the product, and decide afterwards how they feel about it (cognitive–
conative–affective hierarchy). Another possibility is the experiential hierarchy-of-effects model 
in which consumers’ affective responses towards a product lead them to buy it and, if neces-
sary, they reflect on it later. This would suggest an affective–­conative–cognitive sequence.

80     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
Vaughn3 proposed an integration of the different sequence models and presented a model, 
known as the Foote–Cone–Belding (FCB) grid. Four different situations are distinguished, 
based on two dimensions, i.e. the high–low involvement and the think–feel dimension. 
­Involvement can be defined as the importance people attach to a product or a buying deci-
sion, the extent to which one has to think it over and the level of perceived risk associated 
with an inadequate brand choice. The think–feel dimension represents a continuum reflecting 
the extent to which a decision is made on a cognitive or an affective basis. Here Vaughn takes 
into account that for certain products, such as sugar, mineral water, paper towels, soap and 
banks, cognitive elements are important, while for products such as cakes, ice cream and 
perfume, affective elements seem to have more impact on the buying decision process. For 
example, consumers may wonder whether they are running out of water, or whether they 
will need paper towels during the next week. This is in contrast to considerations such as 
what to buy the children for a treat: Kinder Delight or chocolate mousse? Figure 3.1 shows 
the different sequences in each of the four situations.
Year
Model
Cognitive
Affective
Conative
1900
AIDA, St Elmo Lewis
Attention
Interest, desire
Action
1911
AIDAS, Sheldon
Attention
Interest, desire
Action, satisfaction
1921
AIDCA, Kitson
Attention
Interest, desire, 
conviction
Action
1961
ACCA (or DAGMAR), 
Colley
Awareness, 
comprehension
Conviction
Action
1961
Lavidge and Steiner
Awareness, 
knowledge
Liking, preference, 
conviction
Purchase
1962
AIETA, Rogers
Awareness
Interest, evaluation
Trial, adaption
1971
ACALTA, Robertson
Awareness, 
comprehension
Attitude, 
legitimation
Trial, adoption
Source: Based on Barry, T.E. and Howard, D.J. (1990) ‘A review and critique of the hierarchy of effects in advertising’, International 
Journal of Advertising, 9, 121–35.
Table 3.1  Hierarchy-of-effects models
Figure 3.1  The FCB grid
Source: Based on Vaughn, R. (1980) ‘How advertising works: a planning model’, Journal of Advertising Research, 20(5), 27–33,  
www.warc.com/jar.

HIERARCHY-OF-EFFECTS MODELS     81
Purchase decisions in the first quadrant are characterised by high involvement and rational 
decision criteria. Here, the consumer first wants to learn about the product. This could be 
the case for deciding on an insurance policy or a loan or for buying a new computer or major 
household appliances. In this quadrant, the classical hierarchy of effects would hold. The 
second quadrant concerns product decisions of high involvement, but for which less informa-
tion is needed. In this case, the consumer first wants to be emotionally attracted by the brand 
image, then he or she collects information, and finally undertakes some action. Jewellery, 
perfume, fashion and holidays may be examples that fit in this category. In the third quadrant, 
product decisions are located that require a minimum of cognitive effort and tend to become 
routinised because of habit formation. The assumed sequence is first buying the product, then 
learning what its major advantages and disadvantages are, and finally developing an attitude 
after product or brand usage. Toilet paper, sugar, paper tissues and detergents are expected 
to be bought without much reflection and only after product experience will an attitude 
be formed. The fourth quadrant reflects decision-making regarding products which can be 
termed ‘life’s little pleasures’. The assumed sequence here is: buy the product, experience an 
affective response and gather product knowledge afterwards. Examples that fit this category 
might be soft drinks, ice cream and chocolate bars. For example, consumers buy cake or pizza, 
eat it and realise that they are really fond of it, but learn afterwards that it makes them fat.
The Rossiter–Percy grid is an alternative to, or a modification of, the FCB grid which 
again classifies products and buying decisions in four categories, based on the dimensions 
of high–low involvement and fulfilling a transformational or informational buying motive.4 
Transformational buying motives consist of positive motivations, such as sensory gratifica-
tion, social approval or intellectual stimulation, while informational buying motives refer to 
reducing or reversing negative motivations such as solving or avoiding a problem, or normal 
depletion. Examples of products for which transformational motives prevail are products 
that give consumers pleasure, such as ice cream, cosmetics and perfume. Examples of infor-
mational products are detergents, babies’ nappies and insurance products.
It is important to realise that the quadrants in both the FCB-grid and the Rossiter–Percy 
grid do not so much contain product categories, but characteristics of consumers in a buy-
ing decision. In other words, the grids are in fact a segmentation and positioning tool. For 
instance, a car could be in each of the four quadrants of the FCB. If, for a certain group of 
consumers, a car is a rational, high-involvement decision, then this person belongs to the 
‘quadrant 1’ segment. If, for another consumer, buying a car is a highly involving emotional 
decision, this person belongs to the ‘quadrant 2’ segment. A third consumer may primarily 
buy a car on the basis of one simple rational criterion. In that case, this person belongs to 
‘quadrant 3’. Finally, a person may buy a car because he quite likes the design, or the fancy 
colours. This consumer belongs to the ‘quadrant 4’ segment. A car company can then decide 
which segment it wants to focus on. For instance, BMW and Alfa Romeo clearly focus on 
‘quadrant 2’ consumers, while cheap car brands mainly focus on ‘quadrant 3’ consumers. 
The quadrant a consumer is in may also change over time or across buying situations. For 
instance, buying car insurance for the first time may be a high-involvement rational decision. 
However, later on, paying the premium for the insurance may quickly become a habit deci-
sion, and thus ‘quadrant 3’ behaviour. A person may be health-conscious, and mostly buy 
his food on the basis of detailed information of what it contains (a ‘quadrant 1’ decision). 
However, when hungry after a party, he might consider buying an indulgent McDonalds 
hamburger. In that buying situation, he then would be more of a ‘quadrant 4’ consumer.
The advantage of hierarchy-of-effects models and related frameworks is that they pro-
vide a framework for communications objectives and campaign effectiveness measurement 
(see Chapters 4 and 13). They also incorporate an important contribution, i.e. recognition 
of the importance of brand awareness. Hierarchy-of-effects models consider brand aware-
ness as a prerequisite for brand attitude formation. They correctly assume that affective 
responses cannot be formed or that a purchase cannot take place without having an aware-
ness of the brand.5 In this respect, it should be mentioned that most companies strive to 
reach top-of-mind awareness (TOMA) in consumers. TOMA indicates which brand is most 

82     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
salient within a product category. It reflects the first brand that comes to mind when think-
ing of a particular product category. It is generally acknowledged that brands that are top 
of mind are more likely to be purchased.
You could assume that God does not need to be introduced and that awareness of God is high. This is not what 
the Love Singapore Movement (a group of 150 churches) thought. It decided to reintroduce God to Singaporean 
teenagers and young professionals by advertising. The objective of the campaign was first to increase top-of-mind 
awareness of God, and secondly to change God’s image of ‘schoolteacher’ into ‘someone you wouldn’t mind put-
ting on the guest list of your dinner party’. Budgeting for 17 TV commercials and 24 ads in newspapers, Ogilvy 
& Mather came up with witty, playful, approachable God spreading messages like: ‘I hate rules. That’s why I only 
made ten of them’, ‘Bring your umbrella, I might water the plants today’, and ‘Of course I have a sense of humour.  
I gave you baboons with bright red asses, didn’t I?’ Before the ads were on air for a week, the Singapore authorities 
pulled them. Therefore, Ogilvy & Mather started using non-traditional media. Buses were painted with the message 
‘Please don’t drink and drive. You’re not quite ready to meet me yet’. Subway waiting places were plastered with 
the message ‘I’m here. God’, and SMS was used to spread text messages such as: ‘Thank me. It’s Friday. God’; ‘Even  
I rested on the 7th day. Enjoy. God’; and ‘Are you coming over to my place later?’ (on Sundays). The campaign 
received incredible attention both in the traditional media and on the Internet. The campaign was awarded two 
gold lions at the Cannes Advertising Festival and achieved a cult status in no time.6
Business insight
The reintroduction of God in Singapore
Notwithstanding the important contribution of the classical hierarchy models, several 
shortcomings have been formulated. A major critique is that empirical support for the fact 
that consumers go through each stage is lacking. Significant relations have been observed 
between ad characteristics and recall, and between ad characteristics and attitudes and 
purchase intentions, but not between recall and attitudes. This leads to the conclusion that, 
empirically, no hierarchy of cognitive, affective and conative effects can be observed.7 Fur-
thermore, hierarchy models do not allow interactions between the different stages, which 
is very unlikely. Purchase will lead to experience, which will have an important impact 
on beliefs and attitudes, for example. Therefore, to base marketing communications on 
hierarchy-of-effects models may not be the most effective or relevant strategy.
Attitude formation and change
Since the 1980s, attitudes have received more and more attention. An attitude is a person’s overall 
evaluation of an object, a product, a person, an organisation, an ad, etc. In this view, an attitude 
towards a particular brand (Ab) can be considered as a measure of how much a person likes or 
dislikes the brand, or of the extent to which he or she holds a favourable or unfavourable view 
of it. The reason for this interest in, for example, brand attitudes is the belief that the more 
favourable brand attitudes are, the more likely a purchase of the brand becomes. Although brand 
attitudes are relatively stable, they can be changed over time. So, the ultimate challenge for mar-
keting communications is to change attitudes in favour of the company’s brand.
Attitudes play an important role in hierarchy-of-effects models too, but in these models 
they are primarily defined as affective reactions in a hierarchical setting. In fact, an attitude 

ATTITUDE FORMATION AND CHANGE     83
can be assumed to consist of three components (Figure 3.2).8 The cognitive component 
reflects knowledge, beliefs and evaluations of the object; the affective component represents 
the feelings associated with the object; and the behavioural component refers to action readi-
ness (behavioural intentions) with respect to the object.
An example may clarify the distinct components. You may love Timberland shoes (affec-
tive component) because you know they are durable and convenient to wear (cognitive 
component) and that is why you intend to buy Timberland the next time you go shopping 
(behavioural component). To change attitudes, marketers might concentrate on changing 
one of the three components. Gap might stress the fact that its clothes are neat, cool and 
stylish, thereby trying to influence the feelings associated with it by image-building. Com-
munications campaigns trying to influence the consumer on an affective basis often use 
emotional ads containing no or very few product arguments. Miele might address the quality 
and durability of its appliances to change consumers’ beliefs and evaluations. Marketing 
communications will probably use many and strong arguments to illustrate the numerous 
benefits of Miele. Coca-Cola might run a promotion campaign in which consumers can 
receive a fabulous Coke mobile phone or a Coke sofa in return for a certain amount of cola 
caps, to induce consumers to buy (a lot of) the brand.
As mentioned before, consumers follow different processes. Not surprisingly, a lot of 
communications models have been developed, most of them giving an adequate explanation 
for particular situations only. These different communications models regarding attitude 
formation and attitude change can be classified along two dimensions.9 The first refers to the 
way attitudes are formed – primarily cognitive, affective or behavioural; the second is about 
the level of elaboration of a message, or central-route versus peripheral-route processing.
Figure 3.2  Attitude components
In a study of 190 children between 7 and 9 years old, the effect of dental hygiene messages was measured. The 
study investigated the impact of a low- versus high-threat appeal and the medium through which subsequent health 
information is conveyed (game, information brochure, narrative story), on the adaptive behaviour of 7–9 year old 
children concerning dental hygiene.10
Threat appeals are ‘persuasive messages designed to scare people by describing the terrible things that can hap-
pen to them if they do not do what the message recommends’.11 Empirical research shows that, in general, stronger 
threat appeals are more persuasive than weaker ones.
Research insight
How to get the message through? Promoting dental hygiene to kids

84     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
Computer games have become an important part of children’s lives. Gaming is not just one of their favourite 
pastime activities, but games are also increasingly used by marketers in an attempt to influence children’s pur-
chase behaviour. Today, almost every food and beverage brand targeting children has an advergame on its website. 
­Advergames are ‘computer games specifically created to function as advertisements to promote brands’, containing 
brand identifiers such as logos and characters.12 Games can also be powerful learning tools. Several authors13 argue 
that computer games can be more enjoyable, more interesting and thus more effective than traditional learning 
modes to increase children’s knowledge. Previous research shows that playing advergames can affect children’s food 
preferences and eating patterns. The question in the study was whether computer games can be used to promote 
dental hygiene. Therefore, the impact of interactive games as a medium to provide health information was com-
pared with the impact of other media types, such as a traditional information brochure and a narrative story (for 
instance, told in a classroom).
The children were randomly exposed to one of six conditions (low- and high-threat appeal combined with 
three communication formats). After receiving some basic information about the study, the children were exposed 
to either a weak or a strong threat message. In the high-threat condition, children were informed about the con-
sequences of untended teeth, stressing the related dangers and risks. In this high-threat condition, children saw a 
picture of affected teeth with caries. In the low-threat condition, the consequences were described as less severe. 
In this condition, children saw a picture of healthy teeth. All children were told that they could avoid these negative 
consequences by brushing their teeth regularly and eating healthy food in the same way in all experimental con-
ditions, thereby controlling for perceived efficacy. Following the threat message, the respondents were randomly 
assigned to one of three media, i.e. they played a computer game, read a brochure or listened to a narrative story in 
class. Afterwards, each participant was asked to fill in a standardised questionnaire and to choose a snack as a reward 
for participating. By making them choose between candy or a piece of fruit, (non-)adaptive behaviour was meas-
ured. For the interactive game condition, an existing computer game was used that was developed to teach children 
the importance of brushing teeth, going to the dentist and eating healthy food through interactive game play. The 
information brochure and narrative story were developed in such a way that both contained the same information 
as the computer game, only presented in a different way. In all three media, a beaver named Ben was introduced, 
who explained the importance of dental hygiene, eating healthy food and going to the dentist on a regular basis. 
In the computer games, the children were challenged, for example, to brush teeth using the mouse and distinguish 
healthy from unhealthy food, receiving bonus points when succeeding. The same information was incorporated in 
the story, but this time it was told in a more narrative, descriptive way (‘once there was a beaver named Ben’, etc.). 
For the brochure, the same format was followed as in a traditional classroom textbook.
The results of the experiment show that children pay significantly more attention to the game than to the nar-
rative story and the brochure. The children who played the computer game and read the brochure showed no 
significant difference in snack choice after being exposed to either the low- or the high-threat condition. However, 
after being exposed to the narrative story, 19% of the children in the low-threat condition chose a healthy snack, 
while in the high-threat condition 67% preferred the healthy snack over the candy. The results show that, although 
children pay more attention to games and brochures than to a story, a strong perceived threat about the risks of bad 
dental hygiene has a more positive effect on children’s adaptive behaviour (choosing fruit instead of sweets) than a 
weaker threat appeal, especially when they are exposed to a subsequent narrative health-related story.
A high-threat appeal leads to more adaptive behaviour than a low-threat appeal. However, when children are 
provided with additional health-related information after the threat message, the effectiveness of this threat mes-
sage appears to depend on the medium used to communicate this extra health information. The results only show 
a positive effect of a stronger threat appeal on adaptive behaviour when the children listened to a story. For children 
who played the game or read the brochure, the level of perceived threat had no effect on their snack choice. This 
can be explained by the attention-demanding task of playing a game and reading a brochure. Games are immersive 
and interactive, and children devote a lot of attention to them. Reading a brochure also requires the reader to focus 
attention on the reading material, certainly for children within the age category of 7–9 years. Indeed, the results 
show that active reading or game-playing leads to high focused attention. This interference with the preceding threat 
message weakens its effect. Listening to a story, however, is a rather passive activity which requires less attention, 
therefore allowing the threat appeal to ‘stay in’ better. This study implies that for children who are afraid of dental 
caries, the combination of a strong threat appeal and a supplementary narrative story is the best communication 
strategy among the ones tested. Games, pleasant and attention-getting as they may be, are not the most effective 
medium to reinforce a strong threat appeal.

ATTITUDE FORMATION AND CHANGE     85
Broadly stated, these dimensions are comparable with the ones used in the FCB grid, but 
no hierarchical conclusions are derived from them. The think–feel dimension of the FCB 
grid is transformed into a distinction between cognitive, affective and behavioural attitude 
formation. The involvement dimension of the FCB grid is extended to motivation, ability and 
opportunity (MAO). By motivation, a willingness to engage in behaviour, make decisions, 
pay attention, process information, etc., is meant. Motivation is to a large extent influenced 
by consumer needs and goals. Consumer needs can be categorised as functional, symbolic or 
hedonic.14 Functional needs can be compared with the informational motivation dimension of 
the Rossiter–Percy grid and pertain to solving consumer problems. Consumers buy detergents 
to clean dirty clothes and hire a baby-sitter because they cannot leave their baby unattended. 
Symbolic needs relate to how we see ourselves and how we would like to be perceived by oth-
ers. Youngsters may wear Calvin Klein jeans to show they are trendy. Hedonic needs reflect 
consumers’ desires for sensory pleasure. Many tourists buy Belgian chocolates when visiting 
Belgium because of the delicious taste. Needs/goals can also be classified as approach or pro-
motion goals, and avoidance or prevention goals.15 The former pertain to positive outcomes 
while the latter relate to avoiding negative outcomes. For example, consumers can decide to 
shop at Carrefour because it offers them a nice shopping experience (= approach, promotion) 
or because they do not have to drive far (= avoidance, prevention). A consumer who plans to 
buy a new car is probably motivated to process marketing communications on cars. However, 
the needs or higher-order goals that this particular consumer is pursuing have an important 
impact on information processing and the benefits he or she is receptive to.16 If the consumer 
is mainly driven by functional needs, he or she may want clear information on price, safety, 
fuel consumption, etc., while a status appeal or an ad showing driving sensations may be more 
effective when symbolic or hedonic needs prevail. The same goes for approach/promotion 
goals and avoidance/prevention goals: when the former are prevalent then marketing commu-
nications should bring a message focused on positive outcomes (you feel the excitement when 
driving this car), while for the latter goals a message should emphasise negative outcomes (the 
excellent air bags will protect you during a crash).17 So, in order to be persuasive, marketing 
communications should tap into consumers’ motivational concepts and marketers need to 
understand what goals consumers are trying to accomplish by buying the product.18
Teenagers getting pregnant is not a problem in developing countries alone; in many developed countries it also 
happens more than society would like. Many young girls see babies as cute and lovely (approach motivation), but 
do not realise the responsibilities and problems that having a baby at such a young age can bring. To convert the 
approach to a prevention motivation, encourage contraceptive use and raise awareness about teenage pregnancy, 
Duval Guillaume created for the Belgian public health department a TV spot that promotes a fictitious game. The 
game is inspired by The Sims, a game that is very popular among teenage girls. The ad starts out like a normal video 
game commercial: ‘Get ready for teenage mum, your ultimate gaming experience . . . ’. The player is invited to 
change diapers around the clock, try to study while the baby cries all night, and manage relationships with friends 
while looking after the child. The player sees the girl in the game having to choose between picking up the phone 
or letting her baby have a little accident. Choosing the baby results in ‘friend lost’. The next challenge is to feed the 
baby, who spits food in his mum’s face. At the end, the mum is on her knees, totally exhausted. The voiceover ends 
with ‘your ultimate challenge: not having a nervous breakdown’. Next the text ‘Being a teenage mum is not that much 
fun. Use contraceptives. http://www.laura.be’ appears. The ad clearly shows the difficulties of balancing teenagers’ 
needs and wants with the responsibility of a baby. The campaign provoked a lot of discussion, was mentioned on 
many weblogs and received an award for its creativity and effectiveness.19
Business insight
Being a teenage mum is not that much fun

86     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
Figure 3.3  The Elaboration Likelihood model
Source: Based on Petty, R.E. and Cacioppo, J.T. (1986) ‘The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion’, Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 19, 123–205.
Although someone is motivated to do something, he or she may be unable to do it. Ability 
refers to the resources needed to achieve a particular goal. One may be motivated to process 
a computer ad, but when it is full of technical details one may not be able to process and 
understand it because of a lack of technical knowledge. A person may be motivated to buy 
a particular house, but after learning what it is going to cost after renovation, stamp duty, 
land registration fees, etc., might be unable to buy it because of insufficient money.
Finally, opportunity deals with the extent to which the situation enables a person to obtain 
the goal set. A consumer may be motivated to buy Danette of Danone, but if the supermar-
ket runs out of Danette, the consumer does not have the opportunity to buy it. A consumer 
may be motivated to process the information of a particular ad, but if the phone rings, he 
or she does not have the opportunity to pay attention to it. Also, when the ad contains little 
or no information, it does not provide the opportunity to elaborate on it.
The effects of the MAO factors on attitude formation and marketing communications 
processing are presented in the Elaboration Likelihood model (ELM) (Figure 3.3).20 If motiva-
tion, ability and opportunity are all high, the elaboration likelihood is said to be high and 
consumers are expected to engage in central-route processing. This means that they are 
willing to elaborate on the information, to evaluate the arguments and find out what the 
information really has to offer. Depending on the quality and credibility of the ­arguments, 
consumers will react by producing counter-, support or neutral arguments, which induce 

ATTITUDE FORMATION AND CHANGE     87
a negative, positive or no attitude change, respectively. For example, when thinking of 
­McDonald’s consumers might think of how good McDonald’s burgers and fries taste: a 
support argument. On the other hand, consumers might also think of how unhealthy fast 
food is: a counter-argument. Furthermore, consumers might just think of the red and yel-
low colours of a McDonald’s restaurant: in effect, a neutral argument. Attitudes formed 
via the central route prove to be good predictors of later behaviour and are fairly resistant 
to other persuasive messages.
On the other hand, if one or more of the MAO factors is/are low, consumers are more 
likely to process the information peripherally. The result of the latter is no real information 
processing, but an evaluation based on simple, peripheral cues, such as background music, 
humour, an attractive source or endorser, the number of arguments used, etc.21 In other 
words, a favourable brand attitude might be formed because the consumer liked the music 
in a Levi’s commercial or the erotic setting in a Häagen-Dazs ad or because the consumer is 
fond of the polar bears in the Coca-Cola commercial, or because he or she assumed that the 
high price of the Miele washing machine is a sign of superior quality, or that French wine 
is invariably good. However, such attitudes do not necessarily last long. If Pepsi launches a 
campaign with a cute animal, a celebrity or a nice song, consumers may forget about Coca-
Cola’s nice polar bears and switch their attitude in favour of Pepsi. The reason why consum-
ers start paying more attention to peripheral cues is that in many ads peripheral cues form 
the only processable information under circumstances of low motivation, limited ability or 
limited opportunity. Ads without attractive peripheral cues, but with an easy-to-process, 
product-related message, might also work under low MAO, simply because the cognitive 
resources to form counter-arguments are lacking.
Probability markers are specific words or phrases in advertising used to signal to what degree it is likely that a 
given claim or argument is true. Those markers that indicate the probable, rather than absolute, truth of a claim 
are known as hedges, whereas the markers that indicate complete commitment to the truthfulness of the claim are 
known as pledges. Hedges, which can be adverbs (‘possibly’, ‘probably’), verbs (‘can’, ‘may’, ‘help’), particles (‘about’, 
‘sort of’), or other expressions (‘9 out of 10’, ‘85% of’, etc.), weaken the impact of a claim by allowing for excep-
tions or avoiding total commitment. Pledges, on the other hand, examples of which also include some adverbs 
(‘definitely’, ‘undoubtedly’), verbs (‘will’, ‘guarantee’), and other expressions (‘have been proven to’, ‘you can be 
sure’), are absolute in nature and signal total confidence in the truthfulness of the claim.22 Probability markers are 
frequently used in advertising.23 Some well-known examples include the Carlsberg campaign (‘Probably the best 
beer in the world’), a similar slogan used by a Belgian brand of beer, Delirium Tremens (‘Voted as best beer in the 
world’), numerous drug advertisements (such as a Nutra-Life ad stating ‘Nutra-Life Cold and Flu fighter may reduce 
the severity and duration of colds’), as well as cosmetics ads (such as an Oil of Olay ad stating ‘Proven to help you 
look revitalised’).
A study was conducted with 331 Belgian and 374 Croatian students;24 55.7% of the participants were female. The 
majority of them (45.9%) were between the ages of 22 and 26. The remainder fell into the following age groups: 
33.1% between the ages of 18 and 21; 6.7% between the ages of 27 and 30; 12.4% under 18; and 1.9% over 30. The 
purpose of the study was to assess to what extent the type of service (hedonic vs utilitarian), the involvement with 
the service (high vs low), the type of probability marker (hedge, pledge and none), and tolerance for ambiguity 
affected consumer responses.
Research insight
Probability markers have a different effect depending on the type of service and the 
tolerance for ambiguity of individual consumers

88     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
Language power, just like emotions, has been empirically proven to act as a peripheral cue.25 It is, therefore, likely 
that involvement would act as a moderator to the effectiveness of the usage of probability markers in advertising, 
namely that the impact of probability markers on advertising effectiveness would be greater in low-involvement 
situations than in those where involvement is high. This assumption finds support in a previous study.26
Hedonic services, often also referred to as experiential services, are characterised by high levels of people ori-
entation, employee contact and customisation. The quality of and satisfaction with a hedonic service rely on the 
sensations derived from the consumption of the service,27 and are highly person-specific. As such, they are hard 
to assess objectively, being dependent on personal, subjective tastes and experiences. Using pledges, markers of 
absolute certainty, and thus implying universal applicability of the advertising claims, in ads of hedonic services 
might attract the consumers’ attention to the inappropriateness of such claims and cause them to question the 
absolute and categorical conclusion of the truth of the claim. On the other hand, placing a claim with a hedge into 
a hedonic service ad might reduce the tendency of the consumers to counter-argue the claim and increase the per-
ceived honesty/credibility of the advertiser.28 Utilitarian services are, however, much more pragmatic and practical 
than hedonic ones. They are characterised by low levels of employee–customer contact, moderate customisation 
and higher product orientation than hedonic services. All this makes them much less individualised and person-
specific, enabling easier objective assessment of service quality and customer satisfaction, which depend mainly 
on the functionality of their consumption,29 based on an almost universal set of characteristics that ensure optimal 
functionality. Using pledges in ads of utilitarian services, therefore, signals the advertisers’ full confidence in the 
truthfulness of the claim, thus enhancing its persuasive power. A hedge in advertising copy for a utilitarian service, 
on the other hand, might create the impression that the advertiser is not willing to stand totally behind the claim, 
weakening the claim itself, and undermining the advertiser’s authority, credibility and status.30 This would result in 
decreased efficiency of the ad.
The third dimension studied is uncertainty avoidance, defined by Hofstede as ‘the extent to which people feel 
threatened by uncertainty and ambiguity and try to avoid these situations’.31 Since probability markers are linguistic 
expressions of various degrees of certainty vs probability or ambiguity (i.e. uncertainty), the question arises whether 
the cultural dimension of uncertainty avoidance or tolerance for ambiguity could cause higher or lower acceptance 
of pledges and hedges in different cultures, and, therefore, influence the effectiveness of ads containing hedges or 
pledges on consumers from different country markets.
Two 2 (service type: hedonic/utilitarian) * 2 (involvement: high/low) * 3 (probability marker: hedge, pledge, no 
marker) between-subjects experiments were set up, one in Croatia, and one in Belgium (Flanders). The two experi-
ments used the same stimuli, although the verbal part was translated into the local languages. A graduate school 
ad was used as a utilitarian high-involvement service, a copy/printing shop as a utilitarian low-involvement service, 
a bar as a hedonic high-involvement service, and a sandwich shop as a hedonic low-involvement service. Twelve 
different groups were each exposed to one of the ads, and responses were measured.
As expected, hedges and pledges do not have an effect in cases of high-involvement services. This is not sur-
prising, as probability markers are considered peripheral cues that are expected mainly to have an effect in low-
involvement situations. However, probability markers do have an effect in the case of low-involvement services, and 
this effect is moderated by the tolerance for ambiguity. More tolerance for ambiguity improves the attitude towards 
the brand and purchase intention for low-involvement services ads in which hedges are used. More tolerance for 
ambiguity leads to a lower attitude towards the brand and purchase intention for low-involvement services ads in 
which pledges are used. For hedonic low-involvement services, which are experiential, subjective and very person-
specific in nature, advertising claims that include hedges are found to be the most effective, resulting in the highest 
levels of brand attitude and purchase intentions. It seems that such claims may be inciting heightened perceptions of 
honesty/credibility of the advertiser in the eyes of the consumer, whereas a claim containing an absolutistic pledge 
would not only be easy to counter-argue and dismiss, but also have the opposite effect on the perceived credibility 
of the advertiser. On the contrary, ads for utilitarian low-involvement services seem to work better when they include 
a claim containing a pledge. Pledges in this case, where the service is much less customised and person-specific, and 
considerably easier to evaluate objectively (making it also easier to compare its universal functional characteristics 
with other similar services with certainty), signal the strength of the advertisers’ convictions in the absolute truthful-
ness of the claims contained in the advertising copy.

ATTITUDE FORMATION AND CHANGE     89
At first sight, the above might suggest that the central route pertains to cognitive atti-
tude formation (people think carefully about the substance of the message), while periph-
eral-route processing is more likely to give rise to affective attitude formation (people 
rely on how the ad makes them feel instead of what the ad really tells). However, reality 
reveals a more complicated picture. The ELM, as well as other models such as Chaiken’s 
Heuristic–Systematic model (HSM), and Forgas’s Affect Infusion model (AIM), assume 
that, under different MAO conditions, both rational arguments and affect may give rise to 
peripheral and central (and even biased) processing.32 It is not so much the MAO factors, 
but consumers’ goals that might determine whether consumers rely on the substance of 
the message (i.e. the strength of the claims, the compellingness of the product attributes, 
etc.) to form a judgement or on their affective responses (i.e. ad-evoked feelings, aesthetic 
of the product design, charisma of the endorser, etc.). Research also shows that when 
individuals focus on ideals (promotion goals, relating to one’s hopes, wishes and aspira-
tions, such as dreaming of a nice house, an exotic holiday, etc.), they consider affective 
information as more relevant than the substance of the message and, as a consequence, 
are more likely to base their evaluation on affect. On the other hand, when consumers’ 
‘oughts’ (prevention goals, relating to one’s duties, obligations and responsibilities, such 
as providing for a child’s education, looking professional at work) are their driving goal, 
the opposite result is found.33
The above-mentioned results have some interesting practical implications for advertising professionals and 
executives in both countries. As Croatian consumers, being in general rather tolerant of ambiguity, seem to react 
positively to ads containing probability markers, advertising campaigns in Croatia would benefit from inclusion of 
probability markers in advertising copy. This ought to be especially the case for ads for hedonic products or services, 
for which arguments with hedges have been proven to be the best choice. On the other hand, a comparatively low 
tolerance for ambiguity among Belgian consumers should cause advertisers in Belgium to be cautious in the use of 
probability markers in advertising campaigns designed for the Belgian market. An exception to this might be the use 
of pledges, which leave little room for uncertainty and ambiguity, and which, according to the results of this study, 
would be especially well suited to arguments used in ads of utilitarian products/services.
In health campaigns, a fear–relief appeal is often used. This message starts by focusing on negative consequences of 
a risk behaviour and ends with offering a solution via behavioural recommendations. However, due to mixed results, 
there is a lot of discussion about its overall effectiveness. It is often suggested that a valuable contribution could result 
from adopting a segmentation approach in which an individual differences perspective is taken.
A study examined whether taking into account individuals’ chronic self-regulatory focus could contribute to the 
effectiveness of health messages. Although previous research indicates that promotion people tend to rely more 
on affect than prevention people, it was argued that, by using ads with an emotional tone that is compatible with a 
prevention focus in the stimuli, affect could work for prevention people as well. Therefore, in line with the regula-
tory relevancy principle, the emotional tone of the test ads was matched to the chronic self-regulatory focus of the 
Research insight
The impact of self-regulatory focus in health campaigns

90     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
How exactly the message substance or affective responses are processed is likely to depend 
on consumers’ elaboration likelihood. Therefore, we distinguish six types of marketing com-
munications models based on two dimensions (see Table 3.2). The first dimension pertains 
to elaboration likelihood which can be either high or low. The second dimension is related 
to the attitude component on which attitude formation is mainly built, i.e. cognition, affect 
or behaviour.
High elaboration likelihood, cognitive attitude formation
The models that will be discussed here are relevant if the consumer’s motivation, ability 
and opportunity are high and especially when cognitive elements are important for attitude 
formation. An example is someone who is going to buy a home video installation and tries to 
compare objectively the different brands available on several attributes (price, sound quality, 
etc.) before making a decision.
audience. More specifically, it was expected that fear–relief ads would work better for prevention people because 
these emotions are more compatible with their regulatory focus, whereas sadness–joy ads were expected to have 
more impact in promotion people because dejection and cheerfulness emotions match better with a promotion 
focus.
A first study focused on anti-smoking campaigns. The results of an experiment with 256 student smokers 
indeed indicated a congruency effect: smokers with a promotion focus felt more involved with the sadness–joy 
than with the fear–relief campaign, leading to a more positive attitude towards the sadness–joy campaign than 
towards the fear–relief campaign, and vice versa for smokers with a prevention focus. A second study focused on 
sun protection campaigns, and 1386 women aged between 24 and 38 participated in the experiment. Also here, 
an emotion–congruency trend appeared, but only for high users of sun beds. The conclusion of both studies is 
that emotional health campaigns can work for promotion and prevention people on the condition that the ad-
evoked emotions match consumers’ regulatory focus and consumers feel highly and affectively involved in the 
subject matter.34
Table 3.2  Six types of attitude formation and change
Elaboration likelihood based on  
motivation/involvement, ability and opportunity
High elaboration central-
route processing
Low elaboration peripheral-route 
processing
Attitudes 
based on:
Cognitions
● Multi-attribute models
● Self-generated persuasion
● Heuristic evaluation
Affect
● Feelings-as-information 
model
● Ad transfer
● Feelings transfer
● Classical conditioning
● Mere exposure effect
Behaviour
● Post-experience model
● Perception–Experience–
Memory model
● Reinforcement model
● Routinised response behaviour

HIGH ELABORATION LIKELIHOOD, COGNITIVE ATTITUDE FORMATION     91
Multiple attribute models
The most famous multiple attribute model is no doubt the Expectancy–Value model, or 
Fishbein model.35 In this model, brand attitudes are made up of three elements: relevant 
product attributes, the extent to which one believes the brand possesses these attributes, and 
the evaluation of these attributes or how good/bad one thinks it is for a brand to possess 
these attributes. More specifically, brand attitude is represented by the weighted sum of the 
products of brand beliefs and attribute evaluations:
Ao = a
n
i = 1
boiei
where:  Ao = attitude towards object o
boi = belief of object o possessing attribute i
ei = evaluation of attribute i
n = number of relevant attributes
In other words, since not all product attributes are equally important for a consumer, 
­product beliefs are weighted by the importance that the consumer attaches to the different 
product attributes. Table 3.3 shows an example of an attitude towards going to university 
and going to a polytechnic. In this case, beliefs and evaluations are measured by means of a 
seven-point Likert scale. A Likert scale is an ordinal scale but, if the scale contains enough 
categories, it is usually considered an interval scale, as a result of which calculating mean 
scores across respondents is allowed.36 An example of a seven-point (going from 1 to 7 or 
from -3 to +3) Likert scale, is:
Table 3.3  An illustration of the Fishbein model
Attitude towards going to a university/polytechnic
University
Polytechnic
Attribute
ei
bi
ei * bi
bi
ei * bi
Difficulty
2
+2
+4
+1
+2
Prestige
6
+2
+12
0
0
High cost
3
+1
+3
0
0
Quality of teachers
7
+1
+7
-1
-7
Number of friends
5
-1
-5
+2
+10
High study time
3
+2
+6
0
0
Business-orientated
5
-1
-5
+1
+5
Attitude
22
10
ei is measured on a seven-point bipolar scale (1 = bad, 7 = good)
bi is measured on a seven-point unipolar scale (-3 = unlikely, +3 = likely)

92     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
In this example, the quality of the teachers is most valued (e = 7) and the perception that 
it is difficult to get a degree seems to be the least important attribute (e = 2). Multiplying 
these evaluations by the beliefs regarding universities and polytechnics as possessing these 
characteristics gives the results in the fourth and sixth columns. Summing these products 
results in a more positive attitude towards going to a university. So, if all relevant attributes 
are measured and correctly evaluated, a university would eventually be chosen.
The Theory of Reasoned Action (TORA) is an extension of the Expectancy–Value model.37 
The model was developed to provide a link between attitude and behavioural intention. 
The latter is determined not only by attitudes, but also by the subjective norm. A subjective 
norm comprises the belief one holds regarding what different reference groups consider 
as socially desirable behaviour, weighted by the consumer’s need or willingness to behave 
according to the norms of the particular reference group. The latter is referred to as social 
sensitivity. Certain personalities are more sensitive to social pressure and, as a consequence, 
are more willing to comply with the rules, norms and beliefs of reference groups than oth-
ers. An example of socially influenced behaviour is that, even though a child might not be 
particularly fond of piano lessons, the child might take these lessons to please the parents. 
And although a teenager might not hold a favourable attitude towards smoking, he or she 
might do so because his or her friends regard it as ‘cool’ to smoke. Again, some teenagers 
will be more likely to let themselves be led by the opinions of others.
Table 3.4 illustrates how a subjective norm can influence the choice between going to 
university and going to a polytechnic. The reference group valued most highly is the friends 
at school (ss = 6), while the sensitivity or motivation to comply with the opinion of current 
teachers is the lowest (ss = 3). Multiplying social sensitivity by the opinions of significant 
others for the different reference groups, and summing all these products, results in a subjec-
tive norm of +35 for going to university and +1 for going to a polytechnic. In view of these 
results as well as the results of Table 3.3, the attitude towards a university is more favourable 
than the attitude towards a polytechnic.
The TORA has been further extended to the Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB).38 Fish-
bein and Ajzen felt this extension was necessary to be able to deal with behaviours over 
which people have incomplete volitional control. Indeed, behavioural intention can result 
in actual behaviour only if the consumers themselves can decide to perform or not perform 
the behaviour. For many consumer behaviours this prerequisite does not pose a problem 
(e.g. choosing between Coke Vanilla or Coke Lemon), but often behaviour also depends on 
Table 3.4  An illustration of subjective norm effects
Subjective norm = social sensitivity (ss) ‘others’ opinions (oo)
University
Polytechnic
Reference group
ssi
ooi
ssi * ooi
ooi
ssi * ooi
Friends at school
6
+2
+12
-1
-6
Friends in youth club
5
0
0
+1
+5
Friends in sports club
5
-1
-5
+1
+5
Parents
4
+2
+8
-2
-8
Family
4
+1
+4
0
0
Current teachers
3
+2
+6
0
0
Business
5
+2
+10
+1
+5
Subjective norm
+35
+1
ssi is measured on a seven-point bipolar scale (1 = low, 7 = high)
ooi is measured on a seven-point unipolar scale (-3 = negative, +3 = positive)

HIGH ELABORATION LIKELIHOOD, COGNITIVE ATTITUDE FORMATION     93
non-motivational factors, such as resources (time, money, skills, infrastructure, etc.). For 
example, a consumer may be willing to go to work by means of public transport, but when 
he or she lives in a remote village in which hardly any public transport facilities are avail-
able, this may be difficult to do. Or, a consumer and his or her significant others may hold 
very favourable attitudes towards buying a Lamborghini, but when this consumer lacks the 
money, a cheaper car will be bought in the end (so, in fact, the extension resembles the ‘abil-
ity’ and ‘opportunity’ factors of MAO). Behavioural control as perceived by the consumer is 
more predictive of behaviour than actual behavioural control. Perceived behavioural control 
In the context of the adoption (intention) of innovations and (new) behaviour, two conceptual frameworks have 
been extensively studied. In the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), the attitude towards and the adoption or 
continuous use (intention) of an innovation are determined by three antecedents: perceived ease of use (PEOU), 
perceived usefulness (PU) and compatibility.39 PEOU is the degree to which a person believes that using the system 
will be effortless. PU is the degree to which a person believes that using a particular technology will enhance his or 
her job performance. Compatibility is the degree to which the innovation fits with the potential adopter’s existing 
values, previous experiences and current needs.40 The Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB) is a second conceptual 
framework that has often been used for analysing and predicting a variety of intentions and behaviours. The TPB 
predicts behavioural intention which, in turn, is assumed to be a predictor of actual behaviour.41 Behavioural inten-
tion is explained by three general dimensions: the attitude towards the behaviour, the social influence (subjective 
norm) on the behaviour and the perceived behavioural control in conducting the behaviour. Attitudes are evaluative 
responses to the behaviour. The subjective norm stands for perceived social pressure by significant others or differ-
ent reference groups to perform or not to perform a certain behaviour. A reference group is a group that serves as 
a comparison point and the opinion of which is perceived as important for the individual. Perceived behavioural 
control over performing the behaviour is a person’s perception about whether different aspects of the behaviour are 
in his or her control or are easy or difficult. It is related to the perceived ability and the external source constraints 
and facilitators of the behaviour.42
Notwithstanding the overwhelming evidence of the role of affective reactions in consumer decision-making, 
conceptual models and empirical research on the adoption (intention) of innovations or (new) behaviour have 
largely ignored the role of emotions.43 Perugini and Bagozzi argue that ‘although there is little question that the TPB 
offers a parsimonious account of purposive behaviour, its sufficiency can be questioned’.44 Bagozzi states that the 
TPB has seemingly seduced researchers into overlooking the fallacy of simplicity.45 Therefore, various authors sug-
gest extending the TPB with other factors. One of the most often suggested improvements is extending the TPB with 
measures of emotional responses to the product or the issue for which the intention to use is predicted. According 
to Wood and Moreau, the affective influence is often stronger and more far-reaching than previously considered 
and the addition of emotional responses benefits traditional models of diffusion.46
In a sample of 1202 Belgians the determining factors of the usage intention of an electric car and the differences 
between early and late usage intention segments are investigated.47 The TPB framework is extended with emotional 
reactions towards the electric car and car-driving in general. Emotions and the attitude towards the electric car 
appear to be the strongest determinants of usage intention, followed by the subjective norm. Reflective emotions 
towards car-driving and perceived behavioural control factors also play a significant role. Differences in the rela-
tive importance of the determinants of usage intention between sub-groups based on environmental concern and 
behaviour and social values were also studied. In general, people in segments that are more inclined to use the 
electric car are less driven by emotions towards the electric car and more by reflective emotions towards car-driving, 
and take more perceived behavioural concerns into account.
Research insight
Integrating emotions into the Theory of Planned Behaviour and predicting electric 
car usage intention

94     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
(PBC) can be defined as ‘the perceived ease or difficulty of performing the behaviour and it is 
assumed to reflect past experience as well as anticipated impediments and obstacles’.48 Two 
individuals enrolling for a foreign-language course may have equally strong intentions to 
learn the foreign language, but if one feels more confident than the other that he or she can 
master it, he or she is more likely to persevere than the one who feels less confident. There-
fore, not actual control but perceived behavioural control is added to TORA to build the 
TPB. Perceived behavioural control is computed by multiplying control beliefs by perceived 
power of the particular control belief to pose the behaviour, and the resulting products are 
summed across the salient control beliefs. For example, for jogging, salient control beliefs 
appeared to be ‘being in poor physical shape’ and ‘living in an area with good jogging 
weather’. Figure 3.4 presents the TPB model graphically.
Figure 3.4  The Theory of Reasoned Action (TORA)
Handicap International was founded in 1982 in France. Afterwards, a network was created with sections in  
Belgium, Germany, Luxembourg, Switzerland, the UK and the USA. Currently, Handicap International is active 
in about 60 countries with aid programmes for people with disabilities. To collect money for clearing up cluster 
bombs, a mine awareness programme and a physical rehabilitation centre in Afghanistan, Handicap Interna-
tional used direct mail (DM) as a communication tool. It sent citizens a paper bomb, not bloody pictures or cry-
ing people. A strong accompanying letter and a reference to the expertise of Handicap International were also 
included. Since Handicap International is well aware that many people believe their individual efforts do not 
matter, it clearly indicated what could be done with small sums of money and gave people the option to choose 
one of them. For example, €30 meant crutches for one of the victims; with €40 about 10 square metres could 
be cleared of mines; and for €55 a prosthesis could actually be given to a cluster bomb victim. This increased 
donors’ perceived behavioural control. The DM action clearly paid off: the response rate amounted to more than 
10%, and 37% more money than expected was collected. Handicap International received a Cuckoo Award for 
the effectiveness of the campaign.49
Business insight
Handicap International

HIGH ELABORATION LIKELIHOOD, COGNITIVE ATTITUDE FORMATION     95
The TPB has received considerable attention in the literature. Ajzen constructed a website 
with more than 400 articles in which TPB was used.50 These studies deal with a variety of 
activities, from predicting eating behaviour to condom use, from job-seeking behaviour to 
speeding, from helping to health behaviour, etc.51 From a database of 185 of these independ-
ent studies, it has been shown that the TPB accounted for 27% and 39% of the variance in 
behaviour and intention, respectively. Moreover, the PBC construct and attitudes in particu-
lar seem to have predictive value, while the subjective norm in general accounts for only a 
small part of the variance in behaviour and intention.52
The effectiveness of the TPB model has been shown in a variety of contexts. However, comparisons with more 
specific models that are often used in certain research areas are very scarce. Using a combination of real-life pur-
chase behaviour data and survey information of 634 customers, a study compared the TPB with the more specific 
Relationship Quality (RQ) model to predict apparel purchases. The RQ or the Satisfaction–Profit Chain model is one 
of the most often used models to explain purchase intention and/or behaviour in a non-contractual customer–firm 
relationship. It indicates that high levels of relationship quality result in correspondingly high levels of purchase 
intention and behaviour.
The results point out that despite the more specific character of the RQ model and the more general character 
of the TPB model, the TPB constructs (attitude towards the behaviour, subjective norm and perceived behavioural 
control) proved to predict behavioural intentions better than the RQ constructs (trust, commitment and satisfaction). 
Secondly, the RQ and TPB constructs are fully mediated by behavioural intentions. Thirdly, taking ‘buy–not buy’ as 
the dependent variable, intentions had a significant impact on apparel purchase behaviour, above and beyond the 
effects of past behaviour. This proves the importance of measuring the TPB constructs, even in situations when data 
on past behaviour are available.53
Research insight
The explanatory power of the TPB versus the Relationship Quality model in an 
apparel context
Based on the TPB model, marketing communicators can try to change consumers’ atti-
tudes and influence their behaviour in several ways (Figure 3.5). Firstly, they can try to 
change brand beliefs. For example, suppose a university has a reputation for granting 
degrees too easily and not taking the education task seriously enough. If an independent 
quality control committee finds that this university is offering students a good-quality 
education, the university might use this conclusion in an advertising campaign in order to 
influence existing beliefs. A second possibility is changing attribute evaluations. For exam-
ple, when people have the impression that a large university has to be good since it is able 
to attract so many students, a small university can try to change this evaluation by empha-
sising the benefits of small classes (more personal contact, more time per student, greater 
supervision, etc.). Finally, attitudes can be changed by adding attributes. For example, if a 
university has an exchange contract with foreign universities so that foreign students can 
take part in the courses while its own students can follow courses abroad, the university 
can emphasise the multicultural environment. By doing so, it might create an additional 
attribute that students take into account when choosing between universities. When Levi’s, 
for example, saw its market share decline, it emphasised its pioneering role in the jeans 
market and tried to add the fact that Levi’s was the first jeans brand as a product attribute 
that consumers might consider when buying jeans. An example in the beer market is Labatt 
Ice which underscores the freshness of the beer, rather like Cola Light claims ‘you have 
never been refreshed like this before’.

96     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
Besides trying to change attitudes, marketers can focus on changing the opinion of ­others. 
To counter the increase in smoking of young girls, for example, the UK government tried 
to change the opinions of youngsters by means of a communications campaign the main 
message of which was that smoking makes you less attractive to the opposite sex. One ad 
pictured two pairs of kissing lips with the message ‘Ever kissed a non-smoker? Taste the dif-
ference.’ A more recent campaign tries to counter alcohol abuse in teenage girls (to avoid 
getting pregnant while being drunk) with the message ‘if you drink like a man, you might 
end up looking like one’. Raising or lowering social sensitivity for specific significant others 
is another possibility. For example, while buying a new car used to be a decision made by 
the parents, Opel stresses how comfortable, exciting and cool the Opel Safira is perceived 
by children, hoping that parents will take the opinion of their children into account when 
choosing a particular type and brand of car. Finally, perceived behavioural control can be 
influenced. Marketers could change control beliefs by showing how easy or convenient to 
use certain products are. For example, MasterCard used the slogan ‘North. South. East. 
West. No card is more accepted’ to indicate you can pay everywhere with MasterCard.  
Another possibility is to focus on increasing perceived power or the confidence of consumers that 
they can master the activity. Nike stresses ‘Just do it’, meaning that everyone can be an athlete.
Two-sided messages give both sides of an issue or a product. Empirical studies show that this type of message is 
generally more effective in terms of credibility than when only one side is provided.54 Two sub-types of two-sided 
messages can be distinguished: refutational and non-refutational ones. In non-refutational messages, advertisers 
simply present positive and negative information. In refutational messages, the advertiser subsequently refutes 
Research insight
Two-sided messages work better, but is refutation necessary?
Figure 3.5  Marketing communications and the TORA model

HIGH ELABORATION LIKELIHOOD, COGNITIVE ATTITUDE FORMATION     97
or discounts the negative information that was added to the message. Empirical results regarding the credibility 
of refutation in two-sided messages are mixed. Some previous studies found no different effects on credibility 
for both a refutational and a non-refutational two-sided message. Other studies emphasise that a refutational 
statement makes receivers take the message and the source more seriously, implying that a two-sided refu-
tational message is more credible.55 These heterogeneous results show that two-sided messages’ effects on 
credibility are complex.
In a study conducted with 853 teenagers (15–19 year olds, 63.4% females), two-sided refutational and 
non-refutational rational and emotional messages were tested by means of ads that warn against the dan-
gers of binge drinking (a non-controversial issue) and marijuana use (a controversial issue). This study 
tested if issue ambivalence has an effect on the responses to refutational and non-refutational two-sided 
messages.56 Pre-tests showed that binge drinking is not at all ambivalent, since most people condemn 
it. Marijuana use, on the other hand, is clearly an ambivalent issue for people. One could argue that, for 
an ambivalent issue, a two-sided message is ‘normal’ or ‘expected’, as this type of issue is known to have 
obvious pro and contra arguments. Hence, an advertiser who uses a two-sided message for an ambivalent 
issue is not regarded as giving both sides of the issue voluntarily, but just as acknowledging the inherent 
ambivalence of the issue. On the other hand, univalent issues are less obviously dual: they are character-
ised by either strong pro arguments (univalent positive issue) or strong contra arguments (univalent nega-
tive issue). When counter-information about a univalent issue is disclosed, this might be perceived as more 
‘voluntary’, as the source is not expected to disclose information on both sides of the issue.57 Therefore, 
two-sided messages about univalent issues might be considered as more voluntary, and thus more credible,  
than two-sided messages about ambivalent issues.
Besides the sidedness and refutational factors, also the tone of the argumentation was manipulated. Pham found 
that the relevance of the arguments (emotional vs rational) depends on the type of consumption motive underly-
ing the behaviour or the issue. He distinguishes between consummatory motives (i.e. underlying behaviour that 
is pleasant as such), which are more affectively driven, and instrumental motives (i.e. underlying behaviour that is 
undertaken to achieve well-considered further goals), which are more cognitively driven. Consequently, when an 
issue is primarily associated with consummatory motives, affective considerations will be more relevant than cogni-
tive considerations.58 In other words, for consummatory behaviour, emotional arguments are more credible than 
rational arguments. Like most unrestrained behaviour, binge drinking and marijuana use are inherently consumma-
tory, because the act of binge drinking or smoking marijuana holds little if any instrumental value.59 Studies show 
that individuals mostly indulge in drugs for emotional, impulsive, social reasons instead of rational reasons.60 So, for 
the issues of binge drinking and marijuana use, emotional arguments would appear to be more relevant, and thus 
more credible than rational arguments.
A 2 * 2 * 2 between-subjects factorial experimental design was set up, manipulating refutation within a 
two-sided message (two-sided non-refutational vs two-sided refutational), message tone (rational vs emo-
tional), and ambivalence of the issue (ambivalent vs univalent issue), leading to eight different messages. Each 
of the messages contained a main argument against the issue (the directional argument, which is against binge 
drinking or against marijuana use) and a secondary argument in favour of the issue (the counter-argument). In 
the refutational two-sided messages, this secondary positive argument was refuted. Argument tone (rational vs 
emotional) was manipulated through the types of arguments used: general, rational, factual arguments versus 
personal, emotional, subjective arguments. Ambivalence of the issue was manipulated through the use of two 
distinct issues.
The results of the experiment show the following. When the issue is univalent and the arguments are 
emotional, a refutational and a non-refutational two-sided message lead to no difference in source cred-
ibility and message credibility. When rational arguments are used, a refutational two-sided message leads to 
a significantly higher source credibility and message credibility than a non-refutational two-sided message. 
When the issue is ambivalent, and the arguments are emotional, a refutational two-sided message leads to a 
higher source credibility and message credibility than a non-refutational two-sided message. When rational 
arguments are used, a refutational and a two-sided message lead to no difference in source credibility and 
message credibility.

98     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
Self-generated persuasion
Another form of central-route, cognitively based processing is self-generated persuasion.61 
In this case, the consumer is not persuaded by strong brand arguments, but by his or 
her own thoughts, arguments or imagined consequences. These thoughts go beyond the 
information offered in the ad. The consumer combines the information in the message 
with previous experience and knowledge, and tries to imagine him- or herself consuming 
the product and the consequences thereof. Sometimes consumers even come up with new 
product uses. For example, when seeing an ad for canned lobster soup, a consumer might 
think of using the soup not as a soup, but as an ingredient for a sauce to use in a fish pasta. 
In other words, the persuasive process is imagery-based. These self-generated thoughts 
and the cognitive and affective responses evoked by the imagined brand experience give 
rise to fairly strong brand beliefs. These beliefs are believed to have a considerable impact 
on brand attitude.
Low elaboration likelihood, cognitive attitude formation
In this case, one of the MAO factors is low, leading or forcing the consumer to concen-
trate on peripheral cues. The consumer will try to make inferences on the basis of the cue 
in order to form a cognitively based attitude. For example, when consumers do not have 
the time to compare all available brands on relevant attributes, they may infer from a high 
price that the brand is a high-quality brand and therefore form a positive attitude towards 
it. This process is called heuristic evaluation.62 When MAO is low, central information 
processing is unlikely to occur and consumers will probably process the communication 
peripherally. This means that they do not elaborate on the message, but try to make 
inferences on the basis of ad characteristics. In other words, peripheral cues in the ad 
are used as a heuristic cue to evaluate the quality of the message and to form a general 
evaluation of the brand advertised. These inferential beliefs have a significant influence on 
the attitude people form towards the brand. Heuristic evaluation has also been referred 
to as the satisficing choice process.63 Since consumers’ MAO factors are not optimal, 
they lack the motivation, ability or opportunity to gather and process information to 
The results of the study show that the need for refutation depends on the ambivalence of the issue and the 
consistency of the argument tone in the message with the motivation to conduct the behaviour at hand. When 
the health risk issue is univalent, a two-sided message is regarded as more voluntary (because the source is not 
‘supposed’ to give both sides of the issue), leading to more credibility. When such a univalent issue is combined 
with highly relevant, emotional arguments, the overall credibility is high, regardless of whether the message is 
refutational or not. Hence, in this case, refutation is not needed, as the credibility is already high. When, however, 
such a univalent issue is communicated with less relevant, rational arguments, refutation is needed in order to 
enhance the overall credibility. Conversely, for an ambivalent issue, characterised by a lower perceived voluntari-
ness, credibility might be lower: an ambivalent issue is obviously dual, making a two-sided message more the 
‘expected’ way of acknowledging this duality, rather than a sign of honesty or voluntariness. When, for an ambiva-
lent issue, the more relevant, emotional arguments are used, refutation is a helpful tool to increase the credibility. 
When, however, less relevant rational arguments are used, refutation vs non-refutation does not have a different 
impact on source and message credibility.

LOW ELABORATION LIKELIHOOD, COGNITIVE ATTITUDE FORMATION     99
find the best choice. They are not looking for direct evidence of performance superiority 
in this case, but settle for a satisfactory or acceptable brand choice. Therefore, they seek 
for reassurance or credibility in heuristic cues such as brand name reputation, experts 
endorsing the brand, price level, etc. Table 3.5 summarises a few ad characteristics that 
can be used as a heuristic cue (Photo 3.1).
Photo 3.1  The Mini, built in Oxford and sold in 75 countries
Source: Getty Images: Max Nash/AFP.

100     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
Another example is the use of celebrities. The heuristic in this case might be ‘if George 
Clooney loves Nespresso, it has to be good’ or ‘if Anna Kournikova wears a Shock sportsbra 
because “only the ball should bounce”, it has to be a comfortable and good bra’.
It is generally accepted that consumers think products are better when they are made in countries holding a posi-
tive image. These effects have been found in a huge variety of countries. One explanation for these effects is that 
consumers use country stereotypes as a heuristic to simplify the decision process. An additional and more recent 
explanation is that a reference to the country in which the product is made spontaneously activates country ste-
reotypes, and that these stereotypes influence the evaluation of the product even when consumers do not intend 
to use this information in their judgement. In a recent experimental study, consumers had to classify eight ficti-
tious brands of notebooks as either good or bad. In a first stage, consumers were exposed to brand characteristics 
(processor speed, hard drive capacity and RAM size). On the basis of these characteristics they were taught how 
they could easily make a distinction between a good and a bad brand. After an unrelated task, consumers were 
in a second stage re-exposed to the eight brands, but now information was added concerning where the brand 
was manufactured (either a positive- or a negative-image country). Next, consumers had to classify the brands 
again. Half of the respondents were distracted during this task, while the other half could pay full attention to the 
classification task. The results showed that the negative or positive effect associated with the country of origin 
involuntarily influenced brand judgements. This effect was larger in the distracted group who could not pay full 
attention to the brand categorisation. This suggests that in cases where respondents’ MAO factors are high (high 
motivation or involvement, high ability and opportunity) and consumers follow central-route processing, auto-
matically activated country stereotypes are more likely to be inhibited, while their impact is largest when one of 
the MAO factors is low.64
Research insight
Automatic and unintentional country-of-origin effects
Characteristics
Peripheral cue
Heuristic
Source
Attractiveness
The more attractive, the better
Expertise
The more expertise, the better
Status
The higher the status, the better
Number of sources
The more, the better
Message
Number of arguments
The more, the better
Repetition
The more, the better
Layout
The more attractive, the better
Product
Price
The higher, the better
Design
The more attractive, the better
Country of origin
German is good (cars)
The Netherlands is good (cheese)
Italian is good (fashion, leather)
Source: Based on Pieters, R. and van Raaij, F. (1992) Reclamewerking (How Advertising Works). Leiden/Antwerp: 
StenfertKroeseUitgevers.
Table 3.5  Potential heuristic cues

LOW ELABORATION LIKELIHOOD, AFFECTIVE ATTITUDE FORMATION     101
High elaboration likelihood, affective attitude formation
In this category, central processing of affective elements is predominant.
Affect-as-Information
Affect has long been considered as a peripheral cue, having an impact only when people have low 
involvement. However, it is increasingly recognised that affect may play a fundamental role in 
decision-making. People may judge objects by monitoring their subjective feelings to the target. 
The Affect-as-Information model posits that consumers may use feelings as a source of informa-
tion to form an overall evaluation of a product or brand, not by means of a simple association, 
but through a controlled inferential process or, in other words, in an informed, deliberate man-
ner.65 A feeling-based inference often referred to is the ‘how-do-I-feel-about-it’ model. According 
to this model, consumers evaluate brands/objects by imagining the brand in their minds and 
asking themselves ‘How do I feel about this brand/object?’ Next they infer like/dislike or satisfac-
tion/dissatisfaction from the valence of their feelings.66 Consumers may even infer the strength of 
their preference from the strength of the feelings that the brand or object evokes.67 Note that we 
are talking about real feelings (i.e. ‘subjective experiences of affective states and responses with 
a somato-visceral component’), not about affective or hedonic beliefs (such as ‘It would be great 
to spend a weekend in Stockholm’).68 These feelings can be evoked either integrally by looking 
at the product or imagining the product, or by a pre-existing or contextually induced mood.69 
However, a prerequisite of the Affect-as-Information model is that when people inspect their 
feelings to judge a brand or object, they do not inspect their mood states at that moment, but 
their feelings in response to the brand or object. So, if consumers decide not to go to the movies, 
it is because the thought of going to the movies makes them feel unpleasant, not because they 
happen to be in a bad mood. As a consequence, for feelings to influence the product evaluation, 
they must be perceived as representative of the product, i.e. consumers must be convinced that 
these feelings are genuine affective responses to this product. Moreover, feelings not only need 
to be representative, but also have to be relevant for the evaluation at hand and match consum-
ers’ goals.70 For example, when a consumer has made an appointment to go to the dentist, the 
fact that he or she does not feel happy about going may not be considered to be relevant by this 
person, and he or she might still go. In fact, when consumers’ purchase motivations are hedonic 
rather than functional, the likelihood that they will perceive their feelings as relevant and follow 
the ‘how-do-I-feel-about-it’ model is much more likely.71
It should be obvious that feelings should not be assigned a heuristic or peripheral role here. 
Under high elaboration likelihood, people use their feelings because they believe they contain 
valuable information. When consumers closely scrutinise the arguments in a message, mood 
and ad-evoked emotions can be considered as an argument or a central cue.72 One way to 
elicit strong ad-evoked feelings is to make consumers think of pleasant things in the past, such 
as the birth of a baby, a wedding, a first romance, etc. Another way is to use nostalgic ads. 
Nostalgic ads make use of music, movie stars, fashion products, symbols or styles that were 
popular during a consumer’s youth. Research has indicated that early experience performs 
a determining role in shaping subsequent preferences and actually can influence consumers’ 
lifelong preferences.73 For example, it has been shown that consumers retain a lifelong attach-
ment to the styles of popular music they experienced in their late teens and early twenties.
Low elaboration likelihood, affective attitude formation
While central-route processing and cognitively based attitude formation predominated in 
the 1960s and 1970s, models characterised by peripheral processing of mainly affective ele-
ments received a lot of attention in the 1990s. The attitude towards the ad (Aad) and feelings 

102     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
transfer, classical conditioning and the mere exposure effect are some models that have been 
frequently referred to in the literature.
Aad transfer
From the 1980s onwards, research on low-involvement, affective processing has boomed. 
Among the first to indicate that how one evaluates an ad may be transferred to how one evalu-
ates the brand were Mitchell and Olson.74 They used an ad picturing a kitten and a purely 
informative ad. Their conclusion was that both brand attitude (Ab) and purchase intention 
were influenced not only by brand beliefs, but also to a great extent by the attitude towards 
the ad (Aad). Another study found that the difference in brand preference before and after 
exposure to advertising was twice as positive for consumers who liked the ad a lot as com-
pared with consumers who had a neutral Aad.75 When consumers feel indifferent towards the 
available brands as a consequence of low brand differentiation or insignificant consequences 
of a non-optimal choice, their choice goal is likely to be to buy the first brand that they like.76
Ad likeability might be an important factor because of its ability to attract attention 
and facilitate information processing. Peripheral cues such as humour, music, animals and 
children may attract attention, induce curiosity which leads consumers to watch the whole 
ad, and induce a favourable Aad77 which can lead to a favourable Ab.
The Aad transfer model receiving most empirical support is the dual mediation model 
(Figure 3.6).78 According to this model, the evaluation of the ad has not only an immediate 
impact on the evaluation of the brand, but also an indirect effect on brand attitude via brand 
cognitions. The reasoning behind this model is that consumers who hold a positive attitude 
towards the communication are more likely to be receptive to arguments in favour of the 
brand advertised. For example, if you like the Frisk commercial in which a cook accidentally 
drops a Frisk (a mint) in an aquarium, a fish eats it and gets so much energy out of it that 
the fish jumps into the next aquarium, then the next, and at the end out of the window, you 
might be less inclined to think of counter-arguments, or you might find yourself thinking 
of more support arguments (e.g. Frisk gives energy, Frisk is refreshing) because you think 
the commercial is clever, original and humorous.
Feelings transfer
In line with the foregoing, some researchers suggest that the feelings an ad evokes may be 
transferred to the attitude towards the ad, the brand attitude and the purchase intention 
without much deliberation.79
Figure 3.6  Dual mediation hypothesis
Source: Based on and reprinted with permission from ‘The role of attitude towards the ad as a mediator of advertising effectiveness: 
a test of competing explanations’, Journal of Marketing Research, published by the American Marketing Association, MacKenzie, S.B., 
Lutz, R.J. and Belch, G.E., 1986, vol. 23, p. 131.

LOW ELABORATION LIKELIHOOD, AFFECTIVE ATTITUDE FORMATION     103
Why consider ad-evoked feelings? Several studies show that people in a positive mood 
make decisions more quickly, use less information, avoid systematic processing, evaluate 
everything more positively, accept a persuasive message more easily and pay less attention 
to details.80 According to some researchers, ad-evoked feelings might even have a greater 
impact on communications effectiveness than mood.81 Mood affects brand evaluation only 
if this evaluation takes place when watching the ad. Since ad-evoked feelings and the brand 
are associated in a consumer’s memory, emotional advertising might influence brand evalu-
ation no matter when the brand evaluation takes place. In this way, thinking of the brand 
in another situation might activate the feelings associated with it.
It is generally assumed that emotionally pleasant TV commercials not only cause consumers to like the ad itself, 
but they also create more positive feelings towards the advertised brand. Does this apply to all product categories, 
or is it true only for some? For example, does an emotional ad have similar effects on attitudes towards a brand of 
automobiles as opposed to a brand of financial services, soap or chewing gum? The results of a large Belgian study 
show that ad-evoked feelings indeed have a substantial impact on brand evaluations. Interestingly, these effects 
depend on neither the level of involvement associated with the product category nor the type of product. However, 
the effects are slightly more pronounced for products that align themselves with pleasure and experience than for 
functional products.
The attitudinal responses of 1576 Belgian consumers to 1070 TV commercials shown on Dutch-language Belgian 
television over a three-year period were analysed. This pool of commercials featured 318 national and international 
brands across 153 different product categories, including beer, credit cards, diapers, coffee, laundry detergents, cars 
and computers. Groups of 20 to 30 respondents were shown sets of between 20 and 50 commercials and asked 
to rate them. Each ad was rated by an average of 43 consumers. After seeing each commercial, respondents rated 
their attitude towards the ad, how useful and informative the ad was, and their attitudes towards the advertised 
brand. Additionally, an independent group of judges rated the degree of emotionality of each ad and their degree 
of creativity. Another set of judges coded the 153 product categories represented in the ads in terms of their level 
of involvement and type of buying motivation (hedonic/experiential or utilitarian/instrumental) as well as whether 
the advertised product was a durable, a non-durable or a service and whether the ad was for a search or an experi-
ence product.
Ad-evoked feelings exerted a substantial influence on brand attitudes. Regardless of how creative or informative 
the respondents found the ads, their emotional content had a significant positive influence on consumers’ attitudes 
towards the advertised brands. Ads that elicit more pleasant feelings trigger more positive beliefs and thoughts about 
the brand, which results in more favourable brand attitudes. This automatic process can be described as a form 
of evaluative conditioning: by pairing the brand with the feelings evoked by an ad, the feelings become part of an 
ad’s brand evaluation. But feelings also have an indirect effect on brand attitude through their effect on the attitude 
towards the ad. Ads that evoke positive feelings are better liked, and better-liked ads lead to more positive brand 
attitudes. Consumers simply transfer the effect: pleasant feelings towards the ad are carried over to the brand. This 
indirect effect is stronger than the direct effect.
The study also tested the most commonly discussed product-category determinants of ad effectiveness that are 
also often used in advertising practice to distinguish product types. The effects of ad-evoked emotions on brand 
attitudes did not depend on the level of product category involvement: the emotional content of the ad had an 
equally strong influence on brand evaluations in low- and high-involvement product categories. The study investi-
gated the effect of different buying motives. Products are usually bought either for fun (hedonic/experiential motives 
when buying products like ice cream or perfume) or to serve a rather functional purpose (utilitarian/instrumental 
Research insight
Pleasant emotional ads make consumers like your brand more

104     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
Empirical studies investigating the influence of ad-evoked feelings usually find that 
feelings exert a significant influence on the different stages in the communications pro-
cess. A study investigating 23 000 responses to 240 ads shows that ad-evoked feelings 
(pleasure, arousal, dominance) explain 3% to 30% of the variance in brand interest 
and purchase intention while brand knowledge and beliefs explained 2% to 13%.83 The 
magnitude of the influence of ad-evoked feelings depends on the product category adver-
tised, the specific feelings that are evoked and the type of ad that is tested. Also, whether 
­ad-evoked emotions are measured by means of self-report or autonomic measures makes 
a difference.84 Nevertheless, we can conclude that affective responses might be predic-
tive of brand choice and, as a consequence, are a valuable tool for message testing and 
brand tracking.85
Emotional conditioning
Emotional conditioning can be considered an extreme case of feelings transfer, and is based 
on Pavlov’s classic conditioning theory.86 When dogs see food they begin to salivate. This 
is called an unconditioned response since it happens automatically. By frequently pairing a 
conditioned stimulus (a bell) with an unconditioned stimulus (meat powder), Pavlov was 
able to get dogs salivating just by hearing the bell (conditioned response). In a marketing 
context, communications practitioners sometimes try to pair a brand with an emotional 
response. Figure 3.7 explains the strategy DaimlerChrysler followed. Being aware of the fact 
that Celine Dion was a very popular singer, DaimlerChrysler paid Celine Dion between $10 
million and $20 million to use songs such as ‘I Drove All Night’ in a three-year ‘Drive and 
Love’ campaign. Chrysler hoped that by frequently pairing Celine Dion’s songs with the 
brand, the love feeling that her songs evoked would be transferred to Chrysler and would 
make the brand classy again.87 On the premise of a high exposure frequency and strong 
emotional content, attitudes towards saturated brands are said to be predominantly formed 
on the basis of emotional conditioning.88 The findings of one study indicate that emotional 
conditioning can indeed alter brand choice, but only when initially no strong preferences for 
competitive brands were formed and when brand choice is made under cognitive load (i.e. 
motives when buying products like detergents or trash cans). The effects of ad-evoked feelings on brand attitudes 
were more pronounced for products typically associated with fun than with function.
Third, the effect of durables (e.g. cars and refrigerators), non-durables (e.g. food and toilet paper) and services 
(e.g. haircuts and phone subscriptions) was also investigated, as was the distinction between search goods and expe-
rience goods. Search goods can be easily evaluated by the consumer before a purchase (e.g. clothing and furniture), 
while experience goods can only be evaluated after the purchase, by consuming and experiencing the product (e.g. 
a diet programme and movies). The results showed that product durability and the search-versus-experience nature 
of the product did not influence the effects of ad-evoked feelings on brand evaluations. The effect was similar in all 
of these product categories.
The conclusion from this study is that convincing a consumer to like a brand through advertising is mainly 
an emotional challenge. Advertisers should develop ads that elicit pleasant feelings, not only because these ads 
are better liked, but more importantly because they lead to more favourable brand attitudes. It does not mat-
ter which product categories are advertised; positive ad-evoked feelings have an equally strong positive effect 
on brand attitudes for durables, non-durables, services, high- and low-involvement products, and search and 
experience products. When advertising brands in product categories that are bought for fun, pleasure, sensory 
stimulation and experience, evoking positive emotions is even more important for developing favourable brand 
attitudes.82

LOW ELABORATION LIKELIHOOD, AFFECTIVE ATTITUDE FORMATION     105
when consumers lack the cognitive resources to carefully think over their choice).89 Examples 
of brands that try to benefit from emotional conditioning are Martini, Bacardi Breezer and 
Häagen-Dazs, which try to associate sexual arousal with their brands.
Häagen-Dazs has used erotic advertising for several years. One of its campaigns features a couple indulging in 
sexual foreplay. The ice cream is their main attribute, which is put on each other’s body and licked off by the other. 
By frequently combining the ice cream with foreplay, the ice cream itself has sexual connotations for some people. 
This is illustrated by the statements of some university students who completely identify Häagen-Dazs with sex. In 
an interview one of those students said:90
It was very nice ice cream, we really enjoyed the ice cream and the advertising had a lot of sexual connotations in 
it and I think we basically liked the connotations of the ads and we liked the idea of that and we believed the idea 
that Häagen-Dazs was sexy because the ads told us it was sexy, so when we had the ice cream in front of us we felt 
that the pot was very sexy, a sexy pot.
Furthermore, when the students had a date, they always made sure to buy Häagen-Dazs in advance. Successful 
strategies are quickly copied. Besides Häagen-Dazs, Magnum also opted for eroticising its ice cream.91
Business insight
Emotional conditioning worked out well for Häagen-Dazs
Figure 3.7  Emotional conditioning at work
Mere exposure
Hundreds of studies have demonstrated that prior exposure to stimuli (nonsense syllables, 
words, slogans, pictures, faces, sounds, smells, etc.) increases positive affect towards these 
stimuli.92 In the same vein, ad and brand exposures can increase liking of the ad and the 
brand, and can make it more likely that the advertised brand enters consumers’ considera-
tion set.93 In other words, the mere exposure of consumers to a particular ad, without the 
consumer actively elaborating on the ad, can influence consumer preferences and behaviour. 

106     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
Indeed, studies show that respondents who were exposed to an ad more than once, as 
compared with respondents who saw the ad for the first time, appeared to evaluate the ad 
as more favourable and less dull.94 For a while, it has been assumed that prior exposure to 
stimuli acquaints consumers with the stimuli and that this familiarity causes the more posi-
tive attitude towards the stimuli. However, several studies indicate that the mere exposure 
effect on brand attitude does not occur through a subjective feeling of familiarity. When a 
respondent has been exposed to a particular stimulus before, this exposure can result in a 
more positive stimulus evaluation even if the respondent cannot remember having seen the 
stimulus before.95 A more recent explanation of the mere exposure effect is that prior expo-
sure increases processing fluency at the time consumers have to make a judgement.96 The fact 
that consumers have been frequently exposed to a certain ad or brand results in a representa-
tion of this stimulus in consumers’ memory. When consumers later on want to evaluate the 
stimulus, e.g. during a shopping trip, the representation of the stimulus in their memory 
will facilitate the encoding and processing of the stimulus. As a consequence, processing of 
the stimulus will be easier and more fluent. Since consumers often do not realise that prior 
exposure increases processing fluency, they misattribute the source of the processing fluency 
(i.e. the previous exposure) to liking, truth or acceptability of the ad or brand, especially 
when they have been incidentally exposed to the ad or brand and are not aware of this 
exposure.97 Of course, the mere exposure effect is limited and should be seen as a function 
of learning and satiation.98 The more novel a stimulus, the more consumers can learn and 
the more positive the affective response will be.99 When consumers are confronted too often 
with a particular message or ad, there is no longer any learning opportunity and they get 
bored. This can have a boomerang effect on ad and brand attitude. The latter effect is called 
wear-out and indicates that there is a certain threshold of exposure after which additional 
exposure results in negative instead of positive communications effects (see Chapter 7).
Marketing actions are often designed to change people’s attitudes towards certain brands or products. Marketers 
do this on the assumption that inducing a positive attitude towards a brand will result in attitude-consistent buying 
behaviour. Hence, by changing attitudes, they actually want to sway choices in the direction of their products. This 
is a reasonable approach since attitudes are often easier to change than actual behaviour. However, a lot of social, 
psychological and consumer research has already shown that the link between attitudes and behaviour is not that 
straightforward, and that behaviour is often not in line with reported attitudes.
A study investigated to what extent consumers’ choice depends on their attitudes or on the accessibility of a 
certain brand in the decision environment. The research was set up around two data collections, separated from 
each other by one week. In the first phase, 346 respondents’ attitudes towards different charities were measured. 
In the second phase the researchers manipulated the accessibility of the charities by getting respondents to answer 
questions about either their most preferred choice or their fourth most preferred choice (254 students fully com-
pleted both questionnaires).
Subsequently, participants were asked to decide on a charitable organisation to receive a donation of €250. Next, 
they were asked about the perceived importance of the decision they had to make. Participants were split into two 
groups to create a high- and a low-involvement group, based on the median of the perceived importance of the 
decision.
The results show that simply making a choice option relatively more accessible or salient in the decision context 
compared with its competitors increases the likelihood that the alternative becomes part of the consideration set for 
both low- and high-involvement respondents. For low-involvement individuals, also the choice for the alternative 
Research insight
The impact of brand attitudes versus brand accessibility on brand choice

HIGH ELABORATION LIKELIHOOD, BEHAVIOURAL ATTITUDE FORMATION     107
High elaboration likelihood, behavioural attitude formation
The theories discussed above have often been tested for hypothetical products and/or hypo-
thetical brands, which makes them more relevant for new than for established brands. 
Although using hypothetical stimuli is ideal for eliminating research biasing effects such 
as brand knowledge, the extent to which the brand has been advertised in the past and the 
influence of previous campaigns, it disregards a source of information that might have 
important consequences for the way a consumer processes and evaluates a new marketing 
message, more specifically personal brand experience through previous brand usage. Post-
experience models assume central-route processing of prior brand experiences. So, in this 
case the consumers are motivated, willing and able to think of previous brand experience 
and will take this into account in forming an attitude towards the brand, as well as in decid-
ing what brand to buy in the future.
Although incorporating the influence of brand experience is a much more realistic 
approach to consumer information processing, brand experience has been neglected by 
most researchers. As a consequence, only a few communications models exist that try to 
explain its effect on the communications process. However, it is straightforward that brand 
satisfaction or dissatisfaction will have an impact on the next purchase. For example, if 
you have been driving a Ford for six years and you are really satisfied with its design, petrol 
consumption and after-sales dealer service, the probability that you will buy a Ford next time 
is much higher than if you find out that your Ford consumes much more petrol than your 
friend’s Mazda, spare parts are more expensive than Opel’s and your Ford broke down five 
times in six months. Another example is that when you buy Lay’s crisps you expect them to 
be fresh, otherwise you are very likely to switch brands.
An example of a model that incorporates brand experience is the post-experience model.101 
This model assumes relations between the current purchase, on the one hand, and previous 
purchase, previous advertising, previous promotion, current advertising and current promo-
tion, on the other. The post-experience model was tested using scanner panel data for an 
84-week period on ketchup and detergent brands. The data included household purchase 
records, store environment information on price and promotion, and advertising exposure 
records. The results revealed that the current purchase is significantly influenced by previous 
purchase behaviour, current advertising and current promotion, but not by previous advertis-
ing, and negatively by previous promotion. The fact that a brand was previously bought in 
a promotion diminished the probability that the consumer would purchase the brand again 
in the next period. The latter can be explained by the fact that people who take advantage 
of promotions are more likely to be brand-switchers who are less inclined to buy the same 
brand in subsequent purchases. Current advertising also enhanced brand-switching. The 
results of this study seem to suggest that previous purchase behaviour is indeed the most 
important explanatory factor of current behaviour and that advertising mainly serves to 
remind people who have not recently purchased the brand of the fact that it exists.
However, what is the role marketing communications can play for first buys, on the one hand, 
and for other than first-time purchases, on the other? The Perception–Experience–Memory 
that was made more accessible increased. High-involvement respondents were more likely to choose their most 
preferred charity, irrespective of whether another charity was made more accessible.
This study once again underscores the importance of creating positive attitudes in high-involvement respondents 
or for high-involvement products. On the other hand, for low-involvement individuals and low-involvement situ-
ations, high brand accessibility by means of repeated ad exposure or being salient in the purchase environment  
(e.g. by means of floorboards, shelf presence, etc.) may be sufficient.100

108     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
model (see Figure 3.8) tries to formulate an answer to this.102 When consumers do not yet 
have brand experience, the main function of advertising consists of framing perception. 
Framing can affect consumers’ expectation, anticipation and interpretation. Expectation is 
concerned with notifying consumers that a particular brand in a certain product category 
is available and putting the brand in a frame of reference so that consumers expect to see it. 
Next, marketing communications should try to create anticipation or generate hypotheses. 
Research indicates that exposing consumers to an attribute-based ad before brand trial 
makes consumers more curious about the brand (‘Would Red Bull really energise my body 
and mind, and give me wings?’), it helps consumers to formulate hypotheses about the brand 
(‘Red Bull will give me a kick’), and it induces the consumers to test their hypotheses dur-
ing a subsequent trial experience.103 Besides expectation and anticipation, pre-experience 
communications may offer an interpretation or a rationale for the anticipation the brand 
generates. For example, an unfamiliar computer brand could use the Intel Inside logo to 
assure consumers that it is a trustworthy and high-quality brand.
A next critical function of both pre-experience and post-experience communications is 
enhancing sensory and social experience. Products may taste better, function better or look 
nicer and the service may be perceived as friendlier or more knowledgeable just because 
consumers expect to experience this and anticipate the experience.104  Moreover, consumers 
may focus their brand trial evaluation on attributes that they would not have used without 
the pre- or post-experience ad (instead of evaluating Red Bull on taste, carbonation, sugar 
level, etc., it may be evaluated on the uplifting experience it gives because of the advertis-
ing campaign), or marketing communications may change the weight that the advertised 
attributes receive at evaluation (valuing the uplifting experience as more important than 
taste, refreshment, etc.). On the basis of experiments in which respondents were exposed 
to an ad alone, to an ad and a product trial, or to a product trial alone, it appeared that 
a pre-experience ad combined with brand trial resulted in significantly more favourable 
brand responses than either a brand trial alone or an ad alone. More specifically, when an 
ad and brand trial were combined, the pre-trial ad led consumers to process the brand trial 
information in a more focused and meaningful way, resulting in more confidently held brand 
beliefs, a higher expectancy value from the brand (as measured by the Fishbein model) and 
higher purchase intentions. Moreover, ads appeared to be better in fostering confidently held 
beliefs about non-experiential attributes (such as the number of calories), while trial was 
more powerful in creating confidently held experiential attribute beliefs (such as taste).105  
Also, post-experience ads have been shown to enhance the experience of a previous brand 
Figure 3.8  The Perception–Experience–Memory model
Source: Based on Hall, B.F. (2002) ‘A new model for measuring advertising effectiveness’, Journal of Advertising Research, 42 (March/
April), 23–31.

LOW ELABORATION LIKELIHOOD, BEHAVIOURAL ATTITUDE FORMATION     109
trial. This happens when a consumer evaluates his or her brand experience as more favour-
able when he or she has been exposed to advertising after brand usage as compared with the 
situation when no advertising followed the brand experience. For example, if you have had 
Fitnesse cereal for breakfast and afterwards you see an ad for Fitnesse which shows all the 
ingredients and stresses the fact that no sugar is added, it might improve your evaluation of 
Fitnesse as a healthy breakfast choice.
A second role of post-experience communications is to organise memory. It offers verbal 
and visual cues such as jingles, slogans, user imagery, etc., enriching the brand schema and 
making it more likely that afterwards the brand will be recalled. Increasing brand recall 
and top-of-mind awareness can increase the possibility that consumers stop buying the 
competitor’s brand and change to the company’s brand; in other words, it can stimulate 
brand-switching.106 Pepsi, for example, tried to change taste beliefs by stressing ‘nothing else 
is a Pepsi’. On the other hand, post-experience communications may also prevent consum-
ers switching to the competitor’s brand.107 Finally, post-experience communications also 
help consumers to interpret their experiences: ‘The advertisement not only influences the 
consumer to feel that the sensory or social experience was a good one, but it also provides 
reasons to believe that it was.’108 It is important to remember that marketing communica-
tions really are able to improve and reshape objective sensory experience. In an era in which 
consumers have the feeling that in the majority of product categories brands are converging 
instead of becoming more distinct,109 post-experience advertising may offer the extra ele-
ment for a brand to be perceived as better or more unique than the rest.
Low elaboration likelihood, behavioural attitude formation
In this case, at least one of the MAO factors is low, making well-thought-through processing 
less likely. Consumers will rather concentrate on elements of previous brand experience to 
form an attitude and purchase intention. A typical model for this low-involvement–behav-
ioural-orientated processing is Ehrenberg’s reinforcement model. According to this model, 
awareness leads to trial and trial leads to reinforcement. Product experience is the dominant 
variable in the model, and advertising is supposed to reinforce habits, frame experience (see 
previous section) and defend consumers’ attitudes.110 A similar model is called the routinised 
response behaviour model and assumes that a large number of product experiences can 
lead to routinised response behaviour, especially for low-involvement, frequently purchased 
products such as toilet paper, toothpaste, paper tissues, mineral water or chewing gum.111 
In this case, consumers do not spend much time on deciding which brand to buy, but buy a 
particular brand out of habit. In other words, previous behaviour guides future behaviour. 
Although the initial brand choice may have been thoroughly elaborated, routinised response 
behaviour is characterised by no or very low cognitive effort in which very few possibilities 
are considered. The fact that routinised response behaviour is a frequently used purchase 
strategy is illustrated by a study observing consumers who were buying detergents in a 
supermarket:112 83% of the 120 consumers observed took only one brand while no more 
than 4% picked up more than one brand to investigate them a bit closer. It took the con-
sumers on average 13 seconds to walk down the aisle and choose a detergent. Obviously, no 
extended problem-solving was used here. Building brand awareness and trying to become 
top of mind is very important here in order to be included in the limited set of brands that 
a consumer is willing to consider, to retain brand loyalty and to enhance brand-switching 
to the own brand.
As becomes obvious from previous sections, a lot of communications models have 
been presented and all of them found empirical support in some circumstances. How-
ever, the key seems to be to define which variables influence the way a consumer deals 
with marketing communications. Motivation, ability and opportunity certainly are 

110     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
very important variables, although an even more important factor – previous brand 
­experience – has been neglected most of the time. Future research will no doubt try 
to integrate this variable further and will propose new models. One thing is certain: 
communications processing is a complex subject and predicting how someone is going 
to respond to a certain stimulus will always be a cumbersome task. As is the case with 
consumer behaviour, theories and models can only help us to understand consumers and 
their responses a bit better.
How communications work in the digital age
Do marketing communications work differently in an online environment than via more 
traditional channels? Not fundamentally. The purpose of marketing communications is 
always to carry over information about brands, instil brand value and positive brand evalu-
ations in potential consumers, and activate consumers to react upon the brand, buy it, 
and become loyal to it. What is different in an online environment are the tools used to 
communicate, and most of all, the fact that individuals connect with one another and with 
brands in an interactive way and on a much larger scale than would be possible in a tradi-
tional offline environment. Especially social media and social networks facilitate this intense 
interaction. Consumers can write product reviews, post content on websites and on social 
media, like, share or comment on other consumer-generated content or on brand content 
and, in that way, change the previously one-sided brand-controlled communications into a 
situation in which the communications about a brand are as much customer-driven as it is 
company-driven.
An alternative model as to how communications work was adapted by Willie to incorpo-
rate the impact of digital media and interactivity.113 This model starts from the assumption 
that communications work according to four different models:
● Persuasion
● Involvement
● Salience
● Sales promotion
The persuasion framework is the classical one. Brands gradually move consumers through a 
number of sequential stages to persuade them to buy a brand, based on rational benefits and 
a clear selling proposition. This is similar to what the traditional hierarchy-of-effects models 
prescribe. In a digital context, the brand persuades consumers, not just by one-sided nar-
ration, but by ‘guided exploration’. The brand encourages and helps consumers to explore 
and find out more about the brand. This can be done through brand pages on social media, 
electronic newsletters, and online brand communities.
The involvement framework involves consumers with the brand, sometimes rationally, 
but mostly emotionally. Communications convince the customer that the brand is valuable 
to them, because it holds shared or aspirational values. In the digital age, this involvement 
is deepened because consumers can be encouraged to ‘play’. Consumers can create content 
about the brand, and partly take over control of brand building and brand communication. 
This user-generated content turns up in blogs and videos, and on review sites and social 
networks.
The salience framework works on the basis of the assumption that marketing commu-
nications work when it is creative, original, and stands out. The brand is very salient in the 
minds of people because they pay attention to its exceptional and attention-grabbing com-
munications. In a digital context, this effect is amplified by the fact that people share these 
brand messages, and discuss online about the brand, through social networking.

HOW COMMUNICATIONS WORK IN THE DIGITAL AGE     111
The sales promotion framework starts from the premise that marketing communica-
tions should be aimed at buying behaviour and sales. Messages are intended to participate 
in promotions, sales, price deals, etc. The digital context has not fundamentally changed 
this framework. Digital communication has always been aimed at provoking a behavioural 
response, including buying behaviour.
All in all, the digital context has provided new tools and new means to communicate with 
consumers and, most importantly, to activate them to communicate with the brand and with 
other consumers about the brand.
One of the fundamental differences between the offline and the online communication 
environment is the aspect of social interaction and identification. Social network sites allow 
a much more intense interaction and identification between people than in the old time. 
Consequently, their reaction to brand messages will be influenced by the social context even 
more than in a traditional communication environment. Nevertheless, classic theories about 
the effect of the social context on the behaviour of people are still relevant. In that respect, 
classic research on social interaction and identification has identified three aspects that 
determine responses to interpersonal communication: homophily, tie strength and source 
credibility.114
Homophily is the extent to which pairs of individuals are alike, and share, for example, 
the same age group, gender, education, lifestyle, social class or interests. Perceived homo-
phily increases the likelihood of perceiving the other as being more persuasive.115 Perceived 
homophily also stimulates a greater level of interpersonal attraction, trust and understand-
ing116 as it can serve as a cue to indicate that a product or service mentioned is suited, for 
example, to their age group or gender.117 As a result, information from a homophilous 
source (for instance, a post on Facebook) has more influence in the decision-making process 
compared to information from a heterophilous (dissimilar) source.118
Tie strength represents the strength of the dyadic interpersonal relationship in the context 
of social networks.119 Tie strength is characterised by the importance attached to the social 
relation, the frequency of social contact, the type of social relation, the intimacy between 
two parties, etc.120 In an online social network, interpersonal tie strength could be reflected, 
for instance, by the number of common friends and shared activities, or the number of 
interactions between two people. Individuals in a strong tie relationship interact more fre-
quently and exchange more information.121 As a result, strong ties are more influential than 
weak ties. Phelps et al. showed that people tend to open viral messages only from people 
they know (or at least with whom they have some connection).122 An explanation for the 
influence of tie strength is that it can reduce potential risks, as stronger ties are perceived as 
more credible and trustworthy.123 Furthermore, perceived tie strength encourages users to 
interact and to spread information.124 In sum, tie strength between individuals should have 
a positive effect on consumers’ responses to a message posted online.
Source credibility is the degree to which a source is considered as an expert and unbiased 
source.125 A person’s knowledge on a certain topic, occupation, social training or experience 
can contribute to whether or not he or she is perceived as credible.126 In online environments, 
such information is not always available and it may therefore be relatively difficult to assess 
a person’s credibility. Online users are typically aware that they are evaluating the opinions 
of complete strangers.127 In that case, the perceived credibility of a message source may be 
based on the reader’s assessment of the source’s motivation for posting the message.128 When 
a message is perceived as credible because the source has expertise and does not appear to 
have any self-interest to recommend the product, consumers will pay more attention to the 
message and it will be more persuasive.129
These three factors are thus important determinants of how people are going to react to 
and interact with messages disseminated by other people. Brown, Broderick and Lee suggest 
that these insights may also be applicable to websites. They claim that people use websites 
as a social proxy for individual identification.130 Individuals relate to websites as if they are 
the primary actors in the social network. Therefore, the ‘source’ for online information is 
not only the individual that posts it, but also the website it is posted on. They argue that in 

112     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
online environments, consumer responses are also driven by the relationship a person has 
developed with the website, rather than just with the specific person that posts a message. 
The site is seen as an actor in the evaluation of electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM). They 
posit that a greater homophily and tie strength between the individual and the social net-
work site, as well as the source credibility of the site, will improve consumers’ responses to 
eWOM messages.
Summary
How marketing communications persuade consumers is largely a black box process that 
can be explained in many ways. In hierarchy-of-effects models, the consumer is assumed 
to go through a hierarchical process of cognitive, affective and behavioural responses to 
communications stimuli. Depending on the type of product and buying situation, this hier-
archy may differ. A crucial role in this persuasion process is the formation and change of 
attitudes. The extent to which attitudes are formed in a stable or less stable way depends 
on the elaboration likelihood of information processing, which in turn depends on the 
motivation, the ability and the opportunity to process information. If one of these factors 
is not present, consumers may be convinced by peripheral stimuli, such as the colours in 
the ad or the celebrity endorsing the product, rather than by rational product information. 
The way in which attitudes are formed and changed depends on the high or low likelihood 
of elaboration, on the one hand, and whether attitudes are primarily based on cognitive, 
affective or conative factors, on the other. As a result, six types of attitude formation and 
communications models can be distinguished. Among the most important of these models 
are the cognitively based high elaboration likelihood model of Fishbein–Ajzen and the 
Theory of Planned Behaviour, the affectively orientated feelings-as-information and feeling 
transfer models. The post-experience, the perception–experience–memory and the routi-
nised response behaviour models focus on the behavioural aspects of attitude formation. 
The digital context has changed marketing communications in that consumers interact with 
brands and with each other on a massive scale and have partly taken over the control over 
brand communications.
Review questions
	 1.	 What are the contributions and shortcomings of hierarchy-of-effects models, such as the 
Lavidge and Steiner model and the FCB grid?
	 2.	 How are attitudes formed and changed? How can the ELM explain how communications 
work?
	 3.	 How can the elements in the Theory of Planned Behaviour be used in marketing 
communications?
	 4.	 What is heuristic evaluation and how can it be used in marketing communications?
	 5.	 How can the feelings-as-information theory be used in marketing communications?
	 6.	 What is the importance of ad-evoked feelings and emotional conditioning in marketing 
communications?
	 7.	 What is the mere exposure effect?
	 8.	 How can pre- and post-experience advertising influence brand choice?
	 9.	 In what way have marketing communications become different in the digital age?

CASE 3     113
Further reading
Ajzen, I., Theory of Planned Behaviour: A Bibliography, http://people.umass.edu/aizen/
tpbrefs.html (accessed 30 July 2015).
Chaudhuri, A. (2006) Emotion and Reason in Consumer Behaviour. Burlington, MA and 
Oxford: Elsevier Butterworth–Heinemann.
Crano, W.D. and Prislin, R. (2008) Attitudes and Attitude Change. New York: Psychology Press.
Petty, R.E., Fazio, R.H. and Brinol, P. (2008) Attitudes: Insights from the New Implicit 
Measures. New York: Psychology Press.
Ratneshwar, S. and Mick, D.G. (2005) Inside Consumption: Consumer Motives, Goals and 
Desires. New York: Routledge.
Wänke, M. (2008) Social Psychology of Consumer Behaviour. New York: Psychology Press.
Journal of Advertising, http://ja.memphis.edu/.
Journal of Consumer Psychology, http://www.elsevier.com/wps/find/journaldescription 
.cws_home/713950/description#description.
Journal of Consumer Research, http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/toc/jcr/current.
CASE 3:
Club Med: a ‘true creator of happiness’ fights non-consideration
Club Méditerranée: a strong brand with a 
rich history
In 1950, Gérard Blitz, the son of an Antwerp diamond 
merchant, introduced a new style of holiday for ‘develop-
ing a taste for living outdoors and doing physical training 
and sport’, and, together with his partner Gilbert Trigano, 
founded ‘Club Méditerranée’ (Club Med). This idea gave 
birth to the spirit: ‘Our purpose in life is to be happy. The 
place to be happy is here. And the time to be happy is now.’ 
This phrase coined by Gérard Blitz received considerable 
endorsement in the post-war context. By freeing peo-
ple from their restrictions, allowing them to get together, 
recharge their batteries and return to original pleasures, 
happiness by Club Med was born. Club Med invented a 
new way to bring people together and an unprecedented 
vacation style: all-inclusive holidays in resorts in the world’s 
most beautiful venues, where every guest or Great Member 
(GM) could unwind through contact with nature, sports and 
others, surrounded by the friendliness of the staff, or Gentils 
Organisateurs (GO).
In 2005, Club Med refocused its activity on high-end 
global tourism to become the world specialist in upscale, 
friendly, multicultural, all-inclusive holidays. This new posi-
tion placed Club Med in a new international competition 
range comprising luxury hotels, holiday clubs, resorts and 
tour operators. Club Med targets the clients of upscale 
hotels who are seeking a friendlier atmosphere and the 
guests of holiday clubs who require higher-quality service 
within an upscale, all-inclusive formula.
To accompany its new upscale position, Club Med 
adopted in late December 2007 a new signature and 
launched a global communications campaign, bold and 
poetic: ‘Where happiness means the world’ represented this 
strong promise of happiness ‘by Club Med’. Deployed in the 
40 countries where the group was present, the new Club 
Med campaign expressed powerfully, in the style typical of 
the Club Med ‘label’, all the feelings, the happiness, that can 
be experienced through the vast collection of offers, activi-
ties and discoveries available in the resorts.
In 2011, the company operated 72 holiday villages in 
26 countries around the world, where 1.2 million custom-
ers were served by 15 000 staff members of 100 different 
nationalities. The turnover of the company was €1423 mil-
lion, 45% of which was in France. Club Med occupied a 
strong position in the universe of luxury brands.

114     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
concept, such as openness to the world, and a level of 
intimacy that customers could freely choose themselves.
In other words, the study revealed that the problem was 
not so much brand awareness or price perception, but a 
lack of understanding of the concept and the Club Med 
brand. To corroborate these qualitative findings, a quan-
titative study was conducted in a sample of 485 respond-
ents: well-off Flemish couples or families with children less 
than 12 years old, the core target group of Club Med. This 
study largely confirmed the insights from the qualitative 
phase. First of all, the study showed that Club Med’s brand 
awareness was as high as that of its main competitors  
(Figure 3.9). Also the price perception was in line with the 
competition (Figure 3.10). However, the main problem 
was that the brand was not considered by the target group 
as much as the competition (Figure 3.11). Moreover, as 
was also found in the qualitative study, Club Med was per-
ceived as an upmarket version of UCPA, an image that Club 
Med definitely does not want (Table 3.6). Not knowing 
Club Med and the characteristics of its offer appeared to be 
the main reason not to consider the brand (Figure 3.12).
Consumers do not understand the brand 
and do not consider it
For a number of years, Club Med has been in decline in the 
Dutch-speaking part of Belgium. Compared with other tour 
operators, the brand has not been very visible in that part of the 
market. In 2010, its share was 6% in Flanders, while Jetair had 
35%, Thomas Cook 15%, Neckermann 11% and Sunjets 10%.
In 2010 qualitative and quantitative consumer research 
was undertaken. A qualitative study with potential custom-
ers of higher social classes led to the following insights:
● The marketing challenge of Club Med in Flanders was not 
brand awareness or the perception of high prices, but the 
fact that potential customers did not consider Club Med 
when they thought of booking a holiday (mental zapping).
● People perceived Club Med as a ‘UCPA upscale’ (UCPA is a 
low-end travel organisation) which turned part of the target 
group off. People did not know the Club Med concept very 
well, and associated it with noisiness and forced intimacy.
● At the same time, the expectations of the target group 
were consistent with the strong points of the Club Med 
Figure 3.9  Brand awareness of Club Med and its main competitors
Figure 3.10  Price perception of Club Med and its competitors: ‘How do you think the price of their offer compares with 
other travel agencies/resort hotels?’

CASE 3     115
● Maintain brand awareness at least at the same level of 
the competitors.
● The image of the brand should improve, more specifi-
cally on the following key attributes:
● Happy atmosphere
● Experience new things
● Safe and secure
● Closer to my family
● Discovery
● Feel unique
● Improvement of the price perception – Club Med should 
be perceived as relatively expensive.
● Improvement of the value-for-money perception.
● Improvement of product quality perception.
A campaign to put Club Med on  
the map again
In 2011 the company decided to redress the lack of con-
sideration and misperceptions about Club Med by means 
of a marketing communications campaign. The campaign 
was targeted at the affluent Flemish families with children 
younger than 12. The objectives were set out to be reached 
in three stages, as follows:
1.	 Take away the barriers to consideration of Club Med as 
a travel organisation.
2.	 Reinforce the uniqueness of the brand.
3.	 Reinforce word of mouth.
A further ambition was to become an iconic brand by 2013.
Derived from these three pillars, the following specific 
objectives were formulated:
Figure 3.11  Brand consideration of Club Med and its competitors: ‘To what extent would you consider booking a 
holiday with each of these travel agents/resort hotels?’
Also acknowledged by target group
Average
Less acknowledged by target group
Personality
Active
Full of life
Dynamic
Adventurous
Friendly
Satisfaction
Enables getting to know new people
Creates a festive, happy atmosphere
Stimulates new experiences
Creates an atmosphere where 
I can forget my worries
Handles everything and makes sure I 
don’t have to worry
Offer
Has a lot of sport activities
Has an all-inclusive formula
Separate activities for the whole 
family
A well-known and respected chain
Table 3.6  Image of Club Med in target group (those who know Club Med)

116     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
The campaign used a combination of traditional mass 
media and online tools. A billboard teaser campaign was 
supplemented by inserts and ads in a number of major 
newspapers and banners on selected Internet sites. A PR 
campaign targeting travel journalists was rolled out and a 
direct mailing was sent to key prospects. All these efforts 
were geared at attracting prospects to the Internet site 
www.ontdekclubmed.be (‘discover club med’) and to invite 
people to share their thoughts on social media.
Figure 3.12  Reasons not to consider Club Med for holidays
A campaign well received by  
the target group
Various measures indicate that the campaign was well pro-
cessed by the target group. Since its launch, the website 
has received 33 000 unique visitors who visit the site on 
average for one minute (Figure 3.13). Visitor peaks are seen 
as a result of campaign efforts (mailings, newspaper inserts, 
etc.). By the end of March 2011, the Facebook page had 

CASE 3     117
more than 130 000 visitors and 6800 fans. Word of mouth 
on Facebook, blogs, etc., evolved positively during the cam-
paign period. The evolution of word-of-mouth quality dur-
ing the campaign is shown in Figure 3.14.
The campaign in the newspaper De Morgen scored the 
best ever of the 300 campaigns tested for this newspaper. 
Three out of four respondents saw the ad and 94% could 
attribute it to the campaign, leading to an effective score of 
72% (Figure 3.15). Another newspaper ad scored a recog-
nition of 54%, a correct attribution of 72%, and hence an 
effective score of 39%, well above the average of 27% for all 
the ads in this newspaper.
Moving in the right direction
After the campaign, in June 2011, key indicators of effective-
ness were measured. Brand awareness did not change after 
the campaign. Club Med maintained its high awareness 
Figure 3.13  Evolution of number of unique visitors to the website (http://www.ontdekclubmed.be)
Figure 3.14  Evolution of Club Med word-of-mouth quality during the campaign
Figure 3.15  Recognition, correct attribution and effective 
score of the De Morgen newspaper campaign

118     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
Figure 3.17  Evolution of Club Med image attributes, 2010–11
Figure 3.16  Image of Club Med and its competitors, March 2010 versus June 2011

score of more than 90%, and is still equally as well known 
as its competitors. General brand attitude improved: among 
families with kids, the brand opinion of Club Med is signifi-
cantly less neutral and more favourable than in the previous 
measurement (March 2010) (Figure 3.16). In 2010, 27% of 
the respondents found Club Med ‘somewhat less expensive’. 
In June 2011, this decreased to 18%. Although not impres-
sive, the price perception evolved in the desired direction. 
Similarly the ‘value for money’ perception had improved. 
In 2010, 28% felt that Club Med was good value for money. 
In 2011, this had increased to 33%. The brand associations 
in terms of the attributes put forward as important did not 
significantly change between March 2010 and June 2011. 
The image thus largely stayed the same, and the campaign 
did not succeed in altering the perception of the core target 
group (Figure 3.17).
The commercial results of Club Med also evolved 
positively. After two years of severe decline in Flanders, 
the number of customers slightly increased in 2011 (Fig-
ure 3.18). Similarly, turnover substantially increased after 
two years of substantial decline (Figure 3.19). Combining 
the recruitment and sales figures leads to the conclusion 
that sales primarily increased as a result of a higher unit 
price per holiday sold.
Questions
1.	 Describe and assess Club Med’s problem identification 
and the research it is based on. Given its desired posi-
tioning and business problem, did Club Med draw the 
right conclusions from the research?
2.	 In Club Med’s campaign, did it follow a hierarchy-of-
effects approach? If yes, which one? Is such an approach 
needed?
3.	 In which cell of the FCB grid would you classify travel 
solutions? In which cell can Club Med be situated or 
does it aim to be situated? Has it been successful?
4.	 Using the classification of attitude formation models in 
this chapter, which models seem most relevant to explain 
the processing and impact of the Club Med campaign?
5.	 In terms of the Theory of Planned Behaviour, how is Club 
Med trying to form the intentions towards its brand? 
What is the role of attitudes, subjective norms and per-
ceived behavioural control?
6.	 Does Club Med aim at central or peripheral processing? 
Why?
7.	 Would you say Club Med has been effective in reach-
ing its targets, and is this effectiveness attributable to its 
communication campaign?
Figure 3.18  Evolution of Club Med customers in 
Flanders, 2009–2011
Figure 3.19  Evolution of Club Med turnover in Flanders, 
2009–2011
Sources: http://www.clubmed-corporate.com (accessed 22 June 2012); Bert 
Denis, TBWA.
2	 Vakratsas, D. and Ambler, T. (1999) ‘How advertising 
works: what do we really know?’, Journal of Marketing, 
63(1), 25–43.
3	 Vaughn, R. (1986) ‘How advertising works: a planning model 
revisited’, Journal of Advertising Research, 26(1), 57–66.
1	 Barry, T.E. and Howard, D.J. (1990) ‘A review and critique 
of the hierarchy of effects in advertising’, International 
Journal of Advertising, 9, 121–35; Barry, T.E. (2002) ‘In 
defense of the hierarchy of effects: a rejoinder to Weil-
bacher’, Journal of Advertising Research, 42(3), 44–7.
References
REFERENCES     119

120     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
4	 Rossiter, J.R. and Percy, L. (1997) Advertising and Pro-
motion Management. New York: McGraw-Hill.
5	 Keller, K.L. (2008) Building, Measuring, and Managing 
Brand Equity, 3rd edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pren-
tice Hall.
6	 Yoon, S.K. (2001) ‘Prophet warning: is nothing sacred?’, 
Far Eastern Economic Review, 10 May, http://www 
.singapore-window.org/sw01/010510re.htm (accessed 
June 2009).
7	 Barry, T.E. and Howard, D.J. (1990) ‘A review and  
critique of the hierarchy of effects in advertising’, Inter-
national Journal of Advertising, 9, 121–35; Barry, T.E. 
(2002) ‘In defense of the hierarchy of effects: a rejoinder 
to Weilbacher’, Journal of Advertising Research, 42(3), 
44–7.
8	 Bamossy, S. and Hogg, A. (2007) Consumer Behaviour: 
A European Perspective, 3rd edition. Harlow: Pearson 
Education.
9	 Hoyer, W.C. and MacInnis, D.J. (2007) Consumer Behav-
ior, 4th edition. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
10	 Panic, K., Cauberghe, V. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2013) 
‘Promoting dental hygiene to children: comparing 
traditional and interactive media following threat 
appeals’, Journal of  Health Communication, DOI: 
10.1080/10810730.2013.821551.
11	 Witte, K. (1992) ‘Putting the fear back into fear appeals: 
the Extended Parallel Process Model (EPPM)’, Commu-
nication Monographs, 59(4), 329–49.
12	 Kretchmer, S.B. (2005) ‘Changing views of commer-
cialization in digital games: in-game advertising and 
advergames as worlds in play’, Paper presented at 
DIGTAR Conference Changing Views: Worlds in Play, 
Vancouver.
13	 Gee, J.P. (2003) What Video Games Have to Teach Us 
about Learning and Literacy. New York: Palgrave Mac-
millan; Prensky, M. (2005) ‘Computer games and learn-
ing: digital game-based learning’, in Raessens, J. and 
Goldstein, J. (eds), Handbook of  Computer Games 
Studies, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 59–79.
14	 Hoyer, W.D. and MacInnis, D.J. (2007) Consumer Behav-
ior, 4th edition, Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin; Park, 
C.W., Jaworski, B.J. and MacInnis, D.J. (1986) ‘Strategic 
brand concept–image management’, Journal of Market-
ing, 50 (October), 135–45.
15	 Pham, M.T. and Higgins, E.T. (2005) ‘Promotion and 
prevention in consumer decision making: state of the 
art and theoretical propositions’, in Ratneshwar, S. and 
Mick, D.G. (eds), Inside Consumption: Perspectives on 
Consumer Motives, Goals and Desires, London: Rout-
ledge, 8–43; Aaker, J.L. and Lee, A.Y. (2001), “‘I” seek 
pleasures and “we” avoid pains: the role of self-regulatory 
goals in information processing and persuasion’, Journal 
of Consumer Research, 28 (June), 33–49; Higgins, E.T. 
(1997) ‘Beyond pleasure and pain’, American Psycholo-
gist, 52 (December), 1280–300.
16	 Huffman, C., Ratneshwar, S. and Mick, D.G. (2000) 
‘Consumer goal structures and goal determination pro-
cesses’, in Ratneshwar, S., Mick, D.G. and Huffman, 
C. (eds), The Why of  Consumption: Contemporary 
Perspectives on Consumer Motives, Goals and Desires. 
New York: Routledge, 1–35.
17	 Pham, M.T. and Higgins, E.T. (2005) ‘Promotion and 
prevention in consumer decision making: state of the 
art and theoretical propositions’, in Ratneshwar, S. and 
Mick, D.G. (eds), Inside Consumption: Perspectives on 
Consumer Motives, Goals and Desires. London: Rout-
ledge, 8–43.
18	 Baumgartner, H. (2002) ‘Toward a personology of the 
consumer’, Journal of Consumer Research, 29 (Septem-
ber), 286–92.
19	 Cuckoo Awards (2005).
20	 Petty, R.E. and Cacioppo, J.T. (1986) ‘The elaboration 
likelihood model of persuasion’, Advances in Experi-
mental Social Psychology, 19, 123–205.
21	 Petty, R.E. and Cacioppo, J.T. (1986) ‘The elaboration 
likelihood model of persuasion’, Advances in Experi-
mental Social Psychology, 19, 123–205.
22	 Berney-Reddish, I.A. and Areni, C.S. (2006) ‘Sex differ-
ences in responses to probability markers in advertising 
claims’, Journal of Advertising, 35(2), 7–16.
23	 Areni, C.S. (2002) ‘The proposition-probability model of 
argument structure and message acceptance’, Journal of 
Consumer Research, 29(2), 168–87.
24	 Bušljeta Banks, I. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2014) ‘Involve-
ment, tolerance for ambiguity, and type of service 
moderate the effectiveness of probability marker usage 
in service advertising’, Journal of Advertising, 43(2), 
196–209.
25	 Areni, C.S. (2003) ‘The effects of structural and grammat-
ical variables on persuasion: an elaboration likelihood 
model perspective’, Psychology & Marketing, 20 (April), 
349–75; Areni, C.S. and Sparks, J.R. (2005) ‘Language 
Power and Persuasion’, Psychology & Marketing, 22(6), 
507–25; Sparks, J.R. and Areni, C.S. (2008) ‘Style versus 
substance: multiple roles of language power in persua-
sion’, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 38(1), 37–60.
26	 Bušljeta Banks, I., De Pelsmacker, P. and Purnawirawan, 
N.A. (2011) ‘Probability markers in advertising have a 
different effect on the purchase intention for hedonic and 
utilitarian low and high involvement services’, Proceed-
ings of the 40th European Marketing Academy Confer-
ence Ljubljana, CD-ROM.
27	 Voss, K.E., Spangenberg, E.R. and Grohmann, B. (2003) 
‘Measuring the hedonic and utilitarian dimensions of 
consumer attitude’, Journal of Marketing Research, 
11(3), 310–20.
28	 Areni, C.S. (2002) ‘The proposition-probability model of 
argument structure and message acceptance’, Journal of 
Consumer Research, 29(2), 168–87.
29	 Voss, K.E., Spangenberg, E.R. and Grohmann, B. (2003) 
‘Measuring the hedonic and utilitarian dimensions of 
consumer attitude’, Journal of Marketing Research, 
11(3), 310–20.
30	 Berney-Reddish, I.A. and Areni, C.S. (2006) ‘Sex differ-
ences in responses to probability markers in advertising 
claims’, Journal of Advertising, 35(2), 7–16.
31	 De Mooij, M. and Hofstede, G. (2010) ‘The Hofstede 
model: applications to global branding and advertising 

REFERENCES     121
‘A balanced thinking-feelings model of information sys-
tems continuance’, International Journal of Human 
Computer Studies, 65, 511–25.
44	 Perugini, M. and Bagozzi, R.P. (2001) ‘The role of desires 
and anticipated emotions in goal-directed behaviours: 
broadening and deepening the theory of planned behav-
iour’, British Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 79–98.
45	 Bagozzi, R.P. (2007) ‘The legacy of the technology 
acceptance model and a proposal for a paradigm shift’, 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 8(4), 
244–54.
46	 Wood, S.L. and Moreau, C.P. (2006) ‘From fear to loath-
ing? How emotion influences the evaluation and early use 
of innovations’, Journal of Marketing, 70 (July), 44–57.
47	 Moons, I. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2012) ‘Emotions as 
determinants of electric car usage intention’, Journal of 
Marketing Management, 28(3–4), 195–237.
48	 Ajzen, I. (2002) ‘Perceived behavioral control, self-­efficacy, 
locus of control, and the theory of planned behavior’, 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 32, 665–83.
49	 http://www.handicapinternational.be (accessed 28 April 
2006); Cuckoo Awards 2005.
50	 http://people.umass.edu/aizen/tpbrefs.html (accessed 19 
September 2012).
51	 Yao, M.Z. and Linz, D.G. (2008) ‘Predicting self-­
protections of online privacy’, CyberPsychology & 
Behavior, 11, 615–17; White, K.M., Robinson, N.G., 
Young, R.M., Anderson, P.J., Hyde, M.K., Greenbank, 
S. et al. (2008) ‘Testing an extended theory of planned 
behaviour to predict young people’s sun safety in a high 
risk area’, British Journal of Health Psychology, 13, 
435–48; Warner, H.W.N. and Åberg, L. (2008) ‘Drivers’ 
beliefs about exceeding the speed limits’, Transporta-
tion Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 
11, 376–89; Van Hooft, E.A.J., Born, M.P., Taris, T.W. 
and Van der Flier, H. (2006) ‘The cross-cultural gener-
alizability of the theory of planned behavior: a study 
on job seeking in the Netherlands’, Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology, 37, 127–35; Tuu, H.H., Olsen, S.O., 
Thao, D.T. and Anh, N.T.K. (2008) ‘The role of norms 
in explaining attitudes, intention and consumption of a 
common food (fish) in Vietnam’, Appetite, 51, 546–51; 
Townsend, L. and Dawes, A. (2007) ‘Intentions to care for 
children orphaned by HIV/AIDS: a test of the theory of 
planned behavior’, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 
37, 822–43; Knussen, C. and Yule, F. (2008) ‘‘I’m not in 
the habit of recycling”: the role of habitual behavior in the 
disposal of household waste’, Environment and Behavior, 
40, 683–702.
52	 Ajzen, I. (1991) ‘The theory of planned behavior’, Organ-
izational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50, 
179–211.
53	 De Cannière, M.H., De Pelsmacker, P. and Geuens, M. 
(2009) ‘Relationship quality and the theory of planned 
behavior models of behavioral intentions and purchase 
behavior’, Journal of Business Research, 62, 82–92.
54	 Crowley, A.E. and Hoyer, W.D. (1994) ‘An integrative 
framework for understanding two-sided persuasion’, 
Journal of Consumer Research, 20, 561–74; Eisend, M. 
strategy and research’, International Journal of Adver-
tising, 29(1), 85–110.
32	 Bosmans, A. (2002) ‘Affective persuasive communica-
tion: multiple roles of affect in persuading the con-
sumer’, Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Ghent 
University; Forgas, J.P. (1995) ‘Mood and judgment: 
the Affect Infusion Model (AIM)’, Psychological Bulle-
tin, 117(1), 39–66; Chaiken, S. (1980) ‘Heuristic versus 
systematic information processing in the use of source 
versus message cues in persuasion’, Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 39, 752–66; Petty, R.E. and 
Cacioppo, J.T. (1986) ‘The elaboration likelihood model 
of persuasion’, Advances in Experimental Psychology, 
19, 123–205.
33	 Pham, M.T. and Avnet, T. (2004) ‘Ideals and oughts and 
the reliance on affect versus substance in persuasion’, 
Journal of Consumer Research, 30 (March), 503–18.
34	 Adams, L., Faseur, T. and Geuens, M. (2008) ‘The influ-
ence of self-regulatory focus in the effectiveness of emo-
tional health campaigns: it’s a matter of context too’, 
Proceedings of the Association for Consumer Research 
Conference, San Francisco.
35	 Ajzen, I. (2002) ‘Attitudes’, in Fernandez Ballesteros, R. 
(ed.), Encyclopedia of Psychological Assessment, vol. 1. 
London: Sage, 110–15; Ajzen, I. (1991) ‘The theory of 
planned behavior’, Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, 50, 179–211; Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, 
I. (1975) Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behavior: An 
Introduction to Theory and Research. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
36	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Van Kenhove, P. (2006) Mark-
tonderzoek: Technieken en Toepassingen (Marketing 
Research: Techniques and Applications). Amsterdam: 
Pearson Education Benelux.
37	 Ajzen, I. (2002) ‘Attitudes’, in Fernandez Ballesteros, R. 
(ed.), Encyclopedia of Psychological Assessment, vol. 1. 
London: Sage, 110–15; Ajzen, I. (1991) ‘The theory of 
planned behavior’, Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, 50, 179–211.
38	 Ajzen, I. (1991) ‘The theory of planned behavior’, Organ-
izational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50, 
179–211.
39	 Taylor, S. and Todd, P. (1995) ‘Understanding informa-
tion technology usage: a test of competing models’, 
Information Systems Research, 6, 144–76.
40	 Rogers, E.M. (1995) Diffusion of Innovations. New York: 
Free Press.
41	 Ajzen, I. (1991) ‘The theory of planned behavior’, Organ-
izational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50, 
179–221.
42	 Bandura, A. (1986) Social Foundations of Thought and 
Action. Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall.
43	 Perlusz, S. (2011) ‘Emotions and technology acceptance: 
development and validation of a technology affect scale’, 
http://jgxy.usx.edu.cn/DAOM/046_StefanoPerlusz.pdf 
(accessed 1 July 2011); Bagozzi, R.P., Gopinath, M. and 
Nyer, P.U. (1999) ‘The role of emotions in marketing’, 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 27(2), 
184–206; Kim, H.W., Chan, H.C. and Chan, Y.P. (2007) 

122     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
Research, 25(2), 144–60; Bosmans, A. and Baumgartner, H. 
(2005) ‘Goal-relevant emotional information: when extra-
neous affect leads to persuasion and when it does not’, 
Journal of Consumer Research, 32 (December), 424–34.
71	 Pham, M.T. (1998) ‘Representativeness, relevance, and 
the use of feelings in decision making’, Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 25(2), 144–60.
72	 Bagozzi, R.P., Gopinath, M. and Nyer, P.U. (1999) ‘The 
role of emotions in marketing’, Journal of the Academy 
of Marketing Science, 27(2), 184–206; Forgas, J.P. (1995) 
‘Mood and judgment: the Affect Infusion Model (AIM)’, 
Psychological Bulletin, 117(1), 39–66.
73	 Schindler, M.R. and Holbrook, M.B. (2003) ‘Nostalgia 
for early experience as a determinant of consumer prefer-
ences’, Psychology and Marketing, 20(4), 275–302.
74	 Mitchell, A.A. and Olson, J.C. (1981) ‘Are product attrib-
ute beliefs the only mediator of advertising effects on brand 
attitude?’, Journal of Marketing Research, 18, 318–32.
75	 Biel, A.L. (1990) ‘Love the ad: buy the product?’, Admap, 
21–5.
76	 Baker, W.E. and Lutz, R.J. (2000) ‘An empirical test of 
an updated relevance-accessibility model of advertising 
effectiveness’, Journal of Advertising, 29(1), 1–14.
77	 Lancendorfer, K.M., Atkin, J.A.L. and Reece, B.B. (2008) 
‘Animals in advertising: Love dogs? Love the ad!’, Journal 
of Business Research, 61(5), 384–91.
78	 Brown, S.P. and Stayman, D.M. (1992) ‘Antecedents and 
consequences of attitude towards the ad: a meta-analysis’, 
Journal of Consumer Research, 19, 34–51.
79	 Bagozzi, R.P., Gopinath, M. and Nyer, P.U. (1999) ‘The 
role of emotions in marketing’, Journal of the Academy 
of Marketing Science, 27(2), 184–206.
80	 Frijda, N.H. (1987) The Emotions. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press; Bower, G.H. (1991) ‘Mood con-
gruity of social judgment’, in Forgas, J. (ed.), Emotion 
and Social Judgment. Oxford: Pergamon, 31–53.
81	 Mitchell, A.A. (1988) ‘Current perspectives and issues 
concerning the explanation of “feelings” advertising 
effects’, in Hecker, S. and Stewart, D.S. (eds), Nonverbal 
Communication in Advertising. Lexington, MA: Lexing-
ton Books, 122–44.
82	 Pham, M.T., Geuens, M. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2013) 
‘The influence of ad-evoked feelings on brand evalua-
tions: empirical generalizations from consumer responses 
to more than 1000 TV commercials’, International Jour-
nal of Research in Marketing, 383–394.
83	 Morris, J.D., Woo, C., Geason, J.A. and Kim, J. (2002) 
‘The power of affect: predicting intention’, Journal of 
Advertising Research, 42(3), 7–17.
84	 Poels, K. and Dewitte, S. (2006) ‘How to capture the 
heart? Reviewing 20 years of emotion measurement in 
advertising’, Journal of Advertising Research, 46(1), 
18–37.
85	 Morris, J.D., Woo, C., Geason, J.A. and Kim, J. (2002) 
‘The power of affect: predicting intention’, Journal of 
Advertising Research, 42(3), 7–17.
86	 Pavlov, I. (1927) Conditioned Reflexes. London: Oxford 
University Press.
(2006) ‘Two-sided advertising: a meta-analysis’, Interna-
tional Journal of Research in Marketing, 23, 187–98.
55	 Eisend, M. (2006) ‘Two-sided advertising: a meta-analysis’, 
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 23, 
187–98.
56	 Cornelis, E., Cauberghe, V. and De Pelsmacker, P. 
(2013) ‘Two-sided messages for health risk preven-
tion: the role of argument type, refutation and issue 
ambivalence’, Substance Use and Misuse, DOI: 
10.3109/10826084.2013.787093.
57	 Allen, M. (1991) ‘Meta-analysis comparing effectiveness 
of one and two-sided messages’, Western Journal of 
Speech Communication, 55, 390–404.
58	 Holbrook, M.B. and Hirschman, E.C. (1982) ‘The expe-
riential aspects of consumption: consumer fantasies, feel-
ings, and fun’, Journal of Consumer Research, 9, 132–40; 
Pham, M.T. (1998) ‘Representativeness, relevance, and 
the use of feelings in decision making’, Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 25, 144–59.
59	 Ricciardelli, L.A., Williams, R.J. and Finemore, J. (2001) 
‘Restraint as misregulation in drinking and eating’, 
Addictive Behaviors, 26, 665–75.
60	 Williams, A. and Clark, D. (1998) ‘Alcohol consumption 
in university students: the role of reasons for drinking, 
coping strategies, expectancies, and personality traits’, 
Addictive Behaviors, 23, 371–78.
61	 MacInnis, D.J. and Jaworski, B.J. (1989) ‘Information 
processing from advertisements: toward an integrative 
framework’, Journal of Marketing, 53, 1–23.
62	 MacInnis, D.J. and Jaworski, B.J. (1989) ‘Information 
processing from advertisements: toward an integrative 
framework’, Journal of Marketing, 53, 1–23.
63	 Baker, W.E. and Lutz, R.J. (2000) ‘An empirical test of 
an updated relevance-accessibility model of advertising 
effectiveness’, Journal of Advertising, 29(1), 1–14.
64	 Liu, S.C. and Johnson, K.F. (2005) ‘The automatic coun-
try-of-origin effects on brand judgements’, Journal of 
Advertising, 34(1), 87–97.
65	 Schwarz, N. and Clore, G.L. (1996) ‘Feelings and phe-
nomenal experiences’, in Higgins, E.T. and Kruglanski, 
A.W. (eds), Social Psychology: Handbook of Basic Prin-
ciples, New York: Guilford, 433–65.
66	 Pham, M.T. (1998) ‘Representativeness, relevance, and 
the use of feelings in decision making’, Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 25(2), 144–60.
67	 Gorn, G.J., Pham, M.T. and Sin, L.Y. (2001) ‘When arousal 
influences ad evaluation and valence does not (and vice 
versa)’, Journal of Consumer Psychology, 2(3), 237–56.
68	 Pham, M.T., Cohen, J.B., Prajecus, J.W. and Hughes, 
D.G. (2001) ‘Affect monitoring and the primacy of 
­feelings in judgment’, Journal of Consumer Research, 
28(2), 167–88.
69	 Pham, M.T., Cohen, J.B., Prajecus, J.W. and Hughes, 
D.G. (2001) ‘Affect monitoring and the primacy of 
­feelings in judgment’, Journal of Consumer Research, 
28(2), 167–88.
70	 Pham, M.T. (1998) ‘Representativeness, relevance, and the 
use of feelings in decision making’, Journal of Consumer 

REFERENCES     123
103	 Kempf, D.S. and Laczniak, R.N. (2001) ‘Advertising’s 
influence on subsequent product trial processing’, Jour-
nal of Advertising, 30(3), 27–38.
104	 Hall, B.F. (2002) ‘A new model for measuring advertis-
ing effectiveness’, Journal of Advertising Research, 42 
(March/April), 23–31.
105	 Kempf, D.S. and Laczniak, R.N. (2001) ‘Advertising’s 
influence on subsequent product trial processing’, Jour-
nal of Advertising, 30(3), 27–38.
106	 Keller, K.L. (2008) Building, Measuring, and Managing 
Brand Equity, 3rd edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pren-
tice Hall.
107	 Deighton, J., Henderson, J.M. and Neslin, S.A. (1994) 
‘The effects of advertising on brand switching and repeat 
purchasing’, Journal of  Marketing Research, 31(2), 
28–43.
108	 Kempf, D.S. and Laczniak, R.N. (2001) ‘Advertising’s 
influence on subsequent product trial processing’, Jour-
nal of Advertising, 30(3), 27–38.
109	 Clancy, K.J. and Trout, J. (2002) ‘Brand Confusion’, Har-
vard Business Review, 80(3), 22.
110	 Ehrenberg, A.S.C. (1974) ‘Repetititve advertising and the 
consumer’, Journal of Advertising Research, 14 (April), 
25–34; Vakratsas, D. and Ambler, T. (1999) ‘What Do 
We Really Know?’, Journal of Marketing, 63 (January), 
26–43.
111	 Bamossy, S. and Hogg, A. (2007) Consumer Behaviour: 
A European Perspective, 3rd edition. Harlow: Pearson 
Education.
112	 Hoyer, W.D. (1984) ‘An examination of consumer deci-
sion making for a common repeat purchase product’, 
Journal of Consumer Research, 11, 822–9.
113	 Willie, T. (2007) New models of communication for the 
digital age, Admap, October, 487.
114	 Birnbaum, M.H. and Stegner, S.E. (1979) ‘Source cred-
ibility in social judgment: bias, expertise and the judge’s 
point of view’, Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 37(1), 48–74; Brown, J.J. and Reingen, P.H. 
(1987) ‘Social ties and word-of-mouth referral behavior’, 
Journal of Consumer Research, 14 (December), 350–
62; Money, R.B., Gilly, M.C. and Graham, J.L. (1998) 
‘Explorations of national culture and word-of-mouth 
referral behavior in the purchase of industrial services 
in the United States and Japan’, Journal of Marketing, 
62 (October), 76–87.
115	 Eagly, A.H. and Chaiken, S. (1993) The Psychology of 
Attitudes. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt-Brace.
116	 Ruef, M., Aldrich, H.E. and Carter, N.M. (2003) ‘The 
structure of founding teams: holophily, strong ties and 
isolation among U.S. entrepreneurs’, American Socio-
logical Review, 68, 195–222.
117	 De Bruyn, A. and Lilien, G.L. (2008) ‘A multi-stage 
model of word-of-mouth influence through viral mar-
keting’, International Journal of Research in Marketing, 
25(3), 151–63.
118	 Steffes, E.M. and Burgee, L.E. (2009) ‘Social ties and 
online word of mouth’, Internet Research, 19(1), 
42–59.
87	 Freeman, S. (2003) ‘Celine Dion sings “I Drove All Night” 
for Chrysler’, Wall Street Journal, 16 January.
88	 Kroeber-Riel, W. (1984) ‘Effects of pictorial elements in 
ads analyzed by means of eye movement monitoring’, 
Advances in Consumer Research, 11, 591–6.
89	 Gibson, B. (2008) ‘Can Evaluative conditioning change 
attitudes toward mature brands? New evidence from 
the implicit association test’, Journal of  Consumer 
Research, 35(1), 178–88.
90	 Elliott, R. and Ritson, M. (1995) ‘Practicing existential 
consumption: the lived meaning of sexuality in advertis-
ing’, Advances in Consumer Research, 22, 740–5.
91	 Furnival, J. (2009) ‘Lick “n” tell’, Daily Tele-
graph, 26 September, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/
foodanddrink/4809908/Lick-n-tell.html (accessed June 
2009).
92	 Janiszewski, C. and Meyvis, T. (2001) ‘Effects of brand 
logo complexity, repetition, and spacing on processing 
fluency and judgment’, Journal of Consumer Research, 
28 (June), 18–32.
93	 Shapiro, S. (1999) ‘When an ad’s influence is beyond our 
conscious control: perceptual and conceptual fluency 
effects caused by incidental ad exposure’, Journal of 
Consumer Research, 26 (June), 16–36.
94	 Mano, H. (1996) ‘Assessing emotional reactions to TV 
ads: a replication and extension with a brief adjective 
checklist’, Advances in Consumer Research, 23, 63–9.
95	 Zajonc, R.B. and Markus, H. (1988) ‘Affect and cogni-
tion: the hard interface’, in Izard, C.E., Kagan, J. and 
Zajonc, R.B. (eds), Emotions, Cognition and Behaviour. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 73–102.
96	 Janiszewski, C. and Meyvis, T. (2001) ‘Effects of brand 
logo complexity, repetition, and spacing on processing 
fluency and judgment’, Journal of Consumer Research, 
28 (June), 18–32.
97	 Ferraro, R., Bettman, J.R. and Chartrand, T.L. (2009) 
‘The power of strangers: the effect of incidental con-
sumer brand encounters on brand choice’, Journal of 
Consumer Research, 35(5), 729–41.
98	 Hoyer, W.C. and MacInnis, D.J. (2001) Consumer Behav-
iour. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
99	 Berlyne, D.E. (1970) ‘Novelty, complexity, and hedonic 
value’, Perception and Psychophysics, 8 (November), 
279–86.
100	 Van Kerckhove, A., Vermeir, I. and Geuens, M. (2008) 
‘Combined Influence of selective focus and decision 
involvement on attitude-behaviour consistency in a con-
text of memory-based decision making’, in Perks, K.J. 
and Shukla, P. (eds), Marketing Landscapes: A Pause 
for Thought, Proceedings of the 37th Annual Confer-
ence of  the European Marketing Academy (EMAC), 
Brighton.
101	 Deighton, J., Henderson, C.M. and Neslin, S.A. (1994) 
‘The effects of advertising on brand switching and repeat 
purchasing’, Journal of Marketing Research, 31, 28–43.
102	 Hall, B.F. (2002) ‘A new model for measuring advertis-
ing effectiveness’, Journal of Advertising Research, 42 
(March/April), 23–31.

124     CHAPTER 3  HOW MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS WORK
125	 Buda, R. and Zhang, T. (2000) ‘Consumer product evalu-
ation: the interactive effect of message framing, presenta-
tion order, and source credibility’, Journal of Product & 
Brand Management, 9(4), 229–42.
126	 Gotlieb, J.B. and Sarel, D. (1991) ‘Comparative adver-
tising effectiveness: the role of involvement and source 
credibility’, Journal of Advertising, 20(1), 38–45.
127	 Miller, R. and Lammas, N. (2010) ‘Social media and 
its implications for viral marketing’, Asia Pacific Public 
Relations Journal, 11(1), 1–9.
128	 Brown, J., Broderick, A.J. and Lee, N. (2007) ‘Word of 
mouth communication within online communities: con-
ceptualizing the online social network’, Journal of Inter-
active Marketing, 21(3), 2–20.
129	 Park, C., Wang, Y., Yao, Y. and Kang, Y.R. (2011) ‘Fac-
tors influencing eWOM effects: using experience, credi-
bility, and susceptibility’, International Journal of Social 
Science and Humanity, 1(1), 74–9; Silverman, G. (2011) 
Secrets of Word-of-Mouth Marketing: How to Trigger 
Exponential Sales through Runaway Word of Mouth. 
New York: AMACOM.
130	 Brown, J., Broderick, A.J. and Lee, N. (2007) ‘Word of 
mouth communication within online communities: con-
ceptualizing the online social network’, Journal of Inter-
active Marketing, 21(3), 2–20.
119	 Money, R. B., Gilly, M.C. and Graham, J.L. (1998) 
‘Explorations of national culture and word-of-mouth 
referral behavior in the purchase of industrial services in 
the United States and Japan’, Journal of Marketing, 62 
(October), 76–87.
120	 Brown, J., Broderick, A.J. and Lee, N. (2007) ‘Word of 
mouth communication within online communities: con-
ceptualizing the online social network’, Journal of Inter-
active Marketing, 21(3), 2–20.
121	 Sohn, D. (2011) ‘Disentangling the effects of social net-
work density on electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) 
intention’, Journal of Computer-Mediated Communi-
cation, 14(2), 352–67.
122	 Phelps, J.E., Lewis, R., Mobilio, L., Perry, R. and Raman, 
N. (2004) ‘Viral marketing or electronic word-of-mouth 
advertising: examining consumer responses and moti-
vations to pass along email’, Journal of Advertising 
Research, 44(4), 333–48.
123	 De Bruyn, A. and Lilien, G.L. (2008) ‘A multi-stage model 
of word-of-mouth influence through viral marketing’, Inter-
national Journal of Research in Marketing, 25(3), 151–63.
124	 Chu, S.-C. and Kim, Y. (2011) ‘Determinants of con-
sumer engagement in electronic Word-of-Mouth 
(eWOM) in social networking sites’, International Jour-
nal of Advertising, 30(1), 47–75.

125
Chapter outline
Chapter 4
Marketing communications planning

Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Understand the process of segmenting, targeting and positioning
● Get an overview of the criteria for segmenting markets
● Understand the requirements for good segmentation
● Distinguish the strategies for targeting market segments
● Get an overview of the various goals and objectives of marketing communications 
campaigns
● Understand the relation between stages in the product life cycle (PLC) and 
communications objectives
● Understand how communications budgets may influence communications 
effectiveness
● Get an overview of theoretical and practical marketing communications budgeting 
methods
● Optimise share-of-voice decisions
● Identify factors that influence budgeting decisions
● Decide upon a communications budget for a new product or brand
● Develop a message strategy
● Choose a positioning strategy
● Compose a creative brief to develop a creative strategy
Introduction
The marketing communications planning process consists of a number of consecutive 
stages. The first stage in this process is a situation analysis of current and future marketing 
conditions. This analysis leads to opportunities for existing product lines in new or existing 
markets, or new product ideas for new or current markets. Usually, this analysis is done when 
developing a marketing plan on the basis of which a communications plan has to be built. 
The situation analysis provides the answer to the question: why do we have to communicate?
In most circumstances a market has different groups of customers or prospects with 
different needs and subject to different trends. Identifying these different market segments 
and deciding at which segment(s) to target the communications efforts is a second major 
task of communications planning: whom are we going to communicate with? It is crucial to 
the planning process to set the main communications objectives. These goals will influence 
message and strategy development, and determine the choice of the right communications 
and media mix. Formulating marketing communications objectives is also important in 
judging the effectiveness of a campaign. The question of whether a communications plan 
has been effective depends on the goals that were defined for that specific campaign. It is 
therefore impossible to judge campaigns or individual communications executions without 
a precise definition of marketing communications objectives: what do we want to achieve? 
Additionally, a budget has to be decided upon.
Once these building blocks are established, a communication strategy has to be devel-
oped. Which messages are we going to convey and how are we going to translate them into 
a creative platform, in other words: what are we going to communicate and how? Strategy is 
126     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING

SITUATION ANALYSIS     127
followed by tactics: which tools and media are we going to use to contact the target group? 
Based on this information, the plan can be implemented. Finally, the results of the campaign 
have to be evaluated, and its effectiveness has to be assessed. The insights from this effective-
ness analysis are then used to adapt current campaigns and to inform future campaigns.
The integrated communications plan
Various formats exist to visualise the steps in a communications plan, none of which is 
necessarily superior to the other. One of them is represented by the acronym SOSTCE: situ-
ation, objectives, strategies, tactics, control and evaluation.1 Another one is called SOSTAC: 
situation, objectives, strategy, tactics, action, control.2 The format we are going to use here 
is presented in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1  Steps in a communications plan
Situation analysis
Marketing communications, as one of the instruments of the marketing mix, have to be 
embedded in the overall marketing strategy of the company, which, in turn, has to be con-
sistent with the corporate or business plan. Therefore, a marketing communications plan 
has to be consistent with the overall marketing objectives, targeted at the desired market 
segments and it should reflect the positioning strategy defined. The situation analysis or 
situation audit, including strategic communications research, will therefore partially overlap 

128     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
with strategic marketing research. Although it is a frequently neglected research task, it is 
of extreme importance, since it enables the communications manager to establish a solid 
base on which the communications strategy can be built.
The situation analysis needs to be a comprehensive assessment of the company, its prod-
ucts and brands, and its competitive and macro-environment. In that respect it will partly 
need to draw upon the external and internal analysis and the SWOT analysis needed to 
develop a marketing plan. Elements that have to be investigated are:
● Products and brands to be communicated. What are their unique strengths and weak-
nesses, what is the unique selling proposition to be advanced, what could be the com-
munication platform, i.e. the arguments with which to convince the target group, etc.?
● Markets. What are the market size evolution, market shares, market segments, consumer 
characteristics and behaviour, etc.?
● Competitors. Who are our competitors? What are their strengths and weaknesses, and 
their (communication) strategies?
● Macro-environment. Elements of the PEST model may be relevant for a marketing com-
munications situation analysis: what are the Political and legal restrictions or regula-
tions; the Economic situation; Sociological concerns, such as advertising to children and 
sustainable production and consumption; Technological evolutions, such as new media 
and new advertising formats, etc.?
Apart from that, analyses can be carried out to more specifically prepare the communi-
cations strategy, such as the communications audit, competitor communications strategy 
research, communications content research and management judgement tests.
In a communications audit all forms of internal and external communications are 
­studied to assess their consistency with overall strategy, as well as their internal ­consistency. 
The audit can be carried out on the basis of an internal analysis, but should ideally be based 
on research with the various audiences and target groups of the company to determine the 
impact of all overt and non-overt communications. A framework for a ­communications 
audit is presented in Table 4.1. The consistency of the communications mix in this table 
should be assessed both vertically and horizontally. In a vertical analysis, the consistency 
of all tools and instruments used to communicate about a brand is investigated to assess 
to what extent the actual communication efforts are truly integrated. In a horizontal 
­analysis, communications in specific media are checked for consistency across brands and 
­corporate communications. Obviously, horizontal analysis only makes sense in a monolithic 
­branding environment (see Chapter 2). In a multi-branding environment, there is no need for 
­consistency across brands. On the basis of this communications audit, the communications 
strategies of different brands and/or instruments can be adjusted.
Brand A
Brand B
Brand C
Corporate
TV advertising
Newspaper advertising
Online communication
Magazine advertising
Sales promotions
Direct mail
In-store communications
Front desk staff
Public relations material
Publicity
Sponsorship
Table 4.1  The communications audit

SEGMENTING, TARGETING AND POSITIONING     129
Competitor communications strategy research is largely similar to the communications 
audit for the company. Competitive ads, promotions, PR material, etc., can be collected 
and analysed to judge competitive (communications) strategies in order to define target 
groups and positioning strategies more clearly for the company’s own products. In addition, 
competitive media strategies and media mixes can be studied, not to copy them, but to get 
an idea of the competitors’ communications budgets and shares of voice, target groups, 
positioning and communications strategies.
Very concretely, communications content research is used to help communications creatives 
generate ideas about the content of new communications stimuli. When a new campaign 
is to be launched, brainstorming sessions can be organised, involving creatives, advertisers 
and consumers. Thought-starter lists, in which a multitude of potential benefits of the brand 
or product to be promoted is listed, may also be used to get the process underway.
Segmenting, targeting and positioning
Brands and products are seldom capable of appealing to everyone or to everyone in the 
same way. Consumers have different characteristics, different needs, and different ways in 
which they want to satisfy their needs. Therefore, companies have to find out in what way 
market segments are different with respect to their products and brands, or react differently 
to marketing communications actions, and which segments to target their efforts to.
Companies can define target markets in a number of ways, based on several criteria. 
Segmenting a market, deciding on target groups or segments to focus on are at the same 
time vital components of the strategic marketing plan and basic cornerstones of a commu-
nications strategy. Understanding the buying motives and behaviour of target groups is an 
essential element of this groundwork and requires thorough preliminary analysis. The choice 
of well-defined target groups should, later in the communications planning, be reflected in 
the selection of communications objectives, communications strategies, communications 
instruments, campaign execution and touch point planning.
Table 4.2 lists the various steps in the segmenting–targeting–positioning (STP) process. The 
STP exercise starts with a definition of potentially relevant factors on the basis of which a 
market can be segmented. Market segmentation should ideally lead to more homogeneous sub-
groups in that the members of one group should react in the same way to marketing stimuli 
and differ in their reactions to these stimuli from the members of other segments. In other 
words, it is not sufficient for men and women to be physiologically different. If there is no 
systematic difference between the two groups in the way they react to marketing stimuli, there 
is no sound reason to distinguish between them. For example, the furniture market includes 
different segments such as home and business markets. These segments can be further divided: 
home markets include student home furniture, design furniture, classic furniture, etc.; business 
markets include, for instance, office furniture (for small/large companies), hotel furniture, etc.
In stage 2 of the STP process, segmentation variables can be combined to form segmenta-
tion profiles. In fact, by combining segmentation variables, multivariate segmentation takes 
place. Various analytical techniques, such as cluster analysis, conjoint analysis, multidimen-
sional scaling and automatic interaction detection, are being used to identify segments on the 
1. Definition of segmentation criteria
2. Definition of segment profiles
3. Assessment of the attractiveness of segments
4. Selection of target groups
5. Definition of the desired unique position in the mind of targeted consumers
Table 4.2  Segmenting, targeting and positioning

130     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
basis of multiple variables.3 Once segment profiles have been identified, their attractiveness can 
be assessed. Segment attractiveness will depend on the size and predicted evolution of sales, 
buying power and the amount of competition targeted at the same segment.
On the basis of this analysis of attractiveness, the marketer will select a number of target 
groups to focus on, based on their attractiveness and for which the company has relevant 
strengths. This is called targeting. All further communications objectives, strategies and tactics 
will be aimed at these specific groups. Hence, the communications mix may differ depending 
on the different target markets a company is focusing on in its communications programme. 
For example, IKEA, the Swedish international ‘takeaway’ furniture distributor, could target the 
segment of young home users with a limited budget interested in designer furniture by offering 
a special designer furniture line. Or it could capitalise on the trend that teleworking and self-
employment are increasing and develop a home office furniture line for this targeted segment.
Finally, the company has to define a unique and relevant position for its products in the 
mind of the target group. Positioning can be defined as the way a product is perceived by the 
target group on important attributes, the ‘place in the mind’ a product occupies relative to 
its competitors. Positioning is a core element of marketing strategy and hence of marketing 
communications. Indeed, marketing management can be defined as finding and sustaining 
a unique and defendable image or position for a product. Unlike imitating successful com-
petitors, positioning attempts to claim exclusive ‘ownership’ of a benefit in the mind of the 
customer which differentiates it from the competition.4 This position is the brand or product 
uniqueness, which should always be claimed and supported in the communications strategy.5 
Several examples of successful positioning can be given. Mercedes stands for luxury, Volvo 
for safety, Miele (dishwashers, washing machines, etc.) for quality, Levi’s for the original 
American jeans and Duracell batteries for power. Positioning will be further discussed later 
in this chapter, in the ‘strategies’ section.
Market segmentation
Market segmentation is the process of dividing consumers into homogeneous groups, i.e. 
groups that share needs or react in a comparable way to marketing and communications 
efforts. Different variables or criteria can be used to segment a market. Table 4.3 presents 
a framework and some examples of variables used to segment consumer markets.6 Objec-
tive segmentation variables are variables that can be measured objectively and straightfor-
wardly. Inferred constructs have to be defined before people can be classified into groups. 
For instance, the construct ‘lifestyle’ has to be operationalised before any one consumer can 
be attributed to a lifestyle group.
General factors are segmentation variables that hold in all behavioural circumstances. 
A person is always male or female, no matter what buying situation he or she is in. On the 
basis of specific or behaviour-related variables, consumers can belong to different segments 
depending on the product class or buying situation concerned. For instance, a person can 
be a loyal buyer or a heavy user of chocolate or a chocolate brand, but an infrequent and 
brand-switching consumer of margarine.
Objective
Inferred (psychographic)
General
Geographic
Demographic (income, gender, age, 
education, profession, life cycle)
Social class
Personality
Lifestyle
Specific  
(behavioural)
Occasion
Loyalty status
User status
Usage rate
Benefit
Buyer readiness
Table 4.3  Consumer market segmentation variables

MARKET SEGMENTATION     131
Markets can be divided into different geographic segments such as continents, climate, 
nations, regions or neighbourhoods. Consumer behaviour and buying patterns often denote 
cultural differences and therefore the place where consumers live may require other market-
ing mix approaches. For instance, Starbucks Corporation faced challenges when opening 
international franchises in several European countries that have strong traditions of coffee 
bars, such as Italy and Spain. Locals were not accustomed to Starbucks’ core concept of 
takeaway coffees. This segmentation method is often combined with other criteria. A mar-
keting area is first defined geographically and subsequently other segments within this broad 
geographic area are identified.
Acorn is an acronym for ‘a classification of residential neighbourhoods’. These describe residential areas in terms 
of geographical and demographic characteristics of their inhabitants. The Acorn profile currently consists of  
6 categories, 18 groups and 62 types. The categories and groups are as follows:7
1.	 Affluent achievers
A.	Lavish lifestyles
B.	 Executive wealth
C.	 Mature money
2.	 Rising prosperity
D.	 City sophisticates
E.	 Career climbers
3.	 Comfortable communities
F.	 Countryside communities
G.	Successful suburbs
H.	Steady neighbourhoods
I.	 Comfortable seniors
J.	 Starting out
4.	 Financially stretched
K.	 Student life
L.	 Modest means
M.	Striving families
N.	Poorer pensioners
5.	 Urban adversity
O.	Young hardship
P.	 Struggling estates
Q.	Difficult circumstances
6.	 Not private households
R.	 Not private households
Business insight
Acorn profiles of residential neighbourhoods in the UK

132     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Demographic segmentation divides the market on the basis of sex, age, family size, reli-
gion, birthplace, race, education or income. These segmentation variables are frequently 
used, not only because they correlate with other variables such as consumer needs, but also 
because they are less difficult to measure than others.
Diamond targets women in the UK by offering cheaper car insurance because women 
are better drivers and female accidents imply less severe damage. Colgate produces 
­strawberry-flavoured toothpaste for children. BMW launched the BMW 1 series for 
‘smaller’ budgets.
A Belgian study found that families with children account for 46% of fast-moving consumer purchases, although 
they are only 37% of the population. Moreover, the more children in a family, the higher the ticket price per store 
visit. Young children under 12 influence not only the type of products bought, but also the brands chosen. They 
identify needs, they also provide information and advice, and they put pressure on parents (‘pester power’). For 
instance, the penetration of new technologies such as flat-screen TVs is higher than average in families with young 
children. Due to the decreasing number of children, co-shopping occurs more frequently than before, leading to 
on average a more than 17% increase in shopping value. This is due to not only more different products bought, 
but also larger quantities per product type. Moreover, the impact of each child increases when there are fewer 
children in the family (‘little-prince effect’). Families also tend to become more ‘democratic’: children are increas-
ingly allowed to have a say in family decisions. Single or divorced parents tend to feel guilty and compensate for 
this by giving in to their children’s requests. Families with young children also have a lower-than-average perceived 
strong loyalty, less than 20%, as opposed to up to 40% for families without children and retired persons. They also 
shop more in discount stores than other groups. Children predominantly form their preferences and attitudes 
about products and brands through TV advertising. In general, they are more sensitive to emotional messages than 
to rational ones. In families with children, in-store decision rates are 25% lower than in families without children. 
In other words, purchases are more often planned in advance at home, probably due to the impact of children on 
shopping intentions.8
Business insight
Children have a strong impact on buying behaviour
Since its introduction in 2002, Unilever’s body spray brand Axe (Lynx in the UK) has been targeted at young men, 
with commercials depicting women being seduced by Axe users and then aggressively pursuing them. In 2012, Axe 
introduced a fragrance for women. The new brand Anarchy, is available in different versions for women and men. The 
launch campaign included print and online ads and commercials on YouTube. A teaser commercial was ­scheduled 
Business insight
Axe introduces a fragrance for women

MARKET SEGMENTATION     133
for movie theatres and online use. To start the campaign, Axe introduced a series of branded graphic novels on 
YouTube and Facebook, together with Aspen Comics. The plots were based partly on consumers’ suggestions, and 
some fans were even depicted in the comic. Previously, an Axe commercial was always about a guy using Axe and 
Axe facilitating the contact between the boy and a girl. Now, however, women also have an Axe deodorant to use. 
Of the 2.3 million ‘likes’ Axe has on Facebook, about 25% are by women. Women had been looking for their very 
own scent of Axe for a while. Only about 17% of American men use body spray. Axe has a 74% market share in the 
men’s body spray category and it is most popular among men 18 to 24 years old, with 28% using it. As for women, 
47% use body spray.
Unilever launched Axe Anarchy, the women’s body spray, in a ‘limited edition’, with the possibility of being offered 
permanently, depending on sales. Anarchy is also available as a deodorant, antiperspirant, shower gel and shampoo, 
but only for men.9
Probability markers are linguistic techniques to indicate doubt or certainty. Hedges signal uncertainty (e.g. ‘Carlsberg. 
Probably the best beer in the world’). Pledges signal certainty (e.g. ‘definitely the best beer on the market’). Two 
studies were conducted in which ads using different types of probability markers (hedge, pledge, no probability 
marker) were tested with a sample of men and women. In the first study a sample of 638 Belgians was collected 
via an online survey: 53.1% of the respondents were female, and the average age was 27. In the second study the 
participants were 331 Belgian undergraduate students (51.4% were female).10
According to the selectivity model,11 women tend to process information and form judgements 
­comprehensively, taking into account all the available cues, assigning equal importance to information relevant 
to themselves and to others, and exhibiting great sensitivity to detail and all relevant information. Women 
encode a greater number of claims than men do and process each of the claims more extensively.12 In other 
words, women could be considered as more systematic (central) processors. Men most often do not use 
­comprehensive processing of all available information when forming judgements. They instead tend to make 
use of heuristic (peripheral) processing, relying on a highly available, salient single cue or sub-set of cues. 
Hence, the ­expectation is that the presence of probability markers (both hedges and pledges) in advertising 
copy will have a greater impact on brand attitude and purchase intention towards advertised products for men 
than for women.
Studies have shown that both genders are more easily persuaded when the message content is relevant 
to the opposite gender’s social role than to their own. More specifically, Carli found that women who use 
­powerless language in an attempt to persuade men are considered more likeable and can influence men 
­better than women who use more powerful language.13 Moreover, men are less likely than women to rely 
on the opinions of others in making a judgement,14 and have been described as more risk-seeking and 
­competitive than women.15 Therefore it can be expected that men will show a higher preference for hedges 
and will dislike pledges the most. Men are usually described as competitive risk-takers who prefer to rely on 
their own judgements.16 Hedges may be more effective targeted at men, as hedges represent an ­opportunity 
to take a risk and men form their own evaluation. A pledge, on the other hand, can be considered as a 
­challenge to their status/authority and an attempt, on the part of the advertiser, to control their opinions, 
Research insight
Men might be from Mars, but women are definitely from Venus – influence of 
­gender on the effectiveness of probability markers in advertising

134     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Besides differences between younger and older consumers, one can also distinguish 
between generations or age groups born in a particular period. This makes their buying 
responses, needs and interests different from those of people of the same age, living in a 
different time period. Table 4.4 shows the characteristics of three generations, i.e. baby 
boomers, generation X and generation Y.
Baby boomers were born in the years immediately after the Second World War. North 
America and Europe in particular saw a boom in the number of births in these years. Today, 
baby boomers are aged between 50 and 70 years and form a large and wealthy group of 
consumers. As a group they prefer quality products and tend not to look for bargains (unlike 
their parents), on average they have few children and more women go out to work.17 This 
makes baby boomers an ideal market for luxury and high-quality products, as well as for 
products for working households: a smaller car meant as the second family car, easy-to-
prepare meals, child minders, etc.
which might result in a form of rebellion. For men, ads using hedges will result in the most positive brand 
attitude and purchase intention, compared with ads with pledges or no probability markers, while ads with 
pledges will be the least effective.
The results of the first study show that, as expected, the impact of probability markers in advertising copy 
is very significant for men, but not for women. Men are more strongly affected by the use of probability 
markers in advertising than women, and they show a significant preference for hedges. For women, the 
­differences between the levels of brand attitude and purchase intention for the three manipulation conditions 
(no ­probability marker, hedge, pledge) are not significant. Women, in other words, are virtually unaffected 
by the presence or absence of a probability marker in advertising copy. In the second study for services, the 
results show that women are not particularly sensitive to probability markers in the case of hedonic buying 
motivation. Men, however, display a clear dislike of pledges, in both the cases of hedonic and utilitarian 
services. Men again display a strong preference for hedges and especially dislike pledges, while there is no 
difference for women.
In order to be able to deliver products and services that match the differing needs and wants of men and 
women, as well as to create promotional materials that will appeal to the targeted gender, marketers need to 
understand how gender differences influence information processing and the effectiveness of promotional claims. 
When targeting men, hedges are the best strategy and pledges especially must be avoided. As women do not seem 
to be influenced very much by these language tactics, hedges may be an effective strategy for marketers target-
ing a mixed gender audience. When catering to women specifically, the focus should be on other aspects than 
probability markers in the claims, as no benefit in terms of brand attitude or purchase intention can be gained by 
any strategy here.
Years born
Generation name
Characteristics
1945–1965
Baby boomers
Luxury, high-quality products, not bargain hunters, less critical of marketing techniques 
and advertising
1965–1980
Generation X
High spending, materialistic, ambitious, need for individualism, critical of marketing 
techniques and advertising
1980–2000
Generation Y
High buying power, high expectations of services and relationships, marketing and 
technologically savvy, less brand loyal, viral marketing key
Source: Based on Herbig, P., Koehler, W. and Day, K. (1993) ‘Marketing to the baby bust generation’, Journal of Consumer Marketing, 10(1), 4–9; www.petersheahan 
.com; and Krotz, J.L., ‘Tough customers: how to reach Gen Y,’ http://www.microsoft.com/smallbusiness/resources/marketing/market-research/tough-customers-
how-to-reach-gen-y.aspx\#ToughcustomershowtoreachGenY (accessed June 2009).
Table 4.4  Baby boomers, generation X and generation Y

MARKET SEGMENTATION     135
From 1965 to 1980 birth rates in the USA and Europe declined, due inter alia to ­effective 
contraception and an increased number of divorces; people born during this period are 
referred to as baby busters, generation X or X’ers.18 Although this segment is smaller 
than the baby boomers’, it is an interesting target market since they do not seem to be 
particularly inclined to save much. Furthermore, they often received allowances from their 
parents, resulting in quite high spending per capita. Baby busters seem to have different 
characteristics from baby boomers at the same age. Firstly, they hold different values. Baby 
busters are more materialistic, ambitious and show a greater need for individualism, for 
keeping their own identity within the society. Secondly, baby busters have more marketing 
knowledge; they acknowledge the meaning of marketing and advertising. Thirdly, baby 
busters as compared with baby boomers are said to be more cynical and more critical of 
advertising. They reject any attempt to lump them together in a target segment.
In this day and age of new gadgets, clean and simple modern design, some people, including young ones, want 
to escape to the reliability of decent old products. ‘Old’ is in. The brochure of AS Adventure, a chain of outdoor 
stores, is full of high-tech gear, but has the look and feel of an old photo album, with sepia colours and ruffled 
photos with brown edges. J.K. Rowling’s book The Tales of Beedle the Bard has a dowdy cover, as if the book has 
been lying around in a flea market for years. Also, the book that was published following the 40-year writing career 
of John Irving looks like it was found in a basement where it had lain for decades: old-fashioned typography, wrin-
kled paper and a dusty cover. Of course, these are digital technology products, but they illustrate that ‘retro’ and 
‘vintage’ are in. Cookbooks and restaurants increasingly focus on grandmothers’ menus and old vegetables like 
earth pear and horseradish. The Belgian supermarket Delhaize sells ‘unprofessionally baked’ cakes that look as if 
they were made at home. Good old Marseille soap is immensely popular. Estée Lauder’s new Tuberose Gardenia 
perfume is based on the favourite flowers of grandma Lauder. Many children have never seen a conventional 
telephone, but that did not stop Fisher Price from launching its classical toy phone again, as well as its traditional 
school clock, with indicators and without batteries. ‘Time’ is the new currency, and there is a new generation of 
‘time bandits’.19
Business insight
Long live time bandits!
In many rich countries, the 1980s and 1990s were a period of rapidly falling birth rates. 
In Southern Europe and Japan, and less markedly in Northern and Eastern Europe, genera-
tion Y (also known as millennials or echo boomers) is dramatically smaller than any of its 
predecessors. In their book on Connecting to the Net.Generation, Junco and Mastrodicasa 
included research-based information about the personality profiles of generation Y. In their 
survey, they found that 97% of students owned a computer, 94% owned a mobile phone 
and 56% owned an MP3 player (iPod, Zune, Sansa, etc.).20 This generation has never known 
a world without computers, email or the Internet. Their priorities are simple: they want 
whatever the next new product or gadget is and they want it first. Millennials do not pay 
much attention to marketing although this generation is the most marketed to in history. 
The following companies have targeted them and interacted with them effectively: Apple, 
Converse, Facebook and Nintendo. They all personalised their products so that each millen-
nial youngster could fit the product to their ideas, looks and independence. This generation 
is fully aware of all kinds of marketing. The trick is to approach millennials openly and 
creatively.21 Lots of gen Y choices come from peer-to-peer recommendations, which explains 
why viral marketing is quite successful in this age group. Living in an age where information 

136     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
is everywhere and where everyone can reach them, millennials are very selective about who 
they listen to. Via their Facebook and Google+ accounts, they get their information from 
one another – and not from the media. The endorsement by their friends is what they care 
about. They do not get this peer-to-peer information through emails, they instantly text 
one another, using SMS, Facebook chat or instant messaging. Email is too slow and old 
fashioned for them. They watch each other on YouTube. And sometimes they do all three 
at the same time! Millennials multitask and they are good at it.22
Children spend an increasing amount of time on media usage. A study conducted in Germany demonstrates that 
children between the age of 3 and 13 years spend on average over one hour a day watching television.23 A European 
study showed that children between 6 and 14 years old spend on average 88 minutes per day surfing the Internet.24 
The impact of advertising on children and young teenagers has raised considerable concern among governmental 
institutions and professional organisations such as the American Psychological Association.25 Recent studies have 
shown that advertising directed at children impacts on their brand preferences26 and food choices.27 Moreover, 
exposure to advertising messages might also encourage children to pester their parents to purchase the advertised 
product.28 Children are now exposed to commercial messages through new online techniques and hybrid forms of 
advertising. One of the most frequently employed and most interactive techniques is the advergame, a custom-built 
online mini-game designed to promote a brand.29
An experiment with 125 children (11–14 years old) compared the effects of traditional TV advertising, a trailer 
promoting an advergame, and the advergame itself.30
The experiment consisted of five different experimental treatments. The experimental manipulation consisted of 
exposure to different types of advertising techniques for Unilever’s ice lolly and ice cream brand Ola. The employed 
stimuli were all existing commercial materials for the Ola brand. Group 1 was exposed to a 30-second trailer in which 
a fictitious cartoon character encouraged the children to visit the website (www.olakids.be) and play an advergame. 
Group 2 was put in front of a computer to play the actual Ola advergame. The goal of the advergame was to slide down 
an icy slope and collect as many Ola popsicles as possible. It took children about two minutes to complete the game. 
Children in the third treatment were asked to play the advergame, and afterwards they were shown the trailer. In the 
fourth treatment, children were asked to watch the trailer and to play the advergame afterwards. Group 5 was shown 
a traditional TV ad for Ola. All 125 children were randomly assigned to one of the five treatments. The experiment 
was conducted using groups of four children. They were taken to a room where they were given the experimental 
treatment, depending on the group to which they were assigned.
A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to test whether the different experimental treatments 
had an effect on children’s ability to recall the advertised brand. The number of prompts needed before correct 
identification of the brand was used as a dependent measure for recall. The average number of prompts needed by 
children in the advergame condition was significantly higher than that of children in the traditional ad condition. 
Children who were exposed to the advergame needed significantly more help to recall the brand behind the per-
suasive message than children who got to see a traditional TV ad. Advergames engage children and induce feelings 
of telepresence, a sensation of being present in the gaming environment.31 Since advergame playing is an enjoyable 
experience, a feeling of being present in the advergame can produce more positive evaluations of the brand and 
the game. The focus in the advergame is on actively engaging with the brand or the product, rather than on passive 
exposure to brand identifiers. This implies that gamers receive less explicit cues that could give away persuasive 
intentions or information about the brand, which might explain why explicit recall memory for Ola is significantly 
lower in the advergame condition.
Research insight
Children’s reaction towards traditional and hybrid advertising

MARKET SEGMENTATION     137
In 2008, Barack Obama approached American voters by consistently delivering a message of ‘Change’. He did not 
talk to his audience but interacted with them. He spoke to the younger generations directly through his website  
my.barackobama.com (MYBO). By using the keyword ‘my’ at the beginning of his domain name, he brought it to 
a personal level. The site allows users to take control of their relationship with the Obama brand by customising 
and personalising the site when they log on. The site offers the use of tagging, discussion boards, photo uploads 
and other interactive Web 2.0 elements. Obama also hit the millennials’ hearts by talking about ending the war in 
Iraq, about the environment, improving education and his philosophy that every person can make a difference. 
This allowed youngsters to feel independent in thinking and knowing that they affect the world and are not just 
another number. It became trendy to vote for Obama, because youngsters saw their favourite celebrities, music 
groups and peers supporting him. Barack Obama also did a great service in establishing the importance of voting 
among youngsters who felt that their vote would not count in the big picture. He was right! Youngsters played a 
huge role in clinching the presidency.
Learning from Obama’s campaign
The millennial generation is attracted to something smart, fresh and different and found these qualities in Presi-
dent Obama. His success was a result of both product and uniform branding. Obama showed he was consistent 
with his message. He was able to reach not only the millennials, but also the baby boomers who had a chance 
to reminisce about memories of the 1960s and what they wanted to change then. There are parallel issues to 
hand with the war, corruption and health care, and Obama addressed the baby boomers as much as the mil-
lennials. Even though they are opposed to marketing and advertising efforts, there are ways to get into contact 
with them. Cut the mass branding and start niche marketing, so they feel they are ‘learning’ about the next cool 
music device or clothing trend. Catch them on Facebook, not by advertising, but by starting a ‘group’ about 
your business or product and invite those who would be potential customers to join. Try appealing to college 
students by tailoring a line to the top colleges, as Victoria’s Secret did with Pink: OnCampus (see www.vspink.
com). If Barack Obama can inspire action and earn votes from historically inactive young voters together with 
the support of older generations, his brand strategy may turn out to be absolute and a great model for marketers 
to follow to reach millennials.32
In his second election campaign, Barack Obama enlarged his presence on social media networks, to get fully 
into contact with ‘young’ Americans. He, or rather the Obama campaign staff, joined Instagram in January 2012 
(Photo 4.1). By doing so, the 2012 campaign tried to prove it had not lost touch with the hip digital tools that kids 
are using today. In less than a day, and with just two uploads, Obama already had more than 15 000 followers.33 By 
the end of June, after posting 72 photos, his fan club increased to 930 000 followers.34
In April 2012, Barack Obama also joined Pinterest, the wildly popular social network where users pin links 
to items they love or find inspirational on an online board. Some of his boards include Pet Lovers for Obama, 
Obama-inspired recipes, The First Family, ObamArt and Faces of Change. More than 24 000 people follow his 
account.35
Business insight
Obama’s campaign spoke to millennials . . . and they listened

138     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Consumer markets can also be segmented on the basis of household life-cycle criteria. 
This concept has its origin in sociology in the decade of the 1930s and has been applied in 
market research since the 1950s. It is founded on the fact that family changes (for instance, 
marriage, birth and emancipation of children, break-up of the marriage, etc.) affect both 
income and expenditure of households.36 Consequently, each stage will imply different needs 
and therefore consumers can be segmented in this manner. Life-cycle segmentation and mar-
keting is extremely popular in the financial sector where CRM software tools (customer rela-
tionship marketing) allow marketers to track changes in the life cycles of clients as input for 
a targeted marketing campaign.37 Studies revealed that the importance attributed to financial 
choice criteria and financial services varies as consumers pass through the life-cycle stages.38
The conceptual framework of household life-cycle stages has been modernised a few 
times, the most recent consensus being found on the model of Gilly and Enis since it 
excluded only 0.5% of households.39 Figure 4.2 illustrates this model.
Photo 4.1  Obama wins the presidency
Source: Getty Images.
In 1941, General Mills was the first to introduce an oat-based ready-to-eat breakfast cereal, Cheerios. Since then, 
several fruit and chocolate varieties have supplemented the original. General Mills is also known for its long his-
tory of philanthropy, with its foundation having given more than $420 million to non-profit organisations since its 
founding. In November 2009, Cheerios ran a campaign on Facebook designed to strengthen its relationship with 
its key demographic of mothers with young kids, the generation Y mums. Facebook was seen as the best platform 
Business insight
Cheerios targeting young mums

MARKET SEGMENTATION     139
to start a conversation with this target group. The campaign wanted to encourage more people to connect to the 
Cheerios Facebook page. Completely in line with the General Mills philanthropic tradition, Cheerios promised to 
donate a free book to First Book (books for children in need), for every new person who connected to the Cheerios 
Facebook page. Cheerios ran the campaign via Facebook’s ‘reach block’, which guaranteed that Cheerios would 
reach its target audience over a 24-hour period. The company took advantage of Facebook’s anonymised targeting 
to target women over 25 years old.
Several ads were developed: ads to communicate with the Facebook page to ‘help donate a free book’; and ads 
to stress the healthful qualities (no artificial flavours or colours) of the cereal.
This campaign resulted in:
● an increase in Facebook connections from 8854 people on the day before the campaign, up to 133 129 after the 
first day of the campaign on the ‘reach block’;
● an engagement rate of 0.19% – the highest recorded by General Mills at that time;
● 84.5 million delivered impressions;
● more than 124 000 books donated to First Book.
Facebook has given the brand another way of staying in touch with its target group. Cheerios is convinced that it 
can deliver content and messages to its core target of generation Y mums, which they would not be able to deliver via 
traditional media. By partnering with its fans, the company is able to tap into the collective intelligence of thousands 
of mums to gather and share parenting ideas with the entire Cheerios community. The company believes that real 
people saying real things can trump traditional brand messages, especially within social platforms. Its ability to be 
a catalyst for creating this valuable and authentic content is important for Cheerios.40 By June 2012, Cheerios had 
more than 780 000 fans on its Facebook page.
Source: Alamy Images: Michael Dwyer.

140     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Figure 4.2  A model of household life cycles
Source: Gilly, M. and Enis, B. (1982) ‘Recycling the family life cycle: a proposal for redefinition’, Advances in ­Consumer Research, 
9, 271–6.
Segmenting markets using lifestyle or personality criteria is called psychographic segmen-
tation. Psychographic research was developed when traditional demographic segmentation 
was shown to have strong limitations in predicting consumer behaviour. Lifestyle segmentation 
describes how people organise their lives and spend their time and money. These external char-
acteristics (playing sports, going to the theatre or restaurant) are linked to a person’s personality 
(e.g. a risk-averse person will not take up dangerous sports). Lifestyle measurement is based on 
the activities, interests and opinions (AIO) of consumers. AIO combine internal and external 
characteristics to map the lifestyle of a consumer. Activities include how people spend their 
money and time, e.g. work, leisure, product use, shopping behaviour, etc. Interests can be in fash-
ion, housing, food, cars, culture, etc. Opinions are attitudes, preferences and ideas on general 
subjects such as politics or economics, on more specific subjects, or on oneself and one’s family.
In July 2008 InSites Consulting studied the lifestyle of the Dutch youth population (aged 14–24) for MTV Networks. 
The basis for this psychographic segmentation was Schwartz’s theory of human values, and InSites measured the 
ten values (universalism, benevolence, conformity, tradition, security, power, achievement, hedonism, stimulation 
and self-direction) using a K-means clustering based on utilities scores for the different Schwartz value statements. 
Six psychographic clusters within this young population in the Netherlands were found:
● popu kids: 20% of the Dutch 14–24 year olds
● hedonists: 25%
● social explorers: 14%
Research insight
Value segmentation of young people in the Netherlands

MARKET SEGMENTATION     141
● idealists: 6%
● conservatives: 17%
● wizz kids: 20%
Popu kids (20%)
Popu kids score high on achievement and stimulation. They feel it is important to be the best and attach great value 
to the brands of clothes they are wearing. They are quite self-confident and popular; 62% are male. Popu kids are 
interested in gaming, computers, mechanics and new technologies, fitness and football. They tend to drink a lot when 
going out. Important brand characteristics to them are: representing a high status; and an image of luxury and glamour.
Hedonists (25%)
Hedonists have high scores on the Schwartz values hedonism, stimulation and self-direction. They feel they have 
to live now and prefer to be out of the house as much as possible. They like nightlife and partying, hanging around 
and going to pubs. Online they look for new music, recommended by peer youngsters. Luxury, glamour and safety 
are brand attributes that hedonists do not like at all.
Social explorers (14%)
Social explorers have higher scores on values such as stimulation, self-direction and universalism. They also feel it is 
important to be the best but would like to make the world a better place and are open and tolerant to youngsters 
that are different. They love to meet lots of new people, like to play musical instruments or perform on stage; 62% 
are female. Social explorers are interested in cooking, music festivals (such as the Dutch festival Pinkpop), concerts, 
playing music, dancing, art and culture, adventurous travel and psychology. They love visiting friends or acquaint-
ances. In brands they want to identify with, they tend to appreciate social awareness and corporate responsibility.
Idealists (6%)
Idealist youngsters have higher scores on universalism, benevolence and tradition. They like spirituality and playing 
musical instruments. They are interested in reading books, going to concerts, playing music, adventurous travel, 
history, philosophy, politics and graffiti. They identify with brands that give them a safe and secure feeling.
Conservatives (17%)
Conservative youngsters score higher on Schwartz’s values of universalism, tradition, conformity and security. They 
like making music and identify with brands that are honest and give them a safe feeling.
Wizz kids (20%)
Wizz kids score high on power and achievement; 68% are male. They think it is important to be the best and the 
brands of their clothes are important to them. They love gaming and watching video clips online. They look for 
brands that deliver high standards and status to identify themselves with.41
Source: ‘InSites Consulting 2008 lifestyle segmentation of Dutch youngsters for MTV Networks’, Rotterdam, InSites Consulting (Van den Bergh, J. and Verhaeghe 
A. 2008).
When a company divides its market into segments referring to product or brand prefer-
ences, or involvement with categories, it adopts a behavioural segmentation. Consumers can 
be segmented on the basis of the occasion when they use a product or a brand. For instance, 
a brand of orange juice can be targeted at a segment of consumers drinking juice at breakfast, 
but there will also be a segment using orange juice in cocktails in the evening, etc. Minute 
Maid found out that there was an opportunity for fruit juice at home during the evening.

142     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
The Coca-Cola Company launched Minute Maid Hot & Cold as a world premiere in 
Belgium. It is an apple juice with cinnamon that is positioned as a refreshing cold drink 
during the breakfast moment and as a relaxing hot drink in the evening (tea moment), a 
product that can be used in different ways for different occasions.
Markets can also be divided into segments on the basis of customer loyalty. Customers 
can be loyal to one brand, loyal to a set of brands or brand-switchers. Obviously, market-
ing communications efforts can be different when targeting these different groups. Brand-
switchers are mainly influenced by material incentives. Sales promotions will therefore be an 
important tool to get them to buy a product. Brand-loyals, on the other hand, do not have to 
be convinced. Advertising to keep the brand top of mind and loyalty promotions will be the 
main communications instruments used with this group. Consumers that are loyal to a set of 
brands will have to be approached with a combination of communications tools. Advertising 
will keep the company’s brand in their choice set, while in-store communications and sales 
promotions will make them choose the company’s brand rather than competing brands.
Markets can also be segmented on the basis of the user status of customers. An individual 
can be a non-user, a potential user, a first-time user, a regular user or an ex-user. Non-users 
are consumers who will never buy a product. They should therefore be avoided in a marketing 
communications plan. Men, for example, will never buy sanitary towels for themselves. As a 
result, a communications plan should avoid talking to them as much as possible. Ex-users are 
more a target group for customer satisfaction research than for a marketing communications 
campaign. It will be very hard to regain a customer who has deliberately decided not to use 
the product anymore. Potential users need to be persuaded to try the product for the first time. 
Advertising, building awareness and attitude, trial promotions and in-store communications 
may convince them to have a go. First-time users should be converted into regular users. Adver-
tising, building a favourable attitude and a preference for the brand, together with loyalty pro-
motions, might do the job. Regular users should be confirmed in their favourable attitude and 
buying behaviour. They may be approached by means of advertising and loyalty promotions.
Markets can also be segmented on the basis of usage rate. Heavy users are of particular 
interest to a company because they make up the largest part of sales. Light users may be 
persuaded to buy and consume more of the product by means of special offers or ‘basket-
filling’ promotions, increasing the number of items they buy.
Segmenting on the basis of benefits looked for by consumers can be done by researching 
all benefits applicable to a certain product category, e.g. a salty snack should be crunchy, 
taste good and not be expensive. For each of these benefits consumers preferring that benefit 
are identified and for each benefit products or brands offering that benefit are defined. This 
segmentation links psychographic, demographic and behavioural variables. A specific ben-
efit for which a brand has a unique strength can be defined, and the communications effort 
can be targeted at the customer group preferring that particular benefit. As such, benefit 
segmentation is conceptually very close to positioning.
A study was carried out that proposes a new methodology, mixture-amount modelling, which allows advertisers to 
model the dependence of advertising outcomes (e.g. sales, brand equity, campaign recognition) on the total adver-
tising effort on the one hand, and allocation across media on the other, to determine the allocation of advertising 
Research insight
A new type of regression model for optimising the advertising media mix when 
targeting different types of consumers

MARKET SEGMENTATION     143
investments across different media that optimises the advertising response for any given total advertising effort.42 
Compared to more traditional regression models,43 mixture-amount models not only allow for optimisation, but 
also for simulations to predict responses for different combinations of advertising effort and cross-media allocation 
across consumer groups. In this study, it was investigated how the optimal allocation (and the resulting response) 
changes for consumers with different media usage patterns and different degrees of product category experience.
Advertising effort data and consumer responses were collected for 52 skin and hair care (shampoo, facial 
cream, soap) campaigns that ran in magazines and/or on TV in the Netherlands and Belgium between June and 
December 2011. To quantify the advertising effort in each campaign, gross rating point (GRP) indicators were used. 
A GRP value is the number of contacts of a campaign expressed as a percentage of the target audience. For each 
campaign, data were available on the number of GRPs that were invested in TV and magazine advertising in the 
six weeks preceding the data collection as input for the analyses. For the dependent variables and target group 
information (media usage and product experience) panel data were collected. The respondents in the study were 
randomly selected women in the age range of 20 to 50 (the target group), who were representative of the Dutch 
and Belgian population in terms of education and social status. In total, the analysed dataset contains 26 785 
responses from 6679 respondents.
As the dependent variable, campaign recognition was used. It is a binary variable indicating whether or not a 
campaign was recognised by the respondent (as self-reported during the survey). Respondents’ media usage was 
calculated for both TV and magazines by multiplying the frequency with which they use the medium with the inten-
sity with which they use it. TV usage was calculated by multiplying the number of days a respondent watches TV in 
a normal week (1 = never watch TV, 7 = every day) with a measure of how long she watches TV per day (1 = less 
than 30 minutes per day, 9 = eight or more hours per day). Magazine usage was calculated by multiplying how 
often a respondent reads magazines (1 = never reads magazines, 7 = seven or more magazines per week) with a 
measure of the thoroughness with which she reads these magazines (1 = never reads magazines, 5 = reads them 
thoroughly from cover to cover). The resulting magazine usage score ranges from 1 (never reads magazines) to 35 
(reads several magazines every day from cover to cover). Product category experience was measured by means of a 
two-item (never use – experienced user, never buy – experienced buyer) five-point scale (a = 0.89).
For a scenario with a relatively low advertising effort of 150 GRPs for respondents with moderate levels of 
­magazine (14) and TV usage (20), an allocation of 48% to magazine advertising and 52% to TV advertising ­maximises 
the predicted campaign recognition probability. Using this optimal allocation, the predicted campaign ­recognition 
probability is 48.2%. If the advertiser increases the campaign weight to 640 GRPs, given the same consumer media 
usage levels as in Scenario 1, the maximum campaign recognition probability increases to 66.4%. Under this 
­scenario, the optimal media mix also shifts from 52% for TV and 48% for magazines to 55% for TV and 45% for 
magazines. In case of high levels of magazine (35) and TV (63) usage, for a campaign weight of 640 GRPs, the optimal 
media mix of 44% of magazine advertising and 56% of TV advertising leads to a predicted ­recognition of 93.8%. 
As expected, campaign recognition probability thus increases with the total advertising effort, as ­measured by the 
number of GRPs, and with consumers’ media usage. For a scenario that involves an advertising effort of 150 GRPs 
for consumers with moderate levels of product category experience (3), an allocation of 43% of the ­advertising 
effort to magazines and of the remaining 57% to TV leads to the highest predicted campaign recognition ­probability 
(46.2%). In a scenario in which the advertising effort increases to 640 GRPs, with the same moderate level of product 
category experience (3), the maximum predicted campaign recognition probability increases from 46.2% to 63%. 
The optimal allocation of the advertising effort, however, does not alter, and remains at 43% for magazines and 
57% for TV.
As expected, increasing the total advertising effort increases the likelihood of campaign recognition, and this 
effect exhibits diminishing returns. Second, consumers with higher levels of media usage or product category expe-
rience are more likely to recognise campaigns. Importantly, both consumers’ media usage and product category 
experience exert a substantial influence on how advertisers should allocate their efforts across media to maximise 
campaign recognition, especially for larger campaigns. Not surprisingly, for consumers with low magazine usage 
and high TV usage, a relatively larger proportion of the advertising effort should be spent on TV in order to reach 
the highest campaign recognition probability. Conversely, for consumers with high magazine usage and low TV 
usage, a relatively larger proportion should be allocated to magazines. Even in this case, however, a large share 
of the effort should still be allocated to TV advertising. The relative proportion of magazine advertising required 
to maximise predicted campaign recognition probability increases with product category experience. This could 

144     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Finally, consumers can be divided into more homogeneous sub-groups on the basis of 
their buyer readiness. When a potential customer is unaware of a brand, awareness-building 
advertising and sponsorship will have to be used. For a group of customers already aware 
of the product, attitude-building campaigns are called for. People who are interested in and 
like the product should be persuaded to try it by means of sales promotions and in-store 
communications.
Requirements for effective segmentation
In stage 2 of the STP process, segmentation variables can be combined to form segmenta-
tion profiles. Segment profiles have to meet a number of requirements to be meaningful 
(Figure 4.3). Segments have to be measurable. It should be possible to gather information 
about segmentation criteria and about the size, composition and purchasing power of each 
segment. Segments have to be substantial enough to warrant separate and profitable market-
ing campaigns to be developed particularly for that segment. Segment profiles have to be 
attainable, i.e. accessible and actionable. The marketing manager must be able to identify 
the segment members and target the marketing action programme at them separately. Unless 
most members of the segment visit similar places, shop in similar supermarkets or read 
similar media, it will be difficult to reach them separately and develop specific stimuli for 
them. In other words, the chosen segments must be within reach of communications media 
and distribution channels. Finally, market segmentation should be differentiated, and ide-
ally lead to more homogeneous sub-groups in that the members of one group should react 
similarly to marketing stimuli and differ in their reactions to these stimuli from the members 
of other segments. These requirements are sometimes referred to by means of the acronym 
ADMARS (accessible, differentiated, measurable, actionable, relevant and substantial).
Figure 4.3  Requirements for effective segmentation
be due to the fact that heavy users of beauty care products may also be more likely to read glossy magazines. The 
results also allow to show that the optimal allocation also differs depending on the total amount of GRPs, even for 
the same target group.
In the total sample, average campaign recognition is 43%. This percentage resulted from the media allocation 
decisions taken in the campaigns analysed. However, if one considers the maximum predicted campaign recognition 
corresponding to the ‘optimal’ media mix in the different scenarios reported, it is always (substantially) higher than 
43%. This is an indication that advertisers use a poor allocation of the total advertising effort to the different media.

REQUIREMENTS FOR EFFECTIVE SEGMENTATION     145
In 2006, the Northern European market for carbonated soft drinks was in worrying decline, but the sub-sector of light 
soft drinks was still growing, especially within the cola category. Perceived as a feminine brand, Coca-Cola Light was 
experiencing fierce competition as men increasingly turned to competing brands with more masculine overtones. 
Coca-Cola needed to create a macho brand in order to maintain and grow its share of light colas and to avoid los-
ing the young male sector. Coca-Cola Zero was the answer. The key concept was ‘Life as it should be’ – unlimited 
enjoyment with zero compromise and no negative consequences, aimed at 18–29 year old men concerned for their 
health, image, masculinity and waistlines. They dream of a better life – being richer, having hotter girlfriends and 
succeeding in fulfilling their childhood dreams.
Initially, the drink was marketed with a tagline of ‘everybody chill’ – a nice but vague emotional message. It did not 
work. Consumers were confused about what the brand stood for, what was meant by ‘Zero’. The company came back 
to Coke Zero’s intrinsic value with the message ‘real Coke taste, zero calories’. Five years later, the marketing story 
remained the same. Coke Zero’s packaging was initially white. But there was a problem as the colour connoted diet 
drinks, and among the coveted young male demographic, diet connoted ‘female’. The company quickly borrowed 
the idea from its Australian division to have the packaging in black. Its packaging needed to evoke a subconscious 
masculinity: black – good; white – bad. Within six months, the new marketing and packaging were in place, and the 
brand took off.44
Thanks to a communications strategy based on three key principles (to quickly generate attention, build aware-
ness and encourage frequency of use), Coca-Cola Zero grew to double the target set for it in Germany and exceeded 
the target by 38% in Denmark, while unit sales in Germany and Denmark, and Coca-Cola’s share overall, grew 
­significantly.45 One year after the launch (July 2006) of ‘Coca-Cola Zero’ in the UK the sales of Coca-Cola’s sugar-free 
cola were on the cusp of overtaking those of regular Coke for the first time ever, which, if achieved, would make 
the UK the first Coca-Cola market worldwide to achieve this landmark. Total sales for the first full 12 months of 
‘Coke Zero’ reached 68 million litres, helping the company’s sugar-free sales grow 4.4% year on year. Over 49% of 
Coke Zero’s sales were new or additional purchases of the Coke brands, a testimony to the growing role of diet spar-
kling drinks in people’s diets. Coca-Cola Zero was launched in the UK with a major, men-orientated marketing plan: 
‘Buy-A-Player’ football promotion, the Wayne Rooney TV spot and iTunes promotion. A year later the campaign was 
extended with the ‘Win a Real Saturday’ promotion, providing a million tickets to watch English Football League and 
Scottish Premier League matches. The success of the Coke Zero launch has been widely recognised throughout the 
industry. Coca-Cola’s biggest launch in over 20 years became the most successful food and beverage launch in recent 
history, and picked up the coveted ‘Star Product of the Year Award’ at the annual Gold Awards by leading industry 
magazine The Grocer.46 In 2008, two years after its launch in the UK, Coca-Cola Zero was hailed by AC Nielsen as the 
biggest new product development launch in three years. Having grown by 49% since launch, the brand was at that 
time worth £60 million.47 And the success continues. Coke Zero’s sales increased in 2010 with 17 straight quarters 
of double-digit growth. It is sold in 130 countries, including big markets like Brazil and Mexico. It is surely the most 
successful new soft drink of the last decade, a billion-dollar brand mentioned in the same breath as Coca-Cola, 
Diet Coke, Sprite and Fanta. In the USA, its sales are about six times larger than Pepsi Max, introduced in 1993 in 
international markets and in the USA in 2007. In 2009, when the overall soda market shrank by about 2%, Coke Zero 
sales jumped 20% in the USA. Coke Zero was listed in 12th place in the carbonated soft drinks market in the USA.
Marketing can take a brand far, but the product itself has to deliver on the promise. Taste is often tricky with 
diet soft drinks, but in this case the taste was right. Fans say Coke Zero tastes much like Coca-Cola Classic, albeit 
perhaps a little sweeter. The future looks bright. Based on the expanding popularity of diet and ‘light’ drinks, Coke 
Zero is expecting further growth. In 1982, the year of the launch of Diet Coke, diet drinks made up only 1% of 
sales at the Coca-Cola Company. Today, that share has increased to 42% and the company expects it to hit 50% by 
2020. On top of this, the brand’s sales are especially strong among Hispanics and African-Americans, two growing 
demographics.48
Business insight
Coca-Cola Zero aiming at men

146     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
After segmenting the market, opportunities for each segment should be singled out. The 
next stage in the process is targeting segments.49 There are two decisions here: how many 
segments will the company target, and which segments are most attractive to that company?
Targeting strategies
Once a company has defined segment profiles, it has to decide which segments to focus 
upon. This will be done on the basis of consumer and competitor analyses. Ideally, target 
segments should be profitable, meaning that they should contain a sufficient amount of 
consumers that are able and willing to buy the company’s product, and competition should 
not be too strong. In any case, when a company targets different segments, it is usually going 
to do that by means of differentiated marketing communications. Market differentiation 
involves directing the marketing effort to different segments with different marketing and 
communications strategies. Undifferentiated marketing is using the same strategies in all 
segments. There are five basic types of targeting strategies:
● Concentration on one segment. A company chooses one segment (one product for one 
market) and develops a marketing mix for that segment. This strategy has some positive 
aspects. The company will be able to build up expertise and enjoy learning effects. On 
the other hand, it will be dependent on a single segment and vulnerable to competitors. 
For instance, Jaguar was a company concentrating on one segment until it was acquired 
by Ford, and later on sold again to the Indian car company Tata.
● Selective specialisation. A company chooses a number of segments that look attractive. 
There is no synergy between the segments, but every segment looks profitable. Activities 
in one segment can compensate for other, slower-growing segments. For instance, Richard 
Branson started with a music label (Virgin) which he sold while launching new services in 
different segments: travel (holidays, trains, flights and travel guides), entertainment (a new 
music label V2, Virgin Megastores, books, radio and Internet service provision), telecoms 
(mobile and fixed lines), lifestyle (soft drinks, wines, cosmetics and fitness clubs), energy 
(water, gas and electricity), finance (credit cards, loans, insurance, etc.) and motoring 
(retailing of cars and motorbikes).
● Product specialisation. A company concentrates on one product and sells it to different 
market segments. For instance, a company can sell microscopes to companies, hospitals, 
universities, schools, labs, etc.
● Market specialisation. A company concentrates on one market segment and sells different 
products to that group of customers, e.g. a company selling microscopes, oscilloscopes, 
etc., to hospitals.
● Full market coverage. A company tries to target all customer groups with all the products 
they need. For instance, General Motors makes cars (in different classes), four-wheel-drive 
cars, vans, agricultural machines, etc.
‘Wii Fit’ is one of a series of games launched by Nintendo focusing on socialisation and activities designed to 
appeal to consumers who do not typically purchase video games. Looking to expand beyond family-orientated 
sports video games such as ‘Wii Tennis’ and ‘Wii Golf’, Nintendo launched ‘Wii Fit’ in April–May 2008 (December 
2007 in Japan). This game consists of a balance board and software containing 48 fitness training-related games 
Business insight
‘Wii Fit’ looking for the non-typical purchasers of video games

MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS OBJECTIVES     147
Selecting the right target groups
The second decision is to select the most attractive target groups. To evaluate segments, 
companies have to look at four elements: size and growth of segments; structural attractive-
ness of a segment; objectives and budgets of a company; and stability of market segments. 
Current turnover, potential growth and profitability of segments are the first important 
conditions a marketer should evaluate for each segment. For small companies, it could be 
wiser to target smaller or less attractive niche segments when competition is strong in the 
larger segments. Structural attractiveness can be analysed by using Porter’s model. Current 
competitors, potential entrants, substitution products and the power of customers and sup-
pliers influence the attractiveness of segments. Some attractive segments may not fit with 
the strategic objectives or long-term goals of a company.
Finally, a positioning strategy (a ‘place in the mind of target group customers’) has to be 
defined. This will be discussed later on in the ‘strategy’ section of this chapter.
Marketing communications objectives
Marketing communications objectives can be broadly divided into three categories: reach 
goals, process goals and effectiveness goals (Figure 4.4). The reach goal of communicating 
is to reach the target groups in an effective and efficient way. For this purpose a good seg-
mentation and audience definition are needed, as well as insights into the media behaviour 
of the desired segments. Part of this problem was discussed earlier on target groups; the 
detailed considerations of media planning will be the subject of Chapter 7. Process goals 
are ­conditions which should be established before any communications can be effective. All 
communications should capture the attention of the target group, then appeal or be appreci-
ated, and last but not least be processed (and remembered). The third type of communications 
goals are the effectiveness goals. They are, of course, the most important ones, since reach 
goals only assure sufficient exposure, and process goals only ensure enough processing of 
the message to make the effectiveness goals possible. In any case, marketing communica-
tions goals should be derived from organisational/business objectives and objectives of the 
broader marketing plan.
and activities for workouts at home. ‘Wii Fit’ stresses four main categories of physical activity – balance, aerobics, 
yoga and strength training – and, while Nintendo executives are not billing the game as a replacement for exercise, 
they are positioning it as a pastime that promotes a healthy lifestyle. Users can track their weight and training 
progress and receive points for performing tasks using good form and increased intensity. The game allows users 
to measure their weight and body-mass index, and guides them through activities such as yoga poses and muscle-
toning exercises.
According to the NPD Group, GfK Chart-Track and Enterbrain, the game has sold 1.433 million copies in the USA, 
624 000 in the UK and 1.547 million in Japan, respectively, for a total of 3.604 million copies sold from January to 
July 2008. By December 2008, ‘Wii Fit’ was the Wii’s third best-selling game, with 14 million copies sold worldwide.50 
Research International looked at the introduction of ‘Wii Fit’ in the Netherlands, one year after the launch in April 
2008. It found that awareness was very good: 8 out of 10 adults indicated that they knew, had seen or even read 
something about this game. The survey found that 1 out of 14 people used ‘Wii Fit’, a figure which it was felt could 
be higher. There are some interesting socio-demographical differences: Research International found the biggest 
usergroup among women, youngsters (under 35) and owners of game PCs. Men and people older than 35 years 
contained the biggest group of non-users.51

148     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Marketing communications objectives can be further conceptualised on the basis of two 
dimensions: process versus effectiveness objectives on the one hand, and communications 
versus behavioural objectives on the other. As explained, process objectives focus upon 
the extent to which customers should have processed a specific communication stimulus. 
Therefore, they are sometimes called instrument-related or direct objectives. Effectiveness 
objectives focus upon the effect of the whole campaign on the brand or the organisation. 
Therefore, they are sometimes called indirect or brand-related objectives. The term ‘indirect’ 
refers to the assumption that the whole campaign (all tools) should lead to the desired brand 
effects. There is thus no direct relationship between one tool and an effectiveness objective 
or result. The second dimension refers to whether a campaign wants to change something 
in the mind of people or in customer behaviour. Communication objectives aim at changes 
in knowledge or attitudes, while behavioural objectives want to change something in the 
way customers act. Based on these two dimensions, a taxonomy of marketing communica-
tions objectives can be drawn up, as in Table 4.5, in which also examples are given of each 
category of objectives.
Besides a taxonomy for setting communications goals, this framework is at the same 
time a taxonomy of campaign effectiveness measurement. Indeed, campaign objectives and 
campaign effectiveness measures are two sides of the same coin. An effective campaign is a 
campaign that reaches its objectives. Setting objectives determines how effectiveness should 
be measured. Evidently, profitable long-term sales and market share growth are the ultimate 
objectives of most marketing communications campaigns. The behavioural effectiveness 
objectives are called ‘commercial objectives’. However, sales are influenced by other market-
ing mix instruments, such as product quality, design, benefits, packaging, distribution and 
Figure 4.4  Categories of communications objectives
Process objectives
Effectiveness objectives
Communication objectives
Brand recall and recognition
Recall/recognition of message 
elements
Attitude towards the communication
Brand awareness
Brand knowledge
Brand attitude/image
Brand preference
Brand loyalty
Purchase intention
Behavioural objectives
Activation: store or website visits, likes 
and shares on social network sites, 
talk or recommend to friends . . .
Click-through on online banners
Call freephone numbers
Respond to direct mails
Trial purchase
Repeat purchase
Sales
Market share
Profit
Return on marketing 
communications investment
Table 4.5  A taxonomy of marketing communications objectives

MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS OBJECTIVES     149
pricing strategies, as well as the market evolution, technology and innovations, and of course 
competitive action. Furthermore, in many cases commercial objectives will only be achieved 
in the longer term. It is generally assumed that campaigns first have to be processed and 
change something in the mind and the behavioural responses of customers before they can 
have a commercial effect. Therefore, the results of a campaign are often (also) measured in 
terms of what is called ‘intermediary effects’: communication effects and non-commercial 
behaviour (the other quadrants of the table). Consequently, besides commercial objectives, 
for most campaigns intermediary objectives are also set. The logic behind this is that cam-
paign recognition, activation, and brand knowledge and attitudes are necessary conditions 
for longer-term commercial results. This is essentially a hierarchy-of-effects logic (see also 
Chapter 3).
One traditional model of effectiveness objectives and results measurement is the 
­DAGMAR52 (defining advertising goals for measured advertising results) model. 
The ­DAGMAR model is essentially a hierarchy-of-effects model, similar to those discussed 
earlier. It is frequently used as a framework to define campaign effectiveness goals. To get 
a person or organisation to buy a product that was not bought before, or to increase the 
frequency or quantity of repeat buying, a consumer will normally go through the phases 
shown in Figure 4.5.
According to the DAGMAR model, during the communications process nine effects can 
be established. When a marketer is defining his or her communications strategies, he or she 
will have to select the most appropriate communications effect or goals from the list. Every 
promotional campaign should be organised with one or more of these ­communications 
objectives in mind. The choice of the right goals depends on the problems that have arisen in 
the preliminary situation analysis of the market, brand positions, competition, ­opportunities 
and threats. In that sense, communications objectives are only an ­intermediary way to reach 
marketing goals of a higher order, such as sales volumes, market share, ­distribution, 
­penetration, etc.
Figure 4.5  Communications objectives: the DAGMAR model
Source: Colley, R.H. (1961) Defining Advertising Goals for Measured Advertising Results. New York: Association of National Advertisers.

150     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
A good set of communications goals should have a number of characteristics. It should:53
● fit in with the overall company and marketing goals;
● be relevant to the identified problems and specific to cope with threats or to build on 
opportunities in the market;
● be targeted at different target audiences, which implies that different target groups (such 
as countries, socio-demographic groups, heavy and light users) could need different com-
munications objectives;
● be quantified in order to be measurable, which allows a precise evaluation of the cam-
paign results to be made;
● be comprehensive and motivating to all involved persons but at the same time be realistic 
and achievable;
● be timed to enable specific scheduling of the campaign as well as planning the evaluation 
of results;
● be translated into sub-goals when necessary.
This is sometimes referred to as SMART: Strategic, Measurable, Actionable, Realistic and 
Timely.
The communications objectives are guidelines for everyone who is involved in campaign 
development and realisation: marketers, advertising agencies, PR officials and sales pro-
motion agencies, media planners and buyers, and researchers. They are also fundamental 
to campaign strategy: all phases of the marketing communications plan, such as creative, 
media and budgeting decisions, should be built on the goals. As communications objectives 
are also the criteria against which a campaign’s success (or failure) is evaluated, it is impor-
tant that they are well defined and quantified. Only when goals are measurable are they a 
management tool enabling returns to be gauged against investments.
Developing category wants
The first basic condition to be fulfilled by a brand is that it should fit within category needs 
and wants. If buyers cannot perceive the communicated product or brand as an appropriate 
answer to their needs and demands, they will not be motivated to buy it. Category wants 
or needs can be defined as the existence of one or more of these buying motives and the 
perception of the product category as a good means of meeting these motives (Photo 4.2). 
Of course, although category need is always necessary before other brand-related objectives 
work, it is clear that in most cases, i.e. when communications are targeted at category users, 
it can be considered as already present and thus can be ignored. Indeed, it can be assumed 
that category wants are already well developed in product categories such as food, deter-
gents, insurance and cars. However, in product categories that are infrequently purchased 
or infrequently used, such as painkillers, communicating category needs to remind buyers 
of their present but forgotten need may be useful.
Using category need as a primary communications objective is a must for innovations. 
Consumers should first understand which need is satisfied by an innovation and the dif-
ference between the ‘new category’ and known categories should be stressed. When Sony 
invented the CD player, the first thing to communicate, before building awareness for the 
Sony brand, was the difference in sound quality compared with the cassette player. Creat-
ing category awareness is also an appropriate goal when non-category users are addressed. 
For instance, when telecom operators of mobile phone networks communicate to a group 
of non-owners of a mobile phone they will stress the need for mobile telephones. When 
they address owners they will stress other benefits such as special rates and special services. 
Sometimes a manufacturer repositions a product or service to meet other usage occasions or 
methods of use. Kellogg’s introduced Variety cereals in small packages to broaden its cereal 
market from the breakfast moment to other snack and school moments and consequently 

MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS OBJECTIVES     151
Photo 4.2  Coral Black Velvet: innovations 
call for communicating category needs
Source: Reproduced with permission of Gesamtverband 
­Werbeagenturen GWA and J. Walter Thompson.
takes part in the between-meals market. Category wants can be omitted, refreshed or actively 
used in market communications in the different situations described above. The following 
communications goals are not on a category level but focus on the brand.54
Brand awareness: recognition and recall
Brand awareness is the association of some characteristics such as a brand name, logo, pack-
age, style, etc., with a category need. There are two ways brand awareness can be defined. For 
example, if people think of a soft drink, they may spontaneously think of Coca-Cola, Fanta 
or Lipton Ice Tea. This is their top-of-mind brand awareness. People may also recall several 

152     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
The Smart city car was revolutionary at the time it was introduced and still remains one of a kind, but was reaching 
the end of its product life cycle, necessitating a reinvention in 2007. The integrated launch campaign’s main objec-
tive was to introduce the new Smart car in Europe with a pre-launch phase to create awareness and interest and 
a launch phase to convert this interest into sales. In order to achieve a significant sales growth, Smart wanted to 
convert people who like Smart as a brand into those who have the Smart car in their relevance set when thinking 
about purchasing a new small car. The campaign needed to work deeply in the decision process, starting with brand 
awareness and ending with the purchase of the product. A mix of classic media and customer relationship marketing 
(CRM) activities combined TV and cinema, radio, print (mainly consumer magazines) with PR, online and further 
CRM activities such as direct mailings.
The Smart car was designed as an urban mobility solution, tailor-made for life in the city, so the core campaign 
thought was ‘Discover a new city’ – the new Smart car enables the driver to see his or her city with new eyes. Where 
others may see limitations, Smart drivers see opportunities. The campaign increased sales figures in Germany, 
France and Italy by more than 20% (in Germany it was 70% higher) with a lower ‘media spend per unit sold’ than 
main competitors Mini and Toyota Aygo. Smart even managed to outgrow Toyota Aygo in all three markets, as well 
as Mini in Italy and Germany. The CRM activities were also outstandingly successful, generating almost three times 
more leads than expected and selling almost 20 times more cars than one could normally expect.56
Business insight
The Smart car
brands spontaneously. This is brand recall or unaided spontaneous awareness. But it is also 
possible that people recognise a brand by its package, colour, logo, etc. This is brand recog-
nition or aided awareness. Aided brand awareness is of course less difficult to achieve. Less 
repetition and thus smaller investments are needed to establish it than brand name recall. 
Research has shown that the correlation between recall and recognition is on average 50%. 
Buyers will be better able to recognise brands than to recall brand names spontaneously.55  
On the other hand, brand recall is not a guarantee that the buyer will recognise the brand 
in a shop.
The question of which awareness goal should be aspired to by a marketer depends on 
the situational circumstances in which the product or brand is bought. If the purchase deci-
sion is made at another time and location than the point of sales (at the office, at home), or 
when a buyer has to ask explicitly for a certain product or service (e.g. at a drugstore or a 
pharmacist), brand name recall is needed. This is also true when a shopping list with pre-
ferred brand names for every category is made prior to going to a shop, or when somebody 
is making purchases by phone (airline tickets, courier services, etc.). When the purchase 
decision is made in the store, and the buyer can use visual cues such as packages, displays, 
colours, and logos, brand recognition is more important than brand recall.
To stimulate brand recognition, showing the product package or logo in advertising and 
other communications in exactly the same colours and formats is crucial. The latter implies 
that, for instance, radio advertising is less appropriate for brand recognition goals. To build 
brand recall, repetition of the association between the category and the brand is necessary. 
Sign-off slogans should therefore always integrate category and brand name. In some cases 
a marketer should try to attain both brand recall and recognition. A consumer then recalls 
a brand at home and will search for it at the supermarket or store. For this search process to 
be successful, brand recognition is needed. Sometimes this dual brand awareness objective 

MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS OBJECTIVES     153
is required, since for many product categories consumers limit their search activity based 
on loyalty to a limited set of brands.
Every communications activity should take brand awareness into account. Even if brand 
attitude or other objectives are more dominant, it will still be important to support brand 
awareness. A brand can never have too much brand awareness. Brand awareness should also 
be established prior to brand attitude and the other communications objectives. If a brand 
is not known, it will be impossible to build an image, preference or attitude towards that 
brand. The effect of brand awareness on brand choice and brand purchases is substantial. 
If two brands are equally valued, the brand with the highest awareness will be purchased 
more often.57
Brand knowledge
Brand knowledge and comprehension mean that target consumers are aware of the most 
essential brand characteristics, features and benefits. They know the strengths of the 
brands as compared with competitive brands; they know why they should buy brand 
X instead of brand Y or Z. Essentially, consumers should be able to recall the brand’s 
positioning. This knowledge may be based on very objective information, but also on 
more symbolic features such as brand image and lifestyle positioning. It is clear that what 
people know about a brand is very subjective and based on past experiences or on beliefs 
and perceptions.
Nokia, Sony Ericsson, Samsung and Motorola were all competing aggressively for leadership in the mobile handset 
markets in Europe. In 2006, Nokia had a 30.6% volume share in Russia and 38.9% in Poland. Sony Ericsson was num-
ber 2 in Poland with 20% and number 3 in Russia with 11.7%. Consumers perceived Nokia as leader in all relevant 
brand image criteria. Mobile handset advertising is seen as functional, with no brand having yet fully explored the 
emotional territory, so the opportunity for Sony Ericsson was to exploit this lack of differentiation in communica-
tions. Business objectives for Sony Ericsson were to grow faster than Nokia in the total CEEMEA region, especially in 
Russia and Poland in 2007, with at least a double-digit market share growth. The campaign also aimed to overtake 
Nokia in the ‘leadership in music’ brand criterion and increase brand purchase consideration scores in Russia and 
Poland, by at least 20% in both markets.
In a category driven by technological innovation, it was decided to pursue a strategy focused around the music 
category. At the end of 2006, a new brand identity was introduced, Sony Ericsson ‘Walkman’ phones, a new and 
innovative portfolio to challenge market leader Nokia, aimed at two key target audiences: opinion-forming ‘Pioneer 
Youth’ and ‘Mainstream Youth’. The advertising strategy, ‘Brighten Your Day’, focused on delivering mood enhance-
ment to their daily routine by bringing fun, colour and music enjoyment. There were three key phases in Sony 
Ericsson’s campaign: ‘Announce’ focused on awareness and on ensuring high visibility; ‘Showcase’ transformed key 
urban commuter travel hubs; and ‘Engage’ was a fully integrated strategy including music concerts, on out-of-home 
channels and online, in the lead-up to MTV European Music Awards sponsorship. The key message of ‘You can’t get 
closer to your music!’ was designed to increase the awareness of Sony Ericsson Walkman phones and take consum-
ers on an exciting ‘musical mind trip’. In both markets, the goal of a 10% market share increase was exceeded. The 
communications strategy achieved significant gains in the ‘leadership in music’ criterion, overtaking Nokia in both 
markets. This significantly drove brand purchase consideration, which led to a bigger market share growth rate as 
compared with Nokia, all with a significantly lower budget.58
Business insight
Sony Ericsson’s objectives in the hand-held market

154     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Brand attitude
If consumers are aware of a number of brands in a certain product category they will base 
their brand choice on an evaluation of the different brands. The result of this evaluation 
is called brand attitude. Brand attitude is the perceived value of a brand to a consumer. 
Because a brand is stronger (and thus has more loyal customers) when the differentiation 
with another brand is bigger, brand attitude is an important communication objective.
A marketer should study the current brand attitudes and perceptions and then decide 
what to do. If there is no brand attitude, and people are unaware of brand benefits, a brand 
attitude should be created (Photo 4.3). If there is a moderately favourable brand attitude, 
the attitude should be reinforced through adapted communications. Improving attitudes 
Photo 4.3  Guinness: developing brand attitude
Source: Adrian Muttitt/Alamy Stock Photo.

MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS OBJECTIVES     155
among these benefit-aware target groups will lead to more frequent buying and hopefully 
make customers loyal. A very favourable brand attitude should be maintained to keep all 
loyal customers satisfied (Photo 4.4). In marketing practice there is no such thing as a per-
manently very favourable brand attitude because attitudes are liable to change as a conse-
quence of dynamic markets and competition power. When a certain brand attitude cannot 
be improved, it could be a strategic decision to switch to another attitude by repositioning 
the brand and perhaps find a better brand proposition for the targeted market.
Existing brand attitudes can also be adapted to appeal to other and new target groups. 
For instance, Wolverine World Wide, the American company behind Wolverine shoes for 
workers and Hush Puppies, a brand of casual footwear, began building the Caterpillar 
footwear brand in 1994 under licence from Caterpillar Inc., the heavy equipment and engine 
manufacturer. Caterpillar boots and shoes are now sold in 100 countries on six continents, 
reflecting the original brand attitude of Caterpillar in a totally different product category. In 
1998, the company also acquired the licence from Harley-Davidson to transfer the legend-
ary motorcycle’s brand image to shoes and boots; in 2000, Wolverine started to manufac-
ture Stanley footwear, positioned as footwear helping workers to ‘make something great’, 
bringing the slogan of the well-known manufacturer of construction tools to life in a new 
category.
If there is a negative prior brand attitude, changing the attitude is necessary. This is a 
very difficult objective to realise. It might be better – especially when the negative attitude 
is based on negative experiences – to modify the brand attitude and reposition the brand by 
appealing to different buying motivations.59 In January 2003, Christian Dior had to change 
major elements of its advertising campaign for Dior Addict perfume and cosmetics. The TV 
spot for the fragrance originally showed a bikini model dipping her finger into a substance 
on a mirror and holding it up to her nose, then grabbing a bottle of Addict perfume while 
a voice whispers ‘addict’ and ‘Will you admit it?’ The ad initiated the ‘Addiction is Not 
Fashionable’ protest campaign and boycott co-ordinated by Faces & Voices of Recovery and 
MOMSTELL, a group of parents concerned with addiction and recovery issues. In response 
to this protest, Dior stopped using the tagline ‘admit it’ in its marketing communications 
Photo 4.4  Kool-Aid: national brand benefit
Source: Henry Diltz /Corbis via Getty Images /Courtesy of Kraft Heinz Foods Company and its affiliates.

156     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Consumers in Europe, the Middle East and Africa who purchase computers at retail often spend less than planned 
as salespeople persuade them to trade down. Consumers had the cash to upgrade to the best Intel-powered 
computer so Intel had to make them demand it. Intel’s core targets are consumers who are passionate about using 
technology to pursue creative interests. The campaign targeted tech-savvy digital musicians – individuals, aged 
around 25–35 years, who rely on their computers. The goal for the four-month campaign was to get consumers 
to engage with Intel and to express a stronger preference for Centrino Duo processors at retail. Research revealed 
that MySpace was the preferred destination for Intel’s target audience, who spend 10% of their total online time 
there. Intel aimed to win consumer support by giving MySpace users tools to make better music while educating 
them about Centrino Duo. The campaign ran with MySpace in a six-market programme designed to create an 
Intel SuperGroup, with voting determining the band members, the song, the name and the artwork. It rolled out 
in three stages to engage influencers and content creators, drive wider awareness and broaden reach. There were 
more than 66 000 content engagement episodes, well ahead of the initial target of 25 000. Post-campaign research 
showed awareness at 33% among all MySpace users in the six markets where it was promoted. Consumers in 46 
markets were reached. Intel signed up more than 60 000 friends and had more than 25 000 unique users on its 
blog. Total submissions and votes to the online competition hit 171 000, 180% ahead of target. Intel SuperGroup 
was pioneering – it was the first multi-market campaign on MySpace. It was bold – it took Intel into a brand-averse 
environment. It was efficient – cost per profile view was $0.12. And it was very successful – 29% of the target audi-
ence was expected to upgrade.62
Business insight
Intel stimulates purchase intention of Centrino Duo PCs
and altered the ads to emphasise the full name of the product ‘Dior Addict’ instead of 
‘addict’ as a single word.60
Purchase intention
The intention of the buyer to purchase the brand or the product or take other buying-related 
actions (going to the store, asking for more information) can also be enhanced. For low-
involvement buying situations, purchase intention should not be stressed in communica-
tions. In this case, when a brand is known and a favourable brand attitude exists, this will 
in many cases lead to buying behaviour whenever the need for a certain category is aroused. 
In high-involvement situations, however, when perceived buying risks are high, the intention 
to buy is typically a necessary mediating step between a favourable attitude and the actual 
purchase. In this case, generating purchase intention and trial is necessary.61 Advertising and 
sales promotion can stimulate the consumer in that direction.
Purchase facilitation
Purchase facilitation is about assuring buyers that there are no barriers hindering product 
or brand purchase. These barriers could be other elements of the marketing mix, such as 
price, product and place (distribution). Sometimes availability or price is a problem, pre-
venting consumers from buying a product. Communications in this case should minimise 
the perceived problems. For example, if a certain brand is not widely available in all stores, 
a list of approved dealers might help the consumers.63 Point-of-purchase communications 
may also help to facilitate purchases.

MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS OBJECTIVES     157
A lot of men consider lingerie a sexy present for their loved ones. However, buying bras usually turns out to be a painful 
and embarrassing experience. Contrary to popular belief (among women) most men do not have the faintest idea about 
the size of the ‘natural wealth’ of their girlfriends or wives. When asked about size, they give vague indications such as 
‘more or less like that woman over there’ or ‘about a handful’. The consequence is that 90% of women who receive a 
lingerie set as a present (mostly in December or on Valentine’s Day) take it back to the shop because it does not fit. A 
female student of the Piet Zwart Institute for Retail and Interior Design in Rotterdam developed a new retail concept 
that aims at facilitating the buying process for men. In the middle of the shop a ‘breast wall’ is installed. On this wall, 
breasts of different sizes and shapes are modelled in gel, and men can ‘experience’ which size is closest to the one they 
need. Furthermore, most men do not feel comfortable in lingerie shops and find it difficult to make their way around. 
Therefore, the shop is more or less conceived as a do-it-yourself store. There are separate aisles per cup size, and the 
size is clearly illustrated by means of pictures in each aisle. ‘Men know everything about . . . cars, but have a selective 
memory about the anatomy of their wives and girlfriends’, the designer says. ‘We should assist them as much as we can.’ 
In the meantime, the new concept has raised the interest of lingerie retailers and manufacturers all over the world.64
Business insight
Purchase facilitation in lingerie shops
Purchase
Sales are, of course, the main marketing objective. However, in most circumstances it is 
difficult to use sales goals as a primary communications objective. Nevertheless, there are 
situations in which, due to the action-orientated context of communications tools, sales 
could be a good objective. For instance, the main objective of most sales promotions like 
couponing, price cuts and premiums is the short-term effect on sales. Some direct marketing 
tools such as direct response advertising may be evaluated by generated sales. Also, many 
online campaigns are directed at the immediate action of the customer. Indeed, in these 
situations direct sales are the main goal.
In early 2007, Vicks had little presence in the big, growing respiratory category (cough, cold and flu) and a dwindling 
presence in decongestants. The brand was suffering from terminally declining relevance and sales while employing 
different communications ideas for each product initiative. Resurrecting this brand would require the simultane-
ous launch of new products to fill gaps in the Vicks portfolio where it would face strong market leaders. And this in 
a challenging health-care environment where people exhibit high loyalty (three times the fast-moving consumer 
goods average) and have a low buying frequency of the category of 1.2 times a year. The new products had to achieve 
immediate payback on the investment but also be united under a single idea to create a brand that stretched across 
the range. By early 2008, Vicks was a coherent brand with products in both respiratory and decongestant sectors 
and sales growth in the UK/Ireland of 31% (versus an objective of 25%), and value share improvement by 7% in 
Austria and 19% in the Netherlands. Vicks’ use of media was highly efficient. In each of the countries, gross rating 
Business insight
Reviving the sales of Vicks

158     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Research on complaint management has emphasised the importance of service recovery, i.e. restoring customer 
trust after a service failure. A well-executed recovery effort not only is capable of influencing customer satisfaction 
positively, but can also convert dissatisfied customers into satisfied and loyal ones.67 Customer satisfaction after a 
Research insight
Organisational responses to negative online reviews
points fell – by 3% in the UK/Ireland, 20% in Austria and 13% in the Netherlands – while value share growth was still 
achieved. This efficient and effective scenario was achieved with a new communications model that was targeted 
towards 21% of the population who have a high desire to soldier on when they have a cold. Most are women aged 
25–45 with young children and an active lifestyle. The following media were deemed the most crucial for success of 
the campaign: TV to promote the new brand point of view and to introduce hero products; the Web to add visibility, 
information and reassurance; and in-store to encourage cross-range sales. The single brand idea, ‘At Vicks we focus 
on solutions not problems; we are for people not symptoms’, was employed for all advertised products. This idea 
drove sales of advertised products and also drove sales of the entire Vicks range.65
Satisfaction
When a consumer buys a product or service he or she has certain expectations about the 
purchase. When the product or service lives up to the required and desired benefits or sur-
passes expectations, the consumer will be satisfied and thus inclined to choose the same 
brand whenever he or she buys the product again. Dissatisfied consumers will probably 
buy a different brand on the next occasion and will complain to relatives and friends. Most 
marketers are satisfied when consumers finally buy and stop communicating at that point. 
But it is clear that communications should also be directed to existing customers. The most 
important reason is that clients are advocates of the brand and products they buy. Word-of-
mouth communications can be stimulated and approved by communicating with current 
customers. Moreover, it is important to reassure consumers about their choice. Cognitive 
dissonance, i.e. the fact that – due to a choice situation – buyers start to have doubts about 
that choice, should be avoided to enhance brand loyalty.
Brand loyalty
Brand loyalty is defined as the mental commitment or relation between a consumer and a 
brand. But there are different types of brand loyalty. Repeat purchase is not the same as 
brand loyalty. The former is often the result of habit or routine buying rather than of brand 
preference or brand loyalty. Instead of evaluating alternatives and choosing a new brand for 
every new purchase, in low-involvement, fast-moving packaged goods consumers tend to 
buy the same brands again without having a commitment to the brand. This is how brand 
habits develop. By always using and buying the same brands, a positive attitude towards 
those brands is initiated. Longitudinal tracking in the USA, UK and Germany has shown 
that brand loyalty is not a characteristic of a brand but of a product category. Brands with a 
higher market share in that category have a higher ‘loyalty’ because of their higher penetra-
tion rate and not necessarily because the emotional bond with the customer is better. Brand 
‘loyalty’ can indeed be the result of habit formation.66

MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS OBJECTIVES     159
service recovery depends on customers’ fairness perception (i.e. the extent to which they perceive themselves as 
being treated fairly compared with other customers; the extent to which they perceive that the output is in balance 
with the input) and attribution of accountability (i.e. the perceived causes of success or failure, who is to blame).68 
Research on recovery management has usually measured satisfaction after service failure of the duped customer in 
a one-to-one relationship. With the growing use of the Internet, everybody can post a negative comment online, 
for everyone with an Internet connection to read. Negative online WOM (also called electronic word-of-mouth, or 
eWOM) by a dissatisfied customer due to a service failure can have serious consequences, as this can harm brand 
image, companies’ reputations and consumers’ attitudes and purchase intentions.69 Thus, it is one of the major 
challenges for companies to develop appropriate response strategies to negative eWOM.70 When online reviews 
are read by so many potential customers, it is critical not only to satisfy the initial client, but also to remove barriers 
with the readers of these online reviews. People who intend to buy a service are likely to reconsider their decision 
after reading negative reviews, especially when these potential customers realise that the organisation does not 
respond properly to these negative comments.
In a Belgian study, prospective customers’ perceived trust, attitudes and intentions were measured following 
organisational responses to consumer review sets varying in their degree of negativity.71 Using a 3 (positive, neutral, 
negative online review set) * 6 (online managerial response to reviews: no reaction, refutation, apology, apology 
and promise that it will not happen again, apology and compensation, apology by promise and compensation) full 
factorial, between-subjects design, the study investigates how a company (in this case, a restaurant) should react to 
counter different degrees of negative online WOM, and what kind of response is advisable to regain the trust and 
business of prospective customers.
When the number of positive reviews outweighs the number of negative reviews, the results showed that there 
are no significant differences in terms of perceived trust, attitude and purchase intention between the different 
response strategies. Due to the fact that the negative WOM is outnumbered by positive comments, the readers 
believe that the service failure would not reoccur, thus offering an apology or even compensation to the dissatis-
fied customer would not enhance the purchase intention of the reader. Based on the social validation theory,72 
the reader may attribute the accountability to the complaining customers, instead of the service provider: ‘some 
people are just naggers’. When the numbers of positive and negative reviews are equal, it is more difficult to assign 
accountability and thus to evaluate whether justice is served. The results revealed that both the apology and 
promise strategy and the apology, promise and compensation response result in a significantly higher perception 
of trust than refutation. The combination of an apology and a promise also results in the most positive attitude 
and purchase intention score. These results indicate that the apology–promise response significantly enhances 
trust, attitude and purchase intention. However, offering compensation on top of an apology and a promise does 
not significantly improve attitude and purchase intention. According to the justice theory, perceived distributional 
justice will be optimal when there is a balance between the input and the output. When the outcome of the 
recovery is more substantial than the damage experienced, people may feel guilty and less comfortable about 
accepting compensation. As the opinion of the customers is divided, it is possible that the reader is not sure who is 
accountable and perceives the failure as less severe. Assurance of a fair service in the future is enough to enhance 
the perceived trust, attitude and purchase intention of the prospective customer. When the number of dissatis-
fied customers is higher than the number of satisfied ones, it is easy to blame the service provider for the failure. 
The findings showed that, compared with the refutation strategy, the apology and compensation strategy and the 
apology, promise and compensation strategy significantly enhance the perceived trust in the manager. The apol-
ogy, promise and compensation strategy results in significantly more positive attitude and intention scores than no 
reaction, refutation and even the apology responses.
Overall, the findings suggest that different response strategies are needed depending on the ratio of the 
positive and negative reviews, to increase the perceived trust, attitude and purchase intention of readers of 
online reviews. When the reviews are mostly positive, no reaction is needed to counter the few negative com-
ments. When the balance is neutral, an apology combined with a promise that the failure will not happen again 
appears to be the appropriate thing to do. Offering compensation in this situation is found to be unnecessary 
(from the bystander’s perspective). Finally, when the majority of reviews are negative, not only an apology, 
but also a promise and compensation are desirable to convince the readers that the service is actually worth 
considering.

160     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Instead of focusing solely on higher market penetration rates, many high-penetration 
brands are now using advertising campaigns to encourage their loyal consumers to use the 
brand more frequently, as well as suggesting new ways to use the brand or new situations 
in which it can be consumed. The more frequent use of a brand may be a cost-effective way 
to build sales. Research therefore argues that when dealing with brands with a high degree 
of market penetration, consumption intentions are more likely to capture consumption-
related responses (and success of a campaign) than attitudes towards the brand or purchase 
intentions. Volume estimates would then best approximate the actual consumption of heavy 
users and likelihood estimates are best used with light users or with infrequently consumed 
brands.73
Of course, not all communications objectives should be present in a communications 
plan or campaign. A marketer should choose which of the above goals is most appropriate in 
the market and communications situation. Marketers will therefore need a clear view based 
on situation analysis and prior research among the target audience to decide which goals 
a campaign should focus upon. If awareness levels are low, they should focus on that goal; 
if preference is a problem, the campaign should stress liking. Brand awareness and brand 
attitude will always be part of the goals, as both effects should be maintained in every com-
munications campaign. As these objectives should be quantified to make them measurable, 
marketing communications objectives could be: to increase the percentage of unaided recall 
or aided recognition among the target group; to increase the number of target consumers 
preferring the brand above the competitive brands; to stimulate current buyers to stay loyal 
and purchase the products again or buy them more frequently; and to encourage non-buyers 
to try the brand for the first time. The number of people in each step of the hierarchy of 
objectives can be expected to decrease, as is illustrated in Figure 4.6.74
The DAGMAR model has the merit that, instead of sales goals which are hard to correlate 
with communications expenditures, other quantifiable measures for effectiveness, such as 
awareness and image ratings, are introduced. These other measures are assumed to be inter-
mediate effects, and thus indicators of future sales. An increase in awareness and brand rat-
ings would be ahead of sales increases. However, in practice it can be seen that awareness and 
image ratings are highly associated with usage, but that sales fluctuate more than awareness 
Figure 4.6  Percentage of the target group in each stage of the DAGMAR model

STAGES IN THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE AND MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS OBJECTIVES     161
and image ratings. Attitude changes were even found to follow behaviour changes and can 
be considered to be caused by them.75 This change in the communications effects hierarchy 
was extensively described earlier (see Chapter 3) (e.g. the Foote–Cone–Belding or FCB grid).
Further criticism of the DAGMAR model was formulated by Ehrenberg.76 He states that 
there is no evidence that consumers experience a strong desire or conviction before they 
purchase a product or a service. The traditional model is a conversion model, i.e. turning 
non-users into users, whereas advertising is directed at experienced consumers. Jones77 and 
Ehrenberg present an alternative theory: the ATR model (awareness–trial–reinforcement). 
Marketing communications first arouse awareness, then induce consumers towards a first 
trial purchase and then reassure and reinforce those users after their first purchase. Accord-
ing to Ehrenberg, involvement is basically product category involvement and very rarely 
brand involvement. Consequently, the goal of marketing communications is to create or 
recreate brand awareness and to nudge brand choice during purchases. Marketing communi-
cations are almost never directed at so-called virgin non-users as is implied in the DAGMAR 
model, but rather to consumers with prior experience of different brands. This is also true 
in the case of price promotions. Most buyers have already bought the brand before. Even 
when new or unfamiliar brands are promoted, they are rarely chosen.78
Stages in the product life cycle and marketing communications 
objectives79
The choice of the most appropriate communications goals depends on a number of factors 
that originate in the marketing strategy and the situation analysis. One of the more impor-
tant factors in choosing objectives is the phase of the life cycle of a brand or a product. In 
this section, different strategies for different life stages are explored. They are summarised 
in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7  Stages in the product life cycle and communications objectives

162     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Introduction
A company that is marketing a completely new product will have to develop the market. 
Consumers will have to learn what the new product is about: which needs will be fulfilled 
by the product and what the differences are compared with the products that the consumers 
were used to before the innovation or launch of the new product or brand. The major com-
munications objectives in this market situation will be creating category need (explaining 
which needs are better fulfilled with the innovation), brand awareness and brand knowledge. 
With daily consumed goods, consumers will have to be persuaded to try the new product. 
The communications strategy has to stress the basic selling points, i.e. the central functional 
advantages of the products.
For instance, the R8 was Audi’s first entry into the high-end sports car market. In a market 
dominated by the Porsche 911, the R8 was to establish Audi as the German sports car, achieve 
the number 2 spot and bolster the Audi brand. The R8 contains Audi innovations that have 
changed motor sports and car manufacturing in key ways. The communications centred on 
the idea of the R8 as innovative and an embodiment of the brand’s technological compe-
tence. They promoted consumer interest that reflected on the brand as a whole, providing 
convincing evidence that this same technological competence and innovative energy goes into 
every single car. In the year of its launch, the R8 topped the rankings for the most popular 
sports car. It has closed the gap on the Porsche 911, and has energised the Audi brand.80
Most introductions are new brand launches rather than real product innovations. Evi-
dently, in this case it is not necessary to communicate the central functional product features 
as consumers are aware of them from their experience with other brands. The goals are to 
create brand awareness and support brand image connotations. This is done by associating 
a brand with a certain projected lifestyle. When Nivea first launched the colour cosmetic 
sub-brand Nivea Beauté onto the European market in 1997, the objective was to utilise the 
Nivea core competencies of skin care expertise and emotional values to build a care-based 
decorative cosmetic brand focusing on products offering gentle formulae and classic colours 
in the eye, nail, lip and face segments. By 2000 stronger focus had to be placed on category-
specific drivers such as modernity, new colours, fashion trends and innovative products to 
cope with the continued pressure from local competitors, global heavyweight L’Oréal Per-
fection and the US top brand Maybelline, using heavy advertising investments to support 
a global rollout after merging with Jade (Germany, Austria and Switzerland) and Gemey 
(France and Belgium). Apart from TV ads spreading the ‘the most beautiful me’ message, 
the print communications were especially important in demonstrating colour and fashion 
competence. In Germany and France, Nivea Beauté was the only brand in 2000 notably to 
improve brand image values on all levels. Not only the core Nivea values but also category 
drivers such as ‘colours are modern and up to date’ saw improvements. Brand likeability, 
brand usage and brand awareness also improved after the campaign.81 
A study82 on what kinds of communications stimulate sales of new products came up 
with four factors. It should be clearly communicated that it is a new product and is thus dif-
ferent from other products. This difference should be specifically linked to the category such 
as ‘the refreshing soft drink’ or ‘the strongest mint’. Thirdly, differences in characteristics are 
not enough; they should be translated into real benefits for the consumer and communicated 
in that way. The final important factor is the support given to that beneficial point of differ-
ence. Some objective endorsements should give consumers the reason why a certain claim 
should be believed. Typical endorsements are demonstrations, scientific evidence, celebrity 
endorsements, testimonials of experts or ‘normal’ users in a slice-of-life setting.
Growth
In the growth stage, a different situation leads to other strategies. Consumers are aware of 
the brand, the product and the most important characteristics and features. Other brands 
have entered the market with a comparable offer. Communications strategies in this stage 
of the product life cycle will be aimed at defending the brand’s position against possible 

STAGES IN THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE AND MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS OBJECTIVES     163
competitive attacks. Marketers will have to create brand preference by emphasising the right 
product features and benefits to differentiate the brand from competitors and position it 
as unique.
Maturity
A brand in the mature stage of its life cycle has to cope with strong competition in a market 
that is scarcely growing. This implies that an increase in the return of one manufacturer will 
be reflected in a decrease in a competitor’s revenues. Communications strategies will focus 
on increasing the brand loyalty of consumers. Customers should be induced to be less open 
to the advantages of competing brands. There are six possible communications objectives 
in this particular product life-cycle stage:
● High spontaneous brand awareness, top-of-mind awareness.
● Claim a clear and unique brand benefit, a characteristic on which the brand is better than 
competing brands.
● If there are no or only small product differences, stressing a lower price might be a good strategy.
● Get attention by offering small product innovations.
● Reinforce the psycho-social meaning for product categories such as cigarettes, beer and 
coffee. These brands differ very little in functional characteristics but the experience of 
the brands by consumer groups might be very different. The strategy of these brands is 
positioning by supporting the transformational meaning of a brand.
● Communications strategies could also be more defensive in this stage of the product life 
cycle. Current customers should be reassured of their choice and their positive experience 
of and satisfaction with the brand.
Until 1954, Marlboro was a cigarette for women: it had no national distribution and a small share of the market. 
Philip Morris then developed a new filter. Most filter cigarettes were thought to be directed to women, but the 
Marlboro filter cigarette seemed to be appreciated by male smokers too. The advertising professional Leo Burnett 
therefore advised Marlboro to position the brand as a cigarette for real men. After trying out some less successful 
symbols, Burnett and Philip Morris chose the symbol that was mostly associated with virility: a cowboy. Consumer 
response was extraordinary with exploding market shares in the USA and all over the world as a result.
Business insight
Repositioning a mature brand
Decline
When manufacturers are confronted with declining products or brands and decide to milk or 
harvest the brand, they will probably turn to sales promotions such as prizes and lotteries. 
If they decide to renew the life of the declining product or brand (and believe in life-cycle 
stretching), they can use the following strategies:
● communicate an important product adaptation or change;
● draw attention to new applications or moments of use (e.g. beer as a recipe ingredient 
instead of as a drink);
● increase the frequency of use;
● attract new target groups (e.g. Bacardi Breezer for youngsters).

164     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Coral (Robijn in the Netherlands) is a light-duty detergent brand, long established in 
Germany, the Netherlands, Austria, Belgium, France, Switzerland and more recently in 
Sweden, Finland and Norway. Germany and the Netherlands represent two-thirds of global 
sales. Coral had a stable market share over time and nothing had been done to create a 
dynamic over the last decade, resulting in a drastically ageing consumer profile, with a core 
group of people aged 50 and over. To ensure a future for the brand, Coral had to recruit, 
and create a strong bond with, young European women between 25 and 35 years old. This 
target group has absolutely no interest in washing, as they are certainly not housewives. 
Coral had to find another value that would speak emotionally to this young target group. 
Research showed Lever Fabergé, the company behind Coral, that clothes reflect personality, 
self-expression and self-confidence to young women. Hence, taking care of clothes is taking 
care of themselves. As black and dark clothes represent one-third of a modern woman’s 
wardrobe, Coral decided to launch the first washing specialist for black clothes: Coral Black 
Velvet. In this way Coral was no longer a detergent, but an essential fashion accessory 
helping young women to take care of their precious clothes. In order to demonstrate that 
Coral Black Velvet could be part of the strong emotional relationship between clothes and 
women, Lever used a media strategy that created contacts in locations where young women 
care about clothes, appearance and fashion: women’s magazines, parties, fashion shows 
and bars. In Germany, Coral’s share of market moved from 3.8% to 6.2% in six months; in 
the Netherlands, Robijn moved from a share of 9.6% to 14.2% in the same period. Because 
of the huge success of Coral Black Velvet, soon several ‘me-toos’ were introduced on the 
German fabrics market.83
To win business in the management consulting, technology services and outsourcing market, topping the con-
sideration list is crucial. Accenture’s communications had to help it own the category in a distinctive, relevant 
and compelling way, and capture the attention and consideration of a busy, frequently travelling, international 
audience.
The campaign ‘We know what it takes to be a Tiger’ was aimed at the demanding and results-driven ‘change 
drivers’ who occupy the ‘C-Suite’ (i.e. CEO, COO, CFO, etc.) in the world’s largest companies. Business-wise, the 
campaign needed to increase Accenture’s brand valuation year on year. It needed to help Accenture to increase 
revenue, achieve higher margins and deepen existing client relationships. Next to these objectives, the follow-
ing communications goals were set: increase advertising awareness and beat competition on cost per awareness; 
double the consideration for Accenture among the advertising-aware in core markets; increase association with 
key brand personality traits; and own the concept of ‘high performance delivered’. To own this benefit, the idea of 
‘high performance delivered’ was created to brand the unique type of success that Accenture can help deliver for 
its clients. To bring this to life creatively, Tiger Woods was employed to be the personification of high performance. 
Tiger Woods (for golfers and non-golfers alike) gave Accenture’s campaign great power. The campaign ran in out-of-
home (e.g. airports), print, TV, radio and online media in France, Germany, Spain, Italy and the UK. The campaign was 
Accenture’s most successful to date, doubling consideration in each of the core markets. Retention was excellent –  
all of Accenture’s top 100 clients have now been working with the company for at least five years. The advertising 
awareness goal was met and Accenture widened the gap over a key competitor in the UK, France and Italy.84 This 
strategy was abandoned when Tiger Woods ran into severe problems in his personal life.
Business insight
Accenture’s ‘We know what it takes to be a Tiger’ campaign

HOW THE COMMUNICATIONS BUDGET AFFECTS CAMPAIGN RESULTS     165
Campaign budget
Restructuring and rationalisation have dominated companies’ policies during the recession 
years of the new millennium. Companies tend to save most in those expenses that may be influ-
enced in the short term. Hence, communications budgets are often first in line to be reviewed. 
However, the communications budget level is one of the determinants of the communications 
mix effectiveness and thus of company sales and profits. Determining and allocating commu-
nication campaign funds is one of the primary problems and strategic issues facing a marketer. 
Deciding on the communications budget is not a one-off activity. The financial resources of a 
company or brand influence the communications programme, and plans should be continu-
ously assessed against financial feasibility at all stages in the planning process.
There is no ideal formula for making the best budgeting decision. Deciding on the budget 
requires experience and judgement. The budgeting process should be well considered and 
based on concrete marketing and communications objectives defined in the communica-
tions plan. These goals, together with knowledge of past budgets and their effectiveness and 
competitive actions, will be an important input for the budgeting process. The second step 
is to apply one of the budgeting methods discussed in the next section. Using more than one 
method could help a marketer set minimum and maximum budgets which will be a guide to 
the rest of the process, such as planning concrete actions. The final step is to evaluate and 
possibly revise the budget and objectives, and adapt them to specific circumstances.85 It is 
better to scale down the objectives (for instance, to reach a smaller target in a more effec-
tive way than was planned) than to try to reach the same objectives with a smaller budget. 
Finally, budgeting decisions should always take into account the long- and short-term effects 
of communications efforts on sales and profits.
How the communications budget affects campaign results
To be able to assess the size of the budget, it is important to understand how communica-
tions efforts influence results. There is a long tradition of studying the relation between 
campaign budgets and sales. Sales response models depict the relationship between these two 
factors. Figure 4.8 shows a concave sales response model. In this model it is hypothesised 
that sales follow the law of diminishing returns: the incremental value of added communica-
tions expenditures decreases. An explanation for this relation is that, once every potential 
Figure 4.8  Concave sales response model

166     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
buyer is reached with the communications mix, they either will or will not buy, and beyond 
that optimal point prolonged communications will not change the non-buyers’ minds. This 
model suggests that smaller budgets may be as effective as much bigger ones.86
Another way to model sales responses to communications efforts is the S-shaped relation 
­(Figure 4.9). This model assumes that, initially, when the level of effort is low, there is no com-
munications effect at all. Even if the communications effort is zero, there will be a certain level 
of sales, and a minimum investment is needed to enjoy any results of the communications pro-
gramme and to increase sales. When that level is reached, sales will start to increase with incre-
mental communications expenditures. The higher the investments, the greater the additional sales 
will be. At point A, increased investments start to lead to smaller changes in sales. It is impossible, 
even with very high communications investments, to exceed a certain saturation level of sales. 
This is due to the market and the cultural and competitive environment. Exorbitant communica-
tions investments may even lead to negative effects, such as irritation and consumer resistance.87
However, estimating the relationship between the communications budget or effort and 
sales is not as simple and straightforward as sales response functions suggest. First of all, 
marketing communications are not the only marketing mix instrument influencing sales. 
Prices, product line decisions and changes in the distribution strategy will also influence 
sales. Furthermore, an effective marketing mix implies that synergy and interaction exist 
between the various marketing tools. In a well-designed marketing plan each tool reinforces 
another. A communications plan may lead to better results if the distribution strategy is 
optimised or the price is lowered. A rearrangement of the product line may result in more 
effective communications, etc. As a result of this interaction, it is very difficult to isolate the 
effect of the communications budget on commercial results. Furthermore, sales response 
models do not take the effect of competitive actions and environmental factors into account.
Finally, and at least as importantly, communications efforts may have both an imme-
diate short-term and a long-term effect on sales and market share. Traditional theories 
consider communications as a long-term investment in goodwill.88 Cumulative investments 
(‘adstock’) are needed to lead to sales returns, and the long-term effects of communications 
efforts are much higher than the short-term effects.89 This traditional view is challenged by 
John Philip Jones,90 who proposed a theory on the short-term effects of advertising, claiming 
that stating that sales are mainly influenced by accumulated advertising campaigns of the 
past are mistaken. He tried to prove that immediate communications effects on sales exist. 
According to Jones, the whole idea of long-term effects was due to a lack of scanner data. 
All other advertising testing methods were too irregular and too slow to discover short-term 
effects. Fluctuations in two-monthly data were explained as seasonal effects. Promotion 
effects, on the other hand, were traceable and thus researchers deduced that promotions had 
short-term effects and advertising long-term effects. This belief had serious repercussions 
on the ratio of advertising to promotions, because marketers confronted with recession and 
Figure 4.9  The S-shaped sales response model

HOW THE COMMUNICATIONS BUDGET AFFECTS CAMPAIGN RESULTS     167
mature markets chose short-term immediate effects on sales instead of long-term image-
building advertising. Jones used single-source data91 relating advertising exposure (a test 
group with ad confrontation and a control group without ad exposure based on TV viewing 
behaviour tracking) with scanner data of the same test subjects. Differences in purchases 
between the two groups were considered to be a measurement of ad effectiveness.
In the survey, there were 142 brands, of which 78 were advertised. Calculations were made 
on 110 000 observations. Jones introduced a new measurement tool called STAS (short-term 
advertising strength). The baseline STAS for brand X is the share of brand X in the budget 
of families who have not seen an ad for brand X in a seven-day period before purchase. Jones 
then calculated the share of brand X in the budget of families who were exposed to an ad at 
least once during the same period. This is called ‘stimulated STAS’. The difference between 
baseline STAS and stimulated STAS is the ‘STAS differential’, expressing the immediate 
sales-generating effect of an ad campaign. STAS is calculated as an index by multiplying 
the ratio stimulated STAS/baseline STAS by 100. A brand with a market share of 6% with-
out advertising and a share of 9% after one week of advertising had a STAS (differential) 
of 9 , 6 * 100 = 150.92 Based on these calculations, Jones discovered that 70% of all ad 
campaigns were able to generate immediate advertising effects. Mostly these effects were 
small and temporary. When looking at the distribution in deciles of differential scores, 20% 
had good differential scores, 30% on average a positive score, 30% no definite positive or 
negative score, and 20% had a negative score and were not effective in beating competing 
ad campaigns. Only 46% of brands created a long-term effect, defined as an increase in 
market share compared with that of the previous year. Jones concluded that when a brand 
is not able to hold its STAS differential constant, this is often caused by lack of continuity 
in its advertising campaigns.
He also came to the rather surprising conclusion that the first exposure of an ad causes 
the largest part of sales returns, and that additional exposures will only lead to small effects 
on sales. The sales response curve would then be a concave degressive function (Figure 4.8).93 
The most effective frequency of an ad campaign according to Jones is one single exposure.
Jones believes that long-term effects will only come about when an ad campaign is also 
effective in the short term, and does not believe in the sleeper effects of marketing com-
munications. This statement is radically opposed to the widespread belief that a higher ad 
frequency is needed to gain any effects on sales. Therefore, Jones’s statements on short-term 
communications effects are very controversial, and may be an over-reaction to the wide-
spread belief that there are mainly carry-over effects of communications efforts. In reality, 
both short-term and long-term effects are important.94
A frequently used and simple sales response model, taking long-term and short-term effects into account, is the 
following (numbers are illustrative):
St = 250 + 1.4At + 0.6St - 1
St = sales in period t
St - 1 = sales in period t - 1
At = advertising in period t
250 = constant term expressing that even if there were no advertising at all in period t or in the past, sales 
would still be €250
Research insight
Calculating the short-term and long-term effects of advertising

168     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Communications budgeting methods
Table 4.6 lists various communications budgeting methods.
Marginal analysis
The basic principle of marginal budgeting analysis is: to invest resources as long as extra 
expenses are compensated by higher extra returns. Marketers should invest in communications 
efforts as long as their marginal revenue exceeds the marginal communications cost (optimum 
point indicated in Figure 4.10). Profit is calculated as the difference between gross margin and 
communications expenditures. It is clear that sales and gross margin will increase with higher 
communications efforts, but will level off, which leads to lower profits and eventually loss. This 
analysis has the advantage of estimating the effect of communications on profits, and derives a 
normative rule of optimal communication efforts. However, the analysis remains largely theo-
retical because of the problems involved in estimating the sales response relation. This method 
assumes perfect data that are usually difficult to collect. As in other modelling approaches to 
budgeting, the model does not take the effect of other marketing tools or competitive action 
into account, and the potential long-term effect of marketing communications is ignored. As 
a result, marginal analysis is seldom used as a practical budgeting method.95
In addition to the theoretical marginal approach, there are a number of techniques that 
are relatively easy to use without requiring difficult calculations. Some of the techniques that 
practitioners commonly use when developing communications budgets are the following.
Inertia
The inertia budgeting method is to keep budgets constant year on year, while ignoring the 
market, competitive actions or consumer opportunities. Needless to say, this is not a very 
strategic method.
Arbitrary allocation
Again, this is one of the simplest of all budgeting methods, but also one of the least 
appropriate. Whatever the general manager or managing director decides will be imple-
mented. This very subjective way of deciding how to spend promotional funds does, of 
Marginal analysis
Inertia
Arbitrary allocation
Affordability
Percentage of sales
Competitive parity
Objective and task
Table 4.6  Communications budgeting methods
The short-term effect of advertising is the coefficient of At. Every €1000 invested in advertising results in €1400 
extra sales. The coefficient of St - 1 summarises the effect of all advertising efforts in the past. The long-term effect 
of advertising on sales is calculated as 1.4/(1 - 0.6) = 3.5. This means that, in the long run, every €1000 invested 
in advertising results in 3500 extra sales.

COMMUNICATIONS BUDGETING METHODS     169
course, lack critical analysis and overall strategy. The technique is mostly used by small  
companies where the managing director’s personal preferences (e.g. sponsoring a golf event) 
and contacts over-rule more strategic processes that take the marketing and competitive 
environment and customer wants into account.
Affordability method
In this method ‘leftover’ resources, after all input costs (i.e. human resources, operational 
and financial costs), are invested in communications. This method is often used in small and 
medium-size enterprises. Marketing communications are considered to be a pure cost rather 
than an investment and are mostly not part of the strategic plan, neither are any concrete com-
munications goals defined. As a result, it is a technique without any focus on strategic market 
or brand issues. This approach will never lead to optimal budgeting, since some opportunities 
will be lost because of lack of investment-proneness (i.e. the readiness to invest).
Percentage of sales
In this technique, budgets are defined as a percentage of the projected sales of the next year. 
An alternative to this technique is to take the communications outlays of the past year as a 
basis and then add a certain percentage, based on the projected sales growth of the following 
year. These techniques are very popular in many companies due to their ease of use. The 
percentages used by companies differ. Some sources indicate that they fluctuate around an 
average of 5%.96 Other authors speak of percentages between 0.5% and 10%.97 Although 
Figure 4.10  The marginal analysis

170     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
they are commonly used and, like the affordability method, ensure that costs do not threaten 
profits, these budgeting methods have some notable disadvantages. The percentage of sales 
budgeting method could lead to overspending in markets in which these kinds of investments 
are not needed and at the same time communications budgets might be too small where 
they might have had a major impact. Decreasing returns on sales will lead to smaller com-
munications budgets, which will certainly not help to change the negative sales evolution. 
Communications budgets should not be the result of sales but rather should create demand 
and thus push up sales. This technique also defends the theoretical insight that sales are 
dominated by communications investments and that other marketing mix elements do not 
have an impact on sales. This technique does not consider any potential sales growth areas 
and will limit sales performance.
Another common way of using the percentage of sales method is to take the sales of the 
past year instead of projected sales, but that is even worse. This method uses past perfor-
mance as a ceteris paribus situation. Therefore, it is unlikely that the company will make 
progress (unless a lucky wind changes the competitive environment or consumer demands 
in the right direction).
A final variant of this method is to take a percentage of profits instead of sales. This has 
the same disadvantages, as an existing brand might need less advertising than a recently 
launched brand which is not making any profit at all during the first year. Losses will lead 
to cancelling communications budgets and thus to abandoning all hope instead of investing 
in brand communications to make them profitable again.
Competitive parity
Competitive parity budgeting means that companies look at the budgets competitors spend 
on communications and then copy their budgets. The logic of this method lies in the fact 
that the collective behaviour of a market will not skew much of the budget optimum. The 
advantage of this method is that the market will not be destabilised by over-investments or 
extremely low communications budgets. This method is often used in fast-moving consumer 
goods where sales are believed to be highly influenced by advertising and communications 
spending.
Nevertheless, the theoretical basis of this method has some disadvantages. The underlying 
assumption is again that communication spendings are the only variable that influences sales. 
Furthermore, a company assumes that the competitor’s communications budget was set in 
an effective and efficient way. Lastly, this method implies that the resources, operational meth-
ods, opportunities and objectives of competitors used as a benchmark are exactly the same 
as those of the company itself. These are three quite dangerous assumptions. Companies 
may have other market definitions or other targets, leading to other activities and products in 
other stages of their life cycle, which make comparisons a difficult and unreliable technique 
for financial decisions. The parity method is also based on historical data and not on com-
petitors’ plans for the future. Believing that competitors will adhere every year to the same 
communications efforts is probably not the best analytical way to make marketing plans.
Companies can also base their budgeting decisions on competitive considerations with-
out copying the competitors’ budgets. Paradigms were developed for marketers wanting 
to assess the effects of their share of voice (SOV) on their share of market (SOM). Share 
of voice is the ratio of own communications investments divided by the communications 
investments of all brands in the same product category or market. A study on the impact 
of advertising of competitors with comparable products on market share, not taking into 
account the advertising quality or any formal or content characteristics of advertising, came 
to the following conclusions.98 Ad spendings will only influence market share (SOM) when 
there is a different advertising intensity over a long period. Marginal budget changes do not 
affect SOM. If competitors aggressively augment their communications budgets, this can 
be countered by following with increasing communications expenditure. If, however, there 
is no reaction to this attack, an increase in SOV will lead to a higher SOM. This means that 

COMMUNICATIONS BUDGETING METHODS     171
market leaders will have to track the expenditures of competitors and react to changes to 
prevent them from gaining market share.
As shown in Figure 4.11, the largest and the smallest player in the market are located above 
the 45° line. This means that their SOV is smaller than their SOM. The follower in a market is 
located in a position where it has a higher SOV than market share. Leaders enjoy economies of 
scale and have a smaller advertising cost per unit. The smallest players should focus on niches 
because they do not have the resources to compete with the leader and are only profitable if 
they concentrate on specific niches and forget growth ambitions. If followers want to increase 
their market share, they will have to increase their SOV above their SOM. This will put pressure 
on their profitability, which could be dangerous for their competitive positions. This is why 
stuck-in-the-middle positions are very difficult to hold and market consolidation will lead to 
two or three large leaders, like Coca-Cola and Pepsi in the cola market. These leaders will have 
to compete with local or national strong brands (niche players). A market will stay in equilib-
rium as long as the market leaders keep their SOV within a certain range. Market shares and 
positions will only change with a minimum of 20 or 30 percentage-point differences in SOV.
In Figure 4.12 a matrix is proposed with strategic recommendations for communications 
budgets in different market situations.
The relation between SOV and SOM in different market situations was also studied by 
Jones.99 Brands with a higher SOM than SOV are called profit-taking brands. Brands with 
the opposite relation are investment brands. In his study of 23 countries, data on 1096 
brands in repeat-purchase packaged goods markets were collected (Table 4.7).
In Table 4.7, it can be seen that the percentage of profit-takers among brands with a small 
market share is low. The higher the market share, the more profit-taking brands will appear: 
59% of brands with a market share of 16% or more have an SOV that is lower than their 
SOM. Some explanations can be offered to explain this phenomenon. Small brands have to 
invest in communications to create brand awareness. Larger and usually older brands are 
often being ‘harvested’. Communications budgets are cut in order to make the brand more 
profitable. Among brands with market shares larger than 13%, harvesting could be a valid 
explanation for their profit-taking status. Twenty-eight per cent of profit-taking brands are 
able to charge a price premium and two-thirds of profit-takers are able to gain market share. 
Economies of scale in advertising are explained by Jones as a tendency for popular brands 
to benefit from above-average purchase and repurchase frequency. He calls this phenomenon 
‘penetration supercharge’ and illustrates his theory with Unilever’s Lux brand. Lux is sold in 
Figure 4.11  Relation between SOM and SOV in market dynamics
Source: Reprinted by permission of Harvard Business Review. Based on ‘Ad spending: growing market share’ by Schroer, J.C. 68(1), 
44-8 1990. Copyright © 1990 by the Harvard Business Publishing. All rights reserved.

172     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
30 countries and has an average market share of 17% and an average SOV of 14%. Unilever 
is able to keep the market share stable and occasionally enjoys sales increases. In some mar-
kets, Lux tried to economise by lowering SOV. In markets where SOV was below 12%, SOM 
began to fragment. The conclusion is that the under-investment barrier is 5% (17 - 12%).
The relation between SOM and SOV provides a tool for companies to compare their com-
munications spend with the budgets of other players in the market. This allows marketers to 
make a better analysis. The average SOV helps to estimate the maximum underinvestment 
that big brands can afford without losing too much of their market position.
All brands
Profit-taking brands% in total
Investment brands% in total
Total
1096
44
56
SOM 3% and less
224
27
73
SOM 4%–6%
218
37
63
SOM 7%–9%
153
41
59
SOM 10%–12%
112
45
55
SOM 13%–15%
77
56
44
SOM 16% and more
312
59
41
Source: Reprinted by permission of Harvard Business Review. Based on ‘Ad spending: maintaining market share’ by Jones, J.P., 68(1), 
38-43 1990. Copyright © 1990 by the Harvard Business Publishing; all rights reserved.
Table 4.7  The relation between SOV and SOM
Figure 4.12  SOV effect and strategies for different market positions
Source: Reprinted by permission of Harvard Business Review. Based on ‘Ad spending: growing market share’ by Schroer, J.C. 68(1), 
44-8 1990. Copyright © 1990 by the Harvard Business Publishing. All rights reserved.
Besides sales effects, the result of the marketing communications effort can also be measured in other terms, such 
as brand awareness. In the following graph the efficiency of the advertising campaigns of different banks is analysed. 
On the horizontal axis budgets are measured. The vertical axis shows top-of-mind awareness of bank names. For 
two consecutive years, the relationship between the two factors is shown. The more a bank moves to the upper left 
corner of the graph, the more efficiently it is spending its resources. The analysis also permits a comparison of the 
own company with competitors.
Business insight
Relating budgets to top-of-mind brand awareness

COMMUNICATIONS BUDGETING METHODS     173
Objective and task method
This method is one of the least arbitrary methods, which makes it a difficult technique to 
use. It differs from the other methods in that it starts from communications objectives and 
the resources that are needed to reach these planned goals. All needed investments are then 
added and this will lead to the overall communications budget. It requires more strategic 
planning and investment analysis and is therefore clearly superior to all the other methods. 
Moreover, budgets can be evaluated each year, and this feedback will lead to improved 
decision-making and more efficient budgeting in the future. The difficulty in this method 
lies in the estimation of profit impacts of different communications actions and tactics. 
Therefore it is of the utmost importance that historical data on, for instance, sales promo-
tion responses in each market are stored. But estimating all costs of every action needs some 
effort and often the final costs of an action are difficult to foresee.100
A 1993 US study showed that 40% of the respondents claimed to use the objective-and-
task method, and 27% used the percentage-of-sales method. The other respondents used 
a variety of models based on a combination of budgeting techniques.101 An earlier study 
indicated that the percentage of sales method is the most commonly used communications 
budgeting technique in the US (50% in consumer goods markets and 28% in business-to-
business markets). Spending what is left after all other costs are covered is also popular (30% 
in consumer markets and 26% in business markets), and the arbitrary budgeting method is 
frequently used in smaller companies and business-to-business contexts (12% in consumer 
markets and 34% in business markets).102
Experimental budgeting implies using different budgets on different locations or in separate markets. Compar-
ing results of split-run test groups will allow a company to gain insights that will enable it to identify optimal 
communications budgets. Of course, as in every split-run experiment, test groups should be fully comparable 
Business insight
Experimental budgeting
Top-of-mind awareness and advertising budgets

174     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Factors influencing budgets
A number of factors may influence the budgeting decision or may call for budget adjust-
ments.104 They are summarised in Figure 4.13.
The smaller the targeted markets, the easier it is to reach the targets in a cost-efficient 
way. Spending too much in small markets leads to saturation, and overspends are likely to 
be ineffective. Larger markets imply more dispersed target groups which are more difficult 
to reach and thus more expensive. When particular markets have higher potential, it may 
be a good idea to allocate more money to these specific markets. Brands with smaller mar-
ket shares and new brands require a high communications budget; larger well-established 
brands and ‘harvested’ brands in the mature stage of their life cycle could do with a lower 
allocation of communications funds.
Some studies105 show that companies and brands with larger market shares have an advan-
tage in communications costs (such as better media space buying, synergy between different 
communications mix elements on different company brands, better media rental rates and 
lower production costs) and can thus spend less money on promotional activities while hav-
ing the same or even better sales. However, other research106 claims that there is no evidence 
that larger companies are able to support their brands with lower advertising costs than 
smaller ones. A number of organisational factors that have a potential influence on the budg-
eting decision can be identified:107 the organisational structure (centralised vs decentralised, 
formalisation and complexity), the use of experts such as consultants, the organisational 
hierarchy, preferences and experiences of decision-makers and decision-influencers, and 
pressure on management to reach certain budgets.
Sometimes it is necessary to make adjustments to the planned budgets during the year or 
during the communications campaign. If sales and profits lag behind projected and budg-
eted figures (planning gap), cutting communications efforts is often the easiest and fastest 
and other possible influential variables should be kept constant. A well-known example of experimental budg-
eting is the case of Budweiser beer.103 Anheuser-Busch, manufacturers of Budweiser, split the USA into 200 
geographic areas. In the experiment test areas were randomly assigned to experimental groups. One of the 
areas, the control group, received a communications budget level which was believed to be the optimal level. 
All other groups received budgets ranging from -100% to +300% of that of the control group. Tests lasted from 
12 to 24 months and were evaluated by sales responses compared with the five-year, seasonally adjusted sales 
trend line. The results of these experiments indicated that the advertising expenditures of Anheuser-Busch 
were too high. Reducing the communications budgets would have only a minor effect on sales. By lowering 
the advertising costs, the total cost per draft Budweiser beer also decreased. This allowed Anheuser-Busch to 
drop the price, which led to increased sales and market share. The Budweiser case demonstrates that experi-
mental budgeting can be very effective and, when overspends are found, budget cuts might lead to increased 
market share.
However, there are some fundamental disadvantages with this method. Firstly, experiments tend to be expensive. 
To test different budget levels it would be necessary to assign an amount of non-optimal budgets. High budgets 
will lead to a spill of resources and low budgets could affect market positions. Moreover, experiments and the data-
gathering process require additional investments. When cutting costs through reducing the number of test groups 
and/or the test period, less accurate and thus less reliable results will be achieved. A second disadvantage is that 
experiments are hard to control and that uncontrollable factors such as competitive actions, distribution influences, 
etc., are likely to skew the experimental settings. It is also very difficult to reach each of the test groups with differ-
ent isolated communications channels and, when regional media are used, communications impacts might not be 
comparable with the traditional national media coverage.

FACTORS INFLUENCING BUDGETS     175
way to increase profits. Of course, this will only have an immediate effect in the short term. 
In the long run this might lead to eroding competitive edges and market and brand posi-
tions. Crisis situations such as troubles with production or distribution might need excep-
tional investments in public relations and crisis communications. Other internal occurrences 
such as financial scandals, strikes, ecological catastrophes, etc., might also demand budget 
adjustments.
Unexpected opportunities or threats in the market might change strategic plans and 
communications budgets, as well as unexpected moves by competitors, new legislation, new 
media and changes in media costs.
Economic recessions will often have serious consequences for communications budgets. 
Consumers spend less money, and shrinking markets mean stronger competitive battles in 
which price is a commonly used weapon. Companies may react in one of two ways with 
regard to their promotional spending. Some try to economise in every way possible. A 
substantial amount of all costs are fixed and cannot be lowered in the short term. Most 
companies are attracted by a budget that is quite easy to bring down: the communications 
budget. Other companies react by increasing their budget, believing that extra investment 
will drive sales up. A crisis is regarded as the ideal moment to establish their position. This 
is called anti-cycle budgeting. Market share is gained during recessions and then defended in 
periods of a booming economy. Some multinationals such as PepsiCo, Coca-Cola, General 
Mills, Kellogg’s and Procter & Gamble have a strong belief in long-term investments in 
marketing communications.
Some companies prepare contingency budgets. These are reserve budgets provided 
for financing quick management actions as necessary. These crisis actions are planned in 
­so-called contingency plans. They stipulate which actions must be taken when, for instance, 
significant drops in sales occur or an important competitor switches to aggressive promo-
tional actions or launches a new product. Reaction time will be substantially lower in such 
cases when all appropriate actions and budgeting have been foreseen.
Figure 4.13  Factors influencing communications budgets
Source: Based on Belch, G.E. and Belch, M.A. (1998) Advertising and Promotion. An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspec-
tive. New York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill.

176     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Budgeting for new brands or products
Although budgeting for existing brands in established product categories is the most com-
mon task for marketers, often they are confronted with the problem of budgeting for a brand 
or product launch. This is even more difficult than the former. Historical data on the budget 
settings that have been successful are not available and consequently easy-to-use schemes as 
discussed above are not appropriate for estimating required budgets.108
The primary budgeting method for launching new brands or products should be the 
objective-and-task method. But given the uncertainty and lack of historical data, this is not 
only a difficult budgeting method but also one that is not risk-free. Therefore, other meth-
ods are good back-ups to compare estimations made earlier. A marketer may, for instance, 
examine the industry advertising-to-sales (A/S) ratio (advertising intensity) for the market 
in which a brand is to be launched. The marketer may decide to set a budget that is higher 
than the industry average in order to make an impact. Doubling the A/S ratio is considered 
a safe guideline for the first year of introduction. In the second year, overspending the ratio 
by 50% should do. Of course, it could be even more informative to make comparisons with 
particular competing brands or products.
Peckham, a consultant with AC Nielsen, developed a rule of thumb for new, fast-moving, 
consumer good brands.109 Peckham’s 1.5 rule recommends setting the SOV of the brand 
to be launched at 1.5 times the desired SOM at the end of the brand’s first two years. A 
limitation of Peckham’s rule is that it is only applicable in markets or product categories 
for which there is a strong correlation between SOV and SOM. A study of 638 firms across 
20 industries110 found a strong relationship between SOV and SOM across a broad range of 
industries for consumer as well as industrial products.
Communication strategies
Once the communication context is analysed, target groups and objectives have been estab-
lished, and the communications budget has been decided upon, a communication strategy 
has to be developed. This strategy should answer the question: what and how to communi-
cate? In other words, a message and a creative strategy should be developed.
Message strategy
What are we going to say to the consumers? The message strategy or communication plat-
form is a very important element of communication strategy since it has to convince consum-
ers. They have to know why they should buy the product, to learn in what way it is special, 
how it is beneficial or advantageous for them, how it can help them, what characteristics it 
has or what benefits and value it offers, etc. In order to answer the question ‘what to com-
municate?’ a thorough understanding of the target group is crucial: what can the product do 
for the target group, what can the product mean to them and how can the product help the 
consumers reach their goals. Therefore, the message cannot be focused on seller objectives, 
but has to start from the target consumers’ motives.111 Some customers see a car just as a 
functional vehicle, a means of getting them from A to B. This target group can perhaps be 
convinced by communicating the brand’s attributes (airbag, engine, etc.) or benefits (reli-
ability, safety, etc.). Other customers do not want to buy a car; they want to buy an image, a 
status. Obviously, communications to the latter group should be different from those to the 
former group. Communicating a lifestyle, an image or a product’s identity might be more 
suitable than telling customers about attributes or benefits. Knowing the problems, prefer-
ences and aspirations of the target group are essential for deciding on the right message.
Furthermore, it is important not to confuse consumers. Therefore, most compa-
nies stick to promoting one unique benefit of their brand, which can be functional or 

COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES     177
non-functional. A functional benefit, also called a unique selling proposition (USP), usu-
ally refers to functional superiority in the sense that the brand offers the best quality, 
the best service, the lowest price, the most advanced technology. For example, Gillette 
is ‘the best a man can get’; there is ‘no better washing machine’ than Miele; Durex 
Avanti ‘gives the most natural feeling’; no card is more accepted than MasterCard, etc. 
A non-functional benefit usually reflects a unique psychological association to consum-
ers and is referred to as an emotional selling proposition (ESP).112 Center Parcs is a state 
of happiness, you buy L’Oréal because ‘you are worth it’ and you buy a PlayStation 3 
because ‘this is living’. Other examples of brands that are promoted on the basis of 
non-functional benefits include Porsche, Rodania, Rolls-Royce, Louis Vuitton, and Van 
Cleef & Arpels.
In order to know which USP or ESP to go for, the advertiser needs to have a clear con-
sumer insight. These are often revealed by qualitative research. For example, for Dove a 
consumer insight was that tiny, perfect models in advertising lower women’s self-esteem. 
Therefore, Dove came up with its real beauty campaign showing normal women of all ages, 
shapes and sizes in an attempt to inspire consumers to feel comfortable with themselves. The 
Luxembourg fixed-line operator, TELE2 AB, was well aware of the fact that heavy phone 
users are sensitive about the cost that the phone represents in their monthly household 
budget. These heavy users would love to call more if they did not have to worry about the 
cost. Therefore, TELE2 positions itself on the promise of providing the ‘best price offer’ and 
the ‘most simple and clear offer’. A pan-European campaign with the slogan ‘TELE2, simply 
phone for less’ proved to be very successful in France, Germany, Italy, Austria, Switzerland 
and the Netherlands.113
A brand’s message platform should thus reflect the core positioning a brand wants to 
establish in the mind of its target customers, and should support the objectives of the cam-
paign. Positioning a brand or product is differentiating it from competitors in the minds of 
consumers.
Positioning strategies
Six basic questions should be asked when creating a market position:114
1.	 What position, if any, do we already have in our customer’s or prospect’s mind?
2.	 What position do we want?
3.	 What companies must be outgunned if we are to establish that position?
4.	 Do we have enough marketing budget to occupy and hold that position?
5.	 Do we have the guts to stick with one consistent positioning strategy?
6.	 Does our creative approach match our positioning strategy?
A frequently used visual tool that helps companies position products and brands is ‘map-
ping’, based on axes representing the dimensions important to consumers. Every product 
or brand is given a score on both dimensions and the map shows which products or brands 
have the same characteristics. Figure 4.14 is a map of the salty snacks market. In the eyes of 
a consumer, there seems to be a big difference between peanuts and cocktail snack nuts. The 
latter are competing with fantasy snacks (snacks in different shapes). There is no product 
considered as natural and different. This is a hole in the market, but to be attractive it should 
be a profitable hole. There are a number of positioning strategies that a company can use.115 
They are summarised in Table 4.8.
Positioning by product attributes and benefits is based on a unique selling proposition 
which makes a company’s brand or product special for the target market. For example, Vidal 
Sassoon Wash&Go (introduced by Procter & Gamble) was the first shampoo to offer a 
unique combination of shampoo and conditioner. Positioning by price/quality means offer-
ing the same or better quality at a lower price than competitors. For instance, Virgin Coke 
offers a ‘good’ coke with a brand image comparable with Coca-Cola and Pepsi but at a lower 
price. Positioning by use or application implies emphasising a specific use or application of 

178     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
the product. For instance, Kellogg’s introduced cereals as a snack at hours other than break-
fast by offering little variety packages that kids can take to school. Positioning by product 
class is an alternative to positioning against another brand, e.g. Eurostar offers a fast train 
connection as an alternative to airline connections. Positioning by product user is associating 
a product with a specific group of users, e.g. Aquarius, a thirst-quenching isotonic drink for 
sporting men and women, is positioning a brand by a group of product users. In positioning 
by competitor, comparative advertising is often used. A well-known example is Avis, which 
uses the slogan ‘we try harder’ to position itself against the market leader in car and truck 
rental, Hertz. The drink 7 UP was positioned as ‘the un-cola’ and became number 3 in the 
soft drinks market. Cultural symbols refer to brand personalities or branding devices such 
as Tony the Tiger (Kellogg’s Frosties), Mr Clean, Captain Iglo, Bibendum (Michelin). These 
symbols are a visual way of successfully differentiating from competitors. The brand person-
ality or cultural symbol often visualises the key benefit of a product. For instance, Mr Clean 
is a powerful, clean symbol; Tony the Tiger gives power and strength.
A company may possibly detect different competitive edges, in which case it will have to 
choose one or more competitive advantages for its positioning strategy. A company can focus 
on one single advantage for a target group. This exclusive unique selling proposition (USP) will 
be easier to remember by the target group, especially in low-involvement buying situations. 
Other companies will stress more than one competitive advantage. This is necessary when 
two or more competitors claim to be the best in the same attributes. Volvo, for example, 
claims to be both safe and durable.
Not all differences with competitors are meaningful for an effective differentiation. Every 
difference could mean an increase in costs to a company, therefore the way a company dif-
ferentiates its products and brands should be well considered. The chosen USP(s) should be 
important to the target group, clearly different from what a competitor is offering, superior, 
easy to communicate, difficult to imitate or copy, affordable for the target group of consum-
ers and profitable for the company.
Figure 4.14  Mapping the salty snack market
● Product attributes or benefits
● Price/quality
● Use or application
● Product class
● Product user
● Competitor
● Cultural symbols
Table 4.8  Positioning strategies

COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES     179
The more claims a company makes about its brands, the greater the risk of disbelief. 
Moreover, the different product benefits should be compatible in a consumer’s mind: a 
super-strong detergent that also claims to be mild for the hands will not have any credibility.
There are three possible positioning mistakes a company or brand can make:
● Underpositioning. A company fails to make a clear differentiation with competitors, 
e.g. Korean car brands such as Kia or Hyundai: how do they position themselves against 
Japanese or European cars?
● Overpositioning. Extreme positioning on one benefit will reduce the number of interested 
consumers, e.g. if IKEA only claimed low prices and not quality (Möbelfakta guarantee, 
for example), it would deter people looking for a durable dining room suite.
● Confusing positioning. Inconsistent communications or an inconsistent choice of dis-
tribution channels would give a customer a confused image of a company or brand. For 
example, bath towels claiming exclusive quality but also sold in hypermarkets will have 
difficulty keeping their positioning.
Developing a positioning strategy
There are seven consecutive steps in the development of a positioning strategy (Table 4.9). 
Firstly, the company has to identify its major competitors. This competition analysis should 
go further than the brands in exactly the same product category, but should also include 
generic competition, i.e. products in different product categories that nevertheless satisfy the 
same need. For instance, a gift box of chocolates (e.g. Ferrero) is competing not only with 
other chocolate gift boxes, but also with wine, champagne and flowers, which people take 
when visiting friends or relations. All possible competitors and their effects and evolutions 
on consumer target group behaviour should be taken into account. Secondly, the consumers’ 
perception of the products and brands of competitors should be assessed. Questions such 
as which attributes or benefits are important in this market segment and how a competitor’s 
product or brand is evaluated on these criteria are important.
● Identification of competitors
● Assessment of the consumers’ perception of competitors
● Determination of positions of competitors
● Analysis of consumers’ preferences
● The positioning decision
● Implementation of the positioning
● Monitoring the position
Table 4.9  Stages in the development of a positioning strategy
One of the options to counter the trend of depleting natural resources and polluting the air is the partial or complete 
shift to electric vehicles. Car manufacturers have started to develop and launch electric cars. They face the challenge 
of developing and positioning a new product type that is responsive to consumer needs. In this context, product 
Research insight
Developing different types of anticipated experience positioning for electric cars

180     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
design and advertising are boundary spanning functions between companies and consumers. Product categories 
and brands are often categorised as either functional (e.g. lawnmowers) or symbolic (e.g. cars).116 A functional 
product possesses mainly product-related or concrete functional associations117 and is bought primarily to satisfy 
utilitarian needs since they emphasise physical product features, performance and benefits.118 Products or brands 
with a symbolic positioning internally generate needs for self-enhancement, role position, group membership, 
or ego-identification and usually entail non-product-related or abstract, image-based associations.119 Symbolic 
motivations are more important determinants of car use than instrumental motivations. This enables car manufac-
turers to differentiate their products beyond differences in concrete functional needs. Brand experience is one of 
the important cornerstones of symbolic brand identity. Brakus et al. conceptualise brand experience as subjective 
consumer responses that are evoked by specific brand-related experiential attributes (sensory, behavioural and 
intellectual).120
A conjoint measurement study explored how to evoke different types of anticipated experiences for designing 
and advertising electric cars.121 Firstly, brainstorming sessions were organised in six groups of between 6 and 10 
participants (all masters students) to identify electric car features that would be capable of evoking three different 
types of anticipated experiences, i.e. sensory, behavioural and intellectual. Only those ideas that were deemed to be 
both original and workable in the near future were considered. A number of the most often elicited characteristics 
were chosen that could be used to design and position an electric car as sensory, behavioural or intellectual. These 
characteristics served as input for the conjoint analyses.
The purpose of these conjoint analyses was to identify a relatively limited number of combinations of electric car 
characteristics that would evoke a relatively exclusive sensory, behavioural or intellectual anticipated experience. 
Three conjoint designs were set up, one for each experience type. In each of these designs, four two-level attributes 
were defined. For each analysis, an orthogonal conjoint design was generated in which eight car types were defined 
as combinations of the two levels of each of the four attributes. For each of the conjoint measurements, a sample of 
100 individuals, representative of the Flemish (Belgium) population in terms of gender, age and level of education, 
was selected by a professional marketing research agency. They received an online questionnaire. Firstly they were 
asked to read a general description of a person who was going to buy an electric car. They were then exposed to the 
eight car-type descriptions. These eight descriptions were randomised across respondents to avoid order effects. 
Respondents were asked to indicate their anticipated experiences. One item was selected to represent each of the 
three experience types. Consequently, in each of the three conjoint analyses, the respondents were asked to score 
each car type on a five-point Likert scale (completely disagree to completely agree) on the following items: ‘This 
car makes a strong impression on my senses’ (sensory); ‘This car incites me to action’ (behavioural); ‘This car makes 
me think and incites me to solve problems’ (intellectual). Finally, respondents were asked to indicate their gender, 
age and level of education.
Two car descriptions were identified that were capable of evoking relatively exclusively a sensory and an intellec-
tual anticipated experience. No car could be identified that evokes an exclusively behavioural anticipated experience. 
These characteristics could thus be used to develop experientially different electric car propositions in advertising. 
However, this can only be effectuated for the sensory and intellectual car type, but not for the behavioural position-
ing. The two cars have the following characteristics.
Sensory
The electric engine of this car makes no sound. Silence, or the music from the high-quality sound system, can be 
experienced optimally.
The electric car is designed with elements that are specifically developed for the car, such as hard carbon materials 
outside, soft tanned leather for the seats, and hardened plant fibre inside.
The electric car makes a technically advanced and dynamic impression because of the fluent lines, the large glass 
surfaces, the LED headlights, and the remarkable radiator grill that does not serve to cool the engine but behind 
which a blue light is installed.
The electric car is equipped with the latest communications technology. For instance, with your smartphone you 
can ask it to turn on the heating or defrost the windows in the morning. When you drive home in the evening, you 
can programme your oven or TV.

COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES     181
Determining the positions of competitors’ brands and products with respect to each of 
the relevant attributes is the third step in a positioning development. Consumer research 
through in-depth interviews, focus groups or full quantitative assessment should be used in 
this stage. Often, this analysis leads to a ‘map’ of consumers’ perceptions about the relative 
position of each brand, as illustrated in Figure 4.3. It is not just the relative position of each 
brand that is important. Each of the targeted segments may have different buying motives 
or needs and will find other attributes important. Therefore, relative preferences of target 
groups towards the competing brands have to be studied.
After the first four stages of what is essentially market and consumer research, the com-
pany has to decide which position it is going to defend. Ideally, the company will select a 
position on the basis of one or more attributes that are important in the mind of a con-
sumer and for which the brand is at least as strong as its major competitors. As a posi-
tioning decision should be a brand’s direction for a number of years, a marketer should 
consider whether the positioning is appropriate and attainable. Positioning should be based 
on important attributes, not on fads, and on attributes for which the company can hope 
to defend and maintain its relative strength and reputation. Once a position is chosen, a 
company has to implement it by supportive marketing and communications activities. All 
communications instruments, in synergy with all other marketing tools, will have to reflect 
the selected positioning strategy. The final step in the positioning process is the monitoring 
stage. The image of the brand and its competitors on important attributes will have to be 
tracked on a continuous basis to reveal changes in consumer perceptions and in the com-
petitors’ positions.
Intellectual
The electric car allows you to drive into the city centre and park for free. This will no longer be possible with a car 
with a combustion engine.
The electric car has an accounting system. Via your smartphone you can look up the total cost of your car during 
the last month.
The electric car drives silently. Therefore you do not cause any noise pollution.
The electric car has a clearly visible eco-label with information about its environmental friendliness, so that other 
people can easily see that you have chosen an environmentally-friendly way of driving.
In 2005, MySpace ruled the social media world and was bought by News Corp. for nearly $600 million. But ­MySpace 
tried to be everything to too many people, which is difficult with one single product, unless the product is a true 
commodity (e.g. milk) that nearly everyone wants. In the social media world, customers were not looking for the 
same product. They wanted a product that was customisable to their own styles. Facebook took advantage of 
this situation and surpassed MySpace in web traffic in 2007. MySpace was forced to reposition itself. It changed 
its marketing strategy – new website design, new content and more emphasis on entertainment (games, music, 
movies) – and adopted a more targeted approach. The company hoped to appeal to the under 35 market, and in 
particular the under 25s.
Business insight
The repositioning of MySpace

182     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
As a result of this tracking analysis, a company may have to alter the position of its 
brands to keep up with the changing consumer or competitive landscape. There are a num-
ber of ways to change a positioning strategy or to reposition a brand:129
● A company can introduce a new brand. For instance, after major price cuts in its PC 
branch IBM introduced a new brand ‘Ambra’ to be competitive in a new context of con-
sumers expecting cheap computers for daily use. Procter & Gamble reintroduced its old 
Bonux brand as a cheaper laundry powder to counter the competition of private label 
brands.
● A company can change an existing brand. Compaq used a different strategy to cope with 
the changing computer trends. Compaq lowered the prices of its existing brand and made 
basic versions of its computers.
● Changing beliefs with regard to own-brand benefits. Japanese car brands such as Honda 
and Toyota changed their image of cheap, small and poor-quality cars to an excellent 
price/quality appreciation.
● Companies may also attempt to change beliefs with regard to the benefits of competing 
brands. The Body Shop created a less environmentally-friendly and animal-friendly image 
about the cosmetic products of competitors.
● The importance of attributes may be changed. Volvo succeeded in increasing the impor-
tance of safety as a car attribute.
● New attributes can be added to the ‘perceptual map’ of consumers. Procter & Gamble 
introduced the Vizirette to measure out the amount of detergents used in washing machines 
by explaining to the public that it would improve washing results.
According to ComScore, more than 50% of the MySpace users are 25 and younger.122 In June 2011, MySpace 
was sold for $35 million to the digital media company Specific Media and investors including Justin Timberlake. 
Their ‘new’ focus for MySpace was music.123 In February 2012, MySpace added more than 1 million new users in 
one month, taking it to 25 million registered users. The website claimed that about 40 000 people a day had signed 
since it introduced apps with the social networks Twitter and Facebook. This represented a dramatic turnaround 
for MySpace.124 Music had always been MySpace’s biggest attraction, especially as a hub for independent artists 
looking to make their music available to the masses. CEO Tim Vanderhook put it as follows: ‘the one million-plus 
new user accounts we’ve seen in the last 30 days validates our approach. MySpace is building meaningful social 
entertainment experience around content, where consumers can share and discover the music they love. Consum-
ers are getting excited about MySpace again – a testament to a great music product.’125 MySpace claims to offer the 
biggest free music collection online, ahead of popular streaming services such as Spotify and Deezer. MySpace has 
a music catalogue of more than 42 million songs; Spotify has about 15 million songs in the USA. As MySpace’s Music 
Player (with Facebook connection) becomes more popular, users might not need to visit the site. This would enable 
MySpace to continue to grow even without having direct traffic statistics to show for it.126 To help build growth and 
momentum, MySpace started a new partnership with Panasonic to create MySpace TV (movies, news, sports and 
reality programming). This app will offer music video and audio streaming alongside social features such as online 
chat and virtual viewing parties.127
While a million new members is an impressive milestone, MySpace is still on a downward trend overall. Once 
the biggest social medium, MySpace had sunk to fourth place behind Facebook, LinkedIn and Twitter with more 
than 24 million visitors in December 2011. If MySpace can keep adding users, there might be life left yet in what 
was once the world’s most popular social network.128

COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES     183
The latter four repositioning strategies are based on the components of the Fishbein 
model, discussed earlier. Defending a brand position or image will often be one of the major 
objectives of a communications campaign.
In 2011, Playtex ran a £1 million campaign in the UK to reposition Playtex as the underwear brand for women over 
50. The ‘Feeling better than ever’ campaign was run both on the Web and in print advertising and included British 
celebrities. The campaign was targeted at women using messages about being ‘young at heart’ and ‘coping with a 
changing body shape’. Playtex was founded in 1932 and its roots are in latex. Playtex became a dominant brand of 
girdles. For decades, it was one of the most popular brands of bras. Playtex was ‘Cross your heart’ and ‘It lifts and 
separates’. It extended its brand into areas such as baby goods and tampons. In today’s world of Victoria’s Secret and 
Agent Provocateur, it is hard to remember that Playtex pushed the limits. But it was Playtex that, as the first major 
brand, used actual women (and not models) in bra advertising, and was the first brand to advertise a tampon on TV. 
The aim of the new UK campaign was to reposition Playtex as the lingerie label for British women in their 50s, which 
is an admirably tight target, considering that so many brands go for too wide demographic targets and, consequently, 
fall short. In line with the new positioning, Playtex has moved away from using a 20-something model, and is now 
using a 42-year-old mother of three, who embodies the values of the brand to appeal to women who are young at 
heart but coping with their changing body shape. While Playtex is still the brand of the Playtex 18 Hour® Bra and 
Playtex Cross Your Heart® Bra, it is also the brand of the Playtex Nappy Genie and Playtex® Sport® Tampons. So the 
biggest challenge facing Playtex is the fragmentation of the brand itself.131,132
Business insight
Lingerie brand Playtex rebrand targets over 50s
Since the 1950s, Cadbury Snack had been positioned as one of the leading confectionery brands. However, over the 
years Cadbury saw a decline in its consumer loyalty. Research revealed that consumers perceived the Snack brand as 
being for an ‘older/established customer segment’. Cadbury wanted the Snack to appeal to a younger target market 
(ages 25–35). Therefore, Cadbury refreshed Snack by updating the look of its packaging, displays and marketing 
communications to give it a more cheerful and lively appearance, and by incorporating a ­communications campaign 
that depicted the product being enjoyed in a work environment. The repositioning proved to be successful, as the 
company increased its customer loyalty rating by 5%. It is important to set out realistic goals and steps for what 
a company is trying to achieve with its new positioning strategy. If Cadbury Snack had launched an athletic food 
bar instead of repositioning its original product’s brand, its existing and potential customers might have become 
­confused about the link to the other Cadbury products, which are seen as a sweet treat. This could have had a ­serious 
impact not only on Cadbury Snack but also on other Cadbury products.130
Business insight
The Cadbury Snack brand repositioned

184     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
Creative strategy
After the campaign message strategy has been established, a creative strategy has to be 
developed. The core message has to be translated into a creative idea and a creative format. 
Creative formats will be further discussed in the next chapter.
Developing a creative idea and format is the core task of a communication agency. Before 
the agency can start thinking of a creative strategy, the advertiser must give the agency a 
creative brief. The necessary elements of a creative brief are summarised in Figure 4.15. The 
creative brief or the document that forms the starting point for the agency should contain 
not only information on the target group, advertising objectives and message strategy, but 
Source: Rex Features: Crollalanza.

COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES     185
also sufficient information concerning the background of the company, the product, the 
market and the competitors. This implies information concerning the past, present and 
future in order to give the agency as accurate a view of the brand and its environment as pos-
sible. Some examples of necessary elements are the long-term company and brand strategy, 
past, current and desired positioning, former advertising campaigns, message strategies and 
execution styles, desired media, available budget and timing of the different steps (creative 
idea, execution strategies, campaign running, etc.).
The first step of the creative strategy is to develop a creative idea. But what is a creative 
idea? It is hard to give an accurate definition, but let us consider some attempts. A creative idea 
can be defined as an ‘original and imaginative thought designed to produce goal-directed and 
problem-solving advertisements and commercials’.133 According to others, a creative advertis-
ing idea has to be attention-grabbing and should work as a catalyst in the sense that it should 
create a ‘chemical reaction’ of immediately understanding the brand’s position.134 According 
to the jazz musician and composer Charles Mingus ‘Creativity is more than just being differ-
ent. Everybody can play weird, that’s easy. What’s hard is to be as simple as Bach. Making 
the simple complicated is commonplace, making the complicated simple, awesomely simple, 
that’s creativity.’135 In essence, a creative idea seems to boil down to a proposition which 
makes it possible to communicate a brand’s position in an original, attention-getting, but 
easy-to-catch way (Photo 4.5). Several researchers argue that creativity probably is the most 
important aspect of marketing communications.136 An expert panel even held the opinion that 
‘the selling power of a creative idea can exceed that of an ordinary idea by a multiple of 10’.137
Besides the need for a creative idea to develop effective communication, one can question 
how creative the communication campaign itself has to be. Indirect evidence of the belief 
in the success of creative ads might be the fact that advertising seems to be more creative 
than a few decades ago.138 However, attention-grabbing, originality and imagination do not 
suffice. In the end, marketing communications must help to accomplish marketing objec-
tives. The existing studies do not convey consistent results. Some studies139 claim creativity 
has a positive impact on ad likeability, brand awareness, brand liking and purchase inten-
tions, but other studies could not find a relation between ad creativity on the one hand 
and attitude towards the ad, brand attitude, purchase intention or firm profitability on the 
other.140 Although it is clear that a creative idea is needed to express a brand’s positioning 
statement attractively, the question remains as to how creative the communication itself 
should be. Also, research indicates that practitioner views on creativity differ from those of 
Figure 4.15  The creative brief

186     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
consumers.141 It often happens that consumers rank commercials differently than creative 
directors. The latter are often quite surprised that the public do not select the ads perceived as 
most creative by themselves. The foregoing illustrates that more research is called for to find 
out how important creativity is in the eyes of consumers and what creativity means to them.
Communication tactics: tools and touchpoints
Once a message and creative strategy has been established, campaign developers have to 
develop a tactical communications plan. This implies deciding upon how to get in touch 
with the target groups and which tools to use to create touchpoints with them in a consist-
ent and synergetic way. In order to get in touch with customers, many tools can be used 
and combined: advertising in different media, both online and offline, brand activation and 
sales promotions, direct marketing, sponsorship, public relations, exhibitions and trade fairs. 
These tools will have to be combined in an integrated communications campaign which, in 
terms of relative efforts and timing, will result in a detailed communications tactics plan. The 
various tools of the communications mix are discussed in more detail in subsequent chapters.
Control and evaluation
Finally, after the campaign is over, its effectiveness needs to be assessed and the results of 
this evaluation are going to be used to develop further campaigns and/or adapt current 
campaigns. Campaign evaluation and results measurement are discussed in Chapter 13.
Photo 4.5  Eastpak: the selling power of a creative idea
Source: Reproduced with permission of VF Corporation: AMVBBDO.

SUMMARY     187
Summary
Marketing communications planning consists of context analysis, target group definition, 
establishing communication objectives, message and creative strategy, tactics and campaign 
evaluation. Market segmentation is the process of dividing consumers into homogeneous seg-
ment profiles on the basis of a number of segmentation criteria. The next stage in the process 
is to target one or more of these customer groups. Marketing communications can concentrate 
on one segment, specialise selectively, specialise in specific markets or products, or fully cover 
the market. A marketing communications campaign can have several communication and 
behavioural process and effectiveness objectives. Besides generating attention, memory, positive 
attitudes and activation following communication messages, the campaign can aim at stimulat-
ing product category need, increasing brand awareness and brand knowledge, improving brand 
attitude or image, increasing purchase intention and facilitating purchases, and maximising 
customer satisfaction and brand loyalty. Different objectives will require a different communi-
cations mix. The objectives of a communications campaign also differ according to the stage 
in the product life cycle. While awareness-building is more important in the introductory and 
growth stages, brand image and brand preference building will be crucial in the growth and the 
maturity stages, and purchase-directed objectives will prevail in the decline stage.
Next, a campaign budget has to be decided upon. Companies use different budgeting 
methods such as inertia, arbitrary allocation, affordability and percentage of sales. In the 
objectives and task method, the communications needs are assessed, after which a task-
related budget is defined. In the competitive parity method, companies analyse their market 
position and decide on their share of voice accordingly. Communications budgets are influ-
enced by multiple factors, such as a crisis situation, contingencies, unexpected opportuni-
ties, economic recessions and other market and company factors, and companies should 
always be alert and prepared to adapt budgets to changing situations.
Campaign developers further have to decide upon a message and creative strategy. They 
have to define a unique position for their products in the mind of the consumer, based 
on product attributes or benefits, price/quality, use or application, product class, product 
users, competitors or cultural symbols. Developing, monitoring and adapting an appro-
priate position for a brand, a product or a company is a crucial prerequisite for effective 
marketing communications. An important stage in campaign strategy development is the 
development of a creative idea. Companies have to write a creative brief before the commu-
nication agency can start to do its job. The various marketing communication tools have to 
be combined into an integrated campaign that creates meaningful touchpoints with target 
customers. Finally, at the end of the campaign, its effectiveness has to be assessed.
Review questions
	 1.	 What are the steps in the marketing communications plan?
	 2.	 Which topics should be looked at in a situation analysis?
	 3.	 What are the stages in the segmenting–targeting–positioning process, and what is the 
relevance of this process for marketing communications?
	 4.	 On the basis of what criteria can markets be segmented? How can market segmentation 
influence the communications mix?
	 5.	 What are segment profiles, and what are the requirements for effective segmentation?
	 6.	 Discuss the most important targeting strategies and the selection of target groups.
	 7.	 What is the difference between communication and behavioural campaign objectives? 
Give examples of each.

188     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
	 8.	 What is the difference between process and effectiveness objectives? Give examples of each.
	 9.	 Describe the various stages in the DAGMAR model. What is the consequence of this model 
for marketing communications objectives?
	10.	 In what circumstances is it useful to stress category needs and wants in marketing 
communications?
	11.	 In what circumstances is brand recall rather than brand recognition the more important 
communications goal?
	12.	 In what circumstances is the stimulation of purchase intention a good marketing com-
munications objective?
	13.	 What are the shortcomings of the DAGMAR model as a framework for marketing 
­communications objectives?
	14.	 To what extent should marketing communications objectives be adapted in the introduc-
tory, growth, maturity and decline stages of a product life cycle?
	15.	 What is a sales response model and why is it not easy to estimate?
	16.	 Discuss Jones’s theory on the short-term and long-term relationship between advertising 
budgets and sales.
	17.	 Discuss the various communications budgeting methods that are frequently used by 
practitioners.
	18.	 What is the relationship between share of voice and share of market, and how does it 
affect budgeting?
	19.	 What are the factors that influence the budgeting decision?
	20.	 How should the communications budget for a new product launch be determined?
	21.	 What positioning strategies can a company develop, and what are the consequences for 
communications strategies?
	22.	 What are the stages in the development of a positioning strategy?
	23.	 How can a product be repositioned?
	24.	 What are the components of a communication briefing?
	25.	 What is the value of a creative idea?
Further reading
Dibb, S. and Simkin, L. (2013) Market Segmentation Success: Making It Happen! London: 
Routledge.
Fill, C. (2013) Marketing Communications: brands, experiences and participation. London: 
Pearson Education
Jones, J.P. (2006) When Ads Work: New Proof that Advertising Triggers Sales. Armonk, 
NY: M.E. Sharpe.
Krieger, A.M. and Green, P.E. (2006) ‘A tactical model for resource allocation and its applica-
tion to advertising budgeting’, European Journal of Operation Research, 175(3), 1782–97.
Pringle, H. and Marshall, J. (2011) Spending Advertising Money in the Digital Age: How 
to Navigate the Media Flow. London: Kogan Page.
Trout, J. and Rivkin, S. (2008) Differentiate or Die: Survival in Our Era of Killer Competi-
tion. New York: Wiley.
Van den Bergh, J. and Behrer, M. (2013) How Cool Brands Stay Hot: Branding to Genera-
tion Y. London: Kogan Page.

Case 4     189
There had been a major push earlier in 2008, spending 
NZ$2.3 million on a TV advertising campaign, but it had 
had no discernible effect on brand health or usage. With 
a fraction of that budget and such firmly held consumer 
perceptions, Yellow Pages needed to do something com-
pletely different.
Yellow Pages had seen great success with its ‘Treehouse 
Restaurant’ campaign in 2008. To prove that Yellow Pages 
was still the best way to get any job done, the ad agency 
challenged Aucklander Tracey Collins to build a restaurant 
halfway up a redwood pine tree, using nothing but con-
tacts from the Yellow Pages website, mobile app and book. 
The agency publically followed her progress and, in January 
2009, opened the Treehouse Restaurant to a sellout two-
month season. The campaign drew unprecedented atten-
tion, being featured on over 20 000 websites internationally 
and in the pages of over 100 different magazines. It was 
From
To
A thing of the past
Modern and relevant
A book
Online and mobile
Lagging way behind Google
A leader in search
Used when there is a problem
Used when there is 
an opportunity
Used when not found on Google
Used for first search
New Zealand Yellow Pages in trouble
It was the perfect product for the twentieth century: a giant 
yellow book in which whatever you needed . . . some asbes-
tos for the ceiling . . . a man to repair your telex machine . . . 
your nearest waterbed stockist . . . could be found. It was 
updated every single year and efficiently delivered by hand 
to every home in the country. A big yellow helper, without 
which our parents’ lives would have been even more arduous 
and toilsome. As we entered 2008, Yellow Pages was realis-
tic about the public’s view of the brand. Yellow Pages was 
something your mum kept in the cupboard underneath the 
telephone, and pulled out when something went wrong with 
the plumbing. It was an icon of the pre-Internet age, and both 
consumers and businesses were questioning their need for it 
in a world where they could find anything they wanted on 
Google. Businesses were being dissuaded from Yellow Pages 
by all manner of new Internet directory services, and con-
sumers saw Google as a much more modern, relevant way 
to search for anything. Across the world, Yellow Pages busi-
nesses were in sharp decline.
Throughout the world, Yellow Pages businesses faced 
a tumultuous 2009. As online search became increasingly 
mobile and ubiquitous, the relevance of the printed Yel-
low Pages product declined further, resulting in inevita-
ble declines in usage as people migrated to the Internet 
to look up a business. With the recent arrival of multiple 
new online and digital advertising channels available to 
businesses both small and large, the need to be in Yel-
low Pages decreased, resulting in inevitable declines in 
advertiser numbers and revenue. This challenge was made 
even more difficult in 2009 as businesses across the board 
faced a recession and chose to spend significantly less on 
advertising. Total New Zealand advertising spend declined 
by 12% overall, and 17% in the case of other print-based 
media, the most comparable with Yellow Pages’ core offer-
ing. Online advertising did grow, but only at 11%, and off a 
very small base. New Zealand’s Yellow Pages Group faced 
serious and widely touted problems with its yellow.co.nz 
search experience, which frequently provided inaccurate 
or incomplete results, turning online Kiwis back to Google 
for their searches.
Clearly, communications could not address any of these 
fundamental business and marketplace issues. So Yellow 
Pages got going on print innovations to improve the rel-
evance of the print product, broader advertiser packages 
to address advertiser declines and technology investment 
to fix the online search problems. These innovations and 
improvements would drive greater usage and revenue in 
the future, but they would take at least a year to develop 
and launch. So, in the meantime, the decision was taken to 
continue to use communications to improve perceptions 
of the Yellow Pages brand. Communications and brand 
perception alone would not be enough to turn the busi-
ness around, but a stronger brand would facilitate a much 
more successful launch of those improvements in 2010 and 
beyond.
The global challenge is to give Yellow Pages a genuine 
place in the twenty-first century, or haemorrhage business 
at the current rate and see the death of the brand within a 
decade. For Yellow Pages to have a place in the twenty-first 
century it was necessary to challenge the deeply entrenched 
attitudes and behaviours that surrounded the brand:
Case 4:
Yellow Pages: an old-fashioned brand that is being revived through  
a ground-breaking campaign

190     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
reviewed on every major NZ TV property and was the lead 
story on the front page of the NZ Herald. From a media 
spend of only NZ$436 000 the campaign achieved 61% 
awareness of the campaign, showing the idea to be almost 
twice as efficient as Yellow Pages’ historic traditional TV 
advertising. The perceptions of that 61% towards the brand 
have been enhanced significantly, proving that Yellow 
Pages was persuading New Zealanders to re-evaluate their 
view of an old and deeply entrenched brand. As a result of  
the largely online campaign, monthly unique visitors to 
the website (yellow.co.nz) were driven above 1 million for 
the first time ever, and have grown the website’s share of 
first search at the cost of their goliath competitor Google. 
It had improved relevance and modernity perceptions sig-
nificantly, leaving brand health in a far stronger position. 
And so the agency was tasked with producing a follow-up 
campaign, and challenged to improve on the performance 
of the Treehouse, but with a budget 17% smaller. While $2.4 
million was spent on the Treehouse, only $2 million could 
be spent in 2009.
This case history describes a follow-up campaign 
launching a chocolate brand through Yellow Pages to put 
the brand on the map as a relevant and modern way to 
build a business.
Campaign objectives
The overall objective of the 2009 campaign was to con-
tinue to challenge New Zealanders’ deeply entrenched 
perceptions of Yellow Pages and earn the brand a place in 
the twenty-first century. Specifically, the objectives were to:
● Get New Zealanders to think of Yellow Pages as more of 
a leader in search, rather than a laggard to Google, and 
improve its brand tracking score for ‘Leading the way in 
search’.
● Get New Zealanders to see Yellow Pages as a modern, 
contemporary, innovative brand and improve brand 
tracking scores across the board, but specifically the 
measure ‘is modern/of today’.
● Increase awareness of Yellow Pages’ online and mobile 
products and improve brand tracking scores: ‘There is 
much more to Yellow Pages than the printed directory’ 
and ‘Is up with the latest technology’.
The campaign also aimed to spread this message further 
than with the previous year’s Treehouse campaign by 
engaging more New Zealanders, and by using the cam-
paign to actively engage staff and advertiser customers. If 
successful, this would help the wider business in remaining 
New Zealanders’ first choice when searching for a business, 
continuing to be perceived as the most effective advertising 
medium in the minds of small and medium-size businesses 
and performing better financially than the rest of the adver-
tising media category.
Target audience
Yellow Pages has two targets: businesses wanting to adver-
tise and people wanting to find a business. Yellow Pages 
makes its money from business advertisers, but only if those 
businesses believe that their customers use Yellow Pages. To 
make sure they do, it produces specific advertiser campaigns 
to communicate the effectiveness of advertising in Yellow 
Pages. But to maintain that effectiveness it is critical that the 
consumer audience sees it as a modern, relevant option in 
today’s digital world. And so the challenge was to improve 
brand health among the consumer audience. Given that 
there are few people who never have the need to look for a 
business listing, the target is wide – all people aged 25–54.
What the Yellow Pages staff know about those people 
is that they have all grown up with Yellow Pages, they have 
all just been through the Internet revolution, and many of 
them still think of the brand as ‘the way you found stuff 
before the Internet’.
The strategic thinking that inspired  
the idea
In a nutshell, the communications strategy for earning the 
Yellow Pages brand a place in the twenty-first century was 
to prove that it is the best way to get any job done today. It 
is about actions, not words, about truly demonstrating the 
power of Yellow Pages, and about playing up those more 
modern online and mobile Yellow Pages products. The 
Treehouse was proof of concept. It had been enormously 
effective in terms of its media efficiency, its ability to get 
into the conversations of New Zealanders, and ultimately 
its effect on brand health. But Yellow Pages could not just 
do the same thing again. It needed to build on the suc-
cess of that campaign with an updated strategy that would 
improve perceptions among many more New Zealanders 
this time. The Treehouse had touched 46% of New Zealand-
ers in total, a pretty good number considering that Yellow 
Pages used very little traditional media. But it could not just 
speak to those people again. It needed to grow that total 
awareness. Also, only 2000 people – predominantly Auck-
landers – actually got to eat at the restaurant and really live 
the whole campaign experience end to end. The company 
needed many more people to have the full, end-to-end 
experience.
The brief to the Colenso BBDO creatives in 2009 was to 
create a ‘job done’ that could be experienced by thousands 
more people, all over New Zealand, and to make it even 
more participatory by using online, events and social net-
working tools to a greater extent.
The winning idea
On 14 September 2009, Yellow Pages and Colenso BBDO 
challenged ordinary Kiwi Josh Winger to create the world’s 

Case 4     191
first chocolate bar that tasted of the colour yellow, using 
only contacts from Yellow Pages’ online, mobile and print 
products. Between October and March, Josh worked out 
of his Mt Eden office with 45 businesses listed in Yellow 
Pages, the media and thousands of New Zealanders, to cre-
ate Yellow Chocolate. With flavour technologists Sensient, 
and taste tests throughout the country, he determined what 
the colour yellow tasted like. With Donovan’s Chocolate he 
had that taste made into a chocolate bar. With Seven Design 
he created the packaging and retail displays. With Progres-
sive Enterprises he cut a distribution deal which saw the bar 
stocked in Foodtown, Countdown and Woolworths super-
markets and Gull service stations throughout the country. 
With Special Problems he created and launched an adver-
tising campaign for the bar.
The winning media strategy and 
marketing mix/execution
The media objective was to reach and involve as many 
New Zealanders as possible, utilising as many media 
touchpoints as possible. The heart of the media strategy 
was a completely new channel – a chocolate bar. The bar 
was of course the culmination of the entire campaign, but 
also a highly impactful piece of communication. As tens of 
thousands of New Zealanders paid their $2 at Foodtown 
and then sat down to bite into a bar of Yellow Chocolate, 
they had read about Josh’s mission and learnt about Yellow 
Pages’ products and how they are still the best way to get 
any job done.
Along the way, Yellow Pages put particular emphasis on 
progressive media such as online, social networking, TV 
content partnerships and of course the chocolate bar itself. 
Yellow Pages was the first New Zealand brand to create a 
live Twitter billboard, and it designed Facebook integration 
that is now being used by Facebook itself as a case study 
example. The primary reason for that emphasis on new 
media was to achieve the brand objective of being per-
ceived as modern and relevant to this century. Of course, 
these touchpoints would also be more involving and in 
many cases more credible than traditional media. The full 
media mix was as follows:
Results and ROI
Perceptions of the Yellow Pages brand were lifted among 
the majority of New Zealanders as tens of thousands of 
them paid $2 for a piece of direct communications that 
demonstrated that Yellow Pages is still the best way to get 
any job done:
● Over 100 000 bars of Yellow Chocolate were sold in four 
days, creating New Zealand’s fastest ever chocolate bar 
launch.
● Over 100 000 New Zealanders actively followed the 
campaign by visiting the website, following Josh on Face-
book or Twitter, or signing up for a chocolate trial.
● Over 10% of New Zealanders claim to have talked about 
the campaign in conversations with their friends, family 
and colleagues.
● Ultimately 61% of New Zealanders were exposed to the 
campaign.
● Those 61% feel significantly better about the Yellow 
Pages brand than those who were not exposed to the 
campaign.
● Brand health improvements centred around the key 
metrics of ‘modern and of today’, ‘there’s more to Yel-
low Pages than the printed directory’ and ‘up with the 
latest technology and innovations’.
● As a result, that 61% of New Zealand consumers and 
business people see Yellow Pages as being much more 
of ‘a leader in search’.
Today, Yellow Pages remains the number one place where 
New Zealanders search for a business and the top, most 
effective advertising medium in the minds of New Zealand 
businesses.
Across the financial year, Yellow Pages outperformed 
the tough advertising media market, with a smaller decline 
in traditional revenues compared with the average across 
other traditional media channels, and a greater growth 
in online revenues than the market in general, demon-
strating that although the business suffered a recession-
ary impact, that impact was smaller than the rest of the 
category.
These results are reviewed in more detail below.
Campaign participation, awareness, 
talkability and brand perception
Participation in the campaign was huge, with 81 000 unique 
visitors to the website (www.yellowchocolate.co.nz), 17 000 
followers on Facebook and Twitter, and 11 000 people sign-
ing up to be the first to get a taste of Yellow Chocolate. Once 
launched, the 100 000 bars sold out in just four days, each one 
a powerful piece of direct marketing that told the full story of 
Television
$517 340
Online
$225 517
Press
$120 279
Outdoor
$119 170
Radio
$104 000
Ambient
$32 358
Total media spend
$1 118 664

192     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
With the Chocolate campaign, Yellow Pages made more 
New Zealanders feel better about the Yellow Pages brand 
than they had in the previous year, demonstrating that the 
Chocolate campaign built on the success of the Treehouse 
and grew brand health further again.
Perceptions of Yellow Pages being a ‘leader in search’ 
are significantly stronger among those exposed to the cam-
paign (Figure 4.17).
Product usage
Despite consumers being given many more on- and offline 
ways to search for businesses, Yellow Pages remains the 
number one choice for New Zealanders (Figure 4.18).
Again, despite continued efforts from other advertising 
media, small and medium-size businesses in New Zealand 
still perceive Yellow Pages to be by far the most effective 
advertising medium for them (Figure 4.19).
Staff and customer engagement
As part of the campaign, activities were used to create staff 
involvement and interest. This started with clues for staff to 
guess what product the new campaign was going to be for, 
Josh using only Yellow Pages to get his job done. The bar was 
New Zealand’s fastest-selling chocolate bar launch ever, out-
selling favourites like Cadbury Crunchie and Dairy Milk by two 
to one. Yellow Chocolate went on to sell on Trade Me for up to 
$40 for a single bar, and $320 for a pack of 20 bars. The cam-
paign was ultimately seen by 61% of the country. Well over 1 in 
10 New Zealanders claim to have talked about the campaign 
in their conversations with friends, family and colleagues.
Brand health among that 61% of New Zealanders is sig-
nificantly better than among those that were not exposed 
to the campaign, particularly among those critical measures 
of ‘modern and of today’ and ‘more to Yellow Pages than 
the printed directory’ (Figure 4.16).
Compared with the Treehouse campaign, the improve-
ment in brand health between those that saw the campaign 
and those that did not is much greater for the Chocolate 
campaign:
Treehouse
Chocolate
Is modern and of today
4% better
32% better
More than the print directory
13% better
18% better
Up with the latest technology
11% better
29% better
Figure 4.16  Yellow Pages brand associations: recallers vs non-recallers of the campaign
Source: TNS Conversa.

Case 4     193
Figure 4.17  Perceptions of Yellow Pages leadership
Source: TNS Conversa.
Figure 4.18  Information sources used when searching for a business – June 2009 to May 2010
Source: TNS Conversa.

194     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
led to Yellow Pages increasing its share of the New Zealand 
media market from 11% in 2008 to 12.2% in 2009. During 
the period January–June 2010, it was 1.6% ahead of forecast 
sales.
Wrapping up
The Yellow Chocolate campaign engaged over 60% of New 
Zealanders in the Yellow Pages brand, and perceptions of 
that large majority are measurably and significantly better 
as a result of being exposed to the campaign. Importantly, 
the campaign improved on the successes of the earlier Yel-
low Treehouse campaign, engaging many more New Zea-
landers, and making those people feel even better about 
the Yellow Pages brand. This was achieved with a budget 
17% lower than the Treehouse. Yellow Pages remains the 
number one place where New Zealanders look for a busi-
ness, and the top, most effective advertising medium in the 
minds of small and medium-size businesses. As a result, Yel-
low Pages continues to significantly outperform the adver-
tising media category.
Questions
1.	 Describe and assess Yellow Pages’ problem identifica-
tion. Did it make the right analysis, come to the right 
conclusion and identify the right target groups?
2.	 At which stage in the product life cycle was the Yellow 
Pages brand in 2009? Which communications objectives 
trialling the potential product and ending with a treasure 
hunt for Yellow Pages Chocolate. 
Of Yellow Pages’ high-value advertiser customers, 120 
had a sales rep deliver them a bar before they were made 
available to the public. The response from advertiser cus-
tomers was unanimously positive.
Business performance
Given significant industry commentary and speculation sur-
rounding Yellow Pages’ business performance, it is impor-
tant to note that across the 2009 calendar year, Yellow Pages 
far outperformed the rest of the advertising media industry. 
Bruce Cotterill, CEO, Yellow Pages Group, stated in August 
2010:
During the latter half of the Yellow® chocolate campaign 
there was a considerable amount of negative PR about the 
financial stability of the Yellow business. To be clear, these 
issues relate to YPG Finance Limited, and are a result of the 
high purchase price paid for the business ($2.24B) and an 
overall softening in the economy. The core Yellow operating 
business continues to perform strongly and is very profitable, 
with profit in excess of $150M in the financial year ending 
June 2010.
As a consequence of the recession, the traditional media 
market declined by 14%, with print media hardest hit, falling 
17%. Across the same period, Yellow Pages’ print revenues 
declined by just 8%. Online, the market grew by 11%, but 
Yellow Pages’ online growth was over 38%. These successes 
Figure 4.19  Perceived most effective advertising media for small and medium-size businesses – June 2010
Source: TNS Conversa.

4.	 Was the Yellow Pages campaign successful? Why or why 
not?
5	 What could be creative ideas for a new campaign? Think 
of ideas that can bring in a local touch (in your home 
country).
are relevant at that stage? Which objective did Yellow 
Pages choose with its chocolate campaign? Was that 
consistent with the product life-cycle stage of Yellow 
Pages?
3.	 Imagine you were responsible for relaunching Yellow 
Pages in your country. Which of the nine DAGMAR com-
munication goals would you include in your marketing 
communications plan?
Sources: Guy Geerts, Darwin BBDO, Colenso BBDO, Yellow Effie award case New Zealand, 2010.
References
1	 Egan, J. (2015) Marketing Communications. Los 
­Angeles, CA: Sage.
2	 Fill, C. (2013) Marketing Communications: Brands, 
Experiences and Participation. Harlow, UK: Pearson 
Education.
3	 Malhotra, N. (2008) Marketing Research: An Applied 
Orientation. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Education.
4	 Ries, A. and Trout, J. (2001) Positioning: The Battle for 
Your Mind, 2nd edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
5	 Bovée, C.L., Thill, J.V., Dovel, G.P. and Wood, M.B. 
(1995) Advertising Excellence. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
McGraw-Hill.
6	 Dibb, S. and Simkin, L. (2007) The Market Segmenta-
tion Workbook: Making It Happen. London: Routledge; 
Cathelat, B. (1993) Socio-Styles: The New Lifestyles 
Classification System for Identifying and Targeting Con-
sumers and Markets. London: Kogan Page.
7	 CACI Ltd.,  www.caci.co.uk.
8	 IP Backstage, 26 October 2008, 4–9.
9	 http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/09/business/media/
axe-adds-fragrance-for-women-to-its-lineup.html 
(accessed 20 September 2012).
10	 Banks, I.B., De Pelsmacker, P. and Dens, N. (2012) ‘Men 
might be from Mars, but women are definitely from 
Venus – influence of gender on effectiveness of prob-
ability markers in advertising’, International Journal of 
Advertising.
11	 Meyers-Levy, J. and Sternthal, B. (1991) ‘Gender differ-
ences in the use of message cues and judgments’, Journal 
of Marketing, 28 (February), 84–96.
12	 Darley, W.K. and Smith, R.E. (1995) ‘Gender differences 
in information processing strategies: an empirical test of 
the selectivity model in advertising response’, Journal of 
Advertising, 24(1), 41–56.
13	 Carli, L. (1990) ‘Gender, language, and influence’, Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(5), 941–51.
14	 Meyers-Levy, J. (1989) ‘Gender differences in informa-
tion processing: a selectivity interpretation’, in Caffer-
ate, P. and Tybout, A.M. (eds), Cognitive and Affective 
Responses to Advertising. Lexington, MA: Lexington.
15	 Areni, C.S. and Kiecker, P. (1993) ‘Gender differences 
in competitiveness and risk aversion: theoretical foun-
dations and some preliminary findings’, in Gender and 
Consumer Behavior, Volume 2. Duluth, MN: Association 
for Consumer Research, 30–43; Tannen, D. (1991) You 
Just Don’t Understand: Women and Men in Conversa-
tion. New York: Ballantine.
16	 Meyers-Levy, J. (1989) ‘Gender differences in informa-
tion processing: a selectivity interpretation’, in Caffer-
ate, P. and Tybout, A.M. (eds), Cognitive and Affective 
Responses to Advertising. Lexington, MA: Lexington.
17	 Peter, J.P. and Olson, J.C. (1993) Consumer Behavior and 
Marketing Strategy. Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin.
18	 Herbig, P., Koehler, W. and Day, K. (1993) ‘Marketing to 
the baby bust generation’, Journal of Consumer Market-
ing, 10(1), 4–9.
19	 De Morgen, 27 December 2008.
20	 Junco, R. and Mastrodicasa, J.M. (2007) Connecting to 
the Net.Generation: What Higher Education Profession-
als Need to Know About Today’s Students. Washington, 
DC: NASPA.
21	 Novak, R. (2009) ‘Marketing to millennials: a lesson 
learned from the Obama campaign’, The Daily Anchor, 
19 January, http://www.thedailyanchor.com/2009/01/19/
marketing-to-millennials-a-lesson-learned-from-barack-
obama/ (accessed June 2009).
22	 Fields, B. ‘Marketing to gen Y: what you can’t afford not 
to know’, http://www.startupnation.com/articles/9011/1/
marketing-GenY.htm (accessed June 2009).
23	 Feierabend, S. and Chan-Olmsted, S. (2008) ‘Was Kinder 
sehen’, Media Perspektiven, 2008(4), 190–204.
24	 Livingstone, S., Haddon, L., Görzig, A. and Olafsson, K. 
(2011) EU Kids Online II. London: EU Kids Online.
REFERENCES     195

196     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
39	 Gilly, M. and Enis, B. (1982) ‘Recycling the family life 
cycle: a proposal for redefinition’, in Mitchell, A. (ed.), 
Advances in Consumer Research, 9. Ann Arbor, MI: 
Association for Consumer Research, 271–6.
40	 http://www.scribd.com/doc/97390183/Cheerios- 
Facebook-Ad-Case-Study\#download (accessed 20 
­September 2012).
41	 Van den Bergh, J. and Verhaeghe, A. (2008) InSites Con-
sulting 2008 Lifestyle Segmentation of Dutch Youngsters 
for MTV Networks. Rotterdam: InSites Consulting.
42	 Cornell, J. A. (2002) Experiments with Mixtures: 
Designs, Models, and the Analysis of Mixture Data (3rd 
edition). New York, NY: Wiley.
43	 Danaher, P.J. and Dagger, T.S. (2013) ‘Comparing the 
relative effectiveness of advertising channels: a case study 
of a multimedia blitz campaign’, Journal of Marketing 
Research, 50(4), 517–34; Gatignon, H. and Hanssens, D. 
M. (1987) ‘Modeling marketing interactions with appli-
cation to salesforce effectiveness’, Journal of Marketing 
Research, 24(3), 247–57.
44	 estar.com/business/article/862906--coke-zero-becomes-
a-hero-for-coca-cola-co (accessed 20 September 2012).
45	 www.adforum.com, Euro Effies 2008.
46	 ‘“Coke Zero” anniversary sees sugar-free sales on brink 
of overtaking Original Coke’, http://presscentre.coca-
cola.co.uk/viewnews/coke_zero_anniversary, 27 July 
2007 (accessed June 2009).
47	 ‘“Coca-Cola Zero” “launch” a taste of life as it should 
be! Campaign’, http://www.cokecce.co.uk/media-centre/
news-and-press-releases/2008/coke-zero-campaign.aspx 
(accessed June 2009).
48	 http://www.thestar.com/business/article/862906--coke-
zero-becomes-a-hero-for-coca-cola-co (accessed 20 Sep-
tember 2012).
49	 Kotler, P. and Keller, K.L. (2006) Marketing Manage-
ment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
50	 ‘Financial Results Briefing for the Six-Month Period 
Ended December 2008’, http://www.nintendo.co.jp/ir/
pdf/2009/090130e.pdf\#page=6 (accessed June 2009).
51	 www.marketingonline.nl.
52	 Colley, R.H. (1961) Defining Advertising Goals for 
Measured Advertising Results. New York: Association 
of National Advertisers.
53	 Pickton, D. and Broderick, A. (2009) Integrated Market-
ing Communications, 3rd edition. Harlow: Financial 
Times/Prentice Hall.
54	 Rossiter, J.R. and Percy, L. (1997) Advertising Com-
munication and Promotion Management. Sydney: 
McGraw-Hill.
55	 Hefflin, D.T.A. and Haygood, R.C. (1985) ‘Effects of 
scheduling on retention of advertising messages’, Journal 
of Advertising, 14(2), 41–7.
56	 Euro Effie (2008) Brussels: European Association of 
Communications Agencies, http://www.euro-effie.com.
57	 Rossiter, J.R. and Percy, L. (1997) Advertising Com-
munication and Promotion Management. Sydney: 
McGraw-Hill.
25	 Kunkel, D., Wilcox, B.L., Joanne, C., Edward, P., Linn, 
S. and Dowrick, P. (2004) Report of The American Psy-
chological Association Task Force on Advertising and 
Children. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
26	 Buijzen, M. and Valkenburg, P. (2000) ‘The impact of 
television advertising on children’s Christmas wishes’, 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 44(3), 
456–70.
27	 Ferguson, C.J., Muñoz, M.E. and Medrano, M.R. (2011) 
‘Advertising influences on young children’s food choices 
and parental influence’, Journal of Pediatrics, 160(3), 
452–5.
28	 McDermott, L., O’Sullivan, T., Stead, M. and Hastings, 
G. (2006) ‘International food advertising, pester power 
and its effects’, International Journal of Advertising, 
25(4), 513–40.
29	 Mallinckrodt, V. and Mazerski, D. (2007) ‘The effects 
of playing an advergame on young children’s percep-
tions, preferences and requests’, Journal of Advertising, 
36(2), 87–100; Moore, E.S. and Rideout, V.J. (2007) ‘The 
online marketing of food to children: is it just fun and 
games?’, Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 26(2), 
202–20.
30	 Verhellen, Y., Dens, N., De Pelsmacker, P. and Oates, C. 
(2013) ‘Children’s responses to traditional versus hybrid 
advertising formats: the moderating role of persuasion 
knowledge’, Journal of Consumer Policy, DOI: 10.1007/
s10603-014-9257-1.
31	 Grigorovici, D.M. and Constantin, C.D. (2004) ‘Expe-
riencing interactive advertising beyond rich media: 
impacts of ad type and presence on brand effectiveness 
in 3D gaming immersive virtual environments’, Journal 
of Interactive Advertising, 5(1), 22–36; Nelson, M.R., 
Yaros, R.A. and Keum, H. (2006) ‘Examining the influ-
ence of telepresence on spectator and player processing 
of real and fictitious brands in a computer game’, Jour-
nal of Advertising, 35(4), 87–99.
32	 Novack, R. (2009) ‘Marketing to millenials: a lesson 
learned from the Obama campaign’, 19 January via 
www.thedailyanchor.com.
33	 http://mashable.com/2012/01/04/barack-obama-joins-
instagram/ (accessed 20 September 2012).
34	 http://web.stagram.com/n/barackobama/ (accessed 20 
September 2012).
35	 http://www.nydailynews.com/news/politics/president-
obama-joins-pinterest-article-1.1051750 (accessed 20 
September 2012).
36	 Redondo-Bellon, I., Royo-vela, M. and Aldas-Manzano, 
J. (2001) ‘A family life cycle model adapted to the Spanish 
environment’, European Journal of Marketing, 35(5/6), 
612–38.
37	 Dumont, E. (2001) ‘Is life cycle marketing outdated?’, 
Bank Marketing (April), 12–13.
38	 Javalgi, R.J. and Dion, P. (1999) ‘A life cycle segmentation 
approach to marketing financial products and services’, 
The Services Industries Journal, 19 (July), 74–96.

REFERENCES     197
77	 Jones, J.P. (1991) ‘Over-promise and under-delivery’, 
Marketing and Research Today, 19(40), 195–203.
78	 Ehrenberg, A.S.C., Hammond, K.A. and Goodhardt, 
G.J. (1992) ‘The after effects of large consumer promo-
tions’, Journal of Advertising Research, 34(4), 11–21.
79	 Floor, K. and Van Raaij, F. (1993) Marketing commu-
nicatiestrategie (Marketing Communications Strategy). 
Houten: StenfertKroese.
80	 Euro Effie (2008) Brussels: European Association of 
Communications Agencies, http://www.euro-effie.com.
81	 Euro Effie (2001) Berlin: Gesamtverband Werbeagenturen 
GWA eV, http://www.euro-effie.com.
82	 Andrews, K. (1986) ‘Communication imperatives for new 
products’, Journal of Advertising Research, 26(5), 29–32.
83	 Euro Effie (2001) Berlin: Gesamtverband Werbeagen-
turen GWA eV, http://www.euro-effie.com.
84	 Euro Effie (2008) Brussels: European Association of 
Communications Agencies, http://www.euro-effie.com.
85	 Bovée, C.L., Thill, J.V., Dovel, G.P. and Wood, M.B. 
(1995) Advertising Excellence. New York: McGraw-Hill.
86	 Arndt, J. and Simon, J. (1983) ‘Advertising and econo-
mies of scale: critical comments on the evidence’, Journal 
of Industrial Economics, 32(2), 229–41.
87	 Longman, K.A. (1971) Advertising. New York: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich.
88	 Jegers, M. and De Pelsmacker, P. (1990) ‘The optimal 
level of advertising, considering advertising as an invest-
ment in goodwill’, Ekonomicko Matematicky Obzor 
(Review of Econometrics), 26(2), 153–63.
89	 Aaker, D.A., Batra, R. and Myers, J.G. (1987) Advertising 
Management. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
90	 Jones, J.P. (1995) When Ads Work: New Proof that 
Advertising Triggers Sales. New York: Free Press/Lexicon 
Books.
91	 Jones, J.P. (1995) Editorial, Harvard Business Review 
(January–February), 53–66.
92	 François, J. (1996) ‘Forecasting effect of advertising on 
sales: reporting on a large-scale US research’, Media Line 
News.
93	 McDonald, C. (1995) ‘Advertising response functions: 
what are they, what do they mean, and how should we 
use them?’, Admap (April), 10.
94	 Dekimpe, M.G. and Hanssens, D.M. (1995) ‘The persis-
tence of marketing effects on sales’, Marketing Science, 
14(1), 1–21.
95	 Belch, G.E. and Belch, M.A. (1998) Advertising and Pro-
motion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Per-
spective. New York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill.
96	 Aaker, D.A., Batra, R. and Myers, J.G. (1987) Advertising 
Management. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
97	 Kaynak, E. (1989) The Management of International 
Advertising: A Handbook and Guide for Professionals. 
New York: Quorum Books.
98	 Schroer, J.C. (1990) ‘Ad spending: growing market share’, 
Harvard Business Review, 68(1), 44–8.
99	 Based on Jones, J.P. (1990) ‘Ad Spending: maintaining 
market share’, Harvard Business Review, 68(1), 38–43.
58	 Euro Effie (2008) Brussels: European Association of 
Communications Agencies, http://www.euro-effie.com.
59	 Rossiter, J.R. and Percy, L. (1997) Advertising Com-
munication and Promotion Management. Sydney: 
McGraw-Hill.
60	 Curley, B. (2002) ‘“Addict” perfume targeted by anti-
stigma campaign’, Join Together, 21 October, http://
www.jointogether.org/news/features/2002/addict-­
perfume-targeted-by.html (accessed June 2009).
61	 Rossiter, J.R. and Percy, L. (1997) Advertising Com-
munication and Promotion Management. Sydney: 
McGraw-Hill.
62	 Euro Effie (2008) Brussels: European Association of 
Communications Agencies, http://www.euro-effie.com.
63	 Rossiter, J.R. and Percy, L. (1997) Advertising Com-
munication and Promotion Management. Sydney: 
McGraw-Hill.
64	 De Morgen, 13 January 2006.
65	 Euro Effie (2008) Brussels: European Association of 
Communications Agencies, http://www.euro-effie.com.
66	 Franzen, G. and Moriarty, S.E. (2008) The Science and 
Art of Branding. New York: M.E. Sharpe.
67	 Sparks, B.A. and McColl-Kennedy, J.R. (2001) ‘Justice 
strategy options for increased customer satisfaction in a 
services recovery setting’, Journal of Business Research, 
54(3), 209–18.
68	 Swanson, S.R. and Kelley, S.W. (2001) ‘Service recovery 
attributions and word-of-mouth intentions’, European 
Journal of Marketing, 35(1/2), 194–211.
69	 Lee, M. and Youn, S. (2009) ‘Electronic word of mouth 
(eWOM)’, International Journal of Advertising, 28(3), 
473–99; Sen, S. and Lerman, D. (2007) ‘Why are you tell-
ing me this? An examination into negative consumer 
reviews on the web’, Journal of Interactive Marketing, 
21(4), 76–94.
70	 Hennig-Thurau, T., Malthouse, E.C., Friege, C., Gensler, 
S., Lobschat, L., Rangaswamy, A. and Skiera, B. (2010) 
‘The impact of new media on customer relationships’, 
Journal of Service Research, 13(3), 311–30.
71	 Purnawirawan, N., Dens, N. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2014) 
‘We(b)care: how review set balance moderates the appro-
priate response strategy to negative online reviews’, Jour-
nal of Service Management, 26(3), 486–515.
72	 Cialdini, R. (1993) Influence: Science and Practice. New 
York: HarperCollins.
73	 Wansink, B. and Ray, M. (2000) ‘Estimating an adver-
tisement’s impact on one’s consumption of a brand’, 
Journal of Advertising Research, (November/December), 
106–13.
74	 Belch, G.E. and Belch, M.E. (2008) Advertising and Pro-
motion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Per-
spective, 8th edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
75	 Joyce, T. (1991) ‘Models of the advertising process’, Mar-
keting and Research Today, 19(4), 205–13.
76	 Ehrenberg, A.S.C. (1992) ‘Comments on how advertising 
works’, Marketing and Research Today, 20(3), 167–9.

198     CHAPTER 4  MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PLANNING
119	 de Ruyter, K. and Wetzels, M. (2000) ‘The role of cor-
porate image and extension similarity in service brand 
extensions’, Journal of  Economic Psychology, 21(6), 
639–59; Bhat, S. and Reddy, S.K. (2001) ‘The impact 
of parent brand attribute associations and affect on 
brand extension evaluation’, Journal of  Business 
Research, 53(3), 111–22; Dijk, M. and Yarime, M. 
(2010) ‘The emergence of hybrid-electric cars: innova-
tion path creation through coevolution of supply and 
demand’, Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 
77, 1371–90.
120	 Brakus, J.J., Schmitt, B.H. and Zarantonello, L. (2009) 
‘Brand experience: what is it? How is it measured?  
Does it affect loyalty?’, Journal of Marketing, 73(3), 
52–68.
121	 Moons, I. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2012) ‘Developing dif-
ferent types of anticipated experience positioning for 
electric cars’, Proceedings of the 2012 Icoria Conference, 
Stockholm, CD-ROM.
122	 http://www.knowthis.com/blog/postings/to-regain-
importance-myspace-tries-a-repositioning-strategy/ 
(accessed 20 September 2012).
123	 http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/feb/14/­
myspace-one-million-users (accessed 20 September 
2012).
124	 http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/feb/14/­
myspace-one-million-users (accessed 20 September 
2012).
125	 http://www.seo-micrositez.com/blog/post-name/ 
tim-vanderhook/ (accessed 20 September 2012).
126	 http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/feb/14/­
myspace-one-million-users (accessed 20 September 
2012).
127	 http://www.seo-micrositez.com/blog/post-name/ 
tim-vanderhook/ (accessed 20 September 2012).
128	 http://www.pcworld.com/article/249849/myspace_the_
next_hot_social_network.html (accessed 20 September 
2012).
129	 Leeflang, P.S.H. (1990) Probleemgebied marketing (Prob-
lem Field Marketing). Houten: Stenfert Kroese.
130	 http://www.bandagroup.com/ideas/advisor-2007-spring.
html (accessed 20 September 2012).
131	 http://www.brandchannel.com/home/post/2011/03/25/
Playtex-Looks-to-Lift-and-Separate-Branding.aspx 
(accessed 20 September 2012).
132	 http://www.lingerieinsight.com/article-525-playtex-
woos-ignored-50-something-british-women/ (accessed 
20 September 2012).
133	 Reid, L.N., King, K. and DeLorme, D.E. (1998) ‘Top-level 
agency creatives look at advertising creativity then and 
now’, Journal of Advertising, 27(2), 1–15.
134	 Rossiter, J.R. and Percy, L. (2000) Advertising Com-
munication and Promotion Management. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
135	 Centlivre, L. (1988) ‘A peek at the creatives of the ‘90s’, 
Advertising Age, 18 January, 62.
136	 Otnes, C., Oviatt, A.A. and Treise, D.M. (1995) ‘Views 
on advertising curricula from experienced creatives’, 
Journalism Educator, 49 (Winter), 21–30.
100	 Fill, C. (1995) Marketing Communication: Frameworks, 
Theories and Applications. London: Prentice Hall.
101	 Mitchell, L.A. (1993) ‘An examination of methods of set-
ting advertising budgets: practice and literature’, Euro-
pean Journal of Advertising, 27(5), 5–21.
102	 Sissors, J.Z. and Surmanek, J. (1986) Advertising Media 
Planning. Lincolnwood, IL: NTC Business Books.
103	 Aaker, D.A., Batra, R. and Myers, J.G. (1987) Advertising 
Management. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
104	 Belch, G.E. and Belch, M.A. (1998) Advertising and Pro-
motion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Per-
spective. New York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill.
105	 Brown, R.S. (1978) ‘Estimating advantages to large scale 
advertising’, Review of Economics and Statistics, 60, 
428–37.
106	 Boyer, K.D. and Lancaster, K.M. (1986) ‘Are there scale 
economies in advertising?’, Journal of Business, 59(3), 
509–26.
107	 Low, G.S. and Mohr, J.J. (1991) ‘The budget allocation 
between advertising and sales promotion: understand-
ing the decision process’, AMA Educators’ Proceedings. 
Chicago, 448–57.
108	 Rossiter, J.R. and Percy, L. (1998) Advertising Communica-
tion and Promotion Management. Sydney: McGraw-Hill.
109	 Peckham, J.O. (1981) The Wheel of Marketing. Scars-
dale, NY: self-published.
110	 Simon, C.J. and Sullivan, M.M. (1993) ‘The measure-
ment and determinants of equity: a financial approach’, 
Marketing Science, 12(1), 28–52.
111	 Solomon, B. and Askegaard, H. (2007) Consumer Behav-
iour: A European Perspective, 3rd edition. Harlow: Pear-
son Education.
112	 Kotler, P. and Armstrong, G. (2010) Principles of Mar-
keting, 13th edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice  
Hall.
113	 Euro Effie (2001) Berlin: Gesamtverband Werbeagenturen 
GWA eV, http://www.euro-effie.com.
114	 Ries, A. and Trout, J. (2001) Positioning: The Battle for 
Your Mind, 2nd edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
115	 Aaker, D.A., Batra, R. and Myers, J.G. (1992) Advertising 
Management. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
116	 de Ruyter, K. and Wetzels, M. (2000) ‘The role of 
corporate image and extension similarity in service 
brand extensions’, Journal of  Economic Psychology, 
21(6), 639–59; Park, C.W. and Young, S. (1986) ‘Con-
sumer response to television commercials: the impact 
of involvement and background music on brand atti-
tude formation’, Journal of Marketing Research, 23(1), 
11–24.
117	 de Ruyter, K. and Wetzels, M. (2000) ‘The role of cor-
porate image and extension similarity in service brand 
extensions’, Journal of Economic Psychology, 21(6), 
639–59; Park, C.W., Jaworski, B.J. and MacInnis, D.J. 
(1986) ‘Strategic brand concept-image management’, 
Journal of Marketing, 50(4), 135–45.
118	 Bhat, S. and Reddy, S.K. (2001) ‘The impact of parent 
brand attribute associations and affect on brand exten-
sion evaluation’, Journal of Business Research, 53(3), 
111–22.

REFERENCES     199
140	 Biel, A.L. and Bridgwater, C.A. (1990) ‘Attributes of 
likeable television commercials’, Advances in Con-
sumer Research, 11, 4–10; De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den 
Bergh, J. (1998) ‘Ad content, product category, campaign 
weight and irritation: a study of 226 TV commercials’, 
Journal of International Consumer Marketing, 10(4), 
5–27; Till, B.D. and Baack, D.W. (2005) ‘Recall and per-
suasion: does creative advertising matter?’, Journal of 
Advertising, 34(3), 47–57; Tippens, M.J. and Kunkel, 
R.A. (2006) ‘Winning a Clio Award and its relationship 
to profitability’, Journal of  Marketing Communica-
tions, 12(1), 1–14.
141	 West, D.C., Kover, A.J. and Caruana, A. (2008) ‘Practitioner 
and customer views of advertising creativity: same concept, 
different meaning?’, Journal of Advertising, 37(4), 35–45.
137	 Management and Advertising Problems in the Advertiser–
Agency Relationship (1985). New York: Association of 
National Advertisers.
138	 Reid, L.N., King, K. and DeLorme, D.E. (1998) ‘Top-level 
agency creatives look at advertising creativity then and 
now’, Journal of Advertising, 27(2), 1–15.
139	 Smith, R.E., Chen, J. and Yang, X. (2008) ‘The impact of 
advertising creativity on the hierarchy of effects’, Journal 
of Advertising, 37(4), 47–61; Heiser, R.S., Sierra, J.J. and 
Torres, I.M. (2008) ‘Creativity via cartoon spokespeople 
in print ads: capitalizing on the distinctiveness effect’, 
Journal of Advertising, 37(4), 75–84; Leather, P., MacKe-
chnie, S. and Amirkhanian, M. (1994) ‘The importance of 
likeability as a measure of television advertising effective-
ness’, International Journal of Advertising, 13(3), 265–80.

Chapter 5
Advertising
Chapter outline
200
Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Understand the importance of creativity in advertising and developing a creative 
platform
● Evaluate execution strategies for rational appeals
● Understand the effectiveness of emotional execution strategies such as humour, 
eroticism, fear and warmth
● Get an overview of new advertising formats
● Develop insights into cross-cultural advertising
● Understand the effects of advertising irritation and confusion

TYPES OF ADVERTISING     201
Introduction
Advertising is one of the oldest, most visible and most important instruments of the mar-
keting communications mix. Large sums of money are spent on advertising, and no other 
marketing phenomenon is subject to so much public debate and controversy. Huge amounts 
of research are devoted to the question of what makes advertising effective and to the role 
of advertising characteristics on its effectiveness.
The most crucial step in the advertising process is translating the message strategy into a 
creative platform and in advertising execution tactics. To this end, it is important to devote 
a lot of attention to different formal and content techniques and their effectiveness in adver-
tising. Aditionally, in recent years a number of ‘hybrid’ advertising techniques have become 
increasingly popular. These are also discussed in this chapter. Additionally, cross-cultural 
advertising considerations are highlighted. Phenomena such as advertising-induced irrita-
tion and confusion are also discussed. But first of all, an overview is given of the different 
types of advertising.
Types of advertising
Advertising can be defined as any paid, non-personal communications through various 
media by an identified company, non-profit organisation or individual.1 Advertising is a good 
marketing communications tool to inform and persuade people, irrespective of whether a 
product (Nestlé’s Fitnesse keeps you slim), a service (Avis: We try harder) or an idea (Come 
up against cancer) is promoted. Not surprisingly, advertising is a commonly used tool. 
Despite widespread doubts about its effectiveness, global advertising spending is on the rise, 
and is projected to keep on rising in the years to come (Figure 5.1).2
Different types of advertising can be distinguished on the basis of four criteria, as 
shown in Table 5.1. First of all, advertising can be defined on the basis of the sender of the 
message. Manufacturer advertising or product advertising is initiated by a manufacturing 
Figure 5.1  Global ad spendings, 2011–2016
Source: www.statista.com.

202     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Table 5.1  Types of advertising
Sender
Message
● Manufacturer
● Collective
● Retailer
● Co-operative
● Idea
● Informational
● Transformational
● Institutional
● Selective vs generic
● Theme vs action
Receiver
Media
● Consumer
● Business-to-business
–  industrial
–  trade
● Audio-visual
● Print
● Point-of-purchase
● Direct
Photo 5.1  Outdoor advertising to communicate an idea for a generic ‘product category’
Source: Tony Savino/Corbis via Getty Images.
company that promotes its own brands. If a government takes the initiative for a cam-
paign, this is called collective advertising. Retail organisations also advertise (retail adver-
tising). Sometimes two manufacturing companies, or a retailer and a manufacturer, jointly 
develop an advertising campaign. This is called co-operative advertising. Besides goods 
and services, ideas can be promoted (idea advertising), mostly by not-for-profit organisa-
tions (Photo 5.1). 
The intended receiver of the advertising message can be either a private end-consumer 
or another company. In the latter case, the company may buy the products to use in its 
own production process (industrial advertising), or buy the products to resell them (trade 
advertising).

CREATIVE PLATFORM     203
Figure 5.2  Global ad spending per medium type (2014)
Source: www.statista.com.
Different types of advertising can also be distinguished according to the type of message 
conveyed. The difference between advertising focused on informational and transforma-
tional consumer motives was explained earlier (see Chapter 3). Institutional advertising is 
the term used to describe government campaigns. Selective advertising campaigns try to 
promote a specific brand, while a generic advertising campaign promotes a whole product 
category, such as Dutch cheese, British beef or French wine. Theme advertising attempts to 
build a reservoir of goodwill for a brand or a product. Action advertising tries to stimulate 
consumers to buy a product immediately. Often, the latter is used in support of a sales 
promotion campaign.
Finally, different types of campaigns can be distinguished on the basis of the medium 
in which the ad is placed. Two main categories of traditional or above-the-line adver-
tising can be distinguished: audio-visual and print. Other forms of advertising, such 
as in-store communications and direct advertising, are called below-the-line advertis-
ing. In Figure 5.2, global ad spends per medium type are shown. In 2014, television still 
accounted for almost 40% of ad spendings. Internet (18.8%) and newspaper advertising 
(15%) followed as second and third. All other media accounted for between 5 and 7% 
of ad spends. Cinema is marginal. This situation is forecast to remain roughly the same 
in 2017, with one substantial exception: mobile advertising is projected to account for 
12.7% of ad spendings (5.3% in 2014), mainly at the expense of newspaper and magazine 
advertising.
Creative platform
Once a message strategy has been developed, and the advertising agency has been briefed, 
a creative platform has to be developed (see also Chapter 4). This means that the agency 
has to come up with a creative idea, and has to translate this idea into a creative execu-
tion. A creative platform should take several considerations into account: the problem the 
campaign wants to resolve, campaign objectives, the key customer benefit, evidence for this 
benefit, the characteristics of the target group, and a conversational style and advertising 
appeal (soft-hard sell, emotional or rational, . . .). A good creative advertising strategy 

204     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Both kids and teens and senior citizens require a specific advertising approach. The table below outlines some dos 
and don’ts. 
Advertising do’s and don’ts
Kids and teens
Senior citizens
Do’s
Don’ts
Do’s
Don’ts
1. Tell a basic story
2. Entertain kids
3. Surprise kids
4. Use older models
5. Remember mum 
and dad
1. Long dialogues
2. Complex messages
3. Imitate kids’ talk
4. Patronise
5. Execution mistakes
1. Positive message
2. Intergenerational approach
3. Focus on cognitive age
4. Promote benefits to 
overcome guilt
5. Use symbols of their youth
1. Remind of getting older
2. Use senior positioning
3. Age labels
4. Make long story short
5. Take physical consequences of 
getting older into account
Kids and teens want to hear a basic story (a product is a solution to a problem or a reward for good behaviour), 
but not a long dialogue or complex message. Children want to be entertained and surprised. They continually 
look for new experiences and details, and like the use of music, humour, animation, colours, jingles, games, puz-
zles, etc. Although they do like catchy slogans and are fond of slang and kids’ talk, it is better for an advertiser 
to avoid using it since by the time he or she discovers their sayings they are already out of date. The aspirational 
age of children is about four years older than they actually are; therefore it is better to cast older children to 
avoid reactions like ‘This is not for me, this is for babies.’ Kids hate being patronised, so do not pretend to be 
one of them or to know better than them. Although you want children to be fond of your brand, it is usually the 
parents who have to buy it. Therefore, make sure that your appeal is also attractive to parents by mentioning 
arguments pertaining to health, durability, lifetime value, values, etc. Finally, try to avoid ‘wrong executions’ such 
as showing children who are too young or the wrong gender (remember that boys have difficulty identifying 
with girl characters while girls can identify with both boys and girls) and not using enough visuals (children listen 
with their eyes!).3
Senior citizens represent a group that accounts for 80% of personal wealth and about 40% of consumer spend-
ing. Since 80% of consumers over the age of 50 perceive contemporary advertising as irrelevant to them, it is about 
time to take their needs and motivations into account.4 Senior citizens know they are getting older and that this will 
bring inconveniences; they do not want advertising to remind them of this or to confront them with these negative 
life aspects. Rather, focus on what the product can do for them, what the main benefits are. Another possibility is to 
stress positive aspects of getting older, such as friendships, children and grandchildren, wisdom and experience.5 An 
intergenerational approach may tap into these perfectly, such as featuring grandparents enjoying a certain product or 
Research insight
Advertising to specific target groups: kids and teens and senior citizens
summarises the main message into a creative idea and approach that is sustainable: it 
should be usable in different media and tools and over a longer period of time. A creative 
approach that is just ‘filming the strategy’ is seldom appealing, and a creative strategy that 
is merely a one-off creative firework is not sustainable either. A good creative idea can be 
implemented in various media and tools, and is rich and relevant enough to be used over 
a period of time.

CREATIVE PLATFORM     205
In 2006, Nissan’s sales were sliding. It decided to withdraw its Almera and launch a new car for the city segment 
that had to replace the vacuum left by the Almera. Moreover, the new car formed a nice opportunity for Nissan to 
take in younger customers. Almera’s customer base consisted more of older consumers and, because Nissan did not 
want to grow old with its consumers, it had to make sure to regularly take in young consumers. To this end, Nissan 
developed a car that stood out: a combination of a passenger car with the styling of an SUV, a tough car that at the 
same time was urbanproof.
To help generate sales of 93 000 units across European markets, drive awareness and interest in the Qashqai, 
attract new, younger consumers with whom Nissan had never connected before, and to avoid cannibalisation of the 
Nissan’s 4*4 X-trail, Nissan created a two-phase communications programme. The target group consisted of 25–35 
year old, urbanite males in 21 European markets. A consumer insight was that these males enjoy the city and all 
the challenges it brings; they like to rule the city. Moreover, they want to stand out, and attitude and style are more 
important to them than functionality. In the pre-launch phase the objective mainly consisted of building awareness. 
In view of the target group, an online campaign was deemed to be most effective. Therefore, Nissan used viral films 
with a focus on branding and product details, an official website and blogs on which debates were stimulated. In the 
second phase, a clear positioning or brand meaning was built to further increase awareness and trigger interest. At 
this stage, a real integrated campaign was deemed to be most suitable. The communications budget, which was 50% 
smaller than its strongest competitors (such as the VW Golf), was divided as follows: 48% TV advertising, 13% online, 
18% outdoor, 15% print and 6% other. Nissan took over metro stations, wrapped cinemas, used digital floor media 
at train stations, launched an event and invested in PR. The idea behind the campaign was ‘urbanproof’. Keeping the 
consumer insights in mind, Nissan wanted to link the toughness of the car with the target group’s attitude of wanting 
to conquer the city. The TV ad, for example, featured the car being used as a skateboard and showed its agility at 
getting around, parking, etc., in a busy city centre. By positioning the Qashqai as urban, Nissan also differentiated 
the car from the X-trail.
Business insight
Nissan Qashqai: ‘urbanproof’ for city conquerors
service with the rest of the family,6 certainly much better than using a senior positioning. Seniors are not looking for a 
product ‘ideal for seniors’ because they still want to belong to society and do not want to form an isolated group or, as 
Ahmad put it: ‘Older consumers like to be respected as people and not because they are old in terms of chronological 
age.’7 Moreover, many seniors do not feel old (actually, at an age of 55 they feel about eight years younger than they 
are) and do not want to be addressed as old or senior citizens, certainly not if they have not yet reached the age of 65. 
Unfortunately, in practice the age of 50 or 55 is often chosen as the boundary.8 European seniors have lived through 
war situations and recessions and know what poverty and scarcity mean. As a consequence, many of them still feel 
guilty about spending money. Therefore, advertising should try to take away the feeling of being thrifty by providing 
them with good reasons to buy. Many senior citizens are rather critical and want objective, extended information 
and compelling reasons why they should buy the brand.9 Nostalgic appeals showing symbols, heroes, music groups, 
etc., from the seniors’ youth can be very powerful. Finally, although seniors do not like to admit it, they do encounter 
problems when ageing, e.g. sight and hearing problems. Therefore, it is better to use high contrast levels between 
text and background, a serif font not smaller than 10 points, and slower-paced TV and radio commercials, in which 
background noise is avoided.10

206     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Creativity in advertising
What is creativity and how important is creativity in advertising? Creativity has been 
defined in different ways. The most general way to define it is ‘a violation of expectations’. 
Creativity in advertising has at least two dimensions. Creative ads are ‘different’, highly 
unique and novel. At the same time they should be relevant and meaningful.12 In other 
words, advertising should be functionally creative. To stand out and persuade it should 
not only be unexpected, differentiating and novel, but also functional in that it should 
appeal to the target group, be in line with the campaign objectives, and a translation of the 
campaign message strategy. Ang and his colleagues showed that creative ads that people 
remember and like have three characteristics: novelty, meaningfulness and connected-
ness.13 Divergence, or being different, has been conceptualised in many ways. Ads can be 
original in that they contain elements that are surprising or different from the obvious. 
They can be flexible in that they combine different ideas or switch from one perspective 
to the other. They can be elaborate in that they contain unexpected details or become 
more complicated or sophisticated, or combine previously unrelated ideas. Creative ads 
can also be formally new, in that they contain artistic verbalization or beautiful shapes.14
The impact of creative advertising is generally assumed to be in its attention-grabbing 
potential. Indeed, the first and necessary condition for an ad to be eventually persuasive, 
is that the target group notices it. This is assumed to lead to more and deeper processing 
of the ad’s content, and higher recognition and recall of the brand and message elements. 
Moreover, creative ads increase the willingness of viewers to view the ad again. Creativity 
thus stimulates a higher frequency of exposure and repeat message processing.
However, in order to be effective, creative ads also have to be relevant to the target audi-
ence. In other words, ads should not just be artistically creative (as most creatives in ad 
agencies would want), but also strategically creative (as most advertisers want). Creativity 
in advertising should support the message strategy and be appealing to customers not only 
because the ad is surprising and novel, but also because it is relevant to them. Pure artistic 
creativity, without the necessary strategic focus, runs the risk of being noticed and liked, 
but may also cause distraction from the core message. The audience may remember the  
ad, but may at the same time remain completely in the dark about which brand was talking to  
them and what it wanted to say. Non-strategic creativity may indeed lead to brand confu-
sion and lack of message processing (see also hereafter). This type of ‘creative’ ad is inef-
fective. Advertising is not an art form, but an expensive tool to support the marketing of 
products and services. If it fails to do that, it is bad advertising, no matter how creative it is.
The campaign was very effective in the sense that within two months it became Nissan’s top-selling model, 
without cannibalising the X-trail, and taking in many new, young customers. Between March 2007 and March 2008, 
24% of Nissan’s cars sold were a Qashqai. The second and third best-selling models were Note with 16% and Micra 
with 14%. The campaign was awarded a Gold Euro Effie.11
Source: Reproduced with permission of Nissan.

CREATIVE PLATFORM     207
A few examples may clarify what is meant by creative advertising ideas:
● Miller beer has a screw cap instead of a crown cap. Miller promoted its beer in TV commercials with the slogan 
‘twist to open’, showing a fat man in his underwear twisting in front of his bottle of Miller beer, pausing a moment 
to see whether his bottle had opened, and then starting to twist again.
● Volkswagen promoted its Beetle with the slogan ‘think small’, turning the small size into a competitive advantage, 
just as Smart tried to do with ‘reduce to the max’. Nissan did the opposite, promoting its new pick up using print 
ads and billboards. To stress the size of the pick up, a countryside picture features a man and, no, not his dog, but 
his hippopotamus playing with a stick. The baseline reads ‘Think Bigger’. Nissan won a Gold Clio Award for this 
campaign.
● To make clear to the Spanish audience that children should watch less TV and play more, an ad was run in which 
a little boy is shown watching TV while his dog is watching him. After having waited a while to get a bit of atten-
tion, the dog turns away and starts packing its bags. With the bag in its mouth, the dog waits a few minutes in 
front of the boy, but when the boy does not even look up, the dog sadly leaves.
● Oslo Sporveier wanted to encourage existing users to use public transport more often, as well as encourage 
new users to take up the habit of using public transport. To reach these objectives, public transport had to 
be made easier since at that time tickets could only be purchased at a limited number of places. Therefore, 
Oslo Sporveier started to sell season tickets through newsagents. The communications campaign promoting 
this season ticket featured a ticket collector on a bus. A smug-looking, self-satisfied woman holds her ticket 
ready for the collector. Just before the collector arrives, a punk seated next to the woman grabs the ticket, 
eats it, and then shows his season ticket to the collector. The pay-off slogan reads ‘Smart people buy season 
tickets – not single tickets.’15 A Belgian animated advertising campaign to promote the public bus featured 
penguins on a flake of ice. Suddenly, a killer whale shows up and prepares for a nice penguin dinner, already 
slightly opening its mouth. All the penguins smartly move backwards, as a consequence of which the flake of 
ice tilts up and the killer whale bumps into it as if it were a wall. The ad ends with the baseline ‘It’s smarter 
to travel in groups. Take the bus.’
● Nicorette, a product to help smokers give up the smoking habit, received a Silver Euro Effie for its Beat Cigarettes 
campaign. Instead of showing quitters suffering cravings, they were shown beating a giant cigarette. In some 
ads the giant cigarette represented a boxing-ball; in others it was used as a battering ram. All ads showed happy 
quitters in a humorous setting, while the baseline ‘Beat cigarettes one at a time. You’re twice as likely to succeed 
with Nicorette’ summed it all up.16
● Frisk Mints received a Gold Clio Award for its campaign in which a dopey-looking guy is brought into a laboratory 
to test his response latency. In the laboratory, a real horse and a pantomime horse played by humans are shown. 
The guy first has to eat a Frisk and is then asked to distinguish between the real horse and the pantomime horse 
by pushing a button. Amazingly he succeeds in pressing the right button, after which the slogan ‘Frisk sharpens 
you up’ appears.17
Business insight
Creativity in advertising
Source: Reproduced with permission of De Lijn, Belgium.

208     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Advertising appeals 
Measuring the return on investment of advertising campaigns is a long-standing issue with marketing profession-
als. A clear link between advertising expenditures and financial performance is often difficult to establish. Taking it 
one step further, although there is a common belief that advertising creativity is an essential element of advertising 
success, the link between creativity in advertising and advertising effectiveness is not an obvious one. The evidence 
of an impact of creative advertising on the bottom line of companies is anecdotal at best. In the USA, the Clio 
Awards recognise advertising excellence worldwide in mass media, integrated media, design and on the Internet. 
The campaigns are judged by a jury of industry experts. Many thousands of campaigns are submitted each year. The 
winners are made public during an awards ceremony lasting three days. It can be assumed that winning a Clio signals 
a firm’s quality, effectiveness and innovativeness in advertising, and that this information reaches all the stakeholders 
quickly. In a study of 126 Clio Award-winning companies that were also traded on the New York Stock Exchange, 
the relationship between winning Clio Awards and the evolution of stock price was examined. The general conclu-
sion of the study was that, in terms of adding value to the winning firms, Clio Awards did not seem to generate any 
substantial attention from the investment community. The only exception was the group of 16 food advertisers 
for which a cumulative excess return of 2% was measured. Surprisingly, some of the results seem to indicate that 
winning an award affects stock prices negatively, for instance for retailers and manufacturers. This may reflect the 
financial market’s bias against perceived overspending on advertising, or even the prejudice that spending too much 
on advertising is wasteful. The study illustrates that establishing a relationship between advertising efforts, let alone 
creative ones, and financial results is not obvious.18
Research insight
The relationship between winning a Clio Award and firm profitability
P&G had a hit in 2010 with its award-winning Old Spice ad ‘The Man Your Man Could Smell Like’, generating almost 
42 million views (so far). Who does not remember the atypical ad language ‘Hello ladies. Look at your man. Now 
back to me. Now back at your man. Now back to me. Sadly, he isn’t me. But if he stopped using lady scented body 
wash and switched to Old Spice, he could smell like he is me’ going on, showing that anything is possible when a 
man smells like Old Spice and not a lady.
The success of the first commercial was followed by a successful second ad, and another successful ad, etc. The 
ads quickly went viral and the brand surprised everybody by posting dozens of improvised scenes of the main actor 
giving personal responses to everyone who had commented on the Old Spice ads via social networks. All this led 
to a sales increase in Old Spice products of 170%.
Building on what the public came to expect from Old Spice, P&G’s 2012 ad again excels in creativity and original-
ity while keeping on stressing the power of Old Spice. This time, the Old Spice man takes over ads for other P&G 
products such as Bounce and Charmin. The Charmin ad, for example, features the Old Spice man’s head bursting 
through a box of Freshmates and his hand smashing through the wall showing a can of Old Spice while shouting ‘Old 
Business insight
Too powerful to stay in its own commercial

RATIONAL APPEALS     209
In trying to generate the established advertising objectives, agencies or creatives can 
use a multitude of appeals, formats and execution strategies to express or translate their 
creative idea.20 Broadly speaking, two different types of creative appeals can be distin-
guished: rational appeals and emotional appeals. Emotional advertising appeals are adver-
tisements whose main purpose is to elicit affective responses and to convey an image. 
Rational advertising appeals, on the other hand, contain features, practical details and 
verifiable, factually relevant cues that can serve as evaluative criteria. Referring to the dif-
ference between action and image communications as discussed earlier (see Chapter 1), 
many image communications make use of emotional appeals, while most action com-
munications use rational appeals. Also, with respect to the difference between product 
performance and imagery communications, most product performance ads use rational 
elements, whereas imagery communications most often consist of emotional ads. How-
ever, mixed appeals also exist, employing both rational and emotional elements. Both for 
emotional and rational appeals, different formats or execution strategies and different 
types of endorsers can be used (see Table 5.2). Also, it has to be added here that several of 
the formats that can be used for rational appeals could just as well be used for emotional 
appeals, although they are discussed only once. For example, a comparative ad can be 
purely factual, describing own and competitive prices, but could also be humorous, such 
as Virgin Atlantic’s campaign featuring large billboards in airports with the message 
‘Enjoy your overpriced flight’.
Rational appeals
Rational ads may contain one or several information cues. The most widely used classifica-
tion system of information cues is the one presented in Table 5.3, which has been applied 
in more than 60 studies.21 The classification consists of 14 different types of information.
Spice is too powerful to stay in its own commercial!’ Soon consumers started tweeting messages like ‘the Old Spice 
Man in other commercials = pure brilliance’, ‘amazing haha’, ‘disruption earns attention’, etc. It looks like creativity 
is really appreciated by the general public.19
Table 5.2  Creative advertising appeals, advertising formats and endorsers
Rational appeals
Emotional appeals
● Talking head
● Demonstration
● Problem solution
● Testimonial
● Slice of life
● Dramatisation
● Comparative ads
● Etc.
● Humour
● Eroticism
● Warmth
● Fear
● Shock tactics
● Music
● Etc.
Endorsers
● Expert endorsement
● Celebrity endorsement

210     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Abernethy and Franke performed a meta-analysis on 59 studies in 24 different countries, 
including the USA, most Western countries and the Pacific Rim, in which this classification 
had been used, and revealed the following.22 The mean number of information cues (over 
the different countries and over different media) is 2.04, and the cues most frequently used 
are performance (in 43% of the cases), availability (37%), components (33%), price (25%), 
quality (19%) and special offers (13%) (Figure 5.3).
As might be expected, ads for durable goods contain significantly more information 
cues than ads for non-durable goods (2.7 versus 2.0). Ads in developed countries (the 
USA, Canada, Southern and Western Europe, Japan, Australia, New Zealand) are more 
informative than ads in less developed countries (China, Taiwan, South Korea, India, 
Saudi Arabia, parts of Latin America). Another study showed that rational appeals are 
more effective than emotional appeals when a product is new to the market, while the 
opposite holds true in markets in which consumers are already very familiar with the 
product.23 Moreover, ads for intangible products (e.g. services) contain more information 
cues than for tangible products. The same conclusion holds for low as compared with high 
competitive markets.24 One study shows that a diagnostic product element (= informa-
tion that helps consumers to assess product quality) stimulates message involvement and 
enhances ad and brand evaluations for high, but not for low Need for Cognition indi-
viduals (i.e. consumers that do not like to engage in cognitive activities). Two diagnostic 
information elements, however, did not further improve involvement or evaluations as 
compared with one information element, leading to the conclusion that one diagnostic 
information element seems sufficient.25 Finally, the level of information varies between 
different advertising media.
Figure 5.3  Most frequently used information cues in advertising
Source: Based on Abernethy, A.M. and Franke, G.R. (1996) ‘The information content of advertising: a meta-analysis’, Journal of Adver-
tising, 25(2). 1–17
Table 5.3  Resnik and Stern’s information classification
● Price
● Quality
● Performance
● Components
● Availability
● Special offers
● Taste
● Nutrition
● Packaging
● Warranties
● Independent research
● Company research
● New ideas
● Safety

RATIONAL APPEALS     211
Turning to the advertising formats noted in Table 5.2, a talking head refers to an ad in 
which the characters tell a story in their own words: monologue, dialogue or interview 
techniques could be used.
In a demonstration, consumers are shown how a product works. It is an easy way to focus 
on product attributes, and talk about the benefits and product uses while demonstrating  
the product. For example, when Febreze was launched in Europe, ads showed consumers that 
the product could be used for preventing disturbing odours in clothes, sofas, curtains, cars, etc.
The optimal advertising appeal for brand extensions depends, among others, on the fit between the parent brand 
and the extension. In an experimental study with 208 participants, the effectiveness of different advertising appeals 
was studied for extensions varying in fit with the parent brand. A 2 (parent brand concept: functional, symbolic) * 2 
(extension product category: functional, symbolic) * 2 (advertising strategy: parent brand focus, extension focus) 
experiment was set up. Eight different ads were created, two for each new brand extension (sunscreen – functional, and 
champagne – symbolic), introduced by a highly symbolic brand (Louis Vuitton, a French luxury label in handbags and 
fashion accessories), or a more functional brand (H&M, a Swedish fashion and accessories brand which is relatively low 
budget). For each possible brand extension combination, the ads differed in their focus on either the parent brand or 
the new extension. The test brands were chosen based on a pre-test, which showed both brands were highly familiar. 
The test brands as well as the product categories used differed significantly in terms of functionality and symbolism.
The results show that perceived fit positively affects extension evaluation in terms of credibility, attitude and 
purchase intention in that these effects are found in cases of a match between the parent brand concept and the 
extension product category in terms of symbolism and functionality. An incongruent extension also significantly 
damages the parent brand, measured as the difference between pre- and post-extension brand attitude. How-
ever, advertising focus moderated the results of matching versus mismatching extension categories. A focus on the 
extension mitigated the negative effects of a mismatch on credibility, attitude towards the extension and purchase 
intention. When the ad focused prominently on the brand name, mismatching extensions were significantly more 
negatively evaluated than a matching counterpart. In other words, a highly fitting extension is most effectively com-
municated with a brand focus. Lowly fitting extensions are best communicated with an extension focus. Advertising 
messages that focus on the brand are indeed unlikely to compensate for products that are obviously not congru-
ent. In line with categorisation theory, a mismatch between the parent brand and the extension in terms of brand 
concept should result in more difficult categorisation and more piecemeal processing. Consumers will, in this case, 
base their evaluation of the extension more on the core attributes and benefits of the extension itself. Providing this 
information in an ad should positively influence evaluation of the extension. Moreover, a mismatching extension 
significantly dilutes the parent brand, especially when the ad focuses on attributes of the extension. This will increase 
the salience of these attributes, which may be especially incongruent with the parent brand.
In sum, these results suggest that the best advertising strategy is a function of the specific extension situation 
(brand extension match or not), and of the main objective the ad wishes to achieve. If the goal is – as with most 
extension ads – to induce positive communications effects for the extension, then a matching extension benefits 
most from a positioning close to the parent brand, whereas a mismatching extension is better advertised with its 
own attributes and features. However, one should keep in mind that the latter situation may strongly dilute the 
parent brand attitude in general, as it will link incongruent extension associations with the brand schema. Only a 
matching extension, advertised with an extension focus, enhances the parent brand. This is a potential way to build 
brand equity. It should be noted that extensions in any case are a risky strategy for the parent brand, and conditions 
under which enhancement effects occur should be carefully considered. Whether focusing on the brand or on the 
extension, brand managers need to focus on creating extension ads that are well liked, as the attitude towards the 
extension ad positively influences evaluation of the extension, and consequently general parent brand attitude.26
Research insight
Advertising for brand extensions

212     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
A problem solution shows how a problem can be solved or avoided. Problem solution is 
sometimes combined with a fear appeal showing consumers what happens if the brand is 
not used.27 For example, the ads for Head & Shoulders feature an elegant-looking business 
professional wearing a nice dark suit. Unfortunately he has a dandruff problem which clearly 
shows on the suit. Head & Shoulders can solve this problem.
A testimonial features ordinary people saying how good a product is. Typical products which 
are advertised in this way are detergents: ‘I really was amazed, my clothes have never been so 
white.’ SlimFast (‘You really can’) also used ads featuring local testimonials of how much weight 
people lost to introduce or relaunch the brand in the UK, Germany, France and the Nether-
lands.28 Testimonials are often effective because they rely on the positive membership reference 
group effect. The latter is especially the case for consumers who are highly susceptible to norma-
tive influence. For these consumers a testimonial is more impactful than attribute information, 
whereas the reverse holds true for people scoring low on susceptibility to normative influence.29 
In general, it is advisable to carefully pre-test testimonials on believability and the emotions they 
evoke because research shows that testimonials often lead to irritation in consumers.30
Slice-of-life ads feature the product being used in a real-life setting, which usually involves 
solving a problem. The effectiveness of this type of ad is attributed to the fact that the prod-
uct is shown in a real-life context that the target group can relate to. An example would be 
a family putting picnic hampers, blankets, toys, etc., in their new Mercedes space van to go 
out for a picnic on a Sunday afternoon. Another example shows a boy playing soccer with 
his friends, then he comes home with his clothes so dirty one would think they will never 
be clean again. Fortunately, the boy’s mother has Dreft, which cleans the clothes without a 
problem. Although slice-of-life advertising is used quite often, research shows that such ads 
are more likely to cause irritation.31
Dramatisation advertising is rather similar to a slice of life. Both first present a problem 
and afterwards the solution, but a dramatisation builds suspense and leads consumers to 
a climax. The difference between a slice of life and/or a drama (which just tells a story) 
and a dramatisation lies in the intensity. The Alldays Tanga campaign is an example of a 
dramatisation. A young woman is dancing on a stage amid a large crowd, wearing extremely 
close-fitting clothes. Suddenly, in front of everyone, her panty liner gets dislodged, causing 
her a lot of embarrassment while other girls make fun of her. The spot ends showing sev-
eral other girls dancing without any worries. The solution becomes obvious in the base line 
‘Should’ve worn ALLDAYS TANGA’.32
Wash&Go, the mid-tier shampoo leader in the Balkans market, became crushed between a stronger than ever premium 
tier and an impressively large low tier. In response to this situation, other mid-tier competitors launched premium 
ingredients-based variants. Wash&Go decided to do the opposite: it launched Wash&GoReviva, a nettle-based variant. 
The nettle ingredient had already existed for more than 30 years in the market and was especially popular among low-
tier users. Importantly, all existing nettle-based shampoos were priced at least four times cheaper than Wash&GoReviva.
Wash&Go was the only shampoo brand that positioned itself on an ESP. Capitalising on this heritage and on 
Balkan women’s desire to have enduring appeal to their partners, Wash&Go launched an emotional campaign that 
dramatised how women can hold on to their men. The ‘Best of Traditions’ campaign made a humorous comment 
on old, absurd rituals and superstitions to keep a partner, presenting the nettle extract as the only solution to keep 
your beloved one. The campaign objective was to increase sales volume by 25%. The appeal resonated very well in 
the target group, surpassing the sales objective by 210.6% in Bulgaria and 88.3% in Romania. The company received 
a Bronze Euro Effie for its ‘Best of Traditions’ campaign.33
Business insight
Wash&Go is the best of traditions

RATIONAL APPEALS     213
Comparative advertising can be used as a means to differentiate a brand from a competitor. 
A direct comparative ad explicitly names the comparison brand (often a well-known com-
petitive brand) and claims that the comparison brand is inferior to the advertised brand with 
respect to a specific attribute. An indirect comparative ad does not explicitly mention a com-
parison brand, but argues to be superior on a certain attribute compared with other brands 
(‘Gillette, the best a man can get’). For a long time, directly comparative advertising was an 
American phenomenon. However, the European Commission has decided to allow compara-
tive advertising in certain circumstances. A study points out that consumers in countries 
in which comparative advertising is not allowed, or is used infrequently, have a much more 
negative attitude towards comparative ads than American consumers.34 Taylor Nelson Sofres 
found in 2001 that two-thirds of UK consumers find comparable ads unacceptable; women 
were most opposed and youngsters aged between 16 and 24 minded least that brands criticise 
competitors.35 Research in France showed that direct comparative ads led to more positive 
brand attitudes than indirect or non-comparative ads.36 However, French advertisers remain 
unconvinced of the effectiveness of comparative advertising on French consumers and do 
not intend to use it more often in the future.37 Also in Spain, comparative advertising does 
not seem to be well received. A study revealed that the more intense the comparative claim, 
the less consumers believed the propositions, the more counter-arguments were formed, 
and the more negative attitudes and brand intentions became.38 This seems to suggest that 
advertisers should be careful about using this technique in Europe.
Are comparative ads more effective than non-comparative ads? A short review of research results reveals the 
following: 
Research insight
The advantages and disadvantages of comparative advertising
The advantages and disadvantages of comparative advertising
Advantages
Disadvantages
More attention
Less credible
Better brand and message awareness
Comparison of similar brands confuses people
More elaborate processing
Less favourable attitude towards the ad
Association with comparison brand
Possibility of increasing brand confusion
Differentiation
Possibility of aggressive media wars
More favourable attitude towards the brand
Costs due to law suits
Purchase behaviour more likely
Consumers seem to devote more attention to a comparative than to a non-comparative 
ad. The reason is that since at least two brands are being compared, the ad is relevant to 
more consumers (users of both the sponsored and comparison brand).39 Because of more 
attention, comparative ads lead to a better message and brand awareness, evoke more 
­cognitive responses and, as a consequence, enhance a more central communications pro-
cessing.40 However, it should be noted that consumers perceive comparative advertising as 
less credible.41 A recent study shows that elaborate processing and credibility of comparative 

214     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
advertising may be different for men and women. For men, comparative advertising seems to 
increase brand evaluations and purchase intentions because it increases their brand involve-
ment and enhances processing. For women, on the other hand, comparative advertising leads 
to heightened persuasive intent perceptions and these perceptions decrease brand evaluation 
and purchase intentions.42
Concerning product positioning, positive effects can be observed. With new brand intro-
ductions, advertisers often stress the superiority of the new brand over a more familiar 
competitor on a typical attribute. By doing so, two desirable goals seem to be reached: (1) 
the new product is associated with the comparison brand and, as a consequence, more easily 
included in the consideration set of the target consumers; (2) the brand advertised is different 
from, and is more likely to be preferred to, the comparison brand.43
The attitude towards the brand usually is positively influenced by comparative ads, 
while the contrary holds for the attitude towards the ad.44 The latter is perceived to be less 
personal, less friendly and amusing, less honest and more aggressive.45 Although conative 
or behavioural effects have not been extensively studied, it seems that comparative ads 
have a positive influence on purchase intention.46 Furthermore, comparative as opposed 
to non-comparative ads seem to enhance purchase behaviour, as indicated by coupon 
redemption.47
Although the balance of advantages and disadvantages turns out to be in favour of 
comparative advertising, one should also take into account the following threats. The use 
of comparative advertising may lead to aggressive, competitive media wars when the com-
parison brand feels attacked (the so-called boomerang effect). Furthermore, comparative 
advertising may be misleading and confusing for consumers.48 One should try to avoid 
promoting a competitive brand. This occurs when, as a result of the ad, the consumer 
wrongly thinks the ad sponsor is the comparison brand. Costs may also rise because of 
lawsuits, etc. Finally, remember that comparative ads are not appreciated to the same extent 
in different cultures and countries. The findings reported in US studies may not hold at all 
for Europe, Asia, etc.
Emotional appeals
Emotional advertising refers to advertising that tries to evoke emotions in consumers rather 
than to make consumers think. Emotional ads mainly consist of non-verbal elements such 
as images and emotional stimuli. It should be clear that there is a difference between the 
intended emotional content of a stimulus, or the emotional technique used, and the emo-
tions experienced by a consumer as a result of being exposed to an ad. Emotional appeals 
do not necessarily evoke emotions in all people, although they are designed to do so.
Humour
Humorous advertising can be defined as an appeal created with the intent to make people 
laugh, irrespective of the fact that the humour is successful (people indeed perceive the ad 
as humorous) or unsuccessful (people do not think the ad is funny). Humour seems to be 
one of the most frequently used emotional techniques throughout the world. A survey in 
33 countries in 1992 revealed that approximately 35% of all magazine and outdoor adver-
tising contained humour. No significant differences could be detected between the different 
countries, nor between the two media.49 More current estimates also indicate that humorous 
advertising takes a share of about 10% to 30% (Photo 5.2).50
Are humorous appeals effective? No doubt most people appreciate a good joke, but can 
humorous ads convey a brand message? Or do they leave people remembering the joke, 
but neither the brand nor the brand message? Can humour be used for ‘serious’ products, 

EMOTIONAL APPEALS     215
or does a humorous approach make a clown of the advertising company? Humour seems 
to raise a lot of questions, and unfortunately not a lot of straight answers can be given. 
Humour has been studied by many researchers, and overall there is only one aspect on which 
agreement between the researchers can be found: humour attracts attention.51 However, 
the question remains as to what extent humour also attracts attention to the brand. As far 
as recall and recognition, creating positive ad and brand attitudes and increasing purchase 
intention are concerned, no conclusive results can be drawn.52 This can partly be explained 
by several moderating variables (Figure 5.4).
Photo 5.2  Nicorette: giving up 
smoking with a smile
Source: AMVBBDO.
Figure 5.4  Moderating variables affecting the effectiveness of humour in advertising

216     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Different types of humour exist, e.g. cognitive humour. In this case, there is an incongruity, 
an unexpected element as a result of which the consumer has to follow different lines of reason-
ing to solve the incongruity;53 for example, an advert for Amstel Light beer showed products 
that normally belong in the refrigerator in an unexpected spot because Amstel Light has taken 
their place in the refrigerator. One example features a woman who is sleeping in bed. When she 
wakes up and turns on the light, she screams when she finds a plate of meatloaf next to her in 
bed. The next scene shows the refrigerator where a 12-pack of Amstel Light is jammed into 
the meatloaf’s position.54 There is also sentimental humour: for example, a little kitten that 
tries to catch the ball in a football game on TV; a satire, meant to be funny and insulting at the 
same time; sexual humour, making fun of the other sex, etc. The different types of humour are 
appreciated by the target consumers to a different extent leading to different communications 
effects. While sentimental humour is quite innocent, satire or sexual humour is more aggressive 
and, not surprisingly, not everyone finds the latter types of humour funny.
The effectiveness of humour also depends on the product type. The prevailing opinion 
seems to be that humour is more appropriate for low- than for high-involvement products, 
and for transformational rather than for informational products, and that humour, in any 
case, should be avoided for high-involvement/informational products, such as banking and 
insurance.55
In general, humour seems to be more effective for existing and familiar brands than 
for new and unfamiliar brands.56 In other words, building brand awareness using humour 
is more difficult, since the humour might gain too much attention, leading to inferior 
brand attention. Humour that is in one way or another related to the product is more 
effective than unrelated humour.57 Finally, humour may have a detrimental effect when 
prior brand evaluations are negative.58 In other words, if you are convinced that a Lion 
bar tastes awful and sticks to your teeth, you are more likely to think that the company 
wants to be funny, but is not funny at all, while a positive brand attitude leads to more 
tolerance and acceptance.
Eroticism
Defined very broadly, an ad can be classified as erotic if one or more of the following ele-
ments are present: partial or complete nudity, physical contact between two adults, sexy or 
provocatively dressed person(s), provocative or seductive facial expression, and suggestive 
words or sexually laden music. Although some people seem convinced that eroticism is 
being used more and more in European advertising, content analyses show that this is only 
in the eyes of the beholder.59
How effective is an ad showing a seductive Claudia Schiffer in front of the Citroën Xsara, 
the erotic style of the Martini campaigns, the nude Sophie Dahl for Opium or the full-
frontal nude model for Yves Saint Laurent’s scent H7? As was the case with humour, no 
clear guidelines can be provided for the use of eroticism. However, an indisputable conclu-
sion is that erotic advertising attracts attention, even to the extent that more car accidents 
occur near erotic billboards.60 One may wonder, though, whether any attention is directed 
at the brand or the brand message. Indeed, most researchers agree that eroticism reduces 
brand and message recall.61 Another negative aspect on which most researchers agree is that 
eroticism has a negative impact on the image of the advertiser.62 For other communications 
objectives such as the attitude towards the ad or the brand, and purchase intention, mixed 
research results have been reported.63
An explanation can be found in a number of moderating factors. For instance, the 
more intense the eroticism or, in other words, the more overt the sex appeal in the form 
of nudity or suggestion of sexual intercourse, the more negative the responses to the ad 
become.64 However, a study for suntan lotion found exactly the opposite, suggesting that 
advertisers would do better opting for ‘the full monty’ rather than for partial nudity.65 
Perhaps this result can be explained by the product promoted, namely suntan lotion. 
Previous research results reveal that the more the erotic appeal is related to the product, 

EMOTIONAL APPEALS     217
the more positive the responses to it become.66 In other words, functional products such 
as underwear, bath foam, shower cream, etc., and romantic products such as perfume, 
aftershave, alcohol, cosmetics, etc., are expected to benefit more from an erotic appeal 
than other product categories such as coffee, a lawnmower, a lathe, etc. Notwithstanding 
the foregoing, a study in which the effectiveness of eroticism for social marketing topics 
(as diverse as eating healthily, public library and museum attendance, HIV/AIDS preven-
tion, etc.) was tested showed that sexual appeals were more persuasive than matched 
non-sexual appeals.67
Which target group can most effectively be addressed with an erotic appeal? One study 
shows that erotic appeals lead to better memory and superior attitudes and purchase 
intent among low-involvement consumers, whereas high-involvement consumers show 
superior attitudes and purchase intent towards non-sexual appeals.68 Further, in general, 
men respond significantly more positively to eroticism than women.69 However, in most 
of the studies, ads with seductive or naked women were used. Handsome men as product 
endorsers might have completely altered the picture. In fact, lately more and more adver-
tisers are using men as sex objects to please women. Examples are the Cola Light 11.30 
break commercial, the Australian ad for Underdaks men’s underwear in which two female 
airport officers have a man stripped to his underwear by sounding a false alarm each time 
he passes through the control gate, the Gini ad in which a female passionately grabs a guy, 
starts opening the buttons of his shirt, unhooks his belt, pulls the belt out of his trousers 
and . . . uses the belt to open her bottle of Gini. However, the differences between men and 
women cannot be fully explained by the sex of the model. Women seem to respond favour-
ably to erotic ads only when there is a strong fit between the ad and the brand. Men, on the 
other hand, respond favourably to eroticism irrespective of the level of fit.70
To conclude, among marketing practitioners there seems to be agreement that sex sells, 
but some are wondering for how much longer. According to them, sex is becoming a com-
modity that is no longer able to shock or convey indulgent sensuality.71
Warmth
Warm advertising can be described as advertising that consists of elements evoking mild, 
positive feelings such as love, friendship, cosiness, affection and empathy. Although warmth 
now seems to be used less than it was a few decades ago, it is still a frequently used emotional 
technique.72 Is this frequent use of warmth justified? The answer is, clearly, yes. Although 
mixed results have been reported as to the effect of warmth on message and brand recall and 
recognition, warmth leads to more positive affective responses, less negative feelings such as 
irritation, a more positive attitude towards the ad and towards the brand, and sometimes an 
enhanced purchase intention.73 Target groups most responsive to warm appeals are females, 
emotional individuals and individuals with a lot of cognitive empathy (meaning that they 
can understand the situation of others).74
Alzheimer’s disease is a devastating, incurable disease. The disease pathway is typically characterised by a long pre-
clinical phase in which patients experience mild cognitive impairments. Medical research states that through early 
diagnosis of symptoms the disease process can be slowed down.75 The main concern is then to make the population 
at risk aware of the importance of early diagnosis and stimulate them to take responsible actions at the earliest stage 
Research insight
The role of affect in Alzheimer’s disease message processing

218     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
of the onset of the disease. Very little is known about the role of affective communication stimuli in the domain of 
a fatal disease, where one can merely intervene in order to lengthen the time period in which the patient can still 
enjoy a reasonable quality of life.
Forgas’s Affect Infusion Model (AIM) distinguishes four judgemental strategies: two low-affect infusion strate-
gies (direct access and motivated processing) and two high-affect infusion strategies (heuristic and substantive 
processing). Affect should have an effect when heuristic or substantive processing is used.76 Two underlying 
mechanisms of affect infusion are affect-as-information and affect priming. The affect-as-information theory 
suggests that rather than forming a judgement on the basis of recalled features of a target, individuals may  
ask themselves ‘How do I feel about it?’ and, in doing so, may be guided by their feelings to judge a message. 
In the affect priming theory, affect can indirectly inform judgements by facilitating access to related cognitive 
categories.77 Hence, affect can prime the encoding, retrieval and selective use of information in the constructive 
processing of judgements. Within the AIM, it is implied that it is in the course of substantive, constructive pro-
cessing that affect is most likely to play a significant informational role in what is perceived, learned and recalled, 
and how stimulus information is interpreted. Thus stimuli that are perceived as positively affective should lead to 
paying closer attention to positive information, better learning of details, and making more positive interpreta-
tions of ambiguous information. The AIM also implies that judgements about more complex stimuli (substantive 
processing context), requiring more elaborate processing and made without the benefit of objective evidence, 
should show greater affective effects. According to this principle, substantive processing is more likely when the 
message is personally relevant.
A study with Belgian and Spanish participants aimed at exploring the role of message affect and message 
thoughts in the processing of Alzheimer’s awareness messages varying in argument strength and affective tone of 
visuals.78 The study compares two target groups. The first one is older people (hereafter referred to as the ‘General 
Public’), an age cohort that is a prime target group for Alzheimer’s awareness messages. The second group are 
Caregivers of Alzheimer’s patients. The study investigates differences in message processing depending on the 
level of experience with Alzheimer’s disease. The first sample consisted of 495 Belgian and Spanish seniors. The 
second sample, the Alzheimer’s Caregivers sample, consisted of 243 Belgian and Spanish Caregivers for patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease.
Six Alzheimer’s awareness messages were developed in which two levels of argument strength (weak and strong) 
were combined with three pictures of different affective valence (negative, neutral and positive). These messages 
were aimed at convincing people to seek early treatment. A 2 (message strength: weak–strong) * 3 (affective 
valence of image: negative–neutral–positive) between-subjects design was used to collect the data. Participants 
received an email with a link to a Web survey. After answering a number of demographic questions, they viewed 
one of the six Alzheimer’s disease messages, to which they were randomly assigned. Subsequently, they answered 
questions on scales evaluating their responses to the message.
One of the main conclusions of the study is that the affective reaction to an Alzheimer’s message is very 
important for its effectiveness. Affect plays an important role in the development of message thoughts and 
message outcomes such as Alzheimer’s thoughts, perceived message substance and the attitude towards the 
ad. However, what causes this affective reaction, the process by means of which the affective reactions lead to 
message outcomes, and the role of message thoughts in this process differ according to groups with varying 
levels of Alzheimer’s disease experience. For the non-experienced General Public participants, processsing Alz-
heimer’s messages is to a certain extent affect-driven, but message thoughts play an important mediating role in 
processing the message. The afffective reaction to the message and argument strength substantially determine 
message thoughts. Partly through the development of message thoughts, affective reactions positively transfer 
to perceived message substance, Alzheimer’s thoughts and the attitude towards the message, suggesting affect 
priming and infusion as well as central biased processing. In the case of experienced Caregiver participants, 
processing Alzheimer’s messages is more exclusively affect-driven in that affect plays a much more prominent 
role in the development of Alzheimer’s thoughts, perceived message substance and the attitude towards the 
message, and the development of message thoughts is not influenced by affective reactions, neither do they 
mediate their effect.
The results of the study have implications for health communication professionals. Processing health messages and 
forming health issue judgements following these messages is largely an affect-driven process for both experienced 

EMOTIONAL APPEALS     219
and non-experienced subjects. In the General Public, positive affective reactions are an important prerequisite for 
the development of positive attitudes and thoughts. Nevertheless, argument strength remains an important driver 
of positive message processing too, and special care should be taken that positive message thoughts are also devel-
oped. Secondly, various message components may evoke positive affective reactions. Argument strength is one of 
them, but also the type of visual is an important driver of affective responses. On the basis of the study, neutrally 
valenced images seem to be the optimal choice in this type of message. For the subjects with Alzheimer’s disease 
experience, affect is the main driver in forming judgements about Alzheimer’s disease messages. The development 
of messages for groups with Alzheimer’s experience should pay close attention to evoking a positive affective reac-
tion to the message, and not so much to developing positive message thoughts.
Fear
Fear appeal advertising (or threat-based advertising) refers the consumer to a certain type 
of risk (threat) that he or she might be exposed to and which he or she usually can reduce 
by buying (e.g. insurance) or not buying (e.g. not drinking when driving) a product (coping 
efficacy). Typical risks that might be used in a fear appeal are:79
● Physical. The risk of bodily harm, often used for burglar alarms, toothpaste, analgesics, 
etc. An example would be ‘When are you going to install an alarm? After they break in?’
● Social. The risk of being socially ostracised, often used for deodorants, dandruff sham-
poo, mouthwash, etc.
● Time. The risk of spending a lot of time on an unpleasant activity while the activity can be 
performed in less time. During the introduction period of dishwashers, messages frequently 
read ‘Do you realise that most people spend X years of their life washing the dishes?’
● Product performance. The risk that competitive brands do not perform adequately. Dyson 
vacuum cleaners are promoted as having no bag, which makes them the only cleaner to 
maintain 100% suction, 100% of the time.
● Financial. The risk of losing a lot of money, typically used by insurance companies.
● Opportunity loss. Pointing out to consumers that they run the risk of missing a special 
opportunity if they do not act right away. For example, the Belgian mobile phone provider 
Proximus ran a campaign with the following message: ‘Subscribe now to Proximus, and 
pay nothing until April.’
Are threat appeals effective? Most studies point in an affirmative direction. Several stud-
ies confirm that threat appeals are capable of sensitising people to threats and of changing 
their behaviour.80,81
Fear or threat appeals are ‘persuasive messages designed to scare people by describing the terrible things that will 
happen to them if they do not do what the message recommends’.82 Fear appeals and threat appeals are often 
incorrectly used as synonyms. However, threats illustrate undesirable consequences from certain behaviours (threat 
Research insight
How fear appeals work

220     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
appeal); fear is a potential emotional response of an individual to a threat.83 Threat appeals are often used as persua-
sive messages in public service announcements or social profit campaigns, for instance anti-smoking, HIV, speeding, 
drunk driving, etc., but also commercial companies such as banks and insurance companies occasionally use threat 
appeals. The objective is always to increase the involvement of people with an issue or a problem by presenting it 
as threatening, and to offer a credible solution, such as the adaptation of certain behaviour, or purchasing a certain 
brand.
In earlier models of how threat appeals work, fear is considered as the only factor that influences adaptive 
behaviour. These ‘Drive models’84 attribute the effectiveness of threat appeals to evoked fear. Drive models 
claim that there is an inverted U-shaped relationship between the fear level of a message and attitudes and 
behaviour. In other words, moderate fear appeals work best: some fear is needed to motivate people to reach 
a negative drive state. However, the fear has to be able to be reduced (drive reduction). If fear is too high, 
maladaptive behaviour will follow as a result of ‘reactance’, the motivation to resist any perceived threat to 
one’s freedom to make up one’s own mind about an issue.85 The ‘Terror Management Theory’86 also offers a 
potential explanation of why high fear messages are counter-productive. According to this theory, people deny 
their fear of death and attempt to enhance their positive self-esteem, for instance by means of speeding, as a 
way of managing this fear.
The ‘Protection Motivation Theory’ (PMT),87 on the other hand, prescribes that four independent cognitive 
responses mediate the impact of a threat appeal on coping attitudes, intentions and behaviour: perceived severity, 
an individual’s beliefs about the seriousness of the threat; perceived susceptibility or probability of occurrence, an 
individual’s beliefs about his or her chances of experiencing the threat; perceived response efficacy, an individual’s 
beliefs as to whether a response effectively prevents the threat; and perceived self-efficacy, an individual’s belief 
in his or her ability to perform the recommended response. Perceived severity and susceptibility represent the 
perceived level of threat, perceived response efficacy and self-efficacy represent the perceived level of efficacy. 
Threat messages consequently lead to protection motivation which, in turn, has an impact on attitudes and cop-
ing intention and behaviour. Evoked fear may affect attitudes and behaviour through its impact on perceived 
severity and probability of occurrence, but fear is not a necessary prerequisite for compliance with the message 
recommendation.
The PMT does an excellent job in explaining the factors leading to message acceptance, but fails to explain 
the specific factors leading to message rejection. The ‘Extended Parallel Processing Model’88 defines two reac-
tions to threat appeals: a mainly cognitive one (danger control), where people think about the threat and 
ways to avert it; and a mainly emotional one (fear control) in which people react to their fear and engage in 
strategies (reactance, defensive avoidance) to control their fear. Threat appeals may evoke fear that leads to 
fear control, or they may lead to higher perceived threat that leads to fear and, in turn, again to increased 
perceived threat (feedback loop) and danger control. Too high levels of evoked fear may immediately lead to 
fear control and thus to ineffective messages. High levels of threat (caused by or inducing fear), combined with 
high levels of coping efficacy perception (‘I can do something about it’), lead to danger control and message 
acceptance: people feel threatened, but have the impression they can do something about it. On the other 
hand, high levels of threat combined with low levels of perceived coping efficacy lead to fear control and 
message rejection. People feel threatened and get the impression they cannot do anything about it, hence 
ignore or reject the message.
Recent empirical work on threat appeals89 leads to the conclusion that perceived threat and coping efficacy, 
and evoked fear, each have a separate and independent effect on message processing (involvement, credibility), 
and hence on adaptive attitudes and behaviour. Scaring people seems to be particularly effective in grabbing their 
attention, involving them in the message and having them perceive the message as credible. The defensive avoid-
ance or reactance phenomenon, as claimed by some of the above-mentioned models, has seldom been found in 
empirical research. But also an increased perception of threat (even without evoking fear) can do the same thing, 
as well as an improved impression of coping efficacy. Fear can be evoked by different types of stimuli: a higher 
social or physical threat in the message, a negatively framed message, a fear-evoking or negative emotional or 
threatening context.90

EMOTIONAL APPEALS     221
Shock tactics
Similar to fear appeals, but not entirely the same, are shock tactics. Shock advertising delib-
erately startles and offends an audience. By definition, these tactics are unexpected and 
surprise and offend audiences because they violate norms, transgress laws or customs (e.g. 
indecent sexual reference, obscenity), or breach a social or moral code (e.g. vulgarity, gratui-
tous violence, disgusting images). Examples are the FCUK slogan by the clothing company 
French Connection, and the Benetton ads showing a nun kissing a priest or a man dying of 
AIDS. Shock tactics are also often used by non-profit organisations (anti-smoking, animal 
rights) (Photo 5.3). The main advantage of these tactics is that they secure the audience’s 
attention. Recipients of these messages usually also engage in more cognitive elaboration 
because they want to figure out what the message is all about. Moreover, shock ads often 
generate (online) word-of-mouth and media publicity, thereby increasing their reach and 
impact.
Photo 5.3  A public 
awareness fear appeal 
targeted at women
Source: EPA European Pressphoto  
Agency B.v./Alamy Stock Photo.

222     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Music
Who has not caught themselves singing an ad jingle: ‘whenever there is fun, there is always 
Coca-Cola’, ‘I feel Cointreau tonight’, etc., or thinking about one of the songs used in a 
commercial? For example, Celine Dion’s ‘I Drove All Night’ for DaimlerChrysler, Steppen-
wolf’s ‘Born to be Wild’ in the Ford Cougar ad, ‘L’air du Temps’ for the champagne brand 
Bernard Massard, Marvin Gaye’s ‘I Heard it through the Grapevine’ in the California Raisin 
ad, etc. Music is extensively used in TV and radio commercials. For example, a study found 
that 84.5% of US commercials and 94.3% of the ads in the Dominican Republic contained 
music.91
The major reasons why advertisers make use of music is because they believe that it can 
gain attention, create a mood, a sense of relaxation, or it can set an emotional tone that 
enhances product evaluations and facilitates message acceptance, send a brand message and 
convey a unique selling point, signal a certain lifestyle and build a brand personality, and 
communicate cultural values.92
Although there seems to be general agreement that the right music may have a signifi-
cant impact on an ad’s effectiveness, not much empirical evidence exists to support this 
claim. The only point of agreement seems to be that music induces more positive feelings.93 
As far as brand recall is concerned, for example, one could expect that jingles may have a 
positive influence because by singing the jingle yourself afterwards, you actually rehearse 
the brand name and brand message over and over again. However, empirical studies show 
mixed results: sometimes music seems to have a positive effect, sometimes a negative effect 
and sometimes no effect at all on ad recall.94 Regarding behavioural consequences, Gorn95 
demonstrated experimentally that consumers were more likely to choose a specific colour 
of pen if they had been exposed to an ad in which that pen had been paired with pleasant 
rather than unpleasant music. Other researchers were not able to replicate his findings, 
however.96
Two moderating variables may partly account for these contradictory results.97 The 
effectiveness of music may depend on the attention-gaining value referring to the arousal 
or activation potential of the musical sound. Fast, loud music, for example, can be 
expected to have a higher attention-gaining value. However, although this type of music 
might initially attract attention to the ad, it also distracts the listener, which leads to an 
impairment of cognitive processing and brand information recall.98 A second factor is 
music/message congruence, referring to the extent that the music and the ad copy convey 
the same message. Incongruence may lead to distraction from, instead of attention to, 
the brand message.
Endorsers
Experts can be used to demonstrate the quality or high technology of a product. For exam-
ple, toothpaste brands are often promoted by means of someone in a white lab coat to 
imply a dentist’s opinion. The effectiveness of this type of ad is assumed to be based on 
the perceived credibility of the experts’ judgement.99 In contrast with testimonials, expert 
endorsements do not seem to be perceived as irritating. On the contrary, one study even 
suggests experts evoke more positive affective responses.100
Celebrities can also be used to endorse a product. Their effectiveness is based on the 
‘aspiration group’ effect. Examples of celebrity endorsement are George Clooney for 
Nescafé and Martini, Tiger Woods for Nike and Accenture, David Beckham for Voda-
fone, etc.

ENDORSERS     223
Emerging markets such as India are important drivers of future sales growth. One important question is to what 
degree branding and marketing communications in these markets should be standardised (globalisation), locally 
adapted (localisation) or glocalised (‘globally localised’),101 a global brand identity strategy that allows for country-
specific flexibility in communications mix decisions. Brand globalness is often associated with prestige and quality.102 
The use of celebrity endorsement is considered a powerful tool in creating or managing brand equity. At the same 
time, the effectiveness of celebrity endorsement may differ across cultures.103
In two experiments with representative samples of the Indian urban population, it was examined how these 
two factors, brand globalness (global or local) and type of endorser (international celebrity, local celebrity and local 
non-celebrity), interact to influence consumer responses to brand communications.104 In the first study, an exper-
iment was conducted on the basis of a 3 (local non-celebrity, local celebrity, global celebrity) * 2 (local brand, 
global brand) full factorial, between-subjects design. Firstly, a pre-test was conducted to select one local and one 
global celebrity who were equally familiar and one non-celebrity endorser who was not familiar. To avoid con-
founds, the potential endorsers were also pre-tested to be equally attractive, equally credible and equally fitting 
with the advertised product. The actors Leonardo DiCaprio (global celebrity), Akshay Kumar (local celebrity) and 
a local non-celebrity model were selected. Using each of these three endorsers, two identical ads were created for 
a new brand of home cinema systems (TFX) that was positioned as either ‘global’ or ‘local’. A new brand was used 
to avoid potential confounds of prior brand associations. The global brand ad was drafted in English, mentioning 
the cities of New York, London and Delhi, and referring to a website tfx.com. The local brand condition was com-
pletely in Hindi, referred to three Indian cities (Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata) and directed people to the website tfx.in.  
The advertising copy was translated and back-translated by four native Hindi speakers to ensure that the ads transferred 
the same meaning in Hindi and English. In this study, the glocalisation strategy (a combination of a global brand with a 
local endorser) engenders the most positive consumer responses over complete globalisation or localisation.
In the first study, brand globalness was merely manipulated through the language in the ad, geographic locations 
and website, but the brand name was kept constant. In the second study, this time for fashion, brand globalness 
was more extremely manipulated by also manipulating the brand name. Two fictitious proper names that repre-
sented either a local (Ram Lal) or international, global (Jack Dixon) fashion designer were selected. The other brand 
manipulations were identical to study 1, and also the same three endorsers were used. The design was again a 3 * 2 
full factorial, between-subjects design.
When brand globalness is moderate (all verbal elements in the ad except the brand name), global brands do not 
score significantly better than local brands in India. Local brands in India are generally not as positively received 
as global brands, and the type of endorser does not really seem to make any difference. Global brands, however, 
should glocalise their ads by engaging a local celebrity, as ad and brand responses are significantly more positive 
when a local celebrity endorses a global brand than with a global celebrity or a local non-celebrity endorser. This 
glocalisation strategy may have triggered both the higher prestige of a global brand and a sense of uniqueness among 
the Indian participants. When also the brand name is globalised, a global brand is more favourably perceived than a 
local brand and there are no endorser differences whatsoever. It seems that the effect of outspoken brand globalness 
on brand attitudes is so strong that it suppresses endorser-type effects.
Research insight
Endorser type and brand globalness effects in India: think global or act local?
Celebrities are used extensively. For example, one in four ads in US and one in five UK 
campaigns feature celebrities.105 But how effective are celebrity endorsements? They cer-
tainly attract a lot of attention, not only from the target group, but also from the media. 
The latter is very interesting since it can give rise to free publicity. For example, when 
the ‘Won’t Kiss Off Test’ campaign for Revlon’s Colorstay Lipsticks was launched, Cindy 

224     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Crawford kissed reporters, leading to massive free publicity.106 Moreover, several studies 
have shown that celebrities can have a direct positive impact on ad likeability and also an 
indirect effect on brand attitude and purchase intentions.107 For instance, the management 
of Pepsi attributes its 8% increase in sales in 1984 to the Michael Jackson endorsement, 
while the Spice Girls were good for a 2% global market share increase in 1997.108 However, 
not all celebrities are effective for all products or all situations. Several factors play a role.109 
According to the Source Credibility Model, the celebrity should be credible in the sense 
that he or she has expertise and is trustworthy. Expertise is the extent to which an endorser 
is perceived to be an expert with respect to the product, the problem the product solves, 
or the benefit a product can provide. The trustworthiness of an endorser is defined as the 
degree to which the endorser is perceived to be honest and believable. Until he ran into 
trouble because of personal problems, Tiger Woods had proved that he had mastered how 
to play golf, which made him highly credible for promoting golf equipment and sportswear. 
In a study in which both an actor and an athlete promote a candy bar and an energy bar, 
it was found that the ad featuring the athlete was more effective when an energy bar was 
promoted, while the type of endorser did not matter for the candy bar.110
Besides credibility, attractiveness may also be important. According to the Source 
Attractiveness Model, attractiveness refers in this context to the degree that the celebrity 
is known (awareness and familiarity), is physically perceived to be attractive and is liked 
by the target group. Although all adults agree that Sean Connery is a great movie star, 
Will Smith will no doubt have more impact on teenagers. Several studies found support 
for this model, although another study warns that one should be cautious about using 
highly attractive models. Using very thin models, for example, may reduce the self-
image of the target group and evoke negative feelings towards both the celebrity and 
the product.111
Finally, as is summarised in the Product Match-Up Hypothesis, there should be an 
appropriate fit between the endorser’s image, personality, lifestyle, etc., and the prod-
uct advertised. In this respect, it should be added that the behaviour of the celebrity 
may turn against a brand that he or she is associated with. Eric Cantona, for example, 
was prosecuted for kicking a soccer fan. Although this could have been a disaster for 
Nike, the company cleverly managed the problem and even succeeded in turning it to 
an advantage by starting to sell sportswear showing the word ‘punished’. Youngsters 
who like rebels, and who still admire Cantona for his soccer skills, were extremely fond 
of these shirts. Tiger Woods got himself into trouble with his love life. As a result, the 
long-standing relationship between Woods and Accenture was ended. The potential risk 
of negative celebrity information is expected to be especially great for new or unfamiliar 
brands for which the celebrity is the primary cue on which consumers base their brand 
evaluations.112
Denture fixatives are creams that fix dentures to the gums. They hold the teeth in place, securing a good ‘bite’. The 
product is functional, but at the same time it offers peace of mind and social confidence to wearers who are afraid 
of ‘losing’ their false teeth. About 10% of Central and Eastern European citizens have false teeth. However, only 13% 
of them wore fixatives, as compared with 29% in Germany and 21% in the USA. Therefore, the overall objective of 
Corega was to develop the denture fixative market (+15%) and become market leader.
Business insight
Corega, leading the way in the fixatives and denture care market

ENDORSERS     225
New advertising formats
Although traditional mass media advertising is still an important marketing communi-
cations tool, it is under pressure. Shifting media usage, advertising avoidance, scepti-
cism towards advertising and advertising overkill, cast doubts about the effectiveness 
and efficiency of these traditional mass media formats. Consequently, advertisers and 
advertising agencies are constantly looking for new ways and touch points to reach and 
persuade their audiences. This has given rise to new advertising formats and media. Many 
of them have become popular as a result of the digital revolution of the past decades. 
Indeed, the internet has enabled and facilitated new advertising formats and new ways 
to both reach massive audiences and fine-tune messages to specific target groups. The 
typical online techniques will be more extensively discussed in the next chapter. In this 
section, we briefly give an overview of a number of emerging or increasingly used new 
advertising formats.
Some of these new formats are called ‘hybrid’ or ‘hidden but paid for’, because they inte-
grate commercial messages into editorial content in such a way that the audience is reached 
and influenced without even being aware of it. The hidden nature of these advertising for-
mats poses ethical problems. One of the most important principles of ethical advertising is 
that the audience should always be able to recognise commercial messages as intentionally 
persuasive, in other words, customers should have persuasion knowledge.114 Needless to say 
that these ‘hidden’ advertising formats often do not comply with this important ethical rule 
in marketing communications. Perhaps the oldest and most typical example of this form of 
marketing communications is product placement.
What is new in advertising? Many so-called ‘new’ formats are in fact very old and have 
been used by advertisers for decades, be it under a different name. Some of these formats 
have recently known a revival because of increasing digital opportunities.
In contrast to competing brands that made use of patronising ads, Corega decided to use real people talking in 
an authentic way about their teeth issues. Corega chose celebrities famous in the 1960s and the 1970s. The target 
group grew up with these celebrities, which would make it easier to connect with them. The campaign ran in 
Poland, Russia, Ukraine, Romania, Bulgaria, Estonia and the Czech Republic. In each country, a different celebrity 
was used to take into account local, cultural nuances. The campaign had a tremendous success. Category sales 
increased by 22% (as compared with an objective of 15%), and Corega took overall brand leadership in the total 
denture care market with a sales increase of 75% (vs an objective of 30%). The campaign was awarded a Bronze 
Euro Effie.113
Source: Grey Communications Group Ltd.

226     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Brand placement
Brand placement, more commonly referred to as product placement, is the paid inclusion of 
brand identifiers in editorial content (a movie, TV programme, game or book).115 Compa-
nies pay moviemakers, TV programme producers, authors and game developers to include 
brand identifiers in their editorial content. Brand placement is a very old phenomenon. As 
far back as the 1930s, actors got paid by cigarette brands to smoke the brand in the movies 
they appeared in. The popular television format called ‘soap opera’ was initially conceptu-
alised as an advertising vehicle for laundry detergents. Integrating commercial messages in 
editorial content in general, and brand placement in particular, have become increasingly 
popular because advertisers are constantly looking for touch points with their audiences to 
bypass the consumer’s growing resistance to traditional forms of advertising. Brand place-
ment will be more extensively discussed in the chapter on sponsorship.
Ambient advertising
Ambient advertising or ambient media is sometimes described as ‘communications with a 
“wow” factor’.116 It is usually original, surprising and spectacular, and mostly associated 
with outdoor advertising. Examples are light projections on famous landmarks, huge post-
ers on building sites, transformation of public vehicles, street art, or ‘flash mobs’, sudden 
and temporary pop-up events to promote a brand. Related terms for this type of communi-
cation are street marketing and guerrilla marketing (Photo 5.4).
Advertising professionals seek to break through the advertising clutter by trying to find ever more creative channels 
to reach their target audience.
Business insight
Reaching the consumer with street advertising
Photo 5.4  Street advertising
Source: Travel Pictures/Alamy Stock Photo.

ENDORSERS     227
Native advertising
In the old days, in traditional media, there used to be (and there still are) advertorials and 
infomercials. Advertorials are print advertisements (in newspapers and magazines) that 
match the form and style of the medium. In other words, they look and feel like the rest of 
the editorial content of the medium, but they are in fact advertisements. Infomercials are a 
similar format, but on television. They look and feel like a genuine short TV programme, 
but in fact are long TV spots. Both formats are to a certain extent ‘hidden’. Advertisers and 
media are obliged to disclose the commercial nature of this editorial content, but readers 
or viewers often overlook this disclosure and see the message as (partly) editorial. Native 
advertising is the term that is used to indicate a similar online advertising format. Examples 
are the advertisements that appear in the Facebook newsfeed. Native advertising can be writ-
ten by the advertiser, but often it is developed by the editorial staff of the website to closely 
match the form and function of the website on which it appears. The word ‘native’ refers to 
the content’s coherence with other content on the website.119
Content marketing and storytelling
According to the Content Marketing Institute, content marketing is a strategic marketing 
approach focused on creating and distributing valuable, relevant, and consistent content to 
attract and retain a clearly-defined audience – and, ultimately, to drive profitable customer 
action.120 Content marketing is communicating with target audiences without a direct prod-
uct selling intent. It is creating and communicating content that is relevant for the target 
audience and, in that way, builds up knowledge, trust and a favourable disposition towards 
brands. Again, content marketing is not new. First of all, good marketing communications 
have always been about relevant content. Consumers want to create a meaningful consump-
tion context before they will appreciate and buy a product that fits in this context. Content 
marketing provides this context. Traditional formats that have existed for a long time, such 
In the UK a campaign was launched for a new video game which used ‘bleeding’ bus stop posters. For a full 
week, a red blood-like fluid dripped out of the posters, generated by an ink cartridge that was built into the ad. The 
campaign generated a lot of ‘rumour around the brand’. The agency did clean the pavements afterwards.
A US advertising agency pays people $19.50 to walk around with an advertising message on their forehead five 
days in a row and for three hours per day. The message is tattooed on the forehead with vegetable ink, and disap-
pears by itself after one week. The concept is called Fan Branding or Headvertising, and has already been used by, 
among others, Dunkin Donuts and the British TV channel CNX. A 37 year old Australian sold the right part of his 
face to a Mexican restaurant for €6000. He allowed the restaurant to tattoo its name on his face.117
The Belgian agency Rapid-Affichage writes advertising messages on pavements in fluorescent paint. For instance, 
at the entrance to a music store, visitors can read: ‘Soulwax. Nite Versions. Out now.’ Some public authorities do not 
like the idea, because they consider it as ‘damaging the public domain’, but the company meticulously removes all 
traces after the campaign period.
The American company Convex Group patented LidRock, a system to attach CD-ROMs or DVDs to the lid of 
cardboard cups in fast food restaurants, cinemas, sport stadiums and amusement parks. The lid is adjusted to allow 
the CD to be clicked on it. The market potential is enormous. In 2005 in North America, 634 drinks were sold every 
second.
Destroying or damaging bank notes is not allowed in the USA, but attaching removable stickers to them 
is allowed. That is all it takes to create a new advertising medium. Research showed that 95% of consumers 
noticed the message on their bank notes and 56% did not remove it, thus generating extra exposure with other 
consumers.
The Belgian company Activemedia invented a wheel cover that does not turn along with the wheel when the  
car is moving. For €150, a message is attached to the four wheels of one of the hundreds of co-operating Antwerp 
taxis.118

228     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
as ‘sponsored magazines’, are in fact content marketing. Sponsored magazines are maga-
zines that are produced by marketers (‘owned media’) to create context for and promote 
their brands. They look and feel like ordinary magazines, offer content that relates to the 
products of the company, and integrate the company’s brands in a subtle way. In fact, native 
advertising often uses content marketing techniques to convey the message.
A special form of content marketing is storytelling.  Stories are an integral part of our 
lives. People love stories. They create context for a message, they are appealing, and more 
easily remembered than just a mere out-of-context message. Advertisers increasingly use 
storytelling to get their message across and to create a meaningful context for their brands. 
Stories have a theme and a plot. They can help customers to identify with a brand, its his-
tory, the founder of the brand, brand myths, brand heroes, the characters in the story, the 
lifestyle a brand represents, etc. Furthermore, stories are more easily shared with other 
people than just plain advertising messages. A good example of storytelling advertising is 
Harley Davidson.121
Colora is the paint manufacturer Boss Paints’ retail chain for paint and wallpaper. It operates 57 stores across Belgium. 
Colora tries to differentiate itself from the competition by not just selling products but also giving advice and providing 
inspiration. In a saturated market, Colora faces competition both from large companies with big marketing budgets 
and a large share of voice in advertising, and small players that position themselves as ‘service and advice’ providers.
Colora realised that it had to strengthen its proposition. It launched the ‘Always ON’ campaign, a content market-
ing programme by means of which they aimed at being in people’s minds all year through. First of all, a blog was set 
up in which, by means of pictures, video and advice, hands-on solutions for paint-related problems were offered. 
The blog is visited by 3000 people a day and drives visits to the Colora website. In order to emphasise their proximity 
to customers, in 2015 a folder was distributed to all Belgian households in which every month a specific theme was 
thoroughly discussed. Additional activities on Facebook and Instagram provide interaction and inspiration. Also in 
the shops, these topics are made visible, and shopkeepers are trained to use these materials in their contacts with 
customers. The Colora magazine, which is distributed yearly just before summertime, provides inspiration by means 
of explaining low-threshold painting projects.
The paint market is in decline, but Colora’s market share is growing every year.122
Business insight
How Colora became the Belgian paint reference by means of content marketing
Stealth advertising
Stealth advertising is the use of marketing practices that fail to disclose or reveal the true 
relationship between the communication message and the company that pays for it. It is 
an advertising method in which the consumer is often not consciously aware that he or she 
is being subjected to advertising. In that regard, brand placement can also be labelled as 
‘stealth advertising’. But also other techniques are used. This type of technique is again very 
old. Long ago, it was used to launch a cognac brand. Two middle-aged men were hired to 
visit pubs, order the new brand of cognac, and talk about it to each other and other people 
in the pub. Obviously, these other people were unaware of the commercial intent of the two 
gentlemen. More recently, a mobile phone manufacturer paid students to walk around in 
busy places, and ask people to take their picture ‘with their brand new mobile phone with 
the fantastic camera’. Obviously, since the company’s commercial intent is not disclosed, 
stealth advertising is often considered to be an unethical practice.

CAMPAIGN IMPLEMENTATION     229
Buzz marketing
Buzz marketing is an advertising approach that uses public relations techniques. It is deliber-
ately creating news, giving people a reason to talk about products and brands, and making 
it easier for conversations to take place. Buzz marketing is stimulating word-of-mouth by 
creating news to talk about. It is by no means confined to the online world, although online 
platforms have facilitated massive word of mouth to take place, and nowadays buzz market-
ing is mainly associated with online sharing and commenting upon stories and messages.
A related term is viral marketing, an advertising technique that uses pre-existing online 
social networks to spread commercial content. People like, share and comment upon all 
kinds of messages on online social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, product review 
sites . . .). Viral marketing tries to stimulate this user-generated buzz or advertising (‘earned 
media’). This technique is more extensively discussed in the next chapter.
In 2008, one of the elephants in the Antwerp zoo (Belgium) was pregnant. It was the first time in history that an 
elephant in a Belgian zoo was going to have a baby. The marketing department of the zoo developed a huge buzz 
campaign. They managed to get the news into all media, and generated massive online activity. By the beginning 
of 2009, there was no single Belgian that did not know and talk about this event. A webcam was installed in the 
elephant quarters, and people could follow the pregnancy and the birth of the baby elephant live. On the night of 
Sunday 17 May 2009, the baby, named Kai-Mook, was born. More than half a million people watched the birth live. 
More than 13 000 messages from all over the world were posted on the website. During the months after this event, 
the zoo received 200 000 extra visitors (on top of the half million visitors they usually get each year). Even now, it 
would be difficult to find a Belgian citizen who does not know who Kai-Mook is.
Business insight
How a baby elephant became the talk of the town
Campaign implementation
After advertising agencies have come up with creative and executional ideas, the advertiser 
has to evaluate the different alternatives on the basis of the creative brief. This means that 
the ideas ultimately chosen need to be suitable for and appealing to the target group, be 
capable of reaching the advertising objectives, and be a kind of catalyst, making the brand’s 
position immediately clear in a simple, eye-catching manner. The idea must also fit with the 
company’s and the brand’s long-term strategy and with previous campaigns. It has to be 
adaptable to the different media to be used, and financially implementable within the given 
advertising budget and within the given time limits.
When agreement is reached on the creative platform to be used for the different media, 
the ads need to be produced. Since ad production needs special skills, this job is typically 
carried out by technical experts. Photography, typography and sound recording need to 
be well thought through, so that headline, baseline, copy, background music, packshots, 
presenters, characters, the set, etc., form an integrated and consistent ad. As soon as the 
advertiser approves of the ad proposal, the ads are produced and handed over to the media. 
After the campaign has run, it has to be evaluated for its effectiveness. In order to do this, 
it is very important to have clear, measurable objectives at the beginning of the campaign 
development process, as well as accurate data of the situation prior to the campaign launch.
Media planning and communication effectiveness research are discussed in later chapters.

230     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Advertising in a business-to-business context
Traditionally, business-to-business advertising has been described as ‘heavy, ponderous, 
deadly serious and boring’.124 This qualification can be attributed to the specific character-
istics of the business environment, i.e. the importance of technical aspects of products and 
services, the importance of the products for the economic performance of the buyer and the 
complex decision-making units. Business ads, for that reason, tend to be more factual and 
rational, and tend to emphasise the company name rather than its products, because cus-
tomers are also buying reliability, after-sales service and technical support; in other words, 
a relationship with a trustworthy partner.
On the other hand, there are a number of reasons why business advertising should not 
be so different from consumer advertising. After all, the human element is present in both 
situations, and some of the functions of advertising are common to both markets. As to 
the second factor, in business-to-business communications, advertising is used to create 
awareness and interest, and to build preference or reinforce the attitude after the customer 
has purchased the product. As far as the first factor is concerned, people are not all that 
different on and off the job, and are always subject to emotions, values and even biases. 
Some studies even suggest that once basic performance criteria are met, business decisions 
are largely based on psychological factors, such as earlier experience with a vendor, vendor 
credibility, experience, flexibility and reliability to serve customers in the future, and vendor 
commitment to a particular technology.
Advertising agencies often make long commercials that are then cut back to the traditional 30-second format shown 
on TV. However, many advertising professionals feel that they would be able to bring a more convincing message if 
they were allowed to expose their target groups to these longer commercials. A movie theatre is the ideal medium 
to show long commercials. Screenvision, the company that sells advertising space in Belgian movie theatres, worked 
together with the advertising agency Markee to build a website on which advertising agencies could place the long 
versions of their commercials. The public could vote for the best commercial. The ten highest-scoring commercials 
end up in a short list, and a professional jury picks a winner. The winning commercial is then shown in Belgian cin-
emas for free during one month. During the contest, every advertiser can show two-minute commercials for the 
price of a 30-second one in all Belgian cinemas.123
Business insight
Saving XL commercials
In recent years, the consultancy industry has witnessed important mergers and acquisitions, accompanied by renam-
ing and rebranding of the companies involved. Rebranding and repositioning tasks are always accompanied by major 
communication campaigns in which a variety of tools can be used. This is illustrated by the story of PwC.
Business insight
Advertising business-to-business consultancy services: PwC

ADVERTISING IN A BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS CONTEXT     231
All in all, studies show that the content and format of business ads are significantly different 
from consumer ads in a number of ways. The most striking differences seem to be that fewer 
people are depicted in business ads, the proportion of advertising space devoted to copy tends 
to be greater in business advertising, product characteristics are more frequently mentioned and 
psychological – as opposed to functional – appeals are seldom used in business advertising.126
What are the dimensions of an effective business-to-business ad? Research shows that 
a successful business ad should score on four dimensions: characteristics of the ad, the 
reader’s feelings about his or her relationship with the ad, the selling proposition and the 
In 1999, a number of companies merged into PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC). The merger was accompanied by 
a creative advertising campaign intended to build brand awareness and brand image among its high-profile busi-
ness customers worldwide. The 2001 ‘PwC Corporate Finance and Recovery’ campaign in the European business 
press was shortlisted as Best Business Press Campaign for the prestigious European Media and Marketing Awards. 
The company supplements its advertising efforts by sponsoring various initiatives, such as the Fast Track 100 and 
Profit Track league tables, which identify the fastest-growing and most profitable UK companies. PwC also produces 
reports and survey results that are of interest to the boardrooms of its clients, and is strongly involved in the World 
Economic Forum at Davos and the European Business Forum. PwC’s website is used to promote stakeholder dia-
logue and supports the company’s extensive community programme, such as sponsorship of the Web-based Maths 
Enhancement Programme with the University of Exeter. PwC also places a lot of importance on internal marketing 
to inform and motivate its 20 000 employees.125
Comfort Bultex: sits like it fits. Business-to-business advertising.
Source: Reproduced with permission of Reticel NV. Comfort Bultex® is a Reticel registered trademark. Copyright © by Reticel NV. All rights reserved.

232     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Figure 5.5  The major components of culture
Coca-Cola tested more than 30 commercials using a panel of Singaporean teens. Assuming that contemporary youth 
are global and Asian youngsters can be mirrored to American ones, ads showing things that are typical of American 
youth, such as body-pierced, grungy kids in a car listening to rock music and head-banging, shirtless youngsters 
crowd-surfing at a concert and youngsters going down a store aisle on a grocery cart, were shown to Singaporean 
youngsters. However, the ads were not really appreciated by the Singaporean teens. They considered the ads far too 
rebellious and unruly. The head-banging car scene was particularly disliked. One 18 year old made the comment 
‘They look like they’re on drugs constantly. And if they’re on drugs, then how can they be performing at school?’ 
Coke concluded that ads have to be ‘within bounds of societal approval’ in order to be liked by young Singaporeans. 
Business insight
Maybe today’s youth are not so global after all
company’s orientation or visibility. To score positively on each of the dimensions, business 
ads should clearly use a rational approach. The ad should explain the product and the 
benefits of the product, its quality and performance. The information should be presented 
in a logical order. On the one hand, the size of the text should be closely monitored. Too 
much text and too much information decrease ad effectiveness. On the other hand, the use 
of illustrations and pictures, as long as they are relevant to the target group, enhances ad 
effectiveness. Including too many people in the ad reduces its impact and, when people are 
shown, the target group should be able to identify with them. All in all, business ads differ 
and should differ from consumer ads, but there is no reason to assume that business ads 
should be dull, and packed with text and information overload.127
Advertising in a cross-cultural environment
Figure 5.5 shows some important components of culture. Each of these culture components 
may have an impact on how advertising messages are perceived and should be framed to be 
correctly understood by consumers in different cultures.

ADVERTISING IN A CROSS-CULTURAL ENVIRONMENT     233
Verbal language
Subtle differences or different pronunciations may convey totally different meanings. In 
Asian countries such as Japan and Thailand, language differs according to who is speaking. 
The suffixes Thai women use are different from those Thai men use. In Japan the level of 
formality of the language depends on the gender and the status of the speaker.129 For mar-
keting communications, this means that the seller always has to place him- or herself in an 
inferior position. Furthermore, translation of words may lead to more space requirements, 
which can alter the overall layout of the ad. For instance, 25% more space is needed when 
translating from English into a Romanesque language and 30% from English into Ger-
man. Furthermore, the meaning of words may alter as a result of translation. For example, 
Germans associate ruhig with a forest, sleep, church, a cemetery and a bed, while tranquille 
makes the French think of the countryside, a forest, a house, a library.130 Also, non-verbal 
language is important.131 Non-verbal language includes timing, special orientation, gestures, 
touch, colours and eye contact.
Timing
Is time money or do people consider it to be indefinitely available? A time-is-money person 
(such as in Europe and the USA) may find an ad that appeals to ‘saving time’ convincing, in 
contrast to people who do not adhere to this time concept. Also, a distinction can be made 
between a time orientation towards the past, present or future. Many European countries 
have an orientation towards the past, using the past to explain where they are now. Ameri-
cans are more future-orientated, while Muslim countries are rather fatalistic and adhere 
to a present-time orientation. History-related advertising appeals may not work so well in 
the USA.
Space
Asian and Arab people tend to stand very close to one another, Western and American peo-
ple leave more space and find it rather threatening when people stand close to them. Accord-
ing to Hall’s ‘proxemics’, Western countries are characterised by three primary zones of 
space: the intimate zone (0–45 cm), the personal zone (45 cm–1 m) and the social zone (1–2 
m). However, within Europe differences concerning optimal space also appear: the further 
south you go, the smaller the distance gets. Northern Europeans, the English and Americans 
are said to have a low-touch culture, demonstrating low contact in public, while Southern 
Europeans, Arabs and Eastern Europeans are said to have a high-touch culture. However, 
although a country may belong to a high-touch culture, one should keep in mind subtle-
ties in touching rules in advertising. A man touching a woman is usually a more sensitive  
According to the managing director of Viacom’s MTV India, Asian teens are far more conservative than American 
or European youngsters. Rebellion, anger or the need to question authority, which are all elements of global youth 
culture, do not appeal in Asia. Asian youngsters may wear earrings, belly-button rings and ponytails, but they are 
still very conformist, a value deeply seated in Asian culture.128
Bajaj Auto, India’s largest scooter and motorcycle producer, fared better. Its commercial pictured an Indian boy 
and his Caucasian girlfriend cruising around on a Bajaj motorbike. Since in India most marriages are still arranged 
and strict caste codes still operate, this scene is pretty provocative. However, this provocation is set off by the next 
scene: the youngsters arrive at a temple and the boy covers his girlfriend’s head with a shawl. The commercial shows 
rebellion, but it does not push it too far. According to the creator of the ad, the message of the commercial is ‘we are 
changing, testing boundaries, but we have pride in our core values’. Indian youth loved the ad and Bajaj motorcycles 
achieved a sales increase of 25% during the seven months following the launch.

234     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
area and, especially in Arab countries, this may cause problems.132 Moreover, who touches 
who also depends on the culture. In Europe it is usual to see people of the opposite sex (a 
couple) walking hand in hand on the street. This is not the case for many Asian and Arab 
countries. Here you would rather see people of the same sex (not a couple, but just acquaint-
ances) holding hands.
Colours
Colours have different meanings in different cultures. For instance, in the USA and Europe, 
green is often associated with freshness and good health, but in countries with dense green 
jungles it is associated with disease instead. Red suggests good fortune in China but means 
death in Turkey. White stands for purity and cleanliness in many European countries, but 
suggests death in many Asian countries. Black has negative connotations in Japan, India 
and Europe, but is perceived positively in the Middle East.133
Gestures
Cultures differ in the way they greet each other: shaking hands, bowing, kissing, etc. Fur-
thermore, moving the head back and forth is an affirmative sign in most Western countries, 
but means ‘no’ in Greece and Bulgaria. Patting a child on the head is a sign of affection in 
Western cultures, but an insult in Islamic countries. Raising three fingers when ordering a 
drink means you want three drinks in Western countries, but in Japan you would be ordering 
two drinks since Japanese count the number of fingers that are down instead of up.
Eye contact
Looking someone straight in the eye is regarded positively by Europeans and Americans 
because it is perceived as a sign of honesty. However, in Japan you show respect by lowering 
your eyes.
Despite the fact that translators usually know the foreign language quite well, translation errors frequently occur. 
One way to avoid such errors is to translate and back-translate, which should result in the same words or sentence(s) 
as the original one(s). Some well-known examples of translation errors are:134
● The Pepsi slogan ‘Come alive, you’re in the Pepsi generation’ was translated into German in 1960. The result 
became ‘Come alive out of the grave’.
● GM’s brand Chevy Nova translates in Spanish as ‘doesn’t go’, while Nescafé was understood as ‘no es café’ (is not 
coffee).
● A Copenhagen airline office promises to ‘take your bags and send them in all directions’.
● A Hong Kong dentist claims to extract teeth ‘by the latest Methodists’.
● A Japanese hotel left the following notice to hotel guests: ‘You are invited to take advantage of the chambermaid’.
● ‘Let Hertz put you in the driving seat’ became ‘Let Hertz make you a chauffeur’.
● The truck brand Fiera from Ford became ‘ugly old woman’ when translated into Spanish.
● Mitsubishi renamed its Pajero model in Spanish-speaking countries because Pajero is related to masturbation.
Business insight
Slogan translation mistakes

ADVERTISING IN A CROSS-CULTURAL ENVIRONMENT     235
Values and attitudes
Values and attitudes are our guide in determining what is right and what is wrong, what is 
important and desirable, and how we behave. Therefore, it is important to understand differ-
ent cultural values and beliefs. Some researchers claim that cultural values form the core of 
advertising messages and that advertising reinforces cultural values.135 Since different cultures 
cherish different values, they often emphasise different communications appeals. Even in the 
USA and the UK, two countries in which the marketing environment is very similar (eco-
nomic development, language, legal restrictions, marketing institutions, technology, etc.), 
differences in culture lead to different types of advertising appeals. A study investigating beer 
ads in the two countries found that American ads predominantly depict American values 
such as achievement, individualism/independence and modernity/newness, while British ads 
show British values such as tradition/history and eccentricity (acting strangely or whimsi-
cally, often to humorous ends). Furthermore, in British ads the beer is more often shown 
being drunk on regular occasions, while in American ads product use is depicted during 
special occasions or the usage is not shown at all.136 Empirical studies show that consumers 
seem to respond more positively to culture-congruent appeals.137
Religion138
Religion influences what is allowed to be said or shown in a marketing message. For exam-
ple, Seiko got into trouble when it ran its worldwide advertising campaign in Malaysia say-
ing ‘Man invented time, Seiko perfected it’. According to Islam, God and not man invented 
time, so the message had to be changed to ‘Man invented timekeeping, Seiko perfected it’. 
In France, Volkswagen had to withdraw its billboards for the new Golf since it was said to 
mock the Last Supper. A modern version of the Last Supper is shown, the last meal Jesus 
had with his disciples. Instead of ‘Drink, this is my blood’, Jesus says ‘Let’s rejoice since the 
new Golf is born’. Secondly, religion influences the value people attach to material goods. 
According to Islam and Buddhism, material wealth is immoral, while in the Western world 
wealth is a symbol of achievement. Therefore, status appeals can be expected to be more 
successful in Western countries than in Islamic or Buddhist countries. Thirdly, religion has 
an influence on what products can and cannot be consumed. An ad for a refrigerator should 
not show beef or pork inside the refrigerator if the ad is meant to run in countries with a 
Hindu or Islamic culture.
Sense of humour
Some countries make more use of humour than others. Ads in the UK, for instance, are 
more likely to contain humour than in the USA or France, while a higher percentage of ads 
in the latter countries are more humorous than in Germany. Furthermore, different cultures 
seem to appreciate different types of humour. Incongruent humour is more often used in 
Germany and Thailand than in the USA and Korea. The English like black humour, the 
Germans slapstick and demeaning humour, while the Japanese seem to prefer black humour 
and dramatisations.139
Gender roles
A review of content analyses in different countries leads to the conclusion that gender roles 
in advertising differ to a great extent from one country to another. In Malaysia, women are 
usually depicted in the home taking care of the children. In Singapore, women are concerned 
with looking beautiful and are often shown in white-collar and service occupations. German 
and Japanese advertising sticks much more to traditional gender roles than ads in Denmark, 
France, New Zealand and the USA. Australian and Swedish ads have a balanced and non-
traditional way of presenting men and women in advertising.140 Using traditional gender 

236     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
roles, such as talking about the ‘lady’s kitchen’, the ‘lady’s vacuum cleaner’, etc., when try-
ing to sell a house to a young European couple, will not be appreciated by these women since 
more and more men and women share household chores, while in Muslim countries, such 
as Malaysia, it would be unwise to imply that men could have a role in the housekeeping.
High- and low-context cultures
A high-context communication or message is one in which most of the information is 
either in the physical context or internalised in the person, while very little is in the coded, 
explicit, transmitted part of the message. A low-context communication is just the oppo-
site; that is, the mass of the information is vested in the explicit code.141 In other words, in 
low-context cultures, a lot of emphasis is placed on words. One is as accurate, explicit and 
unambiguous as possible so that the receiver can easily decode the message and understand 
what is meant. In high-context cultures words are one part of the message, the other part 
is formed by body language and the context, i.e. the social setting, the importance and 
knowledge of the person. In the latter case, the message is more ambiguous and implicit. 
The Japanese, for example, have 16 ways to avoid saying ‘no’.142 Advertising appeals differ 
to a great extent in different context cultures. For example, Japanese ads have been shown 
to contain fewer information cues, less emphasis on the product’s benefits, fewer com-
parisons and to consist of more emotional appeals than American ads.143 In other words, 
in Japan a soft sell approach is preferred, while in the USA a hard sell approach is more 
frequently encountered.
Cultural dimensions144
According to Hofstede, five cultural dimensions can be distinguished which can explain the 
differences in cultural components across countries (Figure 5.6).
The characteristic of an individualist culture is that there are loose ties between people and 
that they look after themselves and their immediate family only. In a collectivistic culture peo-
ple belong to strong, cohesive in-groups (often extended families) who look after and protect 
each other in exchange for unquestioning loyalty. Central to individualism is giving priority 
to personal goals over the goals of the group, as well as an emphasis on differentiation and 
achievement, while collectivism stands for the reverse: harmony, conformism, group goals, 
participation and teamwork above all. This leads to differences in advertising appreciation. 
An empirical study shows that Americans respond more favourably to an individualistic 
appeal, while Chinese people react more positively to a collectivistic appeal. It should be 
Figure 5.6  Hofstede’s five cultural dimensions

ADVERTISING IN A CROSS-CULTURAL ENVIRONMENT     237
added, though, that a culturally incongruent appeal is less harmful when the appeal matches 
the product use condition. For example, a Chinese individualistic appeal for a toothbrush is 
less harmful than a Chinese individualistic appeal for a camera.145
The degree of power distance refers to the extent to which authority plays an important 
role, and to what extent less powerful members of the society accept and expect that power 
is distributed unequally. In high-power-distance cultures (e.g. Malaysia), a few people have 
all the power and make all the decisions. The other people carry out orders. In low-power-
distance cultures (e.g. Denmark, Austria) power is not concentrated in the hands of a few 
and interactions between people occur on a more equal basis. In the latter case, people 
are used to evaluating information and making decisions themselves. For advertising, this 
might mean that expert endorsers are more appropriate in high-power-distance cultures in 
which people are used to being and expect to be told what to do, while information-dense 
ads might be more appropriate in low-power-distance cultures in which people appreciate 
making decisions on the basis of information offered.146
International advertising strategies can be situated on a continuum ranging from worldwide standardisation (a uni-
fied approach across several countries) to national customisation (adaptation or localisation) with hybrid approaches 
in between (semi-adaptation or glocalisation, a combination of globalised and locally adapted elements).147 Con-
sumers’ responses to different levels of advertising adaptation will depend, among others, on cultural values or 
characteristics.148 In an experimental study in Belgium, India and Iran, consumer responses were investigated to 
advertising messages varying in their degree of adaptation (adaptation, semi-adaptation, standardisation), and by 
testing the moderating role of power distance and the mediating role of self-brand congruity on this relationship.
Self-brand congruity (SBC) is the match between the perceived image of a brand and a consumer’s self-concept.149 
Values, norms and symbols of groups of which individuals are a member, are vital parts of their self-concepts.150 
Branding factors that represent the identity of the individual positively influence self-brand congruity.151 According 
to the theory of meaning,152 the symbolic properties of an advertisement are transferred from the ad to the brand. In 
the context of advertising adaptation, consumers should develop more positive self-congruity between themselves 
and advertisements adapted to their social context, compared to standardised advertisements which are generally 
less congruous with the context of a specific society. Moreover, self-brand congruity is an important antecedent of 
brand attitudes and purchase intention.153
Self-congruity effects can differ between consumers based on their cultural characteristics. One of these cul-
tural characteristics is power distance. Power distance is the extent to which individuals accept social inequality 
or unequal distribution of power in a society.154 Values that are associated with power (authority, wealth, social 
power, preserving public image, social recognition) emphasise control and dominance over people and resources 
within a social system.155 Power distance can affect attitudes and behaviours of individuals towards the symbols and 
beliefs of groups of which the individuals are not a member. For instance, individuals with high power distance are 
motivated by those values that conform with those in their own group.156 These individuals have negative attitudes 
towards multiculturalism.157 Power values are also associated with self-enhancement motives.158 Self-enhancement 
is the desire to see oneself and one’s action in a positive light.159 Individuals with high power distance self-enhance 
by positively evaluating stimuli that are more relevant with their self-concept. An ad or a brand that is associ-
ated with cues adapted to the self-concept of these individuals can enhance self-brand congruity. Thus, for the 
Research insight
Power distance, self-brand congruity and responses to advertising adaptation

238     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
In masculine cultures, assertiveness, competitiveness and status are valued highly, while in 
feminine cultures, caring for others and quality of life are central values. In feminine cultures 
men’s and women’s values and roles coincide, while there is a larger gap in their roles in mas-
culine cultures. Uncertainty avoidance refers to the extent to which people feel uncomfortable 
with uncertainty and ambiguity and have a need for structure and formal rules in their lives. 
Communications for uncertainty avoidance cultures can focus on expert appeals and provide 
information and guarantees to reassure consumers. Long-term versus short-term orientation 
deals with values such as pragmatic future-orientated thinking, virtue, thrift, perseverance 
and a sense of shame versus conventional, historical or short-term thinking, fulfilling social 
obligations, respect for tradition and a sense of security and stability. Table 5.4 shows how 
different countries are positioned on Hofstede’s dimensions and on the communications 
context dimension.162 
high-power-distance segment, the exposure to adapted compared to standardised advertisements can enhance 
the self-congruity with the adapted appeals that match with the self-concepts of these individuals. Following the 
theory of meaning, the positive effect of self-congruity are then transferred to the brand leading to enhanced self-
brand congruity which contributes to more positive attitudes for adaptation compared to standardisation of ad 
appeals. For the low-power-distance segment, social consciousness is low, the conformity with the societal values 
is not emphasised, and the self-enhancement motives contribute less to the purchasing decisions of consumers.160 
In fact for this segment, the emphasis on egalitarianism and utilitarianism values can lead to similar evaluations 
for adaptation compared to standardisation of ad appeals. As a result, attitudinal and behavioural responses of 
consumers with low power distance are not expected to be affected by the level of standardisation or adaptation 
of an advertisement.
In each country, three different ads were prepared for a fictitious brand of home cinema systems (TFX), manipu-
lated by two executional elements, i.e. the celebrity endorser and advertising copy. Both elements were either 
fully adapted (local celebrity and advertising copy) to the context of the three nations (adaptation strategy) or 
standardised (international celebrity) and advertising copy (standardisation strategy). In addition, a glocalisation 
strategy was created by combining a local celebrity with an international advertising copy. To manipulate the adver-
tising copy, the language, the location and website domain were locally adapted or internationally standardised. 
The international advertising copy was drafted in English, mentioning three international metropolitan cities and 
referring to a website ‘tfx.com’. The localised advertising copy was in Hindi for India, in Farsi for Iran and in Dutch 
for Belgium, naming three metropolitan cities of each country (e.g., for India: Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkota) and 
referring to websites with adapted domains of each country (e.g., for India: ‘tfx.in’). Through an online survey, 626 
respondents from three countries (Belgium: 212, India: 209, Iran: 205) were randomly assigned to one of the four 
conditions (adapted for each country). Power distance and self-brand congruity were measured at the individual 
level and the data of the three countries were pooled. Hayes’ (2013) approach for testing moderated mediation 
was used to analyse the data.161
As expected, the results show that individuals high in power distance, when compared to individuals low in 
power distance, have more positive attitudes and purchase intentions following a fully or partly adapted adver-
tisement than following a fully standardised advertisement. Individuals with low power distance do not show any 
difference in response towards either of the advertisements tested. Adaptation and semi-adaptation strategies 
do not lead to differences in the attitude towards the brand and purchase intention, among neither high- nor 
low-power-distance individuals. Semi-adaptation approaches use both local and international cues. Apparently, 
using local cues, even in combination with international symbols, is sufficient to trigger ‘localness’. The results also 
show that, indeed, self-brand congruity is a relevant explanatory factor of more positive brand responses to an 
adaptation versus a standardisation strategy among high power distance individuals. For these individuals, self-
brand congruity fully explains positive brand attitudes and purchase intentions for an adaptation compared to a 
standardisation strategy.

ADVERTISING IN A CROSS-CULTURAL ENVIRONMENT     239
Table 5.4  Positioning of countries on cultural dimensions
Countries scoring high on 
left-dimension attributes
Countries scoring 
average
Countries scoring high on right-
dimension attributes
Collectivism
East and West African 
countries
Latin American countries
Portugal
Arab countries, 
Greece, Japan, Spain, 
Turkey
Australia, Switzerland, 
Scandinavian countries, 
France, UK, USA, Germany, the 
Netherlands, Belgium
Individualism
Low power
Scandinavian countries, 
Austria, Switzerland, 
Germany, Ireland, USA, UK, 
the Netherlands
Spain, Taiwan, Greece, 
Japan, Italy, Portugal
Malaysia, Guatemala, Arab 
countries, West African countries, 
Philippines
High power
Feminine
Scandinavian countries, 
Portugal, the Netherlands, 
Turkey
Belgium, France, 
Greece, Spain, Arab 
countries
Austria, Canada, UK, Ireland, Italy, 
Japan, Switzerland, USA
Masculine
Uncertainty 
tolerant
Scandinavian countries, UK, 
USA, Ireland, Canada, India
Arab countries, 
Austria,
Switzerland, Germany
Belgium, France, Greece,
Japan, Portugal, Spain
Uncertainty
avoidance
Short-term 
orientation
Pakistan, Nigeria, Canada, 
UK, USA, Australia, 
Germany, Poland, Sweden
India, Thailand, 
Hungary, Singapore, 
the Netherlands
China, Hong Kong,
Taiwan, Japan, South Korea
Long-term
orientation
High 
context
Japan, China, Arab 
countries, Latin American 
countries
Italy, Spain, France, 
UK
North American countries, 
Scandinavian countries, Germany, 
Switzerland
Low context
In a study conducted in Denmark, Belgium and Italy in 2013, a conceptual model was tested of the effects of self-identity, 
care for the environment, and green moral obligation, on the attitude towards and the intention to adopt electric cars.
Self-identity is a set of meanings attached to roles individuals occupy in the social structure, and the unique ways 
in which they see themselves in these roles.163 According to Identity Theory,164 self-identity is a primary motivator 
of behaviour because individuals seek to maintain consistency with their identity standard through behavioural 
actions. Green self-identity (GSI) – an individual’s overall perceived identification with the typical green consumer – 
represents a mental mode which may motivate the individual to engage in specific eco-friendly behaviours.165 
Green self-identity may be considered as a ‘primary’ motive of pro-environmental behaviour,166 that is, a motiva-
tional ‘root’ that influences consumers in developing positive attitudes towards and intentions to engage in specific 
pro-environmental behaviours that express the green self-identity role.167 Therefore, the more consumers perceive 
themselves  as green, the more they will develop a positive attitude towards eco-friendly electric cars, and the more 
they will be willing to adopt them.
In addition to the direct influence that green self-identity exerts on consumers’ attitudes towards and intentions 
to perform specific eco-friendly behaviours, there are also indirect effects. According to the Theory of Ethics, con-
sumers rely on moral philosophies of ‘teleology’ and ‘deontology’ in forming their evaluations in situations involving 
ethical issues.168 Teleological evaluation is based on the estimated goodness or badness of the consequences of a 
Research insight
Green self-identity, environmental concern, moral obligation and electric car adap-
tion: evidence from Denmark, Belgium and Italy

240     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
specific behavioural alternative, while deontological evaluation is based on the inherent moral righteousness of  
a specific behavioural alternative.169 The more consumers perceive themselves as green consumers, the more they 
will care about the environmental consequences of a specific consumption behaviour (teleological evaluation),170 
and the more they will develop positive attitudes towards the adoption of eco-friendly electric cars. Additionally, 
the more consumers perceive themselves as green, the more they will perceive a specific environmentally unfriendly 
consumption behaviour as unethical behaviour a green consumer should not engage in (deontological evaluation –  
green moral obligation). Green moral obligation is a personal internal state construct that is concerned with the 
extent to which an individual feels a sense of responsibility to act morally when faced with an ethical situation, such 
as environmental protection.171 A consumer may adhere to specific eco-friendly principles because it is the right 
thing to do and the violation of these principles is intrinsically wrong.172 The more consumers perceive themselves 
as green, the more they will feel a moral obligation to avoid environmentally unfriendly consumption actions, and 
the more they will develop positive attitudes towards the adoption of eco-friendly electric cars.
In sum, green self-identity is assumed to have an effect on the attitude towards and the willingness to adopt an 
eco-friendly electric car directly, and through considerations of environmental concern and green moral obligation.
All well-known models of ethical behaviour assume a relationship between cultural, environment and ethical 
perceptions (such as eco-friendly consumer behaviour).173 A person’s (ethical) value system is indeed greatly influ-
enced by cultural background. In a study in three countries, the proposed model was tested, and cross-country 
differences in the motivational processes to adopt an electric car were investigated. By means of an online survey, 
data were gathered in Belgium (600), Denmark (611) and Italy (794) from respondents owning a driver’s licence. 
These three countries vary substantially in terms of their cultural characteristics. In the table below, the scores of the 
three countries on Hofstede’s cultural dimensions are shown.174
Comparison of the three countries based on Hofstede’s national cultural dimensions
Country
Denmark
Belgium
Italy
Power distance (PDI)
18
65
50
Individualism (IDV)
74
75
76
Masculinity (MAS)
16
54
70
Uncertainty avoidance (UAI)
23
94
75
Long-term orientation (LTO)
46
38
34
Note: Scores for Hofstede’s dimensions are measured on a 0–100 scale
By means of structural equation modelling with multi-group analysis, the model was tested and compared 
between the three countries. The results show that the conceptual model is largely supported in all three samples. 
Furthermore, results reveal significant differences across the countries studied. For Danish consumers, primarily the 
greater the green self-identity, the more positive consumer attitude towards the adoption of electric cars is, which 
is also reinforced by the positive indirect effect of the care for the environmental consequences of using cars. For 
Belgian consumers, most importantly, the greater the green self-identity, the more consumers consider the environ-
mental consequences of using cars. Green self-identity thus influences consumer attitude towards the adoption of 
electric vehicles indirectly via the consideration of the environmental consequences of using cars. The direct effect 
of green self-identity on consumer intention to adopt electric cars is not significant. For Italian consumers, positive 
attitudes towards the adoption of electric cars are primarily influenced by green self-identity directly and indirectly 
via the mediating effect of green moral obligation, whilst the mediating effect of the care for the environmental 
consequences of using cars is more limited. In all the three samples, the attitude–intention relation is significant and 
rather strong. These differences can be explained by differences in cultural characteristics of the three countries.175
In order to develop positive attitudes towards the adoption of electric cars in Denmark, advertising should mainly 
emphasise how consumers may enhance their self-identity by adopting an electric car, and additionally address the 
specific positive impact of electric car usage on the environment. Advertising in Belgium should primarily focus on being 
an eco-friendly consumer means taking into account the negative environmental consequences of using cars, and opt 
for eco-friendly consumption choices. In Italy, policy makers and marketers should use advertising that emphasises 
Italian consumers’ green self-identity and status, and consumers’ adherence to ethical obligations and moral principles.

HOW ADVERTISING WORKS: STRONG AND WEAK THEORY     241
How advertising works: strong and weak theory
There are a number of models and theories that have tried to explain how marketing 
communications work (see Chapter  3). One perspective that is particularly relevant 
for advertising is the strong and weak theory of advertising effectiveness. The strong  
theory of advertising posits that advertising has the power to inform, persuade and sell. 
It is the standard theory that has been adopted by academics and practitioners alike for 
many decades. Advertising is considered the driving force behind consumer behaviour, 
and is assumed to be able to strongly steer this behaviour. The hierarchy-of-effects models  
(discussed in Chapter 3), or the DAGMAR model (see Chapter 4) are typically models that 
are embedded in this ‘strong theory’ thinking. They assume a rational, sequential approach 
to advertising, to convince the customer step by step. For advertising to be successful, the 
customer has to be guided from one stage to the other until the ultimate goal, the sale, is 
reached. Advertising should first elicit cognitive responses in people, than evaluative reac-
tions (attitudes), and finally (buying) behaviour, and is also capable of doing so. However, 
there is little empirical evidence that customers actually go through each of these stages 
before buying a product. These models may be handy frameworks to describe advertis-
ing goals in a campaign, but it is by no means certain that every customer goes from one 
stage to the other. Instead, advertising tends to work in the longer run, after an interaction 
between all these stages in the mind of the customer. For sure, advertising has been capable 
of building strong brands over time, but it is far less certain that this brand building has 
been accomplished as a result of short-term step-by-step persuasion by advertising as sug-
gested in the strong theory.
The weak theory of advertising posits that the power of advertising is less strong. 
Instead of persuading people to consume products and brands and ‘guide’ them through 
various consecutive stages of persuasion, it suggests that advertising is only capable 
of reminding people, and gently nudge them towards a particular product or brand. 
Advertising is neither neutral nor unbiased, and potential customers are aware of that. 
Therefore, it is highly unlikely that advertising alone is capable of successfully guiding 
customers through all stages of persuasion. The weak theory states that most buying 
behaviour is rooted in past experience. Advertising can make people aware of a brand 
or a product. Advertising and the other tools of the marketing and communication mix 
(distribution, pricing, promotion . . .) can make people try a product and, later on, 
advertising acts to remind and reinforce previous buying decision. This logic is called 
the awareness–trial–reinforcement model. This model further proposes that, in this pro-
cess, the power of advertising is less in persuasion than in gentle ‘nudging’, meaning 
that advertising reinforces positive associations with a brand that people have already 
adopted. Consequently, advertising often fails to attract new buyers, but reinforces the 
habit of existing ones and thus keeps existing customers loyal. Big brands remain big 
because they have more loyal customers that buy more often, and this is reinforced by 
advertising. This is also known as ‘double jeopardy’: small brands remain small because 
they have less loyal customers that also buy less than those of bigger brands. In line with 
the weak theory, advertising can also keep a brand top of mind and in the customer’s 
consideration set. The weak theory thus states that advertising predominantly supports 
existing buyers, reinforces past sales, and improves repeat buying.
In reality, there is some truth in both the strong and the weak theory. The weak theory 
could be an accurate description of reality when it comes to low involvement buying deci-
sions, while the strong theory could be more relevant when customers are more highly 
involved (see also Chapter 3).176
Advertising may also lead to negative communication effects, such as irritation and confu-
sion. These are discussed in the following sections.

242     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Causes and consequences of irritation evoked by advertising
When ad-evoked feelings were discussed above, in general only positive feelings were consid-
ered. In this section, frequently experienced negative feelings are addressed. Irritation can 
be defined as ‘provoking, annoying, causing displeasure, and momentary impatience’.177 
As mentioned before, many researchers use different feeling scales and, as a consequence, 
come up with different feeling dimensions. However, a striking result is that in many stud-
ies investigating consumers’ responses to advertising, an irritation dimension appears.178 
In other words, irritation seems to be a basic reaction to advertising. Two questions arise: 
What causes irritation? And what are the consequences of ad-evoked irritation for advertis-
ing effectiveness?
Causes of irritation
A number of factors can cause irritation. They are shown in Figure 5.7. As for media, con-
sumers mention television as one of the most irritating communications media, the reason 
being that commercials interrupt programmes.179 For the same reason, interruption of an 
ongoing task, as well as for the intrusive character, pop-up ads are also considered to be 
rather irritating.180 Concerning irritating ad content, several elements can be identified.181 
Firstly, unbelievable, exaggerated, overdramatised situations such as expert endorsements, 
testimonials and slice-of-life commercials increase irritation. A good example is a house-
wife confirming how white Daz makes her laundry. Secondly, unsympathetic characters in 
the ad, or picturing an uncomfortable situation such as a quarrel, enhance irritation, as 
well as hectic, nervous spots. Thirdly, brand comparisons in which the advertised brand 
always claims to be the best, or showing the brand name too often, leads to more irritation. 
Fourthly, information-orientated appeals seem to irritate more than transformational or 
image-dominant appeals. Furthermore, if information cues are used, it is advisable to fol-
low a ‘soft sell’ (e.g. availability, quality, taste, etc.) rather than a ‘hard sell’ (performance, 
price, etc.) approach and stick to no more than five arguments (four arguments seem to be 
ideal). Fifthly, satire, provocation and eroticism increase irritation, while music, sentimental 
humour and warmth created by the use of animals or children seem to have an irritation-
reducing effect.
With respect to the product category, research results are not really surprising. Products 
that seem to elicit on average more irritation are female hygiene products, female under-
wear, laxatives, toothpaste, mouthwash, personal care products, detergents and cleansers.182 
Figure 5.7  Causes of ad-evoked irritation

CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES OF IRRITATION EVOKED BY ADVERTISING     243
Concerning repetition, consumers seem to react negatively to an ad at low exposure fre-
quency because of the newness of the stimulus. After repeated exposures the ad responses 
become more and more positive, a phenomenon called wear-in. However, after a certain 
number of exposures, ‘wear-out effects’ occur in the sense that negative responses show up 
again183 (see also Chapter 8). However, wear-out effects (leading to a higher level of irrita-
tion) seem to be more prominent for some types of commercials than others. Complex 
messages, minor changes in ad execution, short or slow commercials, very warm spots and 
non-food ads do not seem to experience negative effects of higher exposure levels,184 while 
humorous, long, fast-paced, image-dominant and transformational commercials suffer more 
from high repetition levels.185 Ad density or the fact that consumers are exposed to many 
ads in a short period can also evoke irritation. An experiment in which respondents were 
exposed to a 30-minute documentary on capital punishment with either 3- or 30-second 
embedded ads indicated significant differences in evoked irritation.186
Consumers react differently to advertising. For instance, a study trying to define con-
sumer segments on the basis of the general attitude towards advertising found a segment of 
advertising haters as well as a segment of advertising lovers.187 On the basis of the forego-
ing, it is obvious that some consumers are more likely to be irritated by advertising than 
others. Some research results suggest that men and consumers in the 34–41 age group are 
more irritated by commercials, while irritation seems to increase with increasing levels of 
education and income.
Consequences of ads evoking irritation
Contradictory hypotheses can be found in the literature regarding the effects of irritating 
communications. In line with feelings transfer models, one can expect negative evoked feel-
ings, such as irritation, to have a negative influence on ad- and brand-related responses. This 
has also been referred to as ‘the superiority of the pleasant’ hypothesis. On the other hand, 
the law of extremes theory assumes that the relationship between the attitude towards the 
ad and the attitude towards the brand follows a J-shaped curve (Figure 5.8).188 The latter 
means that not only a very positive, but also a very negative attitude towards the ad (Aad) 
can eventually lead to a positive attitude towards the brand (Ab), while communications 
evoking a moderate instead of an extreme Aad result in a less positive Ab.
Both models found empirical support. Some studies show negative feelings lead to 
exclusively negative effects on Ab, brand recall and brand confusion.189 Moreover, irrita-
tion caused by either an unlikeable ad or many ads in a short time period has also been 
Figure 5.8  The J-shaped relationship between Aad and Ab

244     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
shown to negatively impact unrelated subsequent ads.190 These results can be explained 
by the law of extremes theory or the feelings transfer that is likely under low elabora-
tion likelihood, affective attitude formation. Another study191 found that the effect of 
irritating communications depends on the type of buying motive the ad appeals to. As 
mentioned before, transformational buying motives consist of positive motivations such 
as sensory gratification, social approval or intellectual stimulation, while informational 
buying motives refer to reducing or turning of negative motivations such as solving or 
avoiding a problem, or normal depletion.192 It turns out that ad-related responses are 
negatively affected by irritation in any case, but correct brand recall, the attitude towards 
the brand and purchase intention are only affected negatively by irritating commercials 
when transformational buying motives are appealed to. In other words, for informa-
tional motives, the law of extremes theory seems to be confirmed. People did not like the 
ad, but the negative feelings were not transferred to the brand. This corresponds with 
the Affect-as-Information model that can be expected to apply under high elaboration 
likelihood, affective attitude formation. Consumers experienced negative feelings but, 
depending on their motive, they considered these feelings relevant or irrelevant. Only 
when the feelings were deemed relevant were they taken into account, resulting in a nega-
tive impact for transformational purchase motivations. For informational purchase moti-
vations, feelings apparently were not perceived to be relevant and therefore they did not 
serve as information input. Again, the important role of consumer motivations is shown.
Advertising and brand confusion
The goal of advertising is to stimulate demand for the brand advertised. However, similar 
products and similar advertising appeals may generate brand confusion, which in turn can 
lead to an increase in sales of a competitor’s instead of the advertiser’s brand. Therefore, 
attention should be devoted to how brand confusion can be avoided by finding out which 
factors are most likely to cause it.
Brand confusion refers to the fact that a communication for brand X is regarded by the 
consumer as being a communication for a different brand, Y.193 In other words, the consumer 
attributes a wrong brand name to a particular communications stimulus. Besides brand 
confusion, product confusion can also occur. Product confusion is the phenomenon of attrib-
uting a stimulus to the wrong product category. A consumer might, for instance, think that 
a particular ad is for a bank, while it is in fact for an insurance company. Furthermore, a 
distinction has to be made between positive and negative brand confusion.194 Negative brand 
confusion refers to the extent to which a consumer wrongly thinks that your advertising mes-
sage is an ad for a competitor’s brand, while positive confusion is about wrongly assuming 
that a competitor’s communications campaign is actually a campaign for your brand. It has 
to be added, though, that positive confusion is not necessarily positive, since the confusion 
with another brand can harm the current or desired positioning or image of your brand.
A study195 regarding facial care products and perfumes shows that brand confusion is a 
serious problem. Up to 35% of the people who thought they knew which brand was adver-
tised in an ad in which the brand name was covered, actually confused brands. Another 
study196 investigated correct attribution for print ads. For several of the print ads tested, 
correct brand attribution came to less than 10%. Especially for insurance companies, banks 
and facial care products, correct brand attribution is low, while for clothing and beer some 
of the brands are able to get a correct recognition score of 50%. It has to be added, though, 
that the low numbers in the latter study do not completely relate to brand confusion, since 
the people who did not have the faintest idea are also included in the analyses. However, the 
latter group was excluded in the former study.

ADVERTISING AND BRAND CONFUSION     245
A number of factors can cause brand confusion (Figure 5.9). Examples are brand and 
product category-related, consumer-related, message and campaign-related factors. As for 
brand and product category-related factors, brand name similarity, reduced inter-brand 
differences with respect to functionality and product presentation,197 wilful brand imitation 
by imitating package shape and size, label print style and layout, and package colour,198 and 
a high degree of competition in the product category199 (which is often accompanied by a 
high advertising clutter) seem to increase the risk of brand confusion. Furthermore, brand 
confusion often occurs to the disadvantage of low-market-share brands to the advantage of 
market leaders or other large-market-share brands. Message-related factors refer to differ-
ences between ads in emotional and informational content, but also in format. With respect 
to emotional content, for example, it is generally agreed that emotional appeals attract more 
attention, but when the emotional content distracts the consumers, less brand recall and 
more brand confusion may result, leading to the phenomenon where everybody knows the 
ad, but nobody knows the brand advertised. As mentioned before, too much information 
causes irritation, which in turn can lead to more brand confusion.200 Format factors that have 
been shown to lower the level of brand confusion are a clear headline, the use of pictures 
and showing the product in use. Furthermore, ‘the degree of overall similarity of strategy’ 
(DOSS) in information content seems to have increased over time, although ads seem to 
differ more and more in emotional content.201 Therefore, the more unique an ad is in terms 
of content and execution, the less likely brand confusion is to occur.202
As for campaign-related factors, the campaign budget is negatively related to brand con-
fusion, and the same can be expected for total gross rating points (GRP) or share of voice 
(see also Chapters 6 and 8).203 Furthermore, using multiple communications media and a 
consistent communications strategy, over time as well as over the different media, may be 
important factors in reducing or avoiding brand confusion. Concerning consumer charac-
teristics, individuals with a negative attitude towards advertising in general are more likely 
to confuse brands, since they are more likely to avoid or block out most of the advertising 
targeted at them. Not only the attitude towards advertising in general, but also the attitude 
towards a particular ad are of major importance, since a more positive Aad seems to lead to 
less brand confusion.204 Furthermore, people who feel more involved or who are more famil-
iar with the product category are less likely to confuse brands since they have more brand 
and product knowledge.205 Brand-loyal consumers, on the other hand, are more focused on 
their favourite brand and, as a consequence, confuse brands more easily.206 Rather surpris-
ingly, the fact that a consumer had been exposed to an ad a few or several times did not 
impact the level of brand confusion.
Figure 5.9  Factors affecting brand confusion

246     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
Summary
Advertising is any paid, non-personal communications through various media by an identi-
fied brand or company. It is one of the most visible tools of the communications mix. At 
the very core of the advertising process is the development of a creative platform, based on 
the campaign message strategy. In general, two broad types of creative appeals, rational and 
emotional, can be used to develop a campaign, although mixed forms also exist. Emotional 
appeals are ads whose main purpose is to elicit affective responses and to convey an image. 
Rational appeals, on the other hand, contain information cues such as price, value, quality, 
performance, components, availability, taste, warranties, new ideas, etc. For both rational 
and emotional appeals, different formats or execution strategies can be used. Rational 
appeals may, for instance, make use of a talking head, a demonstration, a problem solution, 
a testimonial, a slice of life, a drama or a (direct or indirect) comparison with competitors. 
Emotional appeals may be based on humour, fear, warmth, eroticism, music or the like. 
Rational and emotional appeals may further feature different types of endorsers: ordinary 
people, experts or celebrities. None of the execution strategies works in all situations and 
for all target groups; for example, although everyone agrees that emotional techniques are 
capable of attracting attention, it is by no means certain that they get the message across 
in the manner intended. Therefore caution should be taken to select the right technique.  
Besides these traditional advertising execution techniques, new advertising formats and 
media are increasingly used, such as brand placement, ambient advertising, native advertis-
ing, content marketing, buzz marketing and stealth advertising. In cross-cultural advertising 
campaigns, substantial differences in cultural characteristics have to be taken into account 
to adapt the message to appeal to local cultures. Advertising can have a strong impact on 
consumer behaviour, although much of advertising’s effects work through reinforcing exist-
ing buying habits and keeping people loyal to brands. Advertising also has negative effects, 
such as irritation and confusion.
Advertising as the classic instrument to reach a large audience, and as one of the most flexible communica-
tions tools, is the obvious channel to support and supplement other communications efforts. Advertising can 
be used to reinforce sponsorship campaigns, by using events and celebrities in advertising, by capitalising on 
product placement in movies and TV programmes, or by pointing out the corporate social responsibility efforts 
of the company. Advertising can also be used to monopolise the broadcast of the sponsored event. Shareholder 
meetings, points of view on societal issues and press releases can be referred to in advertising campaigns. Sales 
promotions can be announced in ads, and ads can build traffic for in-store and promotion campaigns. The latter 
can be reinforced by referring to the ads on the shop floor (‘as seen on television’). Offline advertising can be 
used to build traffic to websites and as an introduction to interactive advertising formats. In general, advertising 
can be used to build the necessary awareness and brand image to provide the fertile soil for other communica-
tion efforts.
Business insight
Integrating advertising in IMC

FURTHER READING     247
Further reading
Belch, M. and Belch, G. (2015) Introduction to Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated 
Marketing Communications Perspective, 10th edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
De Mooij, M. (2013) Global Marketing and Advertising: Understanding Cultural Paradoxes, 
4th edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hofstede, G. and Hofstede, G.J. (2004) Cultures and Organisations: Software for the Mind, 
2nd edition. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional.
Mueller, B. (2011) Dynamics of International Advertising. New York: Peter Lang.
International Journal of Advertising, http://www.internationaljournalofadvertising.com/.
International Marketing Review, http://info.emeraldinsight.com/products/journals/jour-
nals.htm?id=IMR.
Journal of Advertising, http://www.tandfonline.com/toc/ujoa20/current\#.VaZj8–8w-M9
Journal of  Advertising Research, http://www.warc.com/Pages/Store/ProductInfo.
aspx?ProductID=36
Journal of International Marketing, http://www.journalofinternationalmarketing.com/.
Journal of Marketing Communications, http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/13527266.
asp.
Review questions
	 1.	 On the basis of which criteria can advertising be classified? Give examples of each type of 
advertising.
	 2.	 What are the most frequently used execution strategies for rational appeals?
	 3.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of comparative advertising?
	 4.	 Are humorous advertising appeals effective? What about erotic ones?
	 5.	 To what extent are fear appeals effective advertising techniques?
	 6.	 On the basis of what criteria would you select a celebrity?
	 7.	 What is brand placement?
	 8.	 What is the purpose of content marketing?
	 9.	 What is native advertising and why is it used?
	10.	 Give examples of buzz marketing.
	11.	 What are the components of culture and how can they influence international 
advertising?
	12.	 According to Hofstede, on the basis of which dimensions can culture be distinguished, 
and what is their impact on cross-cultural advertising?
	13.	 What causes irritation in advertising? Are irritating ads necessarily ineffective?
	14.	 What is brand confusion and what are the factors affecting it?

248     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
The EMF
The European Milk Forum (EMF) is a pan-European non-
profit organisation which was founded in 2011 to develop 
information and promotion campaigns on milk and dairy 
products. The EMF currently comprises dairy organisations 
of seven countries, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, 
Ireland, the Netherlands and Northern Ireland (UK), and 
expects to welcome dairy organisations of other European 
countries soon. All EMF members have three objectives in 
common:
1.	 Disseminate relevant information on milk and dairy 
among consumers and stakeholders.
2.	 Create a true dialogue with all its stakeholders.
3.	 Clarify the role of milk and dairy products in European 
consumers’ daily diet.
The EMF performs a steering role in the strategic devel-
opment and management of communication programmes 
on milk and dairy products, at the European level as well as 
at the local level. In 2013, the EMF launched its first multi-
country campaign on milk. The campaign ran from April 
2013 till December 2015 and was co-financed by the Euro-
pean Commission. The budget amounted to 16 million euro, 
half of which was paid for by the European Commission.
Context of the campaign
Milk used to be the undisputed leader in healthy drinks, but 
for several years in a row milk consumption went down, 
mainly as a result of two different trends:
1.	 Other alternatives pushed milk to the background: new 
drinks (e.g. smoothies), increased popularity of (fla-
voured) waters, fruit juices and energy drinks.
2.	 Consumers underestimated the healthful characteristics 
of milk. The majority of consumers were unaware of 
the nutritional ingredients of milk, except for calcium. 
Moreover, milk was perceived as a weight increaser. On 
top, several anti-milk attacks made consumers doubt the 
general health advantages of milk.
To turn the tide, the EMF decided to launch a joint 
campaign.
Campaign objectives
The objective of the campaign was three-fold:
1.	 Enhance consumers’ awareness of the various nutrients 
in milk.
2.	 Engender a behavioural change in women aged 18–40, 
and in mothers with children between 8 and 13 years.
3.	 Increase the consumption of milk and dairy as part of a 
healthy, balanced diet.
Milk. A force of nature: first stage
Milk is much more than only calcium. It provides a natural 
package of essential nutrients – vitamins, protein, calcium, 
iodine, potassium and phosphorus – to maintain one’s 
health in every stage of life. Nevertheless, milk apparently 
lost its attractiveness. Messages stressing the natural good-
ness of milk hardly resonated anymore. Thus, the EMF and 
its advertising agency BBDO Darwin Belgium faced the 
challenge of promoting the various strengths of milk in a 
new, powerful way in order to reinforce the personality of 
milk. In other words, the problem was how to tell an old 
story in a new, compelling way.
The EMF chose the following approach: rather than 
pointing out the multiple nutrients of milk by referring to 
scientific facts, milk was visualised as one strong unity: ‘Milk. 
A force of nature’. By means of the latest CGI techniques, 
a mythical world was created in which white knights, ele-
phants and elves represented the hidden force within milk. 
That is, they embodied the unique mix of nutrients that 
deliver the necessary energy, force and power to weather 
the battles of the day. The TV ad, for example, shows the 
words ‘vitamin B12 – calcium – protein’ as trails in milk. 
Then, white knights appear from within the milk and go to 
battle the day. A voice-over uses the slogan ‘Milk. A force 
of nature’ and adds ‘It’s naturally rich in protein, vitamin 
B12 and calcium. Get the power of milk on your side.’ The 
commercial ends with the slogan and a child enjoying a 
glass of milk.
The TV commercial formed the core of the campaign 
and was broadcast simultaneously in the seven EMF coun-
tries. The ad was truly global – it was not adapted to the cul-
tural context in each country in which it was used – except 
Case 5:
How white knights embody the natural force of milk

Case 5     249
for the final packshot, which was adapted to each country 
and language. The TV commercial was complemented 
with print ads and a website. The print ads featured the 
white knights, elephants and/or elves accompanied by 
the slogan and mainly targeted health professionals. The 
website for each country provided background informa-
tion on the campaign, detailed information on the differ-
ent nutrients, reasons to believe the claims, information on 
a healthy lifestyle, and recipes. For example, the website 
visitors can learn that vitamin B12 is needed for the normal 
functioning of the immune system; that whole milk con-
tains only 3.5% fat and skimmed milk even less than 0.5%; 
what the recommended daily intake from milk and dairy 
is for different age groups; that balance and variety are key 
elements of a healthy diet; how to prepare tuna chowder 
or cheesy scones, etc. Recipes, amongst other things, were 
country specific and thus adapted to local taste.
First stage: results
In January 2014, eight months after the start of the cam-
paign, a survey was launched in Belgium to evaluate the 
campaign. Also in France and Ireland a mini version of the 
assessment took place. In the Belgian market, the campaign 
had a stopping power of almost 1 in 2. More specifically, 
45% recalled having seen the campaign. Of the Belgian 
respondents who had seen the campaign, 73% recalled the 
baseline ‘Milk. A force of nature’. Not only was the base-
line well-remembered, the campaign also increased the 
belief that the claim was true. Indeed, whereas before the 
campaign 42% believed the claim, this number increased 
to 54% after eight months of the white, milky knights. The 
campaign further received a 60% score on originality from 
the Belgian respondents (an excellent score in view of 
the fact that the benchmark based on similar campaigns 
in the same market was as low as 37%). Belgian respond-
ents felt that the message stood out as compared to other 
­commercial messages, a perception that was shared by the 
Irish respondents (see Figure 5.10). In France, there was 
quasi-general agreement that the campaign was very com-
prehensible. That is, of all French respondents, 92% agreed 
that they understood the message.
Besides positive results on cognitive measures, affective 
measures also scored well. In Belgium, Ireland and France 
alike, respondents indicated they liked the campaign (see 
Figure 5.10).
This consumer likeability was also mirrored in the high 
recognition the campaign received from international 
experts. The campaign was awarded for its creativity by 
­several prestigious, international juries. It received, for 
example, a silver LIA (London International Award) and a 
bronze Eurobest Award, while it also reached the shortlist 
for the Cannes Lions and Crystal Awards.
However, as the saying goes, the proof of the pudding 
is in the eating. Did the campaign also affect consumers’ 
behaviour? More specifically, were the white knights able 
to reverse the declining trend in milk consumption? As a 
­matter of fact, they did. Milk consumption of Belgian fami-
lies below the age of 40 increased with 4.83% in volume 
and 13.8% in value.
Figure 5.10  Campaign results (Stage 1)
Source: Darwin BBDO, EMF brochure.
 
 

250     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
nature. By drinking milk, this force will protect you, just as 
it did for well-known sports people. The new commercial 
shows a child that – thanks to drinking milk – grows and 
becomes a well-known athlete. The athletes also mention 
that to get in peak form, a healthy diet can make a differ-
ence and that they include milk as part of their balanced 
diet. Each country selected a relevant, local sports person-
ality as endorser of the campaign (see Table 5.5). 
Except for the endorser, the TV commercial was identi-
cal in all participating countries (see Figure 5.11 for the 
storyboards).
Second stage: preliminary results
As the campaign was still running at the time this case was 
written, no end results were available. However, prelimi-
nary results for Belgium show that the campaign’s stopping 
In sum, the results of the post-test of the first stage of 
the campaign showed that the campaign was perceived 
as believable, likeable, and innovative. However, there 
was also a minor point. Consumers felt that the campaign 
somewhat lacked relevance. They believed that the ‘what’s 
in it for me’ factor should be more apparent.
Milk. A force of nature: second stage
As the creative approach of a mystique, milky world in 
which knights, elephants and elves represented the force 
of milk resonated well, the EMF and Darwin BBDO decided 
to build further on this creative idea. They tried to add 
relevance to the campaign by pointing out the benefits 
of milk in a more emotional way. The idea was to turn ‘a 
force of nature’ into ‘your force of nature’. Milk consists of 
a multitude of valuable nutrients which makes it a force of 
Table 5.5  Examples of chosen sports personalities
Country
Endorser
Examples of major sports achievements
Belgium
Evi Van Acker
-  Born in 1985, now a famous sailor
-  1998: European champion in the Optimist class
-  2006, 2007, 2011: European champion 
-  2011: 2nd in World Championship
-  2012: bronze medal in Olympic Sailing Competition
Thomas 
Vanderplaetsen
-  Born in 1990, became a successful decathlete
-  2013: gold medal at Summer Universiade
-  2014: bronze medal at World Indoor Championship
France
Gaël Monfils
-  Born in 1986, turned into a renowned tennis player
-  Former No. 1 in France
-  Former No. 7 of the world
-  2005, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2014: winner of an ATP tournament
-  2008: semifinalist at the French Open
-  2009, 2010: runner-up at the Paris Masters
Denmark
Jeanette 
Ottesen
-  Born in 1987, now a renowned swimmer
-  2004, 2008, and 2012 Summer Olympics participant
-  2008: gold medal European Championship in 100 m butterfly
-  2011: gold medal World Championship in 100 m freestyle 
-  Currently holds the Danish record in the 100 m freestyle
Ireland
Easky Britton
-  Born in 1986, became a famous surfer
-  2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2011: Irish National Surfing Champion
-  2006: UK Pro Tour Champion
-  2008: British Universities Champion
-  2008, 2010, 2011: Irish Universities Champion
-  2011: Billabong XXL Award Nominee
-  2013, 2014: Billabong XXL Award nominee
Source: BBDO Darwin Belgium, https://en.wikipedia.org (accessed 23 October 2015).

Case 5     251
Sources: Materials provided by Guy Geerts, Darwin BBDO Belgium; EMF brochure (http://www.milknutritiousbynature.eu/fileadmin/pixelpool/brochure-_
EMF-_09–13.pdf); http://www.dairycouncil.co.uk/news-events/2013_05/milk-a-force-of-nature (accessed 21 October 2015); http://www.milkaforceofnature 
.ie (accessed 21 October 2015); http://www.milknutritiousbynature.eu (accessed 20 October 2015); http://melkeenkrachtvandenatuur.be/ (accessed 22 October 
2015).
2.	 Would you have set different objectives for the cam-
paign? What, if any, could have been interesting 
alternatives?
3.	 How would you describe the selling proposition of the 
campaign: as a USP or as an ESP? Explain. In view of the 
target group, do you feel the correct USP/ESP has been 
used?
4.	 What communication tools does the EMF use? Would 
you have chosen another mix? Why (not)?
5.	 Specify the creative appeal that was used. Would you 
have opted for another general appeal? Another adver-
tising format? Another type of spokesperson?
6.	 International campaigns can be global, local or glocal-
ised. Which approach did the EMF chose for its cam-
paign? Do you think this was a wise decision?
Figure 5.11  Storyboards of the TV commercials (Stage 2)
Source: BBDO Darwin Belgium.
power increased from 45 to 60%, while affective measures 
remain as positive as the first stage of the campaign.
Milk used to be the undisputed leader in the healthy 
drinks market. The many alternatives that are available on 
the market nowadays seriously threaten this position. Many 
adolescents also question milk because they consider it a 
drink for babies. On top of this, milk has been under attack 
for not being that healthy after all. All these factors made 
a campaign to boost the image of milk indispensable. It is 
too early for an end evaluation of the campaign. Preliminary 
results are positive, however, and suggest that the EMF’s first 
cross-national campaign was a nice step in the right direction.
Questions
1.	 The target group consists of women aged 18–40, and 
mothers with children between 8 and 13 years. Do you 
agree that this is the correct target group? Why? Why not?

252     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
References
1	 Kotler, P. and Armstrong, G. (2010) Principles of Market-
ing, 13th edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
2	 www.statista.com (accessed 15 July 2015).
3	 Geuens, M., De Pelsmacker, P. and Mast, G. (2003) 
‘Family structure as a moderator of parent–child com-
munication about consumption’, International Jour-
nal of  Advertising and Marketing to Children, 4(1), 
1–6; Roedder John, D. (1999) ‘Consumer socialization 
of children: a retrospective look at twenty-five years 
of research’, Journal of  Consumer Research, 26(3), 
183–213; McNeal, J.U. (1999) Kids Market: Myths and 
Realities. Ithaca, NY: Paramount Market; Gunter, B. 
and Furnham, A. (1998) Children as Consumers: A 
Psychological Analysis of the Young People’s Market. 
London: Routledge; Acuff, D.S. (1997) What Kids Buy 
and Why: The Psychology of Marketing to Kids. New 
York: Free Press.
4	 Clegg, A. (2006) Mining the Golden Years, 24 April, 
http://www.brandchannel.com/features_effect.asp?pf_
id=311 (accessed June 2009).
5	 Weijters, B. and Geuens, M. (2003) ‘Evaluation of age-
related labels by senior citizens’, Working paper, Vler-
ick Leuven Gent Management School; Young, G. (2002) 
‘Ageing and the UK economy’, Bank of England Quar-
terly Bulletin, 42(3), 285–92.
6	 Walker, M.M. and Macklin, M.C. (1992) ‘The Use of 
role modeling in targeting advertising to grandparents’, 
Journal of Advertising Research, 32(4), 37–45.
7	 Ahmad, R. (2002) ‘The older ageing consumers in the 
UK: are they really that different?’, International Journal 
of Market Research, 44(3), 337–60; Moschis, G.P. and 
Mathur, A. (1997) ‘Targeting the mature market: oppor-
tunities and challenges’, Journal of Consumer Market-
ing, 14(4), 282–93.
8	 Weyters, B. and Geuens, M. (2003) ‘Evaluation of age-
related labels by senior citizens’, Working Paper, Vlerick 
Leuven Gent Management School; Szmigin, I. and Car-
rigan, M. (2001) ‘Time, consumption and the older con-
sumer: an interpretive study of the cognitively young’, 
Psychology & Marketing, 18(10), 1091–1116; Barak, B., 
Mathur, A., Lee, K. and Zhang, Y. (2001) ‘Perceptions 
of age-identity: a cross-cultural inner-age exploration’, 
Psychology & Marketing, 18(10), 1003–30.
9	 Lewis, H.G. (1996) Silver Linings: Selling to the Expand-
ing Motive Market. New York: Bonus Books.
10	 Yoon, C. and Cole C.A. (2008) ‘Aging and consumer 
behavior’, in Haughtvedt, C.P., Herr, P.M. and Kardes, 
F.R. (eds), Handbook of Consumer Psychology. New 
York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; Lumpkin, J.R. 
(1989) Direct Marketing, Direct Selling, and the Mature 
Consumer: A Research Study. Westpoint, CT: Quorum 
Books.
11	 Euro Effie (2008) Brussels: European Association of 
Communications Agencies, http://www.euro-effie.com.
12	 Smith, R.E., MacKenzie, S.B., Yang, X., Buchholz, L.M. 
and Darley, W.K. (2007) ‘Modelling the determinants and 
effects of creativity in advertising’, Marketing Science, 
26(6), 819–833.
13	 Ang, S.H., Lee, Y.H. and Leong, S.M. (2007) ‘The ad 
creativity cube: conceptualization and initial validation’, 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 35(2), 
220–232.
14	 Smith, R.E., Chen, J. and Yang, X. (2008) ‘The impact of 
advertising creativity on the hierarchy of effects’, Journal 
of Advertising, 37(4), 47–61.
15	 Ind, N. (1993) Great Advertising Campaigns: How They 
Achieve Both Creative and Business Objectives. London: 
Kogan Page.
16	 Euro Effie (2001) Berlin: Gesamtverband Werbeagenturen 
GWA eV, http://www.euro-effie.com.
17	 Anonymous (2003) ‘Belgisch Regisseursduo Gooit Hoge 
Ogen op Amerikaans Reclamefestival’ (‘Belgian produc-
ers amaze at American advertising awards’), De Morgen, 
22 May 2003.
18	 Tippins, N.J. and Kunkel, R.A. (2006) ‘Winning a Clio 
Award and its relationship to firm profitability’, Journal 
of Marketing Communications, 12(1), 1–14.
19	 Sauer, A. (2012) Brand Bites: Old Spice Man Video-
Bombs Other Commercials, http://www.brandchannel.
com/home/post/2012/02/03/Brand-Bites-020312.aspx; 
Hutchings, E. (2012) Old Spice Man Crashes Other 
Product’s Commercials, http://topsy.com/www.psfk.
com/2012/02/old-spice-man-commercials.html (accessed 
July 2012).
20	 De Pelsmacker, P., Decock, B. and Geuens, M. (1998) 
‘Advertising characteristics and the attitude towards the 
ad – a study of 100 likeable TV commercials’, Marketing 
and Research Today, 27(4), 166–79.
21	 Abernethy, A.M. and Franke, G.R. (1996) ‘The Informa-
tion content of advertising: a meta-analysis’, Journal of 
Advertising, 25(2), 1–17.
22	 Abernethy, A.M. and Franke, G.R. (1996) ‘The informa-
tion content of advertising: a meta-analysis’, Journal of 
Advertising, 25(2), 1–17.
23	 Chandy, R.K., Tellis, G.J., MacInnis, D.J. and Thaivan-
ich, P. (2001) ‘What to say when: advertising appeals in 
evolving markets’, Journal of Marketing Research, 38(4), 
399–414.
24	 Chandy, R.K., Tellis, G.J., MacInnis, D.J. and Thaivan-
ich, P. (2001) ‘What to say when: advertising appeals in 
evolving markets’, Journal of Marketing Research, 38(4), 
399–414.
25	 Chang, C. (2007) ‘Diagnostic advertising content and 
individual differences’, Journal of Advertising, 36(3), 
75–84.
26	 Dens, N. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2010) ‘Advertising for 
extensions: moderating effects of extension type, adver-
tising appeal, and product category involvement on 

REFERENCES     253
extension evaluation’, Marketing Letters, 21, 175–189; 
Dens, N. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2015) ‘Attitudes toward 
the extension and parent brand in response to extension 
advertising’, Journal of Business Research, 63(11), 1237–
44; Dens, N. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2015) ‘Does poor fit 
always lead to negative evaluations? Extension advertis-
ing and perceived brand quality’, International Journal 
of Advertising, DOI: 10.1080/02650487.2015.1057924.
27	 Brassington, B. and Pettitt, S. (2003) Principles of Mar-
keting, 3rd edition. Harlow: Pearson Education.
28	 Ball, D. (2003) ‘Unilever sees hefty profit in SlimFast’, 
Wall Street Journal, 23 April.
29	 Martin, B.A.S., Wentzel, D. and Tomczak, T. (2008) 
‘Effects of susceptibility to normative influence and type 
of testimonial on attitudes toward print advertising’, 
Journal of Advertising, 37(1), 29–43.
30	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den Bergh, J. (1998) ‘Ad con-
tent, product category, campaign weight and irritation: a 
study of 226 TV commercials’, Journal of International 
Consumer Marketing, 10(4), 5–27; Aaker, D.A. and Bru-
zzone, D.E. (1985) ‘Causes of irritation in advertising’, 
Journal of Marketing, 49 (Spring), 47–57.
31	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den Bergh, J. (1998) ‘Ad con-
tent, product category, campaign weight and irritation: a 
study of 226 TV commercials’, Journal of International 
Consumer Marketing, 10(4), 5–27; Aaker, D.A. and Bru-
zzone, D.E. (1985) ‘Causes of irritation in advertising’, 
Journal of Marketing, 49 (Spring), 47–57.
32	 Euro Effie (2001) Berlin: Gesamtverband Werbeagenturen 
GWA eV, http://www.euro-effie.com.
33	 Euro Effie (2008) Brussels: European Association of 
Communications Agencies, http://www.euro-effie.com.
34	 Donthu, N. (1998) ‘A cross-country investigation of recall 
and attitude toward comparative advertising’, Journal of 
Advertising, 27(2), 111–22.
35	 Brabbs, C. (2001) ‘Two-thirds find comparative ads 
“unacceptable”’, Marketing, 20 September, 4.
36	 Dianoux, C. and Herrmann, J.L. (2001) ‘The influence 
of comparative advertising on memorization and atti-
tudes: experimentation in the French context’, Recherche 
et Applications en Marketing, 16(2), 33–50.
37	 Dianoux, C. (2002) ‘What is the future for comparative 
advertising in France?’, Décisions Marketing, 25 (Jan-
vier–Mars), 93.
38	 del Barrio-Garcia, S. and Luque-Martinez, T. (2003) 
‘Modelling consumer response to differing levels of com-
parative advertising’, European Journal of Marketing, 
37(1), 256–74.
39	 Grewal, D., Kavanoor, S., Fern, E., Costley, C. and 
Barnes, J. (1997) ‘Comparative versus non-comparative 
advertising: a meta-analysis’, Journal of Marketing, 
61(4), 1–15; Barry, T. (1993) ‘Comparative advertis-
ing: what have we learned in two decades?’, Journal of 
Advertising Research, 33(2), 19–27.
40	 Putrevu, S. and Lord, K. (1994) ‘Comparative and non-
comparative advertising: attitudinal effects under cogni-
tive and affective involvement conditions’, Journal of 
Advertising, 23(2), 77–90.
41	 Grewal, D., Kavanoor, S., Fern, E., Costley, C. and Barnes, 
J. (1997) ‘Comparative versus non-comparative advertis-
ing: a meta-analysis’, Journal of Marketing, 61(4), 1–15.
42	 Chang, C. (2007) ‘The Relative effectiveness of compara-
tive and non-comparative advertising: evidence for gen-
der effects in information-processing strategies’, Journal 
of Advertising, 36(1), 21–35.
43	 Pechmann, C. and Ratneshwar, S. (1991) ‘The use of 
comparative advertising for brand positioning: asso-
ciation versus differentiation’, Journal of Consumer 
Research, 18(2), 145–60.
44	 De Pelsmacker, P., Van den Bergh, J. and Anckaert, P. 
(1998) Vergelijkende Reclame: Een Literatuurstudie 
(Comparative Advertising: Review of the Literature), 
Research report, Marketing Communication Research 
Centre. Ghent: De Vlerick School voor Management.
45	 Droge, C. (1989) ‘Shaping the route to attitude change: 
central versus peripheral processing through comparative 
versus non-comparative advertising’, Journal of Market-
ing Research, 26 (May), 193–204.
46	 Droge, C. (1989) ‘Shaping the route to attitude change: 
central versus peripheral processing through comparative 
versus non-comparative advertising’, Journal of Market-
ing Research, 26 (May), 193–204.
47	 Swinyard, W. (1981) ‘The interaction between compara-
tive advertising and copy claim variation’, Journal of 
Marketing Research, 18 (May), 175–86.
48	 Pechmann, C. and Stewart, D. (1990) ‘The effects of com-
parative advertisements on attention, memory, and purchase 
intentions’, Journal of Consumer Research, 17(2), 180–91.
49	 McCullough, L.S. (1992) ‘The use of humor in inter-
national print advertising: a content analysis’, Working 
paper, Miami University.
50	 Krishnan, H.S. and Chakravarti, D. (2003) ‘A process 
analysis of the effects of humorous advertising execu-
tions on brand claims memory’, Journal of Consumer 
Psychology, 13(3), 230–45.
51	 Cline, T.W. and Kellaris, J.J. (2007) ‘The influence of 
humor strength and humor-message relatedness on ad 
memorability: a dual process model’, Journal of Adver-
tising, 36(1), 55–67; Weinberger, M.G. and Gulas, C.S. 
(1992) ‘The impact of humor in advertising – a review’, 
Journal of Advertising, 21(4), 35–59.
52	 Geuens, M. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2002) ‘The moderat-
ing role of need for cognition on responses to humorous 
appeals’, in Broniarczyk, S. and Nakamoto, K. (eds), 
Advances in Consumer Research. Provo, UT: Association 
for Consumer Research, 29, 50–56.
53	 For a typology of humour types, see Speck, P.S. (1991) 
‘The humorous message taxonomy: a framework for the 
study of humorous ads’, Current Issues and Research in 
Advertising, 14(1), 1–44.
54	 Beirne, M. (2003) ‘Heineken’s headlines are humorous, but 
Amstel light spots are a scream’, Brandweek, 44(19), 8.
55	 Spotts, H.E., Weinberger, M.G. and Parsons, A.M. (1997) 
‘Assessing the use and impact of humor on advertising 
effectiveness’, Journal of Advertising, 26(3), 17–32.

254     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
56	 Weinberger, M.G. and Gulas, C.S. (1992) ‘The impact of 
humor in advertising – a review’, Journal of Advertising, 
21(4), 35–59.
57	 Cline, T.W. and Kellaris, J.J. (2007) ‘The influence of 
humor strength and humor-message relatedness on ad 
memorability: a dual process model’, Journal of Adver-
tising, 36(1), 55–67.
58	 Chattopadhyay, A. and Basu, K. (1990) ‘Humor in adver-
tising: the moderating role of prior brand evaluation’, 
Journal of Marketing Research, 27, 466–76.
59	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Geuens, M. (1997) ‘Emotional 
appeals and information cues in Belgian magazine adver-
tisements’, International Journal of Advertising, 16(2), 
123–47.
60	 Anonymous (2001) ‘Sexy Vrouwelijk Strijkerskwartet 
Zorgt voor Mannelijke Blikschade’ (‘Sexy female musi-
cians cause male car accidents’), De Morgen, 6 April 
2001.
61	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Geuens, M. (1996) ‘The commu-
nication effects of warmth, eroticism and humour in 
alcohol advertisements’, Journal of Marketing Commu-
nication, 2(4), 247–62.
62	 Ford, J.B., LaTour, M.S. and Lundstrom, W.J. (1993) 
‘Contemporary women’s evaluations of female sex roles 
in advertising’, Journal of Consumer Marketing, 8(1), 
15–28.
63	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Geuens, M. (1996) ‘The commu-
nication effects of warmth, eroticism and humour in 
alcohol advertisements’, Journal of Marketing Commu-
nication, 2(4), 247–62.
64	 Smith, S.M., Haughtvedt, C.P. and Jadrich, J.M. (1995) 
‘Understanding responses to sex appeals in advertising: 
an individual difference approach’, Advances in Con-
sumer Research, 22, 735–9.
65	 Dudley, S.C. (1999) ‘Consumer attitudes toward nudity in 
advertising’, Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 
7(4), 89–96.
66	 Geuens, M. (1997) ‘Erotische Reclame: Een Effectieve 
Strategie?’ (‘Erotic advertising: an effective strategy?’), 
Tijdschrift voor Economie en Management, 42(1), 57–79.
67	 Reichert, T., Heckler, S.E. and Jackson, S. (2001) ‘The 
effects of sexual social marketing appeals on cognitive 
processing and persuasion’, Journal of  Advertising, 
30(1), 13–27.
68	 Putrevu, S. (2008) ‘Consumer responses toward sexual 
and nonsexual appeals: the influence of involvement, 
need for cognition (NFC), and gender’, Journal of 
Advertising, 37(2), 57–69.
69	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Geuens, M. (1996) ‘The commu-
nication effects of warmth, eroticism and humour in 
alcohol advertisements’, Journal of Marketing Commu-
nication, 2(4), 247–62.
70	 Putrevu, S. (2008) ‘Consumer responses toward sexual 
and nonsexual appeals: the influence of involvement, 
need for cognition (NFC), and gender’, Journal of 
Advertising, 37(2), 57–69.
71	 Benady, D. (2002) ‘Playing the game’, Marketing Week, 
25 July, 24–27.
72	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Geuens, M. (1997) ‘Emotional 
appeals and information cues in Belgian magazine adver-
tisements’, International Journal of Advertising, 16(2), 
123–47.
73	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Geuens, M. (1998) ‘Different 
markets, different communication strategies? A com-
parative study of the communication effects of different 
types of alcohol ads in Belgium and Poland’, Interna-
tional Marketing Review, 15(4), 277–90; De Pelsmacker, 
P. and Geuens, M. (1996) ‘The communication effects 
of warmth, eroticism and humour in alcohol advertise-
ments’, Journal of Marketing Communication, 2(4), 
247–62; Geuens, M. and De Pelsmacker, P. (1998) ‘Feel-
ings evoked by warmth, eroticism and humour in alcohol 
advertisements’, AMS Review, www.ams.review.org/arti-
cles/geuensol-1998.pdf; De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den 
Bergh, J. (1998) ‘Ad content, product category, campaign 
weight and irritation: a study of 226 TV commercials’, 
Journal of International Consumer Marketing, 10(4), 
5–27.
74	 Geuens, M. and De Pelsmacker, P. (1999) ‘Individual dif-
ferences and the communication effects of different types 
of emotional stimuli: exploring the role of affect inten-
sity’, Psychology and Marketing, 16(3), 195–209.
75	 Bain, L.J., Barker, W., Loewenstein, D.A. and Douara, R. 
(2008) ‘Towards an earlier diagnosis of Alzheimer dis-
ease’, Proceedings of the 5th MCI Symposium 2007, Alz-
heimer Disease & Associated Disorders, 22(2), 99–110.
76	 Schwarz, N. and Clore G.L. (2003) ‘Mood as informa-
tion: 20 years later’, Psychological Inquiry, 14(3&4), 
296–303; Forgas, J.P. (1995) ‘Mood and judgment: the 
affect infusion model (AIM)’, Psychological Bulletin, 
117(1), 39–66.
77	 Isen, A. (1987) ‘Positive affect, cognitive processes and 
social behaviour’, in L. Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in 
Experimental Social Psychology. San Diego, CA: Aca-
demic Press, Vol. 20, 203–53.
78	 Lewi, T. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2010) ‘Affect is an impor-
tant factor in processing Alzheimer disease awareness 
messages’, Proceedings of the 2010 Icoria Conference, 
Madrid, CD-ROM.
79	 Mowen, J.C. (1993) Consumer Behavior. New York: 
Macmillan.
80	 Stephenson, M.T. and Witte, K. (2001) ‘Creating fear in 
a risky world’, in Rice, R. and Atkin, C.K. (eds), Public 
Communication Campaigns. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 
88–102.
81	 Moscato, S., Black, D.R., Blue, C.L., Mattson, M., Galer-
Unti, R.A. and Coster, D.C. (2001) ‘Evaluating a fear 
appeal message to reduce alcohol use among “Greeks”’, 
American Journal of Health Behavior, 25(5), 481–91.
82	 Witte, K. (1992) ‘Putting the fear back into fear appeals: 
the extended parallel processing model’, Communication 
Monographs, 59(4), 329–49.
83	 Lewis, I., Watson, B. and Tay, R. (2007) ‘Examining the 
effectiveness of physical threats in road safety advertis-
ing: the role of third-person effect, gender, and age’, 
Transportation Research Part F, 10(1), 48–60.

REFERENCES     255
84	 Janis, I. (1967) ‘Effects of fear arousal on attitude 
change: recent developments in theory and experimental 
research’, in Berkowitz, L. (ed.), Advances in Experimen-
tal Social Psychology. New York: Academic Press, Vol. 3, 
166–255.
85	 Dillard, J.P. and Shen, L. (2005) ‘On the nature of reac-
tance and its role in persuasive communication’, Com-
munication Monographs, 72(2), 144–68.
86	 Taubman Ben-Ari, O., Florian, V. and Mikulincer, M. 
(1999) ‘Does a threat appeal moderate reckless driving? A 
terror management theory perspective’, Accident Analy-
sis and Prevention, 32(1), 1–10.
87	 Rogers, R. (1983) ‘Cognitive and physiological processes 
in fear appeals and attitude change: a revised theory of 
protection motivation’, in Cacioppo, J. and Petty, R. 
(eds), Social Psychophysiology. New York: Guilford, 
153–76.
88	 Witte, K. (1992) ‘Putting the fear back into fear appeals: 
the extended parallel processing model’, Communication 
Monographs, 59(4), 329–49; Witte, K. (1994) ‘Fear con-
trol and danger control: a test of the extended parallel 
process model (EPPM)’, Communication Monographs, 
61, 113–34; Witte, K. (1998) ‘Fear as motivator, fear, as 
inhibitor: using the extended parallel processing model to 
explain fear appeal successes and failures’, in Anderson, 
P.A. and Guerrero, L.K. (eds), Handbook of Communi-
cation and Emotion: Research, Theory, Application, and 
Contexts. San Diego, CA and London: Academic Press, 
423–50.
89	 Cauberghe, V., De Pelsmacker, P., Janssens, W. and Dens, 
N. (2009) ‘Fear, threat and efficacy in threat appeals: mes-
sage involvement as a key mediator to message accept-
ance’, Accident Analysis and Prevention, 41(2), 276–85.
90	 Janssens, W., De Pelsmacker, P. and Cauberghe, V. (2009) 
‘The effect of prime, frame and death-relatedness in 
threat appeals on ad-evoked fear and message credibil-
ity’, Proceedings of the 2009 Icoria Conference, Klagen-
furt, CD-ROM.
91	 Murray, N.M. and Murray, S.B. (1996) ‘Music and Lyr-
ics in commercials: a cross-cultural comparison between 
commercials run in the Dominican Republic and in the 
United States’, Journal of Advertising, 25(2), 51–63.
92	 Braithwaite, A. and Ware, R. (1997) ‘The role of music 
in advertising’, Admap (July/August), 44–7; Alpert, J.I. 
and Alpert, M.I. (1990) ‘Music influences on mood and 
purchase intentions’, Psychology and Marketing, 7(2), 
109–33; Bruner, G.C. (1990) ‘Music, mood and market-
ing’, Journal of Marketing, 54(4), 94–104.
93	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den Bergh, J. (1998) ‘Ad con-
tent, product category, campaign weight and irritation: a 
study of 226 TV commercials’, Journal of International 
Consumer Marketing, 10(4), 5–27.
94	 Walker, D. and von Gonten, M.F. (1989) ‘Explaining 
related recall: new answers from a better model’, Journal 
of Advertising Research, 29(30), 11–21.
95	 Gorn, G.J. (1982) ‘The Effects of music in advertising 
on choice behavior: a classical conditioning approach’, 
Journal of Marketing, 46(4), 94–101.
96	 Kellaris, J.J. and Cox, A.D. (1989) ‘The effects of back-
ground music in advertising: a reassessment’, Journal of 
Consumer Research, 16(1), 113–18.
97	 Kellaris, J.J., Cox, A.D. and Cox, D. (1993) ‘The effect 
of background music on ad processing: a contingency 
explanation’, Journal of  Marketing, 57(4), 114–25; 
MacInnis, D.J. and Park, C.W. (1991) ‘The differential 
role of the characteristics of music on high and low 
involvement consumers’ processing of ads’, Journal of 
Consumer Research, 18 (September), 161–73; Anand, P. 
and Sternthal, B. (1990) ‘Ease of message processing as 
a moderator of repetition effects in advertising’, Journal 
of Marketing Research, 27 (August), 345–53.
98	 Oakes, S. and North, A.C. (2006) ‘The impact of back-
ground musical tempo and timbre congruity upon ad 
content recall and affective response’, Applied Cognitive 
Psychology, 20, 505–20.
99	 Wang, A. (2005) ‘The effects of expert and consumer 
endorsements on audience response’, Journal of Adver-
tising Research, 45 (December), 402–12.
100	 Aaker, D.A. and Bruzzone, D.E. (1985) ‘Causes of irrita-
tion in advertising’, Journal of Marketing, 49 (Spring), 
47–57.
101	 Sinclair, J. and Wilken, R. (2009) ‘Strategic regionali-
zation in marketing campaigns: beyond the standardi-
zation/glocalization debate’, Continuum: Journal of 
Media & Cultural Studies, 23(2), 147–57.
102	 Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M, Batra, R. and Alden, D.L.  
(2003) ‘How perceived brand globalness creates brand 
value’, Journal of International Business Studies, 33(1), 
35–47.
103	 Biswas, S., Hussain, M. and O Donnell, K. (2009) ‘Celeb-
rity endorsements in advertisements and consumer per-
ceptions: a cross-cultural study’, Journal of  Global 
Marketing, 22(2), 121–37.
104	 Rajabi, M., Dens, N. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2012) 
‘Endorser type and brand globalness effects in India: 
think global or act local?’, Proceedings of the 2012 
EMAC Conference, Lisbon, CD-ROM.
105	 Erdogan, Z., Baker, M.J. and Tagg, S. (2001) ‘Selecting 
celebrity endorsers: the practitioner’s perspective’, Jour-
nal of Advertising Research, 41(3), 39–48.
106	 Erdogan, Z., Baker, M.J. and Tagg, S. (2001) ‘Selecting 
celebrity endorsers: the practitioner’s perspective’, Jour-
nal of Advertising Research, 41(3), 39–48.
107	 Lafferty, B.A., Goldsmith, R.E. and Newell, S.J. (2002) 
‘The dual credibility model: the influence of corporate 
and endorser credibility on attitudes and purchase inten-
tions’, Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 10(3), 
1–12.
108	 Erdogan, B.Z. (1999) ‘Celebrity endorsements: a litera-
ture review’, Journal of Marketing Management, 15(4), 
291–314.
109	 Erdogan, Z., Baker, M.J. and Tagg, S. (2001) ‘Selecting 
celebrity endorsers: the practitioner’s perspective’, Jour-
nal of Advertising Research, 41(3), 39–48.
110	 Till, B.D. and Busler, M. (2000) ‘The match-up hypoth-
esis: physical attractiveness, expertise, and the role of fit 

256     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
134	 Hollensen, S. (2004) Global Marketing: A Market-
Responsive Approach. Harlow: Pearson Education; Kel-
ler, K.L. (2008) Strategic Brand Management: Building, 
Measuring and Managing Brand Equity. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
135	 Pollay, R.W. and Gallagher, K. (1990) ‘Advertising and 
cultural values: reflections in the distorted mirror’, Inter-
national Journal of Advertising, 9, 359–72.
136	 Caillat, Z. and Mueller, B. (1996) ‘Observations: the 
influence of culture on American and British advertising: 
an exploratory comparison of beer advertising’, Journal 
of Advertising Research, 36(3), 79–88.
137	 Zhang, Y. and Gelb, B.D. (1996) ‘Matching advertising 
appeals to culture: the influence of products’ use condi-
tions’, Journal of Advertising, 25(3), 29–46.
138	 Mueller, B. (1996) International Advertising: Communi-
cating Across Cultures. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
139	 Walliser, B. and Usunier, J.C. (1998) ‘The Standardiza-
tion of advertising execution: a review of the empirical 
literature’, in Andersson, P. (ed.), Proceedings of the 27th 
EMAC Conference, Marketing Research and Practice, 
Track 2: International Marketing, Stockholm, 517–36.
140	 Walliser, B. and Usunier, J.C. (1998) ‘The standardiza-
tion of advertising execution: a review of the empirical 
literature’, in Andersson, P. (ed.), Proceedings of the 27th 
EMAC Conference, Marketing Research and Practice, 
Track 2: International Marketing, Stockholm, 517–36.
141	 Hall, E.T. (1976) ‘How cultures collide’, Psychology 
Today (July), 66–97.
142	 Usunier, J.C. and Lee, J.A. (2005) Marketing Across Cul-
tures. Harlow: Pearson Education.
143	 Hong, J.W., Muderrisoglu, A. and Zinkhan, G.M. (1987) 
‘Cultural differences and advertising expression: a com-
parative content analysis of Japanese and US magazine 
advertising’, Journal of Advertising, 16(1), 55–62, 68; 
Ramaprasad, P. and Hazegawa, K. (1990) ‘An analysis of 
Japanese television commercials’, Journalism Quarterly, 
67 (Winter), 1025–33; Mueller, B. (1992) ‘Standardiza-
tion versus specialization: an examination of westerni-
zation in Japanese advertising’, Journal of Advertising 
Research, 32(1), 15–24.
144	 Hofstede, G. (2001) Culture’s Consequences, 2nd edition. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Hofstede, G. (1991) Cultures 
and Organizations: Software of the Mind. London: 
McGraw-Hill.
145	 Zhang, Y. and Gelb, B.D. (1996) ‘Matching advertising 
appeals to culture: the influence of products’ use condi-
tions’, Journal of Advertising, 25(3), 29–46.
146	 Zandpour, F. and Harich, K. (1996) ‘Think and feel coun-
try clusters: a new approach to international advertising 
standardization’, International Journal of Advertising, 
15, 325–44.
147	 Sinclair, J. and Wilken, R. (2009) ‘Strategic regionali-
zation in marketing campaigns: beyond the standardi-
zation/glocalization debate’, Continuum: Journal of 
Media & Cultural Studies, 23(2), 147–57.
148	 Cleveland, M. and Laroche, M. (2007) ‘Acculturation 
to the global consumer culture: scale development and 
research paradigm’, Journal of Business Research, 60(3), 
249–59; Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M. and de Jong, M.G. (2010) 
on brand attitude, purchase intent and brand beliefs’, 
Journal of Advertising, 29(3), 1–13.
111	 Bower, A.B. (2001) ‘Highly attractive models in advertis-
ing and the women who loathe them: the implications of 
negative affect for spokesperson effectiveness’, Journal of 
Advertising, 30(3), 51–63.
112	 Till, B.D. and Shimp, T.A. (1998) ‘Endorsers in advertis-
ing: the case of negative celebrity information’, Journal 
of Advertising, 27(1), 67–82.
113	 Euro Effie (2008) Brussels: European Association of 
Communications Agencies, http://www.euro-effie.com.
114	 Friestad, M. and Wright, P. (1994) ‘The persuasion 
knowledge model: how people cope with persuasion 
attempts’, Journal of Consumer Research 21(1).
115	 Dens, N., De Pelsmacker, P., Wouters, M. and 
Purnawirawan, N. (2012) ‘Do you like what you recog-
nize? The effects of brand placement prominence and 
movie plot connection on brand attitude as mediated by 
recognition’, Journal of Advertising, 41(3), 35–53.
116	 Egan, J. (2015) Marketing Communications. Los Ange-
les, CA: Sage.
117	 De Morgen, 15 April 2008.
118	 Bizz, March 2004, 34–5; De Morgen, 8 December 2005.
119	 http://www.iab.net/media/file/IAB-Native-Advertising-
Playbook2.pdf
120	 http://contentmarketinginstitute.com
121	 http://www.brandstories.net
122	 Information provided by Koen Denolf, The Fat Lady.
123	 De Morgen, 26 March 2009.
124	 Lambert, D.R., Morris, M.H. and Pitt, L.F. (1995) ‘Has 
industrial advertising become consumerized? A longitu-
dinal perspective from the USA’, International Journal of 
Advertising, 14, 349–64.
125	 www.pwcglobal.com and www.superbrands.org 
(accessed 9 June 2003).
126	 Lambert, D.R., Morris, M.H. and Pitt, L.F. (1995) ‘Has 
industrial advertising become consumerized? A longitu-
dinal perspective from the USA’, International Journal of 
Advertising, 14, 349–64.
127	 Lohtia, R., Johnston, W.J. and Aab, L. (1995) ‘Business-
to-business advertising: what are the dimensions of an 
effective print ad?’, Industrial Marketing Management, 
24, 369–78.
128	 Prystay, C. (2002) ‘Selling to Singapore’s teens is tricky – 
what works in the US (grunge, anger, rebellion) doesn’t 
necessarily click’, Wall Street Journal, 4 October.
129	 Mueller, B. (1996) International Advertising: Communi-
cating Across Cultures. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
130	 Walliser, B. and Usunier, J.C. (1998) ‘The standardiza-
tion of advertising execution: a review of the empirical 
literature’, in Andersson, P. (ed.), Proceedings of the 27th 
EMAC Conference, Marketing Research and Practice, 
Track 2: International Marketing, Stockholm, 517–36.
131	 Usunier, J.C. and Lee, J.A. (2005) Marketing Across Cul-
tures. Harlow: Pearson Education.
132	 Mueller, B. (1996) International Advertising: Communi-
cating Across Cultures. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
133	 Brengman, M. (2002) ‘The impact of colour in the store 
environment: an environmental psychology approach’, 
Doctoral Dissertation, Ghent University.

REFERENCES     257
‘A global investigation into the constellation of consumer 
attitudes toward global and local products’, Journal of 
Marketing, 74(6), 18–40.
149	 Moore, D.J. and Homer, P.M. (2008) ‘Self-brand connec-
tions: the role of attitude strength and autobiographical 
memory primes’, Journal of Business Research, 61(7), 
707–14.
150	 Sirgy, M.J., Lee, D.J., Johar, J.S. and Tidwell, J. (2008) 
‘Effect of self-congruity with sponsorship on brand loy-
alty’, Journal of Business Research, 61 (10), 1091–7.
151	 Escalas, J.E. and Bettman, J.R. (2005) ‘Self construal, 
reference groups, and brand meaning’, Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 32(3), 378–89.
152	 McCracken, G. (1986) ‘Culture and consumption: a theo-
retical account of the structure and movement of the cul-
tural meaning of consumer goods’, Journal of Consumer 
Research, 13(1), 71–84.
153	 Sung, Y. and Choi, S.M. (2010) ‘The influence of self-
construal on self-brand congruity in the United States 
and Korea’, Journal of  Cross-Cultural Psychology, 
43(1), 151–66; Aguirre-Rodriguez, A., Bosnjak, M. and 
Sirgy, M.J. (2012) ‘Moderators of the self-congruity 
effect on consumer decision-making: a meta-analysis’, 
Journal of  Business Research, 65(8), 1179–88.
154	 Hofstede, G. (2001) Culture’s Consequences: Compar-
ing Values, Behaviors, Institutions and Organizations 
Across Nations. London: Sage; House, R.J., Hanges, P.J., 
Javidan, M., Dorfman, P.W. and Gupta, V. (2004) Cul-
ture, Leadership, and Organizations: The Globe Study 
of 62 Societies. London: Sage.
155	 Schwartz, S.H. (1992) ‘Universals in the content and 
structure of values: Theoretical advances and empirical 
tests in 20 countries’, Advances in Experimental Social 
Psychology, 25(1), 1–65.
156	 Hsieh, M.-H., Pan, S.-L. and Setiono, R. (2004) ‘Prod-
uct-, corporate-, and country-image dimensions and pur-
chase behavior: A multicountry analysis’, Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, 32(3), 251–70.
157	 Leong, C.-H. (2008) ‘A multilevel research framework 
for the analyses of attitudes toward immigrants’, Inter-
national Journal of  Intercultural Relations, 32(2), 
115–29.
158	 Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M., ter Hofstede, F. and Wedel, M. 
(1999) ‘A cross-national investigation into the individual 
and national cultural antecedents of consumer innova-
tiveness’, Journal of Marketing, 63(2), 55–69; Schwartz, 
S.H. (1992) ‘Universals in the content and structure of 
values: theoretical advances and empirical tests in 20 
countries’, Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 
25(1), 1–65.
159	 Pfeffer, J. and Fong, C.T. (2005) ‘Building organization 
theory from first principles: the self-enhancement motive 
and understanding power and influence’, Organization 
Science, 16(4), 372–88.
160	 Steenkamp, J.-B.E.M., ter Hofstede, F. and Wedel, M. 
(1999) ‘A cross-national investigation into the individual 
and national cultural antecedents of consumer innova-
tiveness’, Journal of Marketing, 63(2), 55–69.
161	 Preacher, K.J., Rucker, D.D. and Hayes, A.F. (2007) 
‘Assessing moderated mediation hypotheses: theory, 
methods, and prescriptions’, Multivariate Behavioral 
Research, 42(1), 185–227.
162	 Preacher, K.J., Rucker, D.D. and Hayes, A.F. (2007) 
‘Assessing moderated mediation hypotheses: theory, 
methods, and prescriptions’, Multivariate Behavioral 
Research, 42(1), 185–227.
163	 Stets, J.E. and Burke, P.J. (2003) ‘A sociological approach 
to self and identity’, in Leary, M. and Tangney, J. (eds) 
Handbook of Self and Identity. New York: Guilford 
Press, 128–52.
164	 Stryker, S. and Burke, P. J. (2000) ‘The past, present, and 
future of an identity theory’, Social Psychology Quar-
terly, 63(4) 284–97.
165	 Arnocky, S., Stroink, M. and DeCicco, T. (2007) ‘Self-
construal predicts environmental concern, cooperation, 
and conservation’, Journal of Environmental Psychol-
ogy, 27(4), 255–64; Clayton, S. (2007) ‘Domesticated 
nature: Motivations for gardening and perceptions of 
environmental impact’, Journal of Environmental Psy-
chology, 27(3), 215–24.
166	 Moisander, J. (2007) ‘Motivational complexity of green 
consumerism’, International Journal of Consumer Stud-
ies, 31(4), 404–9.
167	 Rise, J., Sheeran, P. and Hukkelberg, S. (2010) ‘The 
role of self-identity in the theory of planned behavior: 
a meta-analysis’, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 
40(5), 1085–1105; Bartels, J. and Hoogendam, K. (2011) 
‘The role of social identity and attitudes toward sustain-
ability brands in buying behaviors for organic products’, 
Journal of Brand Management, 18(9), 697–708.
168	 Vitell, S. J., Singhapakdi, A. and Thomas, J. (2001) ‘Con-
sumer ethics: an application and empirical testing of the 
Hunt-Vitell theory of ethics’, Journal of Consumer Mar-
keting, 18(2), 153–78.
169	 Chan, R.Y.K., Wong, Y.W. and Leung, T.K.P. (2008) 
‘Applying ethical concepts to the study of “green” con-
sumer behavior: an analysis of Chinese consumers’ 
intentions to bring their own shopping bags’, Journal of 
Business Ethics, 79, 469–81.
170	 Hansla, A., Gamble, A., Juliusson, A. and Gärling, T. 
(2008) ‘The relationships between awareness of conse-
quences, environmental concern, and value orientations’, 
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 28(1), 1–9; Kil-
bourne, W.E. and Pickett, G. (2008) ‘How materialism 
affects environmental beliefs, concern, and environ-
mentally responsible behaviour’, Journal of Business 
Research, 61(9), 885–93.
171	 Haines, R., Street, M.D. and Haines, D. (2008) ‘The influ-
ence of perceived importance of an ethical issue on moral 
judgment, moral obligation, and moral intent’, Journal 
of Business Ethics, 81(2), 387–99.
172	 Peloza, J., White, K. and Shang, J. (2013) ‘Good and 
guilt-free: the role of self-accountability in influencing 
preferences for products with ethical attributes’, Journal 
of Marketing, 77(1), 104–19.
173	 Hunt, S.D. and Vitell, S.J. (2006) ‘The general theory of 
marketing ethics: a revision and three questions’, Jour-
nal of Macromarketing, 26(2), 143–53; Kilbourne, W.E., 
Beckmann, S.C. and Thelen, E. (2002) ‘The role of the 
dominant social paradigm in environmental attitudes: 

258     CHAPTER 5  ADVERTISING
a multinational examination’, Journal of  Business 
Research, 55(3), 193–204.
174	 www.geert-hofstede.com
175	 Barbarossa, C., Beckmann, S. C., De Pelsmacker, P., 
Moons, I. and Gwozdz, W. (2015) ‘A self-identity based 
model of electric car adoption intention: a cross-cultural 
comparative study’, Journal of Environmental Psychol-
ogy, 42, 149–60.
176	 Egan, J. (2015) Marketing Communications. Los Ange-
les, CA: Sage.
177	 Aaker, D.A. and Bruzzone, D.E. (1985) ‘Causes of irrita-
tion in advertising’, Journal of Marketing, 49 (Spring), 
47–57.
178	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den Bergh, J. (1998) ‘Ad con-
tent, product category, campaign weight and irritation: a 
study of 226 TV commercials’, Journal of International 
Consumer Marketing, 10(4), 5–27.
179	 Pasadeos, Y. (1990) ‘Perceived informativeness of and 
irritation with local advertising’, Journalism Quarterly, 
67, 35–9.
180	 Edwards, S.M., Li, H. and Lee, J.H. (2002) ‘Forced expo-
sure and psychological reactance: antecedents and con-
sequences of the perceived intrusiveness of pop-up ads’, 
Journal of Advertising, 31(3), 83–95.
181	 Aaker, D.A. and Bruzzone, D.E. (1985) ‘Causes of irrita-
tion in advertising’, Journal of Marketing, 49 (Spring), 
47–57; De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den Bergh, J. (1998) ‘Ad 
content, product category, campaign weight and irrita-
tion: a study of 226 TV commercials’, Journal of Inter-
national Consumer Marketing, 10(4), 5–27.
182	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den Bergh, J. (1998) ‘Ad con-
tent, product category, campaign weight and irritation: a 
study of 226 TV commercials’, Journal of International 
Consumer Marketing, 10(4), 5–27.
183	 Pechmann, C. and Stewart, D.W. (1990) ‘Advertising rep-
etition: a critical review of wear-in and wear-out’, Work-
ing paper. Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute.
184	 Cox, D.S. and Cox, A.D. (1988) ‘What does familiarity 
breed? Complexity as a moderator of repetition effects 
in advertisement evaluation’, Journal of  Consumer 
Research, 15, 111–16; Anand, P. and Sternthal, B. (1990) 
‘Ease of message processing as a moderator of repetition 
effects in advertising’, Journal of Marketing Research, 
27, 345–53; Schumann, D.W., Petty, R.E. and Clemons, 
D.S. (1990) ‘Predicting the effectiveness of different strat-
egies of advertising variation: a test of the repetition-
variation hypothesis’, Journal of Consumer Research, 
17, 192–202.
185	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den Bergh, J. (1998) ‘Ad con-
tent, product category, campaign weight and irritation: a 
study of 226 TV commercials’, Journal of International 
Consumer Marketing, 10(4), 5–27.
186	 Fennis, B.M. and Bakker, A.B. (2001) ‘Stay tuned – we 
will be back after these messages: need to evaluate mod-
erates the transfer of irritation in advertising’, Journal of 
Advertising, 15(3), 15–25.
187	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Geuens, M. (1997) ‘Affect intensity 
and the general attitude towards advertising’, in De Pels-
macker, P. and Geuens, M. (eds), The Changing World of 
Marketing and Corporate Communication, Proceedings 
of the Second International Conference on Marketing 
and Corporate Communication. Antwerp: RUCA, 60–2.
188	 Moore, D.L. and Hutchinson, J.W. (1983) ‘The Effect of 
ad affection advertising effectiveness’, Advances in Con-
sumer Research, 10, 526–31.
189	 Burke, M.C. and Edell, J.A. (1989) ‘The impact of feel-
ings on ad-based affect and cognition’, Journal of Mar-
keting Research, 26, 69–83; Stayman, D.M. and Aaker, 
D.A. (1988) ‘Are All the Effects of Ad-Induced Feelings 
Mediated by Aad?’, Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 
368–73; Aaker, D.A. and Bruzzone, D.E. (1985) ‘Causes 
of irritation in advertising’, Journal of Marketing, 49 
(Spring), 47–57; De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den Bergh, 
J. (1997) ‘Advertising content and brand confusion’, 
Research report, Marketing Communication Research 
Centre. Ghent: De Vlerick School voor Management.
190	 Fennis, B.M. and Bakker, A.B. (2001) ‘Stay tuned – we 
will be back after these messages: need to evaluate mod-
erates the transfer of irritation in advertising’, Journal of 
Advertising, 15(3), 15–25.
191	 De Pelsmacker, P., Van den Bergh, J. and Anckaert, P. 
(1998) ‘Irritation, product type, consumer characteristics 
and advertising effectiveness’, Working paper, Market-
ing Communication Research Centre. Ghent: De Vlerick 
School voor Management.
192	 Rossiter, J.R. and Percy, L. (2000) Advertising and Pro-
motion Management. New York: McGraw-Hill.
193	 Poiesz, T.B.C. and Verhallen, T.M.M. (1989) ‘Brand con-
fusion in advertising’, International Journal of Advertis-
ing, 8, 231–44.
194	 Poiesz, T.B.C. and Verhallen, T.M.M. (1989) ‘Brand con-
fusion in advertising’, International Journal of Advertis-
ing, 8, 231–44.
195	 Brengman, M., Geuens, M. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2001) 
‘The impact of consumer characteristics and campaign 
related factors on brand confusion in print advertising’, 
Journal of Marketing Communications, 7, 231–43.
196	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den Bergh, J. (1997) ‘Adver-
tising content and brand confusion’, Research report, 
Marketing Communication Research Centre. Ghent: De 
Vlerick School voor Management.
197	 Poiesz, T.B.C. and Verhallen, T.M.M. (1989) ‘Brand con-
fusion in advertising’, International Journal of Advertis-
ing, 8, 231–44.
198	 Diamond, S.A. (1981) Trademark Problems and How to 
Avoid Them. Chicago, IL: Crain Communication, Inc.
199	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den Bergh, J. (1997) ‘Adver-
tising content and brand confusion’, Research report, 
Marketing Communication Research Centre. Ghent: De 
Vlerick School voor Management.
200	 De Pelsmacker, P., Van den Bergh, J. and Anckaert, P. 
(1998) ‘Irritation, product type, consumer characteristics 

REFERENCES     259
and advertising effectiveness’, Working paper, Market-
ing Communication Research Centre. Ghent: De Vlerick 
School voor Management.
201	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Geuens, M. (1997) ‘Emotional 
appeals and information cues in Belgian magazine adver-
tisements’, International Journal of Advertising, 16(2), 
123–47.
202	 Poiesz, T.B.C. and Verhallen, T.M.M. (1989) ‘Brand con-
fusion in advertising’, International Journal of Advertis-
ing, 8, 231–44.
203	 Poiesz, T.B.C. and Verhallen, T.M.M. (1989) ‘Brand con-
fusion in advertising’, International Journal of Advertis-
ing, 8, 231–44.
204	 Brengman, M., Geuens, M. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2001) 
‘The impact of consumer characteristics and campaign 
related factors on brand confusion in print advertising’, 
Journal of Marketing Communications, 7, 231–43.
205	 Foxman, E.R. and Muehling, D.D. (1990) ‘An investiga-
tion of factors contributing to consumer brand confu-
sion’, Journal of Consumer Affairs, 24(1), 170–89.
206	 Brengman, M., Geuens, M. and De Pelsmacker, P. 
(2001) ‘The impact of consumer characteristics and 
campaign related factors on brand confusion in print 
advertising’, Journal of Marketing Communications, 
7, 231–43.

Chapter 6
Online communication
Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Assess the importance of the Internet and other new media as interactive 
communications tools
● Distinguish the different types of online communication tools related to different 
communications objectives
● Understand the Internet as an advertising medium, its success factors, and the 
different types of Internet advertising
● Learn about the new evolutions in social media advertising such as Facebook, Twitter, 
Pinterest, Instagram, YouTube, mobile marketing and interactive television
● Understand how the Internet contributes to relationship marketing
Chapter outline
260

THE GROWING IMPORTANCE OF ONLINE MEDIA     261
Introduction
Mass marketing communications techniques have dominated communications strategies for 
decades. Gradually, direct marketing principles have been adopted that allow access to each 
member of the target group on an individual basis. The current stage in this evolution is 
the trend towards real interactivity, i.e. not only is the marketer capable of communicating 
with target groups on a one-to-one basis, but also individual members of the target group 
are capable of responding to, and interacting with, the sender of the message. Moreover, 
they often start the conversation themselves. Although some direct marketing communica-
tion techniques also allow a certain degree of interactivity, the increasing penetration of 
the Internet and mobile devices (phones and tablets) and the popularity of new interac-
tive media such as interactive TV and social media are changing the nature of marketing 
communications interactivity. Today people’s media attention is fragmenting. There was a 
total of 3.6 billion unique mobile subscribers at the end of 2014. Half of the global popula-
tion now has a mobile subscription – compared to just one in five 10 years ago. An extra 
one billion mobile subscribers are predicted by 2020, lifting the global penetration rate to 
approximately 60%.1
So, marketers have to follow them into the new media they are consuming. The Inter-
net is fundamentally different from traditional, and even direct, marketing communica-
tions tools: consumers can go all the way from awareness to interest to desire to action, 
all within the same medium and within the same session.2 Its unique characteristics and 
current evolutions are further explored in the first section of this chapter. The next sec-
tions focus on the different online media that a marketer can use for different communi-
cations objectives, with specific sections dedicated to interactive TV, mobile marketing 
and the recent evolutions in social media. Related topics such as relationship marketing 
using the Internet are also considered. Although the Internet has the capability to sup-
port all aspects of company processes (including logistics, e-commerce, e-procurement, 
etc.), this chapter will specifically focus on the use of new media for marketing com-
munications purposes.
The growing importance of online media
The Internet refers to the computer network infrastructure that enables the exchange of 
digital data on a global scale. Worldwide, roughly 904 million hosts3 are interconnected 
through cable and telephone networks. Through historical developments (the Internet 
was first a military tool developed to make communication possible in case of nuclear 
war and was later adapted by academics to share and exchange information) and inten-
tional efforts, nowadays the Internet is a unique, independent medium that is not owned 
or operated by any commercial or government body. Although the Internet is also the 
network serving email applications, news servers (newsgroups), ftp (file transfer), gopher 
(pure text-based information exchange), etc., it is often used as a synonym for the World 
Wide Web (WWW), the interactive and graphical communications medium invented by Tim 
Berners-Lee, a physicist at the European Centre for Nuclear Research (CERN).4 The Web 
is characterised by the use of hypertext mark-up language (HTML) that allows documents 
consisting of text, icons, sounds or images to be shared by different users, regardless of 
the computer operating system they use. The hyperlinks (text- or image-based) make it 
possible to navigate quickly through documents and pages by simple mouse clicks. The 

262     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
growth of the WWW can be attributed to the user-friendly, consumer-operated pages 
utilising this hypertext capability.5
At the end of 2014, there were 294 million domain names6 (an indication of the number 
of websites). Worldwide, 3.07 billion people (582 million of whom are in Europe) are con-
nected to the Internet, which is a global penetration (i.e. the number and percentage of 
people that have access to the Net) of 42.4% and an average European penetration of 70.4%. 
Within the European Union, Luxembourg has the highest penetration rate of 98%, followed 
by Denmark (97.3%), Finland (97.1%), The Netherlands (95.7%), Sweden (94.8%), Belgium 
(90.4%) and the UK (89.8%). Romania (51.4%), Italy (58.5%) and Bulgaria (59%) have the 
lowest Internet penetration in the EU28.7
Thanks to the growth in digital ad spending with mobile as the biggest growth factor, 
there is an overall growth in global ad spending. The latest IAB market tracking study – 
which collates online ad spend from 26 countries – indicates that, in 2014, online adver-
tising recorded double-digit growth for a fifth consecutive year at 11.8% to a market 
value of €30.7 billion. It is now the second largest media category, edging very close to 
TV. The European growth in 2014 was 11.6%, which is lower than the 16% growth in 
the USA. The top five markets in the European continent (UK, Germany, France, Italy 
and Russia) account for 70% of the total online advertising market, up slightly from 
69.9% in 2013 (in 2013 online advertising had a market value of €27.3 billion).8 Adver-
tisers increasingly recognise online as a branding medium. Paid-for-search continues to 
be the largest online advertising format with a market value of €14.8 billion with an 
11.2% growth. Display advertising is the biggest grower with a growth rate of 15.5% 
and has market value of €10.9 billion. Classifieds and directories recorded a modest 
5.8% increase to €4.9 billion.
There is a trend for advertisers to shift ad budgets from mature to emerging markets, 
which is fuelling their online economy. The countries with the highest ad spend growth 
rates are Slovenia (43.1%), Ireland (33.3%) and Belarus (32.8%). An expanding broadband 
infrastructure adds to the attractiveness of those markets.9 The explosion of ‘big data’ 
analysis has delivered enhanced targeting capabilities. There is a new generation of mar-
keting practices that are using sophisticated ‘behavioural advertising’ techniques to learn 
about the viewer’s interest and provide tailored messaging. TV-like commercials can now 
be easily produced, allowing TV advertising content to be rebroadcast online and the cam-
paign stretched further. The creative power of the engaging ‘rich media’ formats that take 
commercial messages across the whole web page has given creative directors a new freedom 
in design. The standardisation of advertising formats and some of the workflow processes 
has removed a barrier that long held agencies back from recommending the Web. There 
are other compelling reasons to use the Internet as a marketing communications medium. 
Daytime is prime time – audiences that could never be reached before are now available 
and attentive. The Internet is a medium of a thousand niches – it combines exceptional 
lifestyle targeting with a mass reach. Accountability and making budgets stretch further 
are a strategic advantage of digital channels.
As online’s share of the market has grown, spend is being drawn from other chan-
nels. Although some of this spend is migrating from the print editions of publications 
– particularly consumer magazines and directories – to their online counterpart, much 
is moving to the Internet pure play firms (i.e. companies who only offer their content 
online).
Direct mail is suffering as customer acquisition budgets move to search, and retention 
budgets move to email marketing. Classified advertising in newspapers and magazines is 
migrating to the Web, with recruitment the largest single advertising sector online in several 
markets, and much of the advertising spend evaporating in favour of free-to-air models or 
disintermediation as consumers access company websites directly.10

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     263
Online communications objectives
While we are witnessing more enthusiasm for the integration of Internet communication 
tactics in today’s communication plans, few brand managers have a clear idea of which of 
these tactics are most appropriate for accomplishing various marketing objectives. In many 
cases, a trial and error process is undertaken, often heavily influenced and stimulated by 
whichever tactic the Internet or advertising agency is trying to sell to the brand manager. 
Because this calls for the development of an overall framework that allows marketers to cat-
egorise the different digital marketing tactics, InSites Consulting has developed a framework, 
on which the following is based.11 Basically, the online marketer can focus on four specific 
marketing goals when turning to digital tools:
● Generating brand awareness: putting or reinforcing the brand in the evoked set (i.e. the set 
of brands that is considered when the need or desire for the product or service arises) of 
consumers. In line with most research and cases found on this subject, stimulating brand 
awareness is ideally achieved via online advertising, content sponsorship, advergames and 
viral and social media marketing.
● Shaping brand image and brand attitudes: defining, reinforcing or changing the set of 
associations that differentiate the brand from competing products and improve consum-
ers’ knowledge and judgement about a brand. According to the literature on the subject, 
shaping brand attitude is best achieved by brand sites, online advertising, anchor deals, 
email marketing, mobile marketing, online contests and peer-to-peer games.
● Generating trial: attracting new buyers to the brand by attracting brand-switchers (i.e. 
consumers of competing brands) or consumers who have never tried the product cat-
egory before. Trial stimulation implies an increase in the brand penetration rate in a 
certain market. Mobile marketing, email marketing, online contests, e-couponing and 
e-sampling are the best online marketing instruments to attain this objective.
● Creating loyalty: influencing consumers’ buying behaviour in the sense of increasing the 
number of satisfied and committed buyers. Striving for customer loyalty is also a cost-
saving strategy as research indicates that the cost of attracting new customers can be as 
much as six times greater than the cost of retaining customers. Email marketing, brand 
websites, virtual communities and certain e-rewarding games and online loyalty promo-
tions contribute to the objective of generating and sustaining brand loyalty.
Generating traffic to a website or social media page is often considered important but is 
not actually a marketing communications end-goal, except for e-commerce sites for which 
traffic is essential. Of course it is important to engage customers by the e-marketing actions 
that a company undertakes but, in the end, site traffic will have to lead to one of the four 
objectives defined above. This is also the case for increasing market and consumer knowledge 
through employing e-direct marketing and database programs. In the next section each type 
of e-marketing tactic is described and illustrated with examples.
Online communication tools
Marketers have a large number of different online communications tools at their disposal. 
In this section, we describe each instrument of the online communications mix. The mul-
timedia capabilities of the Net allow advertisers to use content, graphics, movement, audio 

264     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
and video. Almost every traditional communications tool has an online twin, e.g. e-coupons 
or online contests and seminars. Since almost every Internet user has his or her own email 
address and social profile, marketers can build a direct communications line with customers 
and prospects at lower costs than traditional direct marketing. The huge success of mobile 
telecommunications and the increasing penetration of smartphones and tablets Europe are 
opening new opportunities for companies to use wireless advertising and apps to reach their 
target groups.
Brand websites
Brand websites are sites with specific brand-related information and/or services. A brand 
site can be used to communicate with the target groups and also as a platform that enables 
interaction with, or between, customers or the collection of individual customer data, for 
instance by letting them subscribe to receive e-newsletters. French cable network Canal+ 
increased subscriptions by 18% and its number of email registrations by 10 000 by means of 
an interactive subscription form. Viewers could fill in their details while an auto-play video 
of the French satiric couple Catherine & Liliane was interacting with subscribers by joking 
about their names and giving them directions.12 Additionally, brand websites that deliver 
information and applications that reinforce the positioning of the brand, also have brand 
attitude-forming capabilities.
Beauty brand Clinique recognises the different needs of consumers when it comes to beauty products. Finding the 
perfect beauty product to match your skin type requires help from professionals who can actually analyse your skin. 
To give customers the same assistance in both mortar and brick stores and in their online shop, Clinique has found 
a way to offer customers a personalised skin analysis on their website. Customers have to respond to a range of 
questions concerning their skin and beauty needs and then receive recommended products. The site contains 70 
interactive features such as tabs ‘Personalised, Just for You’ to simplify decision making. Customers can also turn to 
live chat and watch informational videos. They can consult previous purchases, save consultant results, replenish 
favourite products and create lists of favourites.13
Business insight
Clinique
Brand websites are also essential for effectively sustaining or increasing the loyalty 
of user groups. A brand website is necessary for ‘maintenance communication’ all year 
round, 24 hours a day, with loyal customers and brand-lovers. If heavy users of a brand 
bond with the brand and the company, they will also expect to find more product infor-
mation on the Internet and might even want to contact the people behind their favourite 
product. However, merely having a website is, in most cases, a waste of budget since 
often only the leading brands benefit from spontaneous traffic towards their brand sites. 
Brands with a moderate or low unaided brand awareness are likely to be disillusioned 
by the reach of their website. Hence, websites need continuous traffic-generating efforts. 
Successful traffic generators are online advertising, search engine optimisation and includ-
ing the URL on corporate media (stationery such as business cards, letter headings and 
brochures), on packaging and in offline advertising. The way a site is marketed has a 

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     265
substantial impact on the types of customers it attracts. Loyal customers are attracted 
by referrals, whereas promotional discounts and general untargeted banner advertising 
attract ‘butterflies’.14
Outdoor garment brand Peak Performance helped its customers to discover beautiful, remote locations that are 
perfect spots for outdoor activities during so-called magic hour. According to the brand, the magic hour, just after 
sunrise and right before sunset, is the most beautiful time to be out for outdoor activities. To encourage customers 
to go on outdoor activities, Peak Performance opened 15 mobile pop-up shops in 11 different countries on remote 
locations that are only open during the magic hour. Each of the pop-up shops contained two to four items that 
visitors could pick for free. When visitors accessed the shop they were asked to take a selfie to verify that they were 
really at the exact location. Visitors then received an email with a voucher to be used at www.peakperformance.
com. Apart from the temporarily opening stores, they could also visit www.catchmagichour.com where they could 
find the nearest shop and could also compete on Instagram posting pictures of the magic hour. Contestants were 
asked to snap a stunning picture during the magic hour, and add the hashtag #CatchMagicHour on Instagram. The 
winner received a €1000 voucher and the second-best picture won a €500 voucher from Peak Performance. The 
winners were notified through Instagram messages.15
Business insight
#CatchMagicHour
A brand site does not have to be hosted continuously but can be used for a short period 
during a product launch. These temporary sites are also called micro-sites. The growing 
complexity of corporate sites and the limitations of banner advertising have induced adver-
tisers to develop this new way of providing richer online experiences with more complex 
messages (than traditional media). A micro-site is a small website that exists for a specific 
purpose, and often does not contain more than five or six pages. Companies often buy a 
specific URL related to the launch or promotion of a new product or service and then use 
the micro-site to enhance brand experience and to create brand/product excitement without 
revamping the existing website. It is a good way to isolate a user and maintain his or her 
attention to one product or a specific range of products. This is exactly what the Belgian 
band Absynth Minded did when they created www.mostexclusivevideoever.com. On this 
micro-site the video clip of their new song ‘Space’ was only displayed each time a music 
station actually played their song. The video was exclusively available on this site, not on 
TV, nor via YouTube or any other music site.16
Retailers frequently use micro-sites to highlight certain products out of their massive 
assortment. Because of the many possibilities of adding content, audio, video and interac-
tion, micro-sites have many advantages over banners and other standardised ad formats. 
But, just like a standard brand or company site, micro-sites need promotion to be found 
and noticed by the target group. Micro-site-based campaigns have a limited shelf life that 
is comparable with any other advertising campaign. For companies selling low-interest or 
impulse-buy products, such as insurance companies or fast-moving consumer packaged 
goods such as soft drinks and candy bars, micro-sites are an interesting alternative to large 
and expensive websites that often demand enormous efforts to generate traffic to them. 
Direct and/or mass marketing can drive an audience directly to the specific URL, so that the 
pertinent information is only a few clicks away, ideal for search engine optimisation. Besides 
being easy to remember, a specific URL can help increase a brand’s micro-site’s presence in 
organic search engine results, driving more traffic and elevating perceived expertise.

266     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
Search engine optimisation
The biggest issue with having a brand or company website is to attract visitors to the site. 
Unlike traditional advertising with its interruptive nature, online marketing communications 
often require an action from the consumer as the Internet is a pull medium. To find this, traf-
fic marketers use a combination of offline and online marketing communications techniques. 
One specific online technique is search engine optimisation (SEO), improving the listing in 
search engines. A survey conducted by PEW Internet in May 2011 revealed that 92% of the 
online adults use search engines to find information on the Web. This places search at the 
top of the list of most often used online activities among US adults.18 The search engine is 
the new homepage for brands and businesses.
Search engine optimisation is important to many companies, not least to online stores 
and e-commerce sites. Some web agencies are specialists in registering sites in top and 
niche search engines and in improving their rankings on the engine. For this purpose, 
they use specific metatags, page titles, reciprocal linking, hidden keywords and multiple 
domain names as these are the factors that influence search engine robots’ behaviour. 
Today the dynamics (frequency of changing content, links towards the site, likes/shares 
of site content via social media such as Facebook and Twitter, etc.) on the site are also 
taken into consideration to rank the site in the result list. Another way of increasing 
search engine share-of-voice is keyword buying, one of the online advertising techniques 
explained below.19
Online advertising
Online advertising are commercial messages on specific rented spaces on websites of 
other companies. In 2014, global ad spending grew by 6.6% to $558.68 billion. In 2015, 
global ad spending is expected to increase by 6% up to $592.43 billion. The reason for 
this growth can be found in the growth in global digital ad spending. Global digital ad 
spending in 2015 was projected to grow up to $170 billion, up 16% from the $146.42 
Domino’s is teaching its customer how to make the perfect pizza. The Domino’s Pizza School is a virtual campus 
made out of pizza boxes. To host this virtual campus the brand has made a website, stg.dominospizzaschool.com, 
where you can scroll through the different steps it takes to make the perfect pizza. The Domino’s Pizza School also 
welcomes fellow pizza lovers and pizza makers working for competitors. First you learn how to make the perfect 
dough, followed by sauce and cheese and the final step is learning about different topics. After these four lessons 
you receive a Domino’s Pizza School diploma, which you can add to your LinkedIn profile or share on Facebook. 
Graduates who really think they have got what it takes can follow a link to the Domino’s Careers page. In addition to 
the Domino’s Pizza School website, the brand also created a mobile pizza school that travels to competitor retailers 
and trains their staff according to its own ‘back to basics’ methods. By doing this, Domino’s aims to persuade people 
that Domino’s ingredients are more authentic. This way customers also get a look behind the scenes and receive 
some genuinely useful tips for making pizza at home.17
Business insight
Domino’s Pizza School

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     267
billion in 2014. Digital ad spending made up 26.2% of the global advertising budget 
in 2014. In the US digital ad spending accounted for 28.1% of the total advertising 
budget in 2014 at $50.73 billion. Global digital ad spending is expected to continue to 
grow with an estimate of $197.48 billion in 2016, accounting for 31.3% of the total 
global advertising budget. Within digital advertising, mobile is growing the fastest. In 
2014 mobile grew by 112.2% compared from 2013, with $40.20 billion. According to 
eMarketer, mobile will grow 59.8% in 2015 with $64.25 billion and 48.9% in 2016 with 
$95.64 billion being spent on mobile. In 2016 mobile ad spending will overtake desktop 
and in 2018 digital ad spending will overtake TV. Google and Facebook represent 65% 
of the global mobile market. By December 2014, 74% of Facebook’s revenues came 
from mobile ads.
Video ad spending is hot nowadays: worldwide 33% of total digital ad spending is going 
to video. Video in US accounts for $70 billion, of which 20% is spent on YouTube (Decem-
ber 2014). Social media ad spending is also on the rise. In the US it is estimated to have 
had a 30% growth with $9 billion being spent on social media. Social accounts for 16% of 
digital advertising in the US. In 2014, 71% of the US social media advertising budget went 
to Facebook.20
Banner ads are graphic images (animated GIFs or Java applets) used as ads. Several 
formats (defined by number of pixels) exist: some are known as buttons (very small rec-
tangles or squares), rectangles and skyscrapers (a thin and small format, typically along the 
right side of a web page). These are a popular choice as they remain in view as the reader 
scrolls down the page. A good banner ad campaign might include a mixture of different 
sizes and positions for banner ads. Next to the size, the choice needs to be made whether 
the banner ad needs to be static or animated or even incorporate sound. Apart from ban-
ners and their variants, other forms such as pop-ups and interstitials exist. Pop-ups are 
banners that appear in a separate window on top of or beneath (in which case they are 
called pop-unders) the visited website. Interstitials are ads that appear temporarily when 
loading a new web page. Sometimes they cover part of the browser; sometimes they take 
over the entire screen. Superstitials are additional pop-up browser windows that are opened 
when a new web page is opened; they are very intrusive and irritating. Interstitials can 
be static (an image file) or dynamic. In the latter case, they often consist of a so-called 
rich media ad, i.e. an ad using animated content such as audio/video, Flash, Java, etc., to 
create special effects, interaction, or moving or floating ads. The floating ad that moves 
over the browser in an animated way, and is usually very effective in getting the attention 
of the website visitor, is also called ‘shoskele’ or overt. Some newer and popular types of 
online ads are wallpaper, where an ad appears and changes the background of the website, 
and billboards.
According to research conducted by Millward Brown, new large-display ad formats such as ‘Billboard’ and ‘Wallpa-
per’ are outperforming standard banners such as Mid-Page Unit (MPU) banner (Flash or movie banner) against key 
brand metrics, especially at the start of the purchase funnel. The study was based on 940 campaigns over a two-year 
period across the UK, USA, Europe, South America and Australasia and examined the performance of formats on 
Research insight
Size matters: large ads boost brand awareness

268     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
A specific type of targeted online advertising is keyword buying, also known as search 
engine advertising (SEA). This is advertising on large search engines such as Google, 
Yahoo!, Bing, etc., that is triggered by specific keywords and search terms and which 
appears alongside and sometimes above or below the search results. Keyword buying is 
all about placing a catchy ad on several relevant websites, blogs and social media to bring 
more visitors to the target website if the user clicks on the ad. These ‘smart ads’ ensure 
higher impact and lower waste for advertisers looking to target genuine potential cus-
tomers. This type of advertising uses the unique benefits of the Web as a pull medium.22 
Unlike the other types of online advertising that are CPM-based (cost per thousand 
exposures) ad formats, keyword buying uses a pay per click model. This means that adver-
tisers only pay for each click-through on their sponsored link. The prices per click vary 
and are set by bidding on keyword combinations. The more popular the keyword, the 
more expensive it is. Search engine advertising (SEA) is one of the fastest-growing online 
advertising businesses.
Gulf Stream Gear sells custom boat lettering and apparel online through targeted campaigns. Over 11 months, 127 403 
visits were driven to the site, 1594 of which produced sales. As the average cost per sale is $37.78 and the average 
basket is $175 and up, the Adwords campaign turns out to be very profitable. The sales tend to slow during winter. 
Therefore a special holiday season campaign was created. To increase sales the focus was on boating, yachting and 
fishing gifts tailoring keyword and ad text to holiday sales. During December 2009, there were 10 068 visits, 162 of 
which made a purchase at an average of $31.98 per sale. During winter, the focus was on the trade shows, to drive 
traffic and sales at these trade shows. Advertising is responsible for over 80% of the site’s overall traffic.23
Business insight
Gulf Stream keyword advertising campaign
the following key brand metrics: aided brand awareness, online ad awareness, message association, brand favour-
ability and purchase intent.
Six formats were analysed, three new (billboard, wallpaper and half-page) and three already-established formats 
(skyscraper, MPU and banner). The results highlight the performance of the different ad formats in terms of brand 
metrics by showing the average uplift achieved by exposure to each format:
● The billboard outperformed the other formats analysed. It offered three times better ad awareness levels and 
double the level of brand favourability uplift than the next best-performing format (wallpaper).
● The wallpaper format provided five times the level of message association and the highest level of brand 
awareness.
● The skyscraper outperformed other formats at the end of the purchase funnel, achieving an uplift of 1.4 percent-
age points for purchase intent.21
Another way of online advertising is affiliate marketing or affiliate networking. Online 
retailers often use this performance-based marketing technique in which a business rewards 
one or more affiliates for each visitor brought about by the affiliate’s own marketing efforts. 
Affiliates often use regular advertising methods such as search engine optimisation, paid 

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     269
search engine marketing, email marketing and display advertising.24 There are several 
options for affiliate compensation: commission (for every sale which is a direct result of 
click-through traffic from the affiliate’s website), pay per click, pay per lead (for every person 
who signs up for something), residual income (for every time a customer renews a service 
or purchases additional products after initial click-through from an affiliate’s website) or 
pay per sale (for every time a person purchases a product or service after clicking through 
an affiliate’s website).25
Amazon.com, the online book and CD shop, does not use an affiliate network which 
would take commissions from sales, but has developed its own affiliate programme and 
offers a wide range of methods of linking to its site to help improve conversion. For 
example, affiliates can use straight text links leading direct to a product page, or they can 
use dynamic banners that feature different content such as books about Internet market-
ing or a search box. Amazon created tiered performance-based incentives to encourage 
affiliates to sell more Amazon products.26 For Amazon, this affiliate network accounts 
for a quarter of its revenue.27 For its part, Amazon displays relevant Google text ads and 
banner ads from brands. In 2011, Amazon revealed that worldwide media sales accounted 
for 17% of its total revenue. As for the rest of its marketing approach, Amazon does not 
reveal much in its annual reports, but it is clear that there is a focus on targeted online 
marketing, sponsored search, interactive portal advertising, email campaigns and search 
engine optimisation.28
Online advertising formats are more developed, videos are more sophisticated, and targeting tools are more focused 
than before. Advertisers are gradually directing their communications budgets towards online advertising. It is clear 
that measuring online performance has become critical. A study conducted in 2010 by PwC for IAB France high-
lighted some interesting insights. For display advertising campaigns, the click-through rate remains the most widely 
used indicator. But this rate says nothing about the impact of a campaign on a brand’s image or on the browsing or 
purchasing behaviour. Several studies demonstrate the impact that the Web has on a brand. For example, an analysis 
conducted on an Internet campaign run by a catering firm reveals that brand identification improved by 10%. By 
studying display advertising campaigns run by four advertisers from different industries, Médiamétrie Net Ratings 
indicated that the purchase intent of Internet users who were exposed to these campaigns increased by 11%. In a 
study of 73 display advertising campaigns reaching 100 000 Internet users, United Internet Media found that the 
Internet enabled the rate of aided brand awareness to jump by 26%.
Indicators other than the click-through rate can help determine the impact that online advertising has on brand-
ing: for example, indicators such as exposure (the actual visibility of a display ad and the average time during which 
Internet users are exposed to the ad) and interaction. Several studies have revealed a close correlation between 
interaction and impact on a brand’s reputation and image. By assessing the Internet users’ engagement (browsing 
behaviour, depth, duration and actions) on a website, advertisers can measure the impact of their online branding 
campaigns. In 2010, 8 out of 10 Internet users interviewed by Médiamétrie reported consulting a website before 
purchasing a product. The exposure to display advertising campaigns resulted in a 10% increase in shop sales. Expo-
sure to advertising also has an impact on the behaviour of Internet users on the brand website. A 2009 study by the 
Online Publishers Association reports that the time spent by Internet users on websites is on average 50% higher 
following exposure to a display advertising campaign. The PwC study, based on experts’ interviews and desk research, 
indicates five levels for effectively measuring online advertising and nine categories of indicators for measuring online 
performance. The study also reveals that with the growing online advertising possibilities, the use of some measuring 
methods is still developing.
Research insight
Impact measurement of online campaigns29

270     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
Other advertising formats are advertorials, content sponsorship and anchor deals. These 
three formats are not supported by media sellers and so result from direct negotiations with 
each specific website owner. Advertorials (native advertising) are informative ads with an 
editorial approach and a look and feel that is consistent with the website they are integrated 
in. They can be used to communicate product and services news or attributes, third-party 
Source: Measuring the effectiveness of online advertising, Study conducted by PwC for IAB France and the SRI (2010)

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     271
endorsements, research or trends and can include visuals and links to the site of the advertis-
ing company. The content of the advertorial should be informative and engaging. Advertori-
als improve the opinion about the sponsoring company and increase awareness, influence 
image and encourage interest.
Content sponsorship consists of placing an advertiser’s message in an area on a website 
that stands out from other ads, for instance a fixed and exclusive presence in a chosen sec-
tion that is relevant to the advertiser’s brand. Area and topic sponsorships are the two most 
common types. Homepage restyling, an adaptation of the look and feel of a web page using 
the colours, corporate style and images of the advertisers, is another popular form. Many 
consumer product companies are moving towards this kind of online alliance strategy after 
being confronted with the long development timeframes and the high costs involved with 
building, maintaining and driving traffic towards an own-brand site.
In March 2011, Johnson & Johnson introduced Listerine Zero (a new mouthwash product) onto the Australian 
­market. In June, an online-only test campaign (among others, on Facebook and different search engine sites) was 
set up for the purpose of evaluating the impact of online advertising on sales and the brand. No media activity or 
POS occurred prior to this test, conducted by Nielsen. The test campaign managed to reach a wide audience: 44% of 
the target of 25–54 year olds. Exposure to the campaign significantly increased a number of brand equity measures 
for Listerine Zero: awareness (from 5% to 11%), consideration (from 3% to 6%), recommendation (from 14% to 35%) 
and purchase intention (from 13% to 43%). Sales increased by 11%.30
The IAB UK conducted a study on the effectiveness of the online launch campaign of Starbucks VIA, a new instant 
premium coffee brand. For the launch, display ads were shown at portals sites (such as Yahoo!), lifestyle sites (such 
as InStyle.co.uk and Marieclaire.co.uk) and social sites (such as Facebook). The online campaign reached 52% of 
the online population. Online delivered substantial incremental reach as 65% of those exposed to online ads did 
not see the print ad; 55% of those exposed to online ads did not see the outdoor activity. When compared with 
other media, online was the biggest driver of reach – and the most cost-effective. The online campaign was seen 
to deliver this audience at a fifth of the cost of the print campaign, which illustrates that digital advertising delivers 
strong results at a competitive price. A major strength of online is its ability to drive awareness, making it a strong 
tool for launching new brands.
Product awareness differed by 19% between the control group and the exposed group. Among heavy Internet 
users (usage of over 21 hours per week), product awareness differed by 77%, and ad awareness by 41%. Women’s 
purchase intent increased sharply across age groups (+40% in women aged between 35–44 and 55+). Online was 
found to deliver the increase in product awareness at 80% the cost of press and half the cost of outdoors.31
Business insight
Using the Internet to launch brands
Anchor deals represent the presence of a brand on certain content sites and portals as 
a supplier of brand-related content continuously for a long period. In exchange for co-
branding on all Pepsi bottles, in-store displays and so on, Yahoo! handled all the technical 
assistance for the Pepsistuff.com website. The site became the centrepiece of the most suc-
cessful campaign Pepsi ever ran. Consumers logged on to the site by entering a code found 
under the caps of Pepsi bottles. Each code was worth 100 points and could be redeemed 
for prizes such as DVDs and digital rewards (music downloads, credits at Yahoo! auctions, 
etc.). More than 50% of redeemed prizes were digital, saving Pepsi lots of money. Pepsi also 
saved $10 million by not having to print prize catalogues, and the anchor deal with Yahoo! 
resulted in 2.9 million people providing their name, email address, postcode and date of 

272     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
birth, a valuable database for organising polls, launching new products such as Pepsi Blue 
(the Pepsi-with-berries fusion launched in Spring 2003) and promoting the music celebrity 
endorsement with Britney Spears and Shakira.
Targeting online advertising
Online advertising is most effective when it is well-targeted. Marketers can target using 
several criteria:
● Context/content targeting.  Web page content and context can be used to target online 
ads. For example, Unilever targeted people interested in cooking and lifestyle (predomi-
nantly women aged between 20 and 49) for its brands Hertog, Knorr, Maggi and Blue 
Band by using advertorials and content sponsoring on the website of Life & Cooking, a 
TV cookery programme in the Netherlands.32
● Web server/browser.  A web server or ad server can deliver ads based on the profile of 
the user connected to the site, including IP (Internet Protocol) address, browser, operat-
ing system and the date and time of the server request. A marketer can display targeted 
ads based on these simple characteristics. For instance IP addresses reveal the geographic 
location of the user.
● Registration/customer data.  A website or ad network can show targeted ads based on user 
registration data (obtained from memberships, participating in contests, purchases, etc.).
● Clickstream/behavioural data.  As visitors click through a site or different sites, ad networks 
and sites can show ads that are related to the kind of content the Internet user is viewing. A 
study from the Network Advertising Initiative found that the conversion rate for behavioural 
targeted ads was 6.8% while non-targeted ads performed comparatively poorly with 2.8%.33
● Collaborative filtering.  Online ads can be shown to a particular user based on matching 
his or her profile with other users that share common interests.34
Programmatic advertising
Programmatic advertising is an automated, technology-driven method of buying, selling 
or fulfilling ad placements. It uses real-time systems, algorithms and rules to deliver the 
automated purchase of data driven, targeted and relevant online display, video or mobile 
ads. It was foreseen that in 2015 the ad spending scale would tip towards programmatic 
advertising: 55% of all US digital display ads were expected to be bought programmatically, 
representing $14.88 billion in ad spending. According to eMarketer, programmatic advertis-
ing will make up 63% of the total US digital display ad spending in 2016. Digital marketers 
in North America and the UK are currently using programmatic advertising for desktop 
and laptop (63%), video (58%), mobile (58%), social (55%), integrated content (native 
advertising) (49%), search (46%) and TV (36%). In 2015 automated ads were expected to 
account for nearly 60% of the UK digital display market. eMarketer predicted that 56.1% of 
UK programmatic display ad spending would go to mobile, and 43.9% to desktop/laptop.35
A March 2015 study by Unruly found that nearly three-quarters of senior agency and brand 
marketers in the UK and the US were putting a share of their digital video ad budgets in pro-
grammatic buying. About 43.7% of US respondents purchased more than 40% of their digital 
video ads programmatically, as did 31.4% of those from the UK. Nearly 70% of total respond-
ents had moved TV ad investments to programmatic video. In the US, 35% reported transferring 
more than 40% of their TV ad budgets to programmatic video; in the UK that was 26.3%.36
Online events and web(sem)inars
Even face-to-face communications tools such as exhibitions, trade shows and events have been 
translated to an online environment. Victoria’s Secret, the American undergarment brand, 
introduced one of the first commercial online events in 1999 when it held its Web-based 

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     273
fashion show. It was announced in ads in the New York Times, TV commercials during the 
Super Bowl football game and other traditional advertising media. The online event drew 
1.2 million visitors, an 82% increase in web traffic. In subsequent years the online fashion 
shows were continued. Web(sem)inars, with experts that first give an exposition and after-
wards participate in chat sessions, are also becoming more common in business-to-business 
markets and professional segments. An interesting Web 2.0 online service is SlideShare, the 
world’s largest community for sharing presentations. It has 58 million monthly visitors and 
16 million registered users. Besides presentations, SlideShare also supports documents, PDFs, 
videos and webinars. Launched in October 2006, SlideShare was voted among the world’s 
top 10 tools for education and e-learning in 2010.37
Advergames
Advergames are a rich media type of brand-related online entertainment used as a tool for 
brand interaction and experience. In other words, advergames use interactive game technology 
to deliver embedded messages to consumers. The advertising message becomes an integral part 
of playing the game. Advergames are often used in combination with email and viral marketing 
campaigns as their entertainment value increases the value perception of the mail receivers and 
tends to evoke consumer responses beyond their own personal interaction, such as forwarding 
the message to friends and relatives. In this way, advergames can reach up to four times the 
initial number of gamers through referrals. Game advertising can have the following objectives:
● Building brand/product awareness. The ultimate way to succeed in this is to build a 
game or game portal around the brand. As the awareness objective is mostly linked to 
the ambition of reaching a great part of your target group, this might not be the right 
option to take unless enough media support can be given.
● Driving traffic. Using the enormous number of gamers visiting games, game portals, 
virtual worlds or online games are among the possibilities. Another can be to add a viral 
marketing element to your campaign, so users can invite other gamers.
● Conversion/sales. For many campaigns this is the ultimate goal. Because more and more 
e-commerce is taking place, the conversion of the visitor into buying behaviour can be 
better monitored. The largest sales impact is seen when games are used as premiums or 
as co-brands.
● Collecting data. Games are also often used to build up a database for direct marketing/
mailing purposes by returning a free (branded) game as a counterpart for personal infor-
mation given by the surfer.
● Education. This can be the main goal in the case of ‘serious games’. Games can tackle serious 
topics in a more accessible way. Games for kids are often used to teach them certain capabili-
ties and knowledge in a playful way. Also management issues can be tackled in games.38
In April 2015, HBO promoted the fifth season of Game of Thrones, an epic fantasy drama series, by organising an 
online dragon hunt on Twitter. Fans of the show were able to hunt Drogon, a dragon that went missing in the fourth 
season, by tweeting Game of Thrones themed GIFs as dragon bait together with the hashtag #CatchDrogon. If Drogon 
took the bait, fans received a response to the Tweet and had to retweet the post quickly before he took off. Fans that 
retweeted quick enough to catch him received unique content or prizes. A GIF of Drogon flying away was posted 
Business insight
Using online games as marketing communications tools

274     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
There are three main types of advergames:42
● Sponsored games. Apart from the audience fit, there is no direct link to the advertiser. 
The brand simply pays to have its name on an existing game. Strictly speaking, this is not 
an advergame, but in-game advertising.
● A game specially created to promote a brand or product. Barclaycard’s Waterslide TV 
advert tie-in iPhone game became the most popular free branded advertising game in the 
history of the iTunes app store within 13 days of its release back in 2009.
● A game created around a business or product function. This is done in order to increase 
user engagement and purchase frequency by demonstrating brand attributes.
Digital games have invaded every part of the population as millions of people from all socio-demographic segments play 
them.43 The digital game industry has become one of the biggest entertainment industries globally and will continue to 
do so as the global market for digital games is expected to grow from $68 billion in 2013 to $96 billion in 2018.44 Digital 
games are therefore a potentially important medium for advertisers to reach their target audience. Advertisers can make 
use of in-game advertising (IGA), which is the incorporation of advertisements in existing digital games.45 Advertisers 
have taken more notice of advertising in and around games and have increasingly invested in it, which caused it to rise 
in recent years, potentially reaching $7.2 billion globally by 201646 and $655 million by 2017 in the US alone.47
There are various digital game genres, such as action games, sports games, racing games, shooter games and role-
playing games. Some genres include a realistic and contemporary environment (e.g. sport and racing games) whereas 
other genres depict a fantasy world with imaginary events and creatures (e.g. fantasy games and role-playing games).48 
To create such a fantasy world, game designers frequently draw on myths and legends for characters (elves, trolls, 
Research insight
Why is perceived congruity important in in-game advertising in fantasy games?
on the feed of those who weren’t quick enough. Thanks to this game of dragon hunting the series gained more 
than 948.5 million tweets globally, making it the highest daily total for Game of Thrones. Buzz was also created on 
Facebook as 6.6 million people had over 12 million interactions relating to the Game of Thrones premiere.39
Mondelez-owned Milka designed a gaming app to promote its range of biscuits in France called ‘the Milka biscuit 
saga’. The brand created technology so that multiple iPhones could be connected simultaneously to play a game 
together with multiple players. In order to play the game, at least two players were needed. In this way Milka cre-
ated a moment of togetherness and bonding over their biscuits. The app was free to download and contained nine 
mini games. In these games players could win brand goodies and virtual cookies. Players could also create their own 
avatar personalising Milka cookies. Two months after the app was released it had reached 1.1 million downloads, 
making it the most downloaded app. The game even led to a 17% increase in volume sales.40
Hello Bank, the mobile digital bank launched by BNP Paribas, created Hello Play in an effort to attract more mil-
lennials. Hello Play enables anyone (even non-customers of Hello Bank) to fund music projects and emerging artists. 
When someone connects to his or her usual streaming service like Spotify, Soundcloud or Deezer to Hello Play, 
users start to earn digital Hello Coins whenever that person streams or shares music. The more users that engage 
with the app, the more coins they earn. With these coins users are able to support several different music projects 
on the Hello Play website. When a project is fully funded, Hello Bank transforms the digital coins into real money to 
support the project. Seventy projects have so far been funded with more than 700 000 Hello Coins. The project has 
generated 3500 positive mentions on Twitter, resulting in more than 10 million impressions on the network. Hello 
Play also won two Bronze Lions at Cannes Lions Festival of Creativity in the Cyber category in 2015.41

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     275
fairies, wizards, dwarfs), settings (castles, dungeons), plot themes (quests), social structures (guilds) and artefacts (rings, 
gems and magic swords).49 Examples of fantasy games are ‘World of Warcraft’, ‘Guild Wars 2’ and ‘Final Fantasy XIV’. 
The fantasy game genre is largely absent in IGA research because, currently, IGA is rarely used in fantasy games. This 
is because IGA is best suited in modern and contemporary settings where advertising already exists in the real-world 
(e.g. race and sporting events). In fantasy games, IGA, if not executed carefully (e.g. a Coca-Cola billboard in ‘World 
of Warcraft’) can be easily perceived as intrusive and unrealistic.50 Although it is more challenging to implement IGA 
within fantasy genres than in realistic genres, advertising within these games may work under specific conditions.
Previous research on IGA has investigated the effect of congruity of the IGA with the game, defined as the level 
of fit between the execution of the IGA and the game environment. This research suggests that IGA that is congru-
ent with the game content has positive effects on players’ attitudes and behaviour towards the advertisements, the 
advertised brands and products, whilst incongruent IGA results in negative effects and may even lead to avoiding 
games that include IGA.51 Studies have shown that ads that are congruent with the context they are embedded in 
are perceived as less intrusive than incongruent ads.52 Ads that are perceived as less intrusive trigger more positive 
attitudes towards the ad in the game and more intention to play the game.53 Players may perceive the IGA as realistic 
when it appears coherent or plausible within the fictional narrative of this game world.54 Incongruent IGA might 
appear incoherent and implausible in the context of the game world and might decrease the perceived realism of 
the game.55 Content that appears unrealistic might lead to negative evaluative effects.56 Finally, perceived interac-
tivity of the IGA could moderate the effect of IGA congruity through perceived intrusiveness and realism on IGA 
outcomes. Previous research consistently suggests that interactivity positively influences attitudes towards websites 
and brands.57 Interactivity in digital games can also offer players the opportunity to actively interact with brands and 
use the advertised products in the game (e.g. driving a branded car).58 Research has shown that interacting with a 
brand and actively using it in the game can lead to more positive attitudes and purchase intentions than IGA that 
is integrated passively.59 As research shows that both interactivity and congruity of the IGA have positive effects on 
the attitudes and behavioural intention of the player, these two effects could reinforce each other.
A study with 619 fantasy game players investigated the processes through which the congruity effect works. A 2 
(congruent IGA - incongruent IGA) * 2 (interactive IGA - non@interactive IGA) between-subjects online experi-
ment based on vignettes was set up. A vignette is a short, carefully constructed description of a person, object or 
situation that is shown to respondents within surveys in order to elicit judgements about these scenarios. A screen-
shot of the MMORPG ‘Lineage 2’ (NCSOFT 2003) was chosen to represent the fantasy game genre. For the IGAs, a 
fictitious brand of energy drink named ‘Fast Fizz’ was used. Screenshots of a fantasy game were created in which 
IGA was incorporated in either a congruent or incongruent way and either an interactive or non-interactive way. 
Participants in the incongruent condition were exposed to a low level of fit between the execution of the IGA and 
the fantasy game environment. The incongruent IGA displayed a modern billboard with a metallic can which did not 
fit in the fantasy world. Conversely, players in the congruent condition were exposed to a high level of fit between 
the execution of the IGA and the fantasy game environment, which was an IGA displaying a mediaeval themed 
banner with a fantasy potion on it. In the non-interactive conditions, one screenshot was shown. In the interactive 
conditions, two more screenshots were shown that illustrated the interactive applications of the advertised product 
(an energy drink). The second screenshot displayed the drink being given to the player whilst the third screenshot 
displayed a character that utilises the drink and consequently gains an energy boost. Participants were randomly 
assigned to one of the four IGA vignettes. After exposure to the stimulus, the attitudes towards the IGA, play inten-
tion, perceived intrusiveness, realism, congruity and perceived interactivity of the IGA were measured.
The results show that the more congruent the IGA is perceived, the less intrusive the IGA is found and the more 
positive the attitude towards the IGA and the higher the play intention is. The higher the perceived interactivity of 
the IGA, the stronger these effects are. IGA interactivity thus reinforces the congruity effect. Also, the more congruent 
the IGA is, the more realistic the IGA is found and the more positive the attitude towards the IGA and the higher the 
play intention is. Moreover, the lower the perceived interactivity of the IGA, the stronger these effects are.
Practitioners that want to make use of IGA in fantasy games should make sure that the IGA is congruent with the 
fantasy game environment, in order to not interrupt the game play experience and appear plausible and coherent 
within the fantasy game world. This lead to more positive attitudes towards the IGA and a higher play intention. 
Furthermore, making the IGA interactive should also be considered as this reinforces the effect of congruity of the 
IGA on the attitude towards play intention through a decrease in perceived intrusiveness.60

276     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
A popular example of ‘gamification’ (using game elements in advertising) is ‘Foursquare’, 
which is a web and mobile application that allows registered users to post their location at a 
venue (‘check-in’), and connect with friends and share experiences. Every check-in (at shops, 
hotels, restaurants, etc.) is awarded with points to unlock badges for the things members do 
in the real world and compete with their friends. In April 2012, there were more than two 
billion check-ins with Foursquare. Users can choose to have their check-ins posted on their 
accounts on Twitter, Facebook, or both.61 Applying this kind of game thinking is having a 
profound effect across business, government and even the sciences. The ‘Fold It’ project, for 
example, aims to find cures for diseases such as AIDS, cancer and Alzheimer’s through puz-
zle-solving. In September 2011 the Fold It players used human intuition to solve in a few days 
an enzyme structure problem that had been befuddling researchers for years. As reported on 
the BBC, this has the potential to pave the way for the development of anti-AIDS drugs.62
Although the costs of creating an advergame clearly exceed those of rich-media banners, 
interaction time and brand immersion should be considered as well. Online games and 
advergames are tools that permit the online marketer to build brand awareness and brand 
image through a more interactive user experience.63 For example, players of the ‘Jurassic 
Park III’ game played for an average of 19 minutes, which guarantees a bigger mind-share 
among the target groups. The retention value of advergames is said to be ten times higher 
than the retention value of traditional broadcast commercials. They allow voluntary self-
induced exposure to brand communications and are a non-intrusive and non-interruptive 
means of Internet advertising.64
Compared with earlier generations, today’s children are overwhelmed by an increasing amount of commercial 
messages. As a result, advertisers are adopting alternative advertising techniques in order to break through this ad 
clutter and capture their attention.65 One of these techniques is the integration of the persuasive message into the 
media content itself. By doing so, the audience is exposed to the ad during the natural process of watching a movie 
or programme, playing a game, etc.66 The integrated nature of this technique not only makes it impossible for view-
ers to skip the ads, but also implies that they are exposed to the commercial message and the media content at the 
same time. This results in blurred boundaries between advertising, entertainment and information.67
One of the most common theoretical explanations to describe children’s understanding of the persuasive inten-
tion of commercial messages is the Persuasion Knowledge Model (PKM).68 According to the PKM, persuasion knowl-
edge is the knowledge that consumers develop about marketers’ motives and tactics. This knowledge helps them 
to identify how, when and why marketers are trying to influence them. As a result, they are able to critically process 
the ad and ‘cognitively defend’ themselves against its persuasive influences. With young children, however, this 
knowledge is not yet fully developed. Traditional, linear advertising formats no longer dominate the media environ-
ment that children live in. Today’s media environment is characterised by integrated advertising formats. This trend 
demands a re-evaluation of the insights concerning the development of children’s persuasion knowledge.
An exploratory qualitative study set out to investigate the persuasion knowledge of children when exposed to 
various new advertising formats which are embedded into different media contents. Children from three different 
age groups (4–6, 7–8, 9–12 years) participated in this qualitative study to investigate at which age persuasion knowl-
edge is developed for each of these formats. The results of this study were obtained from 30 in-depth interviews 
with children between 4 and 12 years old. To further elaborate on these findings, nine additional focus groups were 
conducted. In both the interviews and the focus groups, children were confronted with several advertising formats. 
The stimuli consisted of an advergame for McDonald’s, a fragment from a TV programme (a craft programme for 
Research insight
Children in a changing media environment: persuasion knowledge for integrated 
advertising formats

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     277
Viral marketing
Quite often the success of advergames and online campaigns depends strongly on the 
strength of online word-of-mouth advertising, also called ‘word-of-mouse’ advertising. Viral 
marketing is a set of techniques used to spur brand users and lovers, game participants or 
advocate consumers among the target group to promote their favourite brand to friends 
and relatives. They are put to work to spread the word about the brand or product by using 
email, SMS, ‘tell or send to a friend’ buttons or via different social media sites such as Face-
book, YouTube, review sites and influential blogs. Viral marketing attempts to harness the 
strongest of all consumer triggers: namely, personal recommendation. Viral marketing uses 
the snowball principle, and the typical network nature of the Internet strongly supports 
rapid exponential growth in the message’s exposure and its influence in a relatively effortless 
children) containing product placement (‘Pritt’, a glue stick often used by children) and a fragment of an Advertiser 
Funded Programme (AFP) (a TV show set in a popular amusement park, with the park being an important part of 
the storyline). After each exposure to an advertising format, the children were asked several questions in order to 
measure their level of persuasion knowledge with respect to that specific advertising format.
Only 4 out of 30 children recognised the brand after seeing the product placement fragment, while 25 out of  
30 children recognised the brand after seeing the AFP and 19 out of 30 children recognised the brand after seeing 
the advergame. This implies that the children had most difficulty spotting the brand when it is integrated into a TV 
programme. Brand recognition in the product placement format is low in all age groups. The brand in the advergame 
is better recognised when children grow older. As such, the youngest respondents had trouble recognising the brand, 
although it was prominently placed in the advergame. The older respondents recognised the brand immediately, 
even the more subtle brand connections. Finally, brand recognition within AFP is highest for the youngest and old-
est respondents.
In general, it was difficult for the children to understand the commercial intent of the persuasive messages. While 
15 out of 30 children think that playing a funny game is the main purpose of the advergame, and 20 out of 30 chil-
dren think that watching a nice TV programme is the main purpose of the product placement fragment, only 9 out 
of 30 children think that watching a nice TV programme is the main purpose of AFP. Accordingly, 17 out of 30 chil-
dren figured out correctly that the commercial intent of the AFP is to buy or like the integrated products. However, 
while the oldest children knew the programme was made to make them buy something, younger children replied 
that the programme was made ‘so that they would have something to watch’. Also, the two youngest groups were 
convinced that the TV programme was made by the researchers or a camera man, while the oldest children knew 
this was made by the advertiser. Only in 4 of the 30 cases did children correctly understand the commercial intent 
of the product placement fragment. Children from the first and second age group did not notice the commercial 
message. They did not mention the brand and when asked if the programme wants to sell them something, they 
all answered that this was not the case. In the oldest group, some children indicated that they saw a brand. They 
mentioned that the TV channel probably ‘works together’ with that brand, and that it was paid to show the brand. 
Although not all children recognised the placement, most of them seemed to know that this was a common practice 
in TV programmes. The commercial intent of the advergame was correctly understood in 8 of the 30 cases. When 
asked why the game was made, the two youngest groups mainly replied that it was made so that they could play a 
funny game on the Internet, while the oldest group indicated that it was to convince them to visit McDonald’s and 
spend money there. Accordingly, when asked who made the game, the youngest children replied ‘you’, meaning 
the researcher or ‘the computer man’. Some children from the second age group replied ‘McDonald’s’, but they 
were not sure. The oldest children, on the other hand, all answered ‘McDonald’s’ right away. This implies that the 
youngest groups had no idea of the commercial intent of the game. When asked if the game was trying to sell them 
something, they were all convinced that this was not the case. One respondent from the second age group replied 
‘I don’t understand why McDonald’s is pictured in that game. That’s for eating, why is it in a game? That is strange.’
In general, children have difficulties recognising and understanding the persuasive intention of the integrated 
commercial content. Especially for product placement, this seemed to be hard for all age groups. The ad recogni-
tion and understanding of AFP was highest. For advergames the results show that children could recognise the ad 
embedded in the game, but had problems in understanding its underlying commercial intent.

278     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
manner. Just like viruses, viral marketing strategies take advantage of rapid multiplication to 
explode the message to thousands or millions of ‘victims’. One of the first viral campaigns 
was set up by Hotmail. By simply using the free Web-based email package, consumers 
hawked the message as every message they sent contained a Hotmail ad (‘Get your own 
private free email at http://www.hotmail.com’). Hotmail grew to 12 million accounts in its 
first year, 1996. Compared with the results of its print campaigns (100 000 new subscribers), 
this result was impressive.69
As illustrated by the following cases, marketers are beginning to understand the impact that social influence and 
consumer data can have. Companies are experimenting with ways to accept their shopper’s social media activity 
and personal data as concrete forms of payment.
OnePiece
Norwegian clothing brand OnePiece, known for its loungewear jumpsuits, has used the power of its customers’ 
Instagram and Twitter followers to increase its impressions by trading discounts for social media promotions. Insta-
gram users who had 40 000 or more followers could receive discounts on products at the OnePiece pop-up store in 
New York. For every 500 followers a shopper receives a $1 discount, with the maximum set at $20. To leverage the 
discount shoppers needed to share an image captioned with the store’s hashtag #OnePiece.70
Marc Jacobs
Luxury designer brand Marc Jacobs hosted a money-free pop-up event in Covent Garden in London. Tweets were 
the exclusive form of currency. Tweets with the hashtag #MJDaisyChain could be redeemed for in-store credit and 
extra credit was redeemed for tweets including images or video of the pop-up event. The most creative tweet of 
each day was awarded a Marc by Marc Jacobs handbag.71
Business insight
Pay with influence
Living with lag – Viral
Broadband provider ume.net launched the ‘living with lag’ campaign to promote its super-fast fibre broad-
band product in a market that was dominated by more established telecom players. By using a custom-built 
Oculus Rift headset (virtual reality headset) the broadband provider created a Lag Machine: a virtual reality 
headset that simulated what it would be like to live with lag (delays, buffering or frozen screens as a result of 
slow Internet connection). In an experiment four volunteers each got a Lag Machine and were filmed as they 
attempted to play table tennis or go bowling. The volunteers could only see the delayed video of their move-
ments, which made their reactions to what was happening around them delayed as well. These funny videos 
of the volunteers misjudging their movements were posted on YouTube where, within the first week, the video 
Business insight
Viral campaigns

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     279
Viral marketing campaigns work best between groups with strong common interests. 
This implies that they allow marketers to spread selective messages to selective groups. By 
using viral marketing tactics carefully, marketers may avoid negative reactions and gain 
an excellent return on investment by increasing the reach of a marketing message to a 
targeted group that is much larger than the audience originally covered. Viral marketing is 
increasingly popular for three reasons. Firstly, entire social networks are online today as a 
large number of everybody’s friends and family members are using social media. Secondly, 
contacting individuals online is virtually cost-free, and it is possible for each individual to 
contact hundreds more without much effort or cost.75 According to a survey, 81% of those 
who receive viral messages pass them on to at least one other person, and almost half of 
those receivers are likely to pass the message along to two or three other people.76
Finally, for 68% of surfers, word of mouth is the top source for learning about new web-
sites, which puts referrals and viral marketing in second place after search engines (74%) and 
above links on other sites (65%), ads (46%) and online advertising (45%).77 Several studies 
prove the power of word of mouth: 90% of the consumers trust recommendations from 
people they know; even 70% trust unknown users; 14% trust advertising while only 8% trust 
celebrities; 92% have more confidence in information found online than they do in anything 
from a salesperson or other source; 70% consult reviews or ratings before purchasing. The 
peer consumer has the power today.78
gained more than 5 million views. 350 different news sites and blogs talked about the campaign, earning an 
estimated €3.3 million worth of PR value for the brand. Ume.net reported that the campaign increased brand 
awareness by 14%, brand preference by 32% and sales increased by 54% in the four-month period after the 
campaign’s launch.72
Love Has No Labels
Another campaign that went viral within the first month of release is the ‘Love Has No Labels’ campaign by Ad Coun-
cil. Ad Council is the largest non-profit producer of public services that wanted Americans to rethink their prejudices 
by putting up an x-ray screen in Santa Monica on Valentine’s Day where couples were portrayed as skeletons to show 
that love has no race, no age, no gender, no religion or disabilities. By posting a video on YouTube it became a viral 
topic; within the first month, the video was viewed over 47.5 million times. The Ad Council’s online film was being 
complemented by TV spots that ran in donated time, as well as web banners and print ads. There is also a Love Has 
No Labels website where you can take a quiz to see whether or not users have any hidden biases through questions 
like ‘Have you ever asked someone where they’re really from?’ On the site you can also find personal stories from 
people who have experienced bias, including recommendations of how people should act if they’re confronted 
with a similar situation. By May 2015 the campaign hit 100 million combined views across social networks, becom-
ing what the agency called ‘the fastest spreading campaign ever’. R/GA also reported that the video was the second 
most viewed and shared public service announcement of all time, after just 3 weeks. The campaign had more than 
1 billion media impressions and was covered in a lot of news stories.73
KFC Romania
During the Summer holidays social media is usually full of holiday pics shared by your friends. KFC Romania came 
up with a way to post holiday pictures on social media, even if you’re not really on a holiday. In select urban outlets 
of KFC Romania customers found floor stickers and tray liners decorated as sandy beaches and blue oceans. Cus-
tomers who visited those outlets could fool their friends by faking a holiday picture with their mobile phone. Faka-
tion promoted the launch of the KFC HotBox, which contained chicken products inspired by dishes from Greece, 
Italy, and Spain. The transformation of KFC branches into ‘fakation’ resorts was reinforced by TV ads, print ads and 
events. The KFC website also gave tips and tricks on how to create the perfect vacation visuals without going to 
those places for real.74

280     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
Just as with offline word-of-mouth advertising, word of mouse is not driven by market-
ers and it is hard to keep control over the messages. This could imply negative associations 
with the brand and a dilution of brand assets as the same strengths could work against a 
company if dissatisfied customers share their anger with their contacts. Therefore, market-
ers should consider pre-testing viral marketing campaigns on a small scale. If viral messages 
contain audio or video components, some Internet users might consider them as bandwidth 
and mailbox space-consuming ‘spam’ (unwanted and unsolicited emails).
The effectiveness of influencers continues to rise in 2015. Analysis of RhythmOne cov-
ered by eMarketer found that the average earned media value from US influencer market-
ing programs was 1.4 times higher in the first quarter of 2015 than the overall average in 
full-year 2014. For every $1 spent it earned an average of $9.60 in media value. The earned 
media were the highest in the consumer packaged goods food industry at $14.29, followed 
by travel ($12.54) and bath, body, skin and beauty ($12.21). Facebook had an average social 
amplification of 0.21%, Google+ saw a rate of 0.15%, and Twitter and Pinterest had respec-
tive averages of 0.13% and 0.11%. Social amplification rates (number of times social media 
buttons are clicked to spread the word) were highest in the electronics category, at 0.66%. 
While most other categories landed between 0.49% and 0.59%, casual dining restaurants’ 
average was a mere 0.13%. Other research highlights the large interest in influencers among 
advertisers. In a 2015 polling by Altimeter Group, 35% of social media professionals world-
wide said they had an influencer relationship management program.79
Traditional word-of-mouth (WOM) communications have been proven to influence both pre-purchase decisions 
as well as post-purchase product perceptions.80 With the increasing use of the Internet and advancing information 
technology, this face-to-face or offline communications form now also takes place on various types of electronic 
word-of-mouth (eWOM) platforms, such as social and professional networking sites (Facebook, LinkedIn), consumer 
review websites (CNet, Epinions), online communities (fan sites), etc. In general, eWOM has been shown to affect 
consumers’ attitudes and behaviours towards products and brands.81
More and more people exchange or share product information on the Internet and this available information 
allows other consumers to deliberate their purchase decision. Most consumers consider user-generated content 
such as online reviews as less intrusive than producer-generated content (e.g. advertising), because they actively 
search for the information themselves.82 Information retrieved from user-generated sources is also generally per-
ceived as more credible, and consequently more useful, than information generated by marketers. This is especially 
true for experience products, such as hotels and restaurants.83 Assuming that consumers are consulting online 
reviews because they intend to buy a certain product or service, some reviews will be categorised as useful (i.e. help-
ful in making a decision about whether or not to buy or use the reviewed product or service), and others less so.84
A study of 413 respondents (Mage = 39 years, 38% male) investigated how the balance (the ratio of positive and 
negative reviews) and sequence (the order in which the reviews are presented) of a set of online reviews impact the 
perceived usefulness of these reviews as a set. In a second analysis of the study, it was investigated how the perceived 
usefulness of a review set moderates the relationship between readers’ recall of review information, their impression 
about the reviews and their attitude and behavioural intention towards a reviewed hotel.85 The main experiment 
was a 3 (balance: positive, neutral, negative) * 4 (sequence: positive/negative, negative/positive, positive/nega-
tive/positive, negative/positive/negative) full factorial between-subjects design. Each respondent read the same 
eight reviews as developed in a pre-test, but, depending on the condition, these were framed either positively or 
negatively, and were presented in a different order. Balance was manipulated by varying the proportion of positive 
Research insight
Balance and sequence in online reviews: how perceived usefulness affects attitudes 
and intentions

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     281
Online contests and sweepstakes
Related to online games are the Internet versions of contests and sweepstakes. They are 
particularly effective for generating enthusiasm, building brand recognition and rewarding 
long-time customers. Online contests often have an offline component, for instance in TV 
or radio ads to get attention, or on packaging, leaflets, etc., to communicate the contest. For 
easy access to the brand’s website a QR-code can be added. Scanned via a smartphone it 
leads the consumer directly to the site. Sometimes other codes such as access codes or lottery 
numbers are distributed either in or on packaging but relate to the brand’s (promotional 
contest) website. A contest should arouse a customer’s interest and demand interaction. 
E-contests can just draw winners at random (sweepstake) or ask for a certain skill or crea-
tive involvement (contest).91
For example, Heineken celebrated its 140th birthday by offering the design community 
the chance to create a limited edition bottle via Facebook. Part of the competition required 
the designer to pair up his or her design with another designer through Facebook. Heineken 
received over 30 000 entries across 100 countries. The top 100 designs were presented to a 
jury in New York where they were judged on their creativity and also their complementary 
pairing. Heineken produced 1 million bottles of the winning design for worldwide sale.92 
Online contests seem to be growing in popularity. Keys to success are an appropriate play 
value of the contest and appropriate incentives to participate. The latter is determined by the 
and negative reviews presented in each set. For a positive balance, six out of eight reviews were positive, while the 
other two were negative. With a neutral balance, four positive and four negative reviews appeared. The negative 
balance consisted of six negative reviews and two positive reviews. Sequence was manipulated by altering the posi-
tion of the negative and positive reviews within the set. One sequence presented the positive statements grouped 
together first, followed by all the negative statements in a set. The second sequence condition was the reverse of 
the first (negative first, followed by positive). The ‘wrapped’ conditions started with half of the positive (negative) 
reviews, followed by all the negative (positive) reviews, again followed by half of the positive (negative) reviews.
The results show that the perceived usefulness of an online review set is affected by its balance and sequence. 
Unbalanced (positive or negative) review sets are considered more useful than those that are balanced (neutral). 
Compared with balanced sets, unbalanced sets provide the reader with a clear general direction and therefore, 
consistent with the diagnosticity principle,86 the balance of a set of reviews is accountable in determining whether or 
not the reviews are useful. As there are more individuals agreeing that the hotel is good (in case of positive balance) 
or bad (in case of negative balance) compared with the neutral conditions, the reader may have more confidence 
that the information is true. When there are too many conflicting opinions, and half of the group express a positive 
judgement while the other half pronounce a negative evaluation (i.e. in a neutral balance), this contradictory infor-
mation leaves the reader at a loss about whether or not to buy this product, and this should be perceived as less 
useful than when the group utters a more straightforward opinion and the balance is clearly positive (negative).87 
As a result, such consistent information in the positive and negative balance is perceived as more useful than the 
relatively inconsistent information in the neutral balance.
There is also a sequence effect. When the balance of a set of reviews is clearly positive or negative, wrapping 
negative reviews in positive ones or vice versa significantly increases the perceived usefulness of the reviews. This 
is in line with the reinforcement of primacy and recency effects principle: both the first and the last elements in a 
list result in a higher impact in comparison with all other elements in the list. Other studies on sequence bias in an 
online environment have found evidence for primacy effects,88 recency effects,89 and primacy and recency effects 
reinforcement.90
After reading the reviews, potential buyers retain some of the review information in their short-term memory. This 
recalled information forms the basis of their attitudes and behavioural intention towards the reviewed object. When 
people perceive the reviews to be more useful, their impression towards the reviewed object becomes a stronger 
predictor of their attitude and behaviour than when they perceive the reviews to be less useful. These findings are 
also consistent with the accessibility–diagnosticity framework.

282     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
business a company is involved in and the goal of the contest. For instance, if the objective of 
the contest is to create a customer database, a company should offer one of its products as 
a prize. This relevancy will attract the right entrants, since providing an incentive to people 
who can and will buy your products and services should be the goal. A contest or sweepstake 
with a high number of participants might look successful at first sight but, if it attracts the 
wrong people, namely those who enter any contest just to win something, the campaign will 
not be effective and customer acquisition costs will rise. Prizes should also create a sense of 
value, uniqueness and emotional appeal to winners. If the prize is large enough or attractive 
enough, people will take the time to enter and fulfil requirements such as registration and 
they will even share the contest with their friends and colleagues. Of course, contests and 
sweepstakes will only work if people know about them, and if you want people to come 
back regularly, it will be necessary to award prizes on a daily or weekly basis.93
Chipotle Mexican Grill, a burrito chain claiming a ‘food with integrity’ positioning, wanted to show what is really 
inside their burritos and compare its food to that of its fast food competitors. The brand launched an online game 
called ‘Friend or Faux’. In this game, players can see for themselves what ingredients they will find in dishes from 
both Chipotle and its competitors. Players can choose between two dishes and have to guess which one belongs 
to Chipotle. By completing the game they are entitled to a mobile offer that lets them have a free second burrito if 
they buy a burrito in one of Chipotle’s restaurants. All players were automatically entered into a national sweepstake, 
rewarding 50 grand prize winners with a year of free burritos, and 100 winners with a catering party for 20 people. 
Customers who shared the game on their Facebook or Twitter walls received an extra sweepstakes entry. The Friend 
or Faux game was available on mobile and desktop computers.94
Business insight
Burrito vs Burger
E-sampling and e-couponing
Companies, especially those in the consumer packaged goods business, can use the Internet 
as a means of promoting their products by sampling or couponing. For instance, banner 
advertising leads consumers to a data-capture page where they leave their details to receive 
samples or coupons. Traditionally, brands have several options for reaching consumers with 
a sample: sampling at events, on street corners, in the mailbox, with newspapers or maga-
zines, on door hangers and in-store sampling. The Internet adds a new way of sampling 
(combined with mail addresses) at a lower cost per converted person because of the opt-in 
request. E-sampling gives marketers the option to carry out extremely accurate one-to-one 
demographic, geographic and psychographic targeting, whereas traditional sampling is often 
based on convenience targeting (street corners, shop) or neighbourhood clusters (mailbox 
sampling). There is also less waste or duplication as ‘one sample item per household’ can 
be controlled and consumers make a conscious choice to request a sample themselves. As 
targeted users can be part of a marketing database that tracks their behaviour and engages 
them over time, e-sampling is less of a one-shot and more part of a customer relationship 
marketing (CRM) campaign. Companies can also get real-time, instant consumer feed-
back on usage and likeability of the sample without high costs or much effort.95 For some 
businesses, e-sampling can be completely handled online, for instance software companies 
providing free downloads or demo versions of their software, often with an expiration time 
of 30–60 days. Online music and book stores like Amazon allow their customers to sample 
30-second clips of music or fragments of books before ordering.96

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     283
E-coupons are the online equivalent of print coupons and can be redeemed online (on 
e-commerce sites) or printed. They can be delivered via emails or via a website. Just as with 
e-sampling, they offer the ability to monitor the user’s online shopping behaviour (if redeemed 
online) and can reach an audience that would not bother to cut out print coupons in news-
paper or magazine ads. Apart from these advantages, online couponing can also save money 
compared with offline printing costs and advertising costs. E-couponing also makes it possible 
for the advertiser to experiment with split-run tests (choosing which offer/design combination 
has the best response results and then quickly adapting the coupon’s value or message) and to 
make immediate and automatic responses by tailoring the coupons to the demographic pro-
file of the consumer. Research has found that about 48% of the web population uses online 
coupons.97 In 2010, online coupon sites emerged as an important channel in driving consumer 
behaviour in Europe. This growth was the highest seen in any region in 2010, bringing the 
reach of coupon sites in Europe to 9.6% of all Internet users. The sizeable growth can largely 
be attributed to Groupon, which was not a significant player in Europe in 2009. Groupon, a 
deal-of-the-day website that features discounted gift certificates usable at local or national 
companies, was able to establish a presence in more than a hundred European cities in 2010 
and now reaches more than 12 million visitors a month, approximately one-third of the total 
market.98 Google reports that 95% of smartphone users have searched for local information, 
proving that location-based deal searching is vital to digital couponing.99
In one of its campaigns, consumer electronics brand Canon used the promise of high-quality pictures of concerts. 
The brand installed one of its best cameras, the C500, at gig venues of Danish rock band Turboweekend’s 2015 tour. 
Concert goers could download The Canon Gig App, a smartphone application that linked to the C500 model at the 
venue. To take high-quality pictures users could livestream the camera to snap pictures. The app worked like a real 
Canon C500 by offering the ability to pan, crop and zoom an image of the band on a viewfinder. Once they pressed 
the shutter, users were sent a high-resolution image that was also shared on social media.100
Business insight
Canon samples through an app
Email marketing
The number of email users continues to grow, with nearly 2.6 billion email users worldwide 
in 2015. eMarketer predicts that, by the end of 2019, the number of email users will reach 
over 2.9 billion. Over one third of the worldwide population will be using email by year-end 
2019. The average number of email accounts per person is also growing from an average 
of 1.7 in 2015 to 1.9 per user in 2019. All instant messaging, social networking and other 
services require a valid email address. In addition, all online transactions like shopping and 
banking also require an email address. In 2015, over 205 billion emails were sent and received 
per day total, and this is expected to grow at an average annual rate of 3% over the next 
four years, reaching over 246 billion by the end of 2019.101 Marketers have different ways to 
reach their target group, and with the rise of different types of social media where brands 
can reach their consumers it’s surprising to see that, even among millennials, Internet users 
still prefer more ‘old-fashioned’ types of communications like email. In December 2014, 
Principal Financial Group polled US Internet users aged 25 to 35 about their preferred com-
munication channels with various institutions: 47% of respondents said they wanted to 
communicate with retailers by email, in-person communication came in second with 28%, 

284     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
followed by postal mail (8%), social media (6%), online chat (5%) and text message (2%). 
Email also came in as the number two channel for conducting actual product research in 
the retail sector, garnering 18% of responses (web search came in first, at 45%). Research-
ing products in person at retail stores was a strong third at 14%, and again, social media 
lagged.102
Email marketing is basically not much more than using the Internet and email for direct 
marketing practices. There are different types of email:103
● Direct email. The one ‘killer’ application that is most used by Internet users is email. Just 
as in traditional direct marketing, email marketing can be used inbound and outbound.104 
Most of the time it is used to send a promotional offer and push the consumer into a 
certain action.
● Retention email. These mails are sent with the purpose of strengthening the brand atti-
tude and experience. A popular example of retention emails is the e-newsletter. These 
online newsletters can contain ads, but the main purpose is to create an impact in the 
longer term by engaging consumers with the brand. They offer the reader a certain added 
value, such as informative content.
● Ads in the emails of third parties. Instead of issuing a newsletter of their own, advertisers 
can select newsletters of third parties and ‘buy’ some advertising or content space.
In the UK, 71% of total emails opened during the first quarter of 2015 were on mobile, 42% of which were on 
smartphones and 29% on tablets. However, 40% of all UK email marketing conversions in the first quarter of 2015 
took place on desktops, 37% on tablets and 12% on smartphones. Fifty-six per cent of UK participants said they 
were most likely to notice emails, which was by far the number one answer of notable messages. On each device, 
the majority of marketing emails are read in 15 seconds or less. Android users were more patient than those on a 
Windows phone, iOS devices and even on desktop. If marketers want their emails to be read they have to put their 
message front and centre. Listrak found that 72% of US Internet users opened and read promotional emails from 
retailers, and age and gender did not play huge roles in whether or not they did. Millennials were the most likely to 
open and read promotional emails, at 75% of respondents from this group, but all other age ranges weren’t too far 
behind either: 73% of 35- to 44-year-olds were promo email readers, as were 71% of those 45–54 and 70% of the 
55–64 and 65-and-older groups. Personalised emails including recommendations are liked, and across these gender 
and age groups, one thing was the best way to get users to check out tailored product recommendations: mention-
ing ‘sales’. Price was the second most popular response among women, cited by 41%, while men cared more about 
getting recommendations on new and highly rated products. Among age groups, 83% of 35- to 44-year-olds said 
sales would encourage them to read website or email recommendations, as did 82% of email users in the 18–34 
and 65-and-older groups, 81% of 55- to 64-year-olds and 77% of those ages 45–54. Price was the second-biggest 
factor among millennials (48%) and the 45–54 (34%) and 55–64 (39%) groups, while 35- to 44-year-olds ranked 
recommendations of new products second, at 50%. Among the 65-and-older bracket, getting recommendations 
about new and the highest-rated products tied for second (35% each).
According to Movable Ink research in the third quarter of 2014, 45% of emails sent by non-apparel retailers in 
the US were read for just 0 to 3 seconds, as were 42% of apparel retailer emails – the top two rates among industries 
studied. Meanwhile, 32% of non-apparel and 34% of apparel retailer emails were read for more than 15 seconds, 
the lowest rates for this frequency among sectors.105
Fifty-seven per cent of UK Internet users polled by Aimia said they avoided companies and brands because their 
messages were annoying, and 50% were overwhelmed by the communications they received.106
Research insight
The effectiveness of emails

ONLINE COMMUNICATION TOOLS     285
The net provides speed, flexibility and low costs compared with traditional direct market-
ing media, and customisation and full individualisation are much easier and cheaper. With 
these features, email marketing usage has grown significantly over the last few years. One of 
the reasons for this surge in volume and spending is that email marketing is more effective 
in terms of response than traditional direct mail or other web campaigns such as banners or 
interstitials. Click-through rates (CTRs) of B2B email newsletters range from 5% to 15%. For 
B2C promotional email marketing campaigns this ranges from 2% to 12%. Email campaigns 
with less than a 2% CTR may be a result of over-mailing and questionable email opt-in pro-
cesses. Highly segmented and personalised email lists (B2B and B2C) are often in the 10% 
to 20% CTR range. Email messages with very strong content but sent to unsegmented lists 
(for instance, news or trend-type e-newsletters) often have CTRs in the 10% to 15% range. 
Trigger or behaviour-based email campaigns (sent to recipients based on some behaviour they 
showed, such as clicking on a product link, visiting a specific web page, etc.) are often in the 
15% to 50% range.108
Banner CTRs are still far below 1%, and a traditional average direct marketing response 
rate is 2%.109 However, it is estimated that an email marketing campaign costs between 60% 
and 65% less than a traditional postal direct marketing campaign by eliminating postage, 
paper and printing expenses. This also implies that email made it possible to start using 
direct marketing for lower-cost items and that communicating with less frequent buyers 
is now profitable.110 Emails reach their destination within a few seconds of sending, and 
responses will also typically arrive within 48 hours of a communication. Compared with the 
usual six weeks response time for a traditional direct mail campaign, this speed of delivery 
and response is clearly another advantage of email marketing.111
Marketers also appreciate the easy and inexpensive way of tailoring messages to groups 
of customers or even individuals. Content of emails and newsletters can be customised to 
specific customer interests and needs, and running tests on small samples to refine mes-
sages before finally mailing them to the entire target market is cheap. Research has shown 
that personalisation has profound effects on results. The average CTRs can be expected to 
double when messages are fully personalised. Personalisation effects grow over time: where 
impersonal e-zines (electronic magazines sent by email or e-newsletters) are still able to 
reach curious people, only the personalised ones seem to be able to continue attracting the 
attention of readers.112
At least half of retailers in North America sent two or more emails per day to the same addressees in 2014. 
­According to research by Experian covered on eMarketer.com, there was a peak at 92% during the week including 
Black Friday and Cyber Monday. The research also showed that second mailings had an average transaction rate of 
0.07%, which is 33% higher than that of first mailings with 0.05%. In addition, revenues per email were 29% higher 
for the second mailings (11 cents vs 8 cents). In all, retailers that sent same-day second mailings saw an average 88% 
rise in revenues. Recipients also appeared unbothered by the increase in messages; unsubscribe rates held steady 
at 0.03% for first and second emails. Still, retailers must make sure their frequent communications are relevant to 
consumers, or they risk ending up in the spam folder.
Experian found that second emails featuring a sense of urgency (such as last-chance offers), mysterious headlines, 
good deals or special products all helped increase transactions. Those with personalised subject lines saw a 75% 
boost in transaction rate, while percentage discount offers had a 41% lift. Free shipping and ‘urgency’ in follow-up 
message subject lines had rates 21% and 12% higher than first mailings, respectively.107
Research insight
Same day second mail

286     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
Measurement and tracking of email marketing effectiveness can be carried out automati-
cally even at a detailed level. There is also a link with viral marketing as it is easy for receivers 
of a promotional email message to pass it along to other readers simply by forwarding it 
to them.
Privacy and legal issues were once a hot and controversial issue in the email marketing 
industry, but now most markets have restricted and regulated the use of commercial emails. 
Spam (unsolicited emails) is forbidden in Europe and opt-out possibilities should be offered 
in each message sent, creating a good environment for permission-based programmes. Per-
mission and privacy must be cornerstones of every email marketing programme. Successful 
email campaigns are based on trust. Opt-in means that users have voluntarily agreed to 
receive commercial emails about topics that they find interesting. They do so by subscribing 
on websites and checking a box. Opt-out means that users have to uncheck the box on a web 
page to prevent being put on an email list. ‘Opt-in’ is better than ‘opt-out’ as the quality 
of the database or list will be better.113 Companies should always stress the purpose of col-
lecting addresses and guarantee that the information will not be disclosed to third parties 
or misused. However, the real threat for email marketing is overuse due to its low cost and 
reputation for outperforming other online actions and traditional direct marketing. Some 
analysts predict that response rates will seriously be driven down due to each consumer’s 
inbox being flooded by thousands of commercial messages and massive opting out. Another 
limitation is the lack of good opt-in email databases. Supply is limited, which results in com-
panies renting the same lists, with bombarded and tired consumers as a consequence. Often 
the first and most difficult challenge for marketers who want to launch an email campaign 
is to create a good target database of prospects and customers.114 The second challenge is 
then to deliver the right content as low relevance of content and high mailing frequency 
both incite consumers to unsubscribe from a mailing list. A survey among 1000 email users 
concluded that the preference in email content differs between males and females. Men are 
more interested in thematic content such as compelling news and information, while for 
women promotional content like discount offers and samples are welcome.115
Fashion retailer Topshop relies on big name supermodels to drive their campaigns and to represent their brand. 
Topshop announces new collections, limited-time sales and seasonal specials to their customers using email to 
get the buzz started. The brand uses teasing, or suggestive, subject lines like ‘New Jean Scene’ to get the interest of 
fashionistas. Topshop tests different subject lines to see which of them have the highest open rates. Topshop also 
uses front and centre buttons to maximise customers exploring the Topshop online store. In the second part of the 
email, Topshop outlines three different outfits that feature their denim line. These outfits are linked to their social 
media pages, which is an effective way to drive their social following.116
Business insight
Topshop uses email to boost sales
Mobile marketing
Mobile devices are shaping the way content is being delivered to us. People are using their 
devices to connect with friends and the world around them on a daily basis. One in five 
global users check their email, text and social media updates once every 10 minutes or 
upwards of 150 times a day.117 Thanks to mobile devices we can now shop wherever and 
whenever we want to. Today, companies who want to engage with their consumers can 

MOBILE MARKETING     287
grab the opportunities, but also have to face up to the challenges that come along with this 
mobile-first development. The rise of mobile devices has also changed the behaviour and 
expectation of consumers. Due to 4G technology certain activities are conducted more fre-
quently via Mobile Networks, such as opening email (48%), stream music/listen to radio 
(45%), access social networks (44%), navigation (42%), search for information (42%), watch 
video (33%) and browse shopping sites (30%). With more 4G networks, on-demand video 
on mobiles is becoming more important. It is even the key driver of mobile data growth, 
with a 66% annual increase through to 2019 compared with 57% for data as a whole. Erics-
son’s consumer research into active TV and Internet users shows that 27% of Germans use 
a mobile device to watch TV or video on a weekly basis. This is a typical level for Western 
Europe, but the figure is even higher in Sweden. Sweden also has the highest 4G penetration 
rate in Europe, where TV viewing via a mobile device is 42%. YouTube stated in October 
2014 that mobile devices now drive 50% of its global traffic, up from 41% in 2013.118
The world is seeing a fast migration to both higher speed mobile broadband networks 
and the increased adoption of smartphones and other connected devices. Mobile broad-
band connections will account for almost 70% of the global base by 2020, up from just 
under 40% at the end of 2014. Smartphone adoption is already reaching critical mass in 
developed markets, with the devices now good for 60% of connections. It is the developing 
world – driven by the increased affordability of smart devices – that will produce most of the 
future growth, adding a further 2.9 billion smartphone connections by 2020. The technology 
migration to higher speed networks is also facilitated by significant operator investments. 
Recent research from GSMA Intelligence predicts that more than four out of five people will 
have access to 3G networks by 2020, up from 70% today. The report also highlights that 4G 
networks are being rolled out at a much faster pace than the 3G ones. While it took 10 years 
for 3G network coverage to reach half of the global population, it will take 4G networks 
merely eight years after launch to reach the same milestone. Affordability has been the 
key restraining factor in developing markets, but this constraint is rapidly abating. GSMA 
Intelligence estimates that smartphone average selling prices are now 30% below their 2008 
levels in Asia, 25% in Latin America and 20% in Africa. The majority of smartphones in 
the developing world are still priced above US$100, but the ‘sweet spot’ for these regions is 
considered to be in the US$25–50 range.119
According to an Ipsos study, smartphone users have an average of 19 apps on their phones 
in Spain and Belgium, up to an average of 30 apps in Sweden and France.120 Apps or mobile 
applications are software applications, usually designed to run on smartphones and tab-
let computers. They are available through application distribution platforms, which are 
typically operated by the owner of the mobile operating system.121 In the USA the average 
smartphone user has 41 apps and is spending an average of 39 minutes per day in using them. 
The top five apps are Facebook, YouTube, Android market, Google Search and Gmail.122
Mobile marketing or wireless advertising consists of all the activities undertaken to com-
municate with customers through the use of mobile devices to promote products and ser-
vices by providing information or offers. In 2008, mobile media began to catch up with the 
hype, as both consumers and advertisers embraced mobile technologies as never before. 
The introduction of the smartphone, heightened by Apple’s iPhone launch in mid-2007, 
was the true turning point for the industry.123 For marketers, increased mobile Internet will 
drive them towards creative strategies that make the best use of multiple platforms, with-
out irritating consumers with too many marketing messages. They should make sure that 
their message (emailings and website) is ‘mobile-proof’, i.e. readable on smaller screens 
and that the ‘call-to-action’ link is clickable by thumb. They should make sure the content 
can be shared through different social media such as Facebook, Twitter, Google+, etc. An 
InSites Consulting study revealed that 10% of smartphone users participated in a mobile 
marketing campaign, most of them via SMS and about 20% of them by downloading a 
branded app. Mobile couponing is not gaining a high acceptance. The overall penetration 
of branded apps/games is very low and improvement in this domain is needed. A branded 
app should add value for consumers, and help them do things better. ‘What’s in it for me?’ 
is key for the app user.124

288     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
Mobile advertising can be broken into two categories: push and pull. Push advertising is 
categorised as messages that are proactively sent out to mobile users and devices like alerts, 
SMS messages or even voice calls. It should be reserved for companies that have established 
a relationship and obtained permission to push communications to wireless users. Due to 
privacy issues and user backlash, pushed mobile advertising will seldom be used for new 
customer acquisition. Pull advertisements are messages shown to users as they are navigating 
WAP or wireless sites and properties. Both push and pull advertising should be carefully 
targeted and of relevance to the viewer to improve customer response and acceptance. Users 
should never feel that viewing the advertiser’s message is costing them airtime.
For the launch of its Christmas 2014 collection, luxury fashion brand Burberry took over the 11 windows of the 
department store Printemps in Paris. Visitors could interact with their mobile while they followed the Christmas 
story of a boy and his teddy bear travelling from the Burberry flagship store in London to Paris. They could control 
the weather of some scenes or direct a fleet of boats. The windows also had built-in cameras that could send images 
to the visitors’ handsets to create Christmas cards.125
In April 2012, the Belgian supermarket chain Delhaize launched Europe’s first virtual store at the central railway sta-
tion of Brussels. The virtual supermarket, named ‘Delhaize Direct Cube’, consisted of four panels containing 300 photos 
of popular items, where customers could scan the desired ones via an app on their smartphone and get them delivered 
later to one of 100 pick-up points. A mobile Internet connection was not needed because the cube also featured a 
Wi-Fi hotspot. In total Delhaize had seven cubes moved across the country during a test period of two months.126
In Germany, the bank ING-DiBa wanted to connect its offering to a younger audience. During the Basketball 
League the bank aimed to leverage smartphones to create an interactive experience that anyone could play: ‘Free 
Throw Billboards’ were born. Users could connect their phone directly to a billboard, turning it into a virtual basket-
ball, and take three ‘Free Throws’ in the competition. The installation required Facebook Connect, powering a live 
broadcast to friends and family, along with a wall post of the person in action shooting virtual basketballs.127 This 
campaign resulted in 21,493 passers-by during the event, 2,823 actual players and 7981 likes.128
Business insight
Mobile marketing campaigns
Mobile will account for more than half of digital ad spending in 2015, which will be the 
benchmark year for ad spending in the US. According to eMarketer predictions, mobile will sur-
pass desktop spending for the first time. Mobile ad spending will make up 52.4% of total digital 
ad spending in 2015. Within mobile ad spending, display advertising accounts for the largest 
share of the mobile ad market making up for 51.1% or $15.55 billion. Within display, banners, 
rich media and sponsorships will account for $12.77 billion and video for $2.78 billion.129
Often, mobile marketing is aimed at young consumers, because they have an intimate 
relationship with their mobile phones. Mobile phones have become the focal point of tech-
nology conversion. As their possibilities expand, their importance to young consumers will 
continue to increase. It is likely that mobile phones will surpass the personal computer as the 
most important single piece of technology in young consumers’ lives. Texting is as natural 
to youth as picking up a phone. Texting is even overtaking speaking, particularly for girls. 
Teen females are sending and receiving 3952 messages per month versus 2815 for males.130 
Marketing via mobile to young consumers is understanding that their use of mobiles differs 
from the use by adults. Texting has created a whole new language, with different syntax and 
grammar. Young people want to be entertained, e.g. gaming, contests, etc., and they want 
two-way interaction on their mobiles because they welcome dialogue.

MOBILE MARKETING     289
Simple push SMS does not take full advantage of the medium. Research and practical 
experience have demonstrated that youngsters love to talk back. They experience brands in 
a new and more fundamental way. They love to display commercial logos on their personal 
devices as well as expecting brands to listen to them. Young consumers do not hate advertis-
ing, but they dislike advertising that is irrelevant or even unwanted. Therefore, permission 
is key in connecting with millennials in an interactive way.131 SMS has many advantages as a 
marketing tool. SMS is instantaneous, but it has an even faster and wider reach than email 
as the mobile device usually accompanies the user and SMS can be received anywhere, at 
any time. It also allows for more precise targeting as every mobile phone has one single user.
Over 90% of SMS campaigns are read by the receiver, generating average response rates 
of 15% to 30% or even as much as 45%, while marketing emails have a response rate of 
only 6%. These rates are reached due to the ease and speed by which users can reply, with 
relatively little effort. Another important element is that SMS messages are cheap. With a 
cost of $0.05 per message, there are few other methods that provide such a strong ROI.132 As 
SMS actions are quite intrusive, they should always be launched on an opt-in basis, which 
implies that they should be regarded as a complement to other marketing communications. 
An SMS message is most appreciated when the content is appealing (an offer, a game, an 
incentive, a contest) and attractive. The most effective wireless campaigns are sweepstakes. 
An instant-win contest is a good way to acquire a database of consumers.
Mobile phones can do more than just listen. They can also create. The texting, imaging, 
audio and video capabilities of mobile phones can be used to create near-real-time content, 
known as mobcasting. Mobcasters upload their content directly from their phones to the 
Internet where it can be downloaded/viewed by others. Mobile is certainly not a medium in 
isolation. Therefore all mobile marketing campaigns should be integrated into the overall 
marketing and media mix.133
Marriott Hotels
Up to 75% of travellers bring along their mobile devices. Marriott decided to launch a messaging platform #App­
YourService. This app allows travellers to instantly connect with 500 Marriott Hotels worldwide before, during and 
after their stay. On the app they can find a list of standard requirements such as requesting extra towels or pillows 
or opt for the ‘anything else?’ feature to chat with a member of hotel staff. This allows travellers to ask anything they 
like, up to 72 hours before their stay. Marriott promoted the launch of the app with a Pop-Up in New York City. The 
feature was launched in 46 hotels at first but went global in Summer 2015.
You can sit with us
Online Fashion retailer brand Net-A-Porter launched its own social network ‘The Net Set’, which is an exclusive, 
invitation-only social networking app where people can shop. Users can upload Net-A-Porter products on their 
profile and, instead of like, ‘admire’ their friends’ posts, comment on and recommend items. On the app users can 
also buy their favourite pieces. If a user needs advice, he or she can ask questions at the ‘Style Council’ feature, where 
a group of style experts are on hand to inspire and engage the Net Set users in real time. The app also has Style 
Tribers: user-curated clubs that group content, products and brands by theme. The app was launched because a lot 
of NAP customers were already engaging with the brand on Pinterest, Instagram, Twitter and Facebook and 40% 
of NAP’s sales already came from mobile, so creating a network for these users seemed only logical to the brand.134
Business insight
Mobile marketing at work

290     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
When using mobile marketing techniques, a lot of legal and moral implications have 
to be taken into account. The Mobile Marketing Association (MMA), which represents 
more than 700 companies worldwide, is the key institute regulating the mobile industry. 
The MMA has released its Global Code of Conduct, designed to provide guidelines that 
all mobile marketers should consider and build their mobile marketing initiatives around. 
This code has five categories:136
1.	 Notice. This is the fundamental principle. Informing users of the marketer’s identity or 
products and services offered, as well as the key terms and conditions that govern the 
interaction between the marketer and the user’s mobile device.
2.	 Choice & Consent. Respecting the right of the user to control which mobile messages he 
or she wants to receive by obtaining consent (opt-in) and implementing a simple termina-
tion (opt-out) process.
3.	 Customisation & Constraint. Ensuring that collected information is used to tailor com-
munication to the interests of the recipient and is handled responsibly, sensitively and in 
compliance with applicable laws.
4.	 Security. The implementation of reasonable procedures to protect user information from 
unauthorised use, alteration, disclosure, distribution or access.
5.	 Enforcement & Accountability. The MMA expects its members to comply with the 
MMA Privacy Code of Conduct and has incorporated the code into the applicable MMA 
Guidelines.
Urban Outfitters
Fashion brand Urban Outfitters is aiming to increase engagement by notifying loyal customers at key moments in 
their shopping trip. The Urban Outfitters app Urban On sends notifications prompting shoppers to log in through 
social media when entering the store, and then serves relevant messages. When customers are in the changing room 
the app nudges shoppers to take selfies of themselves wearing the store’s products in line to pay, where they can 
shake the smartphone to uncover their loyalty card and earn a digital badge.
PlaceUs
PlaceUs is a tracking app that leverages the fact that users tend to repeatedly visit the same locations. It uses artifi-
cial intelligence and ambient sensing technology to determine the patterns and motions of its users. The idea is to 
help people stay connected with a close circle of loved ones. As the app learns the user’s routines, it can do things 
such as automatically send a message to their spouse when they head home from work or when they’re stuck in 
traffic on the way to day care. In stores, it can recognise recurring purchases such as a coffee order at a café and 
automatically place the order.
Starbucks’ loyalty system
Starbucks has included a delivery service offering in their loyalty app now allowing customers to not only order 
and pay, but also have beverages delivered to their location. Coffee fans can pre-order their morning coffee and 
skip lines, and later on will be able to have a standing order of morning coffee automatically ordered, paid for and 
delivered to their desk.135
Business insight
Facilitating mobile commerce

INTERACTIVE TELEVISION     291
Interactive television
Interactive (digital) television, or i(D)TV, is television content that gives viewers the ability to 
interact with programmes and to use a number of interactive services such as t-government, 
t-banking, t-commerce, t-learning information, games, video-on-demand and communica-
tion (t-mail), all supported by a set-top box.137 This relatively new medium offers new pos-
sibilities for marketers as they are now able to move buyers through the complete buying 
process. Traditional TV is still doing its job in reaching and attracting people, while the 
power of SMS and mobile is to convert and support. Interactive TV has many characteristics 
of the Internet (attract, engage and convert) and can empower TV as a medium. Viewers 
can choose among many more channels and watch content on demand. The viewer is in 
control. Interactive TV can elaborate a brand with the possibility of giving more in-depth 
information, generating leads and stimulating trial. Viewers can ask for extra information 
about products and services, receive coupons or samples and even buy a product, all with 
one push of a (mostly red) button. Western Europe will not reach full digital TV penetration 
until 2017, despite a penetration that had reached 85% several years ago.138
iDTV will also enhance the possibilities of understanding the viewing behaviour of the 
target group as well as developing personal relationships with viewers and making tailored 
interactive advertising content adapted to the needs of the viewers.139 Apart from interactive 
commercials, the iDTV medium provides advertisers with other possibilities:
● Programmercials or programme sponsoring, for instance a tour operator sponsors a travel 
programme on iDTV that gives viewers the opportunity to receive more information 
about a destination, order a catalogue or book a holiday.
● Advertising messages or logos on the electronic programme guide, visited on average 5–10 
times per day by the iDTV viewer.
● Linking with certain t-services, for instance the Financial Times sponsoring the t-banking 
application on iDTV.
● Bannering during programmes.
● Walled gardens, a kind of website created specifically for iDTV, and linked with an inter-
active commercial or an iDTV programme, for instance through product placement.140
In June 2011, Burger King started a new interactive TV campaign ‘The Whopperlust’ on Direct TV channel 111. Burger 
King wanted to challenge people and do something beyond just a Facebook like. The longer you stare, the more free 
Whoppers you get. If you stare for five minutes, at some point there will be an on-screen prompt to press an arrow 
button on your remote. After that, you can go double or nothing and stare for ten additional minutes to win two 
Whoppers. If you stay on for another 15 minutes, you can even win three Whoppers. To win the three Whoppers, 
you have to spend a total of about 30 minutes staring. Burger King mailed coupons to those winning households. 
After a couple of days Burger King had given away 50 000 Whopper coupons.141
Yeo Valley is the UK’s leading organic brand. To achieve growth during recession, it had to break out of its declin-
ing niche and appeal to the everyday families of the UK. The goal of the marketing campaign was clear: take the 
Yeo Valley brand into the mainstream. In essence, the strategy was to take a focused approach to media through the 
popular TV programme X Factor, that in return delivered increased engagement with its viewers and results for Yeo 
Valley. A two-minute spot was broadcast in the first live final to get the viewers talking about Yeo Valley and their 
Business insight
Interactive TV campaigns: Burger King’s Whopperlust and Yeo Valley

292     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
The following trends are emerging in different European countries:143
● From broadcast towards on demand. In many countries video-on-demand (VoD) entered 
the top five TV channel charts, and the service to review missed programmes that many 
channels offer is increasingly popular. Transactional VoD services include the online retail 
and rental of audio-visual works, primarily feature films, audio-visual fiction, documen-
taries, educational programmes, cartoons, etc. The market for VoD services in Europe 
is dynamic, diverse and growing rapidly, though nevertheless lagging behind the USA. 
More than 500 on-demand audio-visual services were available in Europe in 2008 and 
VoD generated turnover of €544 million. It is predicted that VoD turnover in Europe will 
increase dramatically over the next few years and thus will represent a more significant 
aspect of the audio-visual markets.144
● Fragmentation. Previously, a household had one TV; now different TVs are available 
within one household, and people are even watching TV via the computer or mobile 
devices. TV broadcast distribution is increasingly diversified. In 2009, satellite broadcast 
accounted for 31% of the EU TV market, cable for 30%, digital terrestrial TV for 25% 
and IPTV (digital TV over the Internet) for 5%. Western Europe is the largest IPTV 
market, accounting for 40% of global subscribers in 2010. France is the leading country 
in the world for IPTV (23% of the global total), followed by China (16%) and the USA 
(16%).145
● The quality of digital TV and digital broadcasting is improving day by day.  
● Personalisation in terms of both offers and ads. More suggestions will be offered by 
advertisers in the way that Amazon has been doing for years on the Internet, i.e.‘Other 
buyers also bought the following titles’ (based on collaborative filtering).
● User-generated content. More and more user-generated TVs, videos and channels that 
can even be shared.
● Connected TV. The sales of Internet-connected TV are booming across Europe. Reports 
from both the Netherlands and Germany show that more than half of all sets sold in 2011 
are connected. GfK claimed that in 2012 around two-thirds of TV sets in the Netherlands 
rapping farmers. This was followed by a spot campaign for ten weeks delivering about 14 million viewers a week. 
Secondly, the X Factor brand was used for the creation of a competition to win tickets to attend the live finals. This 
was promoted through clickable VoD (video-on-demand) and display ads across the X Factor pages on  ITV.com, as 
well as in-store through on-pack branding. All media directed viewers to visit the Yeo Valley farm online to enter 
the competition. Thirdly, there was an integration into the X Factor ‘live chat’ function on  ITV.com, promoting the  
competition and starting the conversations about Yeo Valley, which went live across the multiple social media 
platforms. The results were as follows:
● 1.8 million YouTube views
● No. 1 trending Twitter topic worldwide
● 35 million Tweet impressions
● 35 000 Facebook fans
● 400% increase in visits to the online farm
● 30 000 competition entries
● 30 000 single downloads, with seven weeks in the top 100
● 71% increase in brand awareness
● 15% increase in sales value
● half a million new households to the brand.142

INTERACTIVE TELEVISION     293
will be able to connect to the Web. This growth will lead to 56% connected TV penetra-
tion in three years’ time in the Netherlands. These figures only reflect pure connected TV 
sets, not those connected to the Web by using a separate set-top box or games console. 
GfK’s figures for the Dutch market are in line with those for the German market, where 
half the TVs sold in Germany will be connected, according to figures from the German 
industry association BITKOM. And the Germans are actively seeking these sets rather 
than just buying sets that happen to be connected: 46% of Germans really want web 
content on their TV.146 According to a report from Digital TV Research, the number of 
TV sets connected to the Internet will reach 551 million by 2016 for the 40 countries cov-
ered in this report, up from 124 million at the end of 2010. The Connected TV Forecasts 
Report states that this will translate to 20% of global TV sets by 2016, up from only 6% 
at the end of 2010.147
● Dual screening or second screening. This is rather new consumer behaviour. Back in 
1999, the future of interactive TV was what is now called dual or second screening, 
with people interacting with their TV via their PC. The idea was soon overtaken by 
the use of the ‘red button interactive TV’. But now, with cheap laptops, the increasing 
penetration of smartphones and the rise of social media, dual screening is back on 
the agenda: 60% of people claim to watch TV and go online simultaneously two or 
three times a week, while 37% claim to do so every day. There are roughly three ways 
in which people use TV and the Internet together. There is co-incident usage, where 
people are looking at something on their laptop that is not related to what is on TV. 
To advertisers this is the same as someone reading the newspaper. Secondly there are 
people using the PC/smartphone or tablet for something related to the TV show but not 
in sync with it, such as visiting a brand’s social media site. And then there is the group 
of people who are deeply synchronising with the programme, e.g. playing along with 
a TV game, twittering about the TV show, etc. This synchronous use is of big interest 
to advertisers.148
Mediascope Europe 2012 revealed that 48% of Europeans are using the Internet while 
they are watching TV and 16% of the time spent watching TV is done while using the 
Internet. The heaviest Europeans online/TV multitaskers are the Norwegians at 70%, 
followed by the French at 68% and 62% of those watching TV in the UK; 33% of all 
European TV and online multitaskers claimed synchronous use. This means there is a 
significant opportunity for brands to engage the consumer via both platforms.149
Connected TV offerings tend to fall into two camps: closed and applications-based 
versus open and browser-based. Both closed and open systems vary widely in the con-
tent and services they offer. A connected TV set or device may have all or only some of 
these.150
● Social TV. Connected TV creates social TV. The fact that TV is connected with the 
Internet fundamentally changes the nature of TV by giving viewers access to VoD, web 
video and new online services, such as social networking. Facebook is so large that it 
has a user base in some countries equal to or even larger than the audience for the most 
popular broadcast TV programming. Given the popularity of social networks, people 
are frequently talking about TV shows at the same time as they are watching them. A 
September 2010 survey conducted in the UK for Intel found 45% of individuals use social 
networking services such as Twitter and Facebook to discuss a programme while it is 
being shown. Second-screen devices used when viewing TV include a laptop (57%), a 
desktop computer (23%) and an Internet-enabled smartphone (19%).
Social TV is gaining relevance:151 ITV’s X Factor attracted more than 58 000 tweets per 
day during the last series; Glee accounted for 16% of all social media activity among 
the major US networks’ shows; at the time of writing (May 2016) Fox’s Family Guy has 
50 million Facebook ‘likes’ and BBC’s Top Gear has close to 15 million Facebook ‘likes’; 
275 million Facebook users have ‘liked’ a TV show, and on average they like six.

294     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
The social media revolution
With technology-fuelled changes in recent years, marketing is increasingly about two-way mass 
conversations between Internet users. As Web 1.0 was the web-as-information-source with 
static websites, Web 2.0 (aka social media (networks)) is a concept of web-as-participation-
platform in which users participate and connect to each other using services as opposed to 
sites.153 It can be seen as a collection of emerging technologies enabling social networking by 
offering Internet users the ability to collaborate, add, edit, share and tag content of different 
kinds (text, sound, video, images). This so-called ‘consumer-generated content’ includes 
weblogs (or blogs), video blogs (vlogs), podcasts, wikis, mobile phone photography and RSS 
feeds. One of the earliest Web 2.0 applications was Napster, a peer-to-peer file-swapping tool 
that leveraged personal music catalogues across its user base and facilitated music sharing. 
According to Kaplan and Haenlein,154 who applied a set of theories in the field of media 
research, there are six different types of social media (Table 6.1).
Collaborative projects
The main idea underlying collaborative projects is that the joint effort of many actors leads to 
a better outcome than any actor could achieve individually, also referred to as ‘the wisdom of 
crowds’. Examples within this category include the online encyclopaedia Wikipedia and the 
social bookmarking web service Delicious, which allows the storage and sharing of web book-
marks. Companies must be aware that collaborative projects are becoming a very important 
source of information for many consumers. Although not everything written on Wikipedia 
may actually be true, it is believed to be true by more and more surfers. Adobe Systems main-
tains a list of bookmarks to company-related websites and conversations on Delicious.
Because of the existence of on-screen applications, TV advertising needs to be seen in another, more social, perspec-
tive. Through these applications the consumers can discuss and appraise commercials at the same time as they are 
watching them. Viewers will increasingly rely on the opinions of others before they discover for themselves adver-
tiser funded programming, sponsored web shows and branded online video, all accessible through their connected 
TV. Therefore advertisers need to rethink the content of their campaigns and run social ads.
For social networks such as Facebook and Twitter, advertising is their main revenue source. Facebook aims to tap the 
$180 billion worldwide TV advertising spend. Once Facebook users are ‘liking’ a brand’s Facebook page, they can then 
opt in to get commercial messages from this company, such as brand status updates, along with HD video commercials.
Twitter focuses on brand communications via its sponsored messages (promoted tweets). These tweets, clearly 
labelled ‘promoted’, are seen in the ‘Trends’ section of the Twitter site and can be passed on to followers. Via con-
nected TV apps for Facebook or Twitter, viewers see the status updates or tweets, as well as brand updates or pro-
moted tweets, on their TV screen, directly alongside TV programming and commercials.
A logical future development are apps that display whole Facebook pages, personally targeted display ads or leads 
to video for TV shows and brands incorporating video. The screen space of connected TVs with browsers will be 
divided between the broadcast commercials and sponsored programming, and compete for viewer attention with 
socially targeted advertising. This new more social way of advertising will transform the TV ad market completely.152
Business insight
How social TV influences the rules of TV advertising

THE SOCIAL MEDIA REVOLUTION     295
Blogs
Weblogs, better known as ‘blogs’, are frequently updated personal web journals that allow 
owners to publish ideas and information. Blogs are usually managed by one person only, 
but provide the possibility of interaction with others through the addition of comments. 
Some blogs are just expressions of individual opinions and analysis, while others aggregate 
information or serve mainly to direct readers to other blogs, websites or other sources. Some 
are company-internal and only accessible to employees or departments within a company. 
Others are posted on public websites and available for anyone to see and react. The earliest 
blogs were started in the late 1990s, but interest has skyrocketed over the past few years. 
By the end of 2011, Nielsen tracked over 181 million blogs around the world, up from  
36 million in 2006. Women make up the majority of bloggers, and half of bloggers are aged 
18–34; about 1 in 3 bloggers are mums.155
Social presence/media richness
Low
Medium
High
Self-presentation/
self-disclosure
High
Blogs
Social networking sites 
(e.g. Facebook)
Virtual social worlds 
(e.g. Second Life)
Low
Collaborative 
projects (e.g. 
Wikipedia)
Content communities 
(e.g. YouTube)
Virtual game worlds 
(e.g. ‘World of 
Warcraft’)
Source: ‘Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of social media’, Business Horizons, Vol. 53 (1), pp. 59–68 
(Kaplan, A.M. and Haenlein, M. 2010), p. 62, Copyright © 2010.
Table 6.1  Classification of social media by social presence/media richness and self-presentation/
self-disclosure
Chiara Ferragni started her blog ‘The Blonde Salad’ in 2009. The Blonde Salad now has over 50 000 unique visitors 
every month and brings more than $1.5 million in advertising and referred sales. Chiara now owns two companies 
that are worth $8 million.
Because of the blogs’ major success Chiara was asked by luxury fashion brands like Tod’s and Louis Vuitton to col-
laborate. In 2013 she decided to transform her massively popular blog into an online lifestyle magazine and position 
it as a luxury brand. This meant she would only work together with a limited number of luxury fashion advertisers 
to establish this luxury image. She has appeared on the cover of many fashion magazines such as Vogue and Marie 
Claire. She now has a whole team, called the TBS crew, to run her blog and company. Chiara has 4.5 million follow-
ers on Instagram. According to Ferragni she is very successful because she is transparent in how she operates her 
business. She also earns as much as $50 000 for appearances and hosting gigs. The biggest revenue comes from her 
own line of shoes. In 2014, the Chiara Ferragni collection brought in nearly $5 million.156
Business insight
The Blonde Salad
According to the blogosphere study of Technorati, the leading search engine for blogs, 
38% of bloggers are writing about brands that they love or hate; 65% of bloggers use social 
media to follow brands and blogging on these brands is a common activity.157 Blogs take 

296     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
the pulse of consumer trends and can build relationships. One of Kryptonite’s popular 
U-shaped bike locks had to be recalled and exchanged after a blog posting on biker-forum.
net said it could be picked with a Bic pen. The story raced through the blogosphere and was 
picked up by the New York Times and other big media. The product exchange implied a 
cost of $10 million for Kryptonite. A South African winery, Stormhoek, made use of blogs 
to enter the UK market. The founder sent sample bottles to 150 bloggers in the UK with 
no obligation to say anything about the wine, but a lot of them ended up writing about it. 
By interfacing with the blogosphere, Stormhoek changed the way it looked at its primary 
customers (supermarket chains) and end-users (the supermarkets’ customers). Simply telling 
the blog story to supermarket buyers and importers made the sales process easier and, as a 
result, the wine got a 19% share of its category in the UK market and sales doubled from 
50 000 cases in 2004 to 100 000 in 2005.158
Twitter can be considered a micro-blog but is at the same time a free social network 
service. It will be more extensively discussed in the next section. Due to the need for more 
privacy, private messaging apps are on the rise. According to Pew Research centre, 39% of 
US smartphone owners use messaging apps. These apps are most popular among young 
adults, where almost half (49%) of US smartphone users aged 18–29 are using messaging 
apps. These apps are free and when connected to Wi-Fi they do not use up SMS or other 
data. They offer a more private kind of social interaction then traditional social media 
platforms such as Facebook or Twitter. In addition, apps that automatically self-destruct 
messages are becoming increasingly popular: 17% of total US adult smartphone users are 
using these types of apps, like Snapchat; while 41% of smartphone owners aged 18–29 use 
apps that automatically delete sent messages.159
WhatsApp, a Facebook-owned private messaging app, now has more than 900 million 
users. WhatsApp, which can be downloaded for free, lets users send text messages, call, send 
videos and pictures, and is currently free of advertising. However, the social network has a 
huge user base to build a business around. At the beginning of 2015, Facebook announced 
that WhatsApp might introduce new paid features, such as the ability for businesses to send 
one-on-one messages to consumers. WhatsApp started out as a mobile-only app but is now 
also available on web browsers as WhatsApp Web.
A podcast is a sound file with an RSS feed that can be played by any MP3 or audio 
player (not only iPods as the name would suggest). This technology makes it easy for 
people to create their own audio recordings and post them on the Web. In its report The 
Podcast Consumer 2016, Edison Media Research reports a study conducted in Janu-
ary/February 2016, with 2001 US participants. Fifty-five percent of them were aware 
of the term ‘podcast’ and 36% had listened to at least one podcast. Twenty-one per-
cent listened to podcasts on a monthly basis. Podcast listeners are young, affluent and 
highly educated. Twenty-nine percent listened on a computer; the others on tablet or 
smartphone.160
Content communities
The main objective of content communities is sharing content between users. Content com-
munities share different media types, such as text (e.g. BookCrossing, via which more than 
1 million people from over 132 countries share 9 122 677 books),161 photos, videos and pres-
entations (e.g. SlideShare, which has 60 million monthly visitors and 130 million page views, 
and is among the 200 most visited websites in the world. Besides presentations, SlideShare 
also supports documents, PDFs, videos and webinars).162
The most important photo communities are Flickr (owned by Yahoo!), with about 51 million 
registered users uploading 4.5 million pictures per day;163 Instagram, launched in 2010 and 
bought in April 2012 by Facebook; and Snapchat founded in September 2011. Snapchat is 
a mobile-only app that allows you to send a photo or movie directly to your friends. These 
‘snaps’ are only visible for a short period of time before they self-destruct. Users can choose 
how long the snaps are visible up to 10 seconds. There are nearly 100 million worldwide daily 
active snapchatters viewing over 3 billion videos on Snapchat every day.

THE SOCIAL MEDIA REVOLUTION     297
Instagram
Instagram is a free photosharing program that allows users to take a photo or video with 
their mobile phone, apply different digital filters to it, and then share it on a variety of social 
networking sites, including Instagram’s own. According to Instagram, it has 300 million 
monthly active users who are posting 70 million pictures every day that get a daily 2.5 billion 
likes.164 Besides a photo content community, Instagram is also a social network.
Some brands are still using Instagram in the same way brands used the Internet in 1999, 
i.e. as a way of ‘digitising’ their existing marketing materials. Other brands using Instagram 
in a better way are fashion brands such as Bergdorfs, Burberry, Gucci and Threadless. Their 
photo streams are more than just product shots: they offer the viewer interesting content 
(employees, old ads, fashion show backstage shots, piles of T-shirts) captured from a specific 
point of view and with an editorial eye. They have learned that it is about being interesting, 
not about pushing products.165 Burberry adopted Instagram very early on and has developed 
a follower base of over 356 000 people. The fashion company is displaying not only clothing 
and ads with unique filters, but also snapshots of London supporting its British roots. Dur-
ing its September London runway shows, Burberry fans got real-time photos of the show 
on Instagram before they were available anywhere else.166
At the beginning of 2015, Instagram introduced a new way for brands to tell their stories 
and share more images with their customers, called ‘carousel ads’. By using carousel ads, 
users can swipe left on an ad to see additional images or videos and link to a website of a 
brand’s choice so they can learn more about the product or the brand. Instagram will soon 
carry a lot more advertising. Direct-response buttons, an API for ad buying and Facebook-
style targeting capabilities will give advertisers new ways to buy and will lead to rapid 
increases in ad spending. By enabling people to take action directly from an ad to sign up on 
a website or buy a product or even download an app it will complete the customer journey 
by taking an action. According to eMarketer, Instagram will have nearly $600 million in 
mobile-only ad revenues in 2015, rising to $2.81 billion in 2017. One of the selling points 
for advertisers has been visually appealing ads that blend in with user posts, making users 
more likely to spend time looking at them. Instagram claims that its ads are 2.8 times more 
effective than other online advertising. The platform presents brands with a good channel on 
which to reach teens. A study found that 52% of US teen Internet users used Instagram, the 
second most popular social media platform among the target group after Facebook (71%).167
Ben & Jerry’s new scotchy batch
Ice Cream brand Ben & Jerry’s used Instagram to spread the word about its new scotchy scotch scotch flavour. Ben & 
Jerry’s was one of the first brands to run advertising on Instagram. Over an 8-day period in November 2014 the brand 
posted four sponsored images featuring its new batch of ice cream, in a cone and even as a vision in the clouds. The 
brand reached 9.8 million users in the US and saw a 33 point increase in ad recall. Seventeen per cent of users who 
saw the ad for the new flavour of ice cream became aware of the new flavour and associated it with Ben & Jerry’s.168
Mercedes Benz
When Mercedes Benz launched the GLA, the brand’s first compact SUV, it launched a campaign on Instagram and 
Facebook to achieve direct response results. The brand aimed to reach Millennials. Mercedes-Benz put imagery at the 
centre of their campaign, which was inspired by the #ThingsOrganizedNeatly hashtag. The brand asked photographers 
Business insight
Famous brands use Instagram

298     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
Brand placement, the (paid) inclusion of branded products or brand identifiers in mass media productions, is rapidly 
gaining in popularity as an alternative to traditional advertising. Through integration of the brand in media content, 
advertisers have a unique opportunity to append favourable associations to their brand.170 The global spending 
on brand placement amounted up to $6.25 billion in 2009, the vast majority of which was spent on traditional 
advertising media (e.g. TV, radio, feature films, etc.).171 With the growing shift of both consumers and marketers to 
online media, brand placements in new and online media are expected to rise. User-generated content (UGC) is 
omnipresent in online environments and its rapid growth has created some of the most successful digital brands, 
such as YouTube and Wikipedia.172 UGC-sharing websites are just one of the ways that brands can now interact with 
consumers.173
Previous research in traditional media points out that not all brand placements are equally effective,174 and 
that the outcome varies depending on the characteristics of the placement and the consumer.175 In a sample of 
259 participants aged between 15 and 79 (mean age of 28), in which 41.9% were male, the effect is studied of two 
placement characteristics, namely brand placement prominence and endorser expertise, on brand recognition and 
purchase intention. In addition, the moderating role of UGC liking was explored. The second purpose of the study 
was to investigate the effects of multiple brand placements.
A 2 (prominent vs subtle placement of one brand) * 2 (expert vs amateur endorser) full factorial between-
subjects experimental design was set up. The authors shot four videos of a cooking tutorial (‘how to bake pancakes’). 
These videos were identical in script and placed brands, and only differed in the intended manipulations. Expertise 
was manipulated by using two different endorsers. The expert was a celebrity TV chef who was willing to participate. 
The non-expert endorser was a student. Prominence was manipulated by explicitly pronouncing the brand name 
and simultaneously taking a two-second close-up of the product. In the ‘subtle placement’ condition, the endorser 
was merely shown using the product, without mentioning the brand name and without a close-up. The manipulated 
brand was Solo, a well-known Belgian brand of butter. Five other brands were subtly visually incorporated in the 
videos: Coca-Cola (soft drink), Whirlpool (kitchen equipment), Inza (milk), Tiense Suiker (sugar) and Tefal (frying 
pans). These other brands were placed in the same fashion in all videos. The videos were posted on YouTube. The 
video included a link to an online questionnaire.
While prominence exerted a significant effect on recognition (80.4% vs 93.9%), endorser expertise had no sig-
nificant effect (87.9% vs 87.5%). The highest level of brand recognition was achieved when the (Solo) brand was 
prominently placed through an expert endorser (95.5%). This resulted in a significantly higher brand recognition than 
a subtle placement with an expert endorser (77.4%). However, the difference between a prominent placement by an 
expert and the prominent placement by an amateur (92.3%) was not significant. An amateur endorser and a subtle 
placement resulted in a brand recognition of 83.1%. UGC liking did not moderate the effect of endorser expertise 
on brand recognition of Solo. However, the effect of prominence on recognition was moderated by UGC liking. 
Research insight
Consumers’ reactions to brands placed in user-generated content: the effect of 
prominence and endorser expertise
and brand ambassadors the question ‘what would you pack in your GLA?’ and used their photos of neatly arranged 
items photographed from above on a custom GLA cargo mat to show the versatility of the compact SUV for week-
end trips. It also asked users how they would pack the ‘all-new GLA’ with the hashtag #GLApacked. Mercedes saw a 
14-point lift in ad recall of Instagram ads, and a 54% increase in website visits from Instagram and Facebook branding 
ads. However, when the brand used both Facebook and Instagram ads combined with Facebook direct response 
ads, it saw a 580% increase in website visits. The brand also made it possible to customise your own GLA right on 
Instagram. Thanks to this feature, Mercedes received 100 000 likes and 20 000 new followers on Instagram.169

THE SOCIAL MEDIA REVOLUTION     299
YouTube and Vimeo
YouTube and Vimeo are two examples of video content communities. YouTube started in 2005 
and was bought by Google in October 2006. It gets 4 billion page views a day, which adds up 
to a trillion a year. It has 800 million users who watch 3 billion hours of video a month (i.e. 
340 000 years).177 Every second one hour of video is uploaded to YouTube.178 Individuals have 
uploaded most of the content, although media corporations such as CBS, the BBC and other 
companies offer some of their material via the site. YouTube is structured by channels. These 
are places where an individual user can group a bunch of videos together onto one page. The 
most popular channels are those of celebrities such as Justin Bieber (1.5 million subscribers 
and 51 million views), Rihanna (2.3 million subscribers and 24 million views) and Lady Gaga 
(1.6 million subscribers and 30.6 million views).179 Even the British Royal Family had their 
own Royal Channel reporting in June 2012 on the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee.
Compared to older generations who prefer text-based videos (i.e. mainly talking people 
or animated figures), young people prefer videos with real images. Visual is key. The popu-
larity of YouTube indicates how important visual media are to them. Research from 2014 
showed that 9 per cent of ‘tweens’ (aged 8–11) claimed to use YouTube, with 69 per cent 
of them apparently also having an account despite YouTube restricting use to people above 
13 years old. Additionally, these kids like watching YouTube videos together rather than sim-
ply sharing them over the Internet. This trend of ‘clustersharing’ means that YouTube videos 
often enter the realm of meetings with friends or family, rendering them important media 
moments.180 Young people prefer a personal, human connection and video represents that 
with a more natural form of communication. Marketers therefore need to develop a thor-
ough video content strategy to feed the hungry video-consumers of the young generations.181
YouTube reportedly made $4 billion in 2014 – up from $3 billion the year before. The 
platform attracts advertising from major brands, including Budweiser, Microsoft, Kia, 
Prominent placements generated a significantly higher brand recognition than subtle placements, only for viewers 
with a high UGC liking (93.3% vs 72%). This difference was not significant for low UGC likers (91.5% vs 88.6%). For 4 
out of 5 of the non-manipulated other brands that were placed in the videos, the manipulation of the prominence 
level of the Solo brand did not have an effect on the recognition of these brands. There was one interesting excep-
tion, namely Tefal, a brand of frying pans. When Solo was placed prominently, the brand recognition of Tefal (91.7%) 
also significantly increased compared with when Solo was placed subtly (58%), even though the prominence level 
of Tefal remained constant. This could be due to the fact that Tefal is the brand most closely associated with the 
manipulated Solo brand, because Solo butter is used in the Tefal frying pan. The degree of endorser expertise did 
not have a significant main effect on the brand recognition of any of the five non-manipulated placed brands. There 
was also no significant interaction effect between endorser expertise and Solo prominence on the brand recognition 
for Tefal. The positive effect of Solo prominence on brand recognition for Tefal was significant for both the amateur 
(92.3% vs 62.7%) and the expert condition (91% vs 52.8%).
Although placement prominence has consistently been found to positively influence brand recognition in tra-
ditional media,176 in the present study, a prominent placement only has a significant effect on recognition when 
combined with an expert endorser. Endorser expertise seems to reinforce the effect of prominence on recognition. 
This might be caused by an incongruency effect, caused by the appearance of a known expert in an online format 
usually featuring unfamiliar amateurs. Prominence and endorser expertise also exert a reinforcing effect on purchase 
intention. Prominent placement causes significantly higher purchase intention than subtle placement when the 
brand is used by an expert. People who are fond of UGC content have better recognition scores when the brand 
is prominently placed, and report a greater purchase intention when the brand is used by an amateur than by an 
expert. Most UGC videos are acted out by hobbyists without professional training and the appearance of a celebrity 
expert disrupts this pattern. This may cause dissonant feelings on behalf of the experienced viewer, which in turn 
activates persuasion knowledge. This effect is not present with less experienced users. Marketers should be cautious 
when placing their brands in UGC videos featuring celebrity experts, especially when these are targeted at people 
who are fond of UGC videos. These consumers prefer an amateur endorser.

300     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
T-mobile and BMW, that seek to advertise to the young, fervent fan bases that have emerged. 
In May 2015, YouTube introduced a way to easily shop for the products seen on the movies 
being watched. TrueView video ads, a desktop and mobile feature, is a list of products fea-
tured in a video ad alongside the ad itself. The feature also works on mobile devices. When 
viewers click on one of the featured products, they are led directly to the product page on 
the retailer’s site. This makes it easier for shoppers to find out how to buy something they 
like and, of course, boosts YouTube’s ad revenues in the process.
YouTube has about 117 000 000 animal videos, so people clearly love to watch videos of cute or funny animals. The 
World Wildlife Fund (WWF) decided to use these popular videos to raise awareness for endangered animals. WWF 
uploaded a selection of different videos claiming that these starred cute endangered animals like polar bears, pandas 
and tigers on YouTube. When users searched for terms such as ‘cute animals’ they came across these videos uploaded 
by WWF. The fluffy cover images and titles suggested that the videos contained the content that users were looking 
for. However, when the videos were opened, users were greeted by an error message that told the viewer the content 
was no longer available due to global warming, the destruction of the rainforest or the illegal wildlife trade that had 
caused the animal to go extinct. The extinct adverts encouraged viewers to share the video to help raise awareness.
Business insight
WWF uses YouTube
Vimeo, founded in November 2004, is another video-sharing website on which users can 
upload, share and view videos. Seven years later Vimeo had 64 million unique visitors, an 
increase of 82%. Its membership increased by 48% up to 9 million by November 2011; 15% 
of Vimeo’s traffic comes from mobile devices.182
Social networking sites
Social networking sites enable users to connect by creating personal profiles, inviting friends 
to access those profiles, sending emails and instant messages between each other. These 
personal profiles can include photos, video, audio files, blogs, link to websites, in fact any 
type of information.
MySpace was one of the first social networking sites. It was very successful during the 
period between 2005 and 2008, after which a decline started. Specific Media and Justin 
Timberlake bought MySpace in June 2011, promising to reposition the social network to 
focus on music. Since MySpace introduced new ties with rival social networks Twitter and 
Facebook, its popularity is again rising. In 2015, MySpace had 50.6 million monthly active 
users that viewed 300 million videos per month.183
Facebook
The largest social networking site is Facebook, launched in 2004 by Marc Zuckerberg to stay 
in touch with his fellow students from Harvard University. In 2015 Facebook had 1.49 billion 
monthly active users, 1.3 billion of whom use Facebook monthly on mobile devices through 
the Facebook app and the messenger app. Facebook is planning on adding more apps to the 
mix and will become a family of apps. Social networking sites are of such high popularity, 
particularly among young Internet users, that the term ‘Facebook addict’ has been included 
in the Urban Dictionary (http:///www.urbandictionary.com), a collaborative online slang 
dictionary for the English language.

THE SOCIAL MEDIA REVOLUTION     301
After Facebook lost many millennial users, it introduced changes including new video and 
commerce tools, new feeds and getting ready for the Internet of Things trend. The platform 
recently moved from being photo-focused to video-focused, allowing the Facebook brand 
to shift into the video advertising market as well. The floating video feature enables visitors 
to scroll through their feeds while watching a video. Facebook is also working on spherical 
videos that let users move around 360° inside the video in the newsfeed. These videos are 
made by filming through 24 different cameras at different angles, giving users the ability 
to move around inside the video, and will also work with virtual reality headsets. Another 
new video feature on Facebook is a new social plugin that allows publishers to embed native 
Facebook videos across the Web. When a video gets uploaded on Facebook it will soon be 
possible to embed the video on other sites as well.
Facebook has also added new photo editing features in its Messenger app that looks a 
lot like Snapchat. This will also allow users to send edited movies to their friends in the 
near future.
Chubbies, an online retailer of shorts and shirts, found its niche for its trademark elastic-waist shorts among mil-
lennial guys online. Chubbies wants to be associated with the weekend in the same way Red Bull is associated with 
extreme sports. To do so, video is a big part of the brand’s social push, which shifted from YouTube to Facebook in 
2015. The retailer posted a 30-second spot on Facebook and YouTube in July 2015. The day after posting the video 
the Facebook version had more than 11 000 views and 350 likes while the YouTube clip had only 300 views and 2 
comments. Another movie posted by Chubbies had more than 900 000 views, 3600 likes and nearly 1000 shares on 
Facebook in one month and only 3100 views on YouTube.184
Business insight
Facebook vs YouTube for Chubbies
Facebook is currently testing a shopping feature that will allow users to buy items directly 
from businesses’ Facebook pages. On mobile, the shopping features will appear in a new 
shopping section on the page. In the shopping section, companies will show off products. 
If users want to purchase products, the retailers will be able to choose whether the actual 
transaction will take place within Facebook (with a Buy button) or if users are redirected to 
the company’s website. Facebook has also been experimenting with peer-to-peer payments 
in the US. It lets users send and receive money from other users. This feature will roll out 
to Facebook users in the US across desktop, Android and iOS. Users have to add their debit 
card information in Messenger’s settings section to be able to send payments by striking 
up a conversations with a friend, and selecting the $ icon. These payments may take up to 
three business days to go through.
The company is also testing a business version of Facebook Messenger, ‘Messenger Busi-
ness’, that will allow customers to interact with retailers by sending them a direct message or 
making a reservation and checking shipping information. Users will soon be able to have per-
sonal conversations with companies, make requests, ask questions and get quick responses. 
Facebook is also testing a shopping assistant feature for messenger. On certain web shops 
users are already able to like products with Facebook buttons but soon they will be able to 
receive shipping notifications in Messenger too. While checking out they will see ‘get real 
time shipping info on your phone’. The social network has plans to launch a new app ‘Hello’, 
which is a calling, caller ID and search app for smartphones. The app will use data from 
Facebook to identify callers, allowing users to call contacts that are not even in their address 
book. The Hello app will also let them contact businesses that are registered to Facebook.185

302     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
Facebook is no longer showing users posts in their feed based on how many of their friends 
liked, commented or shared a certain post. Currently, feed posts are being prioritised based 
on the amount of time they spend looking at a post.186 Facebook has also announced it will 
get into the Internet of Things trend with a software developer kit to support web-connected 
devices for the home. The exact plans of how Facebook aims to incorporate the Internet of 
Things into its platform is still unclear. The Internet of Things refers to products and any-
thing else that is connected to the Web. This includes everything from smart thermostats and 
garage doors to activity bracelets and your bed. They collect data about your usage patterns 
and habits and typically connect to an app that offers feedback to improve your lifestyle.
In Summer 2014, Belgian music festival Tomorrowland introduced its new, magical friendship bracelets. With these 
bracelets the festival is making it easier for you to connect with new friends you’ve made during the event. The brace-
lets serve as your access pass to the festival grounds and are connected to your Facebook account. Each bracelet 
contains a heart-shaped button that, when pressed at the same time by two festival goers who are at a close range 
to each other, will send a friendship request through Facebook.187
Thanks to Facebook’s Bluetooth beacons, retailers are able to push offers and updates concerning events to 
customers’ smartphones. The beacon sends messages to your Facebook account as soon as you walk into the store/
establishment using Bluetooth to make a connection. Facebook is calling the program, ‘Place Tips’, and this will show 
personalised notifications based upon personal preferences and interests using user metrics. Users have to open 
their Facebook in-store to see messages and they also have to be connected through Bluetooth. Through these 
messages users will learn more about the location, receive a welcome note and photo, see the Facebook page and 
posts of the establishment, and have the ability to check in. Users will also see messages, photos and videos left by 
friends who have visited the establishment and see any responses. The Facebook Bluetooth beacons have already 
been launched in New York and are now expanding to other cities in the US.188
Business insight
Tomorrowland lets you connect with festivalgoers all over the world
Polish Airlines LOT celebrated Christmas by hanging mistletoe in all its planes and encouraged people on the ground 
to track the planes and kiss. By combining Google Maps with the Live Tracking System, LOT created a website where 
you could check the current position of LOT aeroplanes and its mistletoes. Facebook ads were targeted at people in 
different cities while planes were en route. The LOT fan page announced the approach of the mistletoe via the profiles 
of cities located on the flight path of their planes. The campaign was a hot topic and earned €300 000 in free media.189
Business insight
#KissALOT
Pinterest
Pinterest is a content platform that allows users to organise and share interesting content 
that they find on the Web, that they upload themselves or that they see with other users. 
It is a pinboard-style/bookmarking site, a social network, a gift finder and a platform for 

THE SOCIAL MEDIA REVOLUTION     303
collaboration all in one. Pinterest was founded in March 2010 and by the end of May 2012 
it had become the third most visited social network in the USA after Facebook and Twit-
ter. In August 2015, there were 100 million active Pinterest users and 176 million registered 
users, 45% of whom were from outside the US, 85% were female and 67% under the age of 
40. Forty-two percent of US online adult females use Pinterest, as opposed to 13% of the 
males.190 The content (such as links, images, videos) is organised into different ‘Boards’, cre-
ated and named by the user him- or herself. Popular categories are travel, cars, film, humour, 
home design, sports, fashion and art. Users can browse other pinboards for inspiration, they 
can ‘re-pin’ images to their own collections (over 80% of the pins are ‘re-pins’ of other users) 
and they can ‘like’ photos and comment on them. Other users or a selection of other users’ 
boards can be followed. Users can even start up a collaborative board where all the invitees 
can pin/re-pin interesting stuff. Pinterest allows its users to share ‘pins’ on both Twitter and 
Facebook. This integration allows users to share and interact with a broad community. Apps 
for the iPhone (March 2011) and iPad (May 2012) brought in a greater than expected number 
of downloads. Pinterest Mobile (for non-iPhone users) was launched in September 2011.
The popularity of Pinterest is a consequence of consumers feeling increasingly more 
comfortable with recommendations from friends or other users when they come through 
social personalisation.191 Pinterest is more trusted as an information source than Facebook 
and Twitter by general Internet users. But Pinterest is also seen as a place ‘to have fun’, as 
well as ‘get product information’ and ‘find out about new products’.192 Communities on 
Pinterest are less about friends and more about common interests. The Liverpool Football 
Club was the first Premier League club to launch Pinterest boards aiming to appeal to a 
broad cross-section of its supporter base. Boards include ‘Liverpool Legends’, to track some 
of the greatest players and managers in Liverpool Football Club’s history; ‘The Greatest 
Fans in the World’, a photo tribute to the supporters who follow Liverpool; and even ‘LFC 
Cakes’, a collection of club-themed cakes and cupcakes.193
As Pinterest is one of the fastest-growing social sites of the moment with a large user 
base, the site is becoming more and more interesting for brands. Kotex claims to be the very 
first, although Peugeot did organise a Pinterest Puzzle previously. The ‘Women Inspiration 
Day by Kotex’ is a sort of influencer campaign. By analysing individual pins, Kotex identified 
50 influential women in Israel. Based on their individual interests, Kotex made up a box full 
of individual gifts. To receive their gift box, all they needed to do was to ‘re-pin’ the Kotex 
gift. The women received their gifts and posted comments about them on their social pages, 
blogs and of course their Pinterest page. The campaign resulted in 2284 interactions and 
almost 695 000 impressions.194 Etsy, an e-commerce website with handmade, vintage, art and 
craft items is one of the most followed brands (94 250 followers in June 2012) and displays 
a huge variety of boards conveying its personality. Different travel agencies, such as Travel 
Channel (with 17 156 followers) and Thomas Cook (organised per country), are providing 
visual inspiration on where to book your next holiday. Gap (8610 followers) is showcasing 
popular products, gift guides, new collections, icons and inspirations for using old T-shirts 
for DIY projects, as well as specific pinboards of its major designers.
In April 2012, Harrods invited customers to create a mood board, which was the inspira-
tion for a ‘Queen’s Diamond Jubilee Street Party’ window. To take part in this Pinterest com-
petition your board had to be titled ‘Harrods Street Party Window’ and, once completed, 
a tweet needed to be sent to Harrods containing a link to your board including the hashtag 
#HarrodsWindows. Harrods promoted the competition on its Facebook page (202 000 fans) 
and via its Twitter account (101 000 followers). The competition drew on people’s love of 
taking pictures and intersected well with what Pinterest can deliver. On its own Pinterest 
page Harrods also created a themed board including images of past Harrods window dis-
plays to inspire potential competition participants. The winner was brought to London and 
put up in a top hotel in advance of the official unveiling of the window.195
For a retailer, Pinterest is interesting as a showcase for its products. A user can even 
browse for gifts by clicking on the homepage on ‘gifts’ and filtering a price range. Pinter-
est is establishing itself as a huge traffic driver for online retail. Also, online publishers are 

304     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
receiving a lot of traffic generated via Pinterest. Content from magazine websites and blogs 
that focus on home décor, arts and crafts, style and food are among the most frequently 
‘pinned’ subjects on Pinterest. It is no surprise that those sites are reporting significant traffic 
growth from Pinterest.196 At the beginning of 2015, Pinterest opened up its promoted pins to 
all advertisers. Tests found that these promoted pins performed as well or even better than 
organic pins. Based on 2014 polling, sponsored posts on Pinterest were catching users’ eyes 
more than those on the bigger social networks Facebook and Twitter, with users clicking on 
promoted content on Pinterest at nearly twice the rate. In a March 2015 study by Pinterest 
and Millward Brown Digital, 93% of US Pinterest users who had accessed the network in 
the six months prior to the polling had done so to plan for or make purchases; 87% said 
they had bought a product as a result of the social site; and 52% agreed that Pinterest had 
even helped them make a purchase decision, especially in food, beauty, health and fitness, 
and clothing and accessories.197
Among US social networkers aged 13 to 64 who used Pinterest (30% of respondents), 33% 
said they clicked on promoted content at least weekly, compared with just over one-fifth of 
social networkers who used Twitter and 18% of Facebookers. An additional 33% of Pinter-
est users clicked on sponsored posts at least monthly, vs 15% who said the same for Twitter 
and 22% for Facebook.198 Pinterest is a better driver for e-commerce sales than Facebook 
and Twitter. According to research from Pinterest and Millward Brown Digital, more than 
9 in 10 US Pinterest users had visited the site to help with purchase decisions, and 87% had 
purchased something because of Pinterest. By partnering with key brands that are already 
successful across Pinterest – such as Macy’s and Nordstrom – and powerful e-commerce plat-
forms – like Shopify and Demandware – Pinterest is enabling advertisers to buy pins based 
on visual browsing allowing brands to capitalise on social media advertising campaigns.199
Twitter
Twitter enables users to send and read updates known as tweets. These are text-based posts 
of at most 140 characters that are displayed on the user’s profile page and delivered to other 
users (called followers) who subscribe to it. Tweets can be sent and received via the Twitter 
site, via SMS or external applications. In June 2015, Twitter reported that it had 316 million 
monthly active users in the June quarter, up from 308 million the previous quarter. Twitter 
has added features like Instant Timeline and While You Were Away to make it easier for 
users to follow feeds and conversations. The company recognises the importance of being 
able to follow real-time conversations by grouping related conversations under the original 
tweet and highlighting notable changes. It also prioritises certain online discussions, taking 
into account factors like whether or not the original Twitter account replied. A ‘view other 
replies’ button is also being added.
Domino’s now lets you order food by sending a tweet or a single emoji. You can add your Twitter handle to their 
Domino’s Pizza profile (@dominos) so you can re-order your favourite pizza by using the hashtag #EasyOrder or 
using the pizza-emoji. Customers have to create an easy order account first. To make their consumers aware that 
they can order using emojis, the brand launched the Emoji Literacy campaign. Domino’s launched a video that 
featured parents who did not understand text messages that contained emojis and dramatised the consequences. 
According to Domino’s roughly 40% of Americans don’t know how to read or write emoji, a reality that Domino’s 
is hoping to change. Domino’s aims to help these emoji illiterates by giving them 52 flash cards featuring different 
Business insight
Domino’s Emoji Literacy

THE SOCIAL MEDIA REVOLUTION     305
Twitter is also tapping into the live broadcasting social media trend with its new Pro-
ject Lightning that focuses on offering real-time content about events. Twitter’s new 
project Lightning will bring event-based curated content to the Twitter platform with 
immersive and instant-load photos and videos. Users will be able to embed these expe-
riences across the Web and in other apps. Twitter Lightning is also available to people 
who do not have a Twitter account. Twitter Lightning will be focusing on prescheduled 
events like the Oscars or Coachella, but can also focus on news and ongoing events like 
an earthquake or any event that a lot of people are tweeting about.201
emojis and explaining their meaning. These cards could be downloaded on the emoji literacy site Dominos 
launched. The pizza icon is described as the answer to all life’s questions. Other than tweets, Domino’s also lets 
its customers order pizza by text, smart TV, smart watch, car or voice orders on their website.200
Since the launch of emojis on Twitter in April 2015 they have been extremely popular. In just one month over  
200 million emojis were used. Animal emojis are being used a lot as well but no one really makes the link between 
the emojis and the real endangered status of the cute animals. WWF saw an opportunity in these popular animal 
emojis to raise awareness of the endangered species. Using 17 characters out of the emoji alphabet, each one 
representing an endangered species, WWF launched the endangered emojis campaign on Twitter right before 
Endangered Species day on 15 May 2015. Users who sign-up via Twitter, or the brand’s microsite that was dedicated 
to this campaign, could register tweets with the service. Each emoji usage is priced at $0.15, and at the end of each 
month the charity sends a bill revealing how many of the at risk animals you have used in your tweets. When you 
have used 20 Asian Elephant emojis in your tweets, for example, you receive a $3 bill. Users can donate this sug-
gested amount or another preferred amount. More than 6000 people signed up to the service within 7 hours of the 
campaign going live, three days before its official launch. 202
Business insight
Endangered emojis
Target tested beacons in 50 locations, pushing content and coupons to customers by Christmas 2015. Users of the 
Target app who chose to opt-in on the notifications that were sent by the beacons received deals, recommendations 
and content based on their in-store location. For example, a customer browsing the women’s wear aisle might receive 
an alert about nearby items that are trending on Pinterest on the Target Run homepage within the brand’s app. To 
avoid overloading its customers’ phones, the company promised that push notifications would be limited to two 
notifications per store visit. The Target Run page on the app is like a social media site’s newsfeed, so the latest content 
is added on top of the page. These can be product recommendations or coupons based on location. As you move over 
to the groceries area the Target Run page will update with a department-wide offer or a Cartwheel deal for a range of 
items. Currently, Target is also working on a feature that will re-sort your shopping list as you move through the store.203
Business insight
Target beacons

306     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
The first international brand in the Twitter ranking is Starbucks Coffee with 2.6 million 
followers, whereas its Facebook page has 36 million fans.204 JetBlue Airways, now ranked in 
seventh place in the Twitter Brands charts with 1.7 million followers, was among the first 
corporate companies to join Twitter in 2007. JetBlue is often cited as an example of small 
corporate twittering. It joined Twitter to help its customers. By simply asking, it found out 
what the customers wanted. The company found that customer service tweets generated 
more followers and replies, and tweets about press releases got no response. This approach 
has made it quite successful. JetBlue tore down the wall between the customer and the brand 
by implementing Twitter.205 Google+ is a social network site that in January 2016 had 2.2 
billion profiles, but only 9% of them had publicly posted content. Most of these were com-
ments about YouTube videos.206
LinkedIn
LinkedIn was launched in 2003 and is the largest professional online network. Worldwide, 
it has 364 million members.207 Members of LinkedIn get access to people, job offers, news, 
updates and insights that may be of use for their professional life. On LinkedIn, people can 
create a personal profile, companies can create a business profile, and LinkedIn groups can be 
formed. Via this LinkedIn profile, status updates can be posted: activities, news, events, etc, can 
be shared with other network members. Companies can use their LinkedIn profile to generate 
visibility for their company and their products and generate traffic to their company websites.
LinkedIn offers various advertising possibilities by means of which a company can decide 
for itself who will be exposed to it. This selection can be done on the basis of title, function, 
industry, location, age, gender, company name, company size or LinkedIn group. Adverts 
can be placed on profile pages and start-up pages of LinkedIn members, on group pages, or 
on search results pages. Also ‘sponsored updates’ can be placed. These are advertisements 
that appear in the news feeds of the selected target audience.
Demographics and usage of social network sites
According to PEW research centre,208 in 2015 Facebook remains the most popular and fre-
quently used social media platform among teens, with 71% of all US teens aged 13–17 
using the platform. In addition, 52% of teens use Instagram, 41% use Snapchat, 33% use 
Twitter and 33% use Google+; Vine (24%) and Tumblr (14%) were also used by teens. 
Facebook (41%), Instagram (20%) and Snapchat (11%) are used most often by teens fol-
lowed by Twitter (6%), Google+ (5%), Tumblr (3%) and Vine (1%). Boys are more likely 
than girls to report that they visit Facebook most often (45% vs 36%). Girls are more likely 
than boys to say they use Instagram (23% of girls vs 17% of boys). Girls use social media 
sites more often than boys, especially visually-orientated social media sites like Instagram, 
Snapchat, Pinterest and Tumblr. Older teens aged 15–17 are more likely than younger teens 
to use Facebook (44% vs 35% of younger teens), Snapchat (13% vs 8%) and Twitter (8% 
vs 3%) as a most used platform. Younger teenagers aged 13–15 are more likely to say they 
visit Instagram most often (25% vs 17%). The research also found that Snapchat is more 
likely to be used most often by wealthier teens and Facebook is most popular among lower 
income teens.209 Online American adults use Facebook most (71%), followed by LinkedIn 
(28%), Pinterest (28%), Instagram (26%) and Twitter (23%); 70% of those Facebook users 
use the site daily and 45% use it several times a day. Forty-nine per cent of Instagram users 
and 17% of Pinterest users engage with the platform daily. Women are more likely to use 
Pinterest, Facebook and Instagram while online forums are more popular among men.210
Although there are age restrictions on most social network sites (for instance, Facebook 
is for 13+), millions of pre-teens use these sites anyway. Some get permission from their 
parents to create an account. Others lie about their age to get past the sign-up restrictions. 
According to a study conducted by EU Kids Online, 38% of 9–12 year olds have a social 
networking profile. This percentage grows to 77% with the group of 13–16 year olds. The 
main social network site for 9–12 year olds is Facebook with a penetration of 20%. Among 

THE SOCIAL MEDIA REVOLUTION     307
13–16 year olds, 46% use Facebook as their main social network site.211 Facebook is plan-
ning to abandon the restriction of 13+ by linking the kids’ pages to that of their parents, 
who can keep an eye on the applications used and to give their approval on friends requests.
Social network opportunities for brands
People join social networks to learn about their friends, but also to get information about 
(new) products and brands. However, they do not like the traditional marketing messages. Peo-
ple prefer people above brands. This implies that companies and brands should use their social 
media differently. It is about being human and putting personal identity above an institutional 
identity. About half of the European social networkers follow brands or companies on social 
media. People connect to brand pages because of personal brand experiences and conversa-
tions about brands by peers. They seldom connect because brands or companies ask them to. 
Social networkers expect some sort of benefit from companies on social networks, such as 
product information, promotions and event announcements. There is still a huge opportunity 
for companies to get in touch with their customers: 58% have never experienced any action 
by a company or brand on social network sites; 36% of the social networkers in Europe post 
information about brands; 53% react to comments; and 51% ask for information. Consum-
ers prefer to react on brand updates rather than get into a dialogue with a brand. Content 
planning and regular content updates are one way to increase the engagement with fans. If 
people share information about a brand, company or product, it is often about the product or 
brand experience they have recently had. Recall that positive experiences dominate negative 
ones. One-third of European social networkers share much more than they did in the previous 
year. Again, the credibility of word of mouth is important. Consumers trust each other most. 
When people look for information on products, companies or brands, they tend to look for 
information coming from their peers. Positive brand experiences have the highest impact on 
brand perception and buying intention. Use your own employees as brand ambassadors.212
To conclude, there are five key success factors for a company or brand to be social:213
1.	 Be active. Social media are about sharing, interaction and engaging. If you want to 
develop a relationship with consumers, it is advisable to take the lead and to be active.
2.	 Be interesting. If you would like your customers to engage with you, you need to give them 
a reason for doing so. You must do better than just saying you are the best. An important 
start is to listen to what your consumers want to hear and what they want to talk about. 
What topics or approach would be interesting for your consumers?
3.	 Be humble. Before entering into social media you have to take some time to discover them 
and learn about their history and basic rules.
4.	 Be unprofessional. Avoid over-professional content and behave as a friend, not as a brand 
or a company.
5.	 Be honest. Respect the rules of the game. If companies are not allowed to participate (as 
on Wikipedia) do not force your way in.
In the past decades, the importance of electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) has grown substantially, partly because 
of the popularity of social network sites such as Facebook, Twitter and YouTube. Through social network sites, users 
can freely communicate with each other about a wide range of brands or products, exchange their experiences 
Research insight
The importance of homophily, tie strength and source credibility on consumer 
responses to eWOM messages on social network sites

308     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
Virtual worlds
Virtual worlds are platforms that replicate a 3-D environment in which users can appear in 
the form of personalised avatars and interact with each other as they would in real life. In 
this sense, virtual worlds are probably the ultimate manifestation of social media, as they 
provide the highest level of social presence and media richness. Virtual worlds require their 
users to behave according to strict rules in the context of a massively multiplayer online 
role-playing game (MMORPG). Since standard game consoles like Microsoft’s Xbox and 
Sony’s PlayStation allow simultaneous play among a multitude of users around the globe, in 
recent years these virtual game worlds have gained popularity. The world’s most subscribed 
MMORPG is the cod-mediaeval ‘World of Warcraft’, which had around 10 million active 
subscribers in December 2014. The number of subscribers dropped to 5.5 million in October 
2015.222 The rules of such games are very strict, which limits the degree of self-presentation 
and self-disclosure. Similar to the idea of product placement in movies, brands can have 
in-game advertising as well as leverage the high popularity of virtual game worlds in more 
and make informed purchase decisions.214 eWOM can be defined as ‘any positive or negative statement made by 
potential, actual or former customers about a product or company, which is made available to a multitude of people 
and institutions via the Internet’.215 Recent research shows that 69% of consumers trust online opinions posted by 
other consumers.216 An estimated 70% of consumers visit a social website for information.217
Research on offline social interactions and identification has identified three aspects that determine the responses 
to interpersonal communications: homophily (the extent to which individuals are alike), tie strength (the strength of 
interpersonal relations) and source credibility.218 Brown, Broderick and Lee219 have translated these aspects to online 
social networks, claiming that, in an online environment, individuals develop relationships with the (social network) 
site on which they are communicating rather than with individuals using the site.
In an online study with 795 participants, it was studied to what extent interpersonal and person-to-site relational 
aspects (homophily, tie strength, and source credibility) affect consumers’ intentions to watch a recommended movie 
and to recommend it to others (positive eWOM message on Facebook). Additionally it was tested to what extent 
these effects are moderated by Facebook experience. Brown, Broderick and Lee220 suggest that more experience 
with the social network site might result in a different, more systematic, information evaluation process. Effects of 
interpersonal and person-to-site effects may be different depending on the experience of network users.
The study exposed individuals to a fictitious Facebook wall post about a movie. In order to induce variance in 
perceived interpersonal homophily, tie strength and source credibility, a 2 (interpersonal homophily: low, high) 
* 2 (interpersonal tie strength: low, high) * 2 (person source credibility: low, high) full-factorial between-subjects 
design was created. To manipulate perceived interpersonal homophily, four items were used: the number of ‘likes’ 
the respondent supposedly has in common with the person (zero vs 18), the person’s home town (Brisbane, Australia 
vs Antwerp, Belgium), age (43 vs 23), and place of education (Deakin University vs Antwerp University) (the majority 
of participants were students at Antwerp University in Belgium). Three items were used to manipulate perceived 
interpersonal tie strength: the number of common friends (2 vs 47), the number of common pictures (zero vs 53) 
and the number of wall posts shared (zero vs 49). Finally, three items were used to manipulate perceived source 
credibility: the person’s profession (interior decorator vs film critic), hobbies (reading books vs watching movies) 
and the number of movies the person reported to have seen that year (in the post) (3 vs 116). The positive eWOM 
message and other items on the page were identical in all eight conditions. Respondents were randomly assigned to 
one of the eight experimental conditions. Perceived homophily, tie strength and source credibility were measured 
both for the person that posted the message and for Facebook in general. Also Facebook experience was measured. 
Participants were also asked whether they would watch the movie and recommend it to others.
The results show that the interpersonal relational aspects have a stronger effect on outcomes than person-to-
site relational aspects, although person-to-site credibility also has a significant positive effect on positive word of 
mouth intentions. Furthermore, the effects of interpersonal homophily and interpersonal tie strength are moderated 
by Facebook experience. For users with more experience on Facebook the effect of interpersonal homophily on 
behavioural intentions decreases. The effect of interpersonal tie strength on behavioural intentions, on the other 
hand, increases when the user has more experience with Facebook.221

RELATIONSHIP MARKETING AND THE INTERNET     309
traditional communications campaigns. Japanese automotive giant Toyota used pictures 
and mechanics from the ‘World of Warcraft’ application in its Tundra commercial to reach 
the 2.5 million players in the USA alone.223
Relationship marketing and the Internet
The basis of loyalty programmes consists of collecting data that are related to the customers’ 
behaviour. What kind of customers are they? What do they ask for? What do they buy? What 
interests do they have and how can online communications be tailored to their wants? Cus-
tomer profiles drive what the website looks like, which emails customers receive, what kind 
of offers they receive, etc. The Web is not about fragmenting audiences but about creating 
one-to-one relationships for marketers and increasing the bond between consumers and pro-
ducers. Database applications, like collaborative filtering used by Amazon.com, focus on cus-
tomer retention rather than acquisition. The Internet is well suited for the evolution towards 
an individualised, tailored value proposition. It offers addressability, two-way continuous 
interactivity, customisation capabilities, on-demand availability and seamless transactions. 
Marketers can leverage interactive media to identify self-selected users, enhance loyalty by 
providing value-added services, use what they learn about their customers to customise exist-
ing products or create new products and services, and start an ongoing online communication 
with customers. Email communications with customers are more personal and intimate than 
the traditional letter with glossy brochure. When a customer sends an email to a company, the 
person who replies to the email suddenly becomes the representative for the whole company.224
Relationship marketing is all about building confidence and growing the relationship. 
Make your consumers ‘feel’ they can count on you, and then deliver. Because we live in a 
digital world this relationship is more and more created and supported via the tools provided 
by social media. A formula for success includes building a quality online community. Use 
and select carefully social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, LinkedIn, 
etc., as they will help in promoting your brand. Offer quality content on blog posts. Above 
all be consistent in your brand message and offer value. Be honest and passionate about your 
brand and care about your fans and followers. Listen to your current and potential custom-
ers and offer solutions to their problems, needs or interests. Once the relationship is solid 
you can reach out to your friends, followers and fans by giving them clear offers or calls to 
action. Maintain a consistent style, using personal and promotional content. Integrate offline 
activities to optimise online, like networking, joining relevant groups, and be accessible.
The use of loyalty programmes can be very successful. Identify advocates of your brand 
and get them to help in promoting your products and services. Encourage them to share 
their product experiences with their networks, interact with them regularly, swap tips and 
ask for their advice. This is again a form of relationship-based marketing. And do not forget 
to reward your brand advocates even if it is simply thanking them publicly with a Tweet 
or Facebook post. Relationship marketing is the new currency of business but also via the 
Internet it takes time and effort.225
The essence of CRM is to have a single comprehensive database with a complete history 
of the prospect or customer that can be accessed from any of the customer touchpoints 
(sales, call centre, personalised website and customer service).226 Dell provides a Premier 
Pages service for its corporate clients. Premier Pages are sites dedicated to a particular 
customer and only accessible to that customer. Each dedicated site holds a record of all 
previous interactions between the customer and Dell and can be used to communicate with 
the customer and inform him or her about exclusive offers. The collaborative software that 
Amazon.com, the online book and CD retailer, uses allows communication of personalised 
advice on products that the software predicts to be interesting for a certain customer.227 
LivePerson software (www.liveperson.com) offers website integration with live customer 
service representatives in real time.228

310     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
Personalisation and relevance are an integral part of the new loyalty. A study released 
in 2015 by the CMO Council found that 54% of people would defect from their loyalty 
programme if it didn’t give them tailor-made and relevant offers. In that same study, 20% 
of consumers also stated that they had never received tailor-made communication from any 
brand. 73% of consumers even stated that they had received one-size-fits all promos for prod-
ucts or services they already have.229 Loyalty is going further than creating repeat purchases. 
It should now focus on creating experiences that consumers want to share with friends. 
Rewarding engagement and using social currency instead of basic points for purchase.230
With consumers’ increasing use of social network sites, such as Facebook, Twitter and YouTube, advertising on these plat-
forms has also increased.231 Research suggests that social network sites can be an interesting platform for firms to reach 
their target group: firms are able to target specific consumer groups at lower cost and with higher speed.232 Globally, 
advertising in social media reached about $9 billion in 2013.233 In the US alone, social advertising revenues are expected 
to grow from $4.7 billion in 2012 to $11 billion in 2017, representing a compound annual growth rate of 18.6%.234
One of the advantages of advertising in online social network sites is that advertising messages can be sent to 
specific targets on the basis of their disclosed interests and demographics.235 Personalised advertising can be defined 
as advertising that is tailored to an individual’s characteristics and/or interests or tastes.236 As consumers share a great 
deal of personal information (profile information, social relationships, interests and behaviour) on social network 
sites, marketers can use this information to personalise their advertising messages on social network sites to a great 
extent. This makes social network sites a very relevant context to study the effect of advertising personalisation 
on customer responses. Research in other digital media shows that personalisation can generate more favourable 
consumer responses because it increases the personal relevance of an ad.237
Two experiments were set up, set in a Facebook context, the purpose of which was to investigate how advertis-
ing personalisation impacts consumer responses (attitude towards the brand and click intention) to advertisements 
on social networking sites and the role of perceived ad relevance as a mediator between ad personalisation on 
social network sites and consumer responses; additionally, the moderating role of the attitude towards the site on 
the relationship between ad personalisation and consumer responses. In the first experiment, 155 individuals were 
exposed to a fictitious Facebook home page, showing either generic or a gender-specific message promoting a 
fictitious brand of perfume. In the gender-specific condition, male participants saw a ‘male’ message (‘For men with 
confidence’), while female participants saw the message ‘For women with confidence’. In a second experiment with 
153 participants, the study was replicated, but this time for a fictitious brand of vacuum cleaner.
The results show that perceived personalisation of the message improves responses towards Facebook ads, 
through perceived relevance. In the second experiment, the positive effect of perceived personalisation of Facebook 
advertisements on click intention was stronger for participants with a more positive attitude towards Facebook.238
Research insight
How consumers respond to personalised advertising on social network sites
Summary
In large parts of Europe, the Internet reaches more than 80% of the population. Mobile and 
smartphone penetration is increasing month after month, and connected TV is expected 
to penetrate further within a few years. As a consequence, consumers’ media attention 
is fragmenting and marketers will have to follow them into the new digital media. They 
therefore employ a number of e-marketing tactics that all contribute to the communica-
tions objectives: creating brand awareness, shaping brand attitudes, generating trial and 
sustaining loyalty. Brand websites are essential for most brands to support brand image and 

FURTHER READING     311
communicate with customers. Merely having a website is not enough, and other offline and 
online advertising tools such as search engine optimisation will be required to drive traffic to 
the site. Because of the time and budget involved, more and more companies tend to create 
temporary mini-sites called micro-sites to draw users and bring a new product or service 
to their attention. Online advertising is on the rise in Europe with video and mobile as the 
segments that are increasing the most, and new ad formats regularly see the light. Keyword 
buying and content sponsorship are formats that are known to work on their strengths, i.e. 
relevance to the target group. Ad types that are very popular due to their customer engage-
ment and impact are advergames or online games. Although the cost of this kind of inter-
active advertising tends to be much higher than for other ad formats, the interaction time 
leads to a higher brand immersion. Related to these games are viral marketing actions, which 
make good use of the network characteristics of the net community, online contests, and 
e-sampling and e-couponing, which have a number of advantages over their offline counter-
parts. The same is true for email marketing, the digital form of direct marketing communi-
cations, which has recently been joined by action-driven mobile marketing communications 
to the mobile phones of consumers. The rise in social digital TV is giving marketers new 
opportunities. Finally, the Internet, as an intrinsically interactive medium, can also be used 
to develop and sustain customer relationships, for instance via customer service pages on 
the Net or virtual communities. The participation of the consumer in the dialogue between 
brand or company and consumers via the different social media networks such as Facebook, 
Instagram, Pinterest and Twitter is of massive importance to the marketer.
Review questions
	 1.	 How is the Internet and online advertising market in Europe evolving?
	 2.	 How can a brand or company website contribute to a marketing communications plan?
	 3.	 Discuss the different kinds of online advertising and compare them in terms of 
performance.
	 4.	 What other e-marketing communications tools are available? For which communications 
objective would you choose them?
	 5.	 What is meant by ‘viral marketing’?
	 6.	 What are the dos and don’ts of email marketing?
	 7.	 Explain the added value of mobile marketing to an e-marketing plan.
	 8.	 How can marketers benefit from a new evolution such as social television?
	 9.	 How can social media help to build a relationship with customers?
Further reading
Burger, N. (2012) Paid. Owned. Earned. Maximising Marketing Returns in a Socially Con-
nected World. London: Kogan Page.
Grant, L. (2016) Digital Selling: How to Use Social Media and the Web to Generate Leads 
and Sell More. London: Kogan Page.
Metz, A. (2012) The Social Customer: How Brands Can Use Social CRM to Acquire, Mon-
etize, and Retain Fans, Friends and Followers. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Piskorski, M.J. (2014) A Social Strategy: How We Profit from Social Media. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Van Bockel, H. (2014) The Social Brand. Transform Your Brand to Win in the Social Era. 
New Jersey: The Social Publishing House.

312     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
Source: Steven Huyers, Brand manager VIER.
A personal approach was needed to make this campaign 
work. In order to create a real stalker-feeling, the campaign 
even had to be a little bit too personal. VIER visited as many 
people’s profiles on LinkedIn as possible. They visited the 
personal professional LinkedIn profiles of the target group, 
who in this way felt directly spoken to. Apart from feeling 
slightly scared, the target group also felt honoured, that a 
television channel chose their personal profile to visit.
4. Results
The ‘Stalker-viewed-your-profile’ campaign was meant as 
a word-of-mouth direct communication approach on top 
of the classic bannering in the papers. Stalker viewed about  
12 000 different LinkedIn profiles; 63% got curious and 
viewed Stalker’s profile in return. Without having a Twitter 
account of its own, Stalker organically generated around  
27 600 Twitter impressions. Stalker had a market share 
of 17.3% on the Flemish Belgian television, which is 2.9% 
higher than the average program on VIER.
Questions
1.	 Assess the approach of VIER: what are the strengths and 
why?
2.	 Did VIER make use of online and social media well? 
Why? Or why not?
3.	 Which other online communication tools could VIER 
have used for the Stalker show?
4.	 Suppose you had to make an offline or online commu-
nication plan for a TV-series like Stalker. Which media 
would you use the most?
5.	 Would you consider mobile marketing for this type of 
age group and content? Why or why not?
1. Situation
The Belgian television channel VIER is positioned as a chan-
nel with a good sense of humour and appeals to a well-
educated public. Their average market share is 14.4%. On 
Sunday evenings VIER broadcasts various crime series like 
Castle, The Blacklist or Elementary in succession. Recently, 
VIER added Stalker to the schedule. In order to get attention 
for the premiere of Stalker, they wanted to reach their target 
group in a new, direct way and create substantial buzz with 
a very small budget. This way VIER hoped to snatch some 
market share of the bigger market players.
2. Target audience
The general target audience of VIER are Dutch speaking Bel-
gians aged 18 to 54. The larger part of that target audience 
are highly educated people. They are both loyal and critical 
to VIER. They are active on social media like Facebook, but 
also on Twitter and LinkedIn. They have a wide interest, are 
clever and have a good sense of humour. Therefore, VIER 
selected LinkedIn as the promotion channel for Stalker.
3. Creative execution
LinkedIn is a business network. Yet, it also has a creepy side: 
the ‘who’s viewed your profile’ feature. VIER used this function-
ality to announce the launch of Stalker. VIER created a fictional 
LinkedIn profile for Stalker and stalked as many people as pos-
sible, simply by viewing their profile. All those people directly 
received a notification that a certain Stalker had viewed their 
personal profile. When the ‘victims’ had a look at the profile 
of Stalker, they found all the broadcast info, an exclusive trailer 
and some personal yet very disturbing details. After one day, 
LinkedIn removed the Stalker-profile. But that did not hold 
VIER back. They created even more profiles and kept on creat-
ing new Stalker profiles each time LinkedIn kicked them off. 
The professional context of LinkedIn was in nice contrast with 
the entertainment level of the Stalker-campaign.
Case 6:
VIER ‘Stalker’

REFERENCES     313
1	 http://www.gsmamobileeconomy.com/GSMA_Global_
Mobile_Economy_Report_2015.pdf (accessed 31 Octo-
ber 2015).
2	 Butterfield, L. (2003) AdValue: Twenty Ways Advertising 
Works for Business. Oxford: Butterworth–Heinemann.
3	 Based on Internet Domain Survey Host Count (January 
2012), https://www.isc.org/solutions/survey (accessed 
May 2012).
4	 Samiee, S. (1998) ‘The Internet and international mar-
keting: is there a fit?’, Journal of Interactive Marketing, 
12(4), 5–21.
5	 Peters, L. (1998) ‘The new interactive media: one-to-one, 
but who to whom?’, Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 
16(1), 22–30.
6	 https://www.verisigninc.com/en_US/internet-technol-
ogy-news/verisign-press-releases/articles/index.xhtml?
artLink=aHR0cDovL3ZlcmlzaWduLm13bmV3c3Jvb2
0uY29tL2FydGljbGUvcnNzP2lkPTE5NjMzMDc%3D 
(accessed 28 July 2015).
7	 Based on www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm 
(accessed 30 October 2015).
8	 http://www.iabeurope.eu/news/digital-advertising-
spend-edges-closer-tv-iab-europe-adex-be (accessed 31 
October 2015).
9	 http://www.iab.net/media/file/IAB_Internet_Advertis-
ing_Revenue_FY_2014.pdf (accessed 30 October 2015).
10	 www.iabeurope.eu (accessed 2 October 2012).
11	 De Wulf, K., Van den Bergh, J., Vergult, C. and De Boek, 
F. (2003) ‘Using Internet marketing tactics to support 
FMCG brands: an overview of lessons learned’, White 
Paper published by InSites Consulting, http://www.
insites-consulting.com.
12	 https://www.contagious.io/articles/fun-subscriptions 
(accessed 30 September 2015).
13	 http://www.catchthemagichour.com accessed (accessed 
30 August 2015).
14	 Reicheld, F. and Schefter, P. (2000) ‘E-loyalty, your secret 
weapon on the web’, Harvard Business Review, July/
August, 105–13.
15	 www.catchthemagichour.com (accessed 29 August 2015)
16	 http://www.rambla.be/absynthe-minded-launches-most-
exclusive-video-ever (accessed 2 October 2012).
17	 http://dominospizzaschool.com/ (accessed 14 August 
2015)
18	 http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/search-and-
email/report.aspx (accessed 2 October 2012).
19	 Strauss, J., El-Ansary, A. and Frost, R. (2008) E-Market-
ing, 5th edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
20	 www.emarketer.com (accessed 28 July 2015).
21	 http://www.digitalstrategyconsulting.com/intelli-
gence/2012/04/size_matters_large_ads_boost_b.php 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
22	 Adams, R. (2003) Advertising and Marketing on the 
World Wide Web. Cambridge: Ilex Press.
23	 http://www.gazelleinteractive.com/gulf-stream-gear-
case-study/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
24	 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affiliate_marketing 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
25	 http://david-r-wetzel.suite101.com/best-affiliate-market-
ing-networks-a58383 (accessed June 2009).
26	 http://www.smartinsights.com/digital-marketing-strat-
egy/online-business-revenue-models/amazon-case-study/ 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
27	 Strauss, J., El-Ansary, A. and Frost, R. (2008) E-Market-
ing, 5th edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
28	 http://www.smartinsights.com/digital-marketing-strat-
egy/online-business-revenue-models/amazon-case-study/ 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
29	 http://www.pwc.com/en_GX/gx/entertainment-media/
pdf/IAB_SRI_Online_Advertising_Effectiveness_v3.pdf 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
30	 http://www.aimia.com.au/enews/IAB/IAB%20
Retail%20Study%20-%20Finalv3.pdf (accessed 2 Octo-
ber 2012).
31	 http://www.iabuk.net/video/starbucks-building-brands-
online-trilogy, http://www.iabuk.net/sites/default/files/
research-docs/research_starbucksresultssummary_8217.
pdf (accessed 2 October 2012).
32	 Weima, K.W. (2002) Webvertising: Tools voor een Effec-
tieve Campagne (Tools for an Effective Campaign). 
Alphen aan den Rijn: Kluwer.
33	 http://www.bizreport.com/2010/03/nai_behaviorally-
targeted_online_ads_twice_as_effective.html (accessed 
2 October 2012).
34	 Allen, C., Kania, D. and Yaeckel, B. (2001) One-to-One 
Web Marketing: Build a Relationship Marketing Strategy 
One Customer at a Time. New York: Wiley Computer 
Publications.
35	 http://www.emarketer.com/Webinar/Creating-Ads-on-
FlyNew-Opportunities-Programmatic/4000117 (accessed 
14 September 2015).
36	 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Programmatic-Video-
Takes-Bite-of-Budgets/1012614#sthash.F0lTuXDQ.dpuf 
(accessed 18 September 2015).
37	 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SlideShare (accessed 2 
October 2012).
38	 www.newzoo.nl (accessed 2 October 2012).
39	 https://www.contagious.io/articles/catch-that-dragon 
(accessed 30 July 2015).
40	 www.contagious.com (accessed 24 July 2015).
41	 https://www.contagious.io/articles/moneymaking-
sounds (accessed 24 July 2015).
42	 http://www.digitalstrategyconsulting.com/netimperative/
news/2012/05/guest_comment_lifes_a_game_and_1.php 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
43	 Herrewijn, L. and Poels, K. (2014) ‘Getting involved with 
in-game advertising: the impact of game story and inter-
activity on in-game advertising effectiveness’, Proceed-
ings of the 2014 ICORIA conference, Amsterdam.
References

314     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
44	 DFC Intelligence (2014) ‘DFC intelligence forecasts 
global video game industry to reach $96b in 2018’, http://
www.dfcint.com/wp/?p=358 (accessed 20 April 2014).
45	 Nelson, M.R., Yaros, R.E. and Heejo, K. (2006) ‘Examin-
ing the influence of telepresence on spectator and player 
processing of real and fictitious brands in a computer 
game’, Journal of Advertising 35(4), 87–99.
46	 DFC Intelligence (2011) ‘DFC intelligence forecasts 
global advertising in video games to reach $7.2 billion 
in 2016’, http://www.dfcint.com/wp/?p=315 (accessed 20 
April 2014).
47	 eMarketer (2013) ‘Mobile game monetization: a vir-
tual gold rush’, http://www.theesa.com/wp-content/
uploads/2015/04/ESA-Essential-Facts-2015.pdf
48	 Poels, K., Janssens, W. and Herrewijn, L. (2013) ‘Play 
buddies or space invaders? Players’ attitudes toward 
in-game advertising’, Journal of Advertising, 42(2–3), 
204–18.
49	 Schultze, U. and Rennecker, J. (2007) ‘Refraining online 
games’, Virtuality and Virtualization: Springer, 335–51.
50	 Nelson, M.R. (2002) ‘Recall of brand placements in com-
puter/video games’, Journal of Advertising Research, 
42(2), 80–92; Poels, K., Janssens, W. and Herrewijn, L. 
(2013) ‘Play buddies or space invaders? Players’ attitudes 
toward in-game advertising’, Journal of Advertising, 
42(2–3), 204–18.
51	 Chang, Y., Yan, J., Zhang, J. and Luo, J. (2010) ‘Online 
in-game advertising effect: examining the influence of a 
match between games and advertising’, Journal of Inter-
active Advertising, 11(1), 63–73; Huang, J.-H. and Yang, 
T.-K. (2012) ‘The effectiveness of in-game advertising: 
the impacts of ad type and game/ad relevance’, Inter-
national Journal of Electronic Business Management, 
10(1), 61–72.
52	 Edwards, S.M, Li, H. and Lee, J.-H. (2005) ‘Forced 
exposure and psychological reactance’, Advertising, 
Promotion, and New Media, 215; Lewis, B. and Porter, 
L. (2010) ‘In-game advertising effects: examining player 
perceptions of advertising schema congruity in a mas-
sively multiplayer online role-playing game’, Journal of 
Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 46–60.
53	 Edwards, S.M, Li, H., and Lee, J.-H. (2005) ‘Forced expo-
sure and psychological reactance’, Advertising, Promo-
tion, and New Media, 215; Ying, L., Korneliussen, T. and 
Grønhaug, K. (2009) ‘The effect of ad value, ad place-
ment and ad execution on the perceived intrusiveness of 
web advertisements’, International Journal of Advertis-
ing, 28(4), 623–38.
54	 Busselle, R. and Bilandzic, H. (2008) ‘Fictionality and 
perceived realism in experiencing stories: a model of nar-
rative comprehension and engagement’, Communication 
Theory, 18(2), 255–80.
55	 Lewis, B. and Porter, L. (2010) ‘In-game advertising 
effects: examining player perceptions of advertising 
schema congruity in a massively multiplayer online role-
playing game’, Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 
46–60.
56	 Busselle, R., and Bilandzic, H. (2008) ‘Fictionality and 
perceived realism in experiencing stories: a model of nar-
rative comprehension and engagement’, Communication 
Theory, 18(2), 255–80.
57	 McMillan, S.J. and Hwang, J.-S. (2002) ‘Measures of per-
ceived interactivity: an exploration of the role of direc-
tion of communication, user control, and time in shaping 
perceptions of interactivity’, Journal of Advertising, 
29–42; Jee, J. and Lee, W.-N. (2002) ‘Antecedents and 
consequences of perceived interactivity: an exploratory 
study’, Journal of Interactive Advertising, 3(1), 34–45.
58	 Besharat, A., Kumar, A., Lax, J.R. and Rydzik, E.J. 
(2013) ‘Leveraging virtual attribute experience in video 
games to improve brand recall and learning’, Journal of 
Advertising, 42(2–3), 170–82.
59	 Herrewijn, L. and Poels, K. (2014) ‘Getting involved with 
in-game advertising: the impact of game story and inter-
activity on in-game advertising effectiveness’, Proceed-
ings of the 2014 ICORIA conference, Amsterdam.
60	 Verberckmoes, S., Poels, K., De Pelsmacker, P., Dens, 
N. and Herrewijn, L. (2015) ‘In-game advertising in 
multi-player online role playing games: the effects of 
customization’, Proceedings Etmaal van de Communi-
catiewetenschap, Antwerpen.
61	 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foursquare, https://four-
square.com/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
62	 http://www.digitalstrategyconsulting.com/netimperative/
news/2012/05/guest_comment_lifes_a_game_and_1.php 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
63	 Abcnews.com, November 2002.
64	 Kretchmer, S.B. (2001) ‘The emergent advergames 
industry: developments, impact, and direction’, http://
www.cric.ac.uk/cric/events/dgi/abstracts/kretchmer.htm 
(accessed July 2009).
65	 Calvert, S.L. (2008) ‘Children as consumers: advertising 
and marketing’, The Future of Children, 18(1), 205–34.
66	 Cebrzynski, G. (2006) ‘Lights! Camera! Product place-
ment!’, Nation’s Restaurant News, 40(49), 1–5.
67	 Raney, A.A., Arpan, L.M., Pashupati, K. and Brill, D.A. 
(2003) ‘At the movies, on the web: an investigation of the 
effects of entertaining and interactive web content on site 
and brand evaluations’, Journal of Interactive Market-
ing, 17(4), 38–53.
68	 Friestad, M. and Wright, P. (1995) ‘Persuasion knowledge 
– lay peoples’ and researchers’ beliefs about the psychol-
ogy of advertising’, Journal of Consumer Research, 
22(1), 62–74.
69	 Neuborne, E. (2001) ‘Viral marketing alert!’, Business 
Week, 19 March.
70	 http://www.psfk.com/report/mobile-commerce-play-
book (accessed 29 July 2015).
71	 http://www.psfk.com/report/mobile-commerce-play-
book (accessed2 29 July 2015).
72	 https://www.contagious.io/articles/living-with-lag 
(accessed 10 August 2015).
73	 https://www.contagious.io/articles/love-has-no-labels 
(accessed 7 August 2015).

REFERENCES     315
74	 http://adsoftheworld.com/media/ambient/kfc_romania_
fakation (accessed 14 August 2015).
75	 Krishnamurthy, S. (2000) ‘Is viral marketing all it’s 
cracked up to be?’, Clickz.com, www.clickz.com/mkt/
onl_mkt_comm/article.php/823941 (accessed June 2009).
76	 Jupiter MMX, 2002.
77	 DBT Database & Internet Solutions (2001) ‘Viral mar-
keting’, December, www.dbt.co.uk (accessed July 2003).
78	 http://www.slideshare.net/MichaelBouchier/wom-power 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
79	 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/How-Big-Influencers-
Influence/1012904#sthash.BucOVd8H.dpuf (accessed 3 
September 2015).
80	 Matos, C.A. and Rossi, C.A.V. (2008) ‘Word-of-mouth 
communications in marketing: a meta-analytic review of 
the antecedents and moderators’, Journal of the Acad-
emy of Marketing Science, 36(4), 578–96; Sweeney, J.C., 
Soutar, G.N. and Mazzarol, T. (2008) ‘Factors influenc-
ing word of mouth effectiveness: receiver perspectives’, 
European Journal of Marketing, 42(3/4) 344–64.
81	 Lee, J., Park, D.H. and Han, I. (2008) ‘The effect of nega-
tive online consumer reviews on product attitude: an infor-
mation processing view’, Electronic Commerce Research 
and Applications, 7(3) 341–52; Park, C. and Lee, T.M. 
(2009) ‘Antecedents of online reviews’ usage and purchase 
influence: an empirical comparison of US and Korean con-
sumers,’ Journal of Interactive Marketing, 23(4), 332–40.
82	 Winer, R.S. (2009) ‘New communications approaches 
in marketing: issues and research directions’, Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, 23(2), 108–17.
83	 Bronner, F. and de Hoog, R. (2010) ‘Consumer-generated 
versus marketer-generated websites in consumer decision 
making’, International Journal of Market Research, 
52(2), 231–48.
84	 Cheung, C.M.K., Lee, M.K.O. and Rabjohn, N. (2008) 
‘The impact of electronic word-of-mouth – the adop-
tion of online opinions in online customer communities’, 
Internet Research, 18(3), 229–47.
85	 Purnawirawan, N., De Pelsmacker, P. and Dens, N. (2012) 
‘Balance and sequence in online reviews: how perceived 
usefulness affects attitudes and intentions’, Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, 26(4), 244–55.
86	 Ahluwalia, R. and Gürhan-Canli, Z. (2000) ‘The effects 
of extensions on the family brand name: an accessibil-
ity-diagnosticity perspective’, Journal of  Consumer 
Research, 27(3), 371–81.
87	 Forman, C., Ghose, A. and Wiesenfeld, B. (2008) ‘Exam-
ining the relationship between reviews and sales: the role 
of reviewer identity disclosure in electronic markets’, 
SSRN eLibrary.
88	 Drèze, X. and Zufryden, F. (2004) ‘The measurement of 
online visibility and its impact on internet traffic’, Jour-
nal of Interactive Marketing, 18(1), 20–37.
89	 Buda, R. and Zhang, Y. (2000) ‘Consumer product evalu-
ation: the interactive effect of message framing, presen-
tation order, and source credibility’, Journal of Product 
and Brand Management, 9(4), 229–42.
90	 Purnawirawan, N.A., De Pelsmacker, P. and Dens, N. 
(2010) ‘Balance and sequence in online reviews: the 
wrap effect’, 9th International Conference on Research 
in Advertising (ICORIA) Proceedings, Madrid.
91	 Strauss, J., El-Ansary, A. and Frost, R. (2003) E-Market-
ing, 3rd edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
92	 http://www.digitalbuzzblog.com/heineken-limited-edi-
tion-bottles-via-facebook/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
93	 ‘Supermarket Sweep’, Advertising Age, Direct & Data-
base Supplement, 16 October 2000.
94	 http://www.chipotlefriendorfaux.com/ (accessed 13 
August 2015).
95	 Internet Sampling: Reaching Consumers (2001) Congress 
Presentation, 10th Annual Conference on Global Elec-
tronic Marketing (GEM), San Diego, CA.
96	 Strauss, J., El-Ansary, A. and Frost, R. (2008) E-Market-
ing, 5th edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
97	 http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/consumer/global-
consumers-go-sale-searching-and-coupon-clipping/ 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
98	 http://www.onlinemarketing-trends.com/2011/04/
rise-of-e-coupons-in-europe.html (accessed 2 October 
2012).
99	 http://mashable.com/2012/01/19/digital-coupon-trends/ 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
100	 https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/canon-camerawindow/
id501009725?mt=8 (accessed 5 August 2015).
101	 h t t p : / / w w w. ra d i c a t i . c o m / w p / w p - c o n t e n t /
uploads/2015/02/Email-Statistics-Report-2015-2019-Ex-
ecutive-Summary.pdf (accessed 5 August 2015).
102	 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Where-Do-Millenni-
als-Want-Talk-Retailers-Email/1012253#sthash.lhkA-
cYQx.dpuf (accessed 5 August 2015).
103	 IAB Belgium (2006) Email Marketing Cookbook. Zellik: 
Interactive Advertising Bureau.
104	 Chaffey, D., Ellis-Chadwick, F., Johnston, K. and Mayer 
R. (2008) Internet Marketing: Strategy, Implementation 
and Practice. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
105	 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Why-Do-Consumers-
Read-Retail-Promo-Emails/1012094#sthash.ZozcO6yY.
dpuf
106	 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Mobile-Remains-
Tops-Email-Opens-UK/1012690 (accessed 5 August 
2015).
107	 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Retailers-Same-Day-
Second-Emails-Effective/1012393#sthash.pGNvE7pV.
dpuf (accessed 5 August 2015).
108	 http://www.lyris.com/email-marketing/85-Average-
Email-Click-Through-Rate (accessed June 2009).
109	 Waring, T. and Martinez, A. (2002) ‘Ethical customer 
relationships: a comparative analysis of US and French 
organizations using permission-based e-mail marketing’, 
Journal of Database Marketing, 10(1), 53–69.
110	 Rapp, S. and Martin, C. (2001) Max-e-Marketing in 
the Net Future: The Seven Imperatives for Outsmart-
ing the Competition in the Net Economy. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.

316     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
111	 Furger, R. (2000) ‘E-mail’s second shot’, Upside, 12(4), 
160–8.
112	 Postma, O. and Brokke, M. (2002) ‘Personalisation in 
practice: the proven effects of personalisation’, Journal 
of Database Marketing, 9(2), 137–42.
113	 Strauss, J., El-Ansary, A. and Frost, R. (2008) E-Market-
ing, 5th edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
114	 Khera, R. (2002) ‘E-mail marketing primer: 12 tips for 
successful campaigns’, The Magazine for Magazine 
Management, 30(9), 53.
115	 eMarketer (2002) ‘Does permission e-mail marketing 
push consumers to purchase?’, eMarketer e-zine, Octo-
ber, 28.
116	 https://www.campaignmonitor.com/blog/post/4583/fri-
day-inspiration-topshop-email-marketing (accessed 13 
August 2015).
117	 www.psfk.com (accessed 5 August 2015)
118	 http://www.gsmamobileeconomy.com/GSMA_Global_
Mobile_Economy_Report_2015.pdf (accessed 8 August 
2015).
119	 http://www.gsmamobileeconomy.com/GSMA_Global_
Mobile_Economy_Report_2015.pdf (accessed 31 Octo-
ber 2015).
120	 http://www.ourmobileplanet.com/en-gb/downloads/ 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
121	 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mobile_apps (accessed 2 
October 2012).
122	 http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/online_mobile/state-
of-the-appnation-–-a-year-of-change-and-growth-in-u-s-
smartphones/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
123	 www.emarketer.com (accessed 2 October 2012).
124	 http://www.slideshare.net/InSitesConsulting/mobile-
mindset-report-by-insites-consulting (accessed 2 October 
2012).
125	 https://www.lsnglobal.com/seed/article/16764/a-christ-
mas-story-burberry-creates-interactive-display-in-paris-
ian-department-store (accessed 31 October 2015)
126	 http://blogs.thisplays2.com/narrowcasting/, http://www.
yourdailymac.net/2012/04/delhaize-launches-virtual-
shopping-concept-direct-cube/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
127	 http://www.digitalbuzzblog.com/ing-the-free-throw-
challenge-digital-billboards/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
128	 http://www.brandactivation.nl/node/1286 (accessed 2 
October 2012).
129	 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Mobile-Account-
More-than-Half-of-Digital-Ad-Spending-2015/1012930 
(accessed 2 November 2015).
130	 http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/online_mobile/new-
mobile-obsession-u-s-teens-triple-data-usage/ (accessed 
2 October 2012).
131	 Based on: de Kerckhoven A. (July–September 2002) 
‘Building brand dialogue with mobile marketing’, Adver-
tising & Marketing to Children, World Advertising 
Research Center; Jones, A. (2002) ‘Wireless marketing: 
the linking value of text messaging’, Young Consumers, 
3(2), 39–44.
132	 http://www.techipedia.com/2011/sms-marketing/, 
http://www.punchkickinteractive.com/services/
sms-text-messaging-campaigns/ (accessed 2 October 
2012).
133	 Based on: de Kerckhoven A. (July–September 2002) 
‘Building brand dialogue with mobile marketing’, 
Advertising & Marketing to Children, World Advertis-
ing Research Center; and on Jones, A. (January–March 
2002) ‘Wireless marketing: the linking value of text mes-
saging’, Advertising & Marketing to Children, World 
Advertising Research Center.
134	 https://www.thenetset.com/ (accessed 10 August 2015).
135	 http://www.psfk.com/report/mobile-commerce-play-
book (accessed 5 August 2015).
136	 MMA (2008) ‘Global code of conduct’, http://www.mma-
global.com/codeofconduct.pdf (accessed May 2012).
137	 Wise, T. and Hall, D. (2002) ‘Pause or play? The future of 
interactive services for television’, Accenture.
138	 http://www.i-policy.org/2012/02/dutch-digital-tv-pene-
tration-reaches-729.html (accessed 2 October 2012).
139	 Lekakos, G. (2002) An Integrated Approach to Interactive 
and Personalized TV Advertising. Athens: University of 
Economics and Business.
140	 Bernoff, J. (2002) ‘Smarter television’, The Forrester 
Report (July).
141	 http://mashable.com/2011/06/15/free-whopper-tv-cam-
paign/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
142	 http://www.itvmedia.co.uk/insights-and-effectiveness/
case-studies/building-awareness/yeo-valley-case-study 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
143	 www.frankwatching.com, ‘Cross media café digital TV 
the Netherlands’ (March 2009).
144	 http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/
docs/2011/audiovisual/green_paper_COM2011_427_
en.pdf (accessed 2 October 2012).
145	 http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/
docs/2011/audiovisual/green_paper_COM2011_427_
en.pdf (accessed 2 October 2012).
146	 http://www.worldtvpc.com/blog/connected-tv-sales-
europe-booming/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
147	 http://www.broadbandtvnews.com/2011/11/01/con-
nected-tvs-will-reach-20-penetra/ (accessed 2 October 
2012).
148	 http://www.marketingweek.co.uk/double-your-impact-
with-two-screens/3030126.article (accessed 2 October 
2012).
149	 http://www.iabeurope.eu/research/mediascope-europe/
mediascope-key-findings-2012.aspx (accessed 2 October 
2012).
150	 http://www.brandchannel.com/images/papers/530_
futurescape_wp_connected_tv_0911.pdf (accessed 2 
October 2012).
151	 http://socialtvworldsummit.com/social-tv-gaining-rele-
vance/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
152	 http://www.brandchannel.com/images/papers/530_
futurescape_wp_connected_tv_0911.pdf (accessed 2 
October 2012).
153	 Decrem, B. (2006) ‘Introducing Flock Beta 1’, Flock offi-
cial blog, http://www.flock.com/node/4500 (accessed 
June 2009).

REFERENCES     317
154	 http://michaelhaenlein.com/Publications/Kaplan,%20
Andreas%20-%20Users%20of%20the%20world,%20
unite.pdf (accessed 2 October 2012).
155	 http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/online_mobile/buzz-
in-the-blogosphere-millions-more-bloggers-and-blog-
readers/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
156	 http://www.cbsnews.com/news/chiara-ferragni-fashion-
blogger-became-8-million-dollar-business/ (accessed 30 
October 2015)
157	 http://technorati.com/social-media/article/state-of-the-
blogosphere-2011-part1/page-2/#ixzz1wpZSNBEO 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
158	 ‘Invisible Marketing: what every organization needs to 
know in the era of blogs, social networks and Web 2.0’, 
White Paper, www.marqui.com/resources/whitepapers.
159	 http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/08/19/mobile-messag-
ing-and-social-media-2015/ (accessed 30 October 2015).
160	 http://www.edisonresearch.com/the-podcast-con-
sumer-2016/ (accessed 28 May 2016).
161	 http://www.bookcrossing.com/about (accessed 2 Octo-
ber 2012).
162	 http://www.slideshare.net/about (accessed 2 October 
2012).
163	 http://advertising.yahoo.com/article/flickr.html (accessed 
2 October 2012).
164	 https://business.instagram.com/ (accessed 1 November 
2015)
165	 http://brandisaction.com/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
166	 http://www.businessinsider.com/these-brands-are-doing-
amazing-things-with-instagram-2012-6#burberry-5 
(accessed 2 October 2012); http://web.stagram.com/n/
burberry/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
167	 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Targeting-Teens-on-
Instagram/1012354#sthash.9xaYXPcO.dpuf (accessed 1 
November 2015).
168	 http://instagram-static.s3.amazonaws.com/BenAndJer-
rys_CaseStudy_FINAL.pdf (accessed 8 August 2015).
169	 http://instagram-static.s3.amazonaws.com/MB_CaseS-
tudy_FINAL1.pdf (accessed 8 August 2015).
170	 Roehm, M.L., Roehm, H.A., Jr and Boone, D.S. (2004) 
‘Plugs versus placements: a comparison of alternatives 
for within-program brand exposure’, Psychology & Mar-
keting, 21(1), 17–28.
171	 PQMedia (2010) ‘Global branded entertainment mar-
keting forecast 2010–2014’, http://www.pqmedia.com/
brandedentertainmentforecast2010-read.html (accessed 
2 October 2012).
172	 Krishnamurthy, S. and Dou, W. (2008) ‘Advertising 
with user-generated content: a framework and research 
agenda’, Journal of Interactive Advertising, 8(2), 1–4.
173	 Winer, R. (2009) ‘New communications approaches in 
marketing: issues and research directions’, Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, 23, 108–17.
174	 McCarty, J.A. (2004) ‘Product placement: the nature of 
the practice and potential avenues for inquiry’, in Shrum, 
L.J. (ed.), The Psychology of Entertainment Media: Blur-
ring the Lines between Entertainment and Persuasion. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 45–61.
175	 Balasubramanian, S.K., Karrh, J.A. and Patwardhan, 
H. (2006) ‘Audience response to product placements: an 
integrative framework and future research agenda’, Jour-
nal of Advertising, 35(3), 115–41.
176	 De Pelsmacker, P., Wouters, M., Purnawirawan, N. and 
Dens, N. (2011) ‘I see you, but I don’t like you: consumer 
responses to prominence and plot connection for brands 
placed in movies’, Proceedings of the 40th European 
Marketing Academy Conference, Ljubljana.
177	 h ttp : / / w w w. ti m e . c o m / ti m e / m ag a z i n e / a r t i -
cle/0,9171,2104815-8,00.html (accessed 2 October 2012).
178	 http://www.onehourpersecond.com/ (accessed 2 October 
2012).
179	 http://www.socialbakers.com/youtube-statistics/ 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
180	 Shields M. (2014) ‘Tweens love YouTube, even though 
it’s not for kids’, 1 December 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com/
cmo/2014/12/01/tweens-love-youtube-even-though-its-
not-for-kids/ (accessed 9 July 2015).
181	 Kemp N. (2015) ‘Five marketing lessons from generation 
YouTube’, 3 March, http://www.marketingmagazine.
co.uk/article/1335724/five-marketing-lessons-generation-
youtube (accessed 18 May 2015).
182	 http://vimeo.com/blog/post:468, http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Vimeo (accessed 2 October 2012).
183	 http://expandedramblings.com/index.php/myspace-
stats-then-now/ (accessed 28 May 2016).
184	 http://www.adweek.com/news/technology/how-chub-
bies-making-videos-about-mens-shorts-go-viral-166095 
(accessed 14 August 2015).
185	 https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-switch/
wp/2015/04/23/facebooks-focus-on-the-future-of-commu-
nication-continues-to-grow/ (accessed 1 November 2015).
186	 http://mashable.com/2015/06/12/facebook-updates-
news-feed-based-on-how-much-time-you-spend-reading-
posts/ (accessed 1 November 2015).
187	 http://edm.com/articles/2014-07-02/Tomorrowland-
Bracelets-Facebook (accessed 13 August 2015).
188	 https://www.facebook.com/business/a/facebook-blue-
tooth-beacons (accessed 1 November 2015).
189	 http://kissalot.pl/ (accessed 13 August 2015).
190	 http://expandedramblings.com/index.php/pinterest-
stats/ (accessed 28 May 2016).
191	 http://brand-e.biz/brands-need-to-take-note-of-pinter-
est-traffic_21308.html (accessed 2 October 2012).
192	 http://marketingland.com/study-says-pinterest-more-
trusted-by-women-than-facebook-twitter-8021?utm_
source=pluspost&utm_medium=plus&utm_
campaign=stream (accessed 2 October 2012).
193	 http://brand-e.biz/brands-need-to-take-note-of-pinter-
est-traffic_21308.html (accessed 2 October 2012).
194	 http://www.viralblog.com/social-media/kotex-
launches-worlds-first-pinterest-campaign/ (accessed 
2 October 2012); http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=UVCoM4ao2Tw (accessed 2 October 2012).
195	 http://wallblog.co.uk/2012/04/11/harrods-and-confused-
com-launch-pinterest-campaigns/#ixzz1xTbXQ2AZ 
(accessed 2 October 2012).

318     CHAPTER 6  ONLINE COMMUNICATION
196	 http://mashable.com/2012/03/08/pinterest-more-traffic-
twitter-study/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
197	 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Shopaholics-Pin-
Away-Prepurchase/1012504#sthash.KORnF8nn.dpuf 
(accessed 1 November 2015).
198	 http://www.emarketer.com/Ar ticle/Pinter-
e s t - P r o m o t e d - P i n - S u c c e s s - P r ove - L o o k s -
Matter/1011829#sthash.3tGeQyTH.dpuf (accessed 2 
November 2015).
199	 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Pinterest-Conquer-
Social-Commerce-with-Buyable-Pins/1012584 (accessed 
1 November 2015).
200	 https://emojiliteracy.com/ (accessed 1 November 2015).
201	 http://mashable.com/2015/07/05/twitter-project-light-
ning-moments/ (accessed 11 August 2015).
202	 http://endangeredemoji.com/ accessed (accessed 10 
August 2015).
203	 https://corporate.target.com/article/2015/08/beacon-
technology (accessed 13 August 2015).
204	 http://www.socialbakers.com/twitter/, http://www.
socialbakers.com/facebook-pages/ (accessed 2 October 
2012).
205	 http://kylelacy.com/25-case-studies-using-twitter-to-
increase-business-and-sales/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
206	 http://uk.businessinsider.com/google-active-users-2015-1 
(accessed 28 May 2016).
207	 www.press.linkedin.com (accessed 13 July 2015).
208	 http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/08/19/mobile-messag-
ing-and-social-media-2015/ (accessed 30 October 2015).
209	 h t t p : / / w w w. p e w i n t e r n e t . o r g / 2 0 1 5 / 0 4 / 0 9 /
teens-social-media-technology-2015/
210	 http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/08/19/the-demograph-
ics-of-social-media-users/ (accessed 1 November 2015).
211	 http://www2.lse.ac.uk/media@lse/research/EUKidsOn-
line/EU%20Kids%20II%20(2009-11)/EUKidsOnlineI-
IReports/Final%20report.pdf (accessed 2 October 2012).
212	 http://www.slideshare.net/stevenvanbelleghem/social-
media-around-the-world-2011 (accessed 2 October 
2012).
213	 http://michaelhaenlein.com/Publications/Kaplan,%20
Andreas%20-%20Users%20of%20the%20world,%20
unite.pdf (accessed 2 October 2012).
214	 Blazevic, V., Hammedi, W., Garnefeld, I., Rust, R.T., 
Keiningham, T., et al. (2013) ‘Beyond traditional word-
of-mouth: an expanded model of customer influence’, 
Journal of Service Management, 24(3), 294–313.
215	 Hennig-Thurau, T., Gwinner, K.P., Walsh, G. and 
Gremler, D.D. (2004) ‘Electronic word-of-mouth via 
consumer-opinion platforms: what motivates consumer 
to articulate themselves on the internet?’, Journal of 
Interactive Marketing, 18(1), 38–52.
216	 Nielsen (2013) ‘Global trust in advertising and brand 
messages’, http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/
reports/2013/global-trust-in-advertising-and-brand-
messages.html (accessed 1 November 2015).
217	 Miller, R. and Lammas, N. (2010) ‘Social media and 
its implications for viral marketing’, Asia Pacific Public 
Relations Journal, 11(1), 1–9.
218	 Birnbaum, M.H. and Stegner, S.E. (1979) ‘Source cred-
ibility in social judgment: bias, expertise and the judge’s 
point of view’, Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 37(1), 48–74; Money, R.B., Gilly, M.C. and 
Graham, J.L. (1998) ‘Explorations of national culture 
and word-of-mouth referral behavior in the purchase 
of industrial services in the United States and Japan’, 
Journal of Marketing, 62(4), 76–87; Brown, J.J. and 
Reingen, P.H. (1987) ‘Social ties and word-of-mouth 
referral behavior’, Journal of Consumer Research, 14(3), 
350–62.
219	 Brown, J., Broderick, A.J. and Lee, N. (2007) ‘Word of 
mouth communication within online communities: con-
ceptualizing the online social network’, Journal of Inter-
active Marketing, 21(3), 2–20.
220	 Brown, J., Broderick, A.J. and Lee, N. (2007) ‘Word of 
mouth communication within online communities: con-
ceptualizing the online social network’, Journal of Inter-
active Marketing, 21(3), 2–20.
221	 De Keyzer, F., Dens, N. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2015) ‘The 
impact of homophily, tie strength and source credibility 
on consumer responses to eWOM messages on Face-
book’, Proceedings Etmaal van de Communicatieweten-
schap, Antwerpen.
222	 http://www.statista.com/statistics/276601/number-of-
world-of-warcraft-subscribers-by-quarter/ (accessed 28 
May 2016).
223	 h t t p : / / w w w. yo u t u b e . c o m / wa t c h ? v = v i R _
RlMOsds&feature=related (accessed 2 October 2012).
224	 Smith, P.R. and Chaffey, D. (2002) eMarket-
ing Excellence: The Heart of  eBusiness. Oxford: 
Butterworth–Heinemann.
225	 http://www.websuccessteam.com/WSTblog/2011/12/
relationship-marketing-2012/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
226	 Allen, C., Kania, D. and Yaeckel, B. (2001) One-to-One 
Web Marketing: Build a Relationship Marketing Strategy 
One Customer at a Time. New York: Wiley Computer 
Publications.
227	 Jobber, D. and Fahy, J. (2003) Foundations of Marketing. 
Maidenhead: McGraw-Hill.
228	 Strauss, J., El-Ansary, A. and Frost, R. (2003) E-Market-
ing, 3rd edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
229	 http://contagious.io.s3.amazonaws.com/pdf/PDF%202/
NNW3_The-New-Loyalty.pdf (accessed 2 October 
2015).
230	 http://contagious.io.s3.amazonaws.com/pdf/PDF%202/
NNW3_The-New-Loyalty.pdf (accessed 2 October 
2015).
231	 Kelly, L., Kerr, G. and Drennan, J. (2010) ‘Avoidance 
of advertising in social networking sites: the teenage 
perspective,’ Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10 (2), 
16–27; Eun Sook, K. and Sung, Y. (2011) ‘Follow me! 
Global marketers’ Twitter use’, Journal of Interactive 
Advertising, 12(1), 4–16.
232	 Saxena, A. and Khanna, U. (2013) ‘Advertising on social 
network sites: a structural equation modelling approach’, 
Vision, 17(1), 17–25; Trusov, M., Bucklin, R.E. and 
Pauwels, K. (2009) ‘Effects of word-of-mouth versus 

REFERENCES     319
users’, Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10 (2), 28–45; 
Kelly, L., Kerr, G. and Drennan, J. (2010) ‘Avoidance 
of advertising in social networking sites: the teenage 
perspective’, Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 
16–27; Sundar, S.S. and Marathe, S.S. (2010) ‘Personali-
zation versus customization: the importance of agency, 
privacy, and power usage’, Human Communication 
Research, 36(3), 298–322.
237	 Anand, B.N. and Shachar, R. (2009) ‘Targeted advertis-
ing as a signal’, Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 
7(3), 237–66; Noar, S.M., Harrington, N.G. and Aldrich, 
R.S. (2009) ‘The role of message tailoring in the devel-
opment of persuasive health communication messages’, 
in Communication Yearbook 33, C.S. Beck (ed.). New 
York: Routledge, 73–133.
238	 De Keyzer, F., Dens, N. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2015) ‘Is 
this for me? How consumers respond to personalized 
advertising on social network sites’, Journal of Interac-
tive Advertising, DOI: 10.1080/15252019.2015.1082450.
traditional marketing: findings from an internet social 
networking site’, Journal of Marketing, 73(5), 90–102.
233	 IPG Media brands (2013) Magna Global Advertising 
Forecasts: 2014, 9 December 2013, http://news.ipgme-
diabrands.com/ipgmediabrands/press-releases/magna-
global-advertising-forecast-2014-ipg-mediabrands.print 
(accessed 4 April 2014).
234	 Stadd, A. (2014) ‘U.S. Social advertising spend expected 
to increase to $11 billion by 2017’, https://www.mediab-
istro.com/alltwitter/u-s-social-advertising_b53866.
235	 Kelly, L., Kerr, G. and Drennan, J. (2010) ‘Avoidance 
of advertising in social networking sites: the teenage 
perspective’, Journal of Interactive Advertising, 10(2), 
16–27; Sundar, S.S. and Marathe, S.S. (2010) ‘Personali-
zation versus customization: the importance of agency, 
privacy, and power usage’, Human Communication 
Research, 36(3), 298–322.
236	 Hoy, M.G. and Milne, G. (2010) ‘Gender differences 
in privacy-related measures for young adult Facebook 

320
Chapter 7
Media planning
Chapter outline
Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Distinguish the various steps in the media planning process
● Understand the technical details of media objectives, such as frequency, reach, 
weight, continuity and cost
● Learn about the criteria on the basis of which the media mix can be composed
● Understand the advantages and disadvantages of the different advertising media
● Get an overview of the criteria to be used in media planning
● Understand the importance of media context for advertising effectiveness

THE MEDIA PLANNING PROCESS     321
Introduction
Media planning is receiving more and more attention. This is not surprising since the cost 
of buying advertising time and space makes up a large part of the advertising budget. The 
latter also explains the recent attention paid to integrated marketing communications, the 
purpose of which is to use all advertising media, and more general, all touch points with 
consumers by means of other communications tools, as effectively and efficiently as possible. 
Attention is paid to each of the different steps in a media plan. Media planning is not just 
a matter of selecting the appropriate media, given the target group of the advertising cam-
paign and the characteristics of the different advertising media. It is also a technical issue in 
which the components of media objectives (such as frequency, reach, weight, continuity and 
cost) are calculated and compared. Both technical media objectives and criteria for select-
ing the media mix and characteristics of the different media are discussed. Furthermore, 
­possible influences of the media context are highlighted.
The media planning process
The purpose of media planning is to draw up an adequate media plan. A media plan is a 
document specifying which media and vehicles will be purchased when, at what price and 
with what expected results. It includes such things as flow charts, the names of specific 
magazines, reach and frequency estimates, and budgets.1 Creating a media plan is a process 
that consists of different steps (Figure 7.1).
Just as an environmental analysis is necessary to formulate the marketing strategy and 
to create a marketing plan, the communications environment needs to be screened to for-
mulate a media plan. First of all, media planners should be acquainted with all regulations 
and legal aspects, as well as with local habits. Is TV advertising allowed; do people watch 
predominantly TV, read magazines or listen to the radio, etc.?
Figure 7.1  Steps in media planning

322     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
Secondly, media planners should be able to judge the communications efforts of the 
competition. In this respect, the following elements are important:2
● Category spending. What is the advertising spending in the product category, and how has it 
evolved over the last five years? Did category spending increase, decrease or remain stable?
● Share of voice. What is the relative advertising spending of the different competitive 
brands in the product category? Share of voice (SOV) is calculated by dividing a 
­particular brand’s advertising spending by the total category spending. Besides the 
share of voice, one should also investigate the share of market (SOM) and how share 
of voice relates to share of market. Some researchers assume that share of market 
follows share of voice, while others argue that the share of market should always 
be smaller than the share of voice in order to be able to maintain growth (see also 
­Chapter 4 on budgets).
● Media mix. Identify how each competitor divides its advertising spending across the dif-
ferent media and analyse the trend in media mix composition.
Target groups were extensively discussed earlier (see Chapter 4). Although all segmentation 
variables mentioned there remain valid, a variable that needs special attention at this stage 
is the media behaviour of the target audience. Do the target consumers listen to the radio 
or watch TV and, if so, which programmes do they listen to or watch, at what time and on 
which days? Do the target consumers read newspapers or magazines and, if so, which ones do 
they read? Do the target consumers use electronic media, do they often go the cinema, etc.?
Media objectives
Media objectives are derived from the communications objectives, and ought to be concrete, 
measurable and realistic. Media objectives are usually formulated in terms of the character-
istics shown in Figure 7.2.
Frequency
Frequency indicates how many times a consumer of the target group, on average, is expected 
to be exposed to the advertiser’s message within a specified time period. It is important to 
know that frequency is estimated on the basis of the number of times one could be exposed 
Figure 7.2  Media objectives

MEDIA OBJECTIVES     323
to the media vehicle, and not to the message itself. For example, if a consumer has a newspa-
per subscription and a certain campaign has one ad a week for six weeks in that newspaper, 
we could expect that the particular consumer will be exposed to the ad six times during 
the six-week period. However, if the consumer does not always read the full newspaper and 
occasionally omits the pages in which the ad appears, the actual number of times he or she 
will be exposed to the message will be lower than six.
When deciding on the objective of how many times the target group has to be reached, 
a first question that arises is: How often should a consumer be exposed to a message for 
it to be effective? And how does a consumer respond to frequent exposures to the same 
message? Research shows that advertising repetition initially increases learning, but may 
lead to boredom and irritation later.3 According to the two-factor model, an inverted-U  
relationship exists between the level of exposure on the one hand, and advertising  
effectiveness (cognitive responses, attitudes, purchase) on the other (Figure 7.3). Wear-in 
and wear-out effects explain the nature of this relationship.4 At low levels of exposure, 
consumers develop rather negative responses (e.g. counter-arguments) due to the ­novelty 
of the stimulus. After a few exposures, the reaction becomes more positive. This is 
referred to as wear-in. More frequent exposures again lead to more negative responses, a 
phenomenon called wear-out. Negative responses, such as irritation, can be expected to 
be the highest both at low and high exposure levels, while positive responses are optimal 
at intermediate exposure levels. One way to counter or delay the wear-out effect is to 
make minor changes to the ad so that the consumer is not exposed to the same ad over 
and over again or to use executional cues that evoke positive emotional responses.5 One 
study shows that in cases where consumers process messages in a superficial or shallow 
way (e.g. when they are hardly aware of the fact that there is an ad), wear-out may not 
occur at all.6
Another way of thinking about advertising repetition lies in the economic signalling 
­theory, which assumes that consumers take advertising repetition as a signal of the quality 
of a brand. In this view, higher advertising costs signal greater manufacturer effort and 
higher manufacturer confidence and trust in quality.7 In other words, consumers think that 
if a manufacturer is willing to spend a lot of money on advertising, it must be convinced 
that it will get the money back in the long run. The latter is only possible if consumers 
not only try, but also repurchase the product, which can only occur with a high-quality 
product. However, at extremely high levels of repetition, consumers find the advertising 
Figure 7.3  Ad frequency and ad effectiveness

324     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
Besides brand placements in magazines, movies and TV game shows, digital games have been discovered for brand 
placements too. Advergames are computer games specifically created to function as ads to promote brands, where 
the entertainment content mimics traditional game forms.9 Since advergames are rather simple in their design (no 
complex rules, short playing time, etc.), they can be easily distributed on different platforms, such as on websites, 
via email (tell a friend, viral marketing), on mobile phones and on interactive digital TV, e.g. during a commercial 
break. Integrating brands in games is a growing business. PricewaterhouseCoopers estimated that in-game brand 
placements was a $3 billion business in 2009, which is not surprising given that 69% of the American heads of house-
hold claim to play games.10 According to Yankee Group, the advergame industry, as part of the in-game industry, 
generated $312.2 million in 2009. Strong brands such as Coca-Cola, Honda, Burger King and Gillette have already 
invested in advergames.11 For instance, in the Coca-Cola advergame, the player has to catch soda bottles that drop 
off a conveyer belt.
The effects of repeatedly playing an advergame on brand recall and brand attitude were tested in two experi-
ments. In experiment 1 (480 participants), game repetition was manipulated by requesting that the respondents 
play the game either two or four times. In experiment 2 (88 participants), the respondents could freely decide how 
often they wanted to play the game. In both experiments the game ‘Snag’ was used. This game has a simple design, 
and there are no complex rules. The main goal of the game is that the ‘snag’ (which is under control of the gamer) 
has to catch as many objects as possible that appear at sudden intervals on the screen. However, the tail of the snag 
becomes longer and longer and may not touch the boundaries of the game or itself. The game can be played in a 
few minutes, with different rehearsals, called ‘lives’, making the repeated playing a natural looking action. The game 
was played in two versions, one with a car and one with a coffee brand logo. In both experiments, emails containing 
the URL link to the game and the questionnaire were sent to a convenience sample of Belgian university students. 
After the gaming experience, the participants completed a self-administered questionnaire.
Berlyne’s two-factor model states that in the ‘wear-in’ or learning phase, the consumer becomes familiar with the 
advertising message, leading to an increase in recall rates. After a first level of message repetition, the initial hostil-
ity and uncertainty towards the message declines and positive habituation increases, and also more positive brand 
responses develop. Contrary to this observation in traditional advertising, playing the advergame more frequently 
did not have a significant impact on brand recall in either experiment. The wear-in or learning process was appar-
ently very fast in an advergame, which can be explained by the focused attention of the individual on the interactive 
content. Also, the lack of complexity in the advergame might have accelerated the wear-in phase. Consequently, 
recall did not increase between two and four plays and reached its maximum after two exposures.
In the ‘wear-out’ or tedium phase, advertising effectiveness declines with continuing repetition due to boredom, 
irritation and/or consumer reactance towards the message. The interactive nature of the gaming environment 
increases the focused attention and the likeability of the experience, leading to a high motivation and ability to pro-
cess the interactive content and to fast wear-in. In addition, advergames are rather simple in their design. Therefore, 
it can be expected that the wear-out phase is achieved relatively quickly, leading to the development of negative 
brand attitudes even after low levels of exposure. This expectation was confirmed. Compared with the low game 
repetition level, higher levels of repetition had a negative effect on brand attitudes. These brand attitude results were 
again found under both forced game repetition and voluntary game repetition.
Research insight
Wear-in and wear-out effects in advergames
expenses excessive. At that point, people think something must be wrong, and perceptions 
about the advertising company as well as about the quality level of the brand deteriorate. 
It is interesting to note that the attitude towards the ad seems to wear out more quickly 
than the perception of brand quality.8 In this sense, repetition beyond ad wear-out can 
make sense.

MEDIA OBJECTIVES     325
Given the large amount of money that is annually spent on advertising, the question of possible inefficiency 
in the use of advertising money is a very relevant one. However, it is not easy to measure such efficiency or 
inefficiency and the resulting loss of sales as a consequence of inefficient use of advertising money. Measuring, 
minimising inputs, maximising outputs and benchmarking are vital to detect and correct problems. Defining effi-
ciency as the ratio between outputs (sales attributed to advertising) and inputs (advertising media expenditures), 
Research insight
Is advertising money used efficiently?
Although the premise may exist that repeatedly playing an advergame increases advertising effectiveness, this 
study found support for the opposite. Playing the game several times had no positive influence on brand recall, but 
impacted the development of brand attitudes negatively. Consequently, advertisers should avoid a situation where 
the consumer can repeatedly play the same simple game. Therefore, advertisers could work with more complex 
advergames or build in variations in the advergame, for instance by displaying different ‘play worlds’. The techno-
logical possibilities nowadays even allow the advertising messages to be customised to the consumers, which might 
counter the negative effects on the brand attitude of repetitive playing of an advergame.12
In conclusion, several reasons have been reported in the literature as to why a high (but 
not excessive) repetition level of advertising might be beneficial:
● It makes the message more memorable and raises brand recall.13
● It makes attitudes more accessible and raises consumers’ confidence in their attitudes,14 
making them more resistant to attitude change and brand switching.
● It increases the believability of the ad claims.15
● It leads to a greater top-of-mind brand awareness.16
● It functions as a signal or cue for brand quality.17
However, the difficulty remains to determine the optimal frequency level, which is inevi-
tably linked to the advertising objective, the type of message used, media clutter, the 
product category, the competition level, the target group and the media used. Controversy 
also exists concerning the frequency level that is sufficient to evoke the intended response 
in the consumer. This frequency level is also referred to as the motivational frequency or 
the effective frequency, defined as ‘the minimum number of exposures, within a purchase 
cycle, considered necessary to motivate the average prospect in the target audience to 
accomplish an advertising objective’.18 Some researchers think one exposure is sufficient, 
while others assume an effective frequency of at least three.19 One exposure may be suffi-
cient if the consumer is reached at the right moment, with the right message. For example, 
a consumer is driving home from work and a small stone shatters the car window. One ad 
for Car Glass mentioning that it repairs car windows 24 hours a day may be very effective 
at that moment. On the other hand, a consumer may need to see a yoghurt ad 15 times 
before it becomes effective. Moreover, two exposures may be sufficient for market leaders 
or an established brand image, while at least four might be necessary for new campaigns 
targeted at infrequent users, if the objective is to increase the usage of a product or when 
medium clutter is high.20 In other words, situational variables play an important role.

326     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
Figure 7.4  The b@coefficient: exposure and memorisation
a study used data envelopment analysis (DEA) to evaluate and benchmark the efficiency of the top 47 US adver-
tisers’ ad expenditures in print (magazines and newspapers), broadcast (TV and radio) and the Internet. The 
advantage of DEA is that it can handle multiple inputs and multiple outputs, and that it is capable of calculating 
the efficiency of the 47 advertisers relative to each other. The results showed several clear inefficiencies. More 
specifically, 34 of the 47 advertisers appeared to be inefficient in their ad expenditures and they were least 
efficient with Internet advertising. As compared with the other advertisers, Federated Department Stores, for 
example, would have to reduce print media investments by $2.3 billion, broadcast media expenditures by $68 
million and Internet ad spending by $7 million to become an efficient advertiser. John Wanamaker’s famous 
saying, ‘Half of every dollar spent on advertising is wasted; the problem is I just don’t know which half’, could 
well be true. The good news is that with recent techniques such as DEA, advertisers can get an idea of which 
part they need to cut down.21
One technique to judge the effectiveness of frequency of exposure to media is 
B@coefficient analysis, developed by Morgensztern, in which the relationship between the 
number of exposures to a medium vehicle and the degree of memorisation (i.e. the percent-
age of the target group that remembers the ad) is analysed. The mathematical form of the 
b@coefficient model is as follows:
Mn = 1 - (1 - b)n
where:  Mn = ad memorisation after n exposures
	
b = medium@specific memorisation rate
Figure 7.4 illustrates the evolution of ad memorisation, given a medium with a b@coefficient 
of 12%. As the figure illustrates, total recall increases decreasingly as a function of exposure.
The b@analysis takes into account that memorisation of a message depends on the 
medium used. It is assumed that each exposure is able to make a constant percentage (b) 
of the consumers who previously could not remember the message of a campaign actually 

MEDIA OBJECTIVES     327
remember the message. Table 7.1 gives a few examples of media and their b@coefficients 
while Figure 7.5 shows the relation between the number of exposures and the memorisation 
rate for different media. Cinema advertising is by far the most effective medium to make 
people memorise an advertising message, while outdoor seems to be the least effective. 
Applying the formula shown above suggests that the number of people who have memo-
rised a message after three exposures is 97.3% for cinema advertising, but only 27.1% for 
daily papers.
Morgensztern not only developed different b@coefficients for different media, but also 
used these coefficients to suggest the minimum and maximum number of exposures for the 
different media in order for a message to be effective. Table 7.2 shows the suggested number 
of contacts.
Reach and weight
Total reach of a medium vehicle can be defined as the number of people who are exposed to 
the medium vehicle during a specified period.
Figure 7.5  The relation between exposures and memorisation for different media
Source: JFC Informatique & média, Paris, France (2003).
Table 7.1  b@coefficients for different media
Medium
Cinema
Magazines
Daily 
papers
TV
Radio
Outdoor
b-coefficient
70%
10%
10%
15%
  5%
  2%
Table 7.2  Number of contacts for different media
Medium
Radio
Press
TV
Cinema
Not enough contacts
4
3
2
1
Too many contacts
15
10
7
3
Suggested contacts
5–14
4–9
3–6
2

328     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
Total reach (thousands)
Useful reach (thousands)
Useful reach (% of target group)
SVT1
2193
409
30.9%
SVT2
1234
69
5.2%
Source: Based on IP Peaktime (2004) Television 2004. European Key Factors. Neuilly-sur-Seine, Cedex, Brussels: IP.
Table 7.3  Example of reach by medium
Technological innovation has led to the emergence of various new types of media devices and formats, increasing 
the opportunities for media exposure. Media viewers are adapting to this boundless media landscape, which has 
led to a fundamental change in their media consumption habits. A reflection of this change is viewers’ tendency to 
consume more than one medium at the same time: a phenomenon referred to as media multitasking or simultane-
ous media exposure.22
Media multitasking is quickly becoming a standard behavioural pattern in everyday media consumption. A 
recent survey in the United States reports that the percentage of media multitasking behaviour as a proportion 
of total media exposure has grown substantially since 2004.23 The actual change is that, while media multitasking 
leaves young people’s media use time relatively unchanged, it leads to significantly more saturated exposure to 
media content – more content is viewed within the same timeframe.24 Experimental research on media multitask-
ing has focused primarily on its detrimental effects on learning, memory, and general cognitive processing.25 For 
Research insight
Can’t see the forest for the trees? The effect of media multitasking on cognitive 
processing style
Useful reach of a medium vehicle is how many consumers from the target group are 
exposed to the medium vehicle. As was the case for frequency, only exposure to the medium 
vehicle can be estimated, not exposure to the message itself. Furthermore, one should realise 
that, although total reach may be higher for a TV campaign, useful reach may be higher for 
a campaign in specialised magazines. Even within the same medium type, total and useful 
reach can differ enormously for different media vehicles. As an example, for a target group 
of youngsters aged between 3 and 14 years, Table 7.3 shows the difference between total and 
useful reach for two television channels. Although SVT1 has less than twice the total reach 
of SVT2, the useful reach of SVT1 is proportionally much higher than that of SVT2. This 
essentially means that, proportionally, SVT1 attracts much more young viewers than SVT2.
When the same message is placed in different media vehicles, or multiple times in the same 
vehicle, a distinction can be made between gross reach and net reach. While total and useful 
reach are characteristics of a medium vehicle, gross and net reach are characteristics of an 
advertising campaign. As illustrated in Figure 7.6, gross reach is the sum of the ­number of 
people in the target group that each individual medium reaches, regardless of how many 
times an individual is reached. In other words, a person who is reached by medium x and 
medium y counts as two, and so is a person who is exposed to medium x twice. Net reach, 
often simply referred to as ‘reach’, is the sum of all people reached at least once (a person 
reached by x and y counts as one). In other words, reach equals gross reach minus the dupli-
cated audience. Gross reach, expressed as a percentage of the target group, is referred to 
as gross rating points (GRP). The weight of a campaign is typically expressed in GRP. For 
example, an objective of Gatorade could be to realise a total of 400 GRP in a month for a tar-
get group of sports people. These GRP can be realised by means of different media vehicles.

MEDIA OBJECTIVES     329
Figure 7.6  Gross reach and net reach
example, students’ memory for lecture content suffered significantly, when they were permitted to use laptops 
with Internet access during their classes.26 Furthermore, it was found that while cognitive needs drive media mul-
titasking behaviour, media viewers obtain emotional but not cognitive gratifications from media multitasking.27
From a cognitive psychology perspective, the above findings are hardly surprising. For over a century, researchers 
have documented the human (in)ability to multitask, revealing significant performance deficits when two or more 
tasks are performed concurrently.28 These cognitive deficits suggest that viewers’ ability to process media content 
is likely to be compromised in a media multitasking context. Thus, the new media consumption context that view-
ers choose to create certainly affects their ability to process information. High media multitaskers exhibited greater 
difficulty in filtering out irrelevant stimuli, were less likely to ignore irrelevant representations in memory, and less 
effective at task switching. These findings suggest that individuals who media multitask regularly have a fundamen-
tally different cognitive approach to processing information.
People can attend to information in different ways. For example, a physical object can be processed visually 
either by focusing on the object’s overall shape (like zooming out an optical lens) or by focusing on the details that 
make up the overall shape (equivalent to zooming in an optical lens). Psychologists refer to this distinction between 
global and local processing style as the level of perceptual processing. Similarly, people may conceptually process 
information at a concrete (i.e. low) or at an abstract (i.e. high) level. This distinction in level of conceptual processing 
refers to how objects or behaviours are mentally categorised. Compared to low-level construals, high-level con-
struals are considered to be broader, more abstract, and more elaborate mental representations of reality. Thus, 
both perceptual and conceptual processing can vary from a lower to a higher level of processing. While processing 
information perceptually requires using the senses, processing it conceptually demands the use of pre-existing 
cognitive schemas or mental categorisations.
Two studies demonstrate that media multitasking, compared to sequential media consumption, leads to a 
more local perceptual processing style and to lower-level conceptual processing. In the first study, participants 
in the multitasking condition processed information more locally compared to those in the sequential condition, 
relying more on the local elements (details) rather than the global picture. Furthermore, the number of visual 
switches between media was negatively correlated with the level of perceptual processing, indicating that a high 
fragmentation of the media context induces a more local style of perceptual processing. The second study showed 
that a multitasking context induces a more concrete mindset, extending the findings to conceptual processing 
style. The observed differences in perceptual and conceptual processing style suggest that media multitasking 
contexts require a narrow attentional focus and more concrete construals of information at the expense of ‘the 
whole picture’.29
Another measure often used by media planners is opportunity to see (OTS). OTS is 
defined as the average probability of exposure that an average reached target consumer 
has. It is calculated by dividing gross reach by net reach. For instance, suppose that Bacardi 
Breezer wants to reach the adult Polish population. Reach of an ad during the break of 
the daily soap Clan on the Polish TV channel TVP1 is 57.2%, of an ad during the break 
of the daily soap ‘L’ like love on TVP2 is 51.5%, of an ad on Polskie Radio is 17.3% and of 

330     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
an ad on Radio RMF FM is 22.6%.30 A four-week campaign consisting of four ads during 
the Clan and For Better or for Worse programmes, six ads on Polskie Radio and eight ads 
on radio RMF FM results in 719.4 GRP. To compute reach, we cannot just add the reach of 
the four vehicles since we can expect that some people will watch several channels or watch 
TV and listen to the radio. Assume therefore that reach is 65%. In this case, OTS would be 
11.1 (GRP divided by reach in percentage, or 719.4 divided by 65). To come back to GRP, 
the latter means that GRP can actually be calculated in two different ways:
● By multiplying net reach (in percentage of the target group) and frequency for the differ-
ent media vehicles used:
GRP = a
n
i = 1
 (fi * ri)
where: n = number of media vehicles
fi = frequency of media vehicle i
ri = percentage reach of media vehicle i
● By multiplying net reach (in percentage of the target group) and opportunity to see: 
GRP = Reach * OTS
where: Net reach = audience across different media vehicles minus duplicated audience
Effective reach is the number of target consumers who are expected to be exposed to 
the advertiser’s message at an effective frequency level. Suppose an advertising campaign 
reached 60% of its target consumers with the frequencies reported in Table 7.4. If the con-
sumer needs to be exposed at least three times to be effective, then the effective reach is 
24.0% (11.5% + 6.0% + 3.5% + 1.8% + 1.2%).
Exposures
Reach
1
20.0%
2
16.0%
3
11.5%
4
  6.0%
5
  3.5%
6
  1.8%
7
  1.2%
Table 7.4  Reach and frequency distribution
A company defines its target group as all males aged between 30 and 40. The total size of the target group is 10 
million consumers. The company plans a newspaper campaign. The newspaper has a total readership of 18 million 
and a useful readership of 5 million. Ten ads are placed in the newspaper. The table below gives the distribution of 
percentage reach as a function of the exposure frequency.
Business insight
Calculating gross reach, OTS and effective gross reach

MEDIA OBJECTIVES     331
Continuity
Concerning campaign continuity, advertisers have three possibilities: a continuous, a pulsing 
or a flighting schedule:
● A continuous schedule means that the advertiser spends a continuous amount of money 
throughout the whole campaign period (Figure 7.7). However, since most companies have 
budget constraints, a continuous schedule might result in too low expenditures per period 
to be effective.
● A pulsing schedule indicates that a certain level of advertising takes place during the 
whole campaign period (‘dripping’), but during particular periods higher advertising 
levels are used (Figure 7.8).
The reach of the campaign is 5 million or 50% of the target group. The weight of the campaign is 238 GRP 
(5 * 1 + 6 * 2 + 3 * 3 + 9 * 4 + 8 * 5 + 7 * 6 + 6 * 7 + 3 * 8 + 2 * 9 + 1 * 10). As a result, the 
gross reach is 23.8 million exposures (238% * 10 million). OTS is 4.76 (238/50 or 23.8/5). Effective rating points 
(ERP), based on at least three exposures, are 221 GRP.
Frequency
Newspaper reach (% of target group)
  1
5
  2
6
  3
3
  4
9
  5
8
  6
7
  7
6
  8
3
  9
2
10
1
Figure 7.7  Continuous advertising

332     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
Figure 7.8  Pulsing advertising
Figure 7.9  Flighting advertising
● A flighting schedule is used when advertising is concentrated in only a few periods and 
not during the whole campaign period (Figure 7.9). This might be preferred due to budget 
constraints, for example. In other words, during some months no advertising takes place 
in order to be able to spend higher levels during peak months (‘waves’).
As mentioned before, some researchers argue that the most important thing is to 
reach consumers near the point of purchase. Jones31 suggests that one exposure is suf-
ficient and may have a much greater influence than frequent exposures. According to 
him, trying to reach as many people in the target group within the period near their 
purchasing is more effective than trying to reach a particular segment more frequently 
during the same time period. Ephron32 shares this view and compares being off-air, as is 
the case with a flighting schedule, with being out of stock at the sales point. According 

MEDIA OBJECTIVES     333
to him, advertisers reach this week’s buyers with this week’s advertising, and next week’s 
buyers only with next week’s advertising, and not with this week’s advertising. Also, 
a study investigating the impact of 1482 radio commercials reveals that media consist-
ency and spending the advertising budget in complementary media and radio channels, 
i.e. focusing on reach rather than frequency of exposure (and, as a consequence, using 
a continuous rather than a flighting or pulsing schedule), are important explanatory 
factors for both ad and brand recognition.33 Others argue that both reach and frequency 
remain important.34 When the purpose of advertising is to give information, frequent 
exposure can be important; when the objective of advertising is to remind people (e.g. 
in the case of mature products), one exposure may be enough.35 But, even in the latter 
case, a positive effect of frequent exposure is found.36 Another aspect worth considering 
when deciding on whether to use a continuous, pulsing or flighting schedule is how long 
people remember the message. Too much focus on a certain period of time without any 
repetitions during the rest of the year can be detrimental, since people easily forget the 
communications they have been exposed to.
Two scheduling tactics worth mentioning are double-spotting and roadblocking.37 With 
double-spotting, two spots are placed within the same programme to increase the likeli-
hood of obtaining the effective frequency. Roadblocking refers to placing the same ad across 
many channels at the same time. In this case, reach can be seriously increased since everyone 
watching TV at, for example, 9 p.m., will be exposed to the ad. Moreover, it is also a partial 
solution to the zapping phenomenon since even zapping will not help consumers to avoid 
the ad.
Cost
The cost of a medium is usually expressed as the cost per thousand (CPT), meaning the cost 
of reaching 1000 people. Cost per thousand (CPT) is usually referred to as CPM, the ‘M’ 
referring to the Roman symbol for thousand. CPM is calculated by dividing the cost of the 
medium (the air cost of a 15- or 30-second commercial, the cost of a one-page magazine 
ad, etc.) by the medium’s audience. 
 CPM = Cost of the medium
Useful reach
* 1000
More interesting to know is the cost per thousand in the target market, represented by 
CPM-TM. In this case, the cost of the medium has to be divided by the useful reach:
 CPM@TM = Cost of the medium
Total reach
* 1000
Suppose a fashion chain wants to reach young females (between 16 and 30 years of age). An ad is inserted in 
three women’s magazines, in a TV guide and in a special interest magazine. The following CPMs can be calculated. 
Although the CPM for the TV guide is the lowest, calculation of the CPM-TM shows that, for reaching the young 
female audience, Woman I may be more cost efficient.
Business insight
Calculating cost per thousand useful contacts

334     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
As was the case with the other concepts, only taking CPM and CPM-TM into account 
can lead to major errors. CPM and/or CPM-TM may be low because the medium vehicle is 
very cheap and does not reach the target medium in an effective way. Using billboards near 
minor roads does not cost a lot, but only a very small percentage of the target audience 
may be reached.
The cost per useful contact is most strongly related to medium selectivity, the extent to 
which a medium proportionally reaches a certain target group better. Medium selectivity 
can be represented by a selectivity index showing how well the target group is represented 
in the medium reach, relative to the universe:38
Selectivity index = % of the target group in total reach
% of the target group in the universe * 100
Selectivity index 6 100: The target group is under-represented;  
The vehicle is not selective on the target group
Selectivity index = 100: The target group is proportionally represented
Selectivity index 7 100: The target group is over-represented;  
The vehicle is selective on the target group
The relationship between medium selectivity and cost per useful contact is illustrated in 
the business insight vignette below. 
Consider the Danish TV channels TV2 and Zulu. How selective are they for a target group consisting of young adults 
aged between 12 and 30?
Business insight
Calculating medium selectivity
Media 
vehicle
Population size 
young adults 
(12–30) (000s)
% young adults 
(12–30) of total 
TV population
Reach for 
young adults 
(12–30) (%)
% of young 
adults in total 
reach
Selectivity index 
(fifth column/third 
column)
TV2
1240
23.0
32.2
22.6
98.3
Zulu
1240
23.0
3.8
45.2
196.5
Source: Based on IP Peaktime (2004) Television 2004. European Key Factors. Neuilly-sur-Seine, Cedex, Brussels: IP.
Type of magazine
Magazine
Cost (€)
Total reach (000s)
CPM
(Useful) reach
CPM-TM
Women’s 
magazines
Woman I
3250
230
14.13
115
28.26
Woman II
1995
116
17.19
  58
34.39
Woman III
1800
106
16.98
  53
33.96
TV guide
TV One
3900
585
  6.67
117
33.33
Special interest
Modern Lifestyle
2260
  44
51.36
    7
322.8

SELECTING MEDIA     335
Selecting media
Advertising media refer to types of communications channels that can distribute a ­message. 
Examples are newspapers, magazines, TV, online, etc. Media vehicles are ­particular 
­programmes, magazines, websites, social media, etc., such as The Simpsons, The Osbournes, 
Pop Idol, Cosmopolitan, Star, Facebook, etc. Before deciding which media will and will not 
be included in the media mix, the different media should be evaluated on several ­criteria. 
These can be categorised as quantitative, qualitative and technical. Table 7.5 gives an 
­overview of these criteria.
Quantitative criteria deal with factors such as how many members of the target group 
can be reached effectively how often and how quickly. These were discussed in the previous 
sections. Qualitative criteria to evaluate different media are the extent to which the medium 
is capable of building a brand image and a brand personality, the impact the medium has 
on the audience, how involved the audience are with the medium and, as a consequence, 
whether the audience are active or passive and whether the audience pay a lot of or only 
minor attention to the messages conveyed by the medium.
Qualitative criteria are also about whether or not the vehicle can add value to the brand 
or product due to the context in which the brand or product is shown (see also further in this 
TV2 reaches 32.2% of the youngsters and Zulu only 3.8%. However, Zulu appears to be very selective for the target 
group of youngsters while TV2 is not. The latter can be explained as follows: TV2 has a large audience and, although 
almost one in three youngsters watch this channel, other age groups are better represented. Zulu, on the other hand, 
has a very limited audience and, although it reaches only 3.8% of the youngsters, they are the age group that is most 
represented in Zulu’s audience. Buying reach on Zulu will therefore be proportionally cheap, since a proportionally 
larger part of their total reach is useful (people between 12 and 30). Advertisers have to pay the cost of total reach 
of a medium vehicle. The more ‘useful’ this reach is (i.e. when the medium is more selective), the cheaper the cost 
of useful reach will be.
Quantitative criteria
Reach
Frequency
Selectivity
Speed of reach (delayed or not)
Extent of memorisation of the message (b@coefficient)
Qualitative criteria
Geographic flexibility
Message life
Seasonal influence
Image-building capability
Emotional impact
Medium involvement
Active or passive medium
Attention devoted to the medium
Quality of reproduction
Adding value to the message (by means of the context)
Amount of information that can be conveyed
Demonstration capability
Clutter
Technical criteria
Production cost
Media buying characteristics (lead time, cancellation, etc.)
Table 7.5  Mixed media criteria

336     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
chapter), whether or not the quality of reproduction is sufficiently high, how much and what 
type of information can be conveyed to the consumer (e.g. can the use and customer friendli-
ness of the product be demonstrated?), whether or not the medium is characterised by a lot 
of advertising clutter resulting in a need for more exposures in order to become reasonably 
effective, whether the advertising message can be adapted for different geographic regions, and 
whether the medium is more effective during certain periods of the year than during others.
Technical criteria refer to the production costs of the message, the convenience or prob-
lems related to media buying (is it difficult to book media time or space; how long in advance 
do you have to book media time in order to be sure that you can distribute your message; 
can this media time or space be cancelled and, if so, how long in advance, etc.?).
Every medium vehicle has its own audience which form a market. The seller tries to sell 
the vehicle by claiming that the vehicle audience (e.g. people who read the Financial Times) 
consist of a relatively high number of people with buying power, and the seller also has the 
responsibility of giving the buyer an accurate overview of what the audience look like. The 
buyer’s task is to find out whether or not the vehicle audience match the target group or 
whether or not the target group is sufficiently represented in the vehicle audience.
Knowing that the target group reads magazines every week is not sufficient; it is necessary 
to know what magazines they read. If the target audience like to watch TV, which channels 
do they watch, at what time of the day do they watch, which programmes do they select, 
etc.? The different vehicles should be compared with each other within the same medium, 
between the different media and in relation to the target audience. Therefore comparisons 
should be made to direct (other vehicles within the same medium) and indirect (vehicles 
within other media) competitors.
Care must be taken that media planning is more than just selecting the vehicles with the 
most promising results. The different media and vehicles must be considered in conjunction 
with each other. Is it wise, for instance, to plan the TV campaign after the radio campaign, 
or vice versa? Is it better first to explain the message in more detail in magazines before the 
out-of-home campaign starts? How important is it to have several TV commercials during 
prime time in the first week of the launch of a new product? Research on b@coefficient issues 
is important to get some insight into the consequences of planning one medium before the 
other, or to decrease the GRP of radio to the advantage of TV. Furthermore, for a media 
planner, media consumption should be far more important than GRP cost. The most impor-
tant questions are: Which radio channel does a target consumer listen to in the morning? 
Which billboards does he or she come across on the way to work? Which magazines or 
newspapers are read in the evening? Which TV programmes are watched in the evening? 
What events that can be sponsored does the target consumer go to, etc.?
Every vehicle is also related to its medium type and inherits the characteristics associ-
ated with that medium. Therefore, the starting point for selecting a medium vehicle is the 
characteristics and the advantages and disadvantages of each medium type. In Table 7.6 an 
overview is given of advertising media, their characteristics, strengths and weaknesses. These 
will now be discussed in more detail.
Outdoor
Outdoor advertising consists of media such as billboards, but also transit media in the form 
of messages on buses, trams, in stations, etc. (Photos 7.1 and 7.2). Outdoor advertising has 
the advantage of reaching a lot of people. As a consequence, effective reach can be very high. 
Not only reach, but also frequency can be quite high. The lifetime of a message is very long, 
and the same message can be seen over and over again. For instance, on the way to school 
or office you might encounter the Nokia message of ‘connecting people’ every day. Or you 
might see a bus or tram with the announcement of the film The Matrix Reloaded over and 
over again. The time period to reach the audience is very short and the costs are moderate. 
For certain types of billboards there is the obligation to work nationally, but for others a 
regional approach is obtainable.

SELECTING MEDIA     337
Media type
Advantages
Disadvantages
Outdoor
Wide reach
High frequency
Long message lifetime
Immediate reach
Geographically flexible
● Low involvement
● Low attention potential
● Limited amount of information
● No context
Magazines
Selective on specific target groups
High quality context
High involvement
Quality of reproduction
Lot of information
Long message life
● Long lead time
● Geographically inflexible
● Sometimes high clutter
Newspapers
Wide reach
Short lead time
Flexibility
High involvement
Strong context
Lot of information
Geographical flexibility
● Limited selectivity
● Lower quality of reproduction
● Short message life
Door-to-door
Geographically flexible
High reach
Lot of information
Promotion-orientated
● Limited selectivity
● Low involvement
● Lower quality of reproduction
● High clutter
Television
Flexible
Strong (emotional) impact
Ideal for transferring image
Supportive context
High reach
Selective
● High production costs
● Very short message life
● High clutter
● Strong seasonal variation
Cinema
Very strong emotional impact
Attention-grabbing
Positive context
Selective to young and upmarket target groups
● Limited reach
● Slow reach
● Very short message life
● High production costs
Radio
High reach
High frequency
Low production cost
Flexibility
Very selective
● Very short lifetime
● Low involvement
● Low attention
● Activating
● Brand building
Digital
Cost-efficient
Flexible
Brand building
Activating/interactive
High reach
High frequency
Potentially strong context
Selective
Measurable
● Potentially intrusive
● Low involvement
● Low attention
● Clutter
Table 7.6  Advertising media and media planning criteria

338     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
Photo 7.2  Tio Pepe advertises outdoors
Source: William Perry/Alamy Stock Photo.
Photo 7.1  L’Oréal: a tower in Berlin is a 
spectacular advertising medium
Source: Reuters/Alamy Stock Photo.
However, people do not feel highly involved in billboards or transit advertising and 
usually do not pay a lot of attention to them. Furthermore, only a limited amount of 
information can be conveyed. Targeting or selective reach is not possible, since all kinds 
of people will see the messages. Usually, there is no context that can add value to the 
message.

SELECTING MEDIA     339
One of the challenges of effective advertising is to find media that are selective and result in a guaranteed, undisturbed 
high-quality exposure of the message to the target group. Since the late 1990s, Indoor Media, a Belgian advertising 
agency that specialises in ‘indoor media’ applications, has successfully run the Vespasius network: thousands of post-
ers in the toilets of movie theatres, cafés and discotheques. You cannot ignore the posters. They are at eye level, and 
everyone spends enough time at the toilet to enable them to read the ad. At first, mainly products for young people 
were thought suitable for advertising through this channel. But recently more ‘serious’ companies have also discovered 
the potential of this medium. For instance, AXA Bank uses Vespasius advertising. For €50 000, AXA is on 2200 Vespasius 
posters for two weeks, making it a very cost-effective medium. But companies like Dior are not convinced. They fear 
the ‘the medium is the message’ effect: a toilet is hardly a supportive context for selling a luxury product. Indoor Media 
does not agree, saying: ‘Where do you think women use perfume when they go out? In the toilet, of course!’ Recently, 
the company has also run a network of posters in fitting cubicles. A credit card company was the first to advertise. These 
cubicles have the same advantage as toilets. They are separate for men and women, just like toilets, and, depending on 
the shop or the café, they allow exposure to different lifestyle and age groups. People are more inclined to give their 
undivided attention to the message in toilets than in fitting cubicles but, to guarantee maximum exposure, the ads are 
placed as close as possible to the row of pegs. Further, since people walk in and out of the cubicles frequently during 
one shopping visit, there is repetitive exposure to the message in a short period of time.39
Business insight
Indoor Media: advertising in toilets and fitting cubicles
In November 2001, the beer brand Grolsch ran an integrated marketing communications campaign in the Nether-
lands. The objective of the campaign was to increase home consumption of Grolsch in men aged between 20 and 34. 
To reach this objective a sales promotion ran for three weeks (weeks 47, 48 and 49) consisting of a free lamp for every 
case of Grolsch beer purchased. The sales promotion was supported by point-of-purchase material, information on 
the website, TV advertising, an ad in a regional newspaper and an outdoor Abribus campaign. The Abribus campaign 
ran for one week in the middle of the sales promotion campaign (week 48). During this week, media investments 
in the product category amounted to €1.3 million, with the following shares of voice: Heineken 30%, Grolsch 25%, 
Amstel 13%, Brand 10%, Bavaria 3% and another six competitors 19%. Heineken, Grolsch and Amstel are also the larg-
est players in the Dutch beer market, each enjoying a brand awareness of over 97%. Did the outdoor campaign reach 
its objectives? It sure did. Comparing top-of-mind awareness for Grolsch at the beginning and at the end of week 48 
showed an increase from 25% to 31%. The spontaneous awareness of the sales promotion doubled from 15% to 30%. 
Total awareness of the promotion amounted to 37%, while awareness in the target group reached 46%. As the source 
of the sales promotion awareness, 41.3% of the respondents mentioned outdoor advertising, 46.0% in-store commu-
nications and 23.8% TV advertising. Intention to buy Grolsch during the promotion action did not increase, though.40
Business insight
Grolsch: using outdoor to shine a light on sales promotions
Magazines
Magazines have the advantage that a large audience can be reached. Furthermore, special 
interest magazines or magazines directed at a specific target group, such as females or young-
sters, create the possibility of a selective approach for different target groups. Depending 

340     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
on the type of magazine, a high-quality context can be offered, making it a good medium 
for image building (e.g. Vogue). Special interest magazines, such as computer magazines, 
also have the advantage of inducing a high involvement level and being perceived as highly 
credible, adding a certain value to the inserted ads. For magazines in general, the quality 
of reproduction is high and a lot of information can be distributed. The message life is 
relatively long, people can process the messages at their own pace, and the same message or 
ad may be seen several times, since it is very likely that a reader does not read the magazine 
only once, but rather takes it up several times before he or she disposes of it.
Major disadvantages are that it is a rather slow medium, which leads to a delay in reach. 
People can buy a monthly magazine this week, but not read it for the next two weeks. 
Furthermore, the medium is not so flexible in the sense that last-minute changes are not 
tolerated and regional versions are impossible. Some magazines also suffer from high clutter, 
rendering an advertising message less effective.
Customer media, previously called ‘sponsored magazines’, are magazines that are produced to communicate a 
company’s brands by featuring articles that endorse the brands and targeting the audiences that are target groups 
for the brands. Also in-house magazines that are mainly targeted at internal stakeholders can be considered as 
customer media. According to the British Association of Publishing Agencies, the market for customer media 
was €910 million in 2004, and €1.3 billion in 2011. Customer media are financed by the issuing company or, in 
the case of retailers, by means of ads that are placed by the brands sold in the retailer’s shops and promoted in 
the magazine.
In the Netherlands and the UK especially, customer media have a long tradition. The Dutch retailer Albert Heijn 
has distributed the magazine Allerhande (All kinds of things) since 1983. Around Christmas, about 2.5 million copies 
are distributed, and it reaches one in three Dutch households. The magazine is fully paid for by ads of brands sold 
in Albert Heijn. A.S. Magazine, issued by A.S. Adventure, a Belgian chain of outdoor stores, focuses on adventurous 
travellers, and has featured articles about, for instance, rafting in Sweden and the diary of a pharmacist who climbed 
Mount Everest to raise money for Médecins sans Frontières. After each article, a list of products that relates to the 
article is given. Of course, only gear that can be found in A.S. Adventure shops is featured. Ads of, among others, 
Gore-Tex, North Face and Suzuki provide the budget for the magazine.
Customer media are ideal media to support the image of a company and its products and to place the products 
and brands in an experiential context, adding emotional depth to the brand perception and experience. Research 
indicates that a professionally made and well-targeted magazine is read on average for half an hour, a substantial 
and high-quality level of exposure.41
Business insight
Customer media magazines add experiences to a brand
Newspapers
The major advantage of newspapers is the number of people that can be reached in a very 
short period of time. Furthermore, newspapers are a flexible medium in the sense that 
last-minute changes are possible in case the company’s needs change or when the company 
wants to take advantage of, or make use of, recent events. Ads referring to recent events are 
called top topicals and can usually count on more attention. The readers are usually highly 
involved in their newspaper, and the objective, informational context makes newspapers a 
credible medium with a high impact, not only for ads but also for PR messages. Newspa-
pers also provide the possibility of working regionally. In contrast with several other media, 
newspapers can convey large amounts of information.

SELECTING MEDIA     341
Disadvantages of newspapers are the limited selectivity of the medium and the low qual-
ity of reproduction. Furthermore, they are a transient medium in the sense that the message 
has a very short life since a newspaper lasts only one day.
In 2002, Compaq won an award for the best use of newspapers. Full-page newspaper ads were created that resem-
bled actual news reports. The ads contained testimonials from leading businesses and governments indicating that 
Compaq had never been more dependable. For example, one of the headlines read ‘Hong Kong SAR: Government 
Teams with Compaq to Deliver Online Public Services to Hong Kong Citizens’. Moreover, in some newspapers 
Compaq had fixed positionings on a certain day of the week, always featuring the same headline, e.g. ‘BT: Business 
Tuesday from Compaq’. In the first instance, Compaq wanted to go for business magazines and information technol-
ogy trade magazines. In the end it chose newspapers because of their ‘credibility and immediacy’.42
Business insight
Compaq wins award for best use of newspapers
Door-to-door
Door-to-door advertising periodic publications (once a week, once a month, etc.) are dis-
tributed locally and free of charge. Advertisers in this medium are usually local merchandis-
ers or local service organisations. Door-to-door publications have the advantage of being 
geographically flexible and of obtaining a fairly high reach. Furthermore, the medium pro-
vides the opportunity to deliver a lot of information at a fairly low cost. The promotional 
context in which the message appears may be useful for reaching consumers interested in 
promotional offers.
Limitations are that the medium is not at all selective and people may only be margin-
ally involved in door-to-door publications and may not pay much attention unless they are 
interested in certain promotions. Furthermore, the quality of reproductions is often doubt-
ful. Because of the overload of such publications, people often react negatively to this form 
of irresponsible use of paper and ‘environmental pollution’, and more and more people are 
putting a note on their mailbox stating ‘no advertising please’.
Television
A clear advantage of TV is the communication power of an audio-visual message which, in 
general, leads to a fairly high (especially emotional) impact. TV is a passive medium, mak-
ing it ideal for transferring a brand image or brand personality. The context surrounding 
the message can also add value to the message by inducing in the audience a certain mood 
(e.g. by the programme or movie during which the message is shown). Furthermore, a lot 
of people can be reached in a fairly short period of time. Local TV makes it possible to 
exert a regional approach. Research on viewing habits reveals that different personalities 
and people with different lifestyles watch different programmes, creating the possibility of 
using TV as a selective medium.
Major drawbacks are the high production costs that are involved and the fact that it 
is not always possible to direct a message at a selective target group. Often, a lot of occa-
sional viewers are reached, which results in a low effective reach. Furthermore, the lifetime 
of a message is extremely short: 15 or 30 seconds pass very quickly and often nothing is 
left of the message afterwards. Increasing advertising clutter further impedes the effective-
ness of messages, making more exposures a necessity, which adds to total costs. TV also 

342     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
has a ­seasonal influence. During the summer people spend more time outdoors instead of 
­spending their evenings in front of the TV screen. In other words, during winter a TV com-
mercial will reach a greater audience than in the summer. Due to ‘postponed viewing’, made 
possible by digital television, increasingly more viewers quickly zap through commercials, 
leading to a substantial loss in reach.
Cinema
As is the case with TV, cinema benefits from the audio-visuality of the message, having a 
greater impact on the audience. The impact of cinema advertising is even increased by the 
fact that the audience pay much more attention to the message than in any other circum-
stances, while distraction is less likely to occur. The surroundings and context further add 
to the value of the message, because of the mood and expectations of the audience. As will 
be discussed later in this chapter, a positive mood can lead a viewer to process all incoming 
information more positively than when the viewer is in a neutral or a negative mood. Going 
to the cinema is fun; people have a lot of expectations and are, in a sense, quite excited. 
This can lead to more positive processing of the advertising messages. Another important 
advantage of cinema advertising is the fact that this medium is fairly selective to a young 
and upmarket audience. Furthermore, this audience seem to like cinema advertising, and 
consider it as a part of their cinema visit that cannot be missed.43
The disadvantages are that the potential reach is limited, and that the speed and fre-
quency of reaching the audience are very slow. The lifetime of a message is very short. 
Furthermore, relatively high production costs are encountered.
Radio
The major benefit of radio advertising is that potentially a lot of people can be reached. 
Furthermore, the production costs are low and radio is a very dynamic medium. Different 
people (not only in terms of demographic characteristics, but also in terms of lifestyle, etc.) 
seem to listen to different radio stations, making it a selective medium for targeting a specific 
consumer group.
Limitations are that the lifetime of a message is very short and that people use the radio 
as background noise. The latter means that the potential attention that will be paid to a 
message is fairly low.
Digital
Advertising in digital media are ads on websites, social media and social network sites and 
mobile advertising.
Digital advertising is usually relatively inexpensive. It can be used to build brands (e.g. 
brand communities, video advertising), but at the same time has a high activation poten-
tial. Due to the interactive nature of digital media, people can react to digital ads: they can 
click-through on banners, and like and share a comment on social media content. Digital 
advertising is very flexible and potentially selective. Strategies and tactics can be changed 
rapidly and can easily be adapted to specific circumstances and target groups. Due to the 
information-gathering potential of digital applications, digital campaigns can be adapted 
to the characteristics of different target groups, making it a highly selective advertising 
medium type. Ads can also be integrated in a supportive context, such as on social media 
or in highly relevant websites. A lot of people can be frequently reached, and the results of 
digital campaigns can be easily measured.
On the other hand, many people consider online, and especially mobile, advertising as 
annoying and intrusive. Additionally, people do not seem to pay a lot of attention to digital 
ads (‘banner blindness’), and consequently they are often not so involved in online advertis-
ing. The digital world is also increasingly cluttered, with advertising on every website and 
social medium. Digital media were extensively discussed in the previous chapter.

SELECTING MEDIA     343
Advertisers have to decide on the total amount of advertising effort to invest, and on how to allocate this effort 
across different media. Typically, an advertiser defines a target group, decides on a budget and, with the assistance 
of a media planner, allocates this budget across media vehicles to optimise the effect of the campaign in terms of 
GRPs. The main purpose of traditional media planning is thus to maximise the number of target group ‘eyeballs’ 
reached with the campaign. A recent global survey by McKinsey & Co.44 reports that advertisers tend to allocate 
spending based on historical allocations and rules of thumb far more than quantitative measures. Consequently, 
typical media planning decisions do not take responses or effects of advertising into account. They are aimed at 
maximising potential contacts with the target group, not at campaign effectiveness.
The study reported here allows the advertiser to determine the optimal media mix. It uses a novel approach, 
­mixture-amount regression modelling, that investigates how advertisers can maximise campaign recognition by 
­optimising their advertising effort across different media, for different levels of total investments. Mixture-amount 
­regression ­modelling is inspired by research in food science and agriculture, where fertilisers and pesticides are commonly 
used to enhance the yield of a crop. The fertilisers and pesticides are mixtures of various ingredients. Statistical models 
for studying the yield of the crop use the amount of fertiliser as an independent variable, but also vary the proportions of 
the ­different ingredients, which allows the optimal proportion of the ingredients to be determined.45 Similarly, advertisers 
must decide how much to spend on an advertising campaign and how to allocate the budget to different media. The 
effect of a ­campaign is influenced by the total advertising spends as well as by the allocation of this investment to the 
different media.
Advertising investment data and consumer responses were collected for 34 skin and hair care (shampoo, facial 
cream, soap) campaigns that ran in magazines and/or on television in Belgium between June and December 2011. 
Eighteen campaigns ran in Flanders (the northern, Dutch-speaking part of Belgium), while the remaining 16 ran in 
Wallonia (the southern, French-speaking part of Belgium). The campaigns involved 13 brands from four mother 
brands (e.g. the brands Youth Code and Revitalift from the mother brand L’Oréal Paris). Some brands had multiple 
campaigns in the tested period, and were included several times. To quantify the advertising effort in each campaign, 
gross rating point (GRP) indicators were used. A GRP is the number of contacts of a campaign expressed as a percent-
age of the target audience. GRPs are more suitable to measure advertising effort than campaign budgets, because the 
latter are biased by the discounts offered by media companies, which typically vary across campaigns, brands and 
media. GRPs were calculated for magazine and television campaigns in the six weeks preceding the data collection 
(this represents the ‘amount’ of advertising). For each campaign, data were available on the number of GRPs invested 
in television advertising and in magazine advertising (the ‘mixture’). As the dependent variable, campaign recognition 
was measured. These responses were collected from individual respondents through a survey. The respondents in the 
study were randomly selected women in the age range of 20 to 50 (the target group for these products), who were 
representative of the Belgian population in terms of education and social class. In total, the analysed dataset contains 
17 793 responses from 4399 respondents.
The estimated regression models for campaign recognition can be shown in a graphical fashion using the predic-
tion profiler embedded in the software package JMP. In Figures 7.10 and 7.11 below, the vertical axis represents the 
probability of campaign recognition (in %). The horizontal axis shows the levels of the four explanatory variables 
in the mixture-amount model. The left panel shows the effect of the region dummy variable (where ‘0’ refers to 
Wallonia and ‘1’ refers to Flanders). The second panel from the left shows the impact of the proportion of magazine 
advertising, while the third panel shows the effect of the proportion of television advertising (together, these pro-
portions add up to 100%). The final (right) panel visualises the effect of the total advertising investment expressed 
in GRPs. In each of the panels of the two figures, dashed vertical lines indicate the selected levels of the explanatory 
variables. The solid convex lines in the middle two panels show how the value of the dependent variable changes 
as a function of the allocation of campaign spends to television and magazines.
Research insight
A mixture-amount model for media mix investments to maximise  
campaign recognition

344     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
Figure 7.10 shows that, for a campaign in Wallonia (Region = 0) with a campaign weight of 200 GRPs (right 
panel), an allocation of 40% (80 GRPs) to magazine advertising and 60% (120 GRPs) to television advertising leads 
to the highest possible campaign recognition probability, in this case 57%. The curved solid lines in the panels for 
the proportions of magazine and television advertising show that any other allocation leads to a smaller recognition 
probability. The fact that the curves are convex indicates a positive synergistic effect. For Flanders, the predicted 
campaign recognition using the same GRP value and media mix allocation would be 48%.
If the advertising budget is increased from 200 GRPs to 620 GRPs, the optimal media mix allocation changes. This 
is shown in Figure 7.11, where the proportions 20% and 80% turn out to be optimal for magazine and television 
advertising, respectively. For Wallonia, this results in a predicted campaign recognition probability of 61%. Compar-
ing the results from Figures 7.10 and 7.11, we see that for a larger GRP value, a larger proportion of the campaign 
budget should be allocated to television advertising. For Flanders, the predicted probability of campaign recognition 
is 52% for a GRP value of 620, assuming the same optimal media mix allocation is used.
From Figure 7.10, it is clear that, if an advertiser allocated the 200 GRPs solely to magazine advertising, the pre-
dicted recognition probability would be merely 32%. If the 200 GRPs were fully invested in television advertising, 
the predicted recognition probability would be 46%.
This means that, in the given scenario, by spreading their efforts across magazine and television advertising 
according to the optimal media mix derived by the mixture-amount model, advertisers can increase campaign rec-
ognition by 18%, compared to investing all of their GRPs on either television or magazines. If the advertising budget 
is 620 GRPs, the media mix synergy is 14% for campaign recognition probability. Using more than one medium in 
an advertising campaign leads to synergistic effects, as also demonstrated in previous research.46
Figure 7.11  Optimal media mix allocation for campaign recognition in Wallonia for an advertising budget of 
620 GRPs
0.56
0.62
0.50
0.44
0.38
0.614564
0
Region
0.2
Proportion
magazine
0.8
Proportion
TV
620
GRP_Total
Campaign
recognition
0.32
0.26
0.20
0
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
10
10
100
200
300
400
500
600
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Figure 7.10  Optimal media mix allocation for campaign recognition in Wallonia for an advertising budget  
of 200 GRPs
0.56
0.50
0.44
0.38
0.570087
0
Region
0.4
Proportion
magazine
0.6
Proportion
TV
200
GRP_Total
Campaign
recognition
0.32
0.26
0.20
0
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
10
10
100
200
300
400
500
600
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

MEDIA CONTEXT     345
Media context
Advertising always forms part of a surrounding context. An advertising context consists 
of the receiver context and the medium context.47 The receiver context refers to the situ-
ational circumstances in which a person is exposed to an advertisement (e.g. at home, in the 
company of friends, on one’s way to work, when one is in a bad mood, etc.). The medium 
context is the topic of this section and refers to characteristics of the content of the medium 
in which an ad is inserted, as they are perceived by the individuals who are exposed to the 
ad.48 TV commercials appear before, after or within TV programmes or other commercials, 
magazine or newspaper ads are inserted between articles, billboards are placed on the wall 
of a building or in a bus shelter, transit advertising forms part of the bus or tram, banners are 
inserted on websites with specific content, etc. Several studies indicate that the media context 
has an influence on how people perceive, interpret and process an advertising message. Since 
the effectiveness of the same ad may depend on the context surrounding the ad, it is useful 
for the advertiser to get a clearer view of what these context effects might look like. The 
conclusions outlined in Table 7.7 are made on the basis of an extensive literature review.49
Besides the medium, the content of the medium vehicle also plays a role. Concerning 
how interesting and involving a programme is, one study found that violent and sexual pro-
grammes, as compared with neutral programmes, impair TV viewers’ memory for TV ads.50 
This was found to be the case for males and females, for all age groups and for people who 
like and dislike programmes containing violence and sex. One possible explanation for this 
finding is that sex and violence attract so much attention that there is not enough processing 
capacity left to process the embedded ads. Another explanation is that sexual and violent 
programmes evoke sexual and violent thoughts. By being occupied with thinking about sex 
and violence, consumers’ memory for commercials could be seriously reduced. A similar 
conclusion also seems to hold for humorous programmes, although in the past comedies 
have been shown to lead to a higher ad recall than news or dramas.
As discussed earlier, advertising clutter has increased significantly in most media. A prob-
lem is that, due to this enormous clutter, ads become less effective. The more the clutter, 
the lower the motivation and opportunity to pay attention to an ad. Too many marketing 
messages compete for the attention of the consumer. As a consequence, less attention will 
be devoted to individual ads.51
Media context variable
Impact on ad effectiveness
Objective context variables
● Medium itself
● Vehicle content
● Media clutter in vehicle
● Type of ad block
● Sequence within ad block
● Congruence between context and ad
Context effects more pronounced for TV
Violence, humour and sex have a negative impact
The more the clutter, the less positive the ad results
Context effects more pronounced for interrupting 
than shoulder blocks
Primacy and recency effects
Product involvement (PI) moderates impact: for low 
PI, congruency is best; for high PI, contrast is best
Subjective context variables
● Intensity of response
● Valence of response
Mixed results, balance in direction of higher intensity, 
better ad results
Positive valenced context improves ad effectiveness
Source: Based on Moorman, M. (2003) ‘Context considered: the relationship between media environments and advertising effects’, 
Doctoral Dissertation. University of Amsterdam.
Table 7.7  Impact of media context variables

346     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
Concerning ad blocks, a distinction can be made between interrupting blocks (a com-
mercial block in the middle of the programme) or shoulder blocks (a commercial block 
between two different programmes). Although some researchers hypothesise that commer-
cials in interrupting blocks are less effective because viewers do not want to be disturbed 
at that moment, this does not seem to be true. Intense and positive responses towards the 
context carry over more easily to ads in an interrupting break than in a shoulder break. An 
explanation for the latter is that during the programme viewers experience more arousal 
and interest than between programmes.52
As for the sequence within a block, the earlier an ad appears in the block, the higher the 
motivation to pay attention to the ad and process the information. Furthermore, the place-
ment of an ad also determines the opportunity to pay attention to it. The primacy effect, 
suggesting that ads that come early in a magazine or early in a sequence of TV commercials 
are more effective, has been confirmed on several occasions.53 However, for TV advertising 
the last position can also be beneficial since the consumer has more time to process the ad 
due to the fact that it is not followed by another ad, but by a short silence.54 Because of 
inherent characteristics of the medium, certain places can raise the opportunity to pay atten-
tion; for example, the upper-left corner of a magazine (people normally start reading from 
the left to the right), the right-hand page (this is the flat page when a magazine is open) or 
the cover page.55
It is common for people to be exposed simultaneously to both audio-visual stimuli and interactive information 
in many media-rich websites that contain a video sequence and clickable commercial information. Furthermore, 
people are increasingly watching movies, programmes, and other content via web links. Interactive digital TV, the 
merging of TV and Internet technology, has led to an integration of interactivity within the audio-visual content. 
These evolutions have led to many new entertainment and advertising formats. One of these new advertising formats 
is the telescopic ad. By means of a click on the call-to-action button in a traditional ad, content appears on screen 
that provides additional information.56 This interactivity embedded in the persuasive information has the capacity to 
evoke a cognitively involving experience.57 To avoid viewers missing part of their programming, this new advertising 
format allows people to follow the broadcasting content using the picture-in-picture technology.
When people are simultaneously exposed to interactive persuasive information and a programme context, they 
will divide their attention between both tasks. This can lead to an interference effect. Interference can be defined as 
the process by which our ability to recollect information is hindered by our exposure to some other information.58 
Advertising researchers distinguish between different types of interference. Perceptual interference is related to the 
simultaneous processing of information of different modalities (e.g. reading, listening) and/or different representa-
tion formats (verbal or non-verbal). Semantic interference takes place when an ad is placed within a programme of 
similar content; elements of the programme and ad merge together in a phenomenon known as meltdown, resulting 
in impaired recall. Besides the negative interference effects of simultaneous exposure to ad and context, positive 
reinforcement effects have also been observed. For example, prior research has shown that integrated multisensory 
cues can enhance learning and experience.59 Congruent context information may also cognitively prime the embed-
ded ad, leading to more attention and information processing.60
In two experiments, the effect of simultaneous exposure to a TV programme and an interactive ad on 
self-reported attention and clicking behaviour was studied. Experiment 1 examined perceptual interference/­
reinforcement, and Experiment 2 investigated semantic interference/reinforcement. In the first experiment (208 
participants) a sequence (six minutes) from the movie Taxi was shown. After participants responded to the call 
Research insight
Context effects in split-screen TV formats

MEDIA CONTEXT     347
to action, in the audio-visual programme context condition, the programme appeared in the upper-right-hand 
corner of the screen, by means of the picture-in-picture technology. In the auditory programme context condi-
tion, the programme was not visible, and the interactive information was available on the whole screen. The users 
could only hear the programme in the background. The advertising stimuli were combinations of a traditional 
30-second ad, with an integrated call to action (‘Click here for more information’), followed by an interactive part 
with clickable additional information related to the advertising message. The message was about the selective 
use of antibiotics given the threat of immunity to antibiotics over time. In the interactive part of the ad, partici-
pants could select five information buttons related to the advertising message. The interactive part of the ad was 
manipulated by adding pictures (non-verbal) to the textual information (verbal). The textual information was the 
same in both conditions. The participants received an email with a web link to the stimuli, followed by a ques-
tionnaire. The results showed that, in the case of an interactive ad containing text and pictures, a simultaneous 
audio-visual programme context leads to less attention and clicking than an auditory context. In other words, 
the audio-visual programme context interferes more with the verbal/pictorial interactive ad than the auditory 
programme context, implying a lower self-reported level of attention to the information and fewer clicks than in 
the auditory programme context.
In the second experiment (133 participants), the same 30-second ad from Experiment 1, with an integrated 
call to action followed by an interactive information part with clickable information, was used. The layout of the 
interactive part was a combination of text and pictures and was the same in all experimental conditions. A the-
matically incongruent programme context appeared in the same sequence as in Experiment 1 (a sequence from 
the movie Taxi in which there was a conversation between a man and a woman sitting in a taxi). The message 
of the ad (‘the correct use of antibiotics’) was thematically incongruent with the taxi sequence. The thematically 
congruent programme context was a sequence featuring patients in a hospital who received medication. The use 
of medicines to counter a virus and the medical context of the programme sequence were thematically congruent 
with the ad message about the use of antibiotics. The audio-visual programme context appeared simultaneously 
with the interactive information on screen, by means of picture-in-picture technology. Also the participants’ 
search goals were manipulated by using different calls to action. To evoke a goal-directed motivation to search 
in the information, a promotional incentive was embedded in the call to action (‘Click here and have a chance 
to win a bicycle’). Consequently, participants had a definite end goal: that is, correctly answering the questions 
in the interactive part for a chance to win a bicycle. Experiential motivation was induced by inviting participants 
to view more information (‘Click here for more information’). The study was administered in the same way as in 
Experiment 1. The results showed that, in the case of goal-directed browsing, a congruent programme context 
leads to more attention and clicking than an incongruent context, while there were no differences in attention 
and clicking when people were experientially motivated. Goal-directed people are less likely to be distracted from 
their primary task when the programme context is congruent than when it is incongruent. When the context is 
incongruent with the interactive ad, more attention and elaboration are necessary to encode and dissolve the 
incongruent context. When the user has an experiential goal to browse through information in the interactive 
ad, he or she is not focused on any specific information or stimulus. Thus, the user’s attention will be drawn 
to the audio-visual programme regardless of the (in)congruency between the interactive information and the 
audio-visual programme.61
Studies on the impact of media-style–ad-style congruency are scarce and reveal contra-
dictory conclusions. Some researchers claim that the better the fit between the ad and the 
media context, the more motivated consumers will be to process the ad and the easier 
this job will be for them. A computer ad inserted in a computer magazine, for instance, 
increases the likelihood that the reader wants to pay attention and is willing to process 
the ad, since the computer magazine makes the need for a computer or information on 
computers more salient and this evoked need stimulates the motivation to pay attention 
to stimuli that are relevant to the need. Similarly, people reading a magazine that evokes 
transformational needs, such as a beauty magazine, are more likely to look for transfor-
mational cues in ads, such as the attractiveness of the hair after using a certain shampoo, 
while reading a health magazine is more likely to make people pay attention to cues such 

348     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
as the revitalisation of damaged hair.62 Also, contexts evoking the same feeling as the ad 
appear to enhance ad responses as compared with contexts evoking a different feeling.63 
According to the priming principle, an ad can be interpreted on the basis of schemas 
(knowledge structures) activated or primed by the context.64 Congruency between the 
ad and the context means that the ad can be more easily interpreted since the relevant 
knowledge structures are already activated. However, some studies found no effects or 
even a positive impact associated with placing an ad in a style that is incongruent with the 
media context. This relation between ad–context congruency and ad effectiveness can be 
explained as follows: the novelty of the ad or the unexpectedness of the information given 
its context increases the attention to the ad because consumers see the ad as innovative and 
interesting. How can the contradictory results be explained and what should an advertiser 
go for: a context-congruent or a context-incongruent ad? The solution can be found in 
moderator variables. Apparently, people react differently depending on how involved they 
are with the product category.65 When product involvement is low, consumers go for the 
peripheral route of processing and it helps them if context and ad style are congruent. 
On the other hand, when product involvement is high, they are more likely to follow the 
central route. In this case, they are willing to expend more cognitive resources and seem 
to appreciate a context-incongruent ad more.
Concerning the intensity of context responses, two opposing views are held. Some claim 
that the more intense context responses are, the less capacity will be left for consumers to 
process the ad. As a consequence, less attention will be paid to the ad and the ad will be less 
effective. An exciting context inducing high arousal in respondents has been shown to lead to 
less positive ad responses than a romantic or cosy context which induced a significantly lower 
arousal level.66 However, other researchers claim that the more intense consumer responses to 
the context are, the more attentive and aroused they are and, as a result, the better the ads will 
be processed. Research results are mixed, but the majority of the findings point in the direction 
of a positive impact of intensity of context responses on attitudes and purchase intention.67 
Besides the intensity, the valence of context-induced responses (whether they are positive or 
negative) may also matter.68 Some researchers suggest that a context that evokes a positive 
mood induces less elaborate processing of embedded ads and a less positive attitude towards 
the ad. Two theories try to explain this.69 According to the cognitive capacity theory, a positive 
mood activates a whole bunch of information in memory that limits the consumer’s processing 
of incoming information. A second theory proposes that when people are in a positive mood, 
they try to keep this mood and, as a consequence, avoid all stimuli (such as ads) that could 
alter this situation. The opposite can be expected when they are in a neutral or a bad mood. 
On the other hand, there is also evidence that people who are in a good mood evaluate ads 
more positively and are more capable of, and willing to, process ad-related information. This 
can be explained by feelings transfer (see Chapter 3) by means of which the positive evaluation 
of the context is transferred (or misattributed) to the ad. However, the majority of the stud-
ies investigating the impact of context-induced mood on embedded ads find that emotional 
responses to the context indeed carry over to the ad, but not to the brand.70
Instead of facilitating or inhibiting consumers’ processing of advertising messages, the medium itself can also 
be the message. A recent study investigated the impact of creative media choice. In this study, creative media 
choice refers to the fact that the brand logo and slogan are shown, but that brand associations are primed by the 
Research insight
‘The medium is the message’

SUMMARY     349
Summary
In media planning, the decision is taken about what media and vehicles will be purchased, 
at what time and at what price. Media planning consists of a number of steps. After assess-
ing the communications environment and describing the target audience, media objectives 
have to be set, and media vehicles have to be selected and bought. Media objectives refer to 
­criteria, such as the frequency with which the target group has to be exposed to the message, 
and the reach or weight of a campaign, i.e. the number of desired contacts with the target 
group. Furthermore, the continuity or schedule of the campaign has to be decided on, and 
media costs have to be taken into account. Media selection is based on quantitative criteria, 
such as frequency, reach and seasonal influences, but also on qualitative criteria, such as 
image-building capacity, emotional impact, demonstration capacity and quality of repro-
duction. Technical criteria, such as production costs and media buying characteristics, also 
have to be taken into account. Each type of advertising medium (newspapers, magazines, 
TV, radio, digital, etc.) has its advantages and disadvantages. Furthermore, the media con-
text can have a considerable impact on advertising effectiveness. The role of arousal, mood 
and compatibility of media and ads appears to be important.
medium and, as a consequence, implicitly instead of explicitly communicated. Advantages of creative medium 
choice could be that:
1.	 The ad context is intentionally rather than incidentally processed.
2.	 The distinctiveness of the medium increases the transfer of associations from the medium to the brand.
3.	 The indirect approach creates less negative cognitive responses and enhances ad credibility and attitudes.
In a study, two products were investigated: an insurance company and an energy drink. The insurance company 
was promoted either on an egg or in a traditional newspaper. An egg was chosen because of its protective shell and 
the fact that it is a fragile and easily breakable product. The energy drink was promoted either on an elevator or in 
a traditional newspaper. An elevator was chosen because it is powerful, moves quickly and reminds people of the 
energy that is needed to walk up or down the stairs. About 600 students participated in the experiment. Results con-
firmed the hypotheses: the creative media enhanced the brand associations more than did the traditional medium 
(newspaper). Moreover, the creative media increased ad credibility significantly and induced significantly more 
positive ad and brand attitudes as compared with the traditional medium.71
Review questions
	 1.	 What are the various steps in the media planning process?
	 2.	 How does ad message repetition affect advertising effectiveness?
	 3.	 How can b@coefficient analysis be used to optimise message repetition?
	 4.	 What is the relationship between total and useful reach, net, gross and effective reach, 
opportunity to see, and gross and effective rating points?
	 5.	 How can media scheduling or continuity affect advertising effectiveness?
	 6.	 On the basis of which criteria should a media plan be composed?
	 7.	 What are the main advantages and disadvantages of print and audio-visual media?
	 8.	 Why is cinema advertising effective?
	 9.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of digital advertising?

350     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
Further reading
Geskey, R.D. (2015) Media Planning and Buying in the 21st Century: Integrating Traditional 
and Digital Media, 3rd edition. Rochester, MI: 2020:Marketing Communications LLC.
Katz, H.A. (2010) The Media Handbook: A Complete Guide to Advertising Media Selec-
tion, Planning, Research and Buying. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kelley, L.D. and Jugenheimer, D.W. (2011) Advertising Media Planning: A Brand Manage-
ment Approach. New York: M.E. Sharpe.
Sissors, J. and Baron, R. (2010) Advertising Media Planning, 6th edition. Chicago and New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Case 7:
Maes: a challenger brand with more character
Maes: a Belgian lager beer with character 
in decline
Jupiler (AB Inbev) is the market leader in the Belgian lager 
market. MaesPils is the number 2 brand and is brewed and 
marketed by the Alken-Maes Brewery. For many years, this 
brewery was owned by the British group Scottish & Newcastle, 
but in early 2008 was taken over by the Heineken Group.
Since 2002 the Belgian lager market has been in decline, 
with an average decrease in volume sold of 2% per year. 
This decline is mainly due to the on-trade channel (pubs 
and restaurants), while the off-trade channel (supermarkets) 
partly compensates for this trend (Figure 7.12).
At the same time Maes has lost 30% of volume sold in six 
years, a much larger decline than the average market. This 
is partly due to the fact that Maes has a greater share in on-
trade than in off-trade. On the other hand, Maes also loses 
sales substantially in the off-trade channel. In the remain-
der of this case study, only the off-trade channel is consid-
ered. The decreasing volume sales in supermarkets have a 
severe negative impact on Maes’s market share: from 9.7% 
in 2005 to 7.8% in 2008. Competition in the beer market is 
strong and has substantially changed over the last 20 years. 
In 1985 Maes had a volume market share of 17.8%, Jupiler 
(the market leader) 39.8% and the private labels 12.2%. In 
2008, there was one undisputable market leader that kept 
growing every year (Jupiler), and the private labels had a 
market share of about 33% (Figure 7.13). Maes is stuck in 
the middle and experiences pressure from both sides. The 
reason for the success of Jupiler is manifold. With its central 
brand promise ‘Men know why’, Jupiler has succeeded in 
appealing to a broad male audience. Its communications 
are consistent and synergetic and for many years the brand 
maintained a high share of voice in Belgian beer advertising 
(50% in 2008 as opposed to 21% for Maes). Moreover, for 
many years Jupiler has sponsored the major football league 
in Belgium, therefore called the ‘Jupiler League’.
Ambitious objectives for  
a facelifted Maes
In April 2009 MaesPils was relaunched with the ambition 
to position Maes again as a strong brand. The product and 
packaging went through a thorough facelift and a new 
and modern house style was developed. The product now 
contains more malt and has a fuller, more bitter taste. The 
price was increased by 8%. The case describes the relaunch 
of Maes in two campaign waves: May–June and October–
November 2009.
The commercial objective of the campaign was to half 
the 25-year continuous decline in off-trade market share 
within the campaign period. At the end of 2008, the pro-
jected market share for 2009 without any campaign was 

CASE 7     351
Figure 7.12  Evolution of lager volume per channel
Figure 7.13  Market share of lager brands in Belgium in the off-trade channel

352     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
for refreshingly new, challenging and modern brands with 
guts. For them, going out and drinking beer is no longer the 
exclusive territory of men and their stereotypical jokes, but 
also includes women.
A new beer, a new creative approach
The creative approach and the resulting campaign media 
and tools choice were unusual for a beer brand, and con-
sistent with the communications strategy. The following 
guidelines were applied in all communication tools:
● The product is the hero; a powerful emphasis on the 
product, leading to an appeal in appetite.
● Blue (the Maes colour) is the differentiating colour.
● A straightforward message that can be easily decoded by 
all consumers.
● Self-confidence and intelligent humour.
The credentials of the campaign aimed at making the brand 
a hero again. The key visual introduced the new beer and 
new bottle in all their glory. The visual was meant to evoke 
pride and confidence and generate an appetite appeal. It 
was used in all campaign tools during the first wave. The trial 
campaign tried to install Maes as an active brand. Through 
proximity and innovative trial actions, Maes directed con-
sumers to make them taste the new beer.
Two large-scale brand activations were rolled out, 
one in May and one in November. In the first one, ‘Put 
a case in front of your window’, people were asked to 
put an empty beer case of whatever brand in front of 
their window. Maes exchanged this empty case for a full 
one (24 bottles). During the nine-day campaign, 36 000 
cases of Maes were exchanged. The campaign was inten-
sively discussed in the (social) media. As a result of this 
campaign, Maes ended up in the refrigerator of many 
potential consumers that were up to then loyal to the 
market leader. They now had the opportunity to try Maes 
24 times. In the second brand activation campaign, ‘A can 
with a message’, Maes actively sought social consensus. 
Via the website maes.be friends could send a four-pack 
of Maes to their friends’ homes, including a message to 
their friends. The 50 000 available packs were sent and 
delivered within days, generating 50 000 ambassadors for 
Maes. Both actions aimed at generating trial and sympa-
thy in a surprising and novel way.
Consistent with the communications and creative strat-
egy, the campaign tools were radically different from those 
of the competitors. Traditionally, TV has been the primary 
medium in a beer campaign. It allows emotions to be 
expressed and reaches a broad target group at the moment 
of consumption. Maes decided to do it differently. Outdoor 
was the primary medium of its campaign. This allowed the 
7.2%. During the first few months of 2009, the situation got 
worse. Without any additional efforts, in March the pro-
jected market share was 6.3%. The aim was to reach a mar-
ket share of 7.8% (the same as in 2008) in 2009. Therefore, 
during the last eight months of 2008, substantial growth had 
to be realised to attain this objective.
The year-long decline of Maes resulted in a loss of social 
consensus around the brand. Consumers doubted Maes’s 
taste and even Maes drinkers no longer wanted to admit 
their preference in public. Maes had become a loser brand, 
and consumers chose the leader. The communications 
strategy of the new campaign therefore aimed at restor-
ing the social consensus. Beer drinkers should again trust 
and love Maes. The communications strategy was built on 
three pillars:
1.	 Brand credentials. Restore trust in the beer and the 
brand. The product is at the focus of the campaign. 
Maes has changed and we are confident that it tastes 
better.
2.	 Trial. As many Belgians as possible should try the new 
Maes. Tasting is believing. Prejudices can best be coun-
tered by experience. Massive sampling is key. The objec-
tive is to break old habits and bring Maes back into the 
consideration set.
3.	 Brand attitude. Install a unique and recognisable 
behaviour of the brand as a real challenger. Just a good 
product is not sufficient. People should love the brand. 
Next to the strong Jupiler brand, it is necessary to build 
a strong and differentiated identity and attitude: no 
bullshit, straightforward, with guts and self-confidence, 
but with enough self-relativisation, a brand that does 
real things and not just communicates.
Firstly, brand credentials were restored, then a trial was 
generated. Throughout the whole campaign, attitudes were 
built up. The communications objectives were as follows:
1.	 Increase spontaneous awareness, advertising awareness 
and product quality attributes: excellent quality and 
good taste, compared with the pre-test.
2.	 Increase trial, decrease the number of rejectors (those 
who do not like Maes at all) and realise a significant 
increase in brand adoption.
3.	 Install attitude on the basis of the following attributes: 
sympathetic, continuously does new and interesting 
stuff, a brand that is up to date, a brand with character, 
self-confident.
The focal target group of the campaign was ‘entry drinkers’, 
males between 18 and 35 who have not yet made their beer 
choice and are open to a different brand than the market 
leader. They often see Jupiler as a brand of the older genera-
tion, and want something else. These youngsters are looking 

CASE 7     353
The evolution of awareness and image parameters was 
measured four times: in March (pre-test), May–June, Sep-
tember and December 2009. The measurements show that 
there was a strong and immediate impact in May–June that 
continued throughout the year (Figure 7.15). In terms of 
trial, the objective was to decrease the number of rejec-
tors and to increase the number of adopters. Figure 7.16 
illustrates that this objective was also reached.
The third objective of the communications strategy was to 
improve brand image on a number of key attributes. ­Figure 7.17 
illustrates that brand image has substantially improved on rel-
evant brand dimensions. These excellent results were obtained 
among others because the campaign scored very well in differ-
ent media, as illustrated in Table 7.8 and Figure 7.18.
Maes has largely reached its objectives in this success-
ful relaunch campaign. Not only have more beer drinkers 
found their way to Maes and think it is a better beer and 
a nicer brand, but also they want to pay more for it. The 
combination of the market share and the 8% price increase 
led to a substantial increase in Maes’s turnover. The Maes 
campaign received a Belgian Gold Effie Award in 2010.
Questions
1.	 Describe and assess the problem identification by Maes 
and the resulting strategic communications approach 
and creative idea.
2.	 Do you think the translation of objectives into media 
solutions makes sense? Why or why not?
3.	 Assess the media mix and campaign components. Would 
you have used a different approach with different media 
and a different mix? Why or why not?
4.	 Assess the effectiveness of the campaign. Was it success-
ful? Why or why not?
brand to be on the street, prominently and confidently talk-
ing to beer drinkers. Outdoor was complemented by radio 
commercials to tell the Maes story in more detail. However, 
traditional mass media were only a minor part of the media 
mix. Maes wanted to ‘do’ rather than ‘talk’. Consequently, 
a large part of the budget was devoted to brand activation, 
to get in touch with the consumer. Brand activation was not 
used as a tactical tool, but as an image-building branding 
tool. The mass media were prominently used to announce 
the brand activation campaign, mixing commercials and 
editorial content. Next to ‘paid media’, ‘earned media’ 
were also used: public relations, blogs and social media. 
The high ‘buzz potential’ of the brand activation campaigns 
generated a lot of free media coverage and from consum-
ers talking about the brand in blogs, on Internet forums 
and in social media. This resulted in the following media 
mix (percentages of the total budget): TV 12.8%, radio 7.8%, 
newspapers 0.8%, magazines 0.8%, outdoor 16.9%, brand 
activation 23.5%, public relations 2%, point-of-sales 9.8% 
and events 23.5%.
As a reaction to the Maes campaign, market leader 
Jupiler increased its promotional pressure by lowering its 
prices and increasing sales promotion activity, resulting 
in a substantial decrease in the average sales price and 
increased visibility in the shops.
Impressive results
The commercial objective was to realise a market share of 
7.8% in 2009. Maes’s market share in 2009 was 8.1%, sub-
stantially above the objective. Moreover, since Maes did not 
do well during the first three months of 2009, this had to 
be compensated during the campaign period. Market share 
during this period was 8.3% (Figure 7.14).
Figure 7.14  Maes market share: results versus objectives

354     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
Figure 7.16  Commitment to Maes
Figure 7.15  Evolution of brand credentials

CASE 7     355
Figure 7.17  Evolution of Maes brand image
Maes
Average
I like it
83%
58%
Credible
92%
51%
Original
89%
61%
Informative
94%
55%
Inciting
71%
45%
Table 7.8  Consumer evaluation outdoor campaign
Figure 7.18  Recognition and attribution radio campaign
Sources: Maes Effie case 2010; Bert Denis, TBWA Brussels.

356     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
(1974) ‘Advertising as Information’, Journal of Political 
Economy, 82(4), 729–54.
18	 Donnelly, W.J. (1996) Planning Media: Strategy and 
Imagination. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
19	 Katz, H. (2003) The Media Handbook. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
20	 Donnelly, W.J. (1996) Planning Media: Strategy and 
Imagination. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
21	 Cheong, Y. and Leckenby, J.D. (2006) ‘An evaluation of 
advertising media spending efficiency using data envelop-
ment analysis’, Proceedings of the 2006 Conference of the 
American Academy of Advertising, Reno, NV, 263–71.
22	 Roberts, D.F., Foehr, U.G. and Rideout, V. (2005) Genera-
tion M: Media in the Lives of 8–18-Year-Olds. Menlo 
Park, CA: Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
23	 Roberts. D.F., Foehr, U.G. and Rideout, V. (2005) Genera-
tion M: Media in the Lives of 8–18-Year-Olds. Menlo 
Park, CA: Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
24	 Foehr, U.G. (2006) Media Multitasking Among American 
Youth: Prevalence, Predictors and Pairings. Menlo Park, 
CA: Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
25	 Armstrong, G.B. and Chung, L. (2000) ‘Background tel-
evision and reading memory in context: assessing TV 
interference and facilitative context effects on encoding 
versus retrieval processes’, Communication Research, 27, 
327–52; Pool, M.M., Koolstra, C.M. and van der Voort 
T.H. (2003) ‘Background media and homework perfor-
mance’, Journal of Communication, 53, 74–87; Brasel, 
A. and Gips, J. (2011) ‘Media multitasking behavior: 
concurrent television and computer usage’, Cyberpsy-
chology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 14(9), 527–34.
26	 Hembrooke, H. and Gay, G. (2003) ‘The laptop and the 
lecture: the effects of multitasking in learning environ-
ments’, Journal of Computing in Higher Education, 
15(1), 46–64.
27	 Wang, Z. and Tchernev, J. (2012) ‘The “myth” of media 
multitasking: reciprocal dynamics of media multitask-
ing, personal needs, and gratifications’, Journal of Com-
munication, 62(3), 493–513.
28	 Pashler, H. (1994) ‘Dual-task interference in simple tasks: 
data and theory’, Psychological Bulletin, 116(2), 220–44.
29	 Kazakova, S., Cauberghe, V., Pandelaere, M. and 
De Pelsmacker, P. (2015) ‘Can’t see the forest for 
the tress? The effect of media multitasking on cog-
nitive processing style’, Media Psychology, DOI: 
10.1080/15213269.2015.1006789.
30	 IP Peaktime (2004) Television 2004: European Key Fac-
tors. Neuilly-sur-Seine, Cedex, Brussels: IP; IP Peaktime 
(2002) Radio 2002: European Key Factors. Neuilly-sur-
Seine, Cedex, Brussels: IP.
31	 Jones, J.P. (2002) The Ultimate Secrets of Advertising. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
32	 Ephron, E. (1995) ‘More weeks, less weight: the self-space 
model of advertising’, Journal of Advertising Research, 
35(3), 18–23.
1	 Donnelly, W.J. (1996) Planning Media: Strategy and 
Imagination. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
2	 Donnelly, W.J. (1996) Planning Media: Strategy and 
Imagination. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
3	 Nordhielm, C.L. (2002) ‘The influence of level of pro-
cessing on advertising repetition effects’, Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 29 (December), 371–82.
4	 Pechman, C. and Stewart, D.W. (1989) ‘Advertising 
repetition: a critical review of wear-in and wear-out’, 
Current Issues and Research in Advertising, 12, 285–330.
5	 MacInnis, D.J., Rao, A.G. and Weiss, A.M. (2002) ‘Assess-
ing when increased media weight of real-world advertise-
ments helps sales’, Journal of Marketing Research, 39 
(November), 391–407.
6	 Nordhielm, C.L. (2002) ‘The influence of level of pro-
cessing on advertising repetition effects’, Journal of Con-
sumer Research, 29 (December), 371–82.
7	 Kirmani, A. (1997) ‘Advertising repetition as a signal of 
quality: if it’s advertised so much, something must be 
wrong’, Journal of Advertising, 26(3), 77–86.
8	 Kirmani, A. (1997) ‘Advertising repetition as a signal of 
quality: if it’s advertised so much, something must be 
wrong’, Journal of Advertising, 26(3), 77–86.
9	 Kretchmer, S.B. (2005) ‘Changing views of commerciali-
zation in digital games: in-game advertising and adver-
games as worlds in play’, Paper presented at DIGTAR 
Conference, Changing Views: Worlds in Play, available 
at http://www.gamesconference.org/digra2005/overview 
.php (accessed June 2009).
10	 Entertainment Video Software Association (2006) ‘Sales, 
demographics and usage data 2006’, http://www.theesa.
com/facts/pdys/EAS_EF_2006.pdf (accessed June 2009).
11	 Shields, M. (2006) ‘In-game ads could reach $2 bil’, 
Mediaweek, 12 April.
12	 Cauberghe, V. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2010) ‘Advergames: 
the impact of brand prominence and game repetition on 
brand responses’, Journal of Advertising, 39(1), 5–18.
13	 Newell, S.J. and Henderson, K.V. (1998) ‘Super Bowl 
advertising: field testing the importance of advertisement 
frequency, length and placement on recall’, Journal of 
Marketing Communication, 4(4), 237–48.
14	 Berger, I.E. and Mitchell, A.A. (1989) ‘The effect of 
advertising on ad accessibility, attitude confidence, 
and the attitude–behavior relationship’, Journal of 
­Consumer Research, 16 (December), 269–79.
15	 Hawkins, S.A. and Hoch, S.J. (1992) ‘Low involvement 
learning: memory without evaluation’, Journal of 
­Consumer Research, 19 (September), 212–25.
16	 D’Sousa, G. and Rao, R.C. (1995) ‘Can repeating an 
advertisement more frequently than the competition 
affect brand preference in a mature market?’, Journal of 
Marketing, 59, 32–42.
17	 Kirmani, A. (1997) ‘Advertising repetition as a signal of 
quality: if it’s advertised so much, something must be 
wrong’, Journal of Advertising, 26(3), 77–86; Nelson, P. 
References

REFERENCES     357
51	 Ha, L. (1996) ‘Observations: advertising clutter in con-
sumer magazines: dimensions and effects’, Journal of 
Advertising Research, 36(4), 76–81.
52	 Moorman, M. (2003) ‘Context considered: the rela-
tionship between media environments and advertising 
effects’, Doctoral Dissertation, University of Amsterdam.
53	 Finn, A. (1988) ‘Print ad recognition readership scores: an 
information processing perspective’, Journal of Market-
ing Research, 25 (May), 168–77; Pieters, R. and de Klerk-
Warmerdam, M. (1993) ‘Duration, serial position and 
competitive clutter effects on the memory for television 
advertising’, in Chias, I.J. and Sureda, J. (eds), ­Marketing 
for the New Europe: Dealing with Complexity, Proceed-
ings of the 22nd Annual Conference of the European 
Marketing Academy. Barcelona: EMAC, 59–68.
54	 Olson, D. (1994) ‘The sounds of silence: functions and 
use of silence in television advertising’, Journal of 
Advertising Research (September/October), 89–95.
55	 Janiszewski, C. (1990) ‘The influence of print advertise-
ment organization on affect toward a brand name’, Jour-
nal of Consumer Research, 17, 53–65; Finn, A. (1988) 
‘Print ad recognition readership scores: an information 
processing perspective’, Journal of Marketing Research, 
25 (May), 168–77.
56	 Reading, N., Bellman, S., Varan, D. and Winzar, H.F. 
(2006) ‘Effectiveness of telescopic ads delivered via per-
sonal video recorders’, Journal of Advertising Research, 
46(2), 217–27.
57	 Shrum, L.J. (ed.) (2004) The Psychology of Entertainment 
Media: Blurring the Lines Between Entertainment and Per-
suasion. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
58	 Ryu, G., Lim, E.A., Tan, L.T.L. and Han, Y.J. (2007) 
‘Preattentive processing of banner advertisements: the 
role of modality, location, and interference’, Electronic 
Commerce Research and Applications, 6, 6–18.
59	 Zenhui, J.J. and Bensabat, I. (2007) ‘The effects of pres-
entation formats and task complexity on online consum-
ers’ product understanding’, MIS Quarterly 2007, 31(3), 
475–99.
60	 Herr, P.M. (1989) ‘Priming price: prior knowledge and 
context effects’, Journal of  Consumer Research, 16 
(June), 67–75.
61	 Cauberghe, V., De Pelsmacker, P. and Janssens, W. (2009) 
‘Simultaneous exposure to a program and advertising 
content in an interactive context: perceptual and seman-
tic interference and reinforcement’, Journal of Business 
Research, 63(10), 972–8.
62	 Park, C. and Young, M. (1986) ‘Consumer response to 
television commercials: the impact of involvement and 
background music on brand attitude formation’, Journal 
of Marketing Research, 23 (February), 11–24.
63	 Faseur, T. and Geuens, M. (2006) ‘Different positive feel-
ings leading to different ad evaluations: the case of cosi-
ness, excitement and romance’, Journal of Advertising, 
35(4), 129–420.
64	 Yi, Y. (1993) ‘Contextual Priming effects in print adver-
tisements: the moderating role of prior knowledge’, 
Journal of Advertising, 22 (1 March), 1–10.
33	 De Pelsmacker, P., Geuens, M. and Vermeer, I. (2004) ‘The 
importance of media planning, ad likeability and brand 
position on ad and brand recognition in radio spots’, 
International Journal of Market Research, 46(4), 465–77.
34	 McDonald, C. (1997) ‘From “frequency” to 
“­continuity” – is it a new dawn?’, Journal of Advertis-
ing Research, 37(4), 21–25.
35	 Newell, S.J. and Henderson, K.V. (1998) ‘Super Bowl adver-
tising: field-testing the importance of advertising frequency, 
length and placement on recall’, Journal of Marketing 
Communications, 4(3), 237–48; D’Souza, G. and Rao, R.C. 
(1995) ‘Can repeating an advertisement more frequently 
than the competition affect brand preference in a mature 
market?’, Journal of Marketing, 59 (April), 32–42.
36	 Katz, H. (2003) The Media Handbook. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
37	 Katz, H. (2003) The Media Handbook. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
38	 De Landtsheer, D., Van Rensbergen, N. and Van Roy, T. 
(2001) Mediaplanning: Begrijpen en Benutten (Media-
planning: Understanding and Using), Mechelen: Koncept.
39	 De Morgen, 23 September 2006.
40	 www.jcdecaux.nl (accessed 24 September 2012).
41	 De Morgen, 8 February 2008.
42	 Case, T. (2002) ‘Media plan of the year’, Adweek, 43(25), 
34–36.
43	 Magiera, M. (1989) ‘Advertisers crowd onto the big 
screen’, Advertising Age, 60(40), 14–15.
44	 Doctorow, D., Hoblit, R. and Sekhar, A. (2009) ‘Measur-
ing marketing: McKinsey Global Survey results’, McKin-
sey Quarterly, March, 1–3.
45	 Cornell, J.A. (2002) Experiments with Mixtures: Designs, 
Models, and the Analysis of Mixture Data. New York, 
NY: Wiley.
46	 Havlena, W., Cardarelli, R. and De Montigny, M. (2007) 
‘Quantifying the isolated and synergistic effects of expo-
sure frequency for TV, print, and Internet advertising’, 
Journal of Advertising Research, 47(3), 215–21; Reynar, 
A., Phillips, J. and Heumann, S. (2010) ‘New technolo-
gies drive CPG media mix optimization’, Journal of 
Advertising Research, 50(4), 416–27; Vakratsas, D. and 
Ma, Z. (2005) ‘A look at the long-run effectiveness of 
multimedia advertising and its implications for budget 
allocation decisions’, Journal of Advertising Research, 
45(2), 241–54.
47	 Moorman, M. (2003) ‘Context considered: the rela-
tionship between media environments and advertising 
effects’, Doctoral Dissertation, University of Amsterdam.
48	 De Pelsmacker, P., Geuens, M. and Anckaert, P. (2002) 
‘Media context and advertising effectiveness: the role of 
context appreciation and context-ad similarity’, Journal 
of Advertising, 31(2), 49–61.
49	 Moorman, M. (2003) ‘Context considered: the relation-
ship between media environments and advertising effects’ 
Doctoral Dissertation, University of Amsterdam.
50	 Bushman, B.J. and Bonacci, A.M. (2002) ‘Violence 
and sex impair memory for television ads’, Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 87(3), 557–64.

358     CHAPTER 7  MEDIA PLANNING
context appreciation and context-ad similarity’, Journal 
of Advertising, 31(2), 49–61.
69	 Lee, A. and Sternthal, B. (1999) ‘The effects of positive 
mood on memory’, Journal of Consumer Research, 26, 
115–27.
70	 Moorman, M. (2003) ‘Context considered: the rela-
tionship between media environments and advertising 
effects’, Doctoral Dissertation, University of Amsterdam.
71	 Dahlén, M. (2005) ‘The medium as a contextual cue: 
effects of creative media choice’, Journal of Advertising, 
34(3), 89–98.
65	 De Pelsmacker, P., Geuens, M. and Anckaert, P. (2002) 
‘Media context and advertising effectiveness: the role of 
context appreciation and context-ad similarity’, Journal 
of Advertising, 31(2), 49–61.
66	 Faseur, T. and Geuens, M. (2006) ‘Different positive feel-
ings leading to different ad evaluations: the case of cosi-
ness, excitement and romance’, Journal of Advertising, 
35(4), 129–420.
67	 Moorman, M. (2003) ‘Context considered: the rela-
tionship between media environments and advertising 
effects’, Doctoral Dissertation, University of Amsterdam.
68	 De Pelsmacker, P., Geuens, M. and Anckaert, P. (2002) 
‘Media context and advertising effectiveness: the role of 

Chapter 8
Brand activation
Chapter outline
Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Understand why brand activation is increasingly important
● Learn about the various types of brand activation (sales promotions, point-of-
purchase communication and experiential approaches) and their objectives
● Understand to what extent the various types of brand activation are effective
359

360     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
Introduction
Consumers have an abundance of choice. They can quickly compare alternatives on the 
Internet or solicit other consumers’ opinions. Products are available anywhere and anytime. 
Further, competition in many markets has become fierce as product categories moved into 
their maturity stage. In such environments, passive communications are not enough. Adver-
tising, PR and sponsorship can help build awareness, brand knowledge and brand image, 
but ultimately companies need sales. In that respect brand activation plays an important 
role. Brand activation shifts the focus of marketing communications to the heart of market-
ing: stimulating the purchase process.1 Brand activation means bringing consumers from a 
passive to an active state, to a state where they are ready to purchase and repurchase. This 
chapter discusses three important tools by which brand activation can occur: sales promo-
tions, point-of-purchase communications and brand experiences.
Sales promotions
Unlike many other instruments in the communications mix, sales promotions are a category 
of techniques aimed at increasing sales in the short run, and therefore mostly used for a 
short period of time.2 Essentially, sales promotions are ‘action communications’ to generate 
extra sales, both from existing customers purchasing more products and by (temporarily) 
attracting new customers, on the basis of a temporary incentive or deal. The main charac-
teristics of promotions are that they are limited in time and space, they offer better value 
for money and they attempt to provoke an immediate behavioural response.
The effectiveness of promotions is often attributed to the operant conditioning mecha-
nism: behaviour that is rewarded serves to reinforce future behaviour. Sales promotions are, 
as a result of this type of conditioning, quickly recognised by consumers as a reinforcer, a 
reward, based on their past experience. Once this reward feeling is conditioned, it becomes 
the standard behavioural response. In other words, sales promotions lead to habit forma-
tion. For this mechanism to take place, the incentive has to be important enough for a 
consumer to notice a relevant difference from his or her anchorpoint, i.e. the ‘normal’ price 
quality expectation. In other words, the incentive has to exceed the ‘just noticeable difference 
threshold’.3 Promotions have to be substantial enough to trigger a behavioural response. 
Also priming is a mechanism that may explain why promotions work. A short exposure to a 
promotional ‘prime’ may motivate people to buy (more of) a product that is on promotion.
The growing importance of sales promotions
Sales promotions are a very important instrument of the communications mix. In 1980, 
American companies spent 44% of their advertising and promotions budget on advertising.4 
Up until the 1980s, in most countries, about 60% of the communications budget was spent on 
advertising. Since then, sales promotion expenditures have constantly increased, outweighing 
advertising expenditures.5 In 2008, sales promotion represented three-quarters of the com-
munications budget.6 Now, it is estimated that about 56% of UK grocery sales and more 
than 40% of US grocery sales come from products on promotion.7 The European average is 
estimated to be 25%.8 This evolution can be attributed to a number of factors (Figure 8.1).
In an increasing number of product categories, more and more brands and product 
lines are offered and differences in intrinsic qualities between brands have become smaller. 
Therefore, brand differentiation on the basis of advertising becomes increasingly difficult. 
Promotion is seen as a useful tool to attract the attention of target groups and to ‘seduce’ 
them into buying their brands. Traditional advertising has also become less effective due to 

SALES PROMOTIONS     361
Figure 8.1  Factors affecting the increasing use of sales promotions
Source: Anthony Hatley/Alamy Stock Photo.

362     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
communications clutter and ad avoidance. Therefore, marketers are looking for other tools 
to attract consumers’ attention to their brands.
Consumers, at least for certain fast-moving consumer product categories, are less brand 
loyal, and are becoming increasingly price-conscious, a trend which the recent worldwide cri-
sis only increased. This results in an increased response to material incentives, such as promo-
tions. In a 2011 online survey of more than 25 000 Internet respondents across 51 countries, 
only 9% appeared to have taken no particular actions to save on household expenses as com-
pared with the year before. The most popular actions undertaken by the other respondents 
were looking out for sales, using coupons, shopping at value retailers and looking for large 
value packs (Figure 8.2).9 Moreover, consumers are no longer loyal to one single brand in a 
product category. Rather, most consumers are ‘portfolio buyers’. They have a mental port-
folio of a number of brands from which they make their choice. This choice is often based 
on situational criteria, such as which brand is on promotion at the time of the shopping trip.
The majority of buying decisions take place within the retail outlet. An increasing num-
ber of product or brand purchasing decisions are essentially impulse-buying decisions. Since 
communications efforts are most effective at the time and place when and where the con-
sumer makes his or her decision, in-store communications elements and incentives have 
become more attractive tools of persuasion.
Companies are becoming increasingly short-term orientated. However, the effects of tra-
ditional advertising campaigns only become visible in the long run. Product managers who 
want to see immediate results from their communications efforts will therefore be tempted 
to use promotion tools rather than long-term thematic advertising campaigns. Moreover, 
management also appears to stimulate the use of sales promotions at fiscal quarter ends 
to boost earnings in order to meet key benchmarks. Research shows that the quarterly net 
income can be boosted up to 5% depending on the depth and the duration of the promotion, 
although it comes at a cost in the following period of about 7.5% of quarterly net income.10 
The result of a promotion campaign can be more easily measured than that of an advertising 
campaign. Advertising is often aimed at obtaining intermediate effects, such as awareness 
and favourable attitudes, eventually leading to increased sales. Promotions are aimed at an 
immediate behavioural response, which can be readily measured. The immediate availabil-
ity of results for most product managers is a very welcome characteristic of promotions. 
Finally, distribution channels are becoming increasingly powerful. Retailers increasingly 
offer private label goods, resulting in less shelf space for manufacturer brands and thus 
stronger competition. Many brands are jostling for shelf space and, as a result, retailers are 
in a position to decide which brands will obtain shelf space under which conditions. Often, 
promotional tools are used to persuade the trade channel. Furthermore, the distribution 
channel is taking an increasing part of the promotional activity of manufacturers. On top 
of that, scanning technology increasingly allows for more diverse types of promotion that 
can be conveniently applied and processed.11
Figure 8.2  Saving strategies adopted worldwide by households in response to the crisis
Source: from ‘Shopping and saving strategies around the world’, The Nielsen Company (2011), http://www.nielsen.com/content/
corporate/us/en/insights/reports-downloads/2011/global-shopping-survey-oct-2011.html.

SALES PROMOTIONS     363
Objectives and target groups of sales promotion
Based on the initiator of the promotions and the chosen target groups, several types of 
promotions can be distinguished (Figure 8.3). The initiator of the promotions can be either 
the manufacturer or the retailer. Promotions can be aimed at three types of audiences: 
distributors, the sales force and the end-consumer. Normally, retailers only promote to end-
consumers, whereas manufacturers can target their efforts at all three target groups. This 
results in four types of promotions:
● consumer promotions by manufacturers;
● consumer promotions by retailers;
● trade promotions by manufacturers, aimed at distributors;
● sales force promotions by manufacturers.
The first two types are essentially similar in nature, since they are aimed at the 
end-consumer.
Consumer promotions can have several objectives and target groups12 (Figure 8.4). Poten-
tial new customers can be attracted to try the product. Inducing trial by new customers is 
one of the most important objectives of a promotion campaign. This ‘horizontal’ effect 
results from brand-switching (i.e. consumers of competing brands purchase the promoted 
brand), or from attracting consumers who have never tried the product category before. 
Figure 8.3  Basic types of sales promotions
Figure 8.4  Objectives and target groups of consumer promotions

364     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
The effect of marketing efforts is increasingly dependent on the co-operation of the distribu-
tion channel. To that end, trade promotions are used to persuade channel members to include the 
product in their mix, to give it appropriate shelf space and to assist in promoting the product to the 
end-consumer. One of the most important objectives of trade promotions is to gain the support of 
You are walking through your supermarket on an ordinary weekday. In the wine department, there is a flat-screen TV 
telling you that during the weekend there will be a 30% discount on your favourite wine. You take your mobile phone, 
use it to locate the flat-screen via Bluetooth, which, in turn, sends a code to your phone. The next weekend you buy 
the bottles of wine, show the code on your phone at the checkout, and get the discount. You are satisfied because you 
don’t need to clip coupons from your newspaper or supermarket brochure. And the supermarket is happy because 
you returned over the weekend, probably spending more money than just on the wine, and you may have told your 
friends who may normally go to a different supermarket. You can even forward the electronic coupon to them.
The new technology is called BluPull and was developed with partners such as Panasonic, JVC, Coca-Cola, Volvo 
and Carlsberg. The application also allows for video to be downloaded. For instance, you can record a promotional 
film on how to operate a piece of equipment, shown in a do-it-yourself store, on your mobile phone, and upload 
it to your computer to have a closer look at it at home. The system is useful not only for consumers and shops, but 
also for advertisers. The latter can keep track of the number of consumers who downloaded the promotion or the 
video, which enables them to assess the return on investment of their promotions even better.13
Business insight
Bluetooth changes the world of promotions
Manufacturers also frequently neutralise or disrupt the competition (spoiler campaigns), 
by pre-emptively promoting their own brands just before or during the launch of a competi-
tive brand or communications campaign. Trial promotions are particularly important when 
launching a new brand or a new item in a product line. When a retailer opens a new store, 
trial promotions (in this case by the retailer) can be an important tool to generate store 
traffic, in other words to make consumers enter the store.
Existing customers can be made loyal, and loyal customers can be rewarded for their 
loyalty. For a marketer it may be more important (and certainly less expensive) to retain a 
(loyal) customer than to convince a competitor’s client to switch brands. Therefore, promo-
tions are frequently aimed at inducing repeat purchase or rewarding loyal customers to stop 
them trying a competitor’s product on promotion. Increasingly, loyalty programmes are used 
to build databases by collecting valuable data on consumers for further use.
Promotions can be used to increase market size, as such, by stimulating the use of an entire 
product category. Promotions of this type are particularly suitable for market leaders who 
benefit most from a growing market or from a market without seasonal fluctuations. Exam-
ples are last-minute offerings, or selling ice cream during winter. Another way of inducing 
this ‘vertical effect’ of market growth is to increase sales with existing consumers. Consumer 
‘basket-filling’ (e.g. by giving discounts when large volumes are purchased) not only increases 
sales, but also serves as a buffer against competitors’ actions. As long as the consumer has 
sufficient stock of the product, he or she may be less inclined to try a competitor’s pro-
motional offerings. Alternatively, promotions allow manufacturers to attract deal-sensitive 
consumers, and in that way enlarge their market. In many cases, promotions are also used 
to allow manufacturers to temporarily adjust demand to supply or in case of idle capacity.
Finally, promotions can serve as reinforcers of other communications tools. An advertis-
ing campaign can have a greater impact if a promotion is included. The response to a direct 
mailing campaign may be much more effective if the mail is linked to a promotional offer. 
This symbiotic effect is often counted on in mail order catalogue selling.

CONSUMER PROMOTIONS     365
the distribution channel, both wholesaler and retailer, when launching a new product. In order for 
an end-consumer to be able to buy the product, it has to be on the shelves in sufficient quantities 
and in a sufficiently large number of retail stores. Since the number of new products is increasing 
steadily, the trade channel has to choose which ones to carry in its assortment and to promote. 
In that case, trade promotions precede consumer promotions, and successful trade promotion is 
a prerequisite for an effective new product launch. In that respect, trade promotion is also ‘trial’ 
promotion in the sense that the distribution channel has to be persuaded to include the new prod-
uct in its assortment. Furthermore, the success of a new product often depends on the number 
of retail outlets in which the product is on the shelf. Therefore, trade promotions are often aimed 
at intensifying distribution in terms of the number of outlets in which the product is available.
For existing products, it is useful to keep the trade channel motivated to sell the brand. 
Trade promotions are aimed at maintaining shelf space or at inducing the retailer to pro-
mote the product by means of retailer promotions. One way to motivate the trade channel 
to push the product is by increasing its stock. Full warehouses induce the trade to pay more 
attention to selling the products in stock, i.e. to give them more shelf space and to pro-
mote the products actively themselves. On the other hand, trade promotions can be used to 
decrease the stock of a product in the trade channel rapidly, e.g. when a new product launch 
is being prepared. In a more general sense, trade promotions are used to keep the distribu-
tion channel loyal to a product (category). Much as in the case of ‘rewarding’ the consumer 
for loyalty to a brand by means of consumer promotions, the distribution channel may be 
rewarded for its loyalty in giving shelf space to a product by means of trade promotions.
The sales force are an integral part of the distribution effort, since they are the first link 
in the distribution channel. As a result, offering them incentives to market the product 
well is a vital first step in any marketing strategy. The most important objectives of sales 
force promotion are to induce the sales force to approach new customers, more specifically 
members of the trade channel, to try the product, or to increase the volume purchased 
by existing customers. In industrial marketing situations, new final customers can be the 
target. The sales force can also be encouraged to push new or existing brands as part of an 
integrated short-term sales promotions effort, or in support of an advertising campaign. 
As in consumer promotions, a synergetic effect between sales force promotions and other 
communications tools, such as advertising, can be established. Finally, the sales force can 
be motivated to help the distribution channel to improve exposure of the brand, by giving 
it more and better shelf space, keeping the shelves filled, checking stocks, and pushing and 
improving the use of displays and other in-store communications material.
Depending on the objective of the promotions, a number of specific tools can be used. 
An overview of consumer and trade promotion techniques is given in the following sections.
Consumer promotions
Depending on the type of incentive, we distinguish three categories of consumer promo-
tions: monetary incentives, product promotions and the chance to win a prize (Table 8.1).
Table 8.1  Consumer promotion tools
Monetary incentives
Chance to win a prize
Product promotions
● Price cut on the shelf
● Coupons
● Cash refunds
● Savings cards
● Contests
● Sweepstakes and lotteries
● Sampling
● Extra volume
● Free in mail
● Premiums
● Self-liquidators

366     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
Monetary incentives
Different types of monetary incentives can be used, but they all lead to an improved price/
quality perception by the consumer by lowering the price of the product (Photo 8.1).
The most direct and simple monetary incentive is the price cut on the shelf, in which the 
consumer gets an immediate discount when buying the product. It can be used to generate 
trial, stimulate repeat purchase behaviour and for ‘basket-filling’ purposes. The advantage 
Photo 8.1  Sampling brochures from Debenhams
Source: Oli Scarff/Getty Images.

CONSUMER PROMOTIONS     367
for the consumer is that the price cut is immediate and unconditional. The manufacturer 
can easily and quickly organise sales promotions of this type, and it does not lead to extra 
workload for the retailer. Furthermore, price cuts on the shelf almost invariably lead to 
additional turnover, especially when competing brands offer their promotions in different 
time periods.14
For a price cut to be profitable, certain – sometimes unrealistic – conditions have to be met. Suppose a six-pack of 
chocolate bars costs €2. The manufacturer’s margin is €0.4. A price cut of 10% means that the chocolate bars are now 
sold at €1.8. If the price cut is fully absorbed by the manufacturer, this means that half (€0.2/0.4) of the profit margin per 
chocolate bar pack is being given away. To enable the manufacturer to earn as much total profit as before, twice as many 
chocolate bars will have to be sold; that is, the sales volume will have to increase by 100%. Hence, a status quo in profit-
ability implies a price elasticity of demand of 10, i.e. a price cut of 10% should lead to an increase in demand of 100%.
Business insight
Price cuts are not always profitable
On the other hand, there are a number of disadvantages, the most important being the 
potential damage to the image of the product and the store. Although promotions always 
run the risk of damaging a brand’s high-quality image, this is more the case with immediate 
and directly visible price cuts. When price cuts are used too frequently, the company runs  
the risk of selling discounts rather than products. Furthermore, too frequent price cuts 
influence the consumers’ expectations of the normal price: no price cuts may be perceived as 
price increases. Price cuts can be very expensive for both the manufacturer and the retailer. 
Large extra volumes may be required to compensate for the loss of margin per unit. There-
fore, although the promotion campaign may be successful in terms of extra volume or extra 
trial, its profitability may be far from impressive.
Coupons are vouchers representing a monetary value and with which the consumer can 
get a discount on a specific product. Coupons may be inserted in print ads, in direct mail-
ings or in newspapers and/or magazines. They can also be offered online, on mobile phones, 
on-pack, in-pack or near-pack, or be distributed after a previous purchase. AMEX card-
holders can get targeted deals within their Facebook account. The deals are based on their 
own and their friends’ likes and interests. If the consumer accepts the promotional offer, it 
is automatically added to his or her AMEX credit card. When shopping in a store later on, 
the coupon can be redeemed when the AMEX card is used.15 The percentage of coupons 
distributed that are used when buying a product is called the redemption rate. Coupons are 
popular worldwide although huge variations between countries exist. North American and 
Asia-Pacific consumers heavily used coupons in 2011 (used by 65% and 55% of the citizens 
respectively). In Europe the average percentage of people using coupons is 38%, with huge 
differences between Belgium and Portugal (63%), Greece (55%), France (53%) and Spain 
(50%) on the one hand, and Northern and Eastern European countries on the other hand 
in which coupon usage is rather marginal.16
As a promotional tool, coupons can serve a number of objectives, of which stimulat-
ing trial is a very important one. Couponing has the advantage that the consumer gets an 
immediate discount, provided that he or she has noticed and is prepared to use the coupon. 
The consumer does not have to do much to enjoy the promotion. Manufacturers can target 
a couponing campaign very well, in specific media and/or retail outlets, and for specific 
product categories and towards well-defined target groups. The retailer also benefits from 

368     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
Cash refunds are discounts offered to the consumer by means of refunding part of the 
purchase price after sending a proof of purchase. The refund is transferred to the customer’s 
bank account. A cash refund is very similar to couponing in that it is mainly a trial-induc-
ing promotion technique in which the consumer receives a price discount. Normally, cash 
refunds result in a more substantial discount than coupons. Therefore, the resulting trial 
purchases tend to be higher. Furthermore, in contrast to direct price cuts and couponing, 
the consumer has to pay the full price at the checkout. As a result, the consumer is less easily 
conditioned to expect lower prices, and price expectations are less easily adjusted. As in the 
case of coupons, cash refund actions can be put in place very rapidly. The main advantage 
for manufacturers is that the redemption of proofs of purchase enables them to build up a 
customer database. An advantage for the retailer is that refunds do not result in extra work 
at the checkout.
Similar to couponing, it is difficult for the manufacturer to predict the success of a refund 
action, and hence the budget required. Again, there is the risk that existing customers will 
Procter & Gamble is one of the largest coupon distributors. In 1992, the company announced a new strategy. It 
decided to spend 50% less on couponing, and to adopt an EDLP (Every Day Low Prices) strategy, dropping retail 
prices by $2 billion. In January 1996, the company launched an 18-month no-coupon test in a carefully chosen part 
of the State of New York, where 90% of the shoppers were known to use coupons. The vast majority of other manu-
facturers, retailers and wholesalers believed that this was a viable strategy, and some of them followed Procter & 
Gamble’s lead. However, the no-coupon strategy was very unpopular among consumers. Many consumers consid-
ered coupons as ‘an inalienable right’. Consumers in the test region started boycotts, public hearings and petition 
drives. Signs saying ‘save our coupons’ appeared in front gardens, and the local media were flooded with letters of 
complaint to editors. The protests even made it into the national media. Public officials joined the protests, claiming 
that Procter & Gamble was the company of ‘profit and greed’ that hurt ‘average Joe’. A resolution was voted to ask 
Procter & Gamble to abandon its strategy. Petitions with more than 20 000 signatures were sent to the company. After 
only 14 months, the company pulled the plug on its no-coupon test in April 1997. A settlement was agreed upon 
whereby $4.2 billion worth of coupons was distributed that could be redeemed at any supermarket in the region by 
any consumer or for any food item. However, Procter & Gamble did not admit any wrongdoing. It still claimed that 
during the test period consumers received at least equally good value for money, without the cost and inconvenience 
of coupons. Nevertheless, the sales of Procter & Gamble were flat during the test period, while on average the use of 
coupons of competitors of Procter & Gamble and different product categories increased substantially. The company’s 
experience has triggered new methods to distribute coupons. Instead of inserting them in media, more and more 
coupons are made available through shelf dispensers at the point-of-sale, in frequent buyer and loyalty programmes, 
in combination with free samples at the store, through direct mailings, the Internet, or electronically at the checkout.17
Business insight
The Procter & Gamble zero-couponing strategy
couponing in the sense that it often generates extra sales. A problem with couponing is that 
it is often difficult to predict the redemption rate, and thus the couponing budget. Further-
more, instead of inducing trial, couponing may only have the effect of ‘subsidising’ already 
loyal customers. The latter is not necessarily a disadvantage, since ‘basket-filling’ by exist-
ing customers may be the primary objective of a couponing action. If the consumer is not 
price-sensitive, he or she will probably not notice the coupon or not use it, in which case 
the promotion action will be ineffective. Finally, the co-operation of the retailer is necessary 
since couponing means more work at the checkout.

CONSUMER PROMOTIONS     369
be subsidised instead of new customers being attracted. The main disadvantage for the 
consumer is that it takes more trouble to get the discount, especially if it means saving 
a number of proofs of purchase before part of the price is refunded. Misunderstandings 
may occur if the consumer expects an immediate discount at the checkout or if it is not 
clear what part of the package the consumer has to send back to obtain the refund. The 
retailer may run the risk that the ‘old’ packages, of which no part of the price is refunded, 
are difficult to sell.
Monetary incentives may also be offered on the basis of repeat purchases. Savings cards, 
possibly combined with trading stamps, are promotion techniques on the basis of which 
customers receive a discount provided they have bought a number of units of the brand 
during a specific period of time, e.g. ‘buy 10 items during one year, and you get a 20% dis-
count when you buy the 11th item’, or when trading stamps are handed in at the moment 
of purchase. This tool is often used by shops to stimulate store loyalty. A disadvantage for 
the consumer is that it may take a long time before the consumer experiences the benefits 
of loyalty. An advantage of the system is that the consumer is not conditioned to an imme-
diate lower price. Moreover, promotions of this type (retention promotions) are very suit-
able for generating brand or store loyalty. A final advantage is that the retailer can build a 
consumer database. Store cards, combined with scanning of barcodes of goods purchased, 
lead to powerful databases which improve the ability of the retailer to understand consumer 
behaviour.
Contests, sweepstakes and lotteries
Contests differ from sweepstakes and lotteries in that in the former the participant can influ-
ence the outcome of the game. Creating a slogan or an advertising headline, recognising a 
voice or a piece of music, estimating how many people will send back a coupon, etc., are 
examples of contests. Lotteries and sweepstakes are based purely on chance. In a sweepstake, 
consumers receive a (set of) number(s), the winning ones of which are decided on in advance. 
This means that, if only 10% of the customers having received a set of numbers participate 
by buying a product, only 10% of the prizes have to be awarded.
Chance games are easy to organise and relatively cheap. However, the benefit for the 
consumers is not unconditional or immediate. They have to participate actively to have a 
Source: Alex Segre/Alamy Stock Photo.

370     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
Photo 8.2  Buy one, get one free
Source: Alex Segre/Alamy Stock Photo.
chance of winning. Chance games and lotteries are also plagued by ‘professional players’, 
a group of consumers obsessed by the possibility of winning something, and who therefore 
participate in all campaigns. There is only a very slim chance that this type of consumer 
will ever become loyal to the promoted brand. Furthermore, contests and lotteries are 
seldom capable of generating trial purchases. Retailers are not particularly inclined to co-
operate in promotions of this type since they do not generate long-term benefits for the 
store either. Finally, in most countries legal restrictions on contests and gambling exist, 
which result in either straightforward, and thus not so creative, contests or near-illegal 
situations.
Product promotions
In product promotions the consumer is offered products free, either as an incentive to buy 
a product, or as a reward for having purchased it.
Sampling is a promotion technique that consists of distributing small samples of a prod-
uct, sometimes in a specially designed package free of charge or at a very low cost. This 
technique can be used in a very general way for a broad target group as well as in a very 
targeted way. Sampling is the ideal promotion tool for generating trial, especially in those 
cases in which the product characteristics cannot be communicated very convincingly by 
means of advertising, and/or in those cases in which it is possible for a potential customer to 
get an idea of the product’s benefits on the basis of trying it in small quantities. A possible 
disadvantage is that manufacturing and distributing small samples in large quantities, or 
demonstrations at supermarkets, may be quite expensive, and may lead to logistical prob-
lems for both the manufacturer and the retailer.
In extra volume or BOGOF (buy one get one free) promotions an extra quantity of the 
product is temporarily offered at the same price (Photo 8.2). Promotions of this type are 
mainly used to induce ‘basket-filling’ by regular users. Consumers are not tempted to 
try a product for the first time if it is offered in larger volumes – quite the contrary. On 
the other hand, regular users may be attracted by the extra free volume, and therefore 

CONSUMER PROMOTIONS     371
buy more of the product. Especially larger families are very much in favour of this type 
of promotion.18
Promotions of this type are very attractive for consumers since the advantage is immedi-
ate and unconditional. It does not result in extra workload or costs for the retailer, except 
the problem of fitting larger pack sizes onto the shelves. In terms of organisation, the 
extra volume promotion is a very simple tool for the manufacturer. The promotion can 
easily be communicated on-pack or via an advertising campaign. The disadvantage is that 
extra volume promotions tend to be quite expensive. Special packages have to be designed, 
logistical problems may arise and the extra volume sold does not always compensate for 
the implicit price cut. Retailers may experience logistical problems too, and may find it 
difficult to sell old stock without product plus promotion. Furthermore, as a result of the 
basket-filling, retailers may see a fall in sales after the promotion, since consumers have 
all the product they need for a while. If this promotional tool is used too often or for too 
long, consumers’ expectations as to the normal price/quantity rate may be conditioned in 
the wrong direction.
Although consumers prefer promotions to the regular offering, not all promotions are equally liked. Research shows, 
for example, that bonus packs are generally liked better than price cuts. The reason for this is that bonus packs are 
perceived as ‘gains’, as ‘getting something for free for the same price’, whereas price discounts are interpreted as 
a ‘reduced loss’. Also in the longer term, bonus packs lead to less harm for the brand as the focus is on the ‘bonus 
part’ and not on the ‘monetary value’.19 The foregoing may hold true in general, but there appears to be a difference 
according to the product type that is in promotion. Research shows that people react differently to promotions for 
healthy food as compared with promotions for unhealthy food (also referred to as ‘vices’ and ‘virtues’). Apparently, 
bonus packs score poorer than price cuts when promoting unhealthy food. The reason for this is that it is much 
harder for consumers to justify why they responded to a bonus pack promotion as it would mean consuming even 
more of something they should actually avoid. A price cut, on the other hand, can function as a guilt-mitigating 
mechanism as it gives a better reason to buy the unhealthy food. For healthy food, neither justification nor guilt 
applies, and consequently for these types of products, the main effect of bonus packs being preferred to price 
cuts holds.20
Research insight
Different promotional techniques for ‘vices’ and ‘virtues’
With free in-mail promotions, the customer receives a (nearly) free gift in return for a proof 
of purchase which has to be sent to the manufacturer. In that sense, promotions of this type 
are very similar to the cash refund, the only difference being that the consumer receives a 
gift instead of money. The main purpose of this type of promotion is not to generate trial, 
but to reward loyal customers, or to improve the link between the consumer and the brand. 
Moreover, such promotions can generate a lot of valuable information for the construction 
of a database on the interests and consuming habits of (potential) customers. This infor-
mation can be used for future marketing action, and is one of the major advantages of this 
type of promotion. The disadvantages are that the consumer does not derive an immediate 
benefit, the logistics may be very expensive and time-consuming, and there is not much of 
a benefit for the retailer.
Premiums may be offered in-, on- or near-pack. They are small gifts that come with a 
product, e.g. a free glass when buying a bottle of cognac, or a pair of sunglasses when 

372     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
A disadvantage is that the wrong kind of premium may damage the long-term image of 
the brand. Finally, there is always the risk that only existing customers are subsidised, and 
that no extra trial or basket-filling results. The disadvantage for the manufacturer is that the 
production, handling and logistics costs may be quite substantial. The retailer may experience 
difficulties in displaying the product with the premium. Especially with near-pack premiums, 
shelf space has to be provided, and the retailer has to check for consumer fraud. The old 
stock of the product may also be difficult to sell. Moreover, if the premium is a product that 
is also being sold by the same retailer (a glass, sunglasses, etc.), sales of these items may fall.
The relatively small Dutch beer brand Bavaria managed to attract quite some attention during the soccer World 
Cup in South Africa. Whereas most brands targeted male soccer fans, Bavaria developed a sexy, orange dress, the 
DutchDress, for female soccer fans. Sixty singing and dancing Bavaria models did not go unnoticed during the 
game between the Netherlands and Mexico, resulting in a rush to the store. In no time 160 000 DutchDresses were 
sold and Bavaria ran out of stock. Bavaria had clearly chosen the right sales promotion premium. For its effective 
campaign, Bavaria received a Gold Esprix Award in 2011. Needless to say, Heineken, as the main sponsor of the 
tournament, was not amused by Bavaria’s hijacking.
Inspired by its previous success, Bavaria developed a new dress for the European soccer championship, the 
V-dress. The ‘V’ stands for the V-shape at the neck, for Victory and for vrouwelijkesteun (‘female support’). The V-dress 
is offered as a premium in a pack of six Bavaria bottles for €9.99. Fortunately, the campaign was a bigger success 
than the results of the Dutch soccer team.21
Business insight
DutchDress and V-dress
When a new magazine comes onto the market, its sales usually climb to their potential in a short period of time. 
Next, a slow but steady decline follows. A traditional strategy to counter this sales decline is to develop advertising 
campaigns to strengthen brand awareness and reinforce brand loyalty, or to offer non-price promotions. A new 
Research insight
Magazine sales promotions
buying two bottles of sun lotion. Sometimes the package itself is a premium, like marmalade 
in a glass jar that can be used afterwards. Premiums tend to be successful, since for most 
consumers getting something for free is a powerful incentive. Such promotions can be used 
to generate impulse buying and trial, to reward existing customers, and to stimulate repeat 
buying by offering a series of premiums that can be collected, like a set of glasses or stick-
ers. Consumers like this type of promotion because the benefits are immediately visible and 
easy to obtain. The budgetary implications for the manufacturer are clear in advance, and 
a premium can be easily combined with other types of promotions. Furthermore, there are 
no extra handling costs after the promotion campaign. The advantage for the retailer is that 
a premium campaign can generate extra store traffic and extra sales.

CONSUMER PROMOTIONS     373
In 2015, Nivea decided to launch a campaign to raise general awareness of sunburn while generating product trial 
in the process. The campaign targeted families and especially children. In order to make sure they were speaking a 
language children understand, Nivea and its advertising agency FCB Brazil decided to use dolls. Building on the insight 
that children would love to go to the beach but hate to apply sun block, Nivea decided to design a UV-sensitive doll 
to teach kids the importance of sun block use. Being made of UV sensitive material, the Nivea Doll turns lobster-red in 
no time when exposed to the sun without protection. As such, children can experience what would eventually happen 
to their own skin if it is left unprotected. The dolls were distributed on the main beaches of Rio de Janeiro. All children 
received a box consisting of a Nivea doll and Nivea sun block. If the child applies sun block to the doll, no sunburn 
appears. However, if the child does not apply sun block, the doll sunburns and turns red. To avoid ending up with very 
sad children, the children can restore the doll’s original skin by applying sun block after the skin has turned red. The cam-
paign was a success: children took good care of the doll and understood the sun’s effect on the doll’s and their own skin
Business insight
Nivea educates children with UV sensitive doll
type of sales promotion in the magazine industry is a value pack containing the magazine plus another product. 
The magazine is sold at the same time with and without the promotion at different prices. For example, a value 
pack can consist of the magazine and a dictionary. Promotions are serialised by fractioning the different CDs of 
the dictionary across different magazines. The objectives of this new type of promotion are (1) acquiring new 
customers and (2) increasing the loyalty of current customers. A study investigated whether such promotions are 
effective in slowing down the long-term decrease of sales. This indeed proved to be the case. Although tempo-
rarily offering the magazine with and without promotion cannibalises sales of the magazine without promotion, 
this loss seems to be offset by a long-term increase in non-promoted sales induced by product awareness and 
loyalty enhancement.22
Finally, self-liquidators or self-liquidating premiums are presents that can be obtained 
in exchange for a number of proofs of purchase, and an extra amount of money. Some-
times self-liquidators can be obtained in the store, but more frequently they have to be 
ordered by mail. Similar to free in-mail promotions, self-liquidators are mainly used to 
stimulate repeat purchase and brand loyalty, rather than to generate trial. The advantage 
for consumers is that they can obtain products of relatively high quality at a minimum 
cost. On the other hand, they have to go to some trouble to obtain a product, the quality 
of which is unknown. For the manufacturer, following up the campaign may be cumber-
some, but valuable information about the consumer is obtained. If well communicated 
in-store, the campaign generates attention, to the benefit of both the manufacturer and 
the retailer.
Different manufacturers may also co-operate to generate synergies between their pro-
motional efforts (joint promotions). Similarly, a single manufacturer can offer a joint pro-
motion for two different own brands. One item may be offered as a premium for the other, 
purchase proofs of different products may be requested to obtain a self-liquidator or a free 
in-mail present, and discounts may be made contingent on the purchase of different items 
at the same time. To increase the benefits for both the manufacturer and the retailer, they 
can co-operate in the organisation of promotion campaigns. Retailers can pay part of the 
manufacturer’s promotion budget, perhaps in return for exclusiveness of the campaign in 

374     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
their stores, or they can provide the necessary in-store communications to draw attention 
to a promotion campaign.
In Table 8.2, an overview is given of the different consumer promotions techniques, 
together with their main objectives, advantages and disadvantages.24
Table 8.2  Objectives, advantages and disadvantages of consumer promotions
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
Promotion objectives
Generate trial
+
+ +
+ +
- -
- -
+ +
- -
- -
- -
- -
Induce repeat purchase
+
+
+ +
+ +
- -
- -
- -
- -
+ +
Basket-filling
+ +
+
+
+
- -
- -
+
(Dis)advantages
Direct consumer benefit
+ +
+ +
- -
- -
- -
+
+ +
- -
+ +
- -
Ease of obtaining benefit
+ +
+
- -
- -
-
+ +
+ +
- -
+ +
- -
Impact on brand image and brand loyalty
- -
-
+ +
-
+
+
Manufacturer’s workload and problems
+ +
+
-
+
- -
-
-
- -
-
- -
Impact on consumer’s price perception
- -
-
+
- -
+
-
+
Ease of targeting
- -
+ +
+ +
+ +
+
- -
+ +
-
- -
Ease of budget planning
- -
- -
- -
-
+
+ +
+ +
+ +
+ +
-
Database support
- -
- -
+ +
+ +
+ +
- -
- -
+ +
- -
+ +
Immediate increase in sales
+ +
+
-
+ +
+
Impact on store image and store loyalty
-
+ +
- -
+
Retailer’s workload
+ +
-
+
-
-
-
- -
-
+ + very positive 
+ positive 
- negative 
- - very negative
A  price cut on shelf    C    cash refunds    E    contests, sweepstakes and lotteries    G    extra volume    I    premiums
B  coupons             D    savings cards       F    sampling                         H    free in-mail      J    self-liquidators
The French water sports brand, Tribord, a company that specialises in material to keep water sports save, launched 
its new floatating jacket Izeber 50 in a unique experiential way. Izeber is a buoyancy jacket, that can be worn on 
land and out at sea. It offers protection against the cold, the wind and ... drowning. With only one in three amateur 
sailors wearing a life jacket at sea, Tribord wanted to remind people of the risks at sea and promote their new life 
jacket. They did so by introducing a fake drink. The drink was called ‘WAVE’ and came in a cool blue can. Tribord 
distributed the drink in French harbours. Most passersby were very happy to get a free drink ... until they got a taste 
of what Tribord called ‘the worst drink in the world’. WAVE was composed of 100% of seawater. The reactions to 
the experienced sensation of drowning were unanimous: everybody immediately spat it out and started to read 
the text on the backside of the can ‘Make this your last taste of drowning. Buoyancy jacket. Izeber 50’. The text was 
accompanied by a picture of the new product. By giving amateur sailors a taste of drowning, Tribord got its message 
of water safety across and created awareness of their latest innovation, the new Izeber 50 jacket.ii 
i. Based on: http://www.adweek.com/adfreak/nivea-created-doll-gets-sunburned-teach-kids-about-importance-sun-
screen-165162; http://cramer.com/story/brand-activations-work-heres-how/ (accessed on November 4, 2016).
ii.  Based on: http://cramer.com/story/brand-activations-work-heres-how/; https://www.tribord.co.uk/blog/tribord-launches-wave-
worst-drink-world-b_53624; http://brandactivation.com/en/tribord-the-worst-drink-in-the-world-2/ (accessed on November, 4 2016).
Business insight
WAVE, Tribord’s taste of drowning

TRADE PROMOTIONS     375
● Off-invoice allowances
–  Individual case bonus     –  Count and recount
–  Volume allowance      –  Free merchandise
–  Discount overriders
● Slotting allowances
● Advertising/performance allowances
● Co-operative advertising allowances
● Buy-back allowances
● Dealer contests
● Dealer loaders
Table 8.3  Trade promotion tools
Trade promotions
Different promotion tools can be used to motivate the trade. They are summarised 
in Table 8.3.25 Off-invoice allowances are direct price reductions to the trade during a 
limited period of time. They are the simplest form of trade promotions. The trade may 
receive a discount per unit purchased or a discount after selling a certain volume of 
the product. Discounts may also be given after a longer period of time, when a certain 
volume of sales has been reached (discount overriders). Also, the count–recount method 
is retrospective in that the stock of the manufacturer’s brand is counted at the beginning 
and at the end of a period, and a discount, for instance per case sold, is given. A slot-
ting allowance is a one-time, upfront fee that is charged by retailers before they allow a 
new product on their shelves to cover the start-up costs of entering a new product into 
their system. Manufacturers often contest these allowances because they feel that they 
are subsidising the retailer’s business. Advertising/performance allowances are monetary 
incentives aimed at encouraging the retailer to advertise the manufacturer’s brand and 
are provided when proof of the ad is produced. In fact, the manufacturer pays part of 
the advertising campaign of the retailer. In some cases, a percentage of everything the 
retailer buys from a manufacturer is put into a co-operative advertising fund. The dealer 
adds an agreed-upon percentage to the fund, and uses it to advertise the brands of the 
manufacturer. To stimulate the retailer to put a new brand or a renewed version of the 
product on the shelves, the manufacturer sometimes offers to buy back the ‘old’ prod-
uct, or commits to buying back the stock of the new product that is not sold during a 
specific period of time. This is called a buy-back allowance. To motivate retailers to sell 
more of the manufacturer’s product, a contest among them may be organised in which, 
for instance, trips or other prizes can be won. In some cases, additional materials (dealer 
loaders) are offered during a promotional campaign, for instance a refrigerator during a 
soft drink promotion. After the promotion, the retailer can keep the extra equipment.
Trade allowances result in a higher profit margin for the wholesaler or the retailer. 
This higher margin can (partly) be used to offer a discount to the end-consumer by 
means of retail promotions, or to stimulate sales by means of more shelf space or 
other in-store communications tools. In those cases, the trade promotions can even-
tually result in a favourable effect on end-consumer purchases. If the (volume-based) 
trade allowance is used by the retailer only to increase inventory temporarily, the trade 
promotions will not result in an increase in sales to the end-consumer. Although trade 
promotions have become increasingly important as a result of the growing power of 
the distribution channel, their effectiveness largely depends on the incentives given to 
the retailer to pass on the benefits to the end-consumers and to stimulate short-term 
sales in-store.

376     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
Although some studies26 find a (small) positive long-term sales evolution from promotional efforts, most studies lead 
to the conclusion that, although promotions may be effective in the short run, they result in negative effects in the 
long run. Competitive campaigns neutralise the effects, and the only result is an increase in promotion costs for the 
same amount of sales, and stable, long-term market shares. Furthermore, promotions may undermine the effect of 
more strategic marketing instruments, such as advertising and sponsorship, which try to build brand image in the 
long run. Therefore, some manufacturers increasingly rely on the EDLP strategy, aimed at maintaining a relatively 
low stable price, as opposed to the ‘high–low’ (HILO) strategy in which frequent promotions are used. The potential 
effects of sales promotions are summarised below.
In the short term most promotion campaigns lead to an increase in sales and market share.27 Reported pro-
motional price elasticities range between 4 and 10, but do not always exceed short-term advertising elasticity.28 
The effect of promotions on short-term profitability is unclear, however. Some studies indicate that promotions 
lead to higher profits, whereas others warn of pressured margins.29 Furthermore, various studies indicate that 
80% of the sales increase as a result of promotions is attributable to attracting buyers of competitive products.30 
However, a retailer does not benefit much from brand-switching within the store. Retailers are more interested 
in the extent to which sales promotions stimulate store-switching or increase category demand in the focal 
category as well as in other categories (cross-promotion effects). Research shows that sales promotions indeed 
attract new customers to the store leading to an increase in the retailers’ market share.31 Increased store traffic also 
leads to additional sales in other product categories.32 According to a recent study, one in two price promotions 
expand own-category revenues with a probability of 61% that at least one other category is positively affected. 
These cross-promotional effects seem more likely to occur between the categories more closely located to one 
another in the store.33
In the medium term (4–6 weeks after the promotion), the effect of the campaign on repeat purchase and the 
lack of a ‘post-promotion dip’ become important indicators of effectiveness. When not only new customers are 
Research insight
Are sales promotions effective?

POINT-OF-PURCHASE COMMUNICATIONS     377
Point-of-purchase communications
Point-of-purchase communications or POP communications, also called in-store, point-of-
sales or POS communications, are another powerful tool to activate a brand as they – as 
is the case for sales promotions – reach consumers at the point when they are making the 
decision about which product or brand to buy. Purchase intentions often do not result in an 
actual purchase because of situational factors such as out-of-stocks, competitive brands that 
are on promotion and attention-grabbing displays. Besides altering purchase intentions, the 
store environment also significantly influences consumer behaviour in the sense that many 
unplanned purchases can be attributed to the fact that the point-of-sales environment makes 
consumers aware of new needs while they are shopping. According to a global study, nearly 
30% of shoppers make up their mind at the point of purchase and do not know in advance 
attracted by the promotions, but also existing customers buy more of the product during the promotion cam-
paign, a ‘post-promotion dip’ in sales can result. Therefore, to assess the effectiveness of a promotion campaign, 
both the sales during the campaign and after the campaign have to be measured. If the product is frequently 
on promotion, also a pre-promotion dip may occur: consumers anticipate the campaign and postpone their 
purchase.34 Further, promotions can have a negative effect on the medium-term image of the brand because 
consumers remember afterwards to have chosen the brand because of the promotion rather than the intrinsic 
value of the product. They may then see less reason to buy the product again when it is not on promotion.35 
According to the ‘Mental Accounting Theory’ and the ‘Prospect Theory’, consumers base their decisions on the 
difference between the actual stimulus and a stimulus of reference. Promotions can result in a decrease in ‘refer-
ence price’; in other words, consumers get used to promotions and they adjust their price expectations as a result 
of frequent promotions. Consequently, the normal price becomes expensive and a future promotion will have to 
be more ‘impressive’ to be perceived as a promotion.36 Promotions may also influence repeat-buying decisions 
adversely because the long-term attitude towards the brand is being damaged.37 In this sense, repeated monetary 
promotions have been shown to be more likely to harm brand attitudes than repeated non-monetary promo-
tions.38 However, if the consumer is already a loyal customer before the campaign, and has already developed 
a clear attitude towards the brand, the effect of promotions on his or her long-term attitude towards the brand 
will not be affected. Similarly, in markets in which promotion campaigns are frequently used, and in markets in 
which most consumers are brand-switching anyway, the effect of promotions on brand attitude and thus repeat 
purchase will be limited.39
Frequent promotions may lead to ‘deal-proneness’, with adverse effects on brand attitudes, market shares and 
sales in the long term. Research even indicates that frequent use of promotions leads to a ‘prisoner’s dilemma’ as a 
result of which competitors retaliate in order not to lose market share, and long-term market shares are not affected. 
In a long-term market share analysis of 341 products, it was shown that 60% of all market shares remained stable 
over a period of nine years. Only in 24% of the cases was a significant effect of promotions on market share evolu-
tion found.40 Similarly, in a study of 400 products, 78% of market share appeared to be stable in the long run, which 
means that a maximum of 22% of the market share could have been affected by promotion campaigns (or by other 
marketing mix instruments, for that matter).41
Promotions will have a stronger effect on products that the consumer can easily hold in stock, and on products 
that are bought by large numbers of consumers and for which supporting communications campaigns are organised. 
A recent study by Nielsen shows that consumers are 32% more responsive to a sales promotion campaign of brands 
that also used above-the-line advertising.42 Promotions will be less effective in very competitive markets and when 
the campaign is preceded by a competitor’s promotion.43 Furthermore, promotions seem to be more effective for 
brands with a small market share than for major market players.44 Variety-seeking consumers and consumer seg-
ments with high ‘deal-proneness’ (such as young families) are more influenced by promotions than others.45 The 
risk of ‘deal-to-deal buying’, i.e. postponing purchases until the next promotion campaign, is somewhat higher in 
those segments, and less frequent use of promotion campaigns is advised.46

378     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
what brand they are going to buy. One in ten shoppers change their minds in store and buy 
a different brand than they had planned upfront. Almost 15% buy a product from a product 
category they did not intend to buy before entering the store, and 1 in 10 shoppers leave the 
store without buying a product they planned to buy. Although there are huge differences 
across countries, Figure 8.5 shows that many consumers make at least one decision at the 
point of purchase.47 Furthermore, consumers spend more and more time on the road away 
from home, which makes it harder for traditional media to reach them.48 No wonder that 
managers invest considerable resources in point-of-purchase communications to influence 
shoppers.49
Figure 8.5  Percentage of people making at least one decision in-store
Source: Based on Ogilvy & Mather (2008) ‘Turning shoppers into buyers: the truth behind shopper decisions made in store’, http://
www.scribd.com/doc/11302909/Turning-Shoppers-Into-Buyers#wordpress (accessed July 2012).
It is well known that POP communications attract a shopper’s attention and drive up unplanned purchases. The extent 
to which unplanned purchases are influenced depends on several factors. For example, shoppers appear to do most 
unplanned buying when they shop in unfamiliar stores and have a lot of time available.50 Unplanned purchases are 
also more likely to occur for hedonic product categories and increase with the number of aisles the shopper visits.51 
Further, recent research shows that consumers’ shopping goals also impact the extent to which they are seduced to 
do unplanned purchases. Shoppers may go to the store holding a goal that can range from very specific and concrete 
(e.g. to redeem a specific coupon) to very general and abstract (e.g. to fill up on weekly needs). Consumers in an 
abstract state of mind are more flexible and receptive to their environment, whereas consumers in a concrete mindset 
are more focused on their specific goal. Not surprisingly then, consumers with an abstract (vs concrete) shopping trip 
goal appear to engage more in unplanned buying. The expected percentage change in unplanned buying amounts 
Research insight
Factors driving up unplanned buying

POINT-OF-PURCHASE COMMUNICATIONS     379
Photo 8.3  Red Bull: in-pub 
communication on Table Mountain 
(Cape Town)
to about -25% for a very concrete shopping goal (such as shopping for special offers and promotions), to about +2% 
for a less concrete shopping goal (such as shopping for immediate consumption), to +27% for a rather abstract goal 
(such as a fill-in trip to get daily essentials) and to almost +60% (or an increase of 10% on the total amount spent) 
for a very abstract shopping goal (such as weekly fill-ups). If a consumer decides to shop in a store because of its low 
prices, unplanned purchases increase from 12% to 13% (these additional purchases can be easily justified on the basis 
of the low prices), whereas shopping in a store because of the image or higher-quality products is less likely to stimu-
late unplanned purchases. One-stop shopping, in contrast to shopping in multiple stores, also drives up unplanned 
purchases, more specifically with an average of 12%.52
POP communications are most effective when they form part of an integrated communications 
plan, which means that, for instance, they reflect what consumers have seen on TV or billboard 
ads, and correspond with PR efforts or sponsorships.53 Indeed, it has been shown that, for instance, 
when advertising and POP communications are combined, as compared with using advertising 
only, sales increase by more than 100%.54 Also, the combination of POP and sales promotions 
appears to have enormous advantages over and above the use of POP or sales promotions only.55
Point-of-purchase as a communications tool
POP communications can be defined as any promotional material placed at the POP, such 
as interior displays, printed material at shop counters or window displays (Photo 8.3).56 
However, it also includes in-store broadcasts, video screen demonstrations, shopping-trolley 

380     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
advertising, shelf talkers, coupon dispensers, wastepaper baskets and interactive kiosks 
(devices by means of which the consumer can interactively retrieve information about the 
shop and the products in the shop). POP communications are not only concerned with POP 
advertising. Also, the way the products are placed on the shelves, the store image and store 
atmospherics (e.g. the scent and the music in the store) form an integral part of POP com-
munications. In short, POP communications involve all aspects of the store and the store 
environment that can signal something to customers about the quality, price or product 
assortment, whether it is initiated by the retailer or by the manufacturer.
Nike was founded in 1972 and Foot Locker in 1975. Foot Locker started with a new concept: a store devoted to 
athletic shoes only. This aroused Nike’s interest, and Nike wanted very badly to get into the area. Selling its shoes 
in an athletic shoe store would rub off on its own image. In the beginning, Foot Locker was hesitant since it did 
not want to sell ‘unbranded footwear’ and Nike was still unknown at that time. Over the years, the two companies 
grew together and were able to benefit from each other’s strengths. Nike’s ad campaigns triggered demand for its 
shoes, and Foot Locker’s extensive network of stores made the shoes available everywhere for the consumers. Nike 
got prominent displays in Foot Locker stores and Foot Locker got Nike’s newest models. This allowed Foot Locker 
to grow five times as fast as its competitors. To drive sales, Foot Locker began to aggressively discount its products. 
Nike, on the other hand, wanted to preserve its image of cutting-edge fashion king. This led to a dispute between 
the two companies that started at the beginning of 2002. When Nike posed rigid terms on the selection and price 
of shoes it would sell to Foot Locker, Foot Locker announced a cut in its Nike order by 15% to 25% in the hope 
that Nike would reconsider its terms. Nike responded in the opposite way: it slashed its planned shipments to Foot 
Locker by 40%, withholding its most popular and newest trainers. Consumers could no longer find Nike’s hottest 
shoes at Foot Locker, shoes that Nike began selling to Foot Locker’s competitors. Moreover, Nike’s campaigns were 
no longer driving consumers to Foot Locker’s stores. All this induced a serious drop in sales, a negative impact on 
its image and an enormous marketing challenge for Foot Locker.57
Business insight
No hot Nikes at Foot Locker any more
Objectives and target groups of POP communications
POP communications can serve several objectives or functions (Figure 8.6). An eye-catching 
exterior store design may attract the consumer’s attention and may differentiate the store 
from its competitors, in that way increasing the likelihood that the consumer will enter the 
store. Think of the flagship stores of Apple, Nike and Prada, for example, which clearly stand 
out in the shopping street. In supermarkets, eye-catching displays or funny floor ads may 
draw attention to specific products and may induce the consumers to buy a product they did 
not intend to buy before entering the store. Effective POP material should remind consum-
ers of ongoing or previous advertising, PR, sales promotion or other campaigns, reinforcing 
the communications message. Because of the high amount of communications clutter today, 
consumers have difficulty remembering the different messages and often confuse brands. POP 
material is a good tool to aid consumers in this. Besides reminding, POP material can also 
inform consumers. Detailed information on a DVD recorder or a computer can be shown 
on large displays, the store’s design may signal the intended target groups, or an interactive 
display may help consumers decide on what kind of wine is best served with certain meals.

POINT-OF-PURCHASE COMMUNICATIONS     381
In 2010 Shiseido installed an interactive terminal, the Digital Cosmetic Mirror, at the Takashimaya department store in 
Shinjuku. The terminal instantly became world news as it was one of the first applications of augmented reality. The mirror, 
which functions as a monitor, first scans a customer’s face and then shows the customer how colours and shades of make-
up would look on the customer. Thus, there is no longer any need to actually try the make-up on. This not only saves the 
company a lot of money on samples, but also it is more convenient for the customer as many more different shades can 
be tried on. Further, unlike other interactive tools, the Cosmetic Mirror also gives consumers tailored recommendations.58
Meanwhile, several companies have made use of augmented reality to facilitate consumers’ choice. IKEA, for 
example, uses augmented reality codes on its flyers. Consumers often do not have a clue about how a certain piece 
of furniture would fit into their home. The augmented reality codes on the flyers make it possible to embed life-size 
3-D models of furniture onto a piece of paper, which could be envisaged through a digital or mobile phone camera. 
Thus, the technique allows customers to literally bring the furniture into their home and to get a clear idea of which 
model and which colour would result in a nice fit.59
Business insight
Augmented reality in the store
Figure 8.6  Point-of-purchase communications objectives
Another objective of POP communications is to persuade consumers, to influence their 
decision-making at the point of sale and to trigger impulse purchases. Finally, POP com-
munications serve to help with building an image, both of the retailer and the products sold.
In order to be able effectively to communicate the store, the products and the brands 
offered, market segmentation and a clear understanding of the characteristics of target 
groups are essential components of a marketing communications strategy. For example, with 
fashion clothing the most important attributes seem to be price, quality, product selection 
and service offered by the personnel.60 However, different target groups will prefer different 
levels of these characteristics. Knowing the exact preferences of the target groups is essential 
to fine-tune the interior and exterior design of the store, the POP material present in the 
store, the product assortment and the overall image of the store. For example, the fashion 
retailer catering to wealthy women must design the store in a way that looks exclusive and 
expensive. On the other hand, if you want to communicate that you have low prices and 
that consumers can get bargains, it may not be a good strategy to have the products neatly 

382     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
arranged by size or colour. A chaotic mélange and large price displays attracting bargain 
hunters like a magnet seem to be a better strategy to communicate the bargain possibilities.61
POP communications tools
In-store communications have an enormous potential impact on the consumer. Displays and 
shelf talkers are able to trigger purchase responses, sometimes even when the price reduction 
is negligible. Therefore, POP material is receiving growing interest and is being used more and 
more often. Special product presentations on existing shelves, displays, billboards and pallets 
are most often used, although more sophisticated tools are also becoming popular (see below).
In Philips’ ShopLab project in Eindhoven, the Netherlands, the shop of the future is being developed. One of its 
novelties is the intelligent shop show-window. When somebody passes a shoe store, for instance, an ad is projected 
onto the window. When this person looks at a specific pair of shoes, seconds later the sizes, materials and prices 
appear. With a couple of simple touches on the window, the shoes can be reserved. This is especially handy when 
people walk along a shopping street at night, when the shops are closed. In the shop itself, LED cubicle displays can 
be placed that, chameleon-like, perfectly adapt to the colour of the item displayed, or take on the most contrasting 
colour, as the shopkeeper wishes. Spotlights focus on a specific item as soon as someone approaches within half 
a metre. In that way, each product in the store attracts attention in turn. People who are manifestly bored and do 
not show any interest in the products in the shop are also spotted. They are accompanied to a cosy armchair with 
interesting magazines available. The absolute favourite of retailers is the Lightwand behind the checkout counter. 
Fashion colours change every season. A shopkeeper who wants to reflect this in the shop or at the checkout has to 
repaint several times a year. With the Lightwall technology, a colour sensor pen can measure the exact colours of a 
piece of clothing, and exactly replicate them on the LED wall. Porsche is one company that has invested in this new 
Ambiscene technology. The interior of the dealer room changes to match the colour of the car that is in it. In that 
way, shopping becomes a much more entertaining experience. Retailers of luxury products are especially interested 
in the concept of individualising the look and feel of each store. For instance, no two Prada stores are the same. Why 
would you visit a Prada store in London if it is the same as one in Paris? New in-store light technologies can give a 
shop an exclusive and dynamic look and feel.62
Window shopping is literally possible at Ralph Lauren in New York and Chicago. Inspired by the movie Minor-
ity Report in which advanced touchscreen technology plays an important role, the company wanted to create a 
promotion stunt alongside its role as one of the main sponsors of the US Open tennis tournament. In the show-
windows of the shop in New York, touchscreens were installed by means of which passers-by could buy Ralph 
Lauren products. As soon as they made their choice, they could pay by credit card and the item would be delivered 
to their home. A projector in the shop streamed the information to the touch-sensitive window. Almost half of 
the passers-by stopped to have a look at what was happening. Soon, another store in Chicago was equipped with 
the new technology. The latter store specialised in skiing. Shoppers were virtually taken to the ski slopes in Aspen, 
received information about Ralph Lauren products, fashion and weather and snow conditions, and could even get 
virtual skiing lessons.
The Adidas flagship store in Paris is equipped with a window screen that reacts to gestures. Pointing at a product 
is enough; the window no longer needs to be touched. Top of the bill is the virtual mirror. Customers try on a pair of 
shoes, and then choose other models and colours on-screen. The virtual mirror shows the shoes on their feet without 
actually trying on the real shoe. Customers can also design a customised shoe. Via the screen, colours, design and 
decorations can be changed. The shoes are then manufactured and shipped to the customer.63
Business insight
The shop of the future

POINT-OF-PURCHASE COMMUNICATIONS     383
In a US study, about 1000 shoppers were asked to indicate the POP elements to which they 
pay particular attention when grocery shopping and the POP elements that have motivated 
them in the past to buy a product or brand they had not planned to purchase beforehand.64 
Figure 8.7 summarises the results.
According to the consumers, in-store samples seem to be particularly effective. More 
than two in three respondents claim that these attract attention and have in the past 
persuaded them to buy the product or brand. Moreover, 68.3% say they try in-store sam-
ples almost every time they are available, while 26.3% say they do this occasionally. Of 
course, trying a sample is not the same as buying a product. Some 13% admit buying the 
product or brand almost every time they try a sample, while about 73% claim to buy the 
tried product occasionally. Besides in-store samples, coupons, on-pack promotions and 
displays are also deemed very effective. Interestingly, according to this study, 50% of the 
grocery shoppers who use shelf coupon dispensers most frequently use the coupons for 
brands they have not tried before, while a quarter of them use the coupon only if it is for 
the brand they intended to buy.65 Other studies have also demonstrated the effectiveness of 
shelf coupon dispensers. It has been found, for example, that consumers tend to respond 
even more easily to shelf coupons than to price reductions of the same amount.66 Floor ads 
or floor graphics and shopping cart ads also appear to work, sometimes even better than 
assumed by the respondents of the US study above. Nestlé, for example, tested its floor 
graphics in Germany. To this end, floor graphics were placed in aisles of six test stores 
and compared with six similar control stores without floor graphics. According to 3M, 
the developer of Nestlé’s floor graphics, sales were 23% higher in the test as compared 
with the control stores. Furthermore, brand recall of products advertised by means of 
floor graphics amounted to 47%, as compared with 19% for wall posters and 10% for 
shelf stickers.67 Walls promoted its Solero ice cream by means of shopping cart ads in 100 
Asda supermarkets. The most memorable image from a recent TV ad was used as the 
basis for the poster. It featured a man with an iceberg capping his head eating a Solero 
ice cream. The baseline read ‘the mind cooler’. One in four trollies were decorated with 
a poster on the outside, as well as on the inside, so that both the trolley pusher and other 
shoppers could see the message. The cost of the campaign was estimated at 63 pence per 
1000 exposures. Sales of Solero were monitored in 32 Asda stores, half of which ran the 
Figure 8.7  Attention and purchase motivation of different POP elements
Source: Grocery Incentive Study 2002 (http://www.pmalink.org/research/CDPgrocery_F.asp). © Copyright 2003.

384     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
trolley advertising campaign. The results showed a sales increase of over 20% in the test 
as compared with the control stores.68
Although more difficult and more expensive to install – and therefore only rarely used – 
POP advertising messages can also be customised. The Cyber Solution Laboratory of the 
Japanese telecoms company NTT developed a system called ‘information rain’. Cameras 
observe the customers and, based upon the information that is generated in this way (for 
instance, the amount of time the customer looks at a certain shelf), advertising messages 
are generated and projected on the body of that customer. Obviously, customised POP may 
drive consumer responses even more.69
The spot where POP material is installed also exerts an influence on purchase behaviour. 
In a US study, in-aisle displays resulted in 58% unplanned purchases, as compared with 61% 
for displays at the end of aisles and 64% for displays placed at the checkout.70
In-store displays have proven their effectiveness to draw shoppers’ attention to specific products in brick-and-
mortar stores. Promotional signs and in-store ads are also becoming more and more popular in online grocery 
stores. As compared with offline POP advertising, online POP ads have several additional advantages: (1) they are 
very low cost; (2) they are very flexible (a simple mouse click can change the content and place of a display); and 
(3) they can be customised to the individual customer.71 Further, a study shows that in-store displays in online 
grocery stores can generate an increase in brand sales of up to 106%. Comparing brand and category-level effects, 
the results show that brand-switching takes a much bigger share of the increased sales than newcomers to the 
category. In correspondence with offline in-store displays, in online settings the location also matters. Displays that 
are shown first and in an isolated position are more effective. More specifically, the effect of a display shown on 
the first screen is twice as large as the one for an aisle display. The latter in turn enhances brand sales to a larger 
extent than shelf tag displays.72
Research insight
In-store displays in a virtual store environment
Store atmospherics
Besides the POP communications tools discussed above, store atmospherics need to be men-
tioned as a specific aspect of POP communications. Atmospherics can be defined as the 
effort to design buying environments to produce specific emotional effects in the buyers 
that enhance their purchase probability.73 As a store’s atmosphere is appreciated through 
the senses, sensory aspects are considered the typical dimensions of store atmosphere (see 
Figure 8.8). Taste is not usually considered a meaningful dimension of the store atmosphere 
since one cannot taste an atmosphere. However, some food stores are renowned for their 
in-store ‘degustations’, which may in that case be regarded as an atmospheric dimension 
for these food retailers.
The atmosphere adds a valuable characteristic to the product and serves three main func-
tions. Firstly, the atmosphere can generate attention by using specific colours, music, etc., 
which make a store stand out. Secondly, the atmosphere creates a message by using the 
atmospheric characteristics in such a way that they express, for example, the intended store 
audience. Thirdly, the atmosphere arouses people, which may tip the scale in favour of buy-
ing certain products or brands (Figure 8.9).74

POINT-OF-PURCHASE COMMUNICATIONS     385
Figure 8.9  Relation between store environment and consumer behaviour
Source: Based on Mehrabian, A. and Russell, J.A. (1974) An Approach to Environmental Psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Music is an important in-store marketing tool. According to the Canadian marketing expert Jean-Charles Chebat, 
the best music is original songs, not ‘easy listening’ versions of songs. Nor is it a good idea to turn on a radio chan-
nel, or to buy a couple of CDs and play the same songs all the time. The latter irritates the staff who, in turn, project 
their irritation on the customers. The choice of the type of music can be adapted to specific target groups that shop 
at different times of the day: older consumers shop during the day (play their hits); at noon, mostly hurried and/or 
stressed people pop in (calm music is called for); after four o’clock teenagers take over (a bit louder and modern); 
and during weekends it is mostly families who do their shopping. They want to shop efficiently and need fast music 
to create the illusion of a ‘blitz visit’. At the checkout they need slow music to create the perception of shorter queu-
ing times. The customers do not need to know the music. They just need to recognise it, and feel that the shop 
atmosphere fits in with their lifestyle. Combining smell and music is even more effective. Fast music calls for citrus 
odours; slow music connects with lavender. Supermarkets creating the right atmosphere using music and smell have 
seen their turnover increase by as much as 40%.
Several marketers understood the previous message well. The luxury brand Delvaux decided to play more jazz 
and pop-electro music in its shops, instead of classical music, because it wanted to attract younger people. The 
British clothing retailer Donaldson plays 1960s hits, because its public mainly consists of baby boomers. The Swiss 
chocolate chain Galler discovered the positive impact on its clients of the smell of vanilla, and artificially creates 
it in all its shops. People with a sweet tooth cannot resist the smell of toasted nuts or cacao beans. In shops where 
Galler operates cacao burners, turnover increased by 20%.75
Business insight
Seducing consumers on the shop floor
Figure 8.8  Dimensions of store atmosphere

386     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
Although empirical research in this field has been scarce, the few studies to date seem to 
support the idea that physical attributes in the store induce emotional states, which in turn 
affect consumer behaviour. An experiment in a British supermarket revealed the following.76 
Four French and four German wines were put on the supermarket’s wine shelves. On days 
when French accordion or Gallic favourites such as the ‘Marseillaise’ or can-can music was 
played, Beaujolais and Côtes du Rhône sold extremely well (40 French versus 8 German bot-
tles), while on the days when German, side-splitting Keller music was played, the German 
wine sales rose (12 French versus 22 German bottles). Interviews revealed that consumers 
were certain that the kind of music did not influence their purchase. Also, in a restaurant set-
ting, it has been shown that when visitors’ preferred music is playing they stay significantly 
longer in the restaurant and spend significantly more on both drinks and food.77 In a store 
setting in which the visual dimension or store design factor (colour, layout and displays), the 
store social factor (number of employees, the outfit of the employees) and the store ambient 
factor or aural dimension (music) were manipulated, it was found that all three factors had 
a significant direct impact on store perceptions (such as merchandise quality perceptions, 
price perceptions, etc.) and an indirect impact on store patronage intentions via the evoked 
perceptions. The impact of the design factor appeared to be much stronger than that of the 
social and ambient factors, though.78
In an experimental study involving almost 800 respondents, the Mehrabian and Russell framework shown in 
Figure 8.9 was applied to store environmental colour. In total, 32 different colours were tested for a hypothetical 
design store: eight different hues or pigments (green–yellow, red, blue–green, purple–blue, green, yellow–red, yellow 
and blue), each at two different brightness levels (a bright and dark version of the colour) and at two different satura-
tion levels (saturated version containing a large proportion of the pigment versus an unsaturated version containing 
a large proportion of grey). The results revealed that for two of the eight hues a significant difference in evoked 
feelings could be found. Blue elicited significantly more pleasure and less tension in consumers than green–yellow. 
Moreover, brighter colours induced significantly more pleasurable feelings and less tension than darker colours, 
while more saturated coloured stores were judged by the respondents as significantly less tense. These results show 
that the first part of the model in Figure 8.9 is confirmed: store colour has a significant impact on consumers’ feel-
ings. Furthermore, evidence was also found for the second part of the model in Figure 8.9: the pleasure evoked by 
the store colour was positively related to respondents’ approach behaviour towards the store (i.e. willingness to 
spend time in the store, to spend money in the store, etc.), while colour-evoked tension had a negative impact on 
approach behaviour. The conclusion of this study seems to be that storekeepers had better avoid painting the store 
walls in green–yellow and rather choose a (bright version of) blue instead. If blue does not fit the rest of the interior, 
yellow–red or yellow are also good alternatives.79
Research insight
The impact of colour on consumers’ approach-avoidance behaviour
Besides affecting the time that consumers spend in the store or their willingness to buy, 
high pleasure feelings seem to be related to high customer satisfaction levels.80 This is impor-
tant since customer satisfaction seems to be the driving force of customer loyalty.81
In conclusion, the majority of the atmospherics research seems to support the relation-
ship between store atmospherics, emotions and consumer behaviour. Some practitioners 
even say that ‘50% of consumers’ decisions are made because of the environment they are 
in’.82 Therefore, a good understanding of store atmospherics and store dynamics is very 
important, both for the manufacturer and the retailer.

BRAND EXPERIENCE     387
Brand experience
The most powerful instrument to activate consumers is a positive brand experience. A 
brand experience can be defined as ‘sensations, feelings, cognitions, and behavioural 
responses evoked by brand-related stimuli that are part of a brand’s design and identity, 
packaging, communications, and environments’.83 Just the product itself or any single 
communications tool can deliver a brand experience. However, as most of the following 
examples will show, strong results are more likely when an integrated approach is used and 
the brand experience is related to the brand promise. Brand activation by means of creat-
ing brand experiences should bring the spirit of the brand to life. By doing so, the brand’s 
promise becomes more credible and acceptable. In addition, stimulating brand interactions 
(both between the consumer and the company and among consumers) enhances consum-
ers’ engagement, making brand purchase and repurchase more likely. Recent academic 
research indeed shows that brand experiences have a direct effect on consumer satisfaction 
and loyalty, as well as an indirect effect via a change in brand personality associations.84 
Consumers also appear to use their experienced emotions (sometimes even more than 
product characteristics) to evaluate brands. Consequently, next to brand awareness and 
cognitive associations, brand experiences should also be considered as key drivers of brand 
equity.85
Objectives and dimensions of experiential marketing
Brand experiences serve diverse objectives and functions (Figure 8.10). A first objective 
of experiential marketing is to attract attention to the brand. As experiences form strong  
traces in consumers’ memory and a brand experience makes sure the experience is closely 
linked to the brand, a strong brand experience normally results in increased brand aware-
ness and brand recall. By making a brand’s promise more tangible and making a brand 
alive, brand experiences can also aim to increase brand comprehension. By relating use-
ful and/or pleasuring experiences to the brand, a third objective – a more positive brand 
image – can be reached. Clever activation campaigns can make the brand stand out and/
or make the brand contemporary again. As experiential marketing can be used in a very 
targeted way, it can also be used to enhance the brand image in specific target groups. 
If carried out in a proper way, experiential marketing is more involving than traditional 
campaigns, increasing customers’ engagement. As a consequence, customer loyalty and 
strong brand relationships may be formed. Finally, as is the case for all activation cam-
paigns, the main goal of creating brand experiences remains to increase sales in the 
short term.
In order to reach these objectives, marketers should tap into one or more experien-
tial dimensions. Schmitt distinguishes the following experiential modules or dimensions: 
Figure 8.10  Objectives of brand experiences

388     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
sense, feel, think, act and relate.86 More recent research points out that the feel and relate 
dimensions converge as the relate dimension usually goes together with strong emotions.87 
Ideally, marketers should try to create holistic brand experiences that simultaneously 
evoke sensory, affective, intellectual and behavioural experiences. Table 8.4 describes the 
different experiential dimensions, which we will discuss in more detail below.88
Sense
Consumers become conscious of products, brands and marketing actions by their 
senses. Unlike store atmospherics, the importance of which was laid out a few dec-
ades ago,89 sensory marketing (meant to activate a specific brand instead of to make 
a store in general stand out or to stimulate the general budget spent in the store) has 
been ignored for a long time. However, now the importance of sensorial marketing is 
generally acknowledged.90 Aesthetic products and aesthetic packaging are exciting and 
appealing, increase our affective involvement and even make us prefer an unknown, 
more expensive brand above a known, cheaper-priced brand in a standard packaging.91 
Smelling freshly baked waffles makes us feel like buying one even though we are not 
hungry. Crisps should make the right sound or we do not believe they are fresh. We 
often cannot resist tasty food even if we know this type of food is not healthy. And 
we first want to touch products to avoid buying something that does not feel right. 
Importantly, how a product is perceived by one of our senses can impact or bias our 
perception of the pleasantness of the product derived from our other senses, influencing 
an overall, multisensory product experience.92 Therefore, delivering a consistent multi-
sensory experience can positively influence brand evaluations.93 Abercrombie & Fitch 
understands this well. In line with an image of a sexy, near-luxury brand, it makes sure 
to use half-naked, good-looking models, and have stylish clothing consisting of high-
grade materials such as cashmere, pima cottons and high-quality leather. The music in 
its stores puts consumers in the appropriate mood, and its stores as well as its clothes 
are scented with a nice, distinct smell. Even after having bought Abercrombie & Fitch 
Experiential 
dimension
Description of the experiential dimension
Examples of brands scoring 
high on the dimension
Sense
Creating sensory experiences through the senses 
of sight, sound, touch, taste and smell. Ideally 
marketers follow the principle of ‘cognitive 
consistency/sensory variety’ by sticking to a clear, 
consistent underlying concept combined with fresh 
and new elements
Ferrari, Victoria’s Secret, 
Disney, Apple, Starbucks, 
Lego, Puma, Toys ‘R’ Us, The 
Body Shop, Abercrombie & 
Fitch, BMW
Feel/Relate
Creating affective experiences by appealing to 
customers’ inner feelings and emotions and/or by 
relating the customer to a broader social system. 
Affective experiences can range from mildly positive 
moods to strong emotions of joy and pride
Disney, Victoria’s Secret, 
Hallmark, Starbucks, Harley-
Davidson, BMW
Think
Appealing to the intellect by engaging consumers in 
convergent/analytical and/or divergent/imaginative 
thinking experiences
Lego, Sudoku, Apple, Fair 
Trade, The Body Shop
Act
Enriching customers’ lives by stimulating motor 
actions and behavioural experiences and showing 
them alternative ways of doing things
Adidas, Gatorade, Puma, 
Nike
Source: Based upon Schmitt, B. (1999) Experiential Marketing. New York: Free Press; Schmitt, B. (1999) ‘Experiential marketing’, 
Journal of Marketing Management, 15, 53–67; and Brakus, J.J., Schmitt, B.H. and Zarantonello, L. (2009) ‘Brand experience: What is 
it? How is it measured? Does it affect loyalty?’, Journal of Marketing, 73 (May), 52–68.
Table 8.4  Decomposing brand experience in different experiential dimensions

BRAND EXPERIENCE     389
merchandise, consumers can still smell the distinctive scent, reinforcing the experience 
one got in the store. In short, sight, touch, sound and smell are nicely aligned to create 
a near-luxury, movie-like brand experience.94
Academic research stresses the importance of aligning the different senses to create a 
powerful multisensory experience. For instance, research shows that in people’s minds sour-
ness, bitterness, crunchiness and carbonation correspond cross-modally with angular shapes 
and sharper, plosive stop consonants (e.g. marketers are advised to pack crisps in an angular 
pack and use ‘c’, ‘d’, ‘g’, ‘k’, ‘p’, ‘q’ or ‘t’ in its brand name, such as Croky), whereas sweet, 
still and creamy food and beverage products benefit more from rounder shapes and back 
vowel brand names (e.g. yoghurt is better packed in a round packaging using an ‘o’ rather 
than an ‘i’ in the brand name, such as in Yoplait).95
To activate a brand by means of sensory marketing, marketers should reach the con-
sumers’ five senses on a deeper level than mass communications or store atmospherics in 
general do. It should be done in a personal, preferably interactive way.96 Ideally, the brand 
experience provides proof of a brand claim. Gillette, for example, can claim in a TV spot 
that Gillette Fusion gives a smooth shave, but consumers automatically activate their persua-
sion knowledge when confronted with advertising and will question the message. However, 
when Gillette gives them a free shave and lets them experience the smoothness, the message 
becomes credible because the claim has been proved.97
Philips proved its ‘sense and simplicity’ slogan in Taiwan with a simple campaign. To promote its grooming kits in 
a country in which men are not really interested in facial hair, Philips did not make use of an app or other digital 
gimmick to convince men to grow a beard or stubble. They just distributed transparent mugs with a translucent 
beverage to hairdressers. Hairdressers were chosen because people are very receptive to hairdressers’ advice on 
their looks. On the mugs, one of thousands of varieties of a facial hair pattern was printed. On some there was only 
a moustache, on others only a beard or both a moustache and beard. When the hairdressers brought a drink (as 
usual), the Taiwanese men were surprised by seeing in the mirror how they looked with facial hair. Besides advice, 
the hairdressers also distributed coupons for the Philips grooming kit (50% off). Of all Taiwanese men visiting a 
hairdresser during the campaign, 95% changed their minds about facial hair, and 25% redeemed the coupon. With 
a simple campaign, built on the ‘sight’ sense, Philips proved its ‘sense and simplicity’ slogan for a cost of $2 per 
contact.98
Business insight
What about facial hair?
Feel/Relate
The power of emotions has already been described in Chapter 3. Experiential marketing 
builds on this power but goes one step further than emotional advertising does. It tries to 
bring the brand to life by brand interactions. For example, a brand activation programme 
often makes use of a website that enables consumers to contact the company easily and 
exchange information with other consumers.99 Moreover, effective brand activation cam-
paigns stimulate not only brand–consumer interactions, but also consumer–consumer 
interactions, to have joint brand experiences. The Rugbeer campaign of Salta Cerveza (see 
below) is a good example of how friends interact together with the brand. This way, a deeper 
emotional engagement can be reached making brand loyalty more likely.

390     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
As also outlined earlier (in Chapter 2), going a step further in emotional engagement stim-
ulates brand communities. For instance, during the Jeep jamborees, Harley-Davidson brand 
fests and the Vespa community rides, really strong emotional experiences can be jointly built 
in a group of very passionate brand lovers. Also members of online communities – such as 
those of Nutella, Nike, Audi and Ducati – exchange all kinds of strong brand experiences. 
Importantly, research has shown that brand communities strengthen loyalty and long-term 
brand relations.101
Think
Brand experiences can also be built by having consumers think. Think campaigns are com-
mon for new technology products and have been used for such product categories for ages. 
Examples are Apple’s ‘Think Differently’ campaign or Microsoft’s ‘Where Do You Want to 
Go Today?’ campaign.102 However, in other industries experiences can also be built on the 
think dimension and customers can be engaged creatively. Lego, for example, stimulates not 
only kids to think creatively with their hands, but also grown-ups. Lego invented LEGO® 
Serious Play®, a thinking, communicating and problem-solving technique that helps compa-
nies make better decisions through structured play activities using Lego toys. In a three-hour 
workshop, every person at the table is asked to build a model of leadership, a new product 
innovation, a model for future growth or a model of corporate culture. Next, participants 
tell a story about what they have built. Everybody is engaged and actively participates in 
the discussion. LEGO Serious Play has been successfully employed for team-building and 
problem-solving purposes in several organisations such as NASA, Royal Bank of Canada, 
and in academic and public settings.103
Think campaigns can also be used to activate consumers’ conscience, to make them 
rethink common practices and old assumptions.104 The Fair Trade brand, for example, 
makes people reconsider current prices and makes them realise that farmers of Third 
World countries need a fair wage for their crops. As another example, the Flemish radio 
channel Studio Brussels launched the ‘we do give a shit’ campaign to make people aware 
of the silent disaster of diarrhoea worldwide. Besides educating people about the problem, 
Studio Brussels was able to engage the Flemish population to raise money in crazy ways: 
by playing music, weight-loss contests, making calendars, study marathons, etc. Despite 
the financial crisis, more than €7 million was raised.105 In conclusion, making people 
think can be very beneficial for many brands as thinking leads to stronger brand traces 
in memory, making it more likely that the brand will be recalled and chosen in a future 
purchase situation.
Argentina is the country with the most soccer fans in the world, but in the Salta Province people are more into 
rugby. To tap into these feelings and give the rugby fans a special experience, Salta Cerveza came up with a Rugbeer 
vending machine that needed to be ‘tackled’ to get a beer. The Rugbeer vending machine was equipped with a 
so-called ‘pussy meter’, going from ‘chicken’ to ‘bull’. Only if the machine were tackled hard enough would a can 
of beer come out. On the first night, the vending machine was tackled 332 times. People interacted not only with 
the brand, but also with each other. Indeed, many youngsters made a kind of game out of it: who could tackle the 
machine the hardest? Next, the machine went on tour around several pubs. Besides delivering funny and painful 
brand interactions, the campaign also increased sales of Salta Cerveza by 25%.100
Business insight
Rugbeer

BRAND EXPERIENCE     391
Act
Act campaigns aim to create physical experiences and/or stimulate changes in longer-term 
patterns of behaviour or lifestyles.107 Whereas behavioural change can be rational in nature 
such as proposed by the Theory of Planned Behaviour (‘Public transportation is environmen-
tal friendly’, ‘My peers have a positive attitude towards public transportation’ and ‘I know 
it is easy for me to take public transportation’, so ‘from now on, I’m going to my work by 
public transportation’), lifestyle and behavioural changes are often more motivational and 
emotional in nature.108 Therefore, brand experiences could be more successful in engender-
ing such changes than non-interactive, mass communications. In its Climacool campaign, 
Adidas provided youngsters with such a behavioural experience, trying to increase their 
interest in running and make them more sportive (see below).
Adidas faced the challenge of promoting its new line of Climacool running shoes in France to 14–19 year olds, while 
statistics showed that French teens hate running. How did Adidas succeed in its mission? By giving youngsters a 
good reason. Adidas launched the operation ‘ready to run’. Each time a teen tried on a pair of Climacools, whether 
in Marseilles, Paris, Lyons or elsewhere in France, they ran the risk of being kidnapped in-store by an Adidas team. 
Once kidnapped, the teens had to carry out a mission and take part in a sensational one-hour race to the other end 
of the city to find a couple who were placed there as part of the game. The youngsters were given earphones and 
had to follow Teddy Riner’s (the world judo champion) instructions remotely. Two cameras and a drone followed the 
youngsters. Some of the instructions ran as follows: put on a costume, look for the envelope in the roofing, GO GO 
GO, pick up a bag of meat at the butcher, enter the hotel, take the keys in the cheerleaders’ locker room, find the 
address of the apartment, FASTER, FASTER, grab the voice recorder, divert the security’s guard’s attention, FOCUS 
ON YOUR MISSION, etc. The reward was to interact with several French Adidas celebrities. So, the campaign gave 
the youngsters the opportunity to test the brand promise of the new line of running shoes in a challenging setting. 
Also, besides the crazy experience of being kidnapped and being involved in a wild adventure, they got a nice run-
ning experience. But most importantly, they could meet their heroes, whom Adidas hopes are influential enough to 
Business insight
Ready to run?
More and more criminals escape conviction in South Africa because citizens disturb crime scene evidence. To make 
people aware of the problem and to educate the public that they should never interfere with a crime scene, an inter-
active DNA project was launched. A large floorboard was installed in Cape Town train station featuring the face of a 
criminal and underneath the picture the slogan ‘Disturbing a crime scene makes it impossible to identify the crimi-
nal’. The floorboard was made of short-lasting material. Therefore, after a couple of hours of people walking across 
it, the criminal’s identity disappeared. The activation engaged thousands of people. Many of them asked the DNA 
project representatives questions about the project while others took pictures. To all, the message was clear: ‘never 
disturb a crime scene’. The project was also largely covered by the press so that a wide audience were reached.106
Business insight
Don’t mess with the crime scene

392     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
Although Lay’s was market leader in the salted snacks category in Belgium, its market share was under pressure 
because of the rise of private labels. To stop its loss in market volume and value, Lay’s decided to activate its brand 
by focusing on its core value: taste. Lay’s also aimed to involve its (potential) customers as much as possible. 
Business insight
Create your own flavour
A special and very involving case of brand activation campaign that relies on the act dimen-
sion (and also largely on the think dimension) is the co-creation campaign. Co-creation or 
soliciting input from customers for new products is being used increasingly by companies.110 
For example, of the high-tech firms listed in the S&P 500 index, more than 80% indicate 
that they have established virtual user communities to generate users’ input.111 This is not 
surprising as it is generally acknowledged that a company’s competence in identifying and 
integrating knowledgeable users in the new product development process represents a major 
competitive advantage.112 But how to get the most out of co-creation? Who should be attracted 
and what should be the incentive? Firstly, the right consumers should be involved. Whereas 
for technological products, lead users are often considered most effective, this does not need 
to be the case for non-technological products. In the latter case, crowd sourcing (i.e. making 
use of a group of consumers on the Internet) is being used increasingly.113 In order to know 
which incentive should be provided, it is important to realise that consumers participate in 
co-creation for a variety of reasons.114 Some are motivated by an intrinsic interest in innova-
tion, others by general curiosity, dissatisfaction with current alternatives, to gain knowledge, 
to show ideas, or to receive monetary rewards. Generally, four consumer types can be distin-
guished based on their pattern of motivation: reward-orientated, need-driven, curiosity-driven 
and intrinsically interested consumers. Reward-orientated people are in co-creation for the 
money and need-driven consumers to find a solution for their current problems. Curiosity-
driven and intrinsically interested consumers, on the other hand, are seeking a compelling 
experience. They are interested in getting feedback, being part of a community with a lot of 
interaction and discussion of ideas, the possibility to collaborate and vote for their favourite 
idea. Being officially recognised as a co-developer is also attractive to these latter types of co-
creation consumers.115 So, to encourage participation in co-creation, marketers should follow 
a balanced strategy: (1) using a platform that allows consumer interaction and community-
building, and (2) providing an attractive but not too attractive incentive. Firstly, providing 
the possibilities for social interaction is crucial. Research has shown that more intrinsically 
motivated consumers value the interaction with like-minded consumers and it increases their 
co-creation experience. This co-creation experience in turn has a positive effect on the qual-
ity and number of submitted ideas, and increases consumers’ participation frequency and 
consumers’ interest in future participation.116 Secondly, an incentive should be offered to avoid 
being accused of taking advantage of consumers. Research shows that the higher the reward, 
the higher the number of ideas that are submitted.117 However, the incentive should not be 
too attractive because it could stimulate consumers to adopt a minimax strategy (i.e. do the 
least possible for the most possible reward), and crowd out consumers’ intrinsic motivation.118
motivate the youngsters to take on a more active lifestyle. Needless to say, the youngsters were really wild about the 
operation. During the campaign, the number of youngsters trying on Climacool running shoes increased by more than 
500%. The campaign also got a lot of media coverage and was widely adopted by the most influential French blogs.109

BRAND EXPERIENCE     393
Brand activation is most effective when the instruments used – sales promotions, point-of-purchase communica-
tions or brand experiences – are integrated in the overall marketing communications efforts. First of all, the effec-
tiveness of trade promotions can be enhanced by supplementing them with consumer promotions. Promotions 
can be announced via commercials in the mass media and reinforced by point-of-purchase communications. 
Public relations can be combined with sales promotions to create events and specific brand experiences in which, 
for instance, samples and/or coupons can be distributed, or prizes can be won. Advertising and POP communica-
tions can use images of these events to remind consumers of their brand experiences. Within the framework of 
sponsorship of events, team sampling, couponing and demonstrations can be used to acquaint the public with 
the product and to stimulate trial. Consumers can also be involved by getting them to vote for their favourite 
versions, come up with original ideas for product innovation or marketing communications, etc. Press releases 
on brand experience programmes and specific customer responses to these programmes can be developed in an 
effort to get free publicity. Coupons can be inserted in direct mailings, or e-coupons can be distributed through 
the company’s website or Facebook page or via interactive advertising on interactive digital TV commercials. 
Product placement can be used to stir up interest in a company’s offerings via interactive promotional offers 
during product use in the TV programme. Brand experience programmes can deliver proof of the brand promise 
promoted in mass ads. Customer engagement and loyalty that result from brand experience programmes can be 
reinforced by customer relationship programmes, which in turn can be enhanced by linking them to various types 
of loyalty promotions: contests, saving cards, self-liquidators, etc. Promotions may also serve as a traffic-building 
device for stands at exhibitions and trade fairs, and exhibitions and trade fairs can be used as venues to build 
specific brand experiences.
IMC insight
Integrating brand activation in IMC
Building on the increasing popularity of cooking and experimenting with flavours, Lay’s came up with a ‘create 
your own flavour’ campaign. The purpose was to launch a limited edition of the flavour created by one of the 
consumers. In a first stage, consumers were encouraged to submit their own flavour. The incentive was €25 000 in 
cash and 1% of the turnover of the limited edition sales. TV commercials made sure the general public were aware 
of the campaign. Packaging and in-store communications pushed sales, Facebook increased brand conversations 
(with messages like ‘I’m actually more looking forward to the launch of the new Lay’s flavour than to the launch 
of the new iPhone’), and a good PR plan made sure the campaign was covered in the general press. Almost 246 
000 flavours were submitted. A jury consisting of two chefs and one consumer selected two flavours that were 
developed and launched: Lay’s Bicky Crisp and Lay’s Indian Curry Style. An ad thanked all consumers for submit-
ting their taste and announced the two selected flavours that would be available for sale. Next, it was up to the 
consumers again to select their favourite. Over eight weeks there was a big contest between both flavours with 
Bicky Crisp coming out as the winner. Again Facebook, point-of-sales, packaging and advertising played important 
roles. The campaign was a big success: (1) 134 581 people voted on the website for their favourite flavour; (2) 1.2 
million people visited the Facebook page; (3) Lay’s saw an increase of more than 10% on image parameters like 
‘great taste’, ‘high quality’, ‘contemporary’ and ‘for someone like me’; (4) Lay’s Brand Engagement Index increased 
significantly; (5) more than 1.56 million Lay’s Limited Edition Bicky Crisp and Indian Curry Style were sold; and 
(6) Lay’s market share increased, whereas that of private labels decreased. The campaign won a Gold Activation 
Award. A similar campaign ran in several other European countries, with great results there as well. For example, 
in the Netherlands 678 682 flavours were submitted, 6 million Lay’s Limited Edition ‘Patatje Joppie’ were sold and 
216 739 people voted for their favourite flavour.119

394     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
Summary
Brand activation plays a crucial role in stimulating brand purchases in the short term. Brand 
activation programmes have become increasingly important as a result of communications 
clutter, less brand loyalty, and the lack of differentiation between brands. Three important 
tools to activate a brand are sales promotions, point-of-purchase communications and creat-
ing brand experiences. Sales promotions can be targeted at retailers, the sales force or end-
consumers. Consumer promotions include monetary incentives (price cuts, coupons, savings 
cards), prizes (competitions, sweepstakes and lotteries) and product promotions (sampling, 
extra volume, free in-mail, premiums). By means of sales promotions, various objectives 
can be pursued: attracting new customers, making existing ones loyal, increasing market 
size, reinforcing other communications tools and rewarding loyal customers. Although in 
the short run promotions can increase trial, loyalty and profitability, they can also lead to 
deal-proneness, brand-switching, a post-promotion dip and negative effects on profitability. 
In the medium and long run, the effects are unclear, but a potential negative effect on brand 
image should be taken into account.
As is the case for sales promotions, point-of-purchase communications enjoy the 
advantage that they reach consumers at the moment when, and the place where, they 
are making decisions. The objectives of in-store communications are to attract the con-
sumer’s attention, to remind him or her of ongoing or previous advertising, to inform, to 
persuade and to build an image of the brands on shelves. Several instruments of in-store 
communications can be used, such as shelf displays, floor graphics, trolley advertising, 
moving displays and interactive kiosks. Besides these specific communications instru-
ments, store atmospherics are also important. Most POP communications appear to be 
effective.
Brand activation by means of creating brand experiences is an especially powerful com-
munications tools. Besides stimulating sales, objectives like attention tracking, stimulating 
brand comprehension and brand image, and creating strong relationships can be pursued. 
Brand experiences try to bring the brand alive by tapping into one or more of the follow-
ing experiential dimensions: sense, feel/relate, think and act. Creating a holistic, interactive 
experience that is built on the brand’s values and is smoothly integrated with other com-
munications tools is key.
Review questions
	 1.	 Why is brand activation becoming increasingly important?
	 2.	 What are the objectives and target groups of sales promotions?
	 3.	 Discuss the various tools of consumer promotions, their objectives, their advantages and 
disadvantages for both the manufacturer and the retailer.
	 4.	 To what extent are sales promotions effective in the short and the long term?
	 5.	 What are the tools and objectives of point-of-purchase communications?
	 6.	 How effective are the various point-of-purchase tools?
	 7.	 What are the objectives of experiential marketing programmes?
	 8.	 Discuss the different experiential dimensions that marketers should try to activate to cre-
ate a strong brand experience.

Case 8     395
Further reading
Hultén, B., Broweus, N. and van Dijk, M. (2009) Sensory Marketing. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Lindstrom, M. and Kotler, P. (2010) Brand Sense: Sensory Secrets Behind the Stuff We Buy. 
New York: Free Press.
Mullin, R. (2010) Sales Promotion: How to Create, Implement and Integrate Campaigns 
that Really Work. London: Kogan Page.
Stahlberg, M. and Ville, M. (2012) Shopper Marketing: How to Increase Purchase Decisions 
at the Point of Sale. London: Kogan Page.
Shopper marketing: http://shoppermarketing.com/home/.
Journal of Promotion Management, http://www.tandfonline.com/toc/wjpm20/current.  
Case 8:
Get your parcel! The Belgian Post taps into the e-commerce market
Introduction
Bpost is the historical Belgian post operator and takes 
care of, amongst other things, dispatching and deliv-
ery of domestic mail and parcels in Belgium. Since 
2006, bpost has lost its monopoly in the parcel delivery 
­market, and in 2011 the domestic mail market. Cur-
rently, 64% of bpost’s turnover is domestic mail, 10% 
parcel delivery, and 26% other services (e.g. financial 
services). Bpost delivers more than 100.000 parcels a 
day. The ­parcel delivery market has a B-to-B and an 
B-to-C/C-to-C ­segment. This case focuses on the latter 
segment.
Market situation
Due to increasing e-commerce activities and online buying 
behavior, the B-to-C parcel market is growing very fast. In 
2013, sales of online retailers were €1.8 billion, an increase 
of 18% compared to 2012. Belgian e-commerce used to 
lag behind, but it is catching up rapidly with other Euro-
pean countries. Not only do more people buy online, they 
also spend more. For example, in 2014, 75% of the online 
Belgium population engaged in online purchasing and 
spent an average, monthly amount of €161. In 2014, bpost 
had a 50% market share in this segment, and it was eager 
to improve its position even more.
The B-to-C parcel market has become increasingly 
competitive though. While big, international logistics 
companies like DHL and UPS used to focus on the B-to-
B parcel delivery market, they became more and more 
active on the B-to-C market by means of acquisitions or 
collaborations with other companies (see Fig. 8.11 and 
Fig. 8.12).
DHL and PostNL joined forces with Kariboo! to establish 
500 delivery points in Belgium. On top of that, DHL devel-
oped an additional network of 500 parcel shops, and plans 
to have a total of 1600 delivery points by the end of 2015. 
UPS acquired Kiala and its 930 delivery points. In compari-
son, bpost had 1.250 delivery points. DHL, PostNL and UPS 
are not the only ones bpost should worry about. On an 
international level, Amazon, eBay, UPS, Google, Fedex, Uber 
and Walmart are experimenting with same-day-delivery. 
Amazon, for example, is investing in a network of parcel 
machines. And also retailers are more and more used as a 
pick up point.

396     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
The foregoing clearly shows that the parcel delivery 
market is very competitive. Therefore, differentiation 
is crucially important. To generate valuable consumer 
insights, bpost conducted a study. From this study, they 
learned that consumers are confronted with a conveni-
ence paradox. That is, e-commerce customers experience 
a maximum of convenience in terms of how, where and 
when they can order and pay, but as far as delivery is con-
cerned, they often have no choice. Consumers not only 
expect fast delivery though, they want it to be flexible as 
well. Whereas 73% of these customers want home delivery, 
22% prefer delivery at a pick-up point. However, today, half 
of the customers cannot really choose where their parcel 
should be delivered, because many e-tailers provide only 
one type of delivery (see Fig. 8.12). Offering consumers 
more delivery convenience by means of a larger choice of 
delivery options thus formed an ideal differentiation basis 
and could give bpost a competitive advantage. At that 
time, bpost was market leader in the home delivery seg-
ment, but UPS (making use of the Kiala delivery points) was 
the preferred logistics company in the pick-up segment 
whereas none of the competitors offered parcel machines.
Figure 8.11  Market shares on the B-to-B and B-to-C market
Segment size: ~€ 150–200m
Segment size: ~€ 750–800m
Others
Ciblex
Others
bPost
bPost
FedEx®
B2C/C2 X segment
B2B segment
~5%
~50%
Kiala
DPD
DPD
UPS
Postnl
GLS
GLS
DHL
DHL
T N T
B2B
B2C
home
B2B
C2C
B2C
home
B2B
C2C
B2C
home PUGO
B2B
C2C
B2C
home PUGO
B2B
C2C
B2C
3 methoden
B2B
B2B
B2C
B2C
C2C
B2B
B2B
B2C
C2C
B2B
BEFORE 2014
Rariboo!
Rariboo!
2014
Postnl
UPS
DPD
bPost
Kiala
DHL
DO = delivery option
Figure 8.12  Changes in competitors’ focus

Case 8     397
Strategy
To consolidate its position in the B-to-C market, bpost 
decided at the end of 2011 to extend its delivery options 
and to develop a network of parcel machines (i.e., a kind 
of locker) by means of which both customers and e-tailers 
can deliver and pick up parcels 24/7. The parcel machines 
came on top of its home delivery and pick-up point ser-
vices. This helped bpost to meet consumers’ need for 
delivery convenience and at the same time it created a 
competitive edge as bpost was the only player in the mar-
ket that offered three different types of delivery options.
If a customer wants to use a parcel machine, he or she 
has to register online once, and receives a member card and 
a code which allows the machine to be opened. Therefore, 
in essence, the success of the parcel machines depends on 
three factors:
1.	 the number of parcel machines
2.	 the number of e-tailers who offer delivery by means of 
the parcel machines
3.	 the number of registered users of the parcel machines
At the end of October 2014, bpost had a network of 
118 machines and 219 e-tailers offering parcel machines 
as delivery method. Until then, bpost had only launched 
a few small, local communication initiatives. These mainly 
consisted of actions at the parcel machines where con-
sumers were offered an incentive to register. These actions 
resulted in only 16.000 registered users. In view of the 
fact that e-tailers could only be convinced to offer parcel 
machines delivery if bpost could prove consumers were 
interested in this delivery method, driving up the number 
of registered users was the number one objective.
Campaign objectives
In October, bpost decided to launch a nationwide cam-
paign. The commercial objective of the campaign was 
threefold. As a first objective, bpost sought to increase the 
number of registered users from 16.000 to 50.000 within 
two months. With a budget of € 250.000, bpost hoped 
to generate traffic to the site of about 200.000 visitors. 
Whereas previous actions resulted in a conversion rate of 
20% at max, bpost aimed for a 25% conversion which would 
result in 50.000 new registrations. The second commercial 
objective was to raise the number of active users of par-
cel machines from 700 to 2100 per month. This number 
was based on the assumption that if the number of users 
would triple, the number of active users would also triple. 
The third objective was to increase the number of e-tailers 
offering the parcel machine delivery option from 219 to 390 
by January 2015. In the B-to-C market, bpost has more than 
2.500 e-tailers, of which 1.300 are major customers. Being 
able to convince one in three of the major customers boils 
down to an objective of 390 additional e-tailers offering the 
new delivery method.
Next, alongside the commercial objectives, bpost 
also formulated three communication objectives. As the 
launch of the parcel machines delivery option can be 
compared to the launch of a new product, a first com-
munication objective of the new campaign was to build 
awareness. A recent study (1065 respondents) showed an 
unaided awareness of the parcel machines as low as 6% 
and an aided awareness of 31%. Thus, both unaided and 
aided awareness needed a significant increase. As a sec-
ond objective, bpost wanted the campaign to enhance its 
image as parcel deliverer. The study bpost recently had 
conducted pointed out that only 1 in 3 consumers agreed 
that bpost offered a wide range of possibilities for receiv-
ing parcels. Since bpost added parcel machines as an 
additional delivery option to meet consumers’ conveni-
ence needs, the campaign had to significantly increase 
this perception, as well as bpost’s image concerning being 
customer-oriented and being an expert in parcel deliv-
ery. As a third and final communication objective, bpost 
sought to enhance brand preference and as such increase 
the number of consumers for whom it would be the most 
preferred parcel deliverer.
Creative and media strategy
The campaign had to succeed in creating awareness for 
the parcel machines and converting customers about 
this delivery method at the same time. With the help 
of the communications agency TBWA, a simple creative 
concept (‘Get your parcel!’) was developed that consum-
ers would easily understand and would motivate them 
to register. To reach the awareness objective, the parcel 
machines were chosen as billboard, that is, no additional 
web shop was created, but the parcel machines them-
selves served as web shop. As such, the working of the 
parcel machines could be easily demonstrated and con-
sumers could experience the convenience of 24/7 parcel 
pickup. To activate and convert consumers, the campaign 
tapped into consumers’ emotions of expectation, excite-
ment and surprise when opening a parcel. Specifically, 
1000 parcels were hidden in a parcel machine on the 
contest site ‘get your parcel’. The parcels contained iPads, 
smartphones, espresso machines, etc. To be able to win 
one of these presents, consumers first had to register 
online for the parcel machine system. Next, they could 
select a parcel, after which a first layer of wrapping paper 

398     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
was removed. Consumers did not know how many lay-
ers of wrapping paper would follow, nor what would be 
inside the package. With each layer of wrapping paper, 
consumers’ excitement increased ‘would this be the 
last layer?’ and ‘what will be inside the parcel?’. To get 
a maximum number of registrations, consumers could 
play a second time after sharing the promotional offer 
on Facebook.
As for media, the main focus was on the contest web-
site ‘get your parcel’. To attract consumers to this site, an 
online activation campaign on Facebook and other web-
sites was launched, supported by a radio and a direct mar-
keting campaign, and posters on the parcel machines. The 
30 second radio ad had a clear call to action and the direct 
marketing campaign targeted all consumers living within a 
radius of one kilometer from a parcel machine. The cam-
paign budget amounted to € 743.207, of which € 631.637 
were media costs.
Results
After only one week, already 74.000 new users had regis-
tered. By November 2014, at the end of the campaign, the 
number of new registrations was 115.000, more than twice 
as many as the target of 50.000 (see Fig 8.13). By the end 
of February 2015, almost 146.000 people had registered. 
In contrast to previous campaigns conversion rates of 20% 
max and a target conversion rate of 25%, the campaign 
managed to convert 32% of the contest website’s visitors. 
As for the second commercial objective, by the end of 
October 2014, 2400 active users per month were registered 
which exceeded the target of 2100 by 300 (see Fig. 8.14). 
Also the third commercial objective was exceeded as in 
January 2015, the number of e-tailers offering the parcel 
machine option increased from 219 to 407 e-tailers while 
the objective was 390.
Additionally, after the campaign, 28% of the target group 
was now spontaneously aware of the bpost parcel machines, 
and the aided awareness was 45% (for heavy online shoppers 
even 51%), a substantial increase compared to September 
2014 (see Fig. 8.15). Thus, even though the campaign lasted 
only three weeks, it managed to reach almost 1 in 2 Belgian 
citizens. Radio had the biggest reach (32%, see Fig. 8.16), but 
also the online campaign reached 25% of Belgian consumers 
and resulted in 365.000 clicks. Importantly, consumers not 
only understood the campaign’s key message of the avail-
ability of the parcel machines, but also appreciated this new 
delivery option. Indeed, 72% perceived this new service as 
useful and 17% intended to use it in the future.
Also the brand image and preference for bpost 
improved substantially. Almost 1 in 2 consumers now 
agreed that bpost offers a wide range of delivery options, 
Figure 8.13  Number of registered users of bpost’s parcel machine 
system
56
1042
5110
16000
131000
0
50000
100000
150000
Sept 2011
Sept 2012
Sept 2013
Sept 2014
End of Oct
2014
Figure 8.14  Number of active users of bpost’s parcel machine 
system before and after the campaign
2400
700
0
1000
2000
3000
Average nr of active
users/month BEFORE
Average nr of active
users/month AFTER

Case 8     399
6%
28%
31%
45%
0%
20%
10%
30%
50%
40%
Unaided awareness
Aided awareness
Figure 8.15  Unaided and aided awareness 
before and after the campaign
Online banners
Recognition /Exposure
Unduplicated Exposure
32
25
45
+13
Radio
0
20
10
30
50
40
Figure 8.16  Campaign reach
WO
W1
Wide range of possibilities for receiving 
your parcels
32%
46%
Customer-oriented
29%
36%
Credible as an online shopping/ 
e-commerce player
29%
40&
Real expert in parcels
26%
37%
Understands my needs
24%
33%
Has innovative products/services
24%
37%
Figure 8.17  Image of bpost before and after the campaign
Figure 8.18  bpost as preferred parcel delivery company 
before and after the campaign
42
77
40
72
0
40
20
60
100
80
All online shoppers
Heavy online shoppers
Before campaign
After campaign
mediabudget of €631.637 resulted in 115.000 conversions 
which boils down to an acquisition cost of €5.5 per regis-
tered user.
Questions
1.	 In your opinion, does the ‘Get your Parcel’ classify as an 
experiential marketing program? Why (not)?
2.	 How exactly did bpost try to activate consumers? Was 
this a smart thing to do?
3.	 Taking a look at bpost’s integrated campaign, would 
you have mixed and matched different communication 
tools? Why (not)?
4.	 Could trade promotions have been a useful instrument 
for bpost to convince e-tailers ?
5.	 What do you think of the way bpost tested the effective-
ness of its campaign? Would you advise bpost to test 
anything else?
and its credibility and perceived expertise in the parcel 
delivery market significantly increased. At the same time, 
more consumers believe bpost is customer-oriented and 
understands customers’ needs while also its image of offer-
ing innovative products/services went up (see Fig 8.17). 
Preference of online shoppers for bpost as parcel deliv-
erer increased from 40% to 72%. A percentage which even 
increased to 77% for heavy online shoppers (see Fig 8.18).
Conclusion
In only a couple of months bpost succeeded in activating 
the online shopping public, put its parcel machine network 
on the map, and in the process upgraded its image as a 
customer-oriented and convenient service company. The 
simple creative concept and the right media mix proved to 
be very effective. On top, it was also very efficient. A total 
Source: Information and materials provided by bpost, Olivier Sepulchre, and TBWA, Vicky Willems

400     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
15	 Riedall, K. (2011) ‘Linkable offers – a redemption revo-
lution’, http://www.brandchannel.com/brand_speak.
asp?bs_id=302 (accessed July 2012).
16	 The Nielsen Company (2011) ‘Shopping & saving strat-
egies around the world’, http://www.nielsen.com/con-
tent/corporate/us/en/insights/reports-downloads/2011/
global-shopping-survey-oct-2011.html (accessed July 
2012).
17	 Slater, J. (2001) ‘Is couponing an effective promotional 
strategy? An examination of the Procter & Gamble zero-
couponing test’, Journal of Marketing Communications, 
7(1), 3–10.
18	 Felgate, M., Fearne, A., DiFalco, S. and Garcia-Martinez, 
M. (2012) ‘Using supermarket loyalty card data to ana-
lyse the impact of promotions’, International Journal of 
Market Research, 54(2), 221–40.
19	 Chandran, S. and Morwitz, V.G. (2006) ‘The price of 
“free”-dom: consumer sensitivity to promotions with 
negative contextual influences’, Journal of Consumer 
Research, 33(3), 384–92.
20	 Mishra, A. and Mishra, H. (2011) ‘The influence of price 
discount versus bonus pack on the preference for virtue 
and vice foods’, Journal of Marketing Research, 68 (Feb-
ruary), 196–206.
21	 http://www.esprix.nl/core/winnaars_esprix_2011#
!prettyPhoto[bavaria]/0/, http://www.versereclame.
nl/2012/04/18/de-ek-gadget-van-bavaria-de-v-dress/ 
(accessed July 2012).
22	 Esteban-Bravo, M., Múgica, J.M. and Vidal-Sanz, J.M. 
(2009) ‘Magazine sales promotion: a dynamic response 
analysis’, Journal of Advertising, 38(1), 137–46.
23	 Information provided by BPost, Olivier Sepulchre, and 
TBWA, Vicky Willems.
24	 See also www.incentivesatwork.com (accessed 27 Sep-
tember 2012).
25	 Duncan, T. (2002) IMC: Using Advertising and Promo-
tion to Build Brands. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill/Irwin; 
Brassington, F. and Pettitt, S. (2003) Principles of Mar-
keting. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
26	 Ataman, M.B., Van Heerde, H.J. and Mela, C.E. (2010) 
‘The long-term effect of marketing strategy on brand 
sales’, Journal of Marketing Research, 47(5), 866–82; 
Slotegraaf, R.J. and Pauwels, K. (2008) ‘The impact of 
brand equity and innovation on the long-term effective-
ness of promotions’, Journal of Marketing Research, 45 
(June), 293–306.
27	 Zhang, Q., Seetharaman, P.B. and Narasimhan, C. 
(2012) ‘The indirect impact of price deals on households’ 
purchase decisions through the formation of expected 
future prices’, Journal of  Retailing, 88(1), 88–101; 
Chapman, C.J. and Steenburgh, T.J. (2011) ‘An inves-
tigation of earnings management through marketing 
actions’, Management Science, 57(1), 72–92; Felgate, M., 
References
1	 Alberts, P.G., ‘Theory of brand activation’, www.bran-
dactivation.nl (accessed July 2012).
2	 Felgate, M., Fearne, A., DiFalco, S. and Garcia-Martinez, 
M. (2012) ‘Using supermarket loyalty card data to ana-
lyse the impact of promotions’, International Journal of 
Market Research, 54(2), 221–40.
3	 Kardes, F.R., Cline, T.W. and Cronley, M.L. (2011) 
Consumer Behavior: Science and Practice. Mason, OH: 
South-Western Cengage Learning.
4	 Duncan, T. (2002) IMC: Using Advertising and Promo-
tion to Build Brands. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
5	 Felgate, M., Fearne, A., DiFalco, S. and Garcia-Martinez, 
M. (2012) ‘Using supermarket loyalty card data to ana-
lyse the impact of promotions’, International Journal of 
Market Research, 54(2), 221–40; Briggs, F. (2011) ‘Promo-
tions fuel supermarket sales lifts, reports Nielsen’, http://
retailtimes.co.uk/promotions-fuel-supermarket-sales-
lifts-reports-nielsen/ (accessed July 2012); Raghubir, P., 
Inman, J.J. and Grande, H. (2004) ‘The Three faces of 
consumer promotions’, California Management Review, 
46, 23–41; Del Vecchio, D. (2005) ‘Deal-prone consumers’ 
response to promotion: the effects of relative and absolute 
promotions value’, Psychology & Marketing, 22, 373–91.
6	 Kim, C. (2011) ‘An exploratory analysis of marketing 
budget allocation: advertising vs. sales promotion’, The 
Ritsumeikan Business Review, 1(2–3), 91–111.
7	 The Nielsen Company (2012) ‘Marketing effective-
ness: getting the right returns from brand investments’, 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/reports-down-
loads/2012/marketing-effectiveness.html (accessed July 
2012); Briggs, F. (2011) ‘Promotions fuel supermarket 
sales lifts, reports Nielsen’, http://retailtimes.co.uk/
promotions-fuel-supermarket-sales-lifts-reports-nielsen/ 
(accessed July 2012).
8	 Egan, J. (2015) Marketing Communications. Los Ange-
les, CA: Sage.
9	 The Nielsen Company (2011) ‘Shopping & saving strat-
egies around the world’, http://www.nielsen.com/con-
tent/corporate/us/en/insights/reports-downloads/2011/
global-shopping-survey-oct-2011.html (accessed July 
2012).
10	 Chapman, C.J. and Steenburgh, T.J. (2011) ‘An inves-
tigation of earnings management through marketing 
actions’, Management Science, 57(1), 72–92.
11	 Egan, J. (2015) Marketing Communications. Los Ange-
les, CA: Sage.
12	 See also www.incentivesatwork.com (accessed 27 Sep-
tember 2012).
13	 De Morgen, 12 October 2007.
14	 Freimer, M. and Horsky, D. (2008) ‘Try it, you will like 
it – does consumer learning lead to competitive price pro-
motions?’, Marketing Science, 27(5), 796–810.

REFERENCES     401
Fearne, A., DiFalco, S. and Garcia-Martinez, M. (2012) 
‘Using supermarket loyalty card data to analyse the 
impact of promotions’, International Journal of Mar-
ket Research, 54(2), 221–40; Allenby, G.M. and Lenk, 
P.J. (1995) ‘Reassessing brand loyalty, price sensitivity 
and merchandising effects on consumer brand choice’, 
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 13(3), 281–
9; Leone, R.P. and Srinivasan, S.S. (1996) ‘Coupon face 
value: its impact on coupon redemptions, brand sales, 
and brand profitability’, Journal of  Retailing, 72(3), 
273–89.
28	 Chapman, C.J. and Steenburgh, T.J. (2011) ‘An inves-
tigation of earnings management through marketing 
actions’, Management Science, 57(1), 72–92; Ata-
man, M.B., Van Heerde, H.J. and Mela, C.E. (2010) 
‘The long-term effect of marketing strategy on brand 
sales’, Journal of  Marketing Research, 47(5), 866–82; 
Sethuraman, R. and Tellis, G.J. (1991) ‘An analysis 
of the trade off between advertising and price dis-
counting’, Journal of  Marketing Research, 28 (May), 
160–74.
29	 For instance, Dhar and Hoch report profit increase 
between 113% and 235%: Dhar, S.K. and Hoch, S.J. 
(1996) ‘Price discrimination using in-store merchandis-
ing’, Journal of Marketing, 60 (January), 17–30, while 
Nielsen warns for margins being hurt: The Nielsen 
Company (2012) ‘Marketing effectiveness: getting the 
right returns from brand investments’, http://www.
nielsen.com/us/en/insights/reports-downloads/2012/
marketing-effectiveness.html (accessed July 2012).
30	 Gupta, S. (1988) ‘Impact of sales promotions on when, 
what and how much to buy’, Journal of Marketing 
Research, 25 (November), 342–55; Blattberg, R.C. and 
Neslin, S.A. (1989) ‘Sales promotion: the long and the 
short of it’, Marketing Letters, 81–97.
31	 Grover, R. and Srinivasan, V. (1992) ‘Evaluating the 
multiple effects of retail promotions on brand loyalty 
and brand switching segments’, Journal of Marketing 
Research, 29 (February), 76–89.
32	 Mulhern, F.J. and Padgett, D.T. (1995) ‘The relation-
ship between retail price promotions and regular 
price purchases’, Journal of Marketing, 59 (October), 
83–90.
33	 Leeflang, P.S.H. and Parreno-Selva, J. (2012) ‘Cross-cate-
gory demand effects of price promotions’, Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, 40, 572–86.
34	 Grover, R. and Srinivasan, V. (1992) ‘Evaluating the 
multiple effects of retail promotions on brand loyalty 
and brand switching segments’, Journal of Marketing 
Research, 29 (February), 76–89; Neslin, S.A., Henderson, 
C. and Quelch, J. (1985) ‘Consumer promotions and the 
acceleration of product purchases’, Marketing Science, 
4(2), 125–45.
35	 Rothschild, M.L. (1987) ‘A behavioral view of promo-
tion effects on brand loyalty’, Advances in Consumer 
Research, 14, 119–20.
36	 Kardes, F.R., Cline, T.W. and Cronley, M.L. (2011) 
Consumer Behavior: Science and Practice. Mason, OH: 
South-Western Cengage Learning; Mayhew, G.E. and 
Winer, R. (1992) ‘An empirical analysis of internal and 
external reference prices using scanner data’, Journal of 
Consumer Research, 19 (June), 62–70.
37	 Valette-Florence, P., Guizani, H. and Merunka, D. (2011) 
‘The impact of brand personality and sales promotions 
on brand equity’, Journal of Business Research, 64, 24–8.
38	 Yi, Y. and Yoo, J. (2011) ‘The long-term effects of sales 
promotions on brand attitude across monetary and non-
monetary promotions’, Psychology & Marketing, 28(9), 
879–96.
39	 Kahn, B.E. and Louie, T.A. (1990) ‘Effects of retrac-
tion of price promotions on brand choice behavior for 
variety-­seeking and last-purchase-loyal consumers’, 
Journal of Marketing Research, 27 (August), 279–89.
40	 Lal, R. and Padmanabhan, V. (1995) ‘Competitive 
response and equilibria’, Marketing Science, 14(3), 
101–8.
41	 Dekimpe, M.G. and Hanssens, D.M. (1995) ‘Empirical 
generalizations about market evolution and stationarity’, 
Marketing Science, 14(3), 109–21.
42	 The Nielsen Company (2012) ‘Marketing effective-
ness: getting the right returns from brand investments’, 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/reports-down-
loads/2012/marketing-effectiveness.html (accessed July 
2012).
43	 Kumar, V. and Pereira, A. (1995) ‘Explaining the varia-
tion in short-term sales response to retail price promo-
tions’, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 
23(3), 155–69.
44	 Slotegraaf, R.J. and Pauwels, K. (2008) ‘The Impact of 
brand equity and innovation on the long-term effective-
ness of promotions’, Journal of Marketing Research, 
45 (June), 293–306; Tellis, G.J. and Zufryden, F. (1995) 
‘Tackling the retailer decision maze: which brands to dis-
count, how much, when and why?’, Marketing Science, 
14(3), 271–99.
45	 Felgate, M., Fearne, A., DiFalco, S. and Garcia-Martinez, 
M. (2012) ‘Using supermarket loyalty card data to ana-
lyse the impact of promotions’, International Journal 
of Market Research, 54(2), 221–40; D’Astous, A. and 
Jacob, I. (2002) ‘Understanding consumer reactions to 
premium-based promotional offers’, European Journal 
of Marketing, 36(11), 1270–86.
46	 Simester, D. (1997) ‘Optimal promotion strategies: a 
demand-sided characterization’, Management Science, 
43(2), 251–6.
47	 Neff, J. (2008) ‘Pick a product: 40% of public decide 
in store’, Advertising Age (July 28), http://adage.
com/article/news/pick-a-product-40-public-decide-
store/129924/ (accessed July 2012); PRNewswire (2008) 
‘When shoppers become buyers’, http://www.prnews-
wire.co.uk/news-releases/when-shoppers-become-
buyers-152985515.html (accessed July 2012); Ogilvy & 

402     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
Mather (2008) ‘Turning shoppers into buyers: the truth 
behind shopper decisions made in store’, http://www 
.scribd.com/doc/11302909/Turning-Shoppers-Into-
Buyers#wordpress (accessed July 2012).
48	 Liljenwall, R. and Maskulka, J. (2002) Marketing’s 
Powerful Weapon: Point-Of-Purchase Advertising. 
Washington, DC: Point-Of-Purchase Advertising 
International.
49	 Bell, D.R., Corsten, D. and Knox , G. (2011) ‘From point 
of purchase to path to purchase: how preshopping fac-
tors drive unplanned buying’, Journal of Marketing, 
75 (January), 31–45; Parmar, A. (2002) ‘POP Goes the 
World’, Marketing News, 11 November, 13.
50	 Park, C.W., Iyer, E.S. and Smith, D.C. (1989) ‘The 
effects of situational factors on in-store grocery shop-
ping behavior: the role of store environment and time 
available for shopping’, Journal of Consumer Research, 
15(4), 422–33.
51	 Inman, J., Winer, R.S. and Ferraro, R. (2009) ‘The 
interplay among category characteristics, customer 
characteristics, and customer activities on in-store deci-
sion making’, Journal of Marketing, 73 (September), 
19–29.
52	 Bell, D.R., Corsten, D. and Knox, G. (2011) ‘From point 
of purchase to path to purchase: how preshopping fac-
tors drive unplanned buying’, Journal of Marketing, 75 
(January), 31–45.
53	 Chadwick, P. (2003) ‘POP dos and don’ts’, Promotions 
& Incentives, April, 45–7.
54	 Leeds, D. (1994) ‘Accountability is in-store for marketeers 
in ‘94’, Brandweek 14 March, 17.
55	 Tellis, G.J. (1998) Advertising and Sales Promotion Strat-
egy. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
56	 Rosenberg, J.M. (1995) Dictionary of Retailing and Mer-
chandising. New York: Wiley.
57	 Tkacik, M. (2003) ‘Rubber match: in a clash of sneaker 
titans, Nike gets leg up on Foot Locker’, Wall Street Jour-
nal, 13 May.
58	 William (2010) ‘Augmented reality cosmetic mirror in 
Tokyo’, http://www.japantrends.com/augmented-reality-
cosmetic-mirror-in-tokyo/ (accessed July 2012).
59	 See http://issuu.com/mkparsley/docs/ikea (accessed July 
2012).
60	 Birtwistle, G., Clarke, I. and Freathy, P. (1998) ‘Customer 
decision making in fashion retailing: a segmentation 
analysis’, International Journal of Retail & Distribution 
Management, 26(4), 147–54.
61	 Kotler, P. (1973) ‘Atmospherics as a marketing tool’, Jour-
nal of Retailing, 49(4), 48–64.
62	 De Morgen, 13 January 2007.
63	 De Morgen, 21 April 2007.
64	 Grocery Incentive Study 2002. New York: The Promo-
tion Marketing Association, http://www.pmalink.org 
(accessed July 2005).
65	 Grocery Incentive Study 2002. New York: The Promotion 
Marketing Association, http://www.pmalink.org.
66	 Dhar, S.K. and Hoch, S.J. (1996) ‘Price discrimination 
using in-store merchandising’, Journal of Marketing, 60, 
17–30.
67	 ‘Building the Nesquik Brand’ (1998) In-Store Marketing 
(March), 28.
68	 ‘Special report: Ambient Media is providing retailers 
and suppliers with yet another way of advertising their 
products in store and influencing consumers’ buy-
ing decisions’ (1998) In-Store Marketing, (January),  
32–3.
69	 De Morgen, 15 October 2004, 25 July 2005.
70	 Inman, J.J. and Winer, R.S. (1998) Where the Rubber 
Meets the Road: A Model of In-store Consumer Deci-
sion Making, Working Paper, Report no. 98–122. Cam-
bridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute.
71	 Breugelmans, E. and Campo, K. (2011) ‘Effectiveness of 
in-store displays in a virtual store environment’, Journal 
of Retailing, 87(1), 75–89; Zhang, J. and Krishnamurthi, 
L. (2004) ‘Customizing promotions in online stores’, 
Marketing Science, 23(4), 561–78; Bakos, Y. (2001) ‘The 
emerging landscape for retail e-commerce’, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 15(1), 69–80.
72	 Breugelmans, E. and Campo, K. (2011) ‘Effectiveness of 
in-store displays in a virtual store environment’, Journal 
of Retailing, 87(1), 75–89.
73	 Kotler, P. (1973) ‘Atmospherics as a marketing tool’, Jour-
nal of Retailing, 49(4), 48–64.
74	 Mehrabian, A. and Russell, J.A. (1974) An Approach to 
Environmental Psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
75	 De Morgen, 15 October 2004, 25 July 2005.
76	 North, A.C., Hargreaves, D.J. and McKendrick, J. (1999) 
‘The influence of in-store music on wine selections’, 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 84(2), 271–6.
77	 Caldwell, C. and Hibbert, S.A. (2002) ‘The influence 
of music tempo and musical preferences on restaurant 
patrons’ behavior’, Psychology & Marketing, 19(11), 
895–918.
78	 Baker, J., Parasuraman, A., Grewal, D. and Voss, G.B. 
(2002) ‘The influence of multiple store environment cues 
on perceived merchandise value and patronage inten-
tions’, Journal of Marketing, 66, 120–41.
79	 Brengman, M. (2002) ‘The impact of colour in the store 
environment: an environmental psychology approach’, 
Doctoral Dissertation, Ghent University.
80	 Dawson, S., Bloch, P.H. and Ridgway, N.M. (1990) ‘Shop-
ping motives, emotional states, and retail outcomes’, 
Journal of Retailing, 66 (Winter), 408–27.
81	 Bloemer, J. and de Ruyter, K. (1998) ‘On the relationship 
between store image, store satisfaction and store loyalty’, 
European Journal of Marketing, 32(5/6), 499–513.
82	 Miller, R. (2002) ‘How to exploit POP around the globe’, 
Marketing (August), 27.
83	 Brakus, J.J., Schmitt, B.H. and Zarantonello, L. (2009) 
‘Brand Experience: what is it? How is it measured? Does 
it affect loyalty?’, Journal of  Marketing, 73 (May), 
52–68.

REFERENCES     403
84	 Brakus, J.J., Schmitt, B.H. and Zarantonello, L. (2009) 
‘Brand experience: What is it? How is it measured? 
Does it affect loyalty?’, Journal of Marketing, 73 (May), 
52–68.
85	 Esch, F.-R., Möll, T., Schmitt, B., Elger, C.E., Neuhaus, C. 
and Weber, B. (2012) ‘Brands on the brain: do consumers 
use declaritive information or experienced emotions to 
evaluate brands?’, Journal of Consumer Psychology, 22, 
75–85.
86	 Schmitt, B. (1999) Experiential Marketing. New York: 
Free Press; Schmitt, B. (1999) ‘Experiential marketing’, 
Journal of Marketing Management, 15, 53–67.
87	 Brakus, J.J., Schmitt, B.H. and Zarantonello, L. (2009) 
‘Brand experience: What is it? How is it measured? 
Does it affect loyalty?’, Journal of Marketing, 73 (May), 
52–68.
88	 Schmitt, B. (1999) Experiential Marketing. New York: 
Free Press; Schmitt, B. (1999) ‘Experiential marketing’, 
Journal of Marketing Management, 15, 53–67.
89	 Kotler, P. (1973) ‘Atmospherics as a marketing tool’, Jour-
nal of Retailing, 49(4), 48–64.
90	 Hultén, B., Broweus, N. and van Dijk, M. (2009) Sensory 
Marketing. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
91	 Reimann, M., Zaichkowsky, J., Neuhaus, C., Bender, T. 
and Weber, B. (2010) ‘Aesthetic package design: a behav-
ioral, neural, and psychological investigation,’ Journal of 
Consumer Psychology, 20, 431–41.
92	 Spence, C. (2012) ‘Managing sensory expectations con-
cerning products and brands: capitalizing on the potential 
of sound and shape symbolism’, Journal of Consumer 
Psychology, 22, 37–54; Spence, C. and Gallace, A. (2011) 
‘Multisensory design: reaching out to touch the con-
sumer’, Psychology & Marketing, 28(3), 267–308; Hul-
tén, B. (2011) ‘Sensory marketing: the multi-sensory 
brand-experience concept’, European Business Review, 
23, 256–73.
93	 Spence, C. (2012) ‘Managing sensory expectations 
concerning products and brands: capitalizing on the 
potential of sound and shape symbolism’, Journal of 
Consumer Psychology, 22, 37–54.
94	 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abercrombie_%26_Fitc. 
(accessed July 2012).
95	 Spence, C. (2012) ‘Managing sensory expectations 
concerning products and brands: capitalizing on the 
potential of sound and shape symbolism’, Journal of 
Consumer Psychology, 22, 37–54.
96	 Hultén, B., Broweus, N. and van Dijk, M. (2009) Sensory 
Marketing. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
97	 http://wwww.brandstreet.wordpress.com/2007/02/13/
brand-activation-bringing-your-brand-to-life (accessed 
July 2012); Alberts, P.G., ‘Theory of brand activation’, 
www.brandactivation.nl (accessed July 2012).
98	 Philips June 2012 campaign in Taiwan described on: 
www.brandactivation.nl/en; http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=5eErLNDmdoo&feature=player_embedded 
(accessed on July 2012).
99	 Alberts, P.G., ‘Theory of brand activation’, www.bran-
dactivation.nl (accessed July 2012).
100	 Salta Cerveza June 2012 campaign, www.brandacti-
vation.nl/en, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T6
7EncQPwNk&feature=player_embedded (accessed 
July 2012).
101	 Hur, W.-M., Ahn, K.-H. and Kim, M. (2011) ‘Building 
brand loyalty through managing brand community com-
mitment’, Management Decision, 49(7–8), 1194–1213; 
Stokburger-Sauer, N. (2010) ‘Brand community: driv-
ers and outcomes’, Psychology and Marketing, 27(4), 
347–68; Jang, H., Olfman, L., Ko, I., Koh, J. and Kim, 
K. (2008) ‘The influence of online brand community 
characteristics on community commitment and brand 
loyalty’, International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 
12(3), 57–80; Füller, J., Matzler, K. and Hoppe, M. (2008) 
‘Brand community members as a source of innovation’, 
Journal of Product Innovation and Management, 25(6), 
608–19.
102	 Schmitt, B. (1999) ‘Experiential marketing’, Journal of 
Marketing Management, 15, 53–67.
103	 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k4VZ8xnJn2I 
(accessed July 2012).
104	 Schmitt, B. (1999) Experiential Marketing. New York: 
Free Press.
105	 http://www.unric.org/en/sanitation/27276-citizens-of-
flanders-collected-over-7-million-euros-to-fight-diar-
rhea-worldwide (accessed July 2012).
106	 DNA June 2012 campaign in South Africa, www.bran-
dactivation.nl/en, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8j
M08SYzvjo&feature=player_embedded (accessed July 
2012).
107	 Schmitt, B. (1999) Experiential Marketing. New York: 
Free Press.
108	 Schmitt, B. (1999) ‘Experiential marketing’, Journal of 
Marketing Management, 15, 53–67.
109	 Adidas June 2012 campaign in France www.brandacti-
vation.nl/en, http://vimeo.com/44039499# (accessed July 
2012).
110	 Howe, J. (2008) Crowdsourcing: Why the Power of the 
Crowd Is Driving the Future of Business. New York: 
Crown Business.
111	 Mahr, D. and Lievens, A. (2012) ‘Virtual lead user com-
munities: drivers of knowledge creation for innovation’, 
Research Policy, 41(1), 167–77.
112	 Prahalad, C.K. and Ramaswamy, V. (2004) The Future of 
Competition: Co-creating Unique Value with Customers. 
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
113	 Zheng, H., Li, D. and Hou, W. (2011) ‘Task design, moti-
vation, and participation in crowdsourcing contests’, 
International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 15(4), 
57–88.
114	 Zheng, H., Li, D. and Hou, W. (2011) ‘Task design, moti-
vation, and participation in crowdsourcing contests’, 
International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 15(4), 
57–88; Füller, J. (2010) ‘Refining virtual co-creation 

404     CHAPTER 8  BRAND ACTIVATION
from a consumer perspective’, California Management 
Review, 52(2), 98–122.
115	 Füller, J. (2010) ‘Refining virtual co-creation from a 
consumer perspective’, California Management Review, 
52(2), 98–122.
116	 Füller, J., Hutter, K. and Faullant, R. (2011) ‘Why co-
creation experience matters? Creative experience and its 
impact on the quantity and quality of creative contribu-
tions’, R&D Management, 41(3), 259–73.
117	 Terwiesch, C. and Xu, Y. (2008) ‘Innovation contests, 
open innovation, and multiagent problem solving’, Man-
agement Science, 54(9), 1529–43.
118	 Füller, J. (2010) ‘Refining virtual co-creation from a 
consumer perspective’, California Management Review, 
52(2), 98–122; Kruglanski, A.W., Stein, C. and Riter, A. 
(1977) ‘Contingencies of Exogenous rewards and task 
performance: on the “minimax” principle in instrumen-
tal behavior’, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 7(2), 
141–8.
119	 Best of Activation Awards 2012, www.pub.be (accessed 
July 2012).

Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Understand what direct marketing communications are, and why they are important 
in marketing communications
● Get an overview of the objectives and target groups of direct marketing 
communications
● Acquaint yourself with the direct marketing media, tools and techniques
● Understand why database marketing is so important, and how a database should be 
managed
● See how direct marketing communications can contribute to relationship marketing
Chapter outline
Chapter 9
Direct marketing
405

406     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
Introduction
The success of direct marketing originates from the corner shopkeeper’s philosophy of hav-
ing close and personal contact with customers, knowing everyone’s needs and wants, pro-
viding them with the best solutions to their problems and giving them excellent after-sales 
service. This makes them happy and loyal customers. The growing opportunities offered by 
technology, automation and database-supported marketing intelligence systems, and the 
reductions in computer hard- and software prices, have encouraged marketers to execute 
their marketing activities with an emphasis on efficiency and quantifiable objectives. Adver-
tising budgets are being cut and the cost-effectiveness of communications media becomes 
crucial.1 Direct marketing activities do not require huge production costs like, for instance, 
TV commercials and, consequently, are more accessible to all kinds and sizes of companies. 
They are also very flexible, highly selective (easy to target) media. Knowledge of customer 
habits and needs and other detailed market information are considered to be highly valu-
able tools for marketing strategy development. This is due to fundamental changes in the 
marketplace in the 1990s. The threat of high-quality/low-price private label brands has 
changed consumers’ attitudes towards brands. As there is less and less difference between 
products, consumers are finding brand loyalty increasingly irrelevant. Manufacturers have 
to look for communications tools that motivate consumers to try products and give them 
incentives to keep using their brands. These changes have led to the growing importance 
of one-to-one communications and relationship marketing, based on lifetime bonding of 
customers. Direct marketing has given added value to this kind of marketing activity in 
comparison with traditional mass marketing.
With a high Internet penetration the number of email addresses has been increasing at 
a fast pace, allowing direct marketers to develop emailing campaigns that are more flexible 
and much cheaper than traditional direct marketing media. Online marketing and emailings 
were discussed in Chapter 6.
Direct marketing as a marketing communications technique
In the beginning (the 1960s), direct marketing was considered as a type of distribution 
(direct selling through a different channel), as used by mail order companies. In the 1970s, 
direct marketing became a marketing communications tool with emphasis on feedback and 
optimising response rates on mailings and other direct marketing tools. From the 1990s 
onwards, long-term relationship-building and increasing customer loyalty (‘retention mar-
keting’) became the main issues in direct marketing.2 These different views on direct market-
ing are reflected in the quite diverse definitions of direct marketing. Hughes defines direct 
marketing as ‘any marketing activity in which you attempt to reach the consumers directly, 
or have them reach you’.3 Kobs stresses the importance of a database as a basic tool for direct 
marketing activities (a communications tool according to him) in his definition: ‘Direct 
marketing gets your ad message direct to the customer or prospect to produce some type of 
immediate action. It usually involves creating a database of respondents.’4
In general, direct marketing means contacting customers and prospects in a direct way 
with the intention of generating an immediate and measurable response or reaction. ‘Direct’ 
means using direct media such as mailings (including emailings), catalogues, telephone, 
brochures, websites, mobile applications, and not through intermediaries such as dealers, 
retailers or sales staff. An immediate response is possible via the Internet (email/website/
social media), answering coupons, phone or a personal visit by the customer to the store 
or retailer. In order to make direct contact with customers and prospects, a database is 

DIRECT MARKETING AS A MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS TECHNIQUE     407
required. Databases can be considered as the heart of direct marketing. Some issues on 
database marketing are explored below.
There are a number of fundamental differences between direct marketing media com-
munications and traditional mass media communications. They are given in Table 9.1. 
The basic philosophy of direct marketing is to consider each customer as an investment. 
Identification of each customer means that the most appropriate communications can 
be targeted in an interactive way. Customers are personally addressed and are able to 
respond. Data involved with these transactions are stored in the database and may be 
used to establish long-term relationships by adapting a company’s offer to the needs of 
the customer. Consequently the main goal of a direct marketer is to increase customer 
share (i.e. the quantity and frequency of purchases of each individual customer) rather 
than market share.
The importance of direct marketing in European countries has been increasing con-
sistently since the late 1990s. In 2012, sales as a result of direct marketing activities 
grew 7.1% to nearly $2 trillion, while overall sales in the US only grew by 5.1%. Direct 
marketing spending grew by 5.6% to $163 billion in 2011 and in the US accounts for 
52.1% of total advertising spending. Over the past five years this share has increased 
year by year, a trend expected to continue through to 2016. A parallel trend may explain 
this: in 2011 the ROI of direct marketing was projected at $12.03, compared with $5.24 
for general advertising. Much of the spending growth is led by digital channels, which 
continue to outpace other channels in expenditure growth. Their share of the marketing 
budget increased from 19% in 2011 to 21% in 2012. The total spend on digital market-
ing (mobile, social network, search engine, display, advergaming, blogs, etc.) has grown 
by $14.5 billion since 2006. (Digital marketing was covered in Chapter 6.) Direct mail, 
direct response magazine ads, direct response radio commercials, inserts and telephone 
marketing will all experience negligible growth. Spending on direct response newspapers 
will continue to fall.5 In 2013, in the US, direct marketing spending has grown by 5.9% 
to $137 billon. Although traditional direct mail is in decline by 0.9% in the same year, it 
still accounts for $44.8 billion.6
Also in the UK, an IPA Bellwether study revealed that there is a trend in marketing 
communications spend towards online advertising, direct marketing and sales promotions, 
while spend on traditional media (broadcast and print advertising) is going down.7 Accord-
ing to the predictions of Advertising Association/WARC, spending on direct mail in the 
UK fell 1% to £1.71 billion in 2012, after growing 1.5% in the previous year. Royal Mail 
has claimed that in the half year ended 25 September 2011 its UK letter volumes dropped 
6%.8 However, in the UK, the email marketing industry recorded in 2010 its most success-
ful half-year to date, due to an increase in website traffic generated by email, an increasing 
number of email addresses (90.2 million in Q1 2010 to 101.7 million in Q4 2010) and a rise 
in the number of campaigns being run. The volume of emails being sent during the second 
half-year of 2010 grew by 35%. The DMA’s email tracking study in early 2011 showed 
that consumers are receiving more emails of interest to them. Email is driving more traf-
fic to websites than ever before.9 As the importance of digital direct channels is growing, 
nevertheless traditional direct channels remain important. For instance, a German survey 
Table 9.1  The difference between mass and direct media
Mass media
Direct media
● Segmenting
● Recall, recognition and image measurement
● Mass one-way communications
● Market share
● Individualising
● Response measurement (per client)
● Targeted two-way communications
● Customer share

408     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
revealed that more than 20 million Germans spent time reading brochures and leaflets 
several times a week.10
During the last decade direct marketing has moved from a typical and traditional mail 
order company activity to an important communications tool for many other company 
types. In fact, all marketing is becoming direct marketing. Direct marketing has always 
been seen as the rather unglamorous tactical cousin of the real business of market-
ing, but the reality today is that all marketers will now need to embrace the targeting, 
measurement and rapid response skills pioneered in this discipline: knowing who you 
want to talk to, getting the right message efficiently to them and accurately measuring 
the result.11
Objectives and target groups
Direct marketing may be the appropriate communications tool for different purposes.
Direct sales
Direct marketing communications may be used as a direct sales channel or distribution 
technique: selling products and services without face-to-face contact with intermediaries 
(salespeople, dealers or retailers). The best example is the mail order business. Catalogues 
are mailed to prospects and orders are taken by phone or by mail. With the increased Inter-
net usage, fixed and mobile broadband penetration, and innovations in easy online payment 
systems, online shopping has now been largely adopted. A large number of retailers are 
using more than one retailing format. Multi-channel marketing is the new growth strategy 
among retailers to enhance their sales volume. The Internet and catalogues are used simul-
taneously. Retailers are employing several marketing strategies, including in-store catalogue 
kiosks, online catalogues, email promotions, sales associate referrals and sales circulars to 
reach more customers. Subsequently, the emergence of e-marketing initiatives such as email-
ing have augmented sales in the mail order industry.12
As the roots of direct marketing lie in the mail order industry, many authors argue that 
the real strength of direct marketing, as illustrated by mail order success stories, still relates 
to what is called ‘transactional direct marketing’ or selling. The database compiled by com-
panies allows them to segment their target groups by needs and values and to maximise the 
probability of response. It also allows marketers to develop profiles of the most profitable 
customers, and hence target new prospects more efficiently. This efficiency at transaction 
marketing is what has driven marketing’s growth, and many marketers leave direct market-
ing at that ‘direct sales level’.13
Sales or distribution support
Direct marketing can also be used to support the activities of the sales team, dealers or retail-
ers. Although the actual selling is done by intermediaries, direct marketing tries to prepare, 
stimulate and facilitate sales. It can also be used to follow up sales. Direct marketing is also 
often used to support personal sales. Sales visits are rather expensive, but a high frequency 
of contacts has to be maintained or even increased because of the highly competitive market 
environment. In this case direct marketing has a funnel function (see Figure 9.1). Reducing 
a high number of potentials to a limited number of qualified prospects (to be visited by the 
sales representative) is the main objective. Direct marketing will take over some of the sales 
team’s tasks to reduce costs.14

OBJECTIVES AND TARGET GROUPS     409
Customer retention and loyalty
Direct marketing is also the appropriate tool to improve relations with customers and 
increase their satisfaction and loyalty. Customer loyalty is important for different reasons. 
One study involving 27 brands showed that the most loyal customers (12%) are responsible 
for 69% of the sales figure of a brand.16 Others claim that lack of loyalty slows company 
performance by 25% to 50%. Relationship marketing has two positive effects: firstly, cus-
tomer retention, in combination with gaining new customers, leads to a higher number of 
customers; secondly, the longer they stay, the more profitable they become. The return per 
customer will increase, operational costs will decrease, positive word of mouth will lead 
to new customers and loyal customers are less price sensitive. Figure 9.2 shows how profits 
increase year on year due to the different effects of customer loyalty.17
The role of direct and database marketing in achieving higher levels of customer loyalty is 
not undisputed. A fair amount of academic research seriously doubts that loyalty schemes, 
Figure 9.1  Direct marketing as a sales supporting tool
Caja Madrid, one of the oldest Spanish Saving Banks, launched a new investment management portfolio, offering its 
wealthy private banking customers a personalised service based on their individual investor profile. An impressive 
campaign was set up to communicate to high-net-worth clients that its first-class fund managers could offer superior 
advice, using all the advanced technology at their disposal to buy and sell astutely. This financial service was called La 
Dolce Vita – or the good life – which summarised in three little words the benefit of the scheme. The idea behind the 
mailing was based on an analogy with fine dining: give a chef all the best ingredients and he will create an exceptional 
dish like the Caja Madrid advisers can create exceptional results. All the ingredients needed to make a gold risotto were 
sent by mail, including a 22-carat golden sheet. The results were astounding: 43% of the high-value names on the data-
base who received the mailing called their Caja Madrid personal account manager. The expected response was 15%.15
Business insight
Caja Madrid ‘La Dolce Vita’ direct mail

410     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
magazines or other tactical initiatives make much difference. Emotional loyalty is said to be 
only a reality when personal interactions take place.18 Moreover, large-scale and longitudinal 
studies have found that the relationship between loyalty and profitability is much weaker than 
proponents of CRM and loyalty programmes claim. One study discovered little or no evidence 
to support the hypothesis that customers who purchase steadily from a company over time are 
cheaper to serve, less price sensitive or effective at bringing in new business by positive word-
of-mouth advertising. Instead of focusing on loyalty alone, a trend among many marketers, 
companies will have to measure the relationship between loyalty and profitability in order to 
identify the really interesting consumers. To track the performance of its loyalty programme, 
one US high-tech corporate service provider set up a costing scheme to measure all costs for 
each customer over five years. The results took it by surprise. Half of the customers who had 
regularly been buying for at least two years (the company thought these could be called ‘loyal’ 
customers) barely generated profit, while about half of the most profitable customers were 
buying high-margin products in a short time, before completely disappearing.19
Figure 9.2  Profit per client as a function of customer retention
Source: Reprinted by permission of Harvard Business Review Press. Based on The Loyalty Effect. The Hidden Force Behind Growth, 
Profits and Lasting Value by Reichheld, F.F. Boston, MA 2001. Copyright © 2001 by the Harvard Business Publishing Corporation; all 
rights reserved.
In this world of the Internet and emails, the sending of actual letters has been declining. The Belgian Post wanted 
to retain the loyalty of its consumers following the mail service organisation’s rebranding exercise. It ran a campaign 
aimed at intensifying the emotion of receiving a letter while promoting a tagline: ‘The Post takes care of it’. The 
campaign was based on the idea that it would be great if a famous writer could help you compose a declaration of 
love. The Belgian Post hired four celebrities to act as love letter ghost writers for ordinary Belgians. The campaign 
immediately received wide media attention, which boosted traffic to the ‘Love Letters’ website. Online you needed to 
fill in the name and address of your loved one. Then you saw how the famous writer wrote down the name of your 
darling, and you watched the letter being posted and, on Google Maps, winged its way to the address of that very 
Business insight
Belgian Post’s ‘Love Letters’ direct mail and online campaign

DIRECT MARKETING MEDIA AND TOOLS     411
Direct marketing media and tools
To meet the communications objectives, different direct marketing media and tools can be 
used. Two types may be discerned: addressable media and non-addressable media. They are 
presented in Figure 9.3.
Although it may seem paradoxical, direct marketing communications can also make use 
of mass media or non-addressable media, but the difference with mass communications 
is that they are used to generate a direct response among receivers of the message. Direct 
response advertising (print, radio, TV, online) makes up an important part of the advertising 
activity. Direct response advertising has dominated the online ad business, although there is 
a substantial shift towards more online branding ads.21
Figure 9.3  Direct marketing media and tools
special person. The next day, the loved one would receive your handwritten letter with a unique URL that persuaded 
him or her to watch a video of how the letter came to be. In one month, 22 000 letters were sent. The ‘Love Letters’ 
website received more than 100 000 unique visitors. This campaign won the Silver John Caples International Award.20
Non-addressable media
Direct response print advertising
Direct response print advertising or coupon advertising means placing an ad in a newspaper 
or a magazine with the following characteristics:
● direct feedback from the reader (respondent) to the advertiser by returning a coupon, 
calling a phone number, visiting a website, participating in a contest;
● a clear link between the response (feedback) and the message advertised;
● identification of the respondent.
Direct response print advertising is not addressable and not individually targeted at one 
single consumer. The ad is placed in a mass medium (newspaper or magazine). The primary 
goal of direct response ads is to select interested consumers or companies from a large 
audience. Direct response advertising is also a good way to provide interested consumers 

412     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
and prospects with more information than can be ‘packed’ in a traditional ad. By respond-
ing, the interested potential customer can obtain more detailed information, for instance 
by mail (receiving a catalogue) or online when the reader is directed to the company’s or 
brand’s website.
Nowadays a lot of print campaigns contain a black and white square, called a Quick 
Response code (QR-code), that consumers can scan with their mobile devices. The QR-code 
provides a quick and effortless access to the brand’s website. It also increases the conversion 
rate by coaxing qualified prospects further down the conversion funnel without any delay 
or effort, bringing the viewer immediately to the advertiser’s site, where a longer and more 
targeted sales pitch may continue.23 According to the Multichannel Merchant survey released 
in June 2012, 47% of the respondents said they are using QR-codes, an increase from just 
8% the year before; 63.2% are using them in their print catalogues, while 47.4% are using 
them in postcards and/or other non-catalogue mail pieces.24 The most popular QR-code 
marketing campaigns are delivering video, app downloads and product details.25 An online 
study by SKOPOS revealed that 24% of Germans had used a QR-code, citing the ability to 
retrieve information quickly without the need to input a web address. However, only 4% of 
Germans are regular users of QR-codes. In the UK the QR-code usage is 12%. But no less 
than 74% of QR-code users in the UK said they had had a bad experience with it.26 QR-
codes can also be used to build an email subscriber list. If a company uses a QR-code to 
send people to an email signup, the company should make sure to give them a good reason 
to subscribe to the list. A QR-code can even be integrated automatically to make a phone 
call or generate a short text message.27
Coop, a Swiss food retail chain, wanted to generate new customers and new sales in four retail outlets in Switzerland. 
People living in the neighbourhood of these locations received an unaddressed mail. The mail, attached to the edge 
of the letterbox, contained a coupon that was instantly visible together with the central message. Coop obtained 
2.5% coupon redemption and the sales revenue was 30% higher than the year before.22
Business insight
Coop generating traffic via unaddressed mail-only
In the summer of 2011, Speedo launched ‘The Speedo Pace Club’, a new website and mobile application that uses 
video, informative editorial, social activation and training modules to empower swimmers. To support this launch, 
an integrated consumer and new media campaign was designed to enhance traffic to the site, using Facebook, 
Twitter and YouTube. Also, mobile was incorporated into the new Speedo 2012 Racing Catalogue, which features 
Speedo’s first ever QR-codes, providing new and relevant content to Speedo customers. Catalogue readers who scan 
a QR-code can view video interviews with competitive swimmers talking about how they use a particular item.28
Speedo largely used the codes in its 2012 Spring Performance catalogue. The company is not using the sponsored 
athletes in mass media to state that these athletes are using a certain Speedo product and praise its benefits. Instead 
the company did this with the QR-code videos in order to convince the consumer to buy this product in the last 
phase of the buying cycle.29
Business insight
Speedo puts QR-codes in its catalogue

DIRECT MARKETING MEDIA AND TOOLS     413
Direct response television advertising
Direct response television (DRTV) uses TV as a medium to generate reactions. Quite often, dif-
ferent direct response propositions are combined in one commercial or DRTV is integrated 
in a multi-step strategy to generate extra sales. The power of DRTV as a sales tool is proved 
by the success of teleshopping programmes or even teleshopping channels.
DRTV commercials are different from traditional TV advertising or direct response ads in 
a number of ways. The first is the choice of a response method. Providing the possibility to 
react by phone will create more response than a simple mail-answering method. The phone 
number will have to stay long enough on-screen to allow viewers to memorise the number. 
Visual and auditory support and repeating the phone number will also increase response. 
Today the ‘red button’ on the remote control is also used to encourage the viewer to take 
action: participate in a contest, look for more information, receive coupons or samples. 
Studies in Europe reveal that there are different factors influencing click behaviour (the red 
button) in interactive ads. If the visual call to action is supported by an audio message, the 
click rate is higher. Announcing the interactive spot previously seems to be more efficient. 
A clear, simple, call to action is needed, and it is good to avoid call to actions that are only 
targeting viewers looking for price reductions.30
The Belgian market for fast Internet access is becoming more and more saturated. The growing potential Internet 
use by the over 50s was the starting point for the launch of the ‘Helping Hands’ campaign in 2007 for Telenet, a 
Belgian Internet provider. Young and old can learn from each other. This truth also works for the Internet, but who 
is learning from whom may change. Where the grandfather used to teach his grandson how to ride a bike, today 
the grandson teaches his grandfather how to use a computer and about the complex world of the Internet. Telenet’s 
campaign was developed based on this insight. A DRTV spot was created with a clear call to action, next to a direct 
mail action targeted at the 50+ age group. The campaign generated a clear increase in Telenet results and had a 
high score on conversion and likeability by Telenet wholesalers.31
Business insight
‘Helping Hands’ Telenet
Direct response radio advertising
Similar to DRTV advertising, direct response radio advertising is an interactive form of radio 
advertising, aimed at generating direct behavioural responses from the listening audience 
using the phone, post or the Internet. Although direct response radio advertising can be used 
both for mass and niche markets in a consumer or business-to-business environment, con-
tent analysis of broadcast commercials has shown that services like banking and insurance 
and the tourism industry in particular use this kind of advertising. Compared with other 
advertising media, radio suffers from characteristics such as external pacing, volatility and 
lack of attention. However, it also has some advantages. It is relatively cheap in both renting 
and production costs as the average costs of radio GRP tend to be five to ten times lower 
than the average costs of TV GRP. Radio advertising is also a selective medium, allowing 
advertisers to limit reach to certain geographic areas or demographic and lifestyle groups, 
as the specialised music and news programming of radio stations usually attracts specific 
audiences. Radio is also a very flexible medium to advertisers as commercials can be deliv-
ered shortly before the first broadcast. The last advantage is its availability to a broad public 
in any place, at any time. The growing penetration and use of mobile phones is facilitating 
response to advertising in cars and other places where a fixed phone line is not available.

414     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
Addressable media
Addressable media are media by means of which it is possible to communicate individually 
with each customer or prospect. The most important addressable media are direct mail 
(including email), telemarketing and catalogues.
Direct mail
Direct mail includes written commercial messages, personally addressed and sent by mail 
or email. A traditional direct mailing usually consists of an envelope, a sales letter accom-
panying a brochure and an answering card. The pros of direct mail are the selectivity, 
the opportunity to personalise messages, flexibility in the use of creative ideas, and the 
ability to communicate fast, target specific groups and customise messages and offers.  
The con is that the response to mailings is usually rather low. This is due to the ‘clutter’ and 
the resulting ‘junk mail’ image of direct mail.
Postal companies are facing major challenges32 with the increasing digitisation of com-
munications and business processes, the liberalisation of the letter mail market and the 
global economic crisis. At the same time these represent opportunities to grow and develop 
the business successfully:
● Substitution of letters by email. With the increased use of electronic media, accelerated 
by the intensified cost pressure, the volumes for traditional letter mail products around 
the world have been stagnating and even decreasing. A study carried out on behalf of 
the European Commission concludes that the trend towards declining postal volumes 
will continue, especially in Western European markets. On the other hand, the market 
for direct marketing and the continuous increase in the number of households tend to 
provide a positive impetus for growth (Figure 9.4).
● Full liberalisation of the European letter mail market from 2011. The liberalisation pro-
cess in other industries (e.g. telecommunications or utilities) has taught us that former 
monopolies generally lose market share. In the postal sector, market share losses strongly 
depend on the particular regulatory environment and competitive market situation. Usu-
ally, the national postal providers maintain a high market share in their respective domes-
tic markets (about 90% in Germany and Sweden). This is due to the high fixed costs 
(investments and operating expenses) when entering a new postal market.
● Ongoing boom in online shopping. In particular, the B2C parcels business has posted 
ongoing growth due to the boom in online shopping.
● Customers demand enhanced convenience. E-commerce has high demands on availability 
and service and on delivery speed and precision. The key issues for logistics are now reli-
ability, efficiency and customer-friendly services.
Figure 9.4  Development of addressed mail items in the five largest European markets
Source: The Boston Consulting Group, http://www.post.at/gb2009/en/Postmarkt_Europa.php.

DIRECT MARKETING MEDIA AND TOOLS     415
The perception exists that digital channels outperform traditional direct mail and telemarketing. However, the 
Direct Marketing Association (DMA) tracked consumer behaviour, following almost 30 billion emails and 2 billion 
online display views in the days and weeks following the exposure to an online ad, and found that direct mail had 
a higher response rate than email and a much higher response rate than online ads. Email has a response rate of a 
mere 0.12%, while direct mail generates a 4.4% response rate. The latter has decreased by 25% overall, but still does 
better than digital channels.
For direct mail items of normal size, response rates are between 1.3 and 3.4%. Oversized mail does slightly better 
with response rates between 1.5 and 4%. Postcards generate response rates of between 1.2 and 2.5%, and catalogues 
between 1 and 4.2%. Telephone direct marketing is most effective, with response rates between 8.2 and 13%. On the 
contrary, electronic direct marketing is far less effective. Email response rates are between 0.03 and 0.12%. Display 
ads only generate a 0.04% response, and paid search 0.22%.
Online ads lead to only 6% immediate conversion after the click, which means that 94% of the conversion takes 
place later on. Due to lower costs of emailing, the Return on Investment of email campaigns is four times higher than 
that of traditional mailings: $28.50 versus $7. Consumers are constantly receiving digital messages that they often 
perceive as irrelevant and irritating. This may be the reason for the low conversion and for the fact that traditional 
mailing remains a very strong marketing communications tool.
Research insight
Direct mail response rates beat digital
Lotus Bakeries, with headquarters in Belgium, is selling authentic specialties like biscuits and cakes throughout 
Europe and the USA. Over the past three years the Lotus CRM programme has been optimised by maximising 
readers’ participation in the Lekkers magazine and coupon usage. In 2011, Lotus Bakeries wanted to increase its 
frequency (10 to 365 contacts per year) and interactivity with consumers. It decided to switch to a 100% online 
CRM platform called ‘Lotus Friends’, based on tasting and sharing. This was quite a risky move and a huge chal-
lenge. The aim was to merge the 300 000 offline fans with the 29 000 email opt-ins into one big online family 
before December 2011. Therefore a final paper mailing was sent to the offline fans with an invitation to join 
‘Lotus Friends’ online. The incentive was an e-coupon for free tasting. The online family needed to start sharing. 
A conversation about the ultimate cookie taboo ‘do you dunk your cookie in your coffee or not’ was started. Via 
a Facebook game, the Lotus Friends needed to guess if their friends were dunking or not. The incentive was a 
trip to New York.
In all, 16 875 participants played the Facebook game immediately. The yearly target was achieved in April: 8500 
registrations came directly via the Facebook game and 300 000 e-coupons were printed. The monthly e-newsletter 
had an open rate of 2.75 times the IAB benchmark and a click-through rate of twice the IAB benchmark.33
Business insight
Lotus Bakeries switches to online direct marketing

416     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
Nivea has more than 15 sub-brands, four of which are very important: Nivea Visage, Nivea Vital, Nivea Beauté and 
Nivea Baby. Although the Nivea brand has a penetration of 60%, consumers typically use no more than one or two 
sub-brands. The CRM programme needed to recruit Nivea consumers and turn them into real brand ambassadors 
by giving them exclusive information tailored to their specific profiles. Further, medium/high users were recruited 
and stimulated to use the other sub-brands of the Nivea brand.
In the first phase of the CRM strategy, an extensive user survey was conducted to make sure only consumers with 
a real interest in Nivea would subscribe to the CRM programme. The interested consumers were then grouped via a 
scoring model into nine segments, based upon the usage and the usage frequency of the Nivea brand. The members 
received well-targeted mailings with specific offers according to their profiling in the scoring model. New Nivea 
product launches were communicated in a consistent and recognisable look and feel (‘Natural Beauty’ concept), 
in line with the above campaign, through three contact moments per year. Every mailing grouped information, a 
present, coupons or a contest. The tone of voice was familiar and friendly. Each year the user survey is updated and 
a yearly report informs marketers about progress.
There are about 400 000 members in the programme: 88% of them are part of the three highest segments; 
47% are in the highest two and use at least two of the four main sub-brands. Members use up to 30% more Nivea 
products than non-members. Coupon redemption is responsible for 40% to 60% of sales of new products in the 
two months following a mail drop.34 In 2008, the ‘Nivea Awards’ were born. With the pay-off ‘Beauty is . . . to be 
inspiring’, Nivea Belgium initiated several awards for women dedicated to making the world a better place. A national 
campaign invited Belgians to nominate women who are truly inspiring because of their inner beauty and put them 
into four categories: ‘family’, ‘society’, ‘culture’ and ‘women of the hearts’. Again in this case, the Nivea brand ambas-
sadors were the most active: 22.5% click-through on opened e-newsletters; 5250 dossiers sent in, generating more 
than 105 000 votes with more than 1 million views. The participants acting as brand ambassadors started a virtual 
buzz. The social media widget was installed 1049 times with 270 000 views. The PR effect was very visible on blogs, 
forums, Facebook, etc. The campaign ended in an Award-gala show.35
Business insight
Ten-year Nivea CRM (1998–2008)
A PURL is a personalised website (URL), customised to the person visiting the website. It is often used in 
­combination with direct mail campaigns to increase the response. When a direct mail recipient receives his or 
her PURL (for instance, in a postcard mailing) and logs onto the PURL, the information from the database is used 
to tailor the web page experience to that person. Moreover, once logged in, the website can track the respond-
ent’s activity and continue to tailor the information based on his or her behaviour to improve understanding 
of the customer. By combining both media, marketers can take advantage of the comfort, tangible appeal and 
quality of ­commercial print on the one hand, and the immediacy, tracking and instant response of the Internet 
on the other hand.
A bank that was not succeeding well in getting clients to switch to electronic banking with its direct marketing 
approach used variable data printing combined with the PURL method. The bank increased registrations from 0.4% 
to 2.5% (an increase of 625%). Of all people who actually visited the personalised site, 8 out of 10 enrolled.36
Business insight
The power of a PURL in direct mail

DIRECT MARKETING MEDIA AND TOOLS     417
Telemarketing
Telemarketing is any measurable activity using the phone to help find, get, keep and develop 
customers.37 Telemarketing may be considered as a number of different activities that can be 
defined on the basis of two dimensions, i.e. the party taking the initiative (inbound versus 
outbound telemarketing), and the extent to which it is used as a sales-generating versus a 
sales-supporting direct marketing tool (Table 9.2).38
Outbound telemarketing means that the marketer is taking the initiative to call clients or 
prospects (outgoing calls); inbound telemarketing implies that interested customers or pros-
pects are using the phone to contact the company and ask for product information, order a 
product, ask for help with a problem or file a complaint (incoming calls). Using telemarket-
ing to take orders is especially common in mail order companies or for direct response adver-
tisers. Telesales involve actively calling consumers or companies with the purpose of selling 
products or services. Teleprospecting is searching for prospects by phone. Two other uses are 
controlling and actualising databases and settling dates for the sales team. Telemarketing 
might also be a good way of creating synergetic media effects when it is used together with 
other marketing communications activities. For instance, the response to a direct mailing 
might be increased by calling to announce the arrival of the mailing. Telemarketing can be 
used to generate more traffic at the point-of-sales or to collect debts (telefactoring).
The phone is the most direct of all direct media tools and has some advantages. It is a flex-
ible, interactive and quick medium, the effectiveness of which can be tracked immediately. 
On the other hand, it is quite a hard-selling and intrusive medium and, with its costs being 
10–20 times higher than a mailing, it is a rather expensive tool. However, costs should be 
gauged against response figures to make a correct evaluation.
Over the past 15 years, telemarketing has grown very rapidly. As the economy is moving 
from a manufacturing to a service base, many people believe that telemarketing is the perfect 
growth tool. Telemarketing is in fact all about customer contact, dealing with the public. 
One trend that will affect the telemarketing industry is the increasing demand for privacy 
regulation. The following driving forces will continue the expansion of telemarketing:
● Increasing demand for convenience and speed in the transaction of business.
● The improvement in the capabilities and the price performance of computer technologies 
and telecommunications.
● The abundance of software that facilitates the development of more extensive and more 
creative databases.
● Increase in the knowledge of how to develop and operate successful telemarketing 
programmes.
Table 9.2  The different functions of telemarketing
Sales generating
Sales supporting
Inbound telemarketing
Taking orders
Product and company 
information
Customer service, helpdesk
Complaints service
Outbound telemarketing
Telesales
Organising meetings/dates for 
salespeople
Teleprospecting
Updating commercial 
databases
Supporting other marketing 
communications
Generating traffic
Telefactoring
Source: Based on Walrave, M. (1995) Telemarketing: Storing op de Lijn? (Telemarketing: Badly Connected?). Leuven/Amersfoort: Acco.

418     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
Catalogues
A catalogue is a list of products or services presented in a visual and/or verbal way. It may 
be printed or electronically stored on a disk, a CD-ROM or in a database, or even visualised 
on a website, where one can virtually turn the pages. Catalogues are mostly used by mail 
order companies. Although customers are not able to feel, try, smell, taste, etc., the product 
in a catalogue, it does give them the freedom to go through it, choose from a wide range of 
products and save time.
There are different types of catalogues.39 Reference catalogues are an extensive overview 
of all products with their characteristics, references and prices. This kind of catalogue 
is typically nothing more than a purely technical description and therefore more used in 
industrial markets. The hard-selling catalogue is a sales-generating tool that should be 
able to sell without further involvement of a salesperson, a dealer or distributor. These 
catalogues are used by clothing, soft- and hardware, books and CD mail order ­companies. 
Other types of catalogues are more to support sales and used as guidelines during a sales 
conversation or during a shop visit to stimulate customers to visit the store, like the IKEA 
catalogue. This catalogue is the main marketing tool of IKEA and gets around 70% 
of the annual marketing budget. It is printed in 38 different editions, in 17 languages for 
28 countries; 110 million catalogues were circulated last year – three times higher than 
that of the Bible – with 13 million of these being available in the UK.40 In 2010 IKEA 
took its catalogue mobile and launched an augmented reality application for Apple’s 
iPhone. After selecting a piece of furniture from the catalogue, users can place it any-
where inside the room around them, changing its size to fit the perspective by using the 
phone’s camera. In July 2010, hundreds of thousands of applications were downloaded 
across Europe.41
Because catalogues have been around for so long, they have become very sophisticated, 
strategic vehicles. Still, the increasing cost of postage has made catalogues a challenging 
choice for investment. Today, the role of catalogues is changing. The catalogue is no longer 
just a direct selling tool. It drives web and store traffic, it is a channel between technologies 
and it communicates and builds brands. These catalogues with their expanded roles are 
sometimes referred to as ‘Megalogues’. Megalogues are much more strategic than the cata-
logues of the past.
As selling is the primary objective of many companies, the catalogues that drive sales 
must make purchasing easy and must create an effortless buying environment. The product 
selection and the applications (photography, copy, illustrations, etc.) need to present the 
products in an easily digestible, quickly understandable manner. Catalogues focusing on 
generating a direct response must offer a broader selection of merchandise and provide 
adequate information for product purchase.
Many companies have been driving business to the Web for quicker, less expensive 
fulfilment. Catalogues did a good job in driving consumers to the Internet, although 
there is still the opportunity to connect better with consumers resulting in improved ser-
vice, branding and sales. The customer wants to have an easy transition from print, web, 
email and mobile. Driving traffic to the Internet is only the starting point for catalogues. 
Mobile commerce represents the fastest-growing commercial opportunities. The focus on 
multimedia becomes all the more important as catalogue pages reduce in number.42 Royal 
Mail in the UK reported that 45% of social networkers say they have used a catalogue 
in the past six months, which proves that catalogue users are getting younger and more 
web-savvy.43
Drama is the new technique used to motivate a retail-friendly audience to take action. 
There is less emphasis on the product and related copy. Stronger luxury companies like 
Godiva place greater focus on brand development and imagery. A traffic-generating cata-
logue must be less about product copy and more about drama and promotional messaging 
that generates action.44

DATABASE MARKETING     419
New interactive media
New media are often a combination of existing media such as phone, cable, TV and comput-
ers in new applications. That is why they are also called multimedia. Interactive media are 
characterised by the fact that they deliver tailor-made information to the users at the moment 
when the user wants to have this kind of information. In other words, the user is directing the 
information process. Media such as the Internet, websites and email are the most important 
new interactive media. These techniques were explored in more depth in Chapter 6.
Database marketing
A database is a collection of interrelated data of customers and prospects which can be used 
for different applications such as analysis, individual selection, segmentation and customer 
retention, loyalty and service support.45 The minimum requirements of a good marketing 
database are personal data, including NAP (name, address, phone); email, age, transaction 
(purchase history) data and communications (received mailings, incentives, marketing actions 
and reactions) data. The database could also indicate which products, company departments 
and salespeople are involved with a certain marketing action. In fact, a database stores three 
kinds of data: market information, relationship data and company data (Figure 9.5).
Figure 9.5  The marketing database

420     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
There are two possible sources of data:46 internal and external. Most companies already 
have the basic information needed to start a database: order and invoice information, such 
as customer names, addresses, account numbers, purchase data, method of payment, etc. 
These customer files are internal data which may be the first basis to start up a database. 
External data are all types of lists compiled outside the company which can be bought or 
hired for direct marketing purposes. Examples are subscriber lists of newspapers and maga-
zines, or databases segmented on lifestyle and consumption habits.
In the UK, Intelligent Lemon, a creative and design company, released early in 2009 two 
new consumer databases through Wyvern Direct Response, a direct marketing services com-
pany. Travellers Content and Ladies Gossip are two fast-growing member websites. They 
attract over 2000 new members per month. Both have postal, email, landline and mobile 
data available as well as date of birth, gender, number of children and segmentation levels. 
All data are fully opted in with third-party permissions for each data item. In total, 100 000 
Travellers Content members and 61 000 Ladies Gossip members are being released.47,48
The success of any direct marketing campaign depends on the quality and structure 
of the database used. The effectiveness of direct marketing campaigns will increase with 
improved targeting. The latter means that individuals may be reached with a relevant mes-
sage improving response and reducing irritation levels. Repeat business and new business 
are the key factors to company growth. The former will need communications with the cur-
rent loyal customers. Those heavy users are often small in number and thus only accessible 
through direct marketing targeting. Strategic use of the database and accurate segmentation 
based on the registered consumer profiles will be crucial for these goals. New business suc-
cess depends on the ability to identify potential customers with the correct profile as good 
prospects for the kind of products or services the company has to offer. Learning from the 
current customers and keeping all kinds of useful information about these customers in a 
database will make it easier to develop a good list of prospects.
As the marketing database is a crucial instrument of direct marketing communications, it 
is important that it is correctly managed. Most of the data will expire quickly, and frequent 
updates are required to prevent the database from losing its value. There are five potential 
pitfalls for a marketing database:
● Incompleteness. Some data are not collected for all records in the database.
● Data expiration. Some data expire quickly, for instance function (job title) and home address.
● Unreliability. Some data might be false because the source is not trustworthy.
● Inconsistency. Some data are not changed automatically.
● Duplications. Two or more identical records may be stored due to different spellings, 
resulting in two or more of the same mailings.
Nursery brand Mamas & Papas offers a range of high-quality prams, pushchairs, nursery furniture, clothes and toys 
through its website and over 60 stores across the UK.
Because of the limited purchasing period (from early pregnancy to the toddler years of the child), the opportunity 
for customer engagement is time-limited. The company wanted to create relationships that are more fruitful with 
its customers and generate more value from its customer life cycle. Together with a specialised agency, Mamas & 
Papas has been able to analyse its customer data and map the ideal purchasing journey by identifying key customer 
Business insight
Mamas & Papas’ customer relationships

DATABASE MARKETING     421
The growing importance of one-to-one marketing has made it clear that generating 
and managing customer information has moved from a strategic opportunity to a strate-
gic necessity. Companies that are first to detect and answer customer needs with the right 
product or service at the right moment, offered through the right channel, have a substantial 
competitive advantage. A file with address data is not enough to support marketing decisions 
and drive customer loyalty programmes. More sophisticated database techniques have to 
be used. Figure 9.6 shows five stages in the use of database marketing:50 from the use of the 
database as a file with addresses (untargeted approach) to the use of database marketing 
to get the right product through the right channel at the right moment to the customers 
(event-driven database marketing).
Stage 1: Untargeted marketing
Often, the starting point of database marketing in a company is the phase in which a com-
pany uses a database of prospects. They are selected on certain criteria to fit with the target 
group of the product or service that the direct marketer will promote in the mailing sent to 
this broad group of potential customers.
Stage 2: Product-driven mailings
The disadvantage of the first step in database marketing is that the criteria to determine 
who will be addressed are compiled by the marketer. Sometimes, when the wrong criteria 
are chosen, the mailing can be ineffective. The second step in database marketing is to 
choose the target group on the basis of a test action instead of mailing a predetermined 
target group. This second step is based on response scoring models. A sample of potential 
prospects is mailed, and response profiles are compared with non-response patterns. The 
result of this comparison is a model of customer characteristics with a predictive value 
for response. This model is then used to give a score (the likelihood of response or, in other 
words, the need of every customer for the product or service offered in the mailing) to every 
potential prospect. Those prospects for whom the estimated returns (based on response 
chance) would be higher than the mailing cost are then selected for mailing. Product-
driven database marketing uses customer information to select the right customers for a 
touchpoints. It has built an accurate picture of every customer, understanding their purchasing behaviour and seg-
ment. Well-targeted marketing communications allow the brand to engage on a consistent basis with parents and 
grandparents: namely, email marketing campaigns based on different three-month periods and targeting special 
offers at specific groups.
As a result, the value derived from its customer database increased significantly. Customers opted into market-
ing communications are worth 50% more than those who are not opted in. Knowledge of the due date of the child 
allows even more relevant and accurate communications. Mamas & Papas has found that these customers are worth 
130% more in terms of spend than non-opted-in customers and transact twice as many times. Repeat customers 
online have also increased by 27% year on year.
Mamas & Papas also mapped the ideal customer purchasing journey for expectant and new parents. It can tailor 
communications to that journey, enhancing the customer experience by pre-empting their needs and deploying 
reactive communications whenever a customer deviates from that path in order to extend and enhance the value 
of each customer. This was just the first phase of a longer process in extending the relationship with customers. 
It is based on more cross-channel data from in-store and mobile activity to build a consistent view of individual 
customers, to create more effective customer segmentation and to deliver more relevant communications and a 
better customer experience.49

422     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
certain product or service. This is a more targeted form of direct marketing offering more 
relevant propositions to consumers and lowering mailing costs for the direct marketer.
The disadvantages of this strategy are that too great a focus on action-driven mail-
ings could lead to cannibalisation, i.e. stealing sales from some of the other products 
of the company, and incentives and loyalty systems could subsidise consumers who 
would have bought the products without these incentives. This has a negative influence 
on profits.
Stage 3: Client-driven mailings
To take the negative aspects of product-driven database marketing into account, a measure 
for individual client relationship value can be developed. The decision to contact certain 
customers will depend on the change in this relationship value rather than the profits on 
individual actions. Only customers who increase their relationship after a certain action 
are targeted. This introduces the concept of lifetime value51 or the expected return a certain 
customer will deliver during the years that he or she has a relationship with the company. 
This implies an estimation of the lifetime of a client as well as the profitability of every 
individual customer (share of wallet).52 In this stage, the direct marketer tries to target the 
right customers with the right products.
Stage 4: Multi-channel database marketing
This database marketing technique integrates the knowledge on channel sensitivity into 
marketing activities. Some prospects are more open to direct mail than others. In this 
approach, actions to sell the same kind of products or services are sent through different 
sales channels (direct sales, personal selling, etc.). Which combination of sales channels 
will be used depends on the sensitivity of every individual customer and the costs of 
each channel. Both types of data are stored in the marketing database. Multi-channel 
marketing uses the database to offer the right product to the right client through the 
best channel.
Figure 9.6  Five stages in the use of database marketing
Source: Based on Bügel, MSC (1997) ‘Van Direct Mail naar Event-Driven Marketing’ (From direct mail to event-driven marketing), 
Tijdschrift voor Strategische bedrijfs communicatie, 3(2), 98–106.

DATABASE MARKETING     423
Stage 5: Event-driven database marketing
In stage 4, products and services are promoted and proposed during the action period. But 
consumers’ needs are not always met during this action period. The chance of a mailing 
arriving just in time, i.e. when the consumers are actually considering a certain purchase, is 
slim. By the time they are planning the purchase, there is only a slight chance that they will 
remember the mailing, and the action of competitors could get more attention. To avoid 
this, it is necessary to adjust the timing of mailings and other marketing actions to the 
moment when customers’ needs become prevalent. Needs often arise as a consequence of 
certain events in the life of a customer (marriage, buying a house, birth of a child, moving, 
etc.), or they are related to the relation between the client and the company (e.g. an infor-
mation request two weeks ago, €2500 in a customer’s bank account, etc.). In event-driven 
database marketing, customers are actively followed to detect changes in needs and to offer 
them the right products at the right moment (through the right channel). Smart chip cards, 
Internet and call centres may be used to keep track of these changes. Instead of traditional 
promotion planning done by a marketer, all actions take place at the most effective moment 
for each individual client.
Privacy concerns
With the rising use of databases linked to the growing desire to get to know individual cus-
tomers, consumers are concerned about what companies know about them and how those 
companies obtain and use personal information. The primary source of consumer privacy 
concerns revolves around personal or individual-specific data such as names, addresses, 
demographic characteristics, lifestyle interests, shopping preferences and purchase histo-
ries. Growing numbers of marketers are assimilating and using information from (and 
about) individual consumers and renting or exchanging data or lists describing the habits 
and characteristics of individual consumers. The privacy literature suggests that most of 
the individual-specific consumer information used for marketing purposes falls into five 
broad categories: demographic characteristics, lifestyle characteristics (including media 
habits), shopping or purchase habits, financial data, and personal identifiers such as names, 
In March 2010, AS Adventure (a retail chain of sports garments and equipment) opened a new store in the heart 
of Brussels. The store is a combination of a normal AS Adventure shop combined with a specialised ski store. The 
direct mailing communicating the opening aimed to increase traffic to the shop, raise awareness of the specialised 
ski shop and boost sales by stressing the promotional offers. It was targeted at young families and winter sports fans 
living in the Brussels area. The creative concept was based on famous ski resorts, turning Brussels into ­Belgium’s 
newest winter sports area. The envelope featured a teaser ‘new winter sport resort in Brussels’. It had a ski pass 
inside offering discounts on winter sports material and a folded map displaying the ski collection and with the 
newest shop featured as the central spot of Brussels’ newest sport area. The mailing was sent in November 2010 to 
a carefully targeted 16 000 families. December resulted in the peak month for this AS Adventure store, recording 
7239 individual sales visits (more than in November, the traditional peak month) and sales of winter sports items 
increased 403%.53
Business insight
AS Adventure mails winter sports fans

424     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
addresses and social security numbers. A survey has found that consumers are most willing 
to provide marketers with demographic and lifestyle information and least willing to provide 
financial information (such as annual household income, the kind of credit cards they pos-
sess and the two most recent credit card purchases) and personal identifiers. On the other 
hand, the majority of respondents were always willing to share their two favourite hobbies, 
age, marital status, occupation or type of job and education. Although most consumers 
understand the need for financial information when purchasing on credit, a request for 
income information, particularly from a non-financial or non-insurance service marketer, 
has a profound negative effect on purchase intentions. Most consumers desire more control 
over the collection and use of information. They want to control what companies do with 
their information as well as control the number of catalogues and the amount of advertis-
ing material they receive. The DMA strongly recommends an opt-out format (allowing 
consumers to remove their names from a list by checking a box on a form). Apart from the 
control of information disclosure, privacy also has to do with control over unwanted intru-
sions such as telemarketing, unwanted direct mail or unsolicited commercial email (spam). 
The Internet channel in particular has fostered a new set of privacy concerns resulting from 
the ease with which data in this channel can be collected, stored and exchanged. Additional 
consumer concern results from the volume of spam due to the low absolute cost and waste 
inherent in sending commercial emails.54 In some countries people can add their address 
and/or phone number to a blacklist. Once they are on the list, no marketing activities can 
be done via mail or phone at that address. The Advertising Standards Authority and the 
Code of Practice of the DMA govern the list. In countries such as Belgium, Spain, Germany 
and the UK this list is called the Robinson list. In other countries like the Netherlands, New 
Zealand, Canada and the USA this list is the ‘Do not call’ or ‘Do not mail’ list.55 Neverthe-
less, research has shown that consumers are more likely to request name removal from phone 
lists than email lists. But on the other hand, removal from email lists was more desired than 
postal mail lists.56
Relationship marketing57
Marketers still tend to spend more and exert more effort on gaining new customers than 
on keeping current customers satisfied and loyal. But the efforts involved in attracting new 
customers are much higher than those required to keep current customers loyal. In fact, 
some claim that companies can realise profit increases of 35% to 85% just by decreasing 
customer loss by 5%. Moreover, as mentioned above, the profit per customer can also be 
assumed to increase, the longer a customer stays with the company. This is the result of 
diminishing acquisition costs, lower operational and service costs per client per year, com-
bined with a rise in the average yearly purchases per loyal client, declining price sensitivity 
and, last but not least, positive word of mouth (more referrals) attracting new customers in 
a cost-effective manner.58
In relationship marketing, a marketer’s challenge is to bring quality, customer service 
and marketing into close alignment, leading to long-term and mutually beneficial customer 
relationships.59 In other words, the direct marketer tries to create and maintain relationships 
of value. For example, Harley-Davidson created the Harley Owners Club, which has about 
1 million members worldwide. Besides motorbikes, Harley-Davidson offers its members 
an insurance programme, a travel agency, an emergency roadside service, two magazines, 
member competitions and more than 1200 local chapters.61
The fundamental importance of relationship marketing is related to the principle that 
customer satisfaction, loyalty and profitability are correlated. Lifetime value of a customer, 
or the net present value of the profits a company will generate from a customer over a 

RELATIONSHIP MARKETING     425
period of time (usually 4–5 years), is an important concept for the direct marketer involved 
with relationship or retention marketing. By computing the average lifetime value of its 
customers, the company will be able to determine how much it can invest in attracting 
and making loyal potential new customers. Not all customers should be made loyal.62 It 
makes no sense to build up a loyal but unprofitable relationship. With the Pareto principle 
in mind, 80% of time and promotional efforts should be allocated to 20% of custom-
ers. To identify these customers the information assembled about their past behaviour 
will help the direct marketer select the right customers for further loyalty development. 
Apart from traditional socio-demographic and psychographic segmentations, customer 
portfolio segments can be measured in terms of number of customers, number of pur-
chases (frequency of purchase), recency of purchases and contribution to sales and profits 
(monetary value).63
During a relationship, customers can progress from being a prospect to being a customer, 
client, supporter and, at the top of the loyalty ladder, an advocate. The latter are so involved 
with the organisation that they are very loyal and influence others by positive word of mouth 
(WOM), which is of high value for a brand knowing that WOM is one of the main credible 
information sources for consumers today. The relationship direct marketer wants to encour-
age customers as far up the loyalty ladder as possible.
Customer loyalty will be won by being better than competitors (offering superior prod-
ucts and services) or by loyalty strategies. There are two strategies to stimulate customer 
loyalty: a rewarding strategy and a relationship strategy. The former implies rewarding 
loyal behaviour by giving ‘hard’ advantages to reinforce and maintain customer loyalty. 
Examples are frequent flyer programmes, gifts, prizes or money. Rewarding strategies are 
targeted at rational calculating customers. But, as these rewards are easy to copy or exceed 
by competitors, they are rarely the best strategy when they are not used in combination 
with a relationship strategy. The latter consists of creating tight relations with custom-
ers by gathering information about each individual customer and using it intelligently by 
providing soft, personalised and customised advantages. Examples are sending targeted 
and relevant messages, special events for customers, etc. These relationship strategies are 
targeted at affective-orientated customers. For instance, someone calls a local florist and 
orders a bouquet for their mother’s birthday; the next year they get a postcard from the 
florist three weeks before their mother’s birthday, which reflects the number and type of 
Heinz is a long-established food brand that sells thousands of food products in over 200 countries. One of its product 
ranges is specifically designed for infants. Because of legal restrictions in the UK, Heinz could not talk to new moth-
ers about moving from Heinz milks to its wet foods and snacks for babies. Nevertheless, Heinz wanted to engage 
with parents to increase awareness of these specific products. So the Heinz Baby Club was born – a club, sufficiently 
different from other clubs, that aimed to become a favourite source of information about nutrition and baby care 
for parents. The campaign, targeted at new parents and expectant mothers, was a cross-media campaign including 
direct mail and digital marketing. Because learning to be a mother is a journey of discovery, every pack looked like 
an explorer’s backpack containing relevant content, offers, vouchers, each reflecting a phase of the journey. Different 
packs were developed: a Birth Pack, a Weaning Pack and a Feeding Textures Pack. Twenty-three emails were sent 
over a period of 21 months. After 6 months, around 24 000 mums had registered with the club. The opening rate 
of the emails was 39% with an average click-through rate of 6.3%.60
Business insight
Heinz’s baby club

426     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
flowers ordered last year, accompanied by the message that it only takes one phone call to 
send her flowers again. Which of the strategies should a direct marketer choose? Rewarding 
programmes are effective to use as a first step in the process of building a close relation-
ship. They will bring customers into the programme. However, this will not be enough to 
keep customers loyal.
To profit from loyal customers, marketers should offer the best value to the best custom-
ers: those clients creating most profit should benefit from this situation, which will make 
them even more loyal and profitable. For instance, a company could consider offering lower 
prices to its loyal customers. Unfortunately, most companies forget this and deliver products 
or services of the same quality to all customers. The value created by a customer loyalty 
programme should lead to higher returns than costs. A reward programme may never be a 
cost and should not attract price- or promotion-sensitive customers of competitors instead 
of rewarding loyal clients. Rewards should concentrate on stimulating desired behaviour 
(loyalty, WOM) and discourage unwanted, unprofitable behaviour (customer defection). 
Loyalty programmes are long-term actions and not short-term promotions, and long-term 
advantages should be communicated rather than promoting switching behaviour. Loyalty 
programmes should attract valuable customer segments and discourage less valuable seg-
ments by being self-selective and individually correcting. For example, MCI’s Friends and 
Family loyalty programme offered 20% to 50% discount on calls to a specified network of 
friends and family. The proposition is most attractive to heavy users of long-distance calls, 
a core segment for MCI.
In the customer’s mind, five elements determine the value of a loyalty programme: cash 
value, the number of options, aspiring value, relevance and convenience. The value should be 
calculated as a percentage discount on the amount a consumer has to spend to be able to get 
the reward. A free trip to a Caribbean island or a new car has a higher aspiring value than a 
discount on a phone bill. Customers should also be able to choose from different benefits. A 
programme is only relevant if the aspired benefit is within reach; if it takes years to collect 
the necessary air miles to make a free trip it will not be of any relevance to a customer. If it 
takes a lot of administration, whether for the customer or the retailer, a loyalty programme 
has a small chance of success. This is what is meant by ‘convenience’.
Direct marketing communications should be well integrated into the IMC mix. First of all, different forms of direct 
marketing can be combined. For instance, a telemarketing campaign can serve as input for a better targeted direct 
mail shot. Direct marketing communications and CRM can support personal selling by generating leads, collecting 
information and identifying prospects, thus making sales calls more effective. Sales call results can be ploughed 
back into the CRM system, and can be used for follow-up. Database enrichment as a result of direct mailing or 
telemarketing can also be used for handling requests and complaints, cross-selling and generating traffic to exhibi-
tions and trade fairs, and it can provide important information about customer characteristics, attitudes, preferences 
and buying behaviour. Results of sales promotion and advertising campaigns can be integrated into the customer 
database and used to find out which advertising appeals worked and which promotion campaigns were effective. 
These impact analyses can be used to generate more impact with future direct marketing, promotion and advertis-
ing efforts. Direct marketing communications can also be used for direct (potential) customers to a website, and to 
register and react to in-bound calls resulting from a direct response advertising campaign, or to contacts generated 
through the company website.
IMC insight
Integrating direct marketing communications in IMC

FURTHER READING     427
Summary
Direct marketing communications are an increasingly important instrument of the com-
munications mix, and have the unique characteristics of being able to reach the consumer 
personally and directly, and immediately measure the effects. Direct marketing can serve 
a number of objectives, such as direct sales, sales and distribution support, and customer 
retention and loyalty enhancement. Direct marketing uses a multitude of tools and media. 
Some of them are non-addressable mass media instruments, such as direct response print 
and TV ads and teletext. Others are addressable or personalised, such as direct mail, tele-
marketing and catalogues. A prerequisite for successful direct marketing communications 
is building, maintaining and managing a marketing database which enables the company 
to collect individualised information on all its customers and prospects, and use it in one-
to-one marketing communications campaigns. Depending on the sophistication of data 
collection and data use, five types of databases and direct marketing techniques can be 
distinguished. Given the fact that keeping existing customers loyal is far less expensive than 
gaining new customers, relationship marketing, using databases and direct marketing tech-
niques, becomes increasingly important.
Further reading
Alpert, J. (2012) The Mobile Marketing Revolution: How Your Brand Can Have a One-to-
One Conversation with Everyone. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional.
Peppers, D. and Rogers, M. (2011) Managing Customer Relationships: A Strategic Frame-
work. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Spiller, L. and Baier, M. (2012) Contemporary Direct and Interactive Marketing, 3rd edition. 
Chicago, IL: Racom Communications.
Review questions
	 1.	 What is direct marketing?
	 2.	 What are the typical characteristics of direct marketing communications, and to what 
extent do they differ from mass marketing communications?
	 3.	 What are the main challenges that direct marketers will face in the near future?
	 4.	 What are the objectives and tasks of direct marketing communications?
	 5.	 How can mass media advertising be used in a direct marketing communications campaign?
	 6.	 Compare the various media and tools of addressable direct marketing communications. 
What are the advantages and disadvantages of each tool?
	 7.	 What are QR-codes and how can they be integrated into the different direct marketing 
tools?
	 8.	 What is the ‘new’ role of catalogues?
	 9.	 How important is a database for direct marketing communications and how can it be 
managed?
	10.	 What are the stages in the evolution of database marketing use?
	11.	 What is the importance of relationship marketing and how can direct marketing com-
munications techniques contribute to customer loyalty?

428     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
able to start from a high-quality product with a distinc-
tive taste. Such a distinctive product is crucially important. 
Secondly, the company relied on focused product innova-
tions, aimed partly at format innovation (e.g. mini-variants) 
and partly at introducing products for new consumption 
moments (e.g. caramelised biscuit spread and caramelised 
biscuit ice cream). Thirdly, the company invested more 
resources in marketing communications. Not only did it 
spend more above the line (featuring ads that stressed the 
fact that coffee moments need Lotus), but also it created a 
stronger bond with the customers, among other things, by 
installing the ‘Lotus Friends’ site (see below).
Importantly, to implement its strategy and meet the 
challenging international objectives, Lotus Bakeries’ group 
Case 9:
Lotus Bakeries and Lotus Friends: applying e-CRM in an FMCG market
Lotus Bakeries
Lotus was founded in Belgium in 1932 by the three Boone 
brothers. The company specialised in caramelised biscuits, an 
original Belgian specialty. The typical taste – which is due to 
the caramelisation of the sugar during the baking process – 
quickly made caramelised biscuits a top product in the Belgian 
biscuit market. A merger in 1974 with the Belgian company 
Corona added cakes (pastry), waffles and galettes to Lotus’s 
product portfolio. As internationalisation became important 
and the cakes and pastry market is characterised by huge 
regional differences in taste and consumption, several acqui-
sitions of Belgian, Dutch, French, German, etc., companies 
soon followed to build a stronger, international position. For 
caramelised biscuits no acquisitions took place as this product 
is a Belgian specialty and was appreciated internationally as 
it was. As of 2001, all the regional brands (like Suzy, De Bruin, 
Cremers, Corona, Le Glazik, etc.) were branded under the 
single brand Lotus, and the names of the subsidiaries in the 
Netherlands, France, Luxembourg, Germany and Switzerland 
were all changed to Lotus Bakeries. In line with the company’s 
objective to become recognised as a leading manufacturer 
of authentic, high-quality specialties, Lotus Bakeries took 
over Peijnenburg, the Dutch market leader in gingerbread, in 
2006 and Anna’s, the Swedish market leader of pepparkakor 
(a thin and crispy biscuit enriched with cinnamon and gin-
ger spices), in 2008. Thus, currently Lotus Bakeries produces 
and sells specialty products under three strong brands: Lotus,  
Peijnenburg and Anna’s.
With a strong focus on the best-performing products 
within each brand, Lotus Bakeries has seen a steady growth 
in both traditional markets and in new growth markets over 
recent years (see Figure 9.7 and Figure 9.8).
How did it succeed in making its authentic yet contem-
porary specialties increasingly popular? First of all, it was 
428     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
Thomas, B. and Housden, M. (2011) Direct and Digital Marketing in Practice, 2nd edition. 
London: A&C Black.
Zoratti, S. and Gallagher, L. (2012) Precision Marketing: Maximising Revenue Through 
Relevance. London: Kogan Page.
 www.statista.com
 www.dmnews.com
 www.dma.org.uk
Figure 9.7  Evolution of turnover (€ millions)
Source: Annual Report 2011, p. 33

CASE 9     429
goal of the country and regional organisations is to adapt 
Lotus Bakeries’ commercial policy in a market-orientated 
way and to make sure that the policy reflects the particular, 
local market. Such an organisational structure helps to bring 
the company’s brands closer to the local customers.
Changes to the CRM programme
As Figure 9.8 shows, Belgium is still the most important market 
for Lotus Bakeries. The company is well known and has built a 
strong reputation in Belgium over the past few decades. Nev-
ertheless, company–customer relations began to sour dur-
ing recent years, mainly due to pressure from private labels. 
Building a stronger bond with the customers became crucially 
important. Further, as the company had gradually diversified, 
several customers – even in Belgium – were unaware of the 
fact that the company has much more to offer besides cara-
melised biscuits and waffles. Lotus Bakeries recognised that 
this was actually a good opportunity for cross-selling. Thus, 
in order to remain strong in its home country, the question 
was: How can the company build a stronger relation with its 
Belgian customers and at the same time stimulate these cus-
tomers’ interest in the company’s full product portfolio?
Besides an above-the-line image campaign which ran 
in most countries served by Lotus Bakeries, the company 
policy is set by the Executive Committee, but then passed on 
to the various corporate departments, country and regional 
organisations (see Figure 9.9). The company has sales organ-
isations in nine European countries and in the USA/Canada, 
and an export department for the other countries. A major 
Figure 9.8  Turnover in different markets
Source: Annual Report 2011, p. 33
Figure 9.9  Lotus Bakeries’ organisational structure
Source: Annual Report 2011, p. 11

430     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
decided to launch a new direct marketing programme. In 
2007, the direct marketing programme of Lotus Bakeries 
consisted of sending direct mailings to 300 000 consumers, 
and this not more than four times a year. The direct mailing 
contained coupons for Lotus Bakeries’ products to activate 
the brand. However, an analysis of the redemption num-
bers and the results of a telephone survey amongst Lotus’s 
customers revealed that customers did not have a strong 
bond with the brand. The presence of strong competitors, 
both other A-brands and private labels, made clear to 
Lotus Bakeries that the company needed to strengthen its 
relationship with its customers. To this end, it created a new 
CRM platform. The objectives of this new platform were:
1.	 To link the brand with the communications campaign.
2.	 To stimulate cross-selling.
3.	 To identify and to involve important customers in the 
CRM platform.
4.	 To qualify Lotus consumers with a strong brand 
relationship.
In order to meet these objectives, several tactical short- 
and long-term changes to the CRM platform were effectu-
ated. The slogan ‘Lotus – daar zit liefde in’ (‘Lotus – there is 
love in it’) was internally translated to a platform carrying a 
name that reflected the brand essence and the shift from a 
product to a consumer focus: the Lotus Family. The transfor-
mation process consisted of the following steps:
Step 1: Database
It was first of all necessary to contact only the right con-
sumers. Therefore, Lotus Bakeries installed an ongoing 
selection of all identified consumers in its database to 
filter out those consumers who had not interacted with 
the company over the past two years. This meant that if a 
consumer did not interact with Lotus Bakeries, for exam-
ple by using a coupon from a direct mailing sent to them, 
or by participating in a contest or submitting a savings 
card during the preceding two years, then this consumer 
was characterised as ‘non-active’ and would no longer 
receive any direct mail. Tequila, the CRM advisory agency 
of Lotus Bakeries, developed an additional database cell 
(which meanwhile has developed into a separate company, 
SPICE), to be able to better identify customers and link 
their redemption history. SPICE enables Lotus Bakeries to 
regularly measure and analyse the impact of CRM actions. 
It also allows the company to keep track of its customers’ 
history, preferences and participation in the different direct 
marketing actions.
Step 2: Content and tone of voice of the CRM 
programme
The new CRM platform also entailed a clear choice to provide 
less product information. Lotus Bakeries purposefully evolved 
from a product-centric to a consumer-centric company in 
order to better reflect its brand essence and to create more 
intense brand experiences. This approach paid off. Consum-
ers started to read the contents of the magazine more thor-
oughly, which enabled them to develop a stronger bond with 
Lotus.
Step 3: Coupons
Personalised coupons were added to each direct mailing to 
encourage consumers to try out new or other Lotus Baker-
ies products and to get a deeper penetration in each of its 
product categories. By means of highlighting specific prod-
ucts not only in the editorial, but also by means of coupons, 
Lotus Bakeries hoped in the long term to stimulate families 
to use the coupons in order to keep the brand top-of-mind 
and especially to boost short-term sales.
Step 4: Extension to online media
To bring the company more in line with the growing 
importance of digitisation, the corporate website was 
addressed in 2009. Besides a pure corporate website 
featuring facts and figures such as the annual report and 
the company’s stock price, a separate consumer website 
was developed which allowed interactivity and enhanced 
consumers’ brand experience. The consumer website 
contains, for example, a recipes module where consum-
ers can suggest ideas for starters, main courses and des-
serts for which Lotus Bakeries’ products are used as an 
ingredient. Further, online contests running jointly with 
offline CRM contact moments and an archive of all mini 
consumer magazines deliver a strong brand experience 
and give consumers a reason to visit the site. This way, 
also in the absence of an extra recruitment campaign, traf-
fic to the site is high. This classic CRM approach worked 
very well: within the active group of 300 000 families, the 
number of coupon users showed a growth of 500% while 
the redemption rate almost doubled.
Applying e-CRM: Lotus Friends
After three years of classic CRM, Lotus Bakeries took up 
the next challenge: How to improve even further? Lotus 
Bakeries wanted to rejuvenate and energise the brand to 
be able continuously to attract new customers. Therefore, 
Lotus Bakeries decided to take into account the current 
media consumption behaviour of consumers. Realising 
that the media behaviour of consumers was shifting to the 
online world, the company changed its approach drasti-
cally. Lotus Bakeries wanted to follow its customers in the 
online world in order to communicate with them on a more 
frequent basis and in a more interactive way. To this end, 
in 2010 the company launched ‘Lotus Friends’ (in Dutch, 
‘Lotus Vrienden’; and in French, ‘Les Amis Lotus’), an online 
platform based on two pillars: ‘taste goodies’ and ‘share 
pleasures’ (in Dutch, ‘lekkers proeven’ and ‘leuks delen’; and 
in French, ‘goûtez à nos délices’ and ‘partagez les plaisirs’). 

Case 9     431
This platform was again based on the fact that the company 
wanted to enhance brand bonding as well as to stimulate 
cross-selling.
Lotus Bakeries had the postal addresses of 300 000 fami-
lies, but unfortunately close to zero email addresses. There-
fore, the company set a target of collecting 100 000 email 
addresses from the active Lotus families in its database by 
the end of 2011. Lotus Bakeries sent out a final mailing. The 
mailing consisted of a movers box containing the request 
to visit Lotus on the Lotus Friends website and providing 
two reasons to comply with this request: (1) a coupon that 
could be downloaded online; and (2) a contest to win a 
trip to New York by guessing how many of the consumer’s 
Facebook friends dip their caramelised biscuit in their cof-
fee. After a single month (and not at the end of the year), 
the company met its target of 100 000 email addresses. All 
these people became Lotus Friends and several indicated 
how often they used products from Lotus Bakeries and 
from its competitors. This was perfect information to start 
a segmented e-coupon approach via the new Lotus Friends 
platform.
Lotus Friends is conceptualised as an interactive plat-
form with a clear focus on the consumer and his or her 
opinion. Consumers can download coupons, every month, 
to discover new products and provide honest feedback. 
But Lotus Bakeries goes a step further than merely asking 
for scoring of its products. Lotus Friends actually involves 
consumers with the brand: ‘Do you know a tasty recipe?’, 
‘Could you come up with a catchy name for our new bis-
cuit?’, ‘Lotus is interested in your opinion!’ Lotus stimulates 
interactions not only between the company and its cus-
tomers, but also among its customers. By being so close 
to its customers, Lotus Bakeries is able to create additional 
brand value.
Results of the new (e-)CRM approach
Could Lotus Bakeries meet its objectives with the new direct 
marketing and CRM approach? Let us take a look at each of 
the objectives separately.
1.	 Link the brand with the communications campaign. Due 
to the relevant content of the CRM programme, the 
link between the brand and its campaign has become 
stronger. This is clearly illustrated by the results of a 
study investigating to what extent consumers recall 
­having received a mailing from Lotus Bakeries and to 
what extent consumers recall the content of the ­mailing. 
­Specifically, more than 90% of the consumers recall 
­having received a Lotus mailing and more than 80% (this 
number quadrupled since the null measure) know what 
the mailing was about.
2.	 Stimulate cross-selling. The recurring coupons at each 
contact – whether by means of the classic direct mailing 
or by email – focus each time on another product and 
helps the consumer to become acquainted with the full 
Lotus Bakeries assortment. In two years, the average 
redemption rate has almost doubled. However, cross-
selling is only possible if as many families as possible use 
the coupons. With the new direct marketing approach, 
Lotus Bakeries has managed to get five times more fami-
lies to redeem a trial coupon.
3.	 Identify and involve important customers in the 
CRM platform. The company has succeeded in a very 
short time in registering more than 100 000 consum-
ers in the new database. For all these consumers, 
Lotus ­Bakeries now has the email as well as the postal  
addresses.
4.	 Qualify Lotus consumers with a strong brand relation-
ship. Lotus Bakeries offers a qualification questionnaire 
to the customers in its database. As the company offers 
neither an incentive nor a punishment to fill out the 
questionnaire, it can be assumed that only consumers 
with a strong brand relationship are willing to invest 
time in this. Subsequently, more than 40% of the active 
consumers in the database have voluntarily qualified 
themselves. For these consumers, Lotus Bakeries now 
has ­information on which products they buy, how often 
they eat which products, and where they buy these 
products.
As well as these results, it also became clear that the con-
tact moments effectively drove website visits. Without any 
call to action in above-the-line media, more than 60% of 
the active consumers in Lotus’s database have visited the 
website. Further, the strong bond with the brand is also 
evidenced by the fact that Lotus Bakeries’ email campaigns 
result in click-through rates of up to 45%, which is way 
above the benchmark of 25% put forward by the Interac-
tive Advertising Bureau (IAB).
In sum, the CRM platform ‘Lotus Friends’ turned out to 
be a real success. By making the content more relevant for 
consumers, the average consumer visits three times more 
pages than before.
Every month, Lotus Friends spend about four minutes 
on the site sharing their opinions with other Lotus Friends. 
And more than half of the registered consumers that print 
an e-coupon use it every month to try out another Lotus 
Bakeries product.
Questions
1.	 What are the main objectives of Lotus Bakeries with its 
Lotus Friends site?
2.	 How can Lotus Bakeries differentiate between its cus-
tomers? Would you advise it to take on a segment 
approach or a one-to-one approach? And what exactly 
would you advise it to do?

432     CHAPTER 9  DIRECT MARKETING
3.	 Does Lotus Friends help Lotus Bakeries to communicate 
more effectively and more efficiently with its customers?
4.	 What methods are available to measure the effectiveness 
of Lotus Bakeries’ latest emailing campaigns?
5.	 Do you think Lotus Bakeries’ CRM programme is a good 
means for creating loyalty?
6.	 What is the challenge that Lotus Bakeries is currently fac-
ing and what can it do to stay ahead?
Sources: Case prepared by Christoph Vandewiele, Marketing Strategist, TBWA, Brussels. Based on: http://www.lotusbakeries.com/corporate/; http://www.
lotusbakeries.be/; Lotus Bakeries’ annual report 2011 and internal reports.
References
1	 Bell, F. and Francis, N. (1995) ‘Consumer direct mail 
– just how effective is it?’, Seminar on Advertising, 
Sponsorship and Promotions: Understanding and Meas-
uring the Effectiveness of Commercial Communication. 
Madrid: ESOMAR.
2	 Hoekstra, J.C. (2002) Direct Marketing: Van Respons tot 
Relatie (Direct Marketing: From Response to Relation-
ship). Groningen: Wolters-Noordhoff.
3	 Hughes, A.M. (1995) Second Generation Strategies and 
Techniques for Tapping the Power of your Customer 
Database. Maidenhead: McGraw-Hill Trade.
4	 Kobs, J. (2001) Profitable Direct Marketing: A Strategic 
Guide to Starting, Improving and Expanding any Direct 
Marketing Operation. Chicago, IL: McGraw-Hill/Con-
temporary Books.
5	 http://www.the-dma.org/cgi/disppressrelease?article=1513 
(accessed 28 September 2012); http://ww.statista.com, 
accessed 20 July 2015.
6	 www.cmocouncil.org
7	 http://www.dma.org.uk/news/marketing-spend-confi-
dence-low (accessed 28 September 2012).
8	 http://www.brandrepublic.com/news/1126727/Direct-mail-
spend-predicted-fall-1-year/ (accessed 28 September 2012).
9	 http://www.dma.org.uk/news/email-marketing-hits-new-
highs-most-successful-halfyear (accessed 28 September 
2012).
10	 www.statista.com, accessed 20 July 2015.
11	 http://www.mmc.co.uk/Knowledge-centre/Research/
How-the-future-of-marketing-will-look/ (accessed 28 
September 2012).
12	 http://www.prweb.com/releases/mail_order_online_cata-
log/online_shopping/prweb9116967.htm
13	 Tapp, A. (2001) ‘The strategic value of direct marketing: 
what are we good at? Part 1’, Journal of Database Mar-
keting, 9(1), 9–15.
14	 Goldberg, B.A. and Emerick, T. (1999) Business-to-Busi-
ness Direct Marketing. Yardley, PA: Direct Marketing 
Publishers.
15	 http://www.mmc.co.uk/Knowledge-centre/Case-Stud-
ies/Caja-Madrid-La-Dolce-Vita-direct-mail-case-study/ 
(accessed 28 September 2012).
16	 Baldinger, A.L. and Rubinson, J. (1996) ‘Brand loyalty: 
the link between attitude and behavior’, Journal of 
Advertising Research, 36(6), 22–34.
17	 Reicheld, F.F. (2001) The Loyalty Effect: The Hidden 
Force Behind Growth, Profits and Lasting Value. Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business School Press.
18	 Tapp, A. (2001) ‘The strategic value of direct marketing: 
what are we good at? Part 1’, Journal of Database Mar-
keting, 9(1), 9–15.
19	 Reinartz, W. and Kumar, V. (2002) ‘The mismanagement 
of customer loyalty’, Harvard Business Review (July), 
86–94.
20	 http://www.caples.org/love-letters-belgian-post, http://
www.mmc.co.uk/Knowledge-centre/Case-Studies/Bel-
gian-Post-Love-letters-direct-mail-and-online-campaign/ 
(accessed 28 September 2012).
21	 http://www.forbes.com/sites/roberthof/2012/01/09/look-
out-google-online-brand-ad-spending-may-pass-search-
in-2012/ (accessed 28 September 2012).
22	 http://www.ipc.be/en/Intelligence/Direct_Marketing/~/
media/Documents/PUBLIC/Markets/Case_Studies/
COOP.ashx (accessed 28 September 2012).
23	 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/QR_code (accessed 28 Sep-
tember 2012).
24	 http://www.marketingcharts.com/direct/qr-code-adop-
tion-by-merchants-booms-22306/ (accessed 28 Septem-
ber 2012).
25	 http://www.marketingcharts.com/topics/demographics/
consumer-qr-code-scans-up-157-22145/ (accessed 28 Sep-
tember 2012).
26	 http://www.bizreport.com/2012/05/mobile-quarter-of-
germans-have-used-qr-codes.html (accessed 28 Septem-
ber 2012).
27	 http://www.fastcompany.com/1720193/13-creative-ways-
to-use-qr-codes-for-marketing (accessed 28 September 
2012).
28	 http://www.mobilemarketer.com/cms/news/con-
tent/10579.html (accessed 28 September 2012).
29	 http://www.delivermagazine.com/2012/01/qr-codes-
generate-catalog-of-success/ (accessed 28 September 
2012).
30	 http://www.slideshare.net/cleverwood/cleverwood-i-
dtvpresentation (accessed 28 September 2012).
31	 Cuckoo Awards 2008, Pub magazine nr 7, 15 May 2008, 
Wolters Kluwer.
32	 http://www.post.at/gb2009/en/Postmarkt_Europa.php 
(accessed 28 September 2012).

REFERENCES     433
52	 Peppers, D. and Rogers, M. (1996) The One-to-One 
Future: Building Relationships One Customer at a Time. 
London: Piatkus Books.
53	 http://www.dmplaza.be/2011/03/18/agency-of-the-month-
head-office-as-adventure/ (accessed 28 September 2012).
54	 Phelps, J., Nowak, G. and Ferrell, E. (2000) ‘Privacy 
concerns and consumer willingness to provide personal 
information’, Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 
19(1), 27–41; Milne, G. and Rohm, A. (2000) ‘Consumer 
privacy and name removal across direct marketing chan-
nels: exploring opt-in and opt-out alternatives’, Journal 
of Public Policy & Marketing, 19(2), 238–49.
55	 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robinson_list (accessed 28 
September 2012).
56	 Phelps, J., Nowak, G. and Ferrell, E. (2000) ‘Privacy 
concerns and consumer willingness to provide personal 
information’, Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 
19(1), 27–41; Milne, G. and Rohm, A. (2000) ‘Consumer 
privacy and name removal across direct marketing chan-
nels: exploring opt-in and opt-out alternatives’, Journal 
of Public Policy & Marketing, 19(2), 238–49.
57	 De Wulf, K. (1998) ‘Relationship marketing’, in Van 
Looy, B., Van Dierdonck, R. and Gemmel, P. (eds), 
­Services Management: An Integrated Approach. London: 
Financial Times Pitman, 210–43.
58	 Riechheld, F.F. and Sasser, W.E. (1990) ‘Zero defections: 
quality comes to services’, Harvard Business Review 
(September/October), 105–11.
59	 Christopher, M., Payne, A. and Ballantine, D. (1994) Rela-
tionship Marketing: Bringing Quality, Customer Service 
and Marketing Together. Oxford: Butterworth–Heinemann.
60	 http://www.mmc.co.uk/Creative-Showreel/NoFlash/
Campaign/?campaign=938743b0-5675-454a-
8230-92d2b6d32d28, http://www.ipc.be/en/Intel-
ligence/Direct_Marketing/~/media/Documents/
PUBLIC/Markets/Case_Studies/Best%20Practice%20-% 
20Heinz%20-%20Baby%20Club.ashx (accessed 28 Sep-
tember 2012).
61	 www.harley-davidson.com (accessed 28 September 2012).
62	 Reichheld, F.F. (2001) The Loyalty Effect: The Hidden 
Force Behind Growth, Profits and Lasting Value. Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business School Press.
63	 Curry, A. and Curry, J. (2002) The Customer Marketing 
Method: How to Implement and Profit From Customer 
Relationship Management. Riverside, NJ: Simon & 
Schuster.
33	 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lIoEux3pjtM, http://
go.eventdrive.be/cuckoos (accessed 28 September 2012).
34	 Cuckoo Awards 2008, Pub magazine nr 7, 15 May 2008, 
Wolters Kluwer.
35	 http://www.slideshare.net/DePostLaPoste/
tequila-3414096, http://www.betterfutureindia.com/
grow-business/csr-concepts--branding/the-nivea-awards 
(accessed June 2009).
36	 h t t p : / / e z i n e a r t i c l e s . c o m / ? T h e - Powe r- o f -
PURLs&id=816064 (accessed April 2012)
37	 Liederman, R. (1990) The Telephone Book: How to 
Find, Get, Keep and Develop Customers. London: 
McGraw-Hill.
38	 Walrave, M. (1995) Telemarketing: Storing op de Lijn? (Tele-
marketing: Badly Connected?). Leuven/Amersfoort: Acco.
39	 Van Vooren, E. (1994) Direct Marketing Actieboek: Bon-
dige Tips voor Business-to-Business Marketers (Direct 
Marketing Action Book: Shorthand Tips for Business-
to-Business Marketers). Zellik: Roularta Books.
40	 http://www.ikea.com/gb/en/about_ikea/newsroom/ 
(accessed 28 September 2012).
41	 http://www.mobilecommercedaily.com/2010/07/02/ikea-
takes-its-product-catalog-mobile-with-augmented-reali-
ty-app (accessed 28 September 2012).
42	 http://www.mmc.co.uk/News/Why-catalogues-are-mor-
phing-into-megalogues/ (accessed 28 September 2012).
43	 http://www.themarketer.co.uk/trends/all-trivia-articles/
catalogue-marketing/ (accessed 28 September 2012).
44	 http://www.mmc.co.uk/News/Why-catalogues-are-mor-
phing-into-megalogues/ (accessed 28 September 2012).
45	 Tapp, A. (2008) Principles of Direct and Database Mar-
keting. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
46	 Tapp, A. (2008) Principles of Direct and Database Mar-
keting. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
47	 www.dmarket.co.uk (accessed 28 September 2012).
48	 www.wyverndm.co.uk (accessed 28 September 2012).
49	 http://www.dmarket.co.uk/a/mamas-and-papas-blooms-
with-experian (accessed 28 September 2012).
50	 Bügel, M.S. (1997) ‘Van Direct Mail naar Event-Driven 
Marketing’ (‘From direct mail to event-driven market-
ing’), Tijdschrift voor Strategische Bedrijfs-communica-
tie, 3(2), 98–106.
51	 Hughes, A. (2005) Strategic Database Marketing: The 
Masterplan for Starting and Managing a Profitable 
Customer-based Marketing Program. Hightstown, NJ: 
McGraw-Hill.

434
Chapter 10
Public relations
Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Understand the role of public relations in the company’s communications effort
● Get an idea of the strengths and weaknesses of public relations, and the challenges it 
faces
● Distinguish the various target groups, objectives and tasks of public relations
● Get an overview of the instruments and channels used by public relations
● Learn about the nuts and bolts of good media relations
● Distinguish a number of public relations budgeting techniques
● Learn how to measure public relations effectiveness
● Communicate in times of crisis
Chapter outline

PUBLIC RELATIONS AS A COMMUNICATIONS TOOL     435
Introduction
Traditionally, public relations (PR) is an activity which in most companies has been struc-
turally separated from marketing communications. It originated in the function of ‘press 
agent’, the main activity of whom was to bridge the gap between the company’s point of 
view and media coverage of the company’s activities. Gradually, press agents became a vital 
part of the company’s communications efforts targeted at various publics or stakeholders, 
and the activity of ‘press relations’ evolved into the ‘public relations’ function. Staying in 
touch and creating goodwill with all types of audiences has become an extremely sophis-
ticated and complex task. This is illustrated by the fact that in most companies the PR 
function directly reports to the chief executive officer (CEO). However, not only do the type 
and number of target groups of PR exceed marketing communications target groups, but 
also the nature of the objectives is quite specific, as well as the tools and instruments used, 
although some of the latter are similar to those used in marketing communications. All in 
all, it is fair to say that PR is more complex than marketing communications, due to the 
variety of objectives and target groups it has to take into account.
PR also plays a vital role in integrating the company’s communications efforts (see also 
Chapter 1). Integrated communications at the corporate level imply the creation of syner-
gies between all communications tools, especially marketing communications and corporate 
communications. PR is a very important component of the latter.
Public relations as a communications tool
There are different definitions of public relations, which all stress one or more important 
aspects of this communications tool. Essentially, PR is a communications tool that is used 
to promote goodwill towards the firm as a whole.1 It is the projection of the personality 
of the company, the management of reputation.2 PR is the planned and sustained effort to 
establish and maintain good relationships, mutual understanding, sympathy and goodwill 
with publics, audiences or stakeholders.3 It is those efforts that identify and close the gap 
between how the organisation is seen by its key publics and how it would like to be seen.4 
The Chartered Institute of Public Relations (UK) defines PR as:5
The discipline which looks after reputation, with the aim of earning understanding and support 
and influencing opinion and behaviour. It is the planned and sustained effort to establish and 
maintain good will and mutual understanding between an organisation and its publics.
Publicity is the term used to describe the free media coverage of news about the company 
or its products, often as a result of PR efforts.
Publics are, besides customers and potential customers, groups of people that the com-
pany is not directly trying to sell products to, but that are perceived as influencing opinions 
about the company. The relations with these publics should be positive because they can 
be vital to the company’s survival and success. Essential in most definitions of PR is that 
it is a two-way form of communication: the company learns from its publics and conveys 
information to them. Furthermore, like any other communications activity, PR should be 
a planned effort. It is also a major component of a successful integrated communications 
activity, since it covers a range of activities that can be linked to other elements of the com-
munications mix,6 such as the following:
● Creation and maintenance of corporate identity and image, by communicating the com-
pany’s philosophy and mission through corporate advertising, open days, etc.
● Improving the company’s standing as a good corporate citizen, by means of activities 
such as arts and sports sponsorship or community programmes.

436     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
● Maintaining good relations with the media, both for disseminating good news and in 
times of crisis.
● Attendance at trade exhibitions and the organisation of contacts with suppliers and 
intermediaries.
● Looking after internal communications, with the purpose of involving employees in the 
strategic priorities of the company.
PR is different from marketing communications in the strict sense of the word in a num-
ber of ways. Marketing communications tend to be commercial and short-term. Few mar-
keters will jeopardise short-term benefits for the sake of long-term returns. Although PR 
executives recognise the importance of customer satisfaction and profits, and in that sense 
support core marketing communications efforts, their main concern is the long-term good-
will towards, and reputation of, the company as a whole. They want people to respect their 
organisation. As a result, marketers will always have to keep PR people focused on market-
ing objectives. On the other hand, PR professionals will have to challenge marketing people 
in terms of the effects of their actions on a broader public. The role of PR people is also to 
stress the importance of non-marketing audiences for the well-being of the company in the 
long run.7 Good PR lays the groundwork, and creates the platform for successful marketing 
communications. The relation between corporate and marketing reputation is illustrated by 
the fact that most people seem to believe that a company that has a good reputation would 
not sell bad products, that old-established companies make the best products and that they 
would never buy products made by a company they have never heard of.
Although advertising, sales efforts and direct mailing on the one hand, and PR – more 
specifically the publicity generated by PR activity – on the other, can both have a similar 
influence on the reputation of a company and its products, there are a number of important 
differences between the two types of instruments. As compared with marketing communica-
tions, PR – and the resulting publicity – has a number of strengths and weaknesses. They 
are summarised in Figures 10.1 and 10.2.
PR targets important stakeholders and difficult-to-reach audiences such as opinion lead-
ers, financial analysts and investors. Many of them are not interested in advertising or direct 
mailing, and even avoid it or are very sceptical towards it.8 Furthermore, they are shielded 
from salespeople by their assistants. On the other hand, they are often interested in news and 
may be reached indirectly by the media exposure generated through PR activity. PR profes-
sionals can advise companies on important trends and on the consequences of corporate 
activities on marketing effectiveness. PR can present the company as a good citizen and, as 
such, contributes to the corporate image and reputation.
Figure 10.1  Strengths of public relations

PUBLIC RELATIONS AS A COMMUNICATIONS TOOL     437
PR plays an important role in guiding the company through crises without too much 
damage to its reputation. Often, advertising and sales promotions are strictly regulated by 
governments. PR offers the opportunity of more message flexibility. PR is often relatively 
cost-effective because the media coverage generated is free. Getting media coverage often 
enables the company to reach a variety of audiences and a large number of people at a frac-
tion of the cost that would have been required in an advertising campaign.
The most important advantage of PR and the resulting media exposure over marketing com-
munications tools may be that the former is generally considered to be more objective and there-
fore more believable in the perception of target groups. News is also generally more exciting, or is 
presented as such. Marketing communications, on the other hand, are paid for by the company, 
and the public are aware of that. This results in a certain cynicism about the bias in the mes-
sage. As a result, PR is capable of breaking through the communications clutter more effectively.
Figure 10.2  Weaknesses of public relations
Three Japanese Hitachi engineers visiting a subsidiary in the USA were killed and two were seriously injured when a 
truck accidentally drove into the restaurant where they were having dinner. Hitachi US responded quickly, formed 
a crisis management team and identified a crisis response leader. Information was released to employees and to 
the media as quickly as possible. The spokesman immediately expressed company concern for the victims and their 
families and for plant employees. He did not speculate about the causes of the accident. The company president 
was appropriately visible and involved. It was decided to invite all the Japanese families who wanted to come to the 
USA. According to Japanese tradition, they received flowers on their arrival. A day-long trip was organised to show 
the families where their relatives lived and where they died. They were allowed to collect the personal possessions 
of the victims from their rooms, which had been intentionally left untouched. A meeting was held with the lawyers 
investigating the cause of the accident. Internal communications were quick and overt by means of bulletin board 
messages, following the principle ‘the more you try to hide, the worse things get’. The only false note in this other-
wise well-organised and culturally fine-tuned crisis communications effort was the fact that the truck driver did not 
assume any responsibility for the accident, something that is, according to Japanese culture, incomprehensible.9
Business insight
Hitachi: corporate compassion
The major weakness of PR is the lack of control over the content of the press coverage of 
news releases. Evidently, the media have other priorities and other sources, and the published 
story may be quite different from the information disseminated by the PR department. The 
context and style of the original message may be substantially changed or completely lost. In 
advertising, for instance, the company has full control over the content of its communications. 

438     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
With PR, journalists act as gatekeepers: if a story is perceived as having not enough ‘news value’ 
it may not be published, especially in a period in which there is other important news to cover. 
The timing of ads and sales promotions is fully controlled by the company. The effectiveness 
of PR is hard to measure. Often, exposure measures, such as the amount of media coverage, 
are used, but they hardly say anything about the long-term effect of PR efforts on company 
goodwill or sales. Measuring the effectiveness of advertising is often more straightforward.
PR is of growing importance for companies. A 2006 study estimated that in the US, 
about 400 000 people work in PR jobs, representing an annual PR cost of about $16 billion. 
According to the same study, in Italy this would represent 90 000 people costing about $11 
billion. Extrapolating the methodology worldwide leads to an estimated 2.3–4.5 million 
PR professionals. In economically highly sophisticated countries, 1 in 700–1000 people are 
estimated to work in PR.10
There are a number of trends that make PR an increasingly important communications 
tool. At the same time PR faces a number of challenges (Figure 10.3).11
The maintenance of good employee relations is considered to be increasingly vital. This 
implies effective communications between management and employees. Corporate branding is 
of growing importance (see also Chapter 2). PR plays a crucial role in corporate communica-
tions and, consequently, corporate brand-building. Growing consumer awareness leads to a 
stronger involvement of the public in the activities of companies, thereby increasing the need 
for proactive PR activity and crisis management. More and more ‘single-issue’ publics, such 
as animal liberation groups and consumer and environmental pressure groups, that use con-
frontation as a tactic, are emerging, and are seriously challenging the PR skills of companies.12
Events such as the opening of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, as well as the 
globalisation of marketing activities in general, have caused substantial changes in the market-
ing environment. PR is an important tool in gaining an understanding of these changes, being 
aware of the influence of government regulations on marketing activity and laying the ground-
work for effective market entry. PR departments are increasingly confronted with the need to 
operate globally and draw up international PR campaigns. PR activity is becoming increasingly 
specialised. In the past, PR firms tried to solve all the PR problems of a company. Nowadays, 
there is a growing trend of specialisation and niches in the PR support that companies need 
and, as a result, in the way in which PR companies or departments have to organise themselves.
PR suffers from a bad reputation stemming from the era in which PR activity was 
mainly associated with press conferences, manipulating the media and fancy parties for 
Figure 10.3  Trends and challenges in public relations

TARGET GROUPS, OBJECTIVES AND TASKS     439
stakeholders. And although PR professionals view their activities as having strategic and 
corporate impact, many marketers classify PR as little more than a tactical ingredient of the 
promotional mix.13 Attracting and keeping high-quality personnel and improving the image 
of the PR profession have become priorities for PR executives and management in general. 
Measuring the effect of PR is a difficult task. PR departments will have to upgrade their 
function into a strategic tool for top management and, consequently, will have to develop 
the tools to prove their effectiveness in supporting the company’s long-term profit base. PR, 
as with all other forms of marketing communications, will have to adapt to the opportuni-
ties and threats and, more generally, the environment created by new technologies such as 
business television, the Internet and smart telephony.
Good PR is based on a PR plan that contains the same fundamentals as any other com-
munications plan. Target groups or audiences have to be defined, and the objectives and mes-
sages to be conveyed have to be determined. Communications channels, tools and instruments 
have to be put in place, and timing and a budget have to be decided on. The PR plan has to be 
implemented, and its effectiveness has to be measured. Different types of PR can be defined. 
Depending on the type of PR, different target groups, objectives and tools can be distinguished.
Using a Delphi research method, a 2007 study surveyed the attitudes and ideas of academic and professional PR 
experts and CEOs of PR companies worldwide. The study had four objectives: identify the gaps between academic 
research and industry needs; identify current and new trends in research from theorist and practitioner perspec-
tives; map out the best way for knowledge to be exchanged; and define the research areas for which funding can 
be sought. Participants were asked to rank PR research topics in a priority order from 1 (top priority) to 10 (10th 
priority). The results were as follows (numbers in brackets refer to the average priority given by the respondents):14
	
1.	
PR’s contribution to strategic decision-making, strategy development and realisation and efficient opera-
tion of organisations (2.37).
	
2.	
The value that PR creates for organisations through building social capital and managing key relationships (3.43).
	
3.	
The measurement and evaluation of PR both offline and online (4.17).
	
4.	
PR as a fundamental management function (4.35).
	
5.	
Professional skills in PR, analysis of the industry’s need for education (4.68).
	
6.	
Research into standards of performance among PR professionals, the licensing of practitioners (5.90).
	
7.	
Management of corporate reputation, management of reputation (6.00).
	
8.	
Ethics in PR (6.29).
	
9.	
Integration of PR with other communications functions, the scope of PR practice, discipline boundaries (6.35).
	
10.	
Management of relationships (6.69).
Research insight
Priorities for public relations research of academics and professionals
Target groups, objectives and tasks
As indicated above, publics, audiences or stakeholders are groups of people or organisations 
to whom the company is not directly selling products, but whose favourable opinion can be 
vital for the company in the long run. Depending on the type of audience, different types of 
PR can be distinguished. They are summarised in Table 10.1.

440     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
Corporate
Marketing
Internal
External
Public affairs
Financial
Media
Employees
General public
Investors
Television
Suppliers
Families of employees
Local community 
Government
Bankers 
Consultants
Radio  
Press
Distributors 
Competitors
Trade unions
Trade associations
Stock exchange
Trade press
Wholesalers
Shareholders
Pressure groups
Retailers
Table 10.1  Audiences of different types of PR
The first important distinction that can be made is between corporate and marketing PR. 
The main difference between the two is that corporate PR is mainly aimed at maintaining 
good relations and creating goodwill with all kinds of audiences who may be important for 
the company in the long run. In marketing PR, the direct or indirect profitability of the PR 
activity is more important. Marketing PR is targeted at commercial stakeholders, such as 
distributors, suppliers, competitors and potential customers, and is more in direct support 
of marketing communications. Evidently, in an environment of growing integrated com-
munications, both types of PR will not be mutually exclusive, but will support one another.
The second important distinction is between internal and external corporate PR. Internal 
PR is aimed at internal stakeholders, such as employees and their families and sharehold-
ers. The latter could also be defined as an internal financial audience. External PR – the 
oldest form of PR activity – is directed towards various types of external target groups. 
Three important types of external corporate PR and PR target groups can be distinguished, 
namely public affairs, financial and media PR.
Apart from this typology, sometimes a distinction is made between direct and indirect 
PR. Direct PR activity is directly aimed at the stakeholders of interest, while indirect PR tries 
to reach them indirectly through other publics. In that respect, employees, consultants and 
especially the media can be considered as indirect PR audiences. Keeping good relations with 
the media, consultants and other opinion leaders is not important as such. It is because of 
their role as intermediate groups between the company and important ‘end-audiences’ that 
they are important PR target groups. It is no coincidence that media PR is the oldest and 
still a very important form of corporate PR.
A study by the Dutch National Institute for Finance Information among 2122 students revealed that the average 
Dutch student has a debt of €15 360 on graduation, a number that had increased by 25% over the previous four 
years. The study also showed that students knew surprisingly little about the consequences of borrowing money (e.g. 
interest rates and redemption terms) and that about 20% of Dutch students are always or regularly in the red. Building 
on these figures and taking into account that financial institutions in the wake of the financial crisis were pressured 
by governments to show responsibility, MasterCard decided to launch its ‘Smart Study = Money Management’ PR 
Business insight
Smart Study = Money Management

TARGET GROUPS, OBJECTIVES AND TASKS     441
campaign in order to teach students how to spend money wisely. This way, MasterCard aimed to show the authori-
ties that it wanted to be part of the solution to mounting debt and not part of the problem.
The campaign consisted of teaching students how to spend money wisely via peer-to-peer communications. In 
other words, students taught other students in budget training sessions at universities across the Netherlands and 
spread the word further through local and student media. To avoid being accused of commercial benefit, Master-
Card did not brand the campaign. MasterCard’s logo, image or house style was not revealed; MasterCard was only 
mentioned as sponsor or facilitator. Student trainers, not MasterCard, organised and promoted the courses. They 
set up partnerships with the university’s faculty and student organisations, and maintained local media relations. 
Each student gave at least one training session per month to a minimum of 15 students. Each of them also wrote a 
minimum of four media articles, blog posts, letters to editors or other external communications. This way, hundreds 
of thousands of people received budgeting tips.
Before the training started and the campaign was launched in the media, MasterCard presented the programme 
to different stakeholders, including MPs, civil servants at the Ministries of Finance, Social Affairs and Justice, con-
sumer associations, the Dutch Association of Banks, the Dutch Merchants association and the Dutch Central Bank. 
The ‘Smart Study = Money Management’ campaign resonated well with students, the different stakeholders and 
the media. The campaign was well covered by the main Dutch newspapers, radio stations and on different websites, 
mentioning almost always the budgeting tips as well as MasterCard. At a cost of only €100 380, MasterCard was able 
to increase political goodwill enormously and the campaign opened several doors for MasterCard at a political and 
governmental level. The campaign received a Sabre Award for the best Benelux PR campaign in 2011. Because of 
its huge success, MasterCard decided to extend the campaign.15
Although employees can be a direct target group of PR activity, they are an important 
intermediate public too, because they are often in close contact with other audiences such 
as the general public, the local community, suppliers and distributors, etc. It is therefore vital 
that they should ‘spread the good news’ about the company. Therefore, internal PR should 
create goodwill with employees to motivate them to do so.
Finally, a specific type of PR activity is crisis management or crisis communications. It 
may involve different types of audiences, corporate and marketing, as well as internal and 
external ones. Crisis communications are covered in a separate section of this chapter.
Most PR objectives relate to giving information, influencing opinion and building or 
sustaining attitudes and feelings. Only seldom is PR directly aimed at changing behaviour. 
Although objectives can be similar across target groups, different emphasis can be put on 
different types of objectives and tasks, depending on the nature of the audience (Table 10.2).
Internal public relations
The main purpose of internal PR is to inform employees about the company’s strategic 
priorities and the role they are playing in them, and to motivate them to carry out these 
objectives. Internal communications start with building a corporate identity and moti-
vating and training the company’s own personnel to behave accordingly in their contacts 
with external audiences. This should be a continuous concern, as discussed earlier (see 
Chapter 1). Additionally, employees should be informed about specific marketing actions or 
major decisions that affect them, to motivate them to accept the decisions and to co-operate 
in carrying them out. A bank that launches an advertising campaign to stress service quality 
should convince its own personnel to make quality of service a priority in their day-to-day 
contacts with customers. Otherwise the whole advertising campaign may contrast badly 
with the actual behaviour of the employees and may, as a result, be completely unbelievable.
Often the families of the personnel are also involved in the decisions taken, or in events 
that are employee-related. Organising open days and inviting friends and relatives of the 
personnel, for instance, may create a lot of goodwill and sympathy for the company among 
its employees.

442     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
Corporate
Marketing
Internal
External
Public affairs
Financial
Media
Information
Impact of trends
Information
Information
Support marketing agenda
Training
Public visibility
Credibility
Opinions
Motivation
Information
Trust
Corporate image
New products
Building corporate identity
Opinions
Sponsorship
Attitudes
Goodwill
Events
Corporate image
Build goodwill
Influence 
decisions
Table 10.2  PR objectives and tasks
KBC is one of the major Belgian banks. In 2000, it decided to launch an advertising campaign to stimulate online 
banking by switching regular customers to KBC on-line, a service that is free of charge and by which KBC custom-
ers can carry out their banking activities electronically. The online activation is done during a visit to the bank. The 
duration of the campaign ran from early 2000 to February 2003. During the first stage of the campaign, awareness 
and interest were built with the slogan ‘Always your banker at hand’. The second stage focused upon the adoption of 
the new product: ‘Don’t be the last one to become a KBC on-liner.’ During the last stage, the KBC on-line customer 
was reassured: ‘Everything under control with KBC on-line’.
Especially during the early stages of the campaign, there was a risk that employees would not buy into the online 
idea. They may have been offended by the fact that they would be replaced by a computer, and they may have 
feared that, in the long run, their jobs could become redundant. Therefore, KBC involved the employees in the 
campaign in different ways. In the first stage of the campaign, the focus was on the importance of the availability of 
the personal banker. In TV spots, billboards and print ads, customers were shown in various circumstances, literally 
holding the hand of what appears to be their personal banker. The message is conveyed that online banking enables 
you to do your banking business wherever and whenever you want, but at the same time it stresses the point that 
human contact is indispensable. The mailings to customers were sent out from local branches to increase the link 
between the bank and its employees on the one hand, and the customers on the other. Each campaign stage and 
tool contained an opportunity (for both the employees and the customers) to engage in a personal conversation. 
All personnel received the campaign material six weeks before the start of the campaign so they could prepare 
themselves for an efficient personal follow-up to the mailing. The campaign took into account the potential negative 
fallout of advertising campaigns on the motivation of the employees, and tried to integrate internal PR and external 
communications to avoid negative side effects. The campaign was a considerable success and won a Belgian Gold 
Effie Award in 2003.16
Business insight
KBC on-line: involving employees in an advertising campaign  
promoting online banking

TARGET GROUPS, OBJECTIVES AND TASKS     443
Public affairs
Public affairs is a management function directed towards the societal and political relations 
of the company. It is aimed at continuously studying trends and issues related to government 
decision-making and opinions and attitudes of the general public. Good contacts with the 
general public and the local community are a part of the public affairs activity. The handling 
of the sinking of the Brent Spar oil platform and the Exxon Valdez disaster are examples of 
events that required consistent PR activity to restore faith and goodwill among the general 
public or local communities. The support of good causes by a company is aimed at restoring 
or maintaining goodwill with the general public. Public affairs also encompasses the rela-
tions with local, regional, national and international governments and regulatory bodies, 
as well as pressure groups of all kinds, such as ecological, ethnic, linguistic and consumer 
interest groups. It attempts to influence the decision-making of important stakeholders, or 
to respond to trends and changes in opinions and attitudes in such a way that the long-term 
goodwill of the company benefits from it. For instance, the World Federation of Advertisers 
(WFA) is an international lobbying group that tries to influence government regulations on 
promotional activity, and tries to monitor and/or counter the influence of pressure groups 
on behalf of the world advertising community.
Financial public relations
Financial audiences are those groups that are potential shareholders, investors or (poten-
tial) advisers to shareholders and investors, such as financial consultants and banks. They 
are vital for the establishment of the long-term money-raising potential of a company. A 
crucial objective of these audiences is to build and maintain the confidence that is necessary 
to give the company an image of an interesting investment. The preparation and presenta-
tion of a sound financial report, the stock exchange introduction of a company, financial 
communications accompanying mergers and acquisitions are all examples of financial PR. 
The European cinema group Kinepolis, for instance, was able to attract massive numbers 
of new shareholders as a result of a successful introduction of the company’s shares on 
the stock exchange.
Media public relations
Since the media are the most important intermediate public, developing and maintaining 
good contacts with radio, TV and the (trade) press are often extremely important. All the 
objectives to be met by end-publics are also important in media PR: to inform, build favour-
able attitudes, create a positive image and a reservoir of goodwill, and to ensure coverage of 
marketing-related news (Photo 10.1). Indirectly, media PR is aimed at generating favourable 
publicity about the company, its products and brands and, more generally, all events and 
projects that support the image of the company and its marketing objectives.
Good media PR can result in positive comments during the introduction of a product, 
can create goodwill for the company’s activities and can generate publicity for a range of 
organisational events, activities and sponsorship programmes. In the aftermath of the A 
Class moose test problems when a Mercedes A Class model overturned while undertaking 
a traditional moose test, Mercedes was able to neutralise the bad publicity quickly by means 
of careful PR campaigns directed at the specialised press. Obtaining media attention for 
sponsorship projects can generate publicity that is, in terms of media exposure, worth much 
more than the initial investment in the event. In times of crisis, the media are a crucial audi-
ence in order to avoid or neutralise negative ‘fallout’ from the event that caused the crisis. 
Bad handling of media relations caused the Perrier problem (benzene in Perrier mineral 
water) to evolve into a major wave of bad publicity that resulted in enormous image and 
commercial damage to the brand and the company.

444     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
Marketing public relations
Marketing PR is directly related to selling products and/or supporting brands. As such, it is a 
part of marketing communications for which often product or brand managers are responsi-
ble. Marketing PR can be used to support the launch of a new product, for instance by inviting 
the trade press to test-drive a new car, or to see to it that a new CD gets enough ‘airplay’. It 
can also be used to support and revive existing products, for instance by means of creating 
Photo 10.1  Google creates a positive image
Source: Getty Images.
‘We cannot tolerate that, without our permission, political messages are linked with one of our products’ was 
the official reaction of Procter & Gamble to a campaign run by the Palestine Action Platform. This pressure group 
launched a print advertising campaign in which a fist holds a blood-stained Palestinian shawl, accompanied by the 
slogan ‘How will Ariel get this clean?’ The purpose of the campaign was to make the public aware of the Palestinian 
problem and the alleged role of the former Israeli Prime Minister, Ariel Sharon, using Procter & Gamble’s well-known 
brand of washing powder. The campaign appeared in national newspapers, and Procter & Gamble first sent friendly 
letters to the organisation and to the media, asking them to stop the campaign immediately. The action group was 
not impressed, and continued its campaign: ‘It is obvious that only Mr Sharon is implied, not P&G.’ Procter & Gamble 
then threatened to start legal action if the campaign was not stopped. The company stated that ‘we as a company 
do not want to take a stand on the political situation in the Middle East. Therefore we do not tolerate that our brand 
name, for which we are responsible, is used in this manner.’ By that time all major media had covered the dispute.17 
Eventually, the campaign was withdrawn. Sometimes companies are confronted with unexpected publicity that can 
damage their reputation or that of their brands. Fast and well-balanced PR activity is then called for.
Business insight
Ariel and the Palestinians

TARGET GROUPS, OBJECTIVES AND TASKS     445
an event when the 50th shop is opened, or after the first 100 000 cars of a certain model have 
been sold. Sponsorship and special events can be used as PR tools to improve the relationship 
with suppliers and distributors, by offering free tickets for sports or arts events. Restaurants 
may invite journalists from the specialised press to encourage them to write a positive article 
and, as a result, boost sales. All these examples illustrate that marketing PR is an activity that 
is largely integrated with both corporate PR and other tools of the communications mix.
Photo 10.2  Longines talks to stakeholders 
Source: Getty Images.
Depending on the problem and the objective, publics will have to be divided into primary 
and secondary audiences. Public relations efforts will be more intense towards primary 
target groups (Photo 10.2). Launching a new product, for instance, will generally imply 
more efforts towards the marketing PR target groups, the media and the general public than 
towards financial audiences or the government. Furthermore, an individual can belong to 
more than one public at a time. As a result, consistent PR communications across audiences 
is vital to avoid conveying contradictory messages to the same members of different publics.
Smartees are smart sessions for the marketing (research) industry organised by InSites Consulting, a Belgian head-
quartered marketing research agency. Smartees events were launched in 2008 in Belgium and the Netherlands and 
since then have extended both in reach and format. All sessions are now available around the world and in five 
formats (Eat ‘n Learns, Roundtables, Seminars, Webinars and Workshops). Every format offers a different approach 
to suit professionals’ busy lifestyle or location.
Business insight
Smartees by InSites Consulting

446     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
Instruments and channels
PR professionals use a multitude of instruments and channels to reach their objectives. The 
instruments used may be similar for different target groups and objectives, but some of 
them are specifically suited for specific target groups and objectives. Table 10.3 summarises 
a number of instruments and channels.
Corporate
Marketing
Internal
External
Public affairs
Financial
Media
Consultation
Corporate 
advertising
Corporate 
advertising
Press kit
Product 
placement
Open-door policies
Press release
Internal presentations
Annual report
Annual report
Press conference
Product events
Training programmes
Corporate events
Meetings
Sponsorship
Team projects
Newsletters
Interviews
Meetings
Team meetings
Sponsorship
Video or radio 
news release
Newsletters
Social activities
Lobbying
Direct mailing
Meetings
Bulletin boards
Newsletters
Newsletters or video
Flyers, brochures
Company television
Annual reports
Idea (suggestion) boxes
Surveys
House-style material
Table 10.3  PR instruments and channels
Underpinning InSites’ mission of making market research a sexy and engaging experience, the company shifted its 
focus from explaining how they do things (method stories), to sharing the impact research generates for business (client 
cases and hands-on practical techniques). By making this shift, InSites is now able to attract a global audience of not 
only researchers and insight professionals, but also marketers and C-level professionals at the Smartees worldwide.
The goal of the Smartees events is threefold. First, it increases the global brand awareness for InSites. In 2014, 
events were also organised in Singapore, Sydney, Paris, London, New York, Zürich, Stockholm, Münich and Atlanta. 
Second, the aim is to share knowledge and to invest in continuous learning between partners. Third, Smartees are 
a vehicle to develop stronger relationships with (potential) clients and to show off the talent InSites has in-house.
Smartees are picking up rapidly. From September 2014 to September 2015, 35 Smartees were organised (24 
offline and 11 online) in 14 cities worldwide, with a total of close to 2000 attendees, attracting marketing and busi-
ness professionals from such diverse industries as fast-moving consumer goods, media and entertainment, technol-
ogy and services, finance and healthcare. For each Smartees event organised in this year, at least one new research 
project was obtained. In that way, Smartees are also a strong sales vehicle for InSites.18

INSTRUMENTS AND CHANNELS     447
Internal public relations
A special category of PR tools and techniques is the ones used in internal PR. Internal PR 
should ideally be a two-way communications activity, in which mainly ‘oral’ communica-
tions techniques will be used. But other tools are of increasing importance.
Personal and oral communications
Structured consultation is a crucial factor in internal PR. To count on a spontaneous and 
proactive attitude on the part of employees to enter a manager’s office (even if the door is 
permanently open and the atmosphere is inviting) is insufficient. Two-way communications 
between managers and employees and communications among employees should be prop-
erly organised. By means of internal presentations, managers can clarify new strategic direc-
tions or important organisational changes and the role that employees play in effectuating 
them. Besides an obvious didactical purpose, training programmes (internally or externally) 
can enhance internal communications among employees because they provide the structured 
setting and the opportunity to communicate issues that are otherwise neglected. The same 
goes for team meetings, projects and social activities. An example of the latter are team-
building activities, such as go-karting, paintball, exotic trips or survival weekends.
Communications through media
Direct mailing or internal email can be an effective tool of internal communications. In-house 
(electronic) newsletters are a frequently used tool and allow the diffusion of information of 
a less urgent nature. Company TV narrowcast or digital signage through TV sets at places 
in the company that are frequented by a lot of people (restaurants, halls, etc.) are excellent 
means of rapid diffusion of essential information. Annual reports, both financial and social, 
can be distributed to all personnel. Pens, noteblocks, coffee cups, placemats, mousepads, etc., 
can support the logos or slogans of a major internal communications campaign.
Public affairs
The purpose of corporate advertising is to reinforce the attitudes towards the company 
and/or its products. This type of advertising is often mainly affective, and is seldom used 
to convey information or to elicit sales. It is mainly targeted at the general public or broad 
audiences. It is a PR tool that is often used to reinforce the corporate image. Companies 
also use different types of publications to inform publics and/or build a favourable image 
with target audiences, namely newsletters, flyers, brochures and annual reports. Corporate 
events sponsorship is used to enhance the corporate image.
Lobbying is the activity that companies undertake to influence the decisions of govern-
mental bodies or the opinion of pressure groups in a positive direction. Lobbying implies 
giving information, negotiating, influencing complex decision-making units, and getting 
the best out of it for the company. Often, lobbying is done by specialised companies. It is 
an increasingly important business, in which a growing number of lobbyists are employed.
Most of what consumers and stakeholders know about companies and the issues that surround them comes from 
the news media. There has been a tremendous growth in the volume of business news that appears in the media. The 
selection by journalists of the issues to cover or not to cover significantly influences the opinions and perceptions 
Research insight
Agenda-setting as a PR tool

448     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
Financial public relations
Meetings, newsletters and corporate advertising can also be directed towards financial pub-
lics. But even more important are the annual and financial reports giving bankers and poten-
tial investors the necessary information on the basis of which a sound financial reputation 
can be developed.
Media public relations
The purpose of media PR is to generate publicity and, in that way, reach other important 
audiences. Publicity results from the fact that the media cover events that have some news 
value, or write articles on issues that are company-related. Unless something special hap-
pens – normally unexpected and not so positive for the company – the media are not going 
to write or report positive news about the company. Usually, professional PR activity is 
necessary to draw the attention of the media.
The instruments of media PR are press kits and press releases, and their audio-visual 
counterparts Video News Releases (VNRs) and Radio News Releases (RNRs). A press 
kit is a set of documents, containing photos, reports and a press release, which is sent to 
journalists or presented at a press conference. A press release is a document that contains 
the material that the company would like to see covered in the press. VNRs and RNRs are 
audio-visual news releases sent to TV or radio stations free of charge for unrestricted use. 
Increasingly, companies use online tools and social media to disseminate their messages, via 
Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn or YouTube.
Many checklists have been proposed on how to write and present a good press release 
or a good newspaper article in general. The essentials are summarised in Table 10.4. By 
means of press conferences and interviews the company can comment on the issues that it 
of the public. The specific ability to influence the salience of topics, attributes of these topics and images among 
the public by making them salient in the media is called agenda-setting. Agenda-setting theory and research lead 
to the following ‘rules’:19
● The amount of news about a company that appears in the news media is positively related to the public’s aware-
ness of the company.
● The amount of news coverage devoted to particular attributes of a company is positively related to the propor-
tion of the public that defines the firm by those attributes; if a company mainly receives press coverage about its 
products, it will primarily be known through its products.
● The more positive (negative) that media coverage is for a particular attribute, the more positively (negatively) 
members of the public will perceive that attribute.
● The agenda of substantive and affective attributes associated with a company in business news coverage primes 
the public’s attitude and opinion about the company; if the news coverage is positive (negative) about an impor-
tant characteristic of the company or its activities, the whole company will benefit (suffer) from it.
● Organised efforts to communicate a corporate agenda will result in a significant degree of correspondence 
between the attribute agenda of the company and the news media.
The last point is particularly important for media PR. Media PR can indeed make a difference. Company news 
releases are estimated to influence as much as between 25% and 80% of news content. A substantial number (some 
say more than 50%) of the news stories in newspapers are substantially based on press releases. One study found that 
among the entire population of Fortune 500 companies, those with substantial press rooms on the Web were ranked 
much higher on the Fortune list.20 It is also worth noting that a news story in the general news section of a newspa-
per is often more friendly and positive than a similar story in the business section. News media have a fascination 
with celebrities and elites: 45% of a company’s reputation can be attributed to the CEO. Consequently, PR activity 
aiming at news coverage devoted to the company should be separated from PR campaigns focusing upon the CEO.

INSTRUMENTS AND CHANNELS     449
considers important and try to present them as ‘news’. However, in this over-informed soci-
ety, not many things are ‘news’. Companies should avoid falling into the ‘marketing myopia’ 
trap concerning the news value of ‘important’ company events. What is news to a certain 
medium depends on the characteristics of the message and the medium itself, and on the 
way the news is presented. Table 10.5 lists some rules of good media relations.
Marketing public relations
Product event sponsorship, i.e. sponsoring an activity in which the product plays a major 
role (for instance, the Camel Trophy), is discussed later. Newsletters distributed to retailers, 
suppliers and other business contacts can be important instruments of PR, complementing 
● Indicate the release date
● Answer the following questions in every news story: who, what, why, where and when
● Focus and clarity: know what you want to say
● The lead paragraph: structure your story – get the main news points in the first paragraph
● News story body: flesh out the details – use short paragraphs with only one point per paragraph
● Journalistic style: use short sentences and active verbs
● Imitation: follow the style and construction of existing articles
● Completeness: document all the facts and quote from reliable sources
● Editorialising: do not give your opinion
● Names: use proper style for spelling out names
● Include illustrative materials
● Closing: add a final paragraph
● Editing: review your copy twice, then review it again
● Accuracy and simplicity: strive for a perfect news release
● Contact details: give details of the person who can be contacted
Sources: Based on Smith, J. (1995) The New Publicity Kit. New York: Wiley; Pickton, D. and Broderick, A. (2001) Integrated Marketing 
Communications. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall; Duncan, T. (2002) IMC: Using Advertising and Promotion to Build Brands. 
Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Table 10.4  Writing a news release
Learn about what a medium considers newsworthy:
● Make sure the story is accurate
● Only timely stories or those on the latest developments are news – old facts are of no use
● The facts or news of an event should be perceived as important by the readers of the medium
● Everything that deviates from the ordinary is potential news – everyday events are not news
● Facts endorsed by an authority (CEO or marketing manager) are perceived as more important 
than facts presented by a junior employee
● Human interest is important: to whom does it happen; who is involved; how important are they; 
is the story fun and/or emotionally engaging and does it strike a chord?
● Tension or drama created by conflicting points of view attracts media attention
● Include the name and phone number of a contact person who can answer questions
● Do not expect a medium to copy your release as presented – it will be checked with other sources 
and modified
Sources: Based on Burnett, J. and Moriarty, S. (1998) Introduction to Marketing Communication. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall; 
Duncan, T. (2002) IMC: Using Advertising and Promotion to Build Brands. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Table 10.5  Rules of good media relations

450     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
and reinforcing salespeople’s efforts and sales promotion activity. Placing products in TV 
shows or movies is an increasingly popular type of communication that is at the crossroads 
of PR and sponsorship.
The Da Vinci Code
Even before the movie based on Dan Brown’s book was released in 2006, it succeeded in generating a lot of free 
publicity. The book takes the form of a mystery, and suggests that the classical Catholic interpretation of the Bible 
has been wrong for centuries. Religion-based films always stir up emotions, and Sony Pictures built a whole buzz 
marketing project to generate interest and ‘rumour around the launch’. Sony set up a website (www.davincidialogue.
com) on which it invited experts in Roman Catholicism to react to the criticisms voiced by the Catholic Church. In 
the movie trailers, some letters were brighter than others. If you collected them, you could form the words ‘seek 
the codes’, referring to a website www.seekthecodes.com. The website was a blog of a certain Lisa S. who claimed 
to have found many more hidden messages in the communication about the movie, and urged the visitor to 
­participate in the game ‘The Da Vinci Code Quest’. All of this was set up by Sony. Of course, Sony did not have to 
create a hype, it just had to support an existing one. Before the movie was released, almost 50 million people had 
already read the book.21
VantagePoint (Deus)
The new CD of the popular Belgian rock band Deus, ‘Vantage Point’, was released mid-April 2008. During the period 
before this release, a lot of publicity was generated. One week before the release, the CD could be heard in streaming 
on the Heineken website. This was not promoted but, as was to be expected, a music journalist picked it up and wrote 
about it. The publisher of the CD reacted angrily and demanded the site be closed. Many newspapers and radio stations 
reported this incident. Journalists were also forbidden by court order to publish interviews with Tom Barman, front-
man of Deus, at a penalty of €25 000. Obviously, a lot of angry articles were written about this controversy, and it was 
a headline in the TV news. The newspaper Le Soir broke the embargo, published the interview and added three pages 
of comments. By the day of the release, there was probably no single Belgian who did not know the new CD was out.22
Business insight
Organising buzz to launch a film and a CD
Budgets
PR should be operating within the same discipline that applies to other business functions. 
This implies that a budget has to be fixed, and that measurable objectives should be defined. 
Different budgeting techniques can be applied (Table 10.6).23
Budgets may be based on historical comparison, i.e. on what has been spent in previous 
periods, possibly adjusted as a function of changed circumstances. New product launches 
may result in increased budgets; less competition may imply lower budgets. Overall, this 
method seldom leads to sound budgeting. Maybe the historical starting figure was inap-
propriate, or the company is doing so well that the PR budget can easily be reduced. Most 
importantly, there is a lack of strategic focus: by not taking into account the changing 
environment, great PR opportunities or dangerous threats calling for PR action may be over-
looked. In the resources costing method, management decides what resources are needed (an 
extra press officer, or an event co-ordinator) and calculates the costs implied. This method 
suffers from similar weaknesses to the previous one, although PR needs are to a certain 
extent taken into account.

COMMUNICATIONS IN TIMES OF CRISIS     451
In action costing, a PR programme or activity is planned, and the cost to carry it out is cal-
culated. This method has the virtue of starting from the task to be accomplished, but lacks 
long-term perspective. The competitive tendering method is very similar to the previous one. 
A PR programme is decided on and different PR agencies are requested to file a proposal and 
a budget. In the income proportion method a pre-specified proportion of margin or sales is 
devoted to PR. This method suffers from the same weakness as the historical comparison 
method. There is a lack of strategic focus, and the PR budget grows with sales – generally 
a situation in which less PR activity is needed. In contrast, if there is a decline in sales, PR 
budgets decrease at a time during which they may be needed most. In industry comparison, 
the industry average is used as a benchmark to decide the PR budget. Again, there is a lack 
of strategic focus, and no link with a pre-specified task.
In the capitation rating or achievement targeting method, audiences to be reached and 
objectives to be achieved are defined. For instance, a 30% awareness and a 70% favourable 
attitude with the general public and financial stakeholders by the end of the year may be the 
goals. Experience with other communications tools, such as advertising and direct mailing, 
may be used to calculate the budget required to achieve these objectives. This method is 
probably one of the most useful. However, as for all marketing communications activities, 
PR is not an exact science, and the objectives to be achieved are often long-term orientated. 
Therefore it is difficult to set a PR budget. However, PR agencies increasingly face situations 
in which they are paid by results rather than on a mark-up basis.24
Communications in times of crisis
A special type of circumstance in which PR play an extremely important role is when the 
company faces an unforeseen crisis. By nature, a crisis is an event or a series of events that 
cannot be planned in advance. Crises can have multiple causes. A company’s product may 
be found to contain toxic material, as in the Perrier case, a sinking ship like the Exxon 
Valdez may pollute the environment, a new car model like the Mercedes A may fail to pass 
a safety test, or a company executive may get involved in a personal or a financial scandal. 
Whether a crisis is a ‘Cobra’ (a sudden disaster) or a ‘Python’ (a slow-burning crisis or crisis 
creep),25 good PR strategy should always take the possibility of a crisis into account and be 
prepared for it. A set of rules and procedures should be put in place well before any crisis 
emerges, as a result of which at least a scenario of crisis management is in place in the event 
of a suddenly emerging problem. Crises often turn into nightmares as a result of the lack 
of well-established procedures, which often have to do with the handling of external and 
internal communications. Crises are expected to take place more frequently than before. All 
kinds of audiences, like consumer interest groups and the media, watch companies more 
closely, and modern communications technology results in a more rapid dissemination of 
the news on company incidents. Therefore, preparing for crisis management is an increas-
ingly important task for PR professionals.
● Historical comparison
● Resources costing
● Action costing
● Competitive tendering
● Income proportion
● Industry comparison
● Capitation rating
Table 10.6  PR budgeting techniques

452     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
An important factor in crisis management is the way in which a company behaves and 
communicates in tempore non suspecto, i.e. in the pre-crisis period. It is most important to 
create a reservoir of goodwill. Some rules of conduct are mentioned in Table 10.7.26
To know is to like. There is a strong correlation between knowing a company and liking 
it. Building awareness can be done most effectively by means of intensive communications 
with all important target groups. Target groups are not enemies or nuisances, but people 
who may support the company when things go wrong. Therefore, when these people have a 
problem or need assistance, a helping hand will not be forgotten when the company needs 
them. Telephone calls and letters should be responded to promptly so that audiences know 
that they are important to the company. Do not expect people with whom you have not 
communicated for a long period to remember you and offer help during a crisis.
The company should not pretend that problems do not exist. It has to show confidence 
and knowledge, but also humility. People with complaints may be disregarded, but the com-
plaints will not go away and will rebound on the company in times of crisis. In many cases, 
people have only limited contact with the company, often if they have a problem or a com-
plaint. The way in which the company responds to their problem will largely determine the 
way they feel about the company. Trust has to be built by communicating, being honest and 
being a good corporate citizen. Image-building is a long-term and sometimes expensive 
process, the return on which becomes visible only when the reservoir of goodwill is needed 
to compensate for the negative image caused by a crisis. Building brand equity is important. 
A positive corporate image can often be established most effectively through well-known 
and highly valued brands.
Finally, a company has to learn to prepare and build scenarios for the unexpected. 
Although many crises cannot be predicted, the likelihood of some of them can be taken 
into account. If you operate oil tankers, one of them may sink, causing great damage to the 
environment; if you operate a steel mill, a serious accident may occur; if you manufacture 
drugs, people may die as a result of a human error in manufacturing, as in the B Braun inci-
dent in which two babies died as a result of a lethal confusion of ingredients and labels. In 
the pre-crisis or scanning phase, the company should make contingency plans. In a broader 
context, an issues audit should be carried out. Issues are those potential areas that could 
have an important impact upon the operations of the company. The aim of an issues audit 
is to identify all that might be of consequence and help the company react to it and to plan 
ahead.27 In general, a crisis can be prepared for by building contingency crisis management 
plans. Table 10.8 presents a checklist for preparing for a crisis.
In spite of all the preparations and the investment in goodwill, a crisis may occur and 
damage the company’s image overnight as a result of mishandling the crisis. Often this 
counter-productive approach has to do with the way in which communications are organ-
ised – or, more often, not organised – during the impact of the crisis.
During a crisis, the following rules have to be implemented:28
● Designate a single spokesperson. Often, the damage is done during the first few hours 
and days of a crisis when all kinds of company executives give their – often contradic-
tory – assessment of the facts. Every employee that comments speaks for the company.
● Communicate
● Keep in touch and be responsive
● Do not act as if problems do not exist
● Build trust by communicating
● Build brand equity
● Build scenarios for the unexpected
Source: Based on Marconi, J. (1992) Crisis Marketing: When Bad Things Happen to Good Companies. Chicago: Probus.
Table 10.7  Pre-crisis communications rules

COMMUNICATIONS IN TIMES OF CRISIS     453
● Tell your story first and be honest. It is much more difficult to neutralise rumours or to 
defend yourself against allegations than it is to give a clear overview of the facts first. 
Furthermore, it is counter-productive to lie, since pressure groups or the media will find 
out sooner or later, with even more consequent harm to the company’s image.
● Never go ‘off the record’. There should only be one story which is the same for everybody. 
Act as if all questions and answers will be made public.
● Keep your employees informed, to avoid rumours that take on a life of their own and that 
are fed by the employees’ speculations. Communicate internally and externally, in parallel.
● Position your company or products in a larger context, stressing the positive elements, 
to divert attention from the element that caused the crisis.
● Details. Give as much information about the incident as possible.
● Compassion. Show understanding and regret, and make apologies.
● Reassurance. Everything is under control, there is no further danger.
● What are we doing about it? Present in-depth research by an independent organisation.
After the crisis, the company enters the readjustment phase and has to rebuild a new 
reservoir of goodwill, based on the same principles discussed before.
● Prepare a list of issues, and their potential impact, to be circulated – which crises can occur?
● Identify areas of concern and of opportunity
● Monitor potential legislation that could affect markets
● Establish which publics should be taken into account
● Identify the executive responsible for leading on each issue
● Set up a crisis management team in advance
● Is the crisis management team well trained?
● Incident facilities are needed at all company locations
● Use simulations to test procedures – fine-tune all policies and procedures in ‘peacetime’
● Establish a well-equipped crisis communications centre
● Develop and train your company spokespeople
● Develop policies that clarify how decisions will be made
● Provide each member of the crisis communications team with detailed background data on the 
company
Source: Based on Haywood, R. (1998) Public Relations for Marketing Professionals. London: Macmillan Business; Seymour, M. and 
Moore, S. (2000) Effective Crisis Management: Worldwide Principles and Practices. London and New York: Cassell; Anthonissen, P. 
(2002) Murphy Was an Optimist. Tielt: Lannoo.
Table 10.8  Preparing for and handling a crisis
On Friday afternoon, 26 September 2008, the CEO of Fortis Bank and Insurance held a press conference to state that 
there was nothing wrong with the bank’s solvency and liquidity. A couple of hours later he had to step down, and 
less than 48 hours later the Belgian and Dutch governments had to intervene to prevent Fortis from going bankrupt. 
One week later, the French banking group Paribas stepped in to partially take over Fortis Bank. These communi-
cations mistakes undermined the credibility of Fortis with its stakeholders and destroyed its carefully built good 
Business insight
Fortis blunders during financial crisis

454     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
PR is most frequently used to support the corporate image. However, marketing communications can also be 
reinforced by PR efforts, and PR efforts can build upon other marketing communications campaigns. Publicity 
can be generated following sales efforts and successes: winning an important account, selling to well-known non-
profit organisations or establishing links with famous organisations or events. Sponsorship efforts can be combined 
with PR and advertising to build powerful events that generate a lot of publicity. Sponsored celebrities can be 
used for corporate hospitality, reinforcing sales efforts, corporate identity and image-building, and in offline and 
online advertising and social media activity. PR activities such as annual meetings, events and points of view can 
be announced through mass media advertising. Exhibitions and trade fairs can be used to hold press conferences, 
announcing new products, company news, etc., and to organise corporate hospitality events. Opening a new store 
or changing store appeal and image can be a starting point for organising events and generating publicity. In gen-
eral, PR can reinforce the awareness and the corporate reputation effect of many marketing and communications 
activities with a variety of stakeholders.
IMC insight
Integrating PR in IMC
reputation. Following this disastrous weekend, Fortis decided to withdraw its shares from the stock exchange for a 
couple of days. This withdrawal lasted one and a half weeks. A couple of weeks later, one of the major TV channels 
in Belgium aired a programme called ‘The big money debate’. The CEOs of all major banks were present, but Fortis 
sent a lower-level manager. Crisis communications experts claim that this would have been the ideal moment for 
Fortis and its CEO to show that they took their responsibility seriously and were not hiding from their stakeholders. 
Also, in the negotiations between Paribas and the Dutch and Belgian governments, it was unclear what the role of 
Fortis had been. The bank did not communicate clearly about this and this deteriorated further its already tainted 
reputation. To add insult to injury for its shareholders, who lost a lot of money due to the Fortis crash, news got out 
that various top managers were granted multi-million-euro bonuses, even during the 27–28 September negotiations. 
Finally, in the same period, Fortis held a luxurious and expensive party in Monaco in honour of its agents. In normal 
circumstances this would have gone unnoticed, but at a time when many shareholders and customers of the bank 
felt uncertain and cheated, the party triggered a new wave of indignation and negative media stories. Fortis broke 
many rules of good crisis behaviour and communications in this period, even to the extent that communications 
experts felt that the reputation of the financial group was so damaged that it would have to be replaced by a differ-
ent corporate identity altogether.29
Fortis was eventually taken over by BNP Paribas and a new corporate identity was indeed developed in which, 
nevertheless, the old brand name was integrated: BNP Paribas Fortis.
Summary
PR is the management of reputation. It is about building and maintaining long-term goodwill 
vis-à-vis a large variety of audiences and stakeholders. Depending on the nature of these stake-
holders, different types of PR can be distinguished. Marketing PR is directed towards market-
ing audiences and mainly supports marketing communications objectives. Corporate PR, such 
as public affairs, financial and media PR, supports corporate image and corporate reputation. 

Case 10     455
A special type of PR activity is internal PR, by means of which employees and shareholders are 
informed and/or motivated to co-operate in achieving the goals of the marketing and corpo-
rate communications plans. A broad variety of tools and media are used in PR, ranging from 
personal and oral communications in internal PR, to press releases, corporate advertising, 
direct mailing and annual reports in corporate PR. A specific task of PR is communicating 
in times of crisis. Building goodwill by means of pre-crisis PR is essential to limit the fallout 
from a crisis situation, although PR activity during the crisis is equally important.
Review questions
	 1.	 What is the role of public relations in the communications mix, and what are its strengths 
and weaknesses?
	 2.	 What are the trends that influence public relations?
	 3.	 Who are the target groups of public relations?
	 4.	 What are the objectives of each type of PR activity?
	 5.	 What are the tools of internal communications?
	 6.	 What are the rules and techniques of good media public relations?
	 7.	 Compare the different PR budgeting techniques and their advantages and disadvantages.
	 8.	 What are the basic rules of good crisis communications?
Further reading
Meerman Scott, D. (2015) The New Rules of Marketing and PR: How to Use News Releases, 
Blogs, Podcasting, Viral Marketing and Online Media to Reach Buyers Directly. Hobo-
ken, NJ: Wiley.
Tench, R. and Yeomors, L. (2013) Exploring Public Relations. London: Pearson Education.
Van Ruler, B., Vercic, T. and Vercic, B. (2008) Public Relations Metrics: Research and Evalu-
ation. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wilcox, D. and Cameron, G.T. (2012) Public Relations: Strategies and Tactics. London: 
Pearson Education.
Public Relations Review, http://www.journals.elsevier.com/public-relations-review/.
www.instituteforpr.org
Case 10:
The Global Fund’s Born HIV Free campaign
The Global Fund in need of a different 
communications strategy
In 2002, at the directive of the G8, the Global Fund to Fight 
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria was created as a rapid 
response mechanism to dramatically increase resources to 
fight three of the world’s most devastating diseases, and to 
direct those resources to areas of greatest need. The Global 
Fund operates as an international financing institution. Its 
purpose is to attract, manage and disburse resources to 

456     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
fight AIDS, TB and malaria. It does not implement pro-
grammes directly, relying instead on a broad network of 
partnerships with other development organisations on the 
ground to supply local knowledge and technical assistance 
where most needed. It addresses gaps in country efforts to 
fight the three diseases and strengthen underlying health 
systems by financing programmes that complement those 
of other donors, and seeks to use its own grants to stimulate 
further investment by both donors and recipients. To date, 
it has committed $22.6 billion in 150 countries to support 
large-scale prevention, treatment and care programmes 
against the three diseases. In just ten years, programmes 
financed by the Global Fund have saved 7.7 million lives.
Like many of its counterparts in the development com-
munity, the Global Fund began facing difficult circumstances 
in 2010 in securing funding to both maintain and expand 
its life-saving programmes. Until that time, the Global 
Fund’s communications strategy was much focused on a 
few thousand thought-leaders and policy-makers in donor 
countries. But around 2010, they started to receive strong 
signals from government donors that they could not simply 
continue to tell their constituents that they were giving the 
Global Fund so much money because it was the right thing 
to do, and that they had to make some real efforts to make 
themselves better known to their voters. The lack of public 
awareness about the Global Fund’s successes, or even its 
existence, was also a consequence of its communications 
strategy prior to the difficult global economic circumstances 
that came to a head in 2010.
In May 2010, the Global Fund began talking to the gen-
eral public with the launch of the Born HIV Free campaign, 
a six-month awareness and advocacy campaign that ran 
until 5 October, the day when donors made their three-
year (2011–13) contribution pledge to the Global Fund. The 
campaign narrative and call to action was focused on the 
goal of virtually ending the transmission of HIV from mother 
to child by 2015. The Born HIV Free campaign was created 
to put the issue of preventing mother-to-child transmission 
(PMTCT) of HIV on the global agenda, get taxpayer support 
for the work of the Global Fund and expose the Global Fund 
to the general public in the context of the replenishment 
and pledges for 2011–13. The campaign ‘ask’ was simple – 
add your name to the digital petition that states your belief 
in that goal, and affirm your support for your government’s 
contribution to the Global Fund.
The Born HIV Free campaign 
communications plan
The Born HIV Free campaign was set up as a multi-stage, 
multimedia communications campaign targeting the gen-
eral public from Spain, France, UK, the Netherlands, Italy, 
Germany, Nordic countries and Ireland. It ran from April to 
October 2010 and consisted of a series of vivid and imagi-
native animated films, social marketing tools, the cam-
paign website, and offline campaign events and products. 
The campaign used solely positive messages, calling upon 
Europeans to help end mother-to-child transmission of 
HIV – and to express to their governments that they have 
public support to continue and increase their funding to 
the Global Fund. The continued ambassadorship and ‘voice’ 
of the Global Fund’s Ambassador, Carla Bruni-Sarkozy, was 
central to the Born HIV Free campaign. The campaign draws 
on extraordinary assets from partners – corporate and indi-
viduals – and the communications plan aims to maximise 
their visibility for the purpose of recognition of their contri-
bution and to ensure the success of the campaign.
The campaign rested on three pillars: (1) online vis-
ibility; (2) social media outreach; and (3) offline events. It 
was organised in four phases. To leverage the content and 
spread the word, discussions and word of mouth are vital. 
The campaign activated and nurtured relationships with a 
number of multipliers including:
● 100 top digital influencers (including bloggers) from a 
number of European countries. Material was developed 
for them to spread the word in three languages (Spanish, 
English, French).
● 200 high-profile personalities from all walks of life, 
including celebrities, politicians, the media. The ‘mes-
sengers’ were requested to promote the campaign in 
their sphere of influence. They were provided with mar-
keting material and specific requests for them to be able 
to act on behalf of the campaign.
● A dozen partners of the Global Fund were acti-
vated to spread the word among their constituencies  

Case 10     457
and employees. These groups include health-based 
communities, NGOs, implementing partners, products, 
RED, One, etc.
● Social networking and community management. The 
campaign established contacts with communities on 
international and national social platforms and had 
dedicated staff to ensure a two-way conversation with 
the communities.
Community growth – bottom-up grassroots endorsement
Trigger interest without revealing too many elements
Social media platforms and website
● Opening and launch of campaign through social media 
platforms (Facebook, Causes, Twitter, LinkedIn, and 
national site key markets when possible; YouTube should 
open only at launch day). Basic information about 
the campaign is provided, along with teasers, a trailer etc.
● Holding page on campaign website to go live. Minimum 
and basic information is exposed, including launch date 
and email subscribe function. Mirror content exposed 
on social media platforms and encourage Facebook 
sign up.
Partner activation
● Roadshow of spokespeople of the campaign to capitals 
of target countries to create excitement and seed stories 
among selected media and selected bloggers.
● Partners and their employees are invited to join the 
social media groups (NGOs, media and offline partners, 
the Global Fund, etc.).
● Spread kit is sent to trusted partners (embargoed) in 
advance, for planning purposes. The owner of each rela-
tionship sends material to their own contacts.
● Spread kit for influencers, bloggers and further related 
partners sent one week prior to launch.
● T-shirts sent to 200 ‘messengers’ to wear and trigger 
interest from media.
Media (offline/online)
● Madame Figaro magazine hits newsstands on 26 March. 
Mentions the name of the campaign and its purpose 
without revealing further details.
● Spread kit is sent to media contacts, embedding the 
campaign into its context without going into details of 
activities but referring to the countdown so as to enable 
feature coverage.
Phase 1: Start online (2–4 weeks prior to launch)
● Spread kits for a wider group of mainstream media and 
bloggers with a minimal amount of information about 
the campaign sent a couple of days before the campaign 
launch.
● 
A small number of interviews with selected print and TV 
media, featuring Mme Bruni-Sarkozy, are recorded. 
Embargoed interviews to appear on launch day.
Big European launch – press and bloggers outreach with 
all partners
The Global Fund launched the Born HIV Free campaign 
on 19 May 2010 in Paris. The launch event created pan-
European visibility and was the main vehicle to acknowl-
edge the contributions of the main partners. Partnerships, 
substantial donations and pro bono support by Google, 
YouTube and international health organisations (WHO, 
UNAIDS) were highlighted.
Digital
● Launch of banner campaign in ten countries (TV, Inter-
net, print).
● Launch of campaign website.
● Launch of YouTube channel with first video featured 
on the YouTube Homepage. YouTube functionalities 
activated.
● Wikipedia page on the campaign is launched. Mentions 
objectives, data, facts and figures and ambassadorship. 
Links to CBS’s website, the Global Fund’s pages and 
related articles.
● Launch of partners’ spreading efforts.
● Frequent updates on all social media platforms.
● Michel Kazatchkine to tweet on the campaign Twitter 
account.
● Partners (media, sponsors and offline) are acknowledged 
on website, media releases and social media.
Media
A global press conference was held on the day of the launch. 
The conference was broadcast on the Web. A press release 
was issued to accompany a Video News Release (VNR) with 
quotes from Carla Bruni-Sarkozy and other partners. The 
VNR was sent to the main evening news broadcast of the 
ten target countries and was highlighted on all social media 
platforms and the YouTube channel. Targeted journalists 
were selected from a wide range of media.
Constant presence, sustainable communication
Phase 2: Launch (one day)
Phase 3: Rollout (5–6 months – launch to end September)

458     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
The rollout from the launch to the end of September 
involved a mix of online and offline operations that jointly 
created a European movement through an online video 
campaign and messenger, fashion, music and urban events.
Social media platforms and website
● Launch incentive programme (competition included) on 
social media platforms. Competition prize includes field 
trip to South Africa in August for one person from each 
of the target countries.
● Second film on YouTube 2–3 weeks after launch.
● YouTube competition to create third film.
● T-shirt: online distribution.
● Facebook users’ and selected bloggers’ trip to Africa, 
together with African journalists.
● Launch online goodies collector (May).
Media opportunities
● Mother’s Day (May): Lifestyle media/radio double-rib-
bon brooch competition; interviews with media on mar-
kets where Mother’s Day is strong; talk shows on chosen 
markets.
● Cannes Film Festival (May): T-shirt distribution at the 
Cannes Film Festival; capture photos of celebrities with 
T-shirt.
● Vienna’s International AIDS Conference (July): Ambas-
sador participation and visit to campaign’s interactive 
stand and sign-up for the campaign.
● Concerts: Paul McCartney’s ‘Hard Rock Calling’ concert 
on 27 June 2010 became the first European performance 
to be streamed via YouTube. This live stream was dedi-
cated to the Born HIV Free campaign with campaign 
messages (‘show your support and sign up now’) on You-
Tube at the beginning, end and during short breaks. The 
concert was promoted on the Born HIV Free website, 
Facebook, Twitter and Flickr.
● Solidays, the annual three-day music festival in Paris, 
25–27 June 2010, organised by Solidarité SIDA.
Offline operations
Special issues were featured in magazines, a ‘double-ribbon’ 
brooch was sent to 200 high-profile personalities from all 
walks of life (messengers), and video interviews and talk-
shows were organised for messengers.
Strong finish – event
From the last week of September to 5 October, the day 
of the Replenishment meeting (the meeting at which the 
Phase 4: Wrap-up (3 weeks)
funding of the Global fund is decided upon). The campaign 
continued to provide reports and updates to followers also 
in the weeks and months after 5 October.
Social media platforms, website and offline
● Digital campaign to have online users take one single 
action on one specific day.
● Offline event – display of support.
The event tried to take advantage of the gathering of Heads 
of State and Ministers of Health in New York for the Clin-
ton Global Initiative, the General Assembly and the Millen-
nium Development Goals Summits in New York City at the 
end of September. A video press release was issued of the 
ambassadors talking about the support already given and 
thanking the European population for its engagement. A 
global press conference was held to wrap up the campaign. 
It showcased the outcome of the campaign and ensured 
press coverage in mid-September. The conference was 
broadcast on the Web.
Campaign results
According to a tracking survey conducted in November 
2010 in a sample of 1404 Broad Elites/’Chattering Classes’ 
(university-educated, higher-income people with an active 
interest in national and international economic/political 
affairs – whose opinions and views both reflect and help 
to shape those of policy decision-makers, influencers and 
commentators) in seven countries (France, Germany, Italy, 
the Netherlands, Spain, UK, USA), more than 25% of these 
opinion-makers and chattering classes recognised the cam-
paign. When prompted (aided awareness), 25% were aware 
of the Global Fund, 22% of the product associated with the 
campaign (RED) and 12% of the Born HIV Free campaign. 
When prompted, 22% recognised the logo of the campaign; 
16% of those aware of the campaign associated Carla Bruni-
Sarkozy with it, while 25% associated it with Bono or Ange-
lina Jolie. The highest awareness was reached on TV (24%) 
and Facebook (23%). About a fifth heard about the cam-
paign on YouTube (19%). The campaign raised prevention of 
mother-to-child transmission of HIV awareness significantly 
with a 21% increase in awareness and understanding of the 
issue in those aware of the campaign. Those aware of the 
campaign had a better understanding that mother-to-child 
transmission of HIV is preventable (73%), while only 52% 
of those unaware of the campaign believed it is possible 
to prevent it.
Between its launch on 19 May 2010 and its formal clos-
ing on 5 October 2010, the campaign was viewed more 
than 250 million times, with over 20 million actions (people 
engaged) and more than 700 000 signatures for the cam-
paign petition. Current social media presence is higher than 
500 000 (Facebook, Global Fund & Born HIV Free, Causes, 

Case 10     459
Causes petition-signers, Twitter). The overall campaign cost 
was $23.2 million, $2.8 million of which was paid by the 
Global Fund and $20.4 million was pro bono support. Con-
sequently, the cost per signature was $4 and the cost per 
engagement was $0.14. Besides these concrete results, the 
campaign also served as a tool to kick off communications 
with the general public and built foundations of relation-
ships with companies, the general public and celebrities. It 
received widespread coverage online.
During the first week after the launch day, 4200 signa-
tures were collected, media coverage was 222 articles and 
312 blogs, mainly in Europe, and some radio and TV cov-
erage in France, due to the fact that the launch event was 
in Paris and attended by the ambassador of the campaign, 
Carla Bruni-Sarkozy. According to the comments received, 
she has a controversial image. She has both fans and crit-
ics who object to her past provocative behaviour, morality 
and glamorous and controversial conquests. Neverthe-
less, nearly half think Carla Bruni-Sarkozy is an appropri-
ate spokesperson for the campaign – with 1 in 5 saying she 
is inappropriate. She was also instrumental in attracting 
celebrities (Jean-Paul Gaultier, Paul McCartney and others) 
and was influential in getting partnership deals (Orange, 
Google, ad space, etc.).
Several channels and tools were used throughout the 
campaign: classical mass media advertising (e.g. the ‘Baby 
in the Sky spot’), a launch event, guerrilla (street) market-
ing, presence at music festivals (e.g. Solidays), partnerships 
(among others, with Tiffany), celebrity advocacy (e.g. Paul 
McCartney concert in support of the campaign), ‘saving 
lives’ videos with testimonials. Figure 10.4 gives an impres-
sion of the cost and relative impact of each of these tools 
(not all tools mentioned in the figure were discussed in 
the text). The cheapest and most effective ones in terms 
of achieving the goals of petition signatures and active 
engagement were social media, Thank you and Euronews 
ads, street marketing, the Paul McCartney concert and the 
bloggers’ trip. Selected results for some of these tools are 
given below.
Traditional mass media advertising
Euronews started to broadcast the ‘Baby in the Sky’ spot 
three times per day as of 20 June in 155 countries. Firstly, 
the 30-second version as of July 13, then the 73-second 
version. Total exposure to the spot was 40 million. The spot 
worked well as an awareness tool, generating increased 
visits to the Born HIV Free campaign website. The public 
space company J.C. Decaux donated advertising space in 
Figure 10.4  Costs vs impact matrix of campaign tools

460     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
eight European capital cities in August and September. A 
series of large posters and advertising billboards featured 
Carla Bruni-Sarkozy wearing the Born HIV Free campaign 
T-shirt and inviting the public to join the campaign by sign-
ing up via the YouTube channel. Exposure was 80 million. 
The budget was $2800.
On 6 October, the day after the Replenishment Con-
ference, Thank you ads appeared in five major European 
newspapers (El Pais, Le Figaro, FT, Independent, Bild). The 
Italian monthlies Progress and Progress Viaggi ran the same 
ad in November and put a banner on their websites. The 
ads thanked people and governments for supporting the 
campaign and the Global Fund. Total readership was 19.2 
million. The budget was $6000.
Paul McCartney concert on YouTube
The live streaming of the Paul McCartney concert on You-
Tube was a huge success. It generated 41 000 signatures, 
27 000 of which through the campaign website (the high-
est increase in signatures in a one-week period), 2 million 
YouTube channel visitors from all over the world, and 7000 
tweets. The event resulted in media coverage of 68 articles. 
The budget was $16 600.
Street marketing
The Born HIV Free campaign took to the streets of New York 
and, via social networks, to everyone’s computer screens on 
21 September during the Millennium Development Goals 
summit in an initiative aimed at signposting world lead-
ers in the direction of decisive backing for the Global Fund 
and its work. In partnership with Google and YouTube, the 
initiative saw campaign envoys taking up positions on the 
corners of strategic Manhattan Road intersections holding 
signs with compelling HIV facts and urging that we free 
future generations from HIV by 2015. Also, 3000 flyers were 
distributed in New York and 2268 people viewed Google 
Maps online. The budget was $65 000, part of which was 
covered by YouTube. A bubble effect was created to make 
decision-makers become aware of the Global Fund. This 
initiative was timed with a New York Times ad to create a 
maximum impact.
Born HIV Free YouTube channel
The Global Fund, in partnership with RED Design, launched 
a custom-designed YouTube channel for the Born HIV Free 
campaign. The YouTube channel hosted the videos for the 
campaign, live streams of events, and allowed people to 
sign up directly through the channel. This resulted in 17.9 
million channel visits, 13.5 million channel visitors, 2.75 mil-
lion video views and 70 000 signatures. The YouTube chan-
nel generated considerably higher traffic on the campaign 
website than any other platform during the campaign.
The Born HIV Free campaign website
The Global Fund, in partnership with RED Design, 
launched a unique flash-based website for the Born HIV 
Free campaign. This website provided information about 
the campaign, Carla Bruni-Sarkozy and mother-to-child 
transmission of HIV. During the campaign, the website 
was visited 135 975 times by 118 906 unique visitors. The 
website collected 70 000 signatures. These visitors spent an 
average of three minutes on the website. The website had 
approximately a 60% visitor-to-signature conversion ratio. 
The majority of visitors to the campaign were from France, 

Case 10     461
which had twice the number of visitors as the USA and the 
UK, both of which in turn had twice the number of visitors 
as the following group of Italy, Germany, German Switzer-
land, Brazil, Canada and the Netherlands.
The majority of the traffic on the site originated from 
search engines, referral sites, advertising and direct (incon-
clusive) traffic (Figure 10.5); 61% of visits originated from 
users searching for ‘YouTube’ on the Google search engine 
and clicking on the first sponsored result. This traffic 
remained on the website for an average of 26 seconds and 
viewed an average of 1.11 pages. 21.18% of visits origi-
nated from within YouTube itself, and 97% of these visits 
were referred from the Born HIV Free channel. This traffic 
remained for approximately 2:35 minutes before leaving the 
page; 11.29% of visits have no clear source. 1.2 million visits 
occurred during the Paul McCartney concert. In addition, 
the Twitter integration during the event generated a huge 
number of tweets, which (owing to widespread use of appli-
cations to access Twitter), appear as direct traffic. Hence, 
the majority of this traffic is likely to have originated from 
Twitter referrals during the concert. Visits from the Twitter 
website itself had a similar spike during the concert. Visitors 
from the Paul McCartney concert stayed on the website for 
approximately 2:45 minutes. Visitors from YouTube (outside 
of Paul McCartney) stayed for 1:50 minutes. 2.6% of visits 
originated from banner advertising. This traffic remained 
on the page for 24 seconds and rarely visited another page. 
0.38% of visits originated from Facebook. Visitors from 
Facebook spent over four minutes on the website.
Social media
The Global Fund launched a Facebook fan page for the 
Born HIV Free campaign to increase the level of engage-
ment from supporters. During the campaign period the 
page resulted in 19 583 members and 70 291 visits which 
Figure 10.5  Traffic analysis on the Born HIV Free website
Source/medium
Visits T
Pages/visit
Avg. time on site
1. Google/organic
10 893 312
1.11
00:00:26
2. YouTube.com/referral
3 783 761
1.16
00:02:35
3. (direct)/(none)
2 004 449
1.15
00:00:45
4. Ad-emea.doubleclick.net/referral
469 365
1.12
00:00:24
5. search/organic
184 398
1.12
00:00:32
6. Facebook.com/referral
67 184
1.20
00:01:07
7. Voila/organic
45 729
1.24
00:00:53
8. Twitter.com/referral
41 605
1.23
00:01:35
9. upload.youtube.com/referral
26 226
1.20
00:01:14
10. s0.2mdn.net/referral
21 673
1.16
00:00:35
on average lasted 1:15 minutes, and 6509 interactions. The 
audience were 57% female, 40% male; 56% of the audience 
were aged 18–34 and 32% aged 35+. Most of the likes 
and interactions were driven by a small number of highly 
engaged people. The growth of the Facebook channel was 
initially slow and needed promotion from other sources to 
gain initial momentum. Once that momentum was estab-
lished, the channel was effective at achieving a steady level 
of growth from 5000 to 19 000. Figure 10.6 shows the gen-
der, age and geographic spread of the Facebook audience. 
Facebook cultivated an engaged audience with a deeper 
interest in the subject than other platforms. It might be 
assumed that the best supporters of a campaign were those 
on Facebook. To actively engage members, it was important 
to provide interactive content.
The Global Fund launched a Causes page and petition to 
increase referrals to the Born HIV Free campaign and pro-
vide a means through which people could sign up without 
leaving the Facebook platform. Causes is the world’s larg-
est platform for activism and philanthropy. The platform 
empowers individuals to create grassroots communities 
called ‘causes’ that take action on behalf of a specific issue 
or non-profit organisation. In addition, through associ-
ated Causes to the Global Fund, over 100 000 support-
ers in related Causes (namely, Product RED and Join RED) 
were messaged at various times during the campaign. The 
total reach of this tool was 129 000 members in 22 affiliate 
causes and 48 662 members of the Born HIV Free cause 
were created, resulting in 143 858 signatures and more 
than 10 000 video views. Causes was a very effective plat-
form for raising awareness of the campaign and collecting 
signatures. The Born HIV Free campaign benefited from a 
close relationship with the staff of Causes who helped to 
promote the campaign to huge existing groups. In addition, 
the platform provided the means to message an engaged 

462     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
audience of almost 250 000 members. During the cam-
paign the Causes platform became increasingly popular 
with members sharing videos with each other. Many vid-
eos gained the majority of their views through this plat-
form. Causes became the first platform to have application 
news contents included in the news feeds of the members. 
This represents further opportunities in the future to grow 
the audience and spread campaign messages further than 
before.
By working with Twitter the campaign team wanted to 
persuade millions of members, many of whom would not 
be aware of the Global Fund mission, to run the largest digi-
tal petition ever undertaken on Twitter. To achieve this, Twit-
ter’s support was gained by means of promoted tweets, free 
media space on Twitter profiles, consultancy (using Twit-
ter’s expertise and advice to mobilise an audience around 
emotive causes), suggested User List (to be added to the 
Suggested User List for Twitter under charities and under 
staff picks), promotion on Twitter.com/blog, coverage in the 
monthly newsletter, outreach to top Twitter members, staff 
champions of the cause, etc. Twitter appeared to be not 
the appropriate tool for engagement and it quickly became 
evident that it would not be a major online communica-
tions channel. Therefore, only limited resources and efforts 
were allocated to Twitter after the launch.
Bloggers
Bloggers are hugely influential and command large audi-
ences. These audiences are usually more engaged and feel 
more connected with a blogger than with a traditional jour-
nalist. The endorsement of popular bloggers can start an 
avalanche of attention and build momentum for campaign 
efforts. The Global Fund organised a Born HIV Free com-
petition for bloggers with the possibility for the winner to 
visit Global-Fund-supported programmes with the objec-
tive of bringing the blogger closer to the organisation. The 
more a blogger feels influenced by a campaign and likes 
the people involved, the more likely the blogger will post 
positively about the event.
Seven bloggers from the USA, Canada, Spain, Germany 
and France came to Lesotho for a three-day trip, visiting 
hospitals and interviewing pregnant women on PMTCT 
treatment and HIV-positive mothers having HIV negative 
children. The number of posts related to the trip was 38 (10 
Figure 10.6  Geographic, gender and age spread of the Facebook audience

Case 10     463
German, 10 Spanish, 9 French, 7 Canadian, 2 American). 
Most bloggers wrote and posted a story almost every day, 
which ensured transparency and continuous follow-up for 
the readers. The invited bloggers felt part of the campaign 
and became its ambassadors.
Conclusions
In terms of the main objectives of the campaign, i.e. increase 
public awareness, traffic and petition-signing, the Born HIV 
Free campaign was a success. However, the campaign failed 
to enhance the Global Fund brand.
One of the biggest challenges of running a digital-based 
campaign with media vehicles and social media platforms 
as stakeholders is to decide what to do with traffic: that is, 
either to drive campaign traffic to one central place or to 
diversify and have many hubs; to drive traffic to your site, or 
to go where the traffic is. The campaign officially had three 
online hubs to gather signatures of support: the campaign 
website, the campaign YouTube channel, and the campaign 
Causes page on Facebook. Each proved to be useful in help-
ing to achieve the Global Fund’s campaign objectives, but 
in a segmented way. The campaign website kept users on 
it the longest and converted the highest rate of petition-
signers, while the YouTube channel enjoyed the highest 
amount of traffic (around 20 million visits) and therefore 
brand exposure, but did not convert visitors to petition-
signers at a high rate (0.001%). The campaign Causes page 
on Facebook collected the most petition signatures, but did 
much more to expose the issue of prevention of HIV from 
mother to child than the Global Fund brand.
With the Born HIV Free campaign, the Global Fund 
made a conscious choice to push an issue rather than its 
brand in the campaign’s core DNA. More than anything, 
the Born HIV Free campaign was about putting the attain-
able goal of an HIV-free generation by 2015 on the agenda. 
The downside to this is that the Global Fund was not able  
to create the same impact on raising its brand awareness. 
Figure 10.7  Awareness of the Global Fund and other international organisations
Wave 2: November 2010
The Global 
Fund
UNICEF
Int. Red 
Cross
WHO
MSF
World 
Bank
OXFAM
Awareness – spontaneous
0%
26%
28%
4%
25%
2%
11%
Awareness – aided
25%
89%
71%
70%
63%
57%
46%
Familiarity
11%
51%
40%
34%
35%
22%
21%
Favourability
10%
41%
35%
27%
36%
12%
16%
Agree with cause
9%
38%
31%
24%
30%
11%
15%
Action
6%
28%
21%
13%
22%
6%
12%
Achieving public adoption requires each of the following steps:
Questions asked:
Awareness 
– spontaneous
Is your organisation top of mind in the 
field of international aid?
Thinking about large global organisations that 
provide aid, such as NGOs, what organisations 
come to mind? (% mentions)
Awareness – aided
Are consumers aware of the 
organisation?
Which of the following international aid 
organisations are you aware of? (% mentions)
Familiarity
Are broad elites familiar with the 
organisation and its programmes?
How familiar are you with each of the following 
organisations? (% Very – somewhat familiar)
Favourability
Are broad elites favourable to not only 
the cause, but the organisation itself?
How favourable are you towards each of the 
following organisations? (% Very favourable)
Agree with cause
Do broad elites agree with the issues 
the organisation deals with?
To what extent would you agree that the following 
organisations deal with issues that are important 
to you? (% Agree strongly)
Action
Are broad elites likely to support the 
organisation and its cause?
How likely would you be to support funding for 
each of the following organisations? (% Very likely 
to support)

464     CHAPTER 10  PUBLIC RELATIONS
Only a few of the campaign-aware spontaneously made the 
connection between the Global Fund and Born HIV Free. 
The campaign was huge and complex due to its length, the 
large number of partners, and different goals: signatures vs 
traffic. The Global Fund brand did not benefit from the cam-
paign. This was mainly due to the incredibly complicated 
brand landscape of the campaign. During the most highly 
publicised moments of the campaign, the Global Fund 
essentially squared itself off against the campaign brand – 
Born HIV Free, the brand of its spokesperson, Carla Bruni-
Sarkozy – and its committed commercial partner, YouTube. 
This crowded and complicated brand architecture of the 
campaign proved to be a diluting factor for the Global Fund 
brand, and made it difficult for even the campaign-aware to 
connect the dots. The most obvious conclusion one would 
likely draw from the results of the survey with ‘chattering 
classes’, shown in Figures 10.7 and 10.8, is that the Global 
Fund simply did not create a strong enough connection 
between its brand and the campaign.
After the Born HIV Free campaign, the conclusion is 
that driving traffic to a controlled own platform like a web-
site, while promoting on the platforms where the traffic 
is, like Facebook or YouTube, is the formula that will help 
achieve the campaign’s goals, while creating maximum 
brand impact. The segmentation of web traffic for the 
Born HIV Free campaign was accepted by the Global Fund 
as an inherent compromise to be able to engage as many 
partners as possible. But the Global Fund is using this as a 
lesson-learned after seeing the impact that Born HIV Free 
had on raising awareness for an issue, while leaving the 
brand of the organisation as an afterthought. With their 
follow-up digital-based campaign, ‘One Million Lives’, the 
Global Fund is being disciplined about driving traffic to one 
central place, the campaign website, where they can have 
complete control over their brand exposure to users, even 
though it means not being able to engage with partners in 
the same capacity that they did with Born HIV Free.
Questions
1.	 Assess the approach of the Global Fund.
2.	 What did it do well and why?
3.	 What could have been done differently and why?
4.	 Did it use online channels and social media well? Why 
or why not?
5.	 How could it build a new campaign upon this one in the 
future?
6.	 Which media should be used more intensively? Which 
ones can be dropped?
7.	 Should it keep on using celebrity endorsement? Why or 
why not? What type of celebrity?
8.	 How could it alter its campaign to support the brand 
equity of the Global Fund better than in the previous 
campaign?
Sources: http://www.causes.com; http://www.youtube.com/bornhivfree?x=support; http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tkrG9voS24c; www.theglobalfund.org. 
All information and documentation provided by Claudia Gonzalez, Head of Marketing, The Global Fund to fight AIDS, TB and Malaria.
Figure 10.8  Awareness of the Global Fund before and after the Born HIV Free campaign
Total sample studied
Mar. 2010
Nov. 2010
Shift
Awareness – spontaneous
0%
0%
0
Awareness – aided
23%
24%
+1
Familiarity
10%
9%
-1
Favourability
9%
9%
0
Agree with cause
10%
8%
-2
Action
8%
6%
-2

REFERENCES     465
Public Relations Research Conference, University of 
Miami, FL, 6–9 March.
15	 Sabre Awards (2011) Slim@Studeren=Geld@Beheren 
(Smart Study=Money Management) http://www.hol-
mesreport.com/casestudy-info/10776/Slim-Studeren-
-Geld-Beheren-Smart-Study--Money-Management 
.aspx; http://www.webershandwick.nl/nieuws/163/weber- 
shandwick-nederland-wint-sabre-award-voor-beste-pr-
campagne-in-de-benelux.html (accessed July 2012).
16	 KBC On-line, Effie Award. Belgium, 2003.
17	 De Morgen, 3 April 2002.
18	 http://smartees.insites-consulting.com
19	 Carroll, C. and McCombs, M. (2003) ‘Agenda-setting 
effects of business news on the public’s images and opin-
ions about major corporations’, Corporate Reputation 
Review, 6(1), 36–46.
20	 Callison, C. (2003) ‘Fortune 500 company websites and 
media relations: corporate PR practitioners’ use of the 
Internet to assist journalists in news gathering’, Public 
Relations Review, 29(1), 29–47.
21	 De Morgen, 13 May 2006.
22	 De Morgen, 15 April 2008.
23	 Haywood, R. (1998) Public Relations for Marketing Pro-
fessionals. London: Macmillan Business.
24	 Gofton, K. (1997) ‘Rethinking the Rules’, Public Rela-
tions – Supplement, 6–10.
25	 Seymour, M. and Moore, S. (2000) Effective Crisis Man-
agement: Worldwide Principles and Practices. London 
and New York: Cassell.
26	 Marconi, J. (1992) Crisis Marketing: When Bad Things 
Happen to Good Companies. Chicago: Probus.
27	 Haywood, R. (1998) Public Relations for Marketing Pro-
fessionals. London: Macmillan Business.
28	 Lukaszewki, J.E. (1997) ‘Establishing Individual and 
corporate crisis communication standards: the princi-
ples and protocols’, Public Relations Quarterly, 42(3), 
7–14.
29	 De Morgen, 25 October 2008.
1	 Sirgy, J.M. (1998) Integrated Marketing Communication: 
A Systems Approach. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall.
2	 Haywood, R. (1998) Public Relations for Marketing Pro-
fessionals. London: Macmillan Business.
3	 Public Relations Practice – Its Role and Parameters (1984) 
London: The Institute of Public Relations.
4	 Haywood, R. (1998) Public Relations for Marketing Pro-
fessionals. London: Macmillan Business.
5	 Egan J. (2015) Marketing Communications. Los Angeles, 
CA: Sage.
6	 Brassington, S. and Pettitt, F. (2003) Principles of Mar-
keting. London: Financial Times Management.
7	 Haywood, R. (1998) Public Relations for Marketing Pro-
fessionals. London: Macmillan Business.
8	 De Pelsmacker, P. and Van den Bergh, J. (1998) ‘Advertis-
ing content and irritation: a study of 226 TV commercials’, 
Journal of International Consumer Marketing, 10(4), 5–27.
9	 Bobo, C. (1997) ‘Hitachi faces crisis with textbook 
response’, Public Relations Quarterly, 42(2), 18–21.
10	 www.instituteforpr.org, accessed 20 July 2015.
11	 Dibb, S., Simkin, L. and Vancini, A. (1996) ‘Competition, 
strategy, technology and people: the challenges facing 
PR’, International Journal of Advertising, 15, 116–27; 
Kitchen, P.J. and White, J. (1992) ‘Public relations – 
developments’, Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 
10(2), 14–17; Lages, C. (2001) ‘Dimensions of public 
relations activity: an exploratory study’, PhD Disserta-
tion, University of Warwick, Warwick Business School.
12	 Thomsen, S.R. (1997) ‘Public relations in the new mil-
lennium: understanding the forces that are reshaping the 
profession’, Public Relations Quarterly, 42(1), 11–17.
13	 Lages, C. and Simkin, L. (2003) ‘The dynamics of public 
relations: key constructs and the drive for professional-
ism at the practitioner, consultancy and industry levels’, 
European Journal of Marketing, 37(1), 298–328.
14	 Watson, T. (2008) ‘Priorities in public relations research: 
an international Delphi study’, 11th Annual International 
References

Chapter 11
Sponsorship
Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Understand the difference between sponsorship and other instruments of the 
communications mix
● Know how sponsorship works
● Understand why sponsorship is an increasingly important instrument of the 
communications mix
● Distinguish the target groups and objectives of sponsorship
● Learn about the different types of sponsorship, such as event-related sponsorship, 
broadcast sponsorship, cause-related sponsorship and ambush marketing
● Select sponsorship proposals on the basis of a set of relevant criteria
● Understand branded entertainment
Chapter outline
466

SPONSORSHIP: WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT IS NOT     467
Introduction
Although in most companies the share of sponsorship in the communications budget is 
still limited, worldwide it is an increasingly important instrument of the communications 
mix. Not only are sponsorship budgets increasing, but also sponsored events and causes are 
becoming more and more diverse. Although ‘spouse-driven projects’ still exist, the degree 
of professionalism in the selection and follow-up of sponsorship projects is becoming 
increasingly sophisticated, and the communications effectiveness of sponsored projects has 
become a major concern. In contrast to advertising campaigns that are normally followed 
up by advertising or brand managers, sponsorship projects are often directly monitored by  
corporate management, illustrating the importance that is attached to this type of activity –  
or the lack of maturity of this particular instrument. Sponsorship is different from other 
communications mix instruments. It is a flexible instrument that can serve a multitude of 
objectives, but it is more suited for some objectives than for others. As in advertising, a 
number of channels – types of sponsorship – may be used, each having their own advan-
tages and strengths and disadvantages and weaknesses. The integration of this tool in the 
communications mix may be an even more important condition for success than that of 
the other communications instruments. In any case, in an increasing number of companies 
sponsorship has acquired the status of one of the cornerstones of the communications and 
marketing strategy, and new sponsorship formats, such as brand placement, are on the rise.
Sponsorship: what it is and what it is not
Sponsorship is an investment in cash or kind in an activity, in return for access to the exploit-
able commercial potential associated with this activity.1 The company promotes its interests 
and brands by tying them to a specific and meaningfully related event or cause.2 It is a the-
matic communications instrument with which the sponsor assists the sponsee in realising his 
or her project. In return the sponsee co-operates in realising the communications objectives 
of the sponsoring company. If the latter is not the case, the investment of the ‘sponsor’ is 
nothing more than altruism, charity, patronage or benefaction. As such, ‘sponsorship’ has 
existed for centuries. The Roman Gaius Maecenas was a great sponsor of the arts, and gave 
his name to the concept of Maecenatism. The De Medici family of Florence became famous 
as sponsors of artists such as Michelangelo. The difference between this and contemporary 
professional sponsorship is that sponsorship is an integrated part of the communications 
effort, with explicit communications and commercial objectives. The benefits of charity, on 
the other hand, are mainly directed towards society and/or the beneficiaries.
Generally speaking, sponsorship shares two of the fundamental objectives of advertising, i.e. 
the generation of awareness about a brand or a company, and the promotion of positive mes-
sages about and a favourable attitude towards the brand or the company.3 However, there are a 
number of important differences between the two, the most important one being that advertis-
ing allows greater control over the content and the environment of the message. Advertising 
messages are explicit and direct, and advertisers can decide when and where to place their ads. 
On the other hand, although sponsorship results in a less cluttered promotion of their products, 
companies also have less control over sponsorship, which makes their messages more indirect 
and implicit. As a result, in order to make sponsorship effective, accompanying communications 
efforts are called for.4 Indeed, sponsorship can be described as a ‘mute non-verbal medium’, as 
opposed to advertising, in which messages are created using visuals, vocals and context.5
On the other hand, sponsorship is less cluttered and financially more attractive. It can 
be considered a cheap form of advertising. However, sponsorship may be less effective in 
gaining attention as a result of the distraction factor: spectators are primarily involved with 

468     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
the sponsored event (a soccer game or a work of art) and pay less attention to the environ-
ment of the event, such as the sponsor.6 Indeed, exposure to a sponsor’s name or logo is not 
the same as sponsorship effectiveness. Furthermore, in some cases, the sponsor is closely 
associated with a popular sponsored event or cause, which may turn out to have a strong 
positive effect on corporate and brand image. Sponsorship is also easy for the consumer to 
understand: it essentially works on the basis of association between sponsor and sponsee. 
Advertising, on the other hand, often requires elaborate processing of the message.7
Sponsorship is different from event marketing, which, in turn, is a type of PR activity.8 
Certainly, sponsorship can be integrated into a PR campaign. During the world champion-
ship cycling in Valkenburg (1998), Rabobank was one of the structural sponsors. It invited 
about 5000 guests, mainly employees and customers of Rabobank in the Netherlands and 
elsewhere. Invitations to cultural events, for instance to see David Bowie at the Sea Beach fes-
tival in Ostend and the musical Oliver in one of the 12 large theatres in the Netherlands, are  
examples of corporate hospitality, integrating sponsorship into a PR campaign by Nashuatec.9 
Event marketing can be defined as using a number of elements of the promotion mix to create 
an event for the purpose of reaching strategic marketing objectives. An example of event 
marketing is the Camel Trophy.
Finally, sponsorship should be distinguished from value marketing. Value marketing or 
societal marketing can be defined as a strategy in which a company links its activities to a 
philosophy of general societal interest. The company positions itself on the basis of a value 
system that is often not product-related. For instance, the international cosmetics company 
The Body Shop (now part of L’Oréal) tries to combine fair business, social conscience and 
profitability. It produces environmentally-friendly products, based on natural ingredients, 
that are not tested on animals and which are sold in recycled or recyclable packaging. Raw 
materials are bought from Third World countries at fair prices. Sponsorship can be part of 
the value marketing strategy, but it is by no means its only instrument.10
How sponsorship works
A number of angles can be used to understand the effects of sponsorship. Given the fact that 
sponsor messages are often simple and limited to company or brand names, one could argue 
that the effectiveness of sponsorship is based on the mere exposure effect (see Chapter 3), which 
implies that increased familiarity with the brand as a result of exposure to a sponsor’s name 
in the long run generates a preference for the brand. As such, the main effect of sponsorship is 
that the brand ends up in the evoked set or the choice set of the consumer. Additionally, it could 
be argued that both the episodic (event-based) and the semantic (as a result of longer-term 
exposure) memory of spectators and participants in a sponsored event are stimulated, which 
could lead to higher levels of brand awareness than those resulting from advertising exposure.11
Congruity theory could also explain the effectiveness of sponsorship. Basically, this the-
ory states that people best remember information that is congruent with prior expectations. 
As a result, sponsorships that are consistent with the expectations of the target groups 
about the product could be better recalled.12 Similarly, just as there seems to be a carry-over 
effect between the attitude towards the ad and the attitude towards the brand, it could be 
argued that there is the same effect between the prior attitudes towards the sponsored event 
or cause and the sponsoring brand. Furthermore, it can be expected that the more a person 
is involved with what is being sponsored, the stronger the carry-over effect between the 
sponsoring brand and the sponsored event will be.13
Apart from these cognitively orientated theories, context effects can also partly explain 
how and why sponsorship works. The context of a message may be important in how a 
message is perceived. Since sponsorships tend to occur in positively evaluated environments, 
the resulting positive mood could enhance the positive image of the sponsoring brands.14

THE GROWING IMPORTANCE OF SPONSORSHIP     469
Finally, the behaviourist perspective may be relevant. The principles of operant condi-
tioning posit that behaviour may be conditioned by the consequences that follow it. On the 
basis of this principle, it can be argued that sponsorship draws attention to a brand and in 
that way reinforces past favourable experience with the brand. The stimulus is being associ-
ated with a satisfactory experience and therefore reinforces it. When this point of view is 
accepted, it implies that sponsorship is only effective when it is directed towards consumers 
who are already using the brand. Another principle of conditioning is vicarious learning. 
By educating consumers on how a product can be used, vicarious learning increases the pur-
chase probability. Applied to sponsorship, showing a famous and positively evaluated athlete 
using or endorsing a product may positively influence the target group.15 This mechanism is 
very similar to the source effect in advertising: linking a relevant brand to a credible source 
(a bank to a classical concert, a beer to a famous entertainer) may improve its image.16
The growing importance of sponsorship
It is fair to conclude that sponsorship is an increasingly important instrument of marketing 
communications. Total global sponsorship spendings have risen from $48.6 billion in 2011, 
and were projected to be $57.5 billion in 2015. This represents an annual growth rate of 
between 4 and 5%. Moreover, over the last five years, annual global growth rates of advertis-
ing and sales promotion are lower (between 3 and 4%) than those of sponsorship. It is thus 
fair to conclude that sponsorship accounts for a growing part of marketing communications 
efforts. Furthermore, part of the advertising budget is directly sponsorship-related in that it 
supports and leverages the sponsorship efforts. Sponsorship is increasingly important in all 
parts of the world. Figure 11.1 shows the distribution of sponsorship spending by region. 
North America accounts for more than 37% of spending, while Europe and Asia-Pacific 
each account for about a quarter. In all regions, in 2015 sponsorship spending was projected 
to grow between 4 and 5%. However, in Europe the growth forecast was only 3.3%.17
Figure 11.1  Sponsorship spending per region
Source: www.sponsorship.com
Region
Asia-Pacific
Central-South America
North America
Other countries
Europe

470     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
The (perceived) importance of sponsorship is not only reflected in the increasing budgets 
and the diversification in sponsored causes and events, but also in the level of (top) manage-
ment involvement. Studies of managerial involvement in sports and arts sponsorship cam-
paigns in the USA and Australia show that in more than 50% of the cases senior management 
is involved in proposal assessment and agreement negotiations, and in about 25% of the 
cases in implementation and evaluation of sponsorship campaigns. Senior management is 
even involved in 75% of the renewal decisions.19 This reflects the perceived importance of 
sponsorship, not only for marketing communications, but also for corporate communica-
tions and corporate image. The involvement of other departments mainly depends on the 
type of sponsorship. Sports sponsorship apparently implies the involvement of marketing 
or advertising departments, while art sponsorship is mostly seen as a PR matter.
There are a number of reasons why sponsorship is of increasing importance. Firstly, 
there is a feeling that traditional mass media advertising is becoming increasingly expensive, 
increasingly irritating and, as a result of communications clutter, less effective. Sponsorship 
is believed to have the power to escape this clutter, to isolate the brand from the competition 
and to get the message across at lower cost, although some predict that sponsorship clutter 
may become equally widespread. Furthermore, sponsored events are increasingly broadcast, 
thereby leveraging the initial investment of sponsorship. Overall, media, especially TV pro-
gramme sponsorship (see below), are increasingly accepted, and substantially improve the 
levels of coverage of, and impact on, broad target groups.20
Due to increased leisure, sports and cultural activities, new sponsorship opportunities 
are emerging. Governments are less and less inclined to finance culture and other social 
activities, so forcing cultural and social organisations to look for financial support from 
private companies. Finally, legal constraints on tobacco and alcohol advertising are forcing 
the companies involved to look for other communications strategies to get their message 
across. Sponsorship is an obvious substitute to build awareness and image.
UPS is the world’s largest express carrier and largest delivery company. It entered the European market in 1988, but 
did not make a profit in Europe during the first ten years. In 1996, UPS made the fundamental decision to revamp its 
European operations. It decided to become an official partner of the 2000 Olympics in Sydney. Research identified 
four weaknesses: low awareness of the Olympic sponsorship; low awareness of brand and service capabilities; an 
undifferentiated brand position; and the fact that potential customers were unaware of UPS as an enabler of global 
commerce. UPS launched a global campaign to redress this situation by leveraging its association with the Olympics 
in a relevant way. The Olympics provided a unique opportunity to associate UPS with the core Olympic values of trust, 
integrity, ambition and success. The creative execution of the campaign compared UPS with the Olympics: ‘If UPS are 
good enough to deliver for the Olympics, they must be good enough for us.’ The campaign showed UPS employees 
demonstrating their commitment to preparing to represent their country. The advertising campaign was implemented 
throughout Europe and worldwide, and stretched from the national trials to the games themselves, with special focus 
on key business periods March–May and the weeks before and during the summer Olympics in September 2000. 
Fifty-four campaigns ran in the USA, Latin America, Asia and Europe, using global, pan-European and national media 
vehicles. Besides TV, radio spots, magazine ads and outdoor advertising, sponsorship of key news programmes was 
also used. Research showed that UPS awareness increased by 5% to 10% in most countries, and so did most-often 
usage of UPS by 3% to 20%. Year-to-year revenue growth was 4% during the first quarter of 2001. The international 
export volume grew by 17%, led by Europe with a 25% increase. The UPS example shows that sponsorship programmes 
need to be accompanied by major investments in other communications campaigns to secure maximum impact.18
Business insight
UPS supports Olympic sponsorship with worldwide advertising campaign

TARGET GROUPS     471
Apart from increasing expenditures, a number of other current developments in sponsor-
ship can be discerned:21
● A changing perception of sponsorship on the part of company executives. An evolution 
towards more professionalism can be seen and management practice is becoming increas-
ingly sophisticated.
● Changing expenditure patterns. A greater part of the budget is spent on relatively new forms 
of sponsorship instead of on traditional sports and the arts. Broadcast or programme spon-
sorship, popular music and cause-related projects are becoming increasingly important.
● The diffusion of sponsorship to an expanding range of industries. In the early days, spon-
sorship was mainly used by tobacco, alcohol and soft drinks companies, and banks and car 
manufacturers. Nowadays, retail groups and detergent manufacturers are joining the list.
● The proliferation of sponsorship activity. An increasing number of corporate sponsors, 
combined with a shortage of quality events, are leading to a greater exploitation of their 
properties by event owners.
● Some sponsored events are evolving towards global projects. The Olympic Games, For-
mula One racing and worldwide sports sponsorship by Adidas are examples of this trend.
● Sponsorship is becoming relationship-based rather than transaction-based (structural versus 
punctual sponsorship), implying a longer-term co-operation between sponsors and sponsees.
● Sponsorship is increasingly broadcast-driven. What is not on TV is less attractive as a 
sponsorship project.
Target groups
Given the flexibility of sponsorship to achieve a number of objectives and the wide range 
of sponsorable events and causes, sponsorship audiences are very diversified. Like other 
instruments of the communications mix, marketing and corporate communications target 
groups can be distinguished. Since sponsorship is explicitly linked to an event, an extra 
dimension should be added. Indeed, audiences can be contacted as active participants in 
the event (soccer players or musicians), as live spectators who attend events (fans or visitors 
of a museum) and/or as media followers of the event. Figure 11.2 shows the sponsorship 
audience structure. Obviously, depending on the objectives and the target groups of the  
communications campaign, sponsorship projects will be selected that are best capable of 
reaching the desired target groups. For instance, products targeted at up-market demo-
graphic segments will sponsor tennis, golf and the arts, while brands targeting youngsters 
will focus on popular music festival or programme sponsoring.
Figure 11.2  Sponsorship audience structure

472     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
Objectives
Sponsorship is a very flexible communications tool that can be used to achieve both mar-
keting (product or brand) and corporate communications objectives. Table 11.1 gives an 
overview of the two categories of objectives. In each of the categories a distinction can be 
made between the type of target group and/or the type of objective.23
Does major investment in sports sponsorship actually benefit brand owners? This seems to be primarily the case among 
young consumers. The impact of sports sponsorship on other age groups is much more limited. In 2002, NOP World 
questioned 1001 people from a representative sample of the UK population on behalf of the Superbrand organisation to 
test brand awareness and brand perception of the sponsors of World Cup soccer. Within the 15–24 year old range, 40% 
of people said that they would feel more confident about a brand if it sponsored high-profile sporting events such as the 
World Cup. Only 19% of the 25–34 year olds and 18% of the 35–44 year olds feel more confidence in a sponsoring brand. 
This percentage even lowers to 13% of 45–54 year olds and a mere 6% of 55–64 year olds. For the over 65s, this percentage 
increases slightly to 11%. The impact of high-profile sporting events appears primarily to impress the younger age groups.22
Research insight
World Cup sponsorship and brand perception
General public
Increase general public awareness of company
Promote or enhance corporate image
Alter public perception of company
Involvement with the local community
Channel members and trade relations
Build trade relations
Corporate hospitality
Demonstrate trade goodwill
Employees
Enhance employee relations and motivations
Assist staff recruitment
Facilitate prospecting for the sales force
Opinion-formers and decision-makers
Increase media attention
Counter adverse publicity
Build goodwill
Reassure policy-holders and stockholders
Personal objective of senior managers
Awareness building
Increase awareness with actual customers
Increase awareness with potential customers
Confirm market leadership
Increase new product awareness
Brand image
Alter perception of brand
Identify brand with particular market segment
Sales/market share
Induce trial of new product
Increase sales/market share
Table 11.1  Sponsorship objectives

OBJECTIVES     473
Research indicates that, depending on the type of sponsorship and the type of com-
pany, different objectives are important. As far as marketing communications objectives 
are concerned, mainly awareness-building and, to a certain extent, image-building seem 
to be the objectives that sponsorship is most suited to achieve. These effects only become 
visible in the long run. Indeed, sponsorship effectiveness studies indicate that sponsors 
are not recognised better than their non-sponsoring competitors immediately after the 
sponsored event.24 A direct increase in sales or market share is not the primary objective 
of sponsorship, although, for instance, a beverage supplier can obtain the sole rights for 
selling beverages at an event, and in this way boost sales. Linking a brand’s name with a 
relevant event or cause is often used to improve the image with a specific target group of 
interest. Volvo sponsoring golf and tennis, and Adidas sponsoring, among others, soccer, 
are examples of this.
Equally important are the corporate communications objectives of sponsoring. Most stud-
ies indicate that promoting corporate image and increasing goodwill with a variety of target 
groups are the most important corporate communications objectives of sponsorship.25 But 
internal marketing objectives and motives can be equally or even more important. The 
Bank of Ireland sponsors Gaelic Football and the Bank of Ireland Proms. Besides corporate 
image objectives, employee-related goals are also important. The bank tries to develop a 
corporate identity and a corporate image by transferring the values of the sponsored events 
to both external publics and their own staff. In the process, staff pride is engendered. The 
bank is perceived as a desirable employer. Among the measurement of sponsorship effects, 
the attitude of the company’s own staff towards the sponsored event is of primary impor-
tance.26 Given the fact that the struggle of the future will have to be concentrated as much 
on attracting high-quality staff as on finding customers, the employee-related effects of 
sponsorship are of increasing importance.
Another important category of objectives or motives of sponsorship is corporate hospi-
tality, which can be aimed at own staff, salespeople, distributors or any other opinion leader 
or decision-maker. They can be invited to attend a soccer game, to follow a cycle race, to 
attend a concert or to obtain backstage passes at rock concerts. Creating goodwill and 
establishing stronger relations in an informal context are the primary objectives.
Corporate hospitality is developing relationship marketing activities within the framework of a sponsorship pro-
gramme. It involves, for instance, inviting employees, customers, suppliers, etc., to cultural or sports events, or the 
organisation of special events for these stakeholder groups at the occasion of sponsored activities. The selection of 
VIP events is a delicate exercise. The selection of groups requires an investigation into their interest in, and empa-
thy towards, the sponsored event. If the managing director of one of the largest suppliers of the company is only 
interested in opera, and not in soccer, he or she should not be invited to a soccer game. Grouping VIPs is another 
crucial decision. The result of the PR or relationship effort primarily depends upon the interaction between those 
invited. If they do not have anything to say to each other or are even hostile to one another, they should not be in 
the same group. Corporate hospitality can also lead to irritation, for instance if someone is invited to an event he 
or she does not like, or if other stakeholder groups feel discriminated against by not being invited. Therefore, it is 
a good idea to conduct VIP treatment at a safe distance from the event itself, away from visitors who have paid to 
participate in the event. If the value of the VIP treatment is substantial, this can lead to ethical problems because 
the expectation is raised that the ‘reward’ for being invited should also be significant.
Business insight
Corporate hospitality

474     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
One of the most important motives in sponsorship is the leveraging effect of the media 
coverage of the event. In some cases, as in tobacco or alcohol advertising, the ban on regular 
advertising leads to a situation in which sponsorship is the only way to obtain mass media 
exposure. But a lot of other sponsorship initiatives count on the ‘bullhorn effect’ of media 
coverage too. Sponsorship is indeed becoming more and more broadcast-driven.
Although sponsorship is becoming increasingly professional, in many situations the deci-
sion to sponsor is motivated by personal interest, or ‘management by hobby’ of senior 
executives, or their husbands or wives. It goes without saying that many sports sponsorship 
budgets could have been spent more efficiently on other communications tools. There are 
many examples of sponsorships that end when the senior manager retires or gets another 
job. For instance, the Spanish soft drink brand KAS ended its sponsorship of a cycling team 
(with Sean Kelly as one of the top athletes) after its CEO retired. The sudden death in 1995 
of Mr Furlan, CEO of the clothing company MG, was the cause of great concern among 
Italian professional cyclists, who feared that their successful team would cease to exist.
Types of sponsorship
Sponsorship budgets can be directed towards different types of projects. Figure 11.3 shows 
the main sponsorship types. Four basic categories can be distinguished. Event-related spon-
sorship is the best-known category. Companies may sponsor a soccer competition, a team, 
an athlete, shirts or even a match ball, a golf tournament, skiing or a baseball game. They 
can lend their support, in cash or kind, to an exhibition, a series of concerts, a philharmonic 
orchestra or an artist. Or they can sponsor a rock concert, a beach festival or an annual tra-
ditional crafts exhibition. Broadcast or programme sponsorship is a more recent phenomenon, 
at least in Europe. A brand can sponsor a programme or the weather forecast, or they can 
engage into brand placement (see hereafter). Cause-related sponsorship may be the oldest 
form of sponsorship, or rather charity. Rich people donating money to schools, the poor or 
other good causes is a phenomenon that has existed for centuries. The difference between 
those activities and cause-related sponsorship is that the latter is not just charity, but inte-
grated in the company’s communications strategy. MUSH sponsorship stands for Municipal, 
University, Social, Hospital sponsorship, and is a synonym for sponsorship of good causes. 
Transaction-based sponsorship (sometimes called cause-related marketing or point-of-pur-
chase politics) is a type of sponsorship in which the company invests a pre-specified amount 
of money in a ‘good cause’ every time a consumer buys one of the company’s products. 
Value marketing has been defined in the first section of this chapter. Sponsorship is only one 
aspect of value or societal marketing. Finally, ambush or parasitic marketing is a planned 
effort by a company to confuse the consumer regarding its affiliation status and to associate 
indirectly with an event in order to gain at least some of the recognition and benefits associ-
ated with being an official sponsor.28 A company may be a minor sponsor of an event but, 
by spending considerable budgets on advertising support, it creates the impression of being 
an important sponsor.
Corporate hospitality can also generate negative publicity in the media. An influential sports journalist from a 
Dutch TV channel was interviewed in a newspaper, and was very critical about VIP events organised by sports spon-
sors: ‘A cyclist championship for 15 000 VIPs in a concrete bunker on a car racing circuit – who was the fool who 
thought of that?’ and ‘During the final of the tennis tournament in Rotterdam, the VIP area was full of people in nice 
suits, talking about nothing important, while outside the world’s numbers 1 and 2 were playing. No-one I asked in 
the VIP area knew who they were.’ Needless to say, this kind of negative media publicity can destroy much of the 
goodwill that was built up by the sponsorship programme, and should be avoided.27

TYPES OF SPONSORSHIP     475
In Figure 11.4 an overview is given of the distribution of sponsorship spending across 
a number of types of sponsorship. Traditional event-related sponsorship still accounts for 
the bulk of the expenditures. Sport accounts for 70% of the expenditure, with entertain-
ment and arts taking 10% and 9% respectively. Moreover, in recent years, sports sponsor-
ship’s growth has been higher than that of any other category.30 Sports sponsoring also 
attracts a large variety of companies in different industries. A Dutch study found that of all 
sports sponsorship in the Netherlands, 18% was invested by financial institutions, 8% by 
consultancies, 7.5% by the automotive industry and 5.5% by the Internet/ICT industry.31
Figure 11.3  Types of sponsorship
Companies set up corporate social responsibility (CSR) campaigns in which they sponsor cause-related projects that 
improve the quality of life in society, and by means of which they can improve their own reputation. The following 
examples are taken from the Dutch CSR network ‘Bedrijf & Samenleving’ (Business & Society).
From October 2004, Microsoft Nederland co-operated with the city of Amsterdam and local non-profit organi-
sations to establish ‘Community-based Technology & Learning Centres (CTLCs)’. The project went by the name of 
‘Computer neighbourhood’ and tried to provide computer training to people with a lack of digital skills. The purpose 
of the project was to prevent people from becoming isolated, and to empower less privileged inhabitants to expand 
their capabilities with respect to education, jobs, personal development and participation in society. The objective 
was to establish 16 CTLCs in which 1100 people received training. Eleven locations were set up where people from 
the neighbourhood could learn through short courses how to work with a computer, from chatting to emailing. By 
2007, more than 700 inhabitants had been trained. The project was part of the global Unlimited Potential initiative 
launched by Microsoft Community Affairs and, by 2007, worldwide almost 30 000 CTLCs had been established in 
95 countries. In these projects, Microsoft co-operated with 475 non-profit organisations.
The Shell Young Art Award project was aimed at stimulating young talent and entrepreneurship, besides acquaint-
ing youngsters with developments in modern art. Artists presented their work in three Shell locations in Amsterdam, 
Rotterdam and The Hague. A professional jury judged the work of the young artists and awarded prizes. The initiative 
started in 2000 and dozens of young artists were able to develop expertise in organising exhibitions of their works. 
The Shell Young Art Award was stimulating and enabled recognition and exposure with the prize-winning artists 
allowed to show their work in museums. In this way, the public could also get acquainted with their work. There was 
also an internal effect: many works of art stimulated intense discussions in the Shell offices.29
Business insight
Corporate social responsibility campaigns in the Netherlands

476     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
Figure 11.4  Sponsorship spending in North America per type
Source: www.sponsorship.com.
Type
Arts
Causes
Events
Memberships
Entertainment
Sports
Event-related sponsorship
The opportunities and advantages of event-related sponsorship are multiple. Compared 
with advertising, it is a cost-effective instrument in terms of reaching a particular audience. 
Given the variety of events in terms of targeted audiences, it is an excellent tool to reach 
broad as well as very specific market segments in terms of demographic and psychographic 
characteristics. Sponsorship of opera, exhibitions or rock concerts and of cultural events 
in general is usually very selective in terms of the market segment reached, while some 
sports sponsorship is capable of exposing broad target groups to the sponsor’s message 
(Photos 11.1 and 11.2). Extensive media coverage of sports events leads to high levels of 
exposure of broad target groups to the sponsor’s name. For instance, as far as cycling is 
concerned, 18.4% of managers and executives watch this sport regularly on TV, as well as 
18% of farmers, 16.5% of civil servants, 16.5% of blue-collar workers, 12% of pension-
ers and 9% of housewives.32 Heineken sponsored the Rugby World Cup worldwide. It was 
estimated that, in the UK, 83% of all men were exposed to the Heineken brand name, each 
of them at least 22 times.33
Event sponsorship is also flexible in achieving different kinds of objectives. It can increase 
awareness with actual and potential customers, and improve the company’s image and the 
image of the company’s products. It is a tool in relationship-building and corporate hos-
pitality, it can be a platform for advertising campaigns, database building and sampling, 
and it is efficiently capable of avoiding advertising bans. For instance, as far as the latter 
is concerned, in a 1984 survey it was – sadly – found that the cigarette brands that were 
most widely recalled by children were those brands that were most commonly sponsoring 
televised sporting events.34
On the other hand, event sponsorship and, more particularly, sports sponsorship have 
a number of disadvantages and pose a number of threats. Spending large amounts of 
money on sponsorship can cause trouble with employees, especially if they are not prop-
erly informed about the relevance and economic justification of the sponsorship strategy. A 
company sponsoring a sportsman or woman or a team can alienate fans of the opponent.

TYPES OF SPONSORSHIP     477
Photo 11.1  Guinness sponsors rugby
Source: Getty Images: Guinness.
Photo 11.2  Johnnie Walker sponsors golf
Source: Getty Images.

478     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
Furthermore, unlike TV sets and newspapers, sportsmen and women lead their own lives, 
and sometimes attract media attention that is not always favourable to the sponsor. The 
drugs scandal revealed in the Tour de France of 1998 was not particularly welcomed by the 
teams’ sponsors, although Festina, the Spanish brand of timepieces and main sponsor of one 
of the offending teams, did not seem to suffer too much from the negative publicity. But even 
without such incidents, if the team or the sportsperson does badly, this can reflect negatively 
on the sponsor’s image. Not surprisingly, a clean image is one of the main criteria on the 
basis of which sports or sports teams are selected for sponsorship.35 Finally, although sports 
sponsorship can be used to transcend cultural, linguistic and geographic boundaries, some 
sports, like bull fighting, camel wrestling and dwarf throwing, are unfit for global brand 
sponsorship because they are culturally unacceptable in a number of countries.
Georges Leekens is one of the most famous soccer coaches in Belgium. He has been a player for several top Belgian 
teams and, in 2012, the then 62-year-old coach had a track record of 20 years of coaching first division teams. 
From 2009 onwards, he had been coaching the national soccer team. In mid-May 2012, to everyone’s surprise, he 
announced that he had decided to stop coaching the national team immediately because he had signed a contract 
with one of Belgium’s top teams, Club Brugge. The Belgian Soccer Association was outraged that its national coach 
had ‘abandoned’ the national team just a few months before the qualifying campaign for the Brazil 2014 World 
Soccer Championships. It called his decision unethical and distrustful. The sports media eagerly reminded the public 
of Leekens’ ‘jobhopping’ and ‘unreliable’ record.
For some time, the coach had been the endorser of PwC’s recruitment campaign ‘Move Forward’. In this cam-
paign, aimed at attracting high potentials, PwC emphasises key elements such as ‘trust’ and ‘responsibility’ and ‘a 
career is not a false promise’. Only a few days after Leekens’ announcement, PwC decided to end its co-operation 
with him and stated: ‘Following the news that Leekens resigned as the coach of the national soccer team, PwC 
announces that our cooperation has ended. We regret his decision to abandon the national team, but we wish to 
thank him for the productive cooperation and wish all the best for his further career.’ Apparently, PwC judged that 
the behaviour of the coach was incompatible with the key message and positioning of the recruitment campaign, 
and therefore decided that he was no longer a suitable endorser.
Famous people can be a powerful support for a campaign, not only because they are well-known and liked, but 
also because of their characteristics and behaviour. However, sometimes they behave in ways that may be deemed 
incompatible with the companies’ values, in which case they become a liability rather than an asset.36
Business insight
PwC ends contract with ‘unreliable’ soccer coach
Obviously, arts and cultural sponsorship is fundamentally different from sports sponsor-
ship. First of all, arts audiences are different from sports audiences. The former are typically 
older and more affluent, and generally less numerous. The arts attract less media coverage 
and publicity, and are more suited to niche market segments than sports. However, some 
argue that the arts are increasingly attractive as sponsorship objects because of the increas-
ing costs and saturation of sports sponsorship. Furthermore, a Toshiba study reveals that 
four times as many people visit museums and galleries as attend league football matches. 
Nevertheless, arts sponsors are believed to pursue corporate image and relationship and 
hospitality objectives rather than marketing goals. That makes arts sponsorship more of a 
PR tool than a marketing communications instrument.37

TYPES OF SPONSORSHIP     479
Broadcast sponsorship
Broadcast or programme sponsorship is an increasingly important phenomenon. In some 
countries, as in Belgium, government-owned TV channels are not allowed to broadcast 
advertising messages, but are allowed to have their programmes sponsored, which makes 
broadcast sponsoring an extremely visible phenomenon. Typically, broadcast sponsorship 
takes the form of billboarding: ‘this programme was produced with the kind co-operation 
of company X’. An increasingly popular form of broadcast sponsorship is brand placement. 
This will be more extensively discussed later in this chapter.
At the time when Ford made a brand placement contract with the producers of Desperate Housewives, the Ford 
group owned eight car makes. To reach its customers, the company increasingly relies upon product placement of its 
cars in movies and TV shows instead of traditional advertising, the effectiveness of which is increasingly challenged. 
The Ford Explorer 4 * 4 played a prominent role in Jurassic Park, and a Range Rover was prominently present in 
Ocean’s Twelve, not to mention James Bond’s Aston Martin. Fans of popular shows like Desperate Housewives now 
watch their favourite actresses drive car models of the Ford group: Susan drives a Volvo, and Lynette’s husband goes 
to work in a Jaguar. Film- and programme-makers used to have to talk to each Ford brand separately, but now Ford 
has established ‘Global Brand Entertainment’, a company that supports the product placement of all Ford brands, 
from the Mazda Miata to the Aston Martin Vanquish.38
Business insight
Desperate Housewives drive Ford
Cause-related sponsorship
Cause-related sponsorship is a combination of PR, sales promotions and corporate philan-
thropy, based on profit-motivated giving to good causes. MUSH sponsoring comes closest to 
traditional sponsoring in that money is given to good causes in return for exposure and image-
building linkage with the good cause sponsored. Transaction-based sponsorship (sometimes 
called cause-related marketing) is different in that a company’s contribution to a designated 
cause is linked to customers’ engagement in revenue-producing exchanges with the firm.
In October 1999, ConAgra Foods, a company owning more than 80 household brands, launched Feeding Children 
Better, a cause programme to stop childhood hunger. By partnering with various anti-hunger organisations and 
using its extensive distribution, advertising and promotion resources, the company was able to bring more food into 
the charity food distribution system and put child hunger on the agenda. Since the beginning of the programme, 
50 Kids Cafés (places where kids can have a decent meal after school) have been funded, fresh food deliveries to 
relief organisations have increased dramatically and 29 trucks have been purchased for food banks with gifts from 
ConAgra. The programme received numerous sponsorship and non-profit awards.
Business insight
Cause-related sponsorship programmes as a communications tool

480     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
Although the objectives of cause-related sponsorship are, to a certain extent, the same 
as those of other sponsorship activity, more emphasis is put on the impact on corporate or 
brand image as a result of the link between the company or the brand and the good cause 
sponsored. Research has shown that effective cause-related sponsorship programmes can 
enhance a company’s reputation and brand image and, at the same time, give customers 
a convenient way to contribute to non-profit organisations through their buying deci-
sions. It is not only marketing professionals who believe that cause-related marketing can 
improve the image of their brands, consumers also seem to be interested. Studies indicate 
that as many as two-thirds of consumers are willing to take the company’s contribu-
tion to good causes into account when making a decision on which brands to purchase. 
A 2000 survey in 12 European countries indicated that two in five consumers bought a 
product because of its links to good causes. Cause-related marketing allows companies 
to attract and retain consumers, differentiate themselves from the competition and reach 
niche markets. Furthermore, cause-related sponsorship can motivate and engender loy-
alty in employees. In a 1999 study, 87% of employees in companies with cause-related 
programmes indicated a strong loyalty to their employer. Gradually, for many companies, 
cause-related sponsorship has evolved from a short-term, one-shot activity to a long-term 
strategic choice. Cause programmes are selected because they fit into company competen-
cies and long-term strategic objectives. Cause-related sponsorship places high demands 
on a company’s strategy. A company wanting to engage in cause programmes success-
fully should be aware of the important principles of such activity: integrity, transparency, 
sincerity, mutual respect, partnership and mutual benefit. If not, the whole sponsorship 
programme will backfire, and the company will become known as insincere, opportunistic 
and lacking in credibility.40
A hybrid form of broadcast and cause-related sponsorship is the organised sponsorship 
of advocacy advertising on TV. For instance, an insurance company could sponsor TV spots 
in which parents are warned against situations that are potentially dangerous to children, 
such as water boiling on a stove, knives within reach, etc.
Since 1995, Ford Motor Company has sponsored the Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation. The sup-
port is not linked to Ford sales, but the company helps the organisation with donations, media support and 
in-kind gifts. The company also created the Ford Force, a united front of dealers, employees and the general 
public. More than 12 000 Ford employees and more than 3000 dealers have participated in the activities of 
Ford Force. The results have been impressive, both for the Komen Foundation and for Ford. Website visits and 
freephone telephone calls have increased dramatically, and there is a substantial increase in breast examina-
tions. Ford has been able to create interest and sympathy among women, previously a low-involved market 
segment.
Timberland, a lifestyle brand that sells footwear, apparel and accessories, and City Year, a national youth 
service organisation, have been partners since 1989. Timberland has donated more than $10 million in grants 
and in-kind gifts since the beginning of the partnership. The partnership has helped to promote a service ethic 
among Timberland employees, who have contributed over 170 000 hours of community service. Timberland 
and City Year have co-ordinated numerous other service events and campaigns. Timberland also opened a City 
Year office in its headquarters. As a result, the company was voted by its peers as one of the ‘100 best companies 
to work for’.39
These examples illustrate that cause-related programmes can enhance corporate visibility and image, involve 
previously uninterested market segments and improve the commitment of the employees and future employees 
of the organisation.

BRANDED ENTERTAINMENT     481
Twenty-one companies paid €700 million to be able to call themselves official sponsor of the 2006 World Football 
Championships. Fifteen major partners each paid about €40 million, smaller partners each paid €15 million. In 
return, they demanded exclusive publicity rights. FIFA’s (the organiser) statistical handbook is sponsored by Gillette; 
in the press rooms only Philips video screens are installed; browsing the Internet can only be done via Deutsche 
Telekom; and at the bar only Coca-Cola drinks can be offered. The return on sponsorship is often substantial. For 
instance, Adidas sold 15 million championship footballs, as well as 3 million shirts. Of course, the competitors of 
these sponsors are aware of the commercial impact and, by means of ambush marketing, also try to benefit from 
the championships. The Dutch beer brand Bavaria launched a promotion in the Netherlands. When buying a case 
of Bavaria, a free pair of orange trousers with a lion’s tail and the Bavaria logo was given (orange being the colour 
of the Dutch football team). About a thousand supporters who showed up in the orange trousers were obliged to 
take them off if they wanted to enter the stadium. Others got the warning not to take their wallet out of their bag, 
because Puma (the wallet’s brand) was not an official sponsor. In the German stadiums, the name of insurance com-
pany ‘Allianz’ on the ‘Allianz Arena’ had to be covered, because the company was not a sponsor of the tournament, 
although it paid lots of money to link its name to the new stadium. These measures are not exceptional. Sponsors 
and organisers hire ‘spotters’ to discover and prevent all forms of ambush marketing at major events.41
Business insight
Sponsors of the 2006 World Football Championships prevent ambush marketing
Ambush marketing
Ambush marketing occurs when an organisation deliberately seeks an association with a 
particular event without being an official sponsor of the event to persuade the audience 
that the ambusher is a legitimate or major sponsor.42 This can be done by sponsoring the 
media covering the event, by sponsoring sub-categories within the event (one team or one 
player), or by overstating the organisation’s involvement in the event by means of supporting 
advertising or sales promotion activity during the event.
Ambush marketers use several techniques, some of which are illegal, most of which are at 
least dubious, and some of which are legitimate. Ambush sponsors can use logos and brand 
names in non-authorised media: they can use sports logos and sports images without permis-
sion, exploit PR opportunities, sample non-official products or brochures, or run ambiguous 
advertising campaigns during the time of the event. They can co-operate with sub-sponsors 
of the event or with the media covering the event, or they can buy advertising spots or trail-
ers that are embedded in an event that is, as such, sponsored by another company. They can 
publish ‘congratulation ads’ for athletes that have won a match or a medal or they can sponsor 
non-profit projects associated with the event.43 Not surprisingly, official sponsors try to gain 
exclusive sponsorship and coverage of events in the media to prevent ambushers benefiting or 
the effectiveness of their own sponsorship efforts diminishing as a result of competitive action.
Branded entertainment
Due to recent technological developments, the TV advertising landscape is changing rapidly. 
The introduction of the personal video recorder and the ongoing convergence of TV and the 
Internet are causing consumers to gain more and more control over which content they want 

482     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
to see and when they want to see it. Viewers are also becoming increasingly cynical about 
advertising and pay less and less attention to it.44 Therefore, marketers increasingly look for 
alternative ways to reach, connect to and persuade consumers. One of these new formats 
that is rapidly gaining momentum is branded entertainment, the integration of editorial 
content and brand messages. Its simplest form is brand placement (traditionally referred to 
as product placement), the paid inclusion of branded products or brand identifiers through 
audio and/or visual means within mass media programs.45 Concretely, brand identifiers are 
integrated in movies and television programmes, with the intention to meaningfully promote 
these brands. Although best known for its application in films and on television, brands are 
also placed in music videos, books and games. At the other end of the continuum of branded 
entertainment are advertising-funded programmes. In this television format, a programme 
is completely built around a brand, which is fully integrated in the programme. In fact, the 
brand fully sponsors the programme. Branded entertainment is sometimes called hybrid 
advertising, communication in camouflage and hidden but paid for marketing communica-
tion.46 They are paid messages that do not overly identify their commercial origins.47
Brand placement – the paid inclusion of branded products in editorial content – has a long history in audiovisual media, 
and past research has mainly investigated placement effectiveness in movies and TV programmes,48 computer games,49 
song lyrics50 and music videos.51 Remarkably, however, brand placement in literary fiction has not received much atten-
tion. Nevertheless, brands have populated books for many decades,52 as writers use them to (re)create the physical, his-
torical and social context of a narrative, to increase verisimilitude, and to aid characterisation.53 Furthermore, it has been 
argued that written narratives may be more persuasive than films or TV programmes.54 Finally, investigating book place-
ments is also practically relevant: due to the growing placement clutter in audiovisual media and consumers’ expanding 
knowledge of ‘covert’ marketing tactics,55 product placement in books is likely to become more tempting for advertisers, 
who seek alternative communication outlets, as well as for book publishers, who search for new sources of revenue.56
A recent study examined the interplay of two key variables, which seem especially relevant for the realm of book 
placement, namely brand name repetition and brand familiarity, and their effect on the attitude towards the placed 
brand. In an experimental study, 153 university students (52.1% female, Mage = 19.65, SDage = 1.78) were randomly 
assigned to the conditions of a 3 (repetition: 2, 6, 11) * 2 (target brand: familiar, unfamiliar) between-subjects 
design. The study used the short-story Checkmate (1989) by bestselling British author Jeffrey Archer. The characters in 
the story were depicted as drinking alcohol on several occasions, allowing a brand of vodka to be integrated into the 
narrative quite seamlessly. Brand familiarity was manipulated by inserting either a familiar (Eristoff) or an unfamiliar 
(Posolskaya) brand in the text. Brand name repetition was manipulated by inserting the (familiar or unfamiliar) brand 
name either 2, 6, or 11 times within the story. In the 2-repetition condition, the brand was mentioned once at the 
beginning and once at the end, and these two placements appeared in all conditions. In the 6- and 11-repetition 
conditions, additional placements were inserted at roughly equal intervals in-between the other two placements. 
Additionally, the role of narrative transportation was explored, an immersive state that involves attentional, cognitive, 
and emotional responses, as well as vivid mental imagery, and a willing suspension of disbelief.57
The results show that brand name repetition and narrative transportation do not influence the attitude towards 
the familiar brand. Familiar brands have a strong set of associations in the mind of consumers, and placing them 
a couple of times in a book is not likely to be sufficient to alter brand attitude. On the other hand, repeating an 
unfamiliar brand in a text did lead to more positive brand attitudes. Moreover, the more intensely readers were 
transported into the story, the more repeated exposure to the brand enhanced brand attitudes. This was not the 
case for lowly transported individuals.58
Research insight
How brand placement repetition in a book affects brand attitude

BRANDED ENTERTAINMENT     483
Brand placement is by no means a recent phenomenon. In the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s, 
tobacco companies signed contracts with movie stars to smoke in their films. Among others, 
in 1937–8 Gary Cooper, Joan Crawford, Clark Gable, Barbara Stanwyck and Spencer Tracy 
received $6800 from Lucky Strike, an amount that is the equivalent of $100 000 today. Also 
stars like Gloria Swanson, Bob Hope and Henry Fonda received $1500 (equivalent to about 
$25 000 today).59 ‘Allo ‘Allo! is sometimes called the mother of modern brand placement in 
TV programmes. There is hardly any brand of beer that did not appear in the bar behind 
René’s back.
The champions of brand placement are the Bond movies. In Die Another Day, 20 brands 
were promoted by means of brand placement. The total value of these contracts is estimated 
to be $45 million. James Bond (Pierce Brosnan in this movie) is civilised, appeals to both men 
and women, likes luxury and technology, and is popular around the world. Halle Berry, who 
features as the Bond girl Jinx, appeals to youngsters. Companies try to associate their image 
with the attractive features of the movie characters. Bond shaves with a Philishave Sensotec, 
drinks Finlandia vodka, wears an Omega Seamaster watch, and again drives an Aston Martin, 
after a couple of BMW-dominated Bond movies. Jinx drives a Ford Thunderbird in the same 
colour as her bikini (a special Thunderbird 007 series was also made), uses the new Revlon 
lipsticks Mission Mauve and Hot Pursuit Pink, and wears a Swatch. Other product placers 
are Samsonite, Sony and British Airways.60 In the Bond movie Quantum of Solace, Bond is no 
longer ‘double O seven’, but ‘zero (it should read ‘zero zero seven’) seven’, thanks to Coca-Cola, 
and drives his Aston Martin again, looking at his Omega watch and checking emails with his 
Sony laptop. In Moonraker, a cable cabin crashes into a wall with a gigantic 7UP billboard 
on it, and in GoldenEye, a tank crashes into a Perrier truck. Over the years, the champagne 
label Dom Pérignon featured in seven different Bond movies; in other movies James drinks 
Bollinger.61 The placement of Ray-Ban sunglasses in the movie Top Gun is said to have caused 
the positive turnaround of the company’s performance. In many cases, making movies would 
be impossible without brand placement contracts between companies and movie producers.
Advertising-funded programs are more advanced forms of brand/content integration. In 
Belgium, the design contest television programme De Designers (a spin-off of the format 
Project Runway) was fully financed by a fashion retailer, that was fully integrated in the 
format. Members of the retailer’s staff were on the jury, part of the programme was filmed 
in the retailer’s shops, and the winning team could then produce its fashion line, which was 
afterwards sold in the sponsor’s shops.
In the meantime, brands have also invaded other forms of editorial content, such as 
music videos, books and games. Especially brand integration in games (in-game advertis-
ing) is booming. The industry is estimated at $7.2 billion dollars in 2016.62 This includes 
advergames (games specifically designed and created to promote a brand, product, service or 
idea), around-game advertising (traditional display or digital video units shown around the 
game window) and in-game advertising (IGA, the incorporation of advertisements within 
the worlds of digital games not specifically developed for advertising purposes). Worldwide, 
advertising in video games is expected to reach $7.2 billion by 2016, up from only $3.1 billion 
in 2010.63
Branded entertainment is indeed big business. In 2014, global paid brand placement 
spending was estimated to be $73.27 billion, a 6.3% increase compared to 2013.64 The Euro-
pean Commission has recently updated the ‘Television Without Frontiers Directive’, relaxing 
the rules of advertising to allow for brand placements. Consequently, the phenomenon is 
expected to grow even more.
Brand placement is thus a flexible tool. Brands can be placed in TV programmes, movies, 
games, books and music. Different types of programmes offer different placement oppor-
tunities. In scripted programmes, the brand can be integrated into the plot in a natural 
way. It can be placed prominently or subtly, and it can be shown, mentioned or both. In 
non-scripted programmes such as reality shows, lifestyle programmes and quizzes, brands 
can be used as prizes, tools or ingredients. Also non-profit issues, such as anti-smoking and 
anti-alcohol messages, can be placed.65

484     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
The advent of digital video recording (DVR) systems (e.g. TiVo) is challenging the traditional commercial television 
business model. DVR technology allows viewers to record their programmes, and fast-forward the commercials. In 
addition, online content providers of pay-per-view streaming services such as iTunes and Netflix now allow viewers 
to watch their favourite content wherever and whenever they want, completely ad-free. As ad breaks are vastly 
under pressure for becoming ineffective,66 marketers are looking for new ways to promote their brands. In light of 
this evolution, advertising formats that merge commercial content with media content are becoming increasingly 
important.67 The practice of integrating brands and products into television programmes has been coined branded 
entertainment, or more recently, content marketing, a true convergence of advertising and entertainment in which 
the brand is part of the content’s DNA.68 In terms of brand integration, perhaps the most advanced branded enter-
tainment format is the advertising funded programme (AFP), a television programme that is completely funded by, 
and built around, a specific brand. As opposed to simple brand or product placement, in an AFP the brand is part of 
the programme’s essence and permeates many aspects of the programme content. Industry reports and forecasts 
clearly reflect this trend. The global expenditure on branded entertainment was $54.58 billion in 2009, and rose in 
2014 to reach $73.27 billion.69
In a field study, the effect of a real-life advertising-funded television programme on the attitude towards the brand 
integrated in the programme was investigated. More specifically, the study explored the short- and long-term effects 
of programme liking and perceived brand–programme fit on attitudes towards the sponsor brand.
The ultimate purpose of any commercial campaign is to induce favourable responses to the brand with the target 
audience. Integrating brands in media content induces a transformational process in which content-related feelings 
and thoughts spill over to placed brands.70 The transfer of context-induced affect to attitudes towards advertised 
brands is a well-established theoretical principle in advertising literature.71 Starting from the premise that brand 
placement forges a link between the brand and the content (the movie or television show in which it is placed), it 
is assumed that positive feelings induced by the content are transferred to the brand integrated in this context, a 
process called ‘affect transfer’.
What is the role of brand–programme fit in this mechanism? A strong perceived fit implies that the associative 
networks of two attitude objects converge so that they are perceived as similar.72 In other words, attitude objects 
that match well are strongly connected through shared associations (i.e. nodes in their respective associative net-
works).73 Hence, it can be expected that a high degree of perceived fit between the programme and the placed 
brand facilitates affect transfer. Adversely, when a sponsor brand is perceived as less fitting with the programme, 
programme liking is less likely to influence brand attitude. Furthermore, a high degree of perceived fit strengthens 
the connection between the brand and the programme, making the effect of programme liking on brand attitude 
more resistant to temporal deterioration. The brand and the programme are both part of an associative memory 
structure that is forged by their perceived fit. In contrast, under conditions of low perceived brand–programme fit, 
the brand is only weakly associated with the programme to begin with. These weak associations are much more 
likely to erode over time.74 In that case, in the long run, the positive effect of programme liking on the sponsor brand 
will be weaker than in the case of a high initial perceived fit.
These expectations were studied in a Belgian field study about the programme De Designers, the local version 
of Project Runway. De Designers is a 10-episode advertiser funded fashion designer competition broadcast on the 
largest Belgian commercial television station. Each episode lasted 50 minutes. The programme was sponsored by 
a well-known Belgian fashion retailer. The winner of the competition got to design his/her own clothes collection, 
which would be sold in the retailer’s stores. As such, the brand was an omnipresent and essential part of the com-
petition and the programme. The brand was also given a lot of visibility throughout the programme. Each episode 
contained several brand placements in the form of verbal mentions, brand logos in the designers’ workshop, etc. 
At regular times during the competition, the participants visited the retailer’s designers or the retailer’s stores. 
The sponsor brand was also shown and mentioned in the programme’s end credits by means of a sponsorship 
Research insight
Fitting brand placements enhance the immediate and delayed impact of programme 
liking on brand attitudes

BRANDED ENTERTAINMENT     485
There are many reasons why brand placement may be an extremely effective marketing 
communications tool. First and foremost, advertising that is integrated in editorial content 
cannot be avoided or ‘zapped’. Reach and exposure are guaranteed. Moreover, many TV 
programmes have a long shelf life, and also movies have a second life after initial release 
and find a new audience through DVD sales and rental. Viewers have a willingness to be 
highly involved and connected with their favourite programmes, and often have a positive 
affective response towards them. They are carried away in the programme. This is also 
referred to as narrative transportation, telepresence or flow. Consequently, they pay atten-
tion to programmes and movies and, due to meaning and affective transfer and assimi-
lation effects, also build connections, activate positive emotions and develop favourite 
attitudes towards brands used in them.75 Due to the supportive context and cognitive and 
affective priming, brand characteristics and attributes are better remembered and liked.76 
Later exposure to advertising will benefit from the ‘truth effect’ (an increased belief in 
a claim on account of previous exposure) and the ‘mere exposure effect’ (positive effect 
from exposure to a brief stimulus).77 The balance model and the match-up principle imply 
that brand placement is most effective when there is a fit between products, characters 
and viewers.78
In brand placement, there is also an implied endorsement effect from (famous) actors, 
and it can therefore be at least as powerful as celebrity endorsement in advertising or spon-
sorship.79 Viewers identify and build a relationship with spokespeople and learn from them 
(‘social learning’) what a brand means and how, when and by whom it is used. Actors are 
also trustworthy and likeable spokespeople. According to attribution theory, people develop 
biased (positive) perceptions about brands because they are endorsed – in their perception – 
by trustworthy actors.80 The link between a brand and an actor in a movie or a television 
programme can be used to support marketing communications efforts, such as advertising 
and online community building.
In many cases, viewers are hardly aware of the placements and do not consider them as 
having a commercial intent. In other words, there is less ‘persuasion knowledge’81 than with 
advertising. Therefore, brand placement can be more convincing than traditional advertis-
ing. Brand placement combines some of the advantages of advertising and publicity.82
disclaimer. Short-term and longer-term programme effects were measured through an online questionnaire one 
week (N = 529) and one month (N = 256) after the programme finale was broadcast respectively. Only viewers 
who had viewed at least 10 minutes of the programme were considered. Amongst others, programme liking, per-
ceived brand–programme fit, and the attitude towards the sponsoring brand were measured.
The results show that indeed programme liking positively impacts brand attitude for the sponsor, both imme-
diately after the programme and in the longer run. However, the effect of programme liking becomes weaker over 
time. Furthermore, the effect of programme liking is strengthened by a higher degree of perceived fit between the 
sponsor brand and the programme. A high degree of perceived brand–programme fit is even more crucial in the 
longer term. While a strong perceived brand–programme fit reinforces the positive impact of programme liking on 
brand attitude in the short term, it is a necessary prerequisite to warrant the impact of an AFP on viewers’ attitudes 
towards the sponsor brand in the longer term. When the perceived brand–programme fit is low, the passing of time 
completely wipes out the programme’s effect on brand attitude. However, this is not the case when the perceived 
brand–programme fit is high.
Advertising professionals and brand placers should keep in mind that, although building entertaining and well-
liked content around a brand is beneficial in itself, a good match between the brand and the content reinforces the 
attitudinal benefits the brand draws from the entertaining character of the content. Therefore, managers should pay 
close attention to matching their products to the right type of content before investing in a branded entertainment 
campaign. The importance of perceived fit between the programme and the brand becomes particularly clear when 
looking at the longer-term impact of the AFP. In the longer run, the beneficial effect of programme induced liking 
on brand attitude disappears, unless viewers perceive the brand as a very good fit with the programme. Under these 
conditions, the programme makes a long-term impact on viewers’ attitudes towards the sponsor.

486     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
Some claim that the practice of brand placement is inherently deceptive. Audiences do not 
perceive it as advertising and develop no counter-arguments. Consequently, brand placement 
may be most effective when the distinction between advertising and programming is blurred 
and people are not particularly aware of its influence. Hence, there is an implicit conflict 
between the need to make placement effective and the need to protect consumers from being 
misled.83 Explicit disclosure of brand placement may serve to increase the accessibility of the 
persuasive or commercial intent behind placing brands, and may at the same time produce 
resistance to persuasive attempts and undermine the persuasive power of brand placement.84
Branded entertainment can use many formats. It can be prominently or subtly integrated. 
Prominent integration means that the brand is very prominently present in the editorial con-
tent. Brand identifiers are shown frequently, central on the screen, or for a long period of time. 
They cannot only be shown, but also be mentioned (visual and/or audio-placement). Subtle 
integration means that the brand identifiers are less prominently present. Brand placement 
can also be more or less plot-connected. Plot connection means that the brand is inherently 
part of the story or script. Less plot-connected placements have a minor role in the story. 
Research shows that highly plot-connected and prominent placements enhance brand aware-
ness and memory. On the other hand, a highly prominent but not plot-connected placement 
has been shown to damage brand attitudes. The best effect on brand attitudes is reached with 
highly plot connected and subtle placements.85 Brands can also be integrated in different ways: 
as props (products that are visible but not used), in-use (products that are used by the actors 
or characters in the show), or look-and-feel, in which part of the programme is ‘taken over’ 
by the identity of the brands, for instance by using the brand colours or logo. The research 
vignettes in this chapter dig deeper into specific aspects of brand placement effectiveness.
Sponsorship selection criteria
Selecting sponsorship proposals should be based on a careful comparison using appropriate 
selection criteria. Figure 11.5 shows a five-step multi-attribute decision procedure of spon-
sorship selection. Multiple criteria can be used to assess and select sponsorship proposals. 
They can be divided into three categories, as listed in Table 11.2.
Depending on the type of company and the type of sponsorship projects, some crite-
ria will be more important than others. But some of them should always be assessed as 
important. Sponsorship budgets and supporting marketing budgets, compatibility with the 
Figure 11.5  Selecting sponsorship projects

BUDGETS     487
company’s strategic objectives, the strategic fit between the event and the company’s or 
brand’s name, image and target groups will always be important. Empirical studies show 
that a strong fit between company positioning and the sponsored event or organisation 
enhances sponsorship effectiveness.86 This fit can be functional, i.e. the sponsor’s products 
are used during the event by the organisation or the participants, or image-related. In the 
latter case, the image of the sponsor and the sponsee are congruent.87 On the other hand, 
media exposure and other spin-off potential and competitive considerations may be more 
important in sports sponsorship, while corporate hospitality potential and the interest to 
employees might be more important in an arts sponsorship project. Some companies may be 
more concerned about their corporate image (e.g. service or business-to-business marketers), 
while fast-moving consumer goods companies may be more interested in the commercial 
spin-off potential, like sampling at the event, or organising a lottery to attend an event.
The criteria listed should be used as a starting point. However, the selection of relevant 
criteria and the grading of their importance will largely depend on the type of company 
and its overall communications strategy. The eventual shortlist of potential candidates for 
sponsorship will ultimately depend on the relative weights of the criteria used and the avail-
able sponsorship budget.
Budgets
It is impossible to provide detailed guidelines as to the required budgets of a sponsorship 
campaign. Budgets should depend on the expected effectiveness or return in terms of expo-
sure, communications effects and sales or market share impact. As in communications cam-
paigns in general, the objective-and-task method is called for. Sponsorship decision-makers 
should decide on the objectives they want to achieve, assess to what extent a sponsorship 
programme can contribute to these objectives and try to calculate how large an economi-
cally meaningful sponsorship budget should be. Needless to say, in most cases this is a 
cumbersome task.
Sponsored event or cause
Potential promotional spin-off
Budget
Type of event or cause
Quality level or image of the event
Target groups
Compatibility between sponsored 
event and company’s promotional 
strategy
Strategic fit between event or cause 
and company or brand name
Uniqueness of sponsorship or place of 
the company in the list of sponsors
Length of impact
Geographic scope
Company’s role in decision-making
Protection against ambush marketing
Event’s own communications plan
Estimated media coverage
Quantity and quality of exposure
Fit between company’s and event’s 
communications strategy
Interest with employees
Corporate hospitality potential
Sales promotion spin-off potential
PR spin-off potential
Advertising spin-off potential
Amount of supporting advertising or 
PR activity needed
Chance of negative or no media 
exposure
Measurability and evaluation of 
effectiveness
Costs in cash or kind
Alternative investment for budget and 
expected return
Budget for supporting marketing 
activity
Time implications for own staff
Table 11.2  Assessment criteria for sponsorship proposals

488     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
Audiences don’t want to be passive observers anymore. They want to actively engage with organisations and brands.
The Rolling Stones’ ‘50 and Counting’ tour developed an app, presented by tour sponsor Citi, that allowed fans 
to influence the band’s set list for every concert.
Zywiec, a Polish beer brand, and the main sponsor of the Polish Male Music Festival, allowed fans to create their 
own lyrics for a hit song and have their version sung on video by famous Polish rock artists. Users created 150 000 
versions of their videos on the online interface.
South by Southwest (SXSW), a festival organiser, created the app ‘Avoid Humans’ for festival attendees that, at 
times, were looking for opportunities to avoid the crowds.88
Business insight
Sponsorship goes online
However, sponsorship-linked budgets are not limited to the expenditures directly related 
to the sponsored event or cause, but also encompass all communications efforts and budgets 
that are spent leveraging the investments in the activity or cause. Buying the sponsorship 
rights is indeed ‘just a licence to spend more money to leverage the initial investment’. For 
instance, Coca-Cola spent $40 million to become an official sponsor of the 1996 Olympics, 
and an estimated $500 million to leverage this status.89 A Canadian study revealed that only 
37% of sports sponsors do not provide an additional support budget. But almost 20% allo-
cate an additional budget of 50% of the sponsoring budget or more to communications 
support activities.
Indeed, there are different reasons why sponsorship should be supported by other 
media efforts. Firstly, as has already been mentioned, sponsorship has its limitations. Very 
often brand awareness and brand image are supported, but other necessary communica-
tions and commercial objectives, like building knowledge about the brand and generat-
ing sales, will have to be achieved by means of additional communications support. But 
most importantly, the general principle of integrated communications also applies to 
sponsorship: the more it is supported by, and integrated in, the rest of the communica-
tions mix, the more effective it will be. For instance, among the sponsoring companies 
of the 1996 Olympics that also ran advertising on the events, 64% succeeded in creating 
the link. On the other hand, of the official sponsors that did not run advertising, only 
4% created the link.90
The airline company Virgin Express sponsors several music festivals. To counter the problem of festival visitors not 
knowing/remembering who actually sponsored the festival, Virgin decided to move from just being present dur-
ing the festivals to involving festival visitors before and during the festival. To this end, Virgin launched the Festival 
Buddy campaign. Festival lovers could register by means of SMS or on the Festival Buddy website. Afterwards, Virgin 
sent them a ‘buddyword’ by SMS. The challenge for the registered persons was to find another person with the 
Business insight
Virgin’s Festival Buddy

SUMMARY     489
Summary
Sponsorship is an increasingly important instrument of the marketing communications 
mix. This becomes clear not only from the increasing budgets spent on sponsoring, but also 
from the fact that the key roles in sponsorship decisions are often played by members of top 
management. Sponsors often try to escape the advertising clutter by linking their name to 
an event, and hope for beneficial carry-over effects from the event on company and brand 
awareness and image. Target groups for sponsorship not only are those that visit or partici-
pate in the event, but can also be any of the other marketing and corporate audiences of a 
company. Four basic types of sponsorship can be distinguished. Event-related (culture and 
sports) sponsorship is best known. Cause-related sponsorship, or sponsoring good causes, is 
the oldest form. Broadcast sponsorship, including branded entertainment, is a more recent 
phenomenon, but is growing fast. The youngest type is ambush marketing, whereby a com-
pany tries to benefit from an event it does not sponsor. To integrate sponsorship effectively 
into the marketing communications mix, it is crucial to select the right sponsorship pro-
jects and to manage them at close range. Criteria that can be used to select projects can be 
event-related (type of event, quality level, target groups, uniqueness of sponsorship, fit with 
strategic objectives, etc.), spin-off-related (indirect communications effects, media coverage, 
interest with employees, advertising and PR spin-off, etc.) and budget-related (cost in cash 
or in kind, time implications for staff, etc.).
Sponsorship is probably one of the marketing communications tools that requires most support from other tools 
to be effective and, at the same time, offers ample opportunities for marketing communications spin-off activities. 
Sponsorship of events, teams and organisations can be referred to in TV advertising during the event or in the ads of 
sponsored partners, by means of cross-reference to teams, celebrities, events, etc. TV coverage of events can be used 
as an opportunity for programme sponsorship or product placement. Events can be an opportunity for couponing 
or sampling, but also for corporate hospitality. Cause-related sponsorship can be part of a PR campaign aimed at 
building a good reputation for the company and its brands. It can enhance corporate identity building by means of 
the opportunities it offers to motivate and reward employees. During the sponsored event, a microsite can be set 
up on which games, promotions and other customer contact opportunities are offered, which can subsequently be 
used for customer relationship marketing and direct communications. In-store merchandising can hook up to the 
sponsorship campaign by drawing attention to the sponsored event and by offering special promotions connected 
with the sponsorship campaign.
IMC insight
Integrating sponsorship in IMC
same buddyword. Everyone who succeeded in this and presented themselves with their buddy at a Virgin stand on 
one of the festivals won a free Virgin flight. The campaign created an enormous viral effect and was a real hype for 
several months in many communities. A Google search on the word ‘festivalbuddy’ delivered about 80 000 results. 
Someone created a special ‘festivalbuddy-matching’ site and during the festivals several people wore a T-shirt on 
which their buddy word was printed in the hope of finding their buddy. No doubt, Virgin succeeded in its objective 
of being linked to the sponsored festivals.91

490     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
Further reading
Cornwell, B. (2014) Sponsorship in Marketing: Effective Communication Through Sports, 
Arts and Events. London: Routledge.
Grey, A.M. and Skildum-Reid, K. (2014) The Sponsorship Seeker’s Toolkit. Sydney: 
McGraw-Hill.
Lehu, J.-M. (2009) Branded Entertainment: Product Placement and Brand Strategy in the 
Entertainment Business. London: Kogan Page.
International Journal of Sports Marketing & Sponsorship, http://www.imrpublications.
com/JSMS/.
www.PQmedia.com
www.sponsorship.com
Review questions
	 1.	 What is the difference between sponsorship and advertising, public relations and value 
marketing?
	 2.	 How can the mere exposure effect, congruence theory and operant conditioning explain 
how sponsorship works?
	 3.	 What are the most important current developments in sponsorship?
	 4.	 How can sponsorship be used to reach a variety of objectives in different target groups?
	 5.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of the various types of event-related 
sponsorship?
	 6.	 How can cause-related sponsorship contribute to a company’s communications strategy?
	 7.	 What criteria can be used to select sponsorship proposals?
	 8.	 What is branded entertainment, and what is the difference between brand placement and 
advertising funded programmes? How does branded entertainment influence consumers?
Case 11:
Carrefour: setting up convenience stores at music festivals
Carrefour: a world leader in distribution
The Carrefour Group is one of the world’s leading distri-
bution groups. It is the world’s second-largest retailer and 
the largest in Europe. The group currently operates four 
main grocery store formats: hypermarkets, supermarkets, 
cash & carry and convenience stores. The Carrefour Group 
currently has over 9500 stores, either company-operated 
or franchises. It operates in three major markets: Europe, 
Latin America and Asia. With a presence in 32 countries, 
over 57% of group turnover derives from outside France. 
The group sees strong potential for further international 
growth in the future, particularly in such large national 
markets as China, Brazil, Indonesia, Poland and Turkey. 

Case 11     491
urban and rural customers. Each of the group’s convenience 
store stands out for the way it tailors its offering to the needs 
of its customer base. In France, the convenience stores offer 
a range of products and services (e.g. home delivery, dry 
cleaning, 48-hour photo development, ticket distribution, 
photocopying, stamps, newspapers and more). With sur-
face areas that range between 50 and 900 m2, convenience 
stores can be adapted to suit any situation, from urban sites 
to the most rural location, where they help to counteract 
the trend of disappearing services. Worldwide, Carrefour 
operates 4800 stores in seven countries, mainly under fran-
chising agreements.
Carrefour is the largest retailer in Belgium. In 2007, it 
operated 626 shops, 57 of which are hypermarkets, 378 
supermarkets and 191 Express convenience stores. It 
employs 15 500 people and has a turnover of €5.27 billion.
Music festivals: a large and unserved 
audience
As in many other countries, in Belgium during the sum-
mer season there is a music festival nearly every weekend. 
The three largest ones are Graspop, Pukkelpop and Rock 
Werchter.
The first Graspop festival was held in 1986 as a family 
music festival with mainly local acts. After ten years, in 1995, 
the festival faced a sharply decreasing audience, despite 
international top acts such as Joe Cocker and Simple Minds. 
The 1993 and 1994 festivals were, however, very success-
ful, featuring heavy-metal bands such as Motörhead, the 
Ramones, Paradise Lost and Biohazard. The management 
therefore decided to reposition the festival as an interna-
tional open-air metal music festival, the Graspop Metal 
Meeting, on the last weekend of June. The first festival in 
1996 was a big success. Ten thousand metal heads enjoyed 
the music of 15 bands, featuring Iron Maiden and Type O 
Negative as top acts. By 1998, the metal crowd increased 
to 20 000, a loyal group of fans that in subsequent years 
turned out for top acts such as Black Sabbath, Judas Priest, 
Agnostic Front, Slayer, Sepultura and Alice Cooper. The 
10th anniversary in 2005 was celebrated with 80 000 visi-
tors, offering a three-day festival on four different podiums 
featuring over 60 bands. In 2007, the festival welcomed  
100 000 visitors (calculated as the sum of all visitors per 
festival day, or 48 000 ‘unique’ visitors), about 30 000 of 
whom stayed on the camping ground. In total, Graspop 
has featured over 350 bands. It is one of the major festival 
events in Belgium.
Pukkelpop is a three-day music festival which celebrated 
its 23rd anniversary in 2009. It is internationally renowned 
for its focus on alternative, progressive and underground 
music. In 2007, 152 000 visitors (77 000 unique) came to 
Pukkelpop, to experience more than 210 acts. Fifty thou-
sand visitors spent the night on the camping ground.
In 2009, Carrefour had a turnover of €112 245 million and 
471 000 employees. Wherever it has a presence, Carrefour is 
actively committed to promoting local economic develop-
ment. The group consistently emphasises local recruitment 
plus management and staff training on the job wherever 
they work. Typically, the Carrefour Group will be one of the 
leading private employers in any country where it operates. 
Naturally, this is the case for France, where the group was 
originally founded, but it is also true of such countries as 
Brazil, Argentina, Colombia, Italy and Greece. The group 
also seeks to support local suppliers, with some 90% to 95% 
of the products on its shelves sourced locally, depending 
on the country.
Faithful to the concept of ‘everything-under-one-roof’, 
Carrefour hypermarkets offer an average surface area of 
8400 m2 filled with a range of between 20 000 and 80 000 
food and non-food items, all at attractive prices. With over 
1100 hypermarkets in 32 countries, the Carrefour Group 
is consolidating its number one global position in this for-
mat. In 2007, expansion accelerated with 123 new hyper-
markets, particularly in Asia, with the building of 36 new 
hypermarkets, including 22 in China – where the group 
broke its record for store openings in a one-year period. 
In Europe, 51 new hypermarkets came on board, including 
the 160th in Spain and the 71st in Poland following integra-
tion of the 15 AholdPolska hypermarkets. In Latin America, 
the group became the number one food retailer in Brazil 
after acquiring the 34 Atacadao discount hypermarkets and 
inaugurating 62 new hypermarkets. Hypermarkets account 
for almost 60% of Carrefour sales and employ more than 
300 000 people.
Carrefour supermarkets, with surface areas ranging from 
1000 to over 2000 m2, offer a range of some 10 000 listings, 
most of them food. Rural stores are currently developing a 
broader offering of non-food products, such as clothing and 
household goods. In 2007, the Carrefour Group opened 326 
new supermarkets, mainly in Europe. At the end of 2007, 
the Carrefour Group had 2708 supermarkets in 10 coun-
tries, accounting for 23.5% of sales and employing almost 
85 000 people.
Carrefour’s cash & carry stores offer a reduced product 
range at discount prices – around 20% lower than major 
brands – in surface areas ranging from 200 to 1000 m2 for 
Dia stores with a car park. The range mainly comprises Dia-
branded food products plus a small selection of established, 
major brand items. The group’s cash & carry stores offer a 
range of quality fresh products at attractive prices. In France, 
they offer everything a family needs, with between 1500 
and 1800 food listings plus a limited number of essential 
personal care and cleaning products. At the end of 2007, 
there were 897 discount stores with more than 6000 
employees, accounting for almost 10% of sales.
A key element in the group’s multi-format policy is the 
convenience stores. They offer a complementary outlet to 

492     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
sophisticated. Of course, people can buy beer, soft drinks, 
hamburgers and sausages, usually at high prices, but festival 
attendees want more. Providing a shop would give them 
the opportunity to buy food and other convenient products 
at fair prices, consistent with the slogan of ‘The power to 
choose’.
The selection of music festivals was based on two cri-
teria. First of all, the festival should be large enough and 
enough people should stay for a number of days on the 
camping ground to make it worthwhile. Secondly, there 
should be enough variation in the public to reach custom-
ers and potential customers. Eventually, three 2008 festivals 
were selected: Graspop (25–28 June), Rock Werchter (2–5 
July) and Pukkelpop (19–22 August).
At each of the festival camping grounds a 
100 m2 (10 m * 10 m) convenience shop was set up with 
two checkout counters each with a capacity of 1000 check-
outs per day. The shops were open the evening before the 
start of the festivals, and during the festivals every day from 
8 a.m. to 10 p.m., and the morning after the festival. The 
shops were positioned as ‘Express festival shops’, Carre-
four’s convenience store label. Conventional Express shops 
are open on Sundays and offer mainly an assortment of 
food products. It was decided to apply normal shop prices 
and not add a ‘festival premium’ like most other drink and 
food stands usually do. Also, private labels are becom-
ing increasingly popular. The company therefore decided 
to use the opportunity to promote its own private label 
‘Carrefour’ under which a wide assortment of about 3000 
products are sold, and to offer as many Carrefour products 
as possible. The assortment of 280 products was adapted 
to what camping goers need: tents, batteries, toilet paper, 
tape, toothbrushes, sleeping bags, camping gas, deodor-
ant, shaving cream, sun block, condoms, tooth picks, dis-
infectant, bottle openers and food and drink items such 
as rice, spaghetti, ketchup, fruit, vegetables, yoghurt, milk, 
mineral water and, every morning, freshly baked bread. 
Express shops are renowned for their fresh products. Bak-
ing fresh bread in the shop creates a more genuine real 
shopping experience. At Graspop, barbecuing is allowed, 
so barbecue material was also sold. Pack sizes were small 
and adapted to what people would need for one weekend. 
No alcohol, soft drinks and cigarettes were sold, because 
a substantial part of the festival’s profit comes from sell-
ing these products. Festival organisers are very wary about 
guerrilla marketing, and they see to it that if, for instance, 
Coca-Cola is an official sponsor, no Pepsi is sold on the 
festival grounds. Where Coca-Cola was an official festi-
val sponsor, Carrefour sold only Chaudfontaine water, a 
Coca-Cola company brand, in order to blend in with other 
festival sponsors. The shops were operated by students, 
but shop management was entrusted to Carrefour staff, 
selected after an internal call for candidates. The response, 
both from its own employees and from external people 
The history of Rock Werchter dates back to 1967, when a 
so-called beat happening was organised long before Wood-
stock in the USA and the Isle of Wight in the UK. At its height 
in 1978, this Jazz Bilzen event, back then a four-day festival, 
drew 15 000 festival-goers on its main day. Three years later, 
only 6000 people showed up and the festival stopped. From 
1981 the festival was held in two places (Torhout and Wer-
chter), when about 20 000 and 27 000 spectators showed 
up. Things really ‘exploded’ in Werchter in 1982, when 
about 40 000 people were standing at the festival gates. In 
1998, the festival presented 23 acts. In 2008, there were 60, 
on two stages. Rock Werchter has turned into one of the 
most important and – according to its fans – best festivals 
in the world. It receives 107 000 unique visitors, 60 000 of 
whom stay on the camping grounds.
All these visitors have to eat, drink and camp, and thus 
form a gigantic and largely unserved audience for a con-
venience store with a well-adapted product mix. In 2008, 
Carrefour decided to develop tailor-made points-of-sales 
at these festivals.
Carrefour festival shops: tapping into a 
unique point-of-sales opportunity
The Belgian fast-moving consumer goods retailing indus-
try is dominated by three major players with nearly equal 
market shares: Delhaize, Colruyt and Carrefour. Carrefour 
was perceived as stuck in the middle: its image was unclear 
if not negative. At the end of 2006, it was apparent to Car-
refour that it had an image problem. Delhaize was known 
for its quality products, Colruyt was the cheapest retailer 
for manufacturer-branded products and Carrefour was big, 
cold, distant and very French. In terms of communications 
mix, the company used advertising campaigns and sales 
promotion brochures, but very little, if any, PR and spon-
sorship. In 2007, the whole marketing management was 
changed and, by the end of 2008, it was decided to reposi-
tion Carrefour using the slogan ‘The power to choose’. It 
was also decided to use sponsorship and PR more inten-
sively to carry over an image of warmth, cosiness and ‘close 
to the people’.
One of the first ideas that came to mind was to be pre-
sent at one or more of the many music festivals that take 
place annually in Belgium. However, the management felt 
that it would not be sufficient to have a logo on the festi-
val billboard or to be visually present at the festival venue, 
but better to link its presence to a cost-efficient, innova-
tive and fun experience in a way that could generate many 
contacts with young customers and potential customers, 
not so much to build brand image, but to build experiences 
that would enhance brand image. The idea arose to install a 
shop at selected festival camping grounds. The weak point 
of music festival camping lots is that people have to sur-
vive in basic conditions and accommodation is not very 

Case 11     493
Due to the short planning cycle, Carrefour itself did not 
support its initiative by means of other communications 
efforts.
Adapting and extending the project 
in 2009
After a thorough evaluation, the market team decided to 
extend the initiative and to make some adaptations. In 2009, 
shops were set up at the same three festivals, and a fourth 
festival, Dranouter Folk (6–9 August), was added. Shop floor 
surface was slightly enlarged, and a third checkout was pro-
vided. The shops would no longer be open the day after 
the festival – attendees pack and leave as soon as they can. 
However, opening hours during the festival were extended, 
based on the 2008 experience. On the evening before the 
start of the festival, the shops were open until 2 a.m., and 
on festival days between 7 a.m. and 11 p.m. The assort-
ment only required minor modifications since it appeared 
to be well adapted to festival attendees’ needs. Even more 
Carrefour private label products were offered instead of 
A-brands. Price-level policy was the same. Although the 
branding of the shops on the outside was OK, inside brand-
ing was improved. Also some fine-tuning was called for. For 
instance, at Pukkelpop, coffee brand Douwe Egberts organ-
ised a ‘breakfast action’ with coffee and croissants. There-
fore, these products were not part of the assortment at this 
festival.
Questions
1.	 Do you think that setting up a point-of-sales at music 
festivals was a good idea? Does it focus on the right tar-
get groups? Is it meaningful in terms of image-building 
for Carrefour?
2.	 Did Carrefour take the right decision in terms of festival 
selection, pricing strategy, assortment and shop layout? 
Why or why not? What would you do differently?
3.	 If a retailer in your own country were to think of doing 
a similar project, which festivals could they select and 
why? Would the retailer have to organise its shops in a 
different way than Carrefour? Why or why not?
4.	 At the 2008 festival, Carrefour did not support the ini-
tiative by means of other marketing communications 
activities. Build a supporting Carrefour communications 
plan for the next festival.
5.	 In what way could Carrefour measure the success and 
effectiveness of this project?
interested in shop keeping at the festivals, was massive. 
Also internally, the initiative led to a lot of ‘rumour around 
the brand’. The cost of setting up these stores at festivals, 
including the festival sponsorship fee, logistics, shop keep-
ers’ salaries, stands and transportation, was significantly 
lower than that of a main festival sponsor, and in the latter 
case no real experience is provided and main sponsors still 
have to provide sampling and animation at an extra cost.
A cost-effective marketing 
communications project
Obviously, there was a direct return on investment. The 
festival shops realised a significant turnover. Sales per 
customer per purchase were similar to what is sold in an 
average regular Express shop. To Carrefour’s own surprise, 
during the first business hour at Rock Werchter, 40 tents 
were sold. In total, about 4000 chocolate cakes, over 6000 
croissants, more than 5000 breads and sandwiches and 
over 2000 doughnuts were sold, but also 3000 bottles of 
milk, 400 raincoats, 300 toothbrushes, hundreds of plastic 
spoons, forks, knives and plates, 1500 apples and 1000 nec-
tarines, and 3000 packets of crisps.
Of course, image-building was at least as important. 
Festival attendees were all very positive. After the festivals, 
various blogs were screened; no single negative remark was 
found and people remarked: ‘if I would have known there 
was going to be a shop, I would not have brought so much 
stuff’. Many people appreciated the fair, ‘normal’ prices, and 
nobody complained about the long queues.
Also festival organisers were very enthusiastic. They 
consider it a very cost-effective way of offering added 
value on their festivals, and they urged Carrefour to set up 
shops at other camping grounds too. Most festival organis-
ers announced the presence of the shop on their websites 
and issued press releases. Rock Werchter announced the 
presence of the Express shop explicitly on its 2009 festival 
website. Competitors of Carrefour have also shown their 
interest in being present at the festivals, a move that Carre-
four blocked by negotiating a right of first refusal. Also, other 
festivals have asked Carrefour to set up a store at their venues.
At Rock Werchter, the shop was set up along a major 
road. Many people other than festival attendees have there-
fore been exposed to this new initiative.
The shops also led to massive amounts of free public-
ity in almost every Belgian newspaper, featuring extensive 
coverage with headlines such as: ‘Festival shops: bull’s eye’, 
‘Carrefour finds hole in festival market’, ‘Supermarket on 
festival camping ground’.
Sources: www.carrefour.com; www.carrefour.eu; www.graspop.be; www.pukkelpop.be; www.rockwerchter.be. Information provided by Lars Vervoort, Corporate 
Communication Manager, and Tine Nelissen, PR & Communication Coordinator.

494     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
13	 Hansen, F. and Scotwin, L. (1995) ‘An experimental 
enquiry into sponsorship: what effects can be meas-
ured?’, Marketing and Research Today, 23(3), 173–81.
14	 De Pelsmacker, P., Geuens, M. and Anckaert, P. (2002) 
‘Media context and advertising effectiveness: the role of 
context appreciation and context–ad similarity’, Journal 
of Advertising, 31(2), 49–61.
15	 Hoek, J., Gendall, P., Jeffcoat, M. and Orsman, D. (1997) 
‘Sponsorship and advertising: a comparison of their 
effects’, Journal of Marketing Communication, 3(1), 
21–32.
16	 Hansen, F. and Scotwin, L. (1995) ‘An experimental 
enquiry into sponsorship: what effects can be meas-
ured?’, Marketing and Research Today, 23(3), 173–81.
17	 www.sponsorship.com, accessed 17 July 2015
18	 Euro Effie (2002) Berlin: Gesamtverband Werbeagenturen 
GWA eV, http://www.euro-effie.com.
19	 Quester, P.G., Farrelly, F.J. and Burton, R. (1998) ‘Sports 
sponsorship management: a multinational comparative 
study’, Journal of Marketing Communication, 4(2), 
115–28; Farrelly, F.J. and Quester, P.G. (1997) ‘Sports and 
arts sponsors: investigating the similarities and differ-
ences in management practices’, in Meenaghan, T. (ed.), 
New and Evolving Paradigms: The Emerging Future of 
Marketing, American Marketing Association Special 
Conference Proceedings. Dublin: University College, 
874–86.
20	 Quester, P. (1997) ‘Awareness as a measure of sponsor-
ship effectiveness: the Adelaide Formula One Grand Prix 
and evidence of incidental ambush effects’, Journal of 
Marketing Communications, 3(1), 1–20.
21	 Meenaghan, T. (1998) ‘Current developments and future 
directions in sponsorship’, International Journal of 
Advertising, 17(1), 3–28.
22	 http://www.nop.co.uk/news, 23 May 2003.
23	 Thwaites, D., Anguilar-Manjarrez, R. and Kidd, C. 
(1998) ‘Sports sponsorship development in leading 
Canadian companies: issues and trends’, International 
Journal of Advertising, 17(1), 29–50; Abratt, R., Clay-
ton, B.C. and Pitt, L.F. (1987) ‘Corporate objectives in 
sports sponsorship’, International Journal of Advertis-
ing, 8(2), 299–311; Hansen, F. and Scotwin, L. (1995) ‘An 
experimental enquiry into sponsorship: what effects can 
be measured?’, Marketing and Research Today, 23(3), 
173–81.
24	 Quester, P. (1997) ‘Sponsoring returns: unexpected 
results and the value of naming rights’, in Meenaghan, 
T. (ed.), New and Evolving Paradigms: The Emerging 
Future of Marketing, American Marketing Association 
Special Conference Proceedings. Dublin: University Col-
lege, 692–4.
25	 Cornwell, T.B. and Maignan, I. (1998) ‘An international 
review of sponsorship research’, Journal of Advertising, 
27(1), 1–21.
References
1	
Meenaghan, T. (1991) ‘The role of sponsorship in the 
marketing communication mix’, International Journal 
of Advertising, 10(1), 35–48; Lagae, W. (2006) Market-
ing-communicatie in de Sport. Amsterdam, Pearson Edu-
cation Benelux.
2	
Erdogan, Z.B. and Kitchen, P.J. (1998) ‘The interaction 
between advertising and sponsorship: uneasy alliance or 
strategic symbiosis’, in Kitchen, P.J. (ed.), The Changing 
World of Corporate and Marketing Communication: 
Towards the Next Millennia, Proceedings of the 3rd 
Annual Conference of the Global Institute for Corporate 
and Marketing Communication. Glasgow: Strathclyde 
Graduate Business School, 144–55.
3	
Hastings, G.B. (1984) ‘Sponsorship works differently 
from advertising’, International Journal of Advertising, 
3(2), 171–8.
4	
Erdogan, Z.B. and Kitchen, P.J. (1998) ‘The interaction 
between advertising and sponsorship: uneasy alliance or 
strategic symbiosis’, in Kitchen, P.J. (ed.), The Changing 
World of Corporate and Marketing Communication: 
Towards the Next Millennia, Proceedings of the 3rd 
Annual Conference of the Global Institute for Corporate 
and Marketing Communication. Glasgow: Strathclyde 
Graduate Business School, 144–55.
5	
Meenaghan, T. (1983) ‘Commercial sponsorship’, Euro-
pean Journal of Marketing, 7(7), 5–71.
6	
Marshall, D.W. and Cook, G. (1992) ‘The corporate 
(sports) sponsor’, International Journal of Advertising, 
11(3), 307–24.
7	
Bloxham, M. (1998) ‘Brand affinity and television pro-
gramme sponsorship’, International Journal of Advertis-
ing, 17(1), 89–98.
8	
Cornwell, T.B. and Maignan, I. (1998) ‘An international 
review of sponsorship research’, Journal of Advertising, 
27(1), 1–21.
9	
Adfo Specialist Group (1999) Rabobank Wielerplan 
(Rabobank Cycling Plan), Adfo Sponsoring Cases no. 
2, Alphen aan den Rijn: Samson; Adfo Specialist Group 
(2000) Nashuatec en Oliver (Nashuatec and Oliver), Adfo 
Sponsoring Cases no. 5, Alphen aan den Rijn: Samson.
10	 See also: Abshire, M. (2002) ‘Consumer product manu-
facturers: maintain giving in uncertain times’, Corporate 
Philanthropy Report, 17 (March), 1–11; Polonsky, M. 
and Macdonald, E. (2000) ‘Exploring the link between 
cause-related marketing and brand building’, Interna-
tional Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Mar-
keting, 5 (February), 46–57.
11	 Cornwell, T.B. and Maignan, I. (1998) ‘An international 
review of sponsorship research’, Journal of Advertising, 
27(1), 1–21.
12	 Watson, J. and Watson, J. (2001) ‘Sponsorship and 
congruity theory: a theoretical framework for explain-
ing consumer attitude and recall of event sponsorship’, 
Advances in Consumer Research, 28, 439–45.

REFERENCES     495
47	 Gupta, P.B. and Lord, K.R. (1998) ‘Product placement in 
movies: the effect of prominence and mode on audience 
recall’, Journal of Current Issues in Advertising, 20(1), 
47–59.
48	 Dens, N., De Pelsmacker, P., Wouters, M. and 
Purnawirawan, N. (2012) ‘Do you like what you recog-
nize? The effects of brand placement prominence and 
movie plot connection on brand attitude as mediated by 
recognition’, Journal of Advertising, 41(3), 35–53; Rus-
sell, C. and Stern, B. (2006) ‘Consumers, characters, and 
products: a balance model of sitcom product placement 
effects’, Journal of Advertising, 35(1), 7–21; Van Rei-
jmersdal, E., Neijens, P. and Smit, E.G. (2007) ‘Effects of 
television brand placement on brand image’, Psychology 
and Marketing, 24(5), 403–20.
49	 Cauberghe, V. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2010) ‘Advergames: 
the impact of brand prominence and game repetition on 
brand responses’, Journal of Advertising, 39(1), 5–18.
50	 Van Vaerenbergh, Y., Van de Sompel, D., Van Loock, N. 
and Vermeir, I. (2011) ‘The impact of brand name place-
ment in song lyrics on brand attitudes: does the attitude 
toward the artist matter?’, in Okazaki, S. (ed.), Advances 
in Advertising Research: Breaking New Grounds in 
­Theory and Practice, 2. Gabler Verlag, 21–33.
51	 Schemer, C., Matthes, J., Wirth, W. and Textor, S. (2008) 
‘Does “passing the Courvoisier” always pay off? Positive 
and negative evaluative conditioning effects of brand 
placements in music videos’, Psychology and Marketing, 
25(10), 923–43.
52	 Friedman, M. (1985) ‘The changing language of a con-
sumer society: brand name usage in popular Ameri-
can novels in the postwar era’, Journal of Consumer 
Research, 11(4), 927.
53	 Brennan, I. and McCalman, D. (2011) ‘Word-of-author 
advertising in textbooks: the role of brand familiarity 
and placement repetition on recall and recognition’, 
Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, 15(1), 125–37.
54	 Green, M.C. and Brock, T.C. (2002) ‘In the mind’s eye: 
transportation-imagery model of narrative persuasion’, 
in Green, M.C., Strange, J.J. and Brock, T.C. (eds), 
Narrative Impact: Social and Cognitive Foundation. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 315–42; Green, M., Kass, S. Car-
rey, J., Herzig, B., Feeney, R. and Sabini, J. (2008) ‘Trans-
portation across media: repeated exposure to print and 
film’, Media Psychology, 11(4), 512–39; Hakemulder, F. 
(2011) ‘Ways to engage readers: relevance in the scientific 
study of literature’, Scientific Study of Literature, 1(1), 
144–52.
55	 Atkinson, C. (2003) ‘Merger of advertising and content  
worries consumers’, Advertising Age, 6 January,  
http://adage.com/article/media/merger-advertising- 
content-worries-consumers/36541/.
56	 Jacobs. E. (2012) ‘Hard sellers’, Financial Times, 18 May, 
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/85ce1ede-9aae-11e1-
9c98-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3SrQlmy8C.
57	 Green, M. and Brock, T. (2000) ‘The role of transporta-
tion in the persuasiveness of public narratives’, Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(5), 701–21.
26	 Grimes, E. and Meenaghan, T. (1998) ‘Focusing com-
mercial sponsorship on the internal corporate audience’, 
International Journal of Advertising, 17(1), 51–74.
27	 Lagae, W. (2005) Sports Sponsorship and Marketing 
Communications. Harlow: Prentice Hall.
28	 Irwin, R., Sutton, W. and McCarthy, L. (2002) Sport Pro-
motion and Sales Management. Champaign, IL: Human 
Kinetics.
29	 www.samen.nl
30	 www.sponsorhip.com (accessed 17 July 2015).
31	 Westerbeek, H., Shilbury, D. and Quick, S. (2007) Strat-
egischesportmarketing (Strategic sports marketing). 
Nieuwegein: Arko Sports Media.
32	 Lagae, W. (1997) ‘Het Pokerspel van de Professionele 
Wielersponsoring’ (‘The poker game of professional 
cycling sponsorship’), in Duyck, R. and Van Tilborgh, 
C. (eds), Aan Marketing Denken en Doen. Marketing 
Jaarboek (Thinking of and Doing Marketing. Marketing 
Yearbook). Zellick: Roularta Books, 86–94.
33	 Brassington, F. and Pettitt, S. (2003) Principles of Mar-
keting. London: Pitman.
34	 Cornwell, T.B. and Maignan, I. (1998) ‘An international 
review of sponsorship research’, Journal of Advertising, 
27(1), 1–21.
35	 Thwaites, D., Anguilar-Manjarrez, R. and Kidd, C. 
(1998) ‘Sports sponsorship development in leading Cana-
dian companies: issues and trends’, International Journal 
of Advertising, 17(1), 29–50.
36	 De Morgen, 16 May 2012.
37	 Farrelly, F.J. and Quester, P.G. (1997) ‘Sports and arts 
sponsors: investigating the similarities and differences 
in management practices’, in Meenaghan, T. (ed.), 
New and Evolving Paradigms: The Emerging Future of 
Marketing, American Marketing Association Special 
Conference Proceedings. Dublin: University College, 
874–86.
38	 De Morgen, 4 May 2005.
39	 http://community.timberland.com, http://company.cona-
grafoods.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=202310&p=foundation, 
http://ww5.komen.org (accessed 26 September 2012).
40	 www.bsr.org (accessed 23 May 2003).
41	 De Morgen, 29 June 2006.
42	 Westerbeek, H., Shilbury, D. and Quick, S. (2007) Strat-
egischesportmarketing (Strategic sports marketing). 
Nieuwegein: Arko Sports Media.
43	 Lagae, W. (2005) Sports Sponsorship and Marketing 
Communications. Harlow: Prentice Hall.
44	 Balasubramanian, S.K., Karrh, J.A. and Patwardhan, H. 
(2006) ‘Audience response to product placement: an inte-
grative framework and future research agenda’, Journal 
of Advertising, 35(3), 115–41.
45	 Karrh, J.A. (1998) ‘Brand placements: a review’, Journal 
of Current Issues and Research in Advertising, 20(2), 
31–49.
46	 Balasubramanian, S.K., Karrh, J.A. and Patwardhan, H. 
(2006) ‘Audience response to product placement: an inte-
grative framework and future research agenda’, Journal 
of Advertising, 35(3), 115–41.

496     CHAPTER 11  SPONSORSHIP
on brand attitude, purchase intent and brand beliefs’, 
Journal of Advertising, 29(3), 1–13.
73	 Gawronski, B. and Bodenhausen, G.V. (2007) ‘Unraveling 
the processes underlying evaluation: attitudes from the 
perspective of the ape model’, Social Cognition, 25(5), 
687–717.
74	 Finn, B. and Roediger, H.L.I. (2013) ‘Interfering effects of 
retrieval in learning new information’, Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 
39(6), 1665–81.
75	 Karrh, J.A. (1998) ‘Brand placements: a review’, Journal of 
Current Issues and Research in Advertising, 20(2), 31–49.
76	 McCracken, G. (1989) ‘Who is the celebrity endorser? 
Cultural foundations of the endorsement process’, 
Journal of Consumer Research, 16, 310–22; Balasubra-
manian, S.K., Karrh, J.A. and Patwardhan, H. (2006) 
‘Audience response to product placement: an integra-
tive framework and future research agenda’, Journal of 
Advertising, 35(3), 115–41.
77	 Law, S. and Braun, K.A. (2000) ‘I’ll have what she’s hav-
ing: gauging the impact of product placements on view-
ers’, Psychology & Marketing, 17(12), 1059–75.
78	 Russell, C.A. and Stern, B.B. (2006) ‘Consumers, char-
acters and products: a balance model of sitcom product 
placement effects’, Journal of Advertising, 35(1), 7–21.
79	 Yang, M., Roskos-Ewoldsen, B. and Roskos-Ewoldsen, 
D.R. (2004) ‘Mental models for brand placement’, in 
Shrum, L.J. (ed.), Psychology of Entertainment Media: 
Blurring the Lines Between Entertainment and Persua-
sion. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 79–98.
80	 Balasubramanian, S.K., Karrh, JA. and Patwardhan, H. 
(2006) ‘Audience response to product placement: an inte-
grative framework and future research agenda’, Journal 
of Advertising, 35(3), 115–41; La Ferle, C. and Edwards, 
S.M. (2006) ‘Product placement: how brands appear on 
television’, Journal of Advertising, 35(4), 65–86.
81	 Friestad, M. and Wright, P. (1994) ‘The persuasion knowl-
edge model: how people cope with persuasion attempts’, 
Journal of Consumer Research, 21 (June), 1–31.
82	 McCarthy, J.A. (2004) ‘Product placement: the nature of 
the practice and potential avenues of inquiry’, in Shrum, 
L.J. (ed.), Psychology of Entertainment Media: Blur-
ring the Lines Between Entertainment and Persuasion. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 45–62.
83	 Bhatnagar, N., Aksoy, L. and Malkoc, S.A. (2004) 
‘Embedding brands within media content: the impact 
of message, media and consumer characteristics on 
placement efficacy’, in Shrum, L.J. (ed.), Psychology 
of Entertainment Media: Blurring the Lines Between 
Entertainment and Persuasion. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, 99–116; Law, S. and Braun-LaTour, 
K.A. (2004) ‘Product placements: how to measure their 
impact’, in Shrum, L.J. (ed.), Psychology of Entertain-
ment Media: Blurring the Lines Between Entertainment 
and Persuasion. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associ-
ates, 63–78; Avery, R.J. and Ferraro, R. (2000) ‘Verisimili-
tude or advertising? Brand appearances on prime-time 
television’, Journal of Consumer Affairs, 34(2), 217–44.
58	 Avramova, Y., De Pelsmacker, P. and Dens, N. (2016), 
‘Brand placement repetition in a fictional text’, Interna-
tional Journal of Advertising: The Review of Market-
ing Communications, 10 May, 1-22 Copyright © 2016 
Routledge.
59	 De Morgen, 26 September 2008.
60	 De Morgen, 16 November 2002.
61	 De Morgen, 3 October 2008.
62	 DFC Intelligence (2011) ‘DFC intelligence forecasts 
global advertising in video games to reach $7.2 billion 
in 2016’, http://www.dfcint.com/wp/?p=315 (accessed  
20 August 2015).
63	 http://www.dfcint.com/dossier/can-games-capture- 
big-ad-bucks/
64	 www.PQmedia.com (accessed 17 July 2015).
65	 Russell, D.W. and Russell, C.A. (2008) ‘Embedded alco-
hol messages in television series: the interactive effect of 
warnings and audience connectedness on viewers’ alco-
hol beliefs’, Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 
69(3), 459–71; Russell, C.A. and Stern, B.B. (2006) 
‘Consumers, characters and products: a balance model 
of sitcom product placement effects’, Journal of Adver-
tising, 35(1), 7–21; Gupta, P.B. and Gould, S.J. (2007) 
‘Recall of products placed as prizes versus commercials 
in game shows’, Journal of Current Issues and Research 
in Advertising, 29(1), 43–53.
66	 Bellman, S., Schweda, A. and Varan, D. (2010) ‘The resid-
ual impact of avoided television advertising’, Journal of 
Advertising, 39(1), 67–82.
67	 PQMedia (2012) ‘Global product placement spending 
forecast 2012–2016’; Verhellen, Y., Dens, N. and De Pels-
macker, P. (2013) ‘Consumer responses to brands placed  
in YouTube movies: the effect of prominence and endorser  
expertise’, Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 
14(4), 287–303.
68	 Hudson, S. and Hudson, D. (2006) ‘Branded entertain-
ment: a new advertising technique or product placement 
in disguise?’, Journal of Marketing Management, 22(5–
6), 489–504.
69	 PQ Media (2010) ‘Global branded entertainment market-
ing forecast 2010–2014’.
70	 Russell, C.A. (1998) ‘Toward a framework of product 
placement: theoretical propositions’, Advances in Con-
sumer Research, 25(1), 357–62.
71	 Cauberghe, V., De Pelsmacker, P. and Geuens, M. (2011) 
‘Context effects of TV programme-induced interactiv-
ity and telepresence on advertising responses’, Inter-
national Journal of  Advertising, 30(4), 641–63; De 
Pelsmacker, P., Geuens, M. and Anckaert, P. (2002) 
‘Media context and advertising effectiveness: the role 
of context/ad similarity’, Journal of Advertising, 21(2), 
49–61; Moorman, M., Neijens, P.C. and Smit, E.G. 
(2002) ‘The effects of magazine-induced psychological 
responses and thematic congruence on memory and 
attitude toward the ad in a real-life setting’, Journal of 
Advertising, 31(4), 27–40.
72	 Till, B.D. and Busler, M. (2000) ‘The match-up hypoth-
esis: physical attractiveness, expertise, and the role of fit 

REFERENCES     497
88	 www.sponsorship.com, accessed 17 July 2015.
89	 Sandler, D.M., Shani, D. and Lee, M.S. (1998) ‘How 
consumers learn about sponsors: the impact of infor-
mation sources on sponsorship’, in Meenaghan, T. (ed.), 
New and Evolving Paradigms: The Emerging Future of 
Marketing, American Marketing Association Special 
Conference Proceedings. Dublin: University College, 
869–71.
90	 Erdogan, Z.B. and Kitchen, P.J. (1998) ‘The interaction 
between advertising and sponsorship: uneasy alliance or 
strategic symbiosis?’, in Kitchen, P.J. (ed.), The Chang-
ing World of Corporate and Marketing Communication: 
Towards the Next Millennia. Proceedings of the 3rd 
Annual Conference of the Global Institute for Corporate 
and Marketing Communication. Glasgow: Strathclyde 
Graduate Business School, 144–55.
91	 Cuckoo Awards 2006.
84	 Russell, D.W. and Russell, C.A. (2008) ‘Embedded alco-
hol messages in television series: the interactive effect of 
warnings and audience connectedness on viewers’ alco-
hol beliefs’, Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 
69(3), 459–71; Campbell, M.C., Mohr, G.S. and Verlegh, 
P.W.J. (2007) ‘Effects of product placement and sponsor-
ship disclosure: a flexible correction approach’, Proceed-
ings of the ICORIA Conference, Lisbon, CD-ROM.
85	 Dens, N., De Pelsmacker, P., Wouters, M., Purnawirawan, 
N. (2014) Do you like what you recognize?, Journal of 
Advertising, 41 (3), 35–54.
86	 Simmons, C.J. and Becker-Olsen, K.L. (2006) ‘Achieving 
marketing objectives through social sponsorships’, Jour-
nal of Marketing, 70(4), 154–69.
87	 Poon, D.T.Y and Prendergast, G. (2006) ‘A New frame-
work for evaluating sponsorship opportunities’, Interna-
tional Journal of Advertising, 25(4), 471–88.

Chapter 12
Exhibitions and trade fairs
Chapter outline
Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Understand the role of exhibitions and trade fairs in marketing communications
● Learn about the objectives and target groups of trade fairs and exhibitions
● Plan an exhibition
● Understand the limitations and drawbacks of exhibitions as a marketing 
communications tool
498

TYPES OF EXHIBITIONS AND TRADE FAIRS     499
Introduction
An exhibition or trade fair is a place where manufacturers and retailers of a certain product 
category or industry meet each other to talk about trade, to present and demonstrate their 
products and services, to exchange ideas and network and actually to buy and sell products.
Exhibitions and trade fairs are one of the oldest communications tools. They originate 
from the Roman period when merchants traded at fixed places called ‘Collegia Mercato-
rum’. At trade fairs, goods were exchanged for other goods until coinage became more 
widespread in the sixteenth century. Value was defined by supply and demand. Most trade 
fair and exchange buildings were built during the Middle Ages. The invention of the car 
in the late nineteenth century made some people predict that exhibitions and fairs would 
disappear because merchants would travel to meet buyers for personal selling. However, 
exhibitions have proved their added value to other communications mix elements and are 
an important part of the communications mix. Several studies have proved that there is a 
complementary effect of trade shows on personal selling. Trade show exposure significantly 
reduces the cost of follow-up sales efforts to close the sale. This cost reduction exceeds the 
breakeven, and return-on-sales figures are higher among show attendees than non-attendees. 
Trade shows also generate positive effects on customer purchase intentions.1
This chapter discusses the place of trade fairs and exhibitions in the marketing communi-
cations mix and the objectives and target groups for which trade fairs and exhibitions may be 
used, and provides a framework for how to use this communications tool in an effective way.
Types of exhibitions and trade fairs
Exhibitions can be broadly divided into public fairs and trade fairs (Table 12.1).
Public or general fairs are open to the general public. There are two kinds of public fairs: 
general interest fairs and special interest fairs. The former target a broad audience and often 
exhibit a wide and diverse range of products and services. They are strongly promoted and 
aim to attract as many visitors as possible, especially buying visitors. For instance, The France 
Show in January 2012 attracted more than 17 800 visitors over three days. The France Show is 
the UK’s largest event dedicated to France for lovers of French culture, cuisine, wine and way 
of life. The show also incorporates the largest French Property Exhibition in the UK. In two 
seminar theatres expert advice is offered to all those planning to move to France. The France 
Show is organised by the publishers of French magazines (French Property News, Living 
France and France magazine) and the French property portal.2 Special interest fairs are fairs 
targeted at certain segments of the general public. They often place emphasis on informing 
visitors rather than making them buy. For instance, Adventure Affair is a fair for exciting 
and active leisure activities such as bungee jumping, mountain climbing, survival trips, etc.
Trade fairs are open to people working in a certain field of activity or industry. There are 
four kinds of trade fairs. In horizontal trade fairs, exhibitors from one single industry exhibit 
Public fairs
Trade fairs
General interest
Horizontal
Special interest
Vertical
Conference-bound
Trade mart
Table 12.1  Types of exhibition

500     CHAPTER 12  EXHIBITIONS AND TRADE FAIRS
their products and services to professional target groups, such as sales agents or distributors, 
from different industries. Companies selling chemical components may participate in that type 
of exhibition to market their products to buyers from different industries (food, detergents, 
etc.). In vertical trade fairs, different industries present their goods and services to target groups 
belonging to one single field of activity. Various marketers of building materials, wooden doors, 
plumbing equipment, etc., may participate in trade fairs aimed at construction companies.
RFID 2007 is an event organised by Fairtec. Fairtec is a Belgian organiser of technical fairs in the Benelux countries. 
RFID was organised for the first time in Belgium on 7 July 2007 in Brussels. RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) 
technology has been around for many years and is used in applications such as access control, animal tagging and 
electronic payment. The technology consists of two elements that communicate via radio waves: a tag (or transponder) 
and a reader. It is a promising and forthcoming technology in various industries for many different applications. RFID 
2007 offered an opportunity for companies to expand their network in the Benelux countries. RFID focuses on three 
domains: logistics and distribution, control and sensors, and supply management.
The problem for RFID was who to communicate with. Fairtec was sure that many companies could be interested 
in this technique, but they did not know which specific persons to communicate with. Therefore, at the beginning, 
Fairtec decided to communicate broadly. A website where people could register was very helpful in making commu-
nications easier. Another way to communicate RFID was to have contacts with the Flemish engineering federation. This 
federation could help communicate the existence of RFID to possible visitors. Communications in foreign countries 
for RFID were done via trade magazines. For the RFID event, a special English-language website was developed for 
the visitors as well as for the exhibitors. Fairtec also tried to give incentives to exhibitors who made the databases 
of their clients available. It made use of all the existing databases from former years, and every visitor who had 
expressed an interest in the automation industry got an invitation to the RFID fair. RFID is an international event. 
Therefore, the location and the date when the fair is being organised are essential. It is very important to organise 
a certain fair by taking the other international fairs into account. The big fairs are normally organised every two or 
four years in May or June, and all other fair organisers follow these dates. Fairtec organised its RFID fair in July in 
Brussels, a well-known international city.3
Business insight
RFID: establishing a fair
Conference-bound exhibitions4 are small exhibitions linked to a conference. They have a 
low reach, but may be highly effective as a result of their high selectivity on the target group. 
This kind of exhibition, in combination with a conference or symposium, has become very 
popular both because it is financially attractive to conference organisers and because they 
offer an effective way to reach target groups that are hard to reach through other commu-
nications media. The fair conference formula is very popular in the USA, as opposed to 
exhibitions which are more explicitly aimed at buying and selling. Unlike their European 
counterparts, American companies do not enjoy buying and selling in the open. In Europe 
the concept of a ‘market’, where sellers and buyers of competing products stand next to 
each other and try to out-shout each other, has always existed.
A trade mart is a hybrid kind of exhibition, i.e. half-exhibition, half-display, with a high 
frequency. Participants rent a permanent stand and aim to sell. Participants in trade marts 
have samples permanently on display.
In Table 12.2, an alternative classification of exhibitions is presented, based on types of 
visitors and exhibitors.5 Other classifications include: public versus private fairs, indoor 
versus outdoor exhibitions and static versus mobile exhibitions.

OBJECTIVES AND TARGET GROUPS     501
The role of exhibitions in marketing communications
Like direct marketing and personal selling, exhibitions and trade fairs are considered to be 
a more personal and thus a ‘below-the-line’ communications tool. Demonstrations, one-to-
one contacts with customers and prospects, direct selling and public relations are combined 
in this medium. Exhibitions have the advantage that all the senses (listening, watching, 
feeling, tasting and smelling) can be stimulated. The Index study of the CEIR (Centre for 
Exhibition Industry Research) reported an increase in the overall trade show industry of 
15% in 2011, compared with 2010. The positive growth brought an end to three consecutive 
years of decline. The growth is reflected in all four metrics of measurement (real revenues, 
net square feet, attendees and exhibitors). Additionally, the Index forecasts increases for the 
forthcoming years (3.2% in 2013 and 3.4% in 2014).6
In business-to-business markets, trade shows represent a large part of the marketing spend-
ing than in business-to-consumer markets. According to a CEIR survey in February 2012, B2B 
exhibitions received an average of 39.2% of respondents’ marketing dollars in 2011, with those 
allocating on average 64% of their budgets to this channel. The survey required marketers to 
have participated in at least one B2B exhibition in the past two years.7 In a 2013 US survey of 214 
companies, 53% stated that they exhibited at international trade shows. Another US survey in 
2015 revealed that 53% of the respondents were optimistic and 38% hopeful about the effective-
ness of trade show participation. In Germany, in 2012, more than 10 million people visited trade 
shows. A 2014 German study showed that one third of German companies planned on increas-
ing their trade show investments. In 2013, German companies on average participated in 8.3 
trade fairs, and the average German company had an annual trade show budget of €357 000.8
Objectives and target groups
A company should first focus on the objectives it wants to achieve by participating in an 
exhibition or trade fair. Exhibition goals vis-à-vis the overall communications and market-
ing objectives should be formulated, often integrating specific goals of sales and marketing 
departments. Figure 12.1 displays a number of objectives which may positively influence the 
decision to participate in exhibitions and trade fairs.9
Selling products is especially important for companies in markets in which an important 
proportion of the annual sales is done in trade fairs. Examples are cars, clothing and china-
ware. Trade fairs and exhibitions are important to make the first contacts with prospects and 
to generate leads that could eventually lead to sales. On the other hand, they are also meeting 
places where clients are met and contacts are reinforced. Moreover, the public of exhibitions 
are highly selective since they would not come to the fair if they were not interested in the 
exhibited products or services. A research report from the CEIR says it costs 56% less to close 
a lead generated at an exhibition than a lead generated in-field ($625 versus $1117). Booths at 
Visitors
Vertical
Horizontal
Exhibitors
Vertical
Focused shows
Reserved for companies and 
clients from a specific industry
Multi-industry visitors
Companies from a specific 
industry exhibit to a diverse public
Horizontal
Multi-industry exhibitors
Different companies exhibit to a 
specific public
Diversified trade shows
Different companies exhibit to a 
diverse public
Table 12.2  Types of exhibition based on the type of visitors and exhibitors
Source: Based on Shoham, A. (1992) ‘Selecting and evaluating trade shows’, Industrial Marketing Management, 21(4), 335–41.

502     CHAPTER 12  EXHIBITIONS AND TRADE FAIRS
Figure 12.1  Marketing communications objectives and trade fair participation
M + R is a trade fair organised by Fairtec. M + R Antwerp and M + R Brussels are one-day trade fairs for meas-
uring and regulation instrumentation in the process industry. The M + R programme gives visitors the opportu-
nity to experience the whole range of products and services for the process industry. There are exhibitors from 
many different industries (batch systems, embedded systems, factory automation, identification systems, intelligent 
Business insight
M + R: repositioning an existing fair
exhibitions lead to hundreds or thousands of face-to-face interactions with highly targeted 
individuals.10 Launching and/or testing a new product can be another important objective 
of trade fair participation. Visitors and other participants of exhibitions learn about new 
products. A company can use trade fairs as a ‘test market’ for new products by observing 
visitor interest, reactions and intentions to buy certain innovations.11 Possible improvements 
and new applications may be discovered in that way. For instance, Nivea for Men used an 
exhibition to launch its range of grooming products under the ‘for men who dare to care’ 
theme. Pre-show mailings, tube posters and show sponsorship drove people to the stand where 
sampling, interactivity and a competition took place. Nivea supported its product launch with 
media coverage as a result of the exhibition and gave out thousands of free samples to its 
target group. Another example is Procter & Gamble launching Sunny Delight, a range of fruit 
drinks, at a top retailing trade show. In this case, the objectives were push marketing to get 
the new drinks noticed among the distribution as well as to earn shelf space. P&G attracted 
35 to 40% of the entire exhibition audience to its colourful stand with free prize draws and 
product sampling, generating thousands of leads for sales call follow-up. Within a few months 
of its launch, Sunny Delight was rivalling the sales figures of Coca-Cola and Pepsi in the UK.12

OBJECTIVES AND TARGET GROUPS     503
New companies can take off quickly in a market by immediately marketing their prod-
ucts and services to the target market in a direct way. Trade fairs may help to increase brand 
and company awareness rapidly within the target market, and to make deals with custom-
ers whom they would not have met as quickly using other communications tools. One of 
the major strengths of trade fairs is that products and services can be demonstrated and 
potential buyers may experience the value of products by trying them out, looking at them, 
touching them, etc. Potential customers can have all the technical details they want and the 
products’ features and unique selling points can be demonstrated.
In an era when food retailers are seeking to differentiate themselves, the SIAL show in Paris, 
an international food, beverage, wine and spirits exhibition, provides a showcase of innovative 
products in three ways. The exhibition floor offers a range of products divided into product 
areas, then subdivided by country of origin. A trend showcase provides a specific array of 
products that are among the most outstanding of the new products. The show’s own SIAL 
d’Or Awards spotlight items that are distinguished as fresh, inventive and trendy by a panel 
of judges. In the category ‘Savoury Frozen Products’ the Italian company Agrifood Abruzzo 
won the award in 2012 with its ‘Foglia a Foglia’ product. Foglia a Foglia is a dish made from 
layers of leaves of frozen spinach, beet, savoy cabbage and chicory. The innovative technology 
keeps the leaves intact, and preserves the flavour, colour and tenderness of the fresh vegetables. 
Since 2010, SIAL has also rewarded innovative products aimed at children aged 3 to 12 via 
the Disney-SIAL Award. These products must combine the nutritional value required for a 
balanced diet with taste and fun so that they satisfy both parents and children. The biennial 
SIAL exhibition in Paris attracts more than 136 400 delegates from 200 countries and is one 
of the biggest events in the world for the food industry. It offers foreign and small companies 
the opportunity to demonstrate their innovative products to the world’s biggest retailers.14
instrumentation, PLC, test and measurement, automatisation, digital data transmission, operating panels, sensors, 
etc.). At the M + R fair in Antwerp, 25% of the visitors had come to the fair for the first time, meaning that every 
fair brings a pool of potential new clients to reach. Fairtec focuses on organising smaller specialised fairs to compete 
with the large, international, broader-scoped fairs in Germany and France. Its position is complementary to those 
large fairs. In Europe, every country has its own large fairs because every national headquarters of a big international 
company still keeps its proper national identity. M + R is a flexible concept. Companies can decide to participate 
every six months, every year or on a two-year basis.
In 2002, Fairtec decided to diversify geographically by organising the same fair concept in the Netherlands. 
Fairtec noticed that a lot of exhibitors at the Belgian fairs also had sister companies in the Netherlands. So it con-
cluded that, instead of opening its doors to Dutch exhibitors, it should implement the concept in the Netherlands 
for Dutch exhibitors and visitors. So Fairtec went with M + R to, among other places, Rotterdam, Amsterdam and 
Eindhoven. The one-day regional fair formula was intended to be a flexible alternative to the traditional four-day 
Het instrument fair that takes place in the Netherlands every second year. The Dutch venture started in 2002, but 
in 2004 it had already come to an end. The fair had only 65 exhibitors and 600 visitors in Rotterdam, which was 
not enough for such a large port city. For instance, in Antwerp there were 100 exhibitors and around 1500 visitors. 
Apparently, diversifying by entering a larger geographical market did not work, because the Dutch fair Het instru-
ment (‘The instrument’) proved to be too strong a competitor for M + R in the Netherlands. Having lost its place as 
an organiser on the Dutch market, Fairtec moved to reposition its marketing approach to attract Dutch companies 
and visitors to the M + R fair in Antwerp.
In 2007, Fairtec thought about making changes to the M + R formula. A lot of exhibitors felt that the fair was 
too crowded, and exhibitors complained that not all interested visitors could be contacted. One possible solution 
was to organise a two-day fair instead of a one-day fair, in one place. At the time, M + R attracted 1500 visitors 
on one day. If the fair were expanded over two days, only 750 visitors a day would attend, which is not enough. So, 
making M + R a two-day fair is a possible risk for the organiser. Another question was: Would exhibitors be happy? 
They would incur more costs because they would have to rent the space and the stand for one more day. The result 
of a survey showed that exhibitors did not want to change the current format of short, relatively small fairs in two 
cities.13 In 2012, the fair was still organised in Ghent and Antwerp for one day.

504     CHAPTER 12  EXHIBITIONS AND TRADE FAIRS
‘Adventure Affair’ is a public fair for adventurous travellers with a global passion organised by Flanders Expo. There 
are more than 100 exhibitors who give people a look at all the adventurous and sport-orientated vacations, spe-
cialised tour operators, new discoveries and destinations. The fair is also for active and extreme sports fans (diving, 
mountainbiking, wildwater rafting, etc.). The fair is composed of different sections: ‘Far away’, ‘Near home’, ‘Material’, 
‘Bikes’, ‘Big kick’, ‘Non-profit’, ‘Four-wheel drive’ and ‘Living abroad’.
In 2003, the organisation realised that there was a problem. Adventure Affair was overly focused on a niche. 
The fair had been in existence since 1996. But, at that time, adventure travel was, for example, backpacking in 
Vietnam. Nowadays people think differently about adventure travel: everyone is going to Vietnam. The concept of 
adventure travel has acquired a new connotation. There were few young people at the fair. The young public did 
not seem to be interested anymore, and they did not find what they were looking for at the fair. The organisation 
realised that the market for adventure travel had changed in such a substantial way that a repositioning of the fair 
was more than necessary to keep it alive. A SWOT analysis showed that the fair was still well known and that the 
market for adventure was still rising. Other strengths were the fact that the fair received a lot of media attention 
and that it attracted a qualitatively high visitor public. A major weakness was the fact that the fair for adventure 
travel was no longer perceived as adventurous enough. Every year fewer people visited the fair. There were also 
many opportunities, though. Adventure Affair could diversify into the more exciting side of adventure and travel-
ling and could focus on a younger public without neglecting the older public. On the basis of the results of the 
SWOT analysis and brainstorming, the organisation found out that there had to be more modern kicks at the fair. 
So it decided to reposition the fair for a younger public by changing the activities and offerings at the fair and by 
branding and communicating it differently.
Flanders Expo felt that the fair needed more short adventure vacations on offer and decided to work more on 
excitement, kicks and adrenaline. It implemented new activities at the fair, such as a four-wheel drive section, an 
outdoor bungee jump, an evening event where visitors could watch travel movies and listen to traditional music from 
abroad, a rope and obstacle course, etc. The fair now offers adventure to the elderly but also to the young public 
looking for kicks. In order to reposition the fair, the organisation has chosen to strengthen the brand in the consum-
ers’ minds but also to take in a new, unoccupied position that consumers could value and appreciate. The fair is still 
the fair it was before, but the organisation has extended and renewed it. The limitation of the first positioning was 
that the organisation over-positioned the fair, installing too narrow an image. The repositioned Adventure Affair is 
now a concept that attracts a young as well as an older public.
The organisation has changed the fair and communicated its repositioning by means of a new media campaign. 
First of all, the organisation worked together with two radio stations, Studio Brussel and Q Music. Studio Brussel is 
an alternative rock radio for younger people. Q music is a more general radio station but also attracts a younger 
public. A print campaign was also developed in an innovative and attractive way: a woman was pictured in the 
mouth of a shark. All the communications tools conveyed the message that the fair was an event where people 
could find extreme kicks, and that it was not just a fair for adventurous travelling. Another marketing tool used by 
the organisation was to co-operate with a popular adventure-type TV programme in Belgium, Expedition Robinson. 
In this programme 15 people go to live on an uninhabited island. They have to survive by searching for their own 
food, and the contestants also have to do tests. The person who can stay the longest on the island becomes the 
Robinson. In 2005, the selection for the candidates who wanted to participate in the programme took place at 
Adventure Affair. Applicants could register their interest in advance on the website and then had to take part in an 
adventurous activity while at the fair. The organisers also actively encouraged visitors to register via the website. 
While doing this, they could indicate what their interests were, meaning that they could receive relevant newslet-
ters during the year.
The repositioning was a success. The level of appreciation from the visitors as well as from the exhibitors  
was higher after the repositioning than before it. In 2003, the number of fair visitors was 15 239; in 2006, there 
were 17 066 visitors. The number of exhibitors increased from 96 in 2003 to 112 in 2006. The surface area of the 
fair increased from 2559 m2 in 2003 to 5153 m2 in 2006.15 At the 2007 fair, around 12 000 visitors were registered.
Business insight
Repositioning the Adventure Affair

OBJECTIVES AND TARGET GROUPS     505
Exhibitions are a part of a company’s relationship marketing programme with its cus-
tomers and are also a PR tool to support the corporate image of the company and the qual-
ity and fame of its brands. Companies not participating in certain exhibitions or trade fairs 
may send out negative signals to the market. Customers and prospects will have questions 
about the absence of a company at a trade fair, and competitors will try to profit from its 
absence. Multinational companies may increase their international brand awareness and 
sales by participating in foreign trade fairs. This could lead to new contacts and sales con-
tracts in new foreign markets. For instance, Russian and Asian trade fairs may help European 
companies develop markets outside Europe. Often they will be able to enjoy financial and 
organisational support from governmental export departments. Overseas trade shows are 
the least costly and most efficient way to check out international opportunities for franchis-
ers with expansion plans who want to determine interest in their concept before making 
further investments. National franchise exhibitions in Birmingham, Valencia, Brazil, Hong 
Kong, Singapore and Milan have all averaged between 15 000 and 30 000 attendees.16
There is no quicker way to learn about the new products and policies of competitors 
than by participating in exhibitions and trade fairs. Competitor analysis and comparing own 
products and prices with those of competitors could also be an objective for participating in 
an exhibition. Trade fairs often offer the opportunity to build relationships with customers. 
Clients feel important if they are treated as VIPs (champagne, food, personal demonstrations 
of novelties, etc.) at fairs and exhibitions. Companies often have special guest suites and 
activities reserved for their best customers. Sometimes, exhibitions and VIP arrangements for 
salespeople in luxury hotels etc. are used as an incentive to enhance personnel morale and to 
motivate employees. Further, new salespeople may be recruited at exhibitions and trade fairs. 
Finally, some companies stick to their tradition of participating in certain exhibitions and do 
not consider other communications objectives because ‘we do it every year, it is a tradition’.
In Table 12.3, the results of a study of exhibition objectives among 104 UK companies17 are 
compared with a study among 311 Belgian firms.18 As this table shows, the six most frequently 
Objective
UK (N = 104)
Belgium (N = 311)
Mean (10 points)
Rank
Mean (5 points)
Rank
Meeting new customers
8.87
  1
4.25
  1
Launching new products
8.68
  2
3.86
  4
Taking sales orders
7.69
  3
2.82
23
Enhancing company image
7.52
  6
3.89
  3
Interacting with existing customers
7.67
  4
3.73
  7
Promoting existing products
7.53
  5
3.82
  5
Getting information about competitors
4.84
10
3.66
  8
Getting an edge on non-exhibitors
4.57
12
–
–
Keeping up with competitors
4.86
  9
–
–
Enhancing staff morale
3.90
13
1.72
26
Interacting with distributors
4.80
11
–
–
Doing market research
5.77
  7
–
–
Meeting new distributors
5.01
  8
–
–
Increasing company awareness
–
3.93
  2
Reaching as many people as possible
–
3.76
  6
Increasing brand awareness
–
3.63
  9
Reaching people in an effective way
–
3.60
10
Table 12.3  Objectives of trade fair participation in the UK and Belgium
Source: Based on Blythe, J. (2002) ‘Using trade fairs in key account management’, Industrial Marketing Management, 31, 627–35;  
De Pelsmacker, P., Van den Bergh, J. and De Schepper, W. (1997) Febelux Research on the Image of Exhibitions and Trade Fairs among 
Companies and Communication Agencies. Ghent, Belgium: De Vlerick Leuven Gent Management School.

506     CHAPTER 12  EXHIBITIONS AND TRADE FAIRS
formulated goals are similar for both countries: interaction with new and existing customers, 
promoting existing and new products, learning about competitors’ new products and enhanc-
ing the corporate image are the most important reasons why companies choose to participate in 
exhibitions or trade fairs. Taking sales orders seems more important in the UK, whereas brand 
and company awareness are more frequently formulated goals in Belgium. Overall, an exhibi-
tion or trade fair combines a number of the following functions: sales generation, promotion, 
contact generation, demonstration, research, promotion of the company and its image, and PR.
For a stand to be successful, both sales teams and marketing must work in tandem. An 
exhibition should be as much about customer relationships as about sales. Quantel, a manu-
facturer of high-end creative software for the film and TV industry, regularly exhibits at the 
National Association of Broadcasters show in Las Vegas and at the International Broadcast-
ing Convention in Amsterdam. Its goal is to generate more sales leads but not at the risk of 
diluting the brand equity. At the same convention, Microsoft TV wanted to make visitors 
aware of its name in the broadcasting marketplace while ensuring that the sales force could 
engage visitors with the product in a suitable environment. At the stand, physical barriers 
were discarded and the stand was divided into zones by changes in colour, furniture, textures 
and materials. Large screens and chill-out areas enabled visitors to see the message.19
Exhibitions and trade fairs can be directed at a number of quite different target groups, 
each having its own expectations and information needs. This will have an influence on 
designing the stand and choosing what kind of information is presented in what way. Target 
groups include customers, prospects, competitors, suppliers, own personnel and journalists 
(media). All this depends on the type of exhibition.
Visitors may have a number of reasons for attending an exhibition. They may want to 
increase their knowledge about products, services and companies, discover novelties and 
evolutions, contact other people working in the same area and prepare specific purchases.
As a result, areas of interest and typical questions of exhibition visitors are:20
● comparing different suppliers and having an overview of supply;
● technical novelties and trends;
● scientific information;
● product and system information;
● technical information;
● user conditions;
● prices and sales conditions;
● competitor analysis;
● who the preferred supplier is;
● who may be potential partners;
● training.
The more heterogeneous the target groups of the exhibition, the simpler the stand con-
cept will have to be.
Planning an exhibition
The success of participating in an exhibition is highly determined by the preparation. As 
planning and implementing exhibitions is a labour-intensive and long-term process, a check-
list should be used throughout the entire procedure. Most projects start one year in advance 
of the actual exhibition. The logical steps one should follow when planning an exhibition 
are shown in Figure 12.2.21
In the first stage of this process, exhibitions are considered as a medium or communica-
tions tool and compared with other media to reach the communications goals as stated 
in the communications plan of the marketing strategy. A company should also choose an 

PLANNING AN EXHIBITION     507
Figure 12.2  The exhibition planning process
Source: Based on Van Den Tempel, W. (1985) ‘Beursdeelneming en Return on Investment’ (‘Trade fair participation and return 
on investment’), in Beurzen en Tentoonstellingen: Praktijk Handboek voor Communicatief Exposeren (Trade Fairs and Exhibitions: A 
Practical Guide to Expose and Communicate). Deventer: Kluwer.
exhibition that is most representative for the communications objectives it has planned. 
A number of selection criteria will help marketers to make the right choice:
● Reach of the exhibition or trade fair: both quantitatively (number of visitors) and quali-
tatively (profile of visitors).
● Costs and estimated return of fair participation.
● Programme of the exhibition: the subject of the exhibition should correspond to the 
characteristics of the products or services a company is selling.
● Presence of competitors: not participating could send negative signals to the market of 
buyers, and competitors may use your absence as a strategic tool in negotiations with 
your (ex-)clients.
● Reputation and fame of an exhibition and its organiser.
● Number of participants.
● Media attention for former exhibitions.
● Own experiences with previous exhibitions.

508     CHAPTER 12  EXHIBITIONS AND TRADE FAIRS
● Supporting activities, such as workshops, readings, conferences.
● Timing of a trade fair: fairs should be scheduled into the planning of a company and 
sales leads generated at a fair need sales capacity immediately after the fair.
Types of visitors and the types of products or services presented at trade fairs are the 
most important selection criteria. Other important criteria include estimated numbers of 
leads, numbers of visitors, costs and publicity. Date and duration of the event and reputa-
tion of the organiser are the least important criteria. For instance, for financial advisers, 
fairs for senior citizens can draw big crowds of retirees looking for financial information, 
but there is a good chance that every broker and insurance agent will be present at the fair 
as well. The same can be said for specific financial expositions. Therefore financial advisers 
should be creative in their choice of public fairs. For instance, expositions for expectant 
parents might be interesting to reach parents and grandparents. Health fairs can also be 
interesting. Even boat shows or construction equipment trade shows could be important 
fairs for the financial adviser. The former attracts people with enough money for boats, who 
will certainly also have funds to invest. The attendees of the latter are owners of, or upper 
management in, companies that could need retirement plans and other financial advice.22
Infratech is a Dutch trade fair for civil engineering, ground, water and road construction that takes place in the Ahoy in 
Rotterdam. In 2008, the Belgian fair organiser Flanders Expo decided to organise ‘Infratech Belgium’. The first version 
of the new trade fair was held in Flanders Expo on 12–15 February 2008. The dynamic world of the civil engineering, 
hydraulic engineering, road construction and traffic engineering industry demands up-to-date knowledge and excel-
lent contacts. The pace of technological development is fast and working conditions are becoming increasingly com-
plicated and, consequently, there is an increasingly urgent need for fast, effective collaboration and tailored solutions 
for implementation of infrastructure projects. The exhibitors are companies working in general construction (manu-
facturers and distributors of construction machinery and materials, concrete construction, groundwork, soil surveys, 
etc.), road construction (road construction work, bridge construction, tunnel construction, paving, sewer work, etc.), 
hydraulic engineering (dredging, water treatment plants, water barrier and water barrier products, underwater work, 
hydrological construction, harbour construction, etc.), railway engineering (railway construction, manufacturers of rail-
way machinery, etc.), drilling (drilling and sounding work, horizontal drilling and well drilling, etc.), traffic engineering 
(signage and signalling systems, mobility and traffic management, traffic signs and signals, road and yard signage and 
signalling systems, building signs and signalling systems, traffic signs along connecting roads, etc.) and energy (energy 
supply, renewable energy, energy saving and recovery). Also, suppliers of pumps and compressors, transmission com-
ponents, crane and lifting equipment cables, pipes and tubes, pipeline systems, mains networks, and so on, are invited.
In preparing the new fair, the organisation found out that the number of contracts awarded by public tender is 
increasing. In recent years, the Belgian government has started making major investments in road construction and pub-
lic transport. There have also been investments for expanding regional airports and investments in water management. 
The total volume of contracts awarded in 2007 reached €50 billion. This information shows that the market is increasing. 
A booming market is necessary to start up a fair. The next step is to analyse the exhibitor market to see if there is a good 
market potential. For Infratech Belgium, Flanders Expo hired a market research agency that carried out an analysis of the 
Belgian market. The market research is based on surveys with different companies which could be potential exhibitors 
or visitors to the Infratech fair. The organisation explains the concept of the fair to the companies and does the survey 
afterwards. The organisation has also done a SWOT analysis on the market situation before launching the Infratech fair 
concept. Based on this information, the organisation saw that there was a place for Infratech on the fair market.
Flanders Expo also studied the match between the Infratech offer and market structure and demand. A successful 
fair has to correspond with the existing market. This means that a fair has to show a good balance between all the 
Business insight
Infratech: evaluation of the market potential for a new trade show concept by ana-
lysing exhibitor markets

LIMITATIONS OF FAIRS AND EXHIBITIONS     509
In the next phase, budgets, time and capacity are checked and one person is made respon-
sible for the planning and implementation of the trade fair. Then, a strategy and exhibition 
goals are defined, together with the budget, back-timing and briefing for the development of 
stands, animation, etc. This is developed further in the next steps. Later, the participation 
is evaluated through the tools discussed in the next chapter.
The promotion stage is one of the more important exhibition-supporting activities of 
the planning process. A direct mailing or emailing to invite clients and prospects (with free 
entrance tickets) is often employed. Advertising on radio and TV may be used to bring the 
exhibition and stand to the attention of the public. Ads in the exhibition catalogue and on its 
website will help visitors find a stand and have an important after-fair promotion effect. Free 
entrance tickets, direct mails and ads in the catalogue are frequently used as pre-promotion 
tools. Press releases and ads in above-the-line media are also used.
Companies which successfully develop integrated marketing communications programmes 
emphasising trade shows do so because these trade fairs create sales for them. These compa-
nies create a competitive advantage through their use of shows in two ways: they are twice as 
likely to close sales from their trade show exposure; and they are able to gain these sales more 
efficiently, at a lower cost per sale. They also obtain up to three times more exposure because 
they can exhibit in more shows at the same cost. These companies have additional expertise, 
enabling them to make better use of trade shows. In addition, responsibility and authority 
for the show operations and success lie with someone who has and can develop expertise. 
A study clearly indicates that success is not based on preference for shows but rather on the 
performance of activities that lead to success. Less successful companies can increase success 
by identifying someone in the organisation to take the exhibition marketing responsibility.24
After participating in an exhibition, a company should evaluate the effectiveness of its 
efforts. Effectiveness measures for trade shows and exhibitions are discussed in Chapter 13.
Limitations of fairs and exhibitions
There are a number of reasons why companies could have a negative attitude to participating 
in trade fairs and exhibitions. Visitors are overwhelmed with lots of information during a short 
period of time, and it is likely that communicating a message in this clutter will be ineffective. 
Competitors are easy to contact and comparisons are possible. It is likely that a client will find 
a better offer for his or her preferences at the fair; on the other hand, it is also possible to gain 
new customers (ex-clients of competitors). Trade fairs are often hectic and exhibitions with 
a high visitor number will only lead to very superficial contacts. Exhibitions are exhausting. 
Weary visitors are difficult to contact and will not be very willing to buy. Half of the visitors 
spend a maximum of 3–4 hours at an exhibition. The most frequently mentioned reason why 
trade fairs are not chosen as a communications tool is the high cost. Low sales responses and 
satisfaction about the current communications mix are also high-scoring reasons.25
market players and all the products of a certain industry, in this case civil engineering, hydraulic engineering, road 
construction and traffic engineering. The organisation defined a typology for the different potential exhibitors. This 
typology is based on the different positions of the exhibitors in the market and their individual developments. Accord-
ing to a market study, the organiser reaches an ideal mix of exhibitors: trendsetters/market leaders (8%), international 
and national brand companies (27%), competitive compulsory exhibitors (41%), hangers-on (17%) and newcomers 
(7%). Infratech is especially aware of the importance of newcomers and market leaders at the fair. Newcomers are very 
important to keep the fair innovative, and market leaders are very important to attract the national market industry. If 
the market leaders are not present at Infratech, other exhibitors will evaluate the fair as less important. Internationalisa-
tion is important because more management decisions are being taken in foreign countries. Potential exhibitors should 
be aware of this. On the other hand, many visitors take local decisions. Visitors detect trends in foreign countries, but 
they will order similar products and technologies in Belgium. Therefore, a local Belgian fair such as Infratech is useful.23

510     CHAPTER 12  EXHIBITIONS AND TRADE FAIRS
Online trade shows
Although traditional trade shows still have advantages for companies that want to showcase 
their products, online shows have emerged as an attractive option for those with audiences 
that are too focused to justify the expenses of a real-world show. Recession, tight corporate 
travel and marketing budgets, and terrorism have taken their toll on traditional exhibitions. 
For instance, in 2002 attendance at trade shows fell by 2% and sales of exhibition space 
declined by 5%. Meanwhile the popularity of online shows has been growing. Most of those 
budgets would be spent on more specialised exhibits, smaller shows with targeted audiences 
and refined messages. For instance, EE Times magazine was targeted at such an audience of 
electronic engineers. In November 2002, the magazine moved its IP/System on Chip confer-
ence to cyberspace for the first time. Using software from the Israeli firm Unisfair, EE Times 
created a website depicting a conference centre, complete with virtual visitors walking along 
paths to the conference hall and an exhibition space. A click on the conference hall took the 
visitors, paying nothing for the two-day event, into a virtual auditorium where presenters’ 
slides filled the screen while their speeches were broadcast via streaming audio. In the exhibi-
tion hall, attendees could view exhibitors’ displays and chat with sales reps. Exhibitors such 
as IBM, Intel and Motorola could get details on who viewed products and contact visitors in 
real time. The online trade show drew about 600 live attendees, with another 1100 viewing 
an archive of the event. Due to its success, the show was immediately rescheduled.
However, virtual shows have one big disadvantage when compared with their real-world 
counterparts: the lack of personal face-to-face contact. Virtual exhibition halls and online 
chat might be successful but cannot beat the ability to see, touch and play with a product 
or shake hands with a potential business partner. As traditional shows involve more effort 
from, and higher costs for, attendees, leads generated are more likely to turn into actual sales 
as less serious shoppers are weeded out. Some virtual trade shows are trying to make their 
events more realistic by using technologies that allow individuals to be represented by lifelike 
avatars who can move and interact in a simulated world online. Another standard feature 
of traditional exhibitions, the goodie bag of promotional items given out by exhibitors and 
organisers, is also very important. DataWarehouse.com sends out gifts to a random sample 
of about two-thirds of visitors half-way through each show.26
In May 2012, the Belgian city of Ghent held its first digital job exhibition. Thirty-three 
companies with local plants or offices, such as Coca-Cola, Eandis, Volvo Group Belgium and 
Innogenetics, attended this virtual experiment. On the website www.gentwerkt.be (‘Ghent 
works’), a person looking for a new job could see three different screens, representing three 
halls, with the logos of the participating companies. By clicking on the logo, the visitor 
entered the virtual stand. Via Skype and chat sessions the job hunter could have live contact 
with the recruiter representing the company. After one day, the fair had nearly 4000 virtual 
visitors and more than 1000 CVs were posted.27
Obviously, exhibitions and trade fairs can be announced in advertising campaigns and on websites, or awareness and 
interest can be created through press conferences, but, in the first place, exhibition and trade fair activities should 
be well integrated into the direct marketing and personal selling efforts. Direct marketing can be used to announce 
IMC insight
Integrating exhibitions and trade fairs in IMC

FURTHER READING     511
Summary
Exhibitions and trade fairs are mainly, but not exclusively, used in business-to-business market-
ing as places for merchants of a certain product category or industry to meet and talk. Different 
types of exhibitions can be distinguished, such as public fairs, horizontal and vertical trade 
fairs, conference-bound exhibitions and trade marts. The place of exhibitions, especially in 
business marketing communications, is considered to be almost as important as direct market-
ing and personal selling. The objectives of exhibitions can be very diverse: to launch and test 
new products, establish brand or company awareness, demonstrate products, reinforce corpo-
rate image, monitor the competition, build relationships, generate sales leads and sell products. 
Exhibitions and trade fairs have to be planned carefully. After an analysis of the exhibition 
project, and making an inventory of what is needed, the actual exhibition has to be prepared, 
a concept for a stand has to be developed and the exhibition has to be realised (reservations, 
stand-building, catering, press, etc.). After the exhibition, the results have to be evaluated.
Review questions
	 1.	 What is the importance of trade fairs and exhibitions in the marketing communications 
mix?
	 2.	 What are the main objectives of trade fair participation, and for which objectives are 
exhibitions and trade fairs most suited?
	 3.	 What are the basic steps and considerations in the development of an exhibition participa-
tion plan?
	 4.	 What are the limitations of trade fair participation?
the fair to customers and stakeholders. Information collected at the fair can be ploughed into the customer database 
and be used for more effective mailing campaigns or for better advertising and promotion. At the trade fair, pros-
pects can be identified and deals can be closed. It is an opportunity to invite loyal customers and to build a stronger 
relationship with them. Exhibitions and fairs are also opportunities to hold press conferences and organise corporate 
hospitality events. Prospects, identified through sales efforts and direct marketing campaigns, can be invited to 
the fair for a more personal approach. In general, fairs and exhibitions can make direct marketing and sales efforts 
more effective, and the latter can turn fairs and exhibitions into powerful tools by adequately preparing for them.
Further reading
Kirchgeorg, M., Dornscheidt, W.M., Giese, W. and Stoeck, N. (2006) Trade Show Manage-
ment. Wiesbaden: Gabler.
Krauel, J. (2008) New Trade Show Design. Barcelona: Links International.
Siskind, B. (2005) Powerful Exhibit Marketing: The Complete Guide to Successful Trade 
Shows, Conferences, and Consumer Shows. Mississanga, ON: Wiley.
www.statista.com
www.ufi.org

512     CHAPTER 12  EXHIBITIONS AND TRADE FAIRS
specialist contractors in the home improvement market 
is sometimes difficult. The database of Casius contains 
details of thousands of home builders and improvement 
professionals throughout Belgium and the Netherlands. 
Casius was founded in 1999 and quickly became a suc-
cessful Internet company in the Benelux countries. FISA 
also organises ‘Second Place’, the first Belgian fair for sec-
ond homes. The first fair took place in 2006. For the first 
time, everything that interests people looking for a second 
home was gathered together under one roof. FISA also 
organises, together with the architect organisation NAV 
and Media Office, the event ‘My house, my architect’. This 
is an initiative of the organisation of architects to exhibit 
220 recently built or recently renovated houses. These 
houses can be visited for an entire weekend. The purpose 
is to put future builders or renovators into contact with 
Company profile
FISA is a company of 14 employees that came into being at 
the first Brussels Building Fair in 1960, which was renamed 
Batibouw in 1973 (Photo 12.1). Batibouw is the core busi-
ness of FISA, but also a number of spin-off activities are 
organised, such as ‘Red Turtle Art’, an art contest open to 
all amateur artists. Batibouw supports novice or experi-
enced artists and, in that way, proves that the building 
trade and a sense of beauty can go hand in hand. A ‘Public 
Award’, ‘Artist Award’ and ‘Press Award’ are presented to 
the winners in the categories of painting, sculpture and 
photography. Another activity of FISA is the casius.be and 
casius.nl websites that help people to find a good special-
ist quickly and free of charge. Finding a reliable builder, 
architect, decorator, plumber, electrician and other 
Case 12:
FISA – Batibouw: how to calculate the effectiveness of a trade show
Photo 12.1  Batibouw, the Belgian building and construction fair
Source: Reproduced with permission of FISA, Belgium.

Case 12     513
have been completely filled. Each year for the past 48 years, 
countless products and services have been introduced 
and presented at Batibouw. For 11 days the entire build-
ing industry is the centre of attention. The event receives 
extensive media coverage. Batibouw is also strongly sup-
ported by policy-makers, who implement special measures 
to enhance this key economic industry’s resilience. Today, 
Batibouw has become the flagship of an industry that every 
Belgian holds dear. So, now, Batibouw is a fair that does not 
really have to be marketed, with 85% of exhibitors regis-
tering automatically again for the next fair. The other 15% 
are companies that have ceased to exist or think that par-
ticipation is too expensive. In 2007, the rent for a stand at 
Batibouw was :120.96/m2. Normally for Batibouw, every 
sub-industry (kitchen, bathroom, etc.) occupies a full hall. 
Every hall is full, and there is always a waiting list for poten-
tial new exhibitors. Demand for exhibition space outstrips 
supply. For Batibouw, there are no problems finding suf-
ficient exhibitors. There is no need to convince people to 
participate at Batibouw. The fair is so popular and visible 
that companies just want to be there.
How to increase the effectiveness of the 
fair for the organiser and the visitors
FISA always tries to organise the fair from the perspective of 
the visitor. A fair can only survive if it attracts enough visi-
tors. Therefore, the organisation invests in finding out what 
the public need and want and how it can generate visibil-
ity and media interest to attract the public. For instance, 
Batibouw is a big fair, there are a lot of people and it can 
be an exhausting experience for the visitor. Therefore it is 
necessary to segment the fair. The first focal point in the 
communication strategy is to clearly communicate where 
visitors can find products and stands. A second focal point 
is identifying new trends. Every year, there are hundreds of 
new innovations at Batibouw. But one innovation is more 
spectacular than another. Therefore, Batibouw always works 
with three themes for the fair. These themes are artificially 
created, but they always attract a lot of media attention, and 
articles appear in the press about the fair and building in 
general. For instance, the first theme in the 2007 fair was 
lifestyle, which put the kitchen in the spotlight. The second 
theme was technical, ‘the acoustic norm’. The third and last 
theme concerned saving energy. If these three themes are 
well chosen, success is guaranteed.
Exit polls of exhibitors and visitors are very important 
to learn more about client satisfaction and, perhaps, to 
improve some elements in the future. The exit polls of visi-
tors of Batibouw 2007 revealed the following. Batibouw had 
361 644 visitors, of whom 290 159 were private individuals 
and 71 485 professionals. Of the professionals, 62% came 
on the first two days that are limited to professional visitors 
and 38% came on the other days. As a comparison, in 2006 
there were 369 178 visitors (Figure 12.3).
the architect and his or her work. The strategy of FISA is 
to engage in new ventures, but the core business of FISA 
is still Batibouw.
In total there are around 232 fair and event locations in 
Belgium, which might seem a lot for a small country. Many 
of them, though, are small. The biggest in Belgium is Brus-
sels Expo at 140 000 m2, where Batibouw takes place. Bati-
bouw is one of the largest and most visited fairs in Belgium. 
It attracts around 1000 exhibitors and 370 000 visitors each 
year. Compared with other fairs, this is large: Agriflanders (350 
exhibitors and 86 000 visitors); Bois & Habitat (250 exhibi-
tors and 86 000 visitors); Furniture Fair (189 exhibitors and 
9532 visitors); Accenta (400 exhibitors and 85 000 visitors); 
Febiacvzw – Autosalon (300 exhibitors and 349 000 visitors).
Batibouw is the largest building fair in Belgium, 
although there are other smaller, regional fairs that are 
also dedicated to building or related subjects and can also 
be found at Batibouw. These include BIS fair (a building 
and real estate fair in Flanders Expo with 350 exhibitors); 
Hout, Energie en Wonen (‘Wood, Energy and Living’ at 
Antwerp Expo); Vlaanderenverbouwbeurs (a renovating 
fair at Waregern Expo); Bois et Habitat Namur (‘Wood and 
Living Namur’); Salonenergie et Habitat (‘Energy and Liv-
ing’ at Namur Expo); Domotix Forum (Domotica Fair at 
Brabanthal); Architect at Work (a fair for architects at Kor-
trijk Xpo); Batireno (a construction and renovation fair at 
Namur Expo); and Bouwinnovaitie (building innovation at 
Grenslandhallen).
Batibouw’s history
The ‘Bouwsalon van Brussel’ (‘Brussels Building Fair’) was 
launched by Georges de Vestel in 1960. Until then, smaller 
regional building fairs were open to the general public. 
Georges de Vestel’s dream was to set up a trade fair in Brus-
sels, not only for professionals but also for the public at 
large. In 1967 the fair – which was still called the Brussels 
Building Fair – launched its new logo: a turtle in blue, green 
and orange. The red and green turtle, which is still used 
today, was developed in 1976 by the renowned graphic 
designer Julian Key. Until 1968, the fair had its base in the 
Rogier Centre in the city centre. However, its increasing suc-
cess forced the organisation to find another venue and the 
fair moved to the Heysel Expo exhibition centre. By its tenth 
birthday in 1970, the fair covered Halls 2, 3, 8 and the Patio 
of this huge exhibition complex. In 1973, a new name was 
chosen: ‘BATIBOUW’, a typically Belgian combination of two 
words – the French batir and the Dutch bouwen (both mean-
ing ‘to build’). Due to its growing support among the general 
public and professionals, Batibouw became an increasingly 
international building, renovation and decoration fair.
The fair attracted more and more visitors, but also 
exhibitors’ interest and booth surface area continued to 
grow. Since 1993, all 13 halls of the Brussels Expo exhibition 
centre, covering a gross surface area of some 140 000 m2, 

514     CHAPTER 12  EXHIBITIONS AND TRADE FAIRS
visit and 37% did not. Half of them prepared themselves 
by using the website, 17% by reading articles, 5% by read-
ing the catalogue and 28% used other ways. Thirteen per 
cent saw totally what they had expected at the fair, 70% for 
the most part, 14% not really, 2% not at all and 1% had no 
opinion. Eighteen per cent of the public visitors thought 
about placing an order with an exhibitor they had seen at 
the fair, 60% thought there was a possibility, 16% thought 
they would not and 6% had no opinion. Seventy per cent 
of the public visitors said they had discovered a few com-
panies they did not know before visiting the fair, 25% said 
they had discovered a lot of new companies and 5% said 
they had not discovered any.
Batibouw is a strongly segmented fair, so every segment 
of the building industry is located in a different hall. In the 
survey, the organisation asks visitors which hall they came to 
visit. Based on those answers, the organisation learns more 
about what people are looking for in their homes or what 
are they are interested in. Once FISA has gathered all the 
information, it shares it with exhibitors. It is important that 
they know about the profile of the visitors. The organisation 
does not give names or addresses to the exhibitors, though.
Batibouw’s website during the fair had 284 246 visitors 
in 2006 and 445 688 in 2007. Over the whole year of 2006, 
the website received almost a million visitors. FISA also sells 
tickets online. A visitor who buys a ticket at the entrance 
pays €12, a visitor who buys tickets online only pays €10. In 
that way, FISA has the names and addresses of buyers who 
buy tickets online. During the year FISA sends four or five 
newsletters to visitors of previous fairs. The newsletters are 
about building and construction but also about the other 
activities of the organisation.
All professional visitors wear a name badge so that they 
are easily recognisable to exhibitors. Professionals are regis-
tered in advance so the organisation has information about 
them. At the end of every day, it can see if the professionals 
have been at the fair and then send them an email to thank 
them for their visit and ask if they want to fill in a question-
naire. In 2007 forty-two per cent of the professional visitors 
came to Batibouw to get in touch with the market, 25% to 
learn about new products, 13% to look for concrete solu-
tions for specific problems, 9% to discover existing suppli-
ers and 5% to discover new suppliers. Fifty-four per cent of 
the professionals said they were prepared when coming to 
the fair and 46% said they were not prepared. From the 54% 
who came prepared for the fair, 41% informed themselves on  
the Batibouw website, 16% read articles in the press, 3%  
read the Batibouw catalogue and 40% had other ways of pre-
paring. Seventeen per cent of the professional visitors found 
exactly what they expected at the fair, 69% for the most part, 
12% not really, 1% not at all and 1% had no opinion. When 
FISA asked the professional visitors if they were attending to 
buy from an exhibitor because they met it at the fair, 21% were 
sure, 51% said maybe, 15% thought not and 13% had no opin-
ion. Seventy-eight per cent of the professionals said that they 
had discovered a few companies at the fair that they did not 
know before, 8% said that they had discovered a lot of new 
companies and 14% said that they had not discovered any.
FISA also surveys the private (non-professional) visitors. 
Twenty-six per cent of the general public visited the fair in 
2007 because they were building a new house, 39% were 
renovating, 19% were redecorating, 12% had no specific 
reason and 4% had another reason not mentioned. Sixty-
three per cent of the private visitors prepared for their 
Figure 12.3  Daily visitors at Batibouw, 2006 and 2007
Source: Geert Maes, CEO, FISA.

Case 12     515
ad material to announce their fair participation. Seventy-
one per cent sent personal invitations, 48% wrote emails, 
62% did a classic mailing, 31% announced it in the pro-
fessional press, 30% announced their participation in the 
consumer press, 13% did a poster campaign, 6% advertised 
on TV and 3% on radio.
Batibouw also gives exhibitors the opportunity to rent a 
manual scanner for about €100. This allows them to quickly 
register information about visitors. Every evening, the 
organisation gives exhibitors a USB stick or a disk with all 
the information about the visitors to their stand on that day.
In order to raise awareness about and make visible 
examples of ‘good practice’, Batibouw issues communica-
tions awards. One award concerns the best reception. How 
are people received? Do the sales representatives feel what 
the customer needs and wants? Is the reception friendly? 
Another award goes to the best product presentation. The 
third award goes to the best communications strategy, before 
as well as during the fair. Awards are given to exhibitors who 
rent less than 70 m2 and to exhibitors who rent more than 
70 m2, so that small and large exhibitors have equal chances.
Finally, every year Batibouw organises an information 
day dedicated to inform exhibitors. Also, during the year, 
Batibouw organises two lunches. At these lunches, a guest 
speaker connected to the building industry is invited, for 
instance the renovators of the Atomium Monument in Brus-
sels or the company building the highest towers in Dubai.
FISA devotes a lot of effort to generating publicity and 
media exposure for Batibouw. The value of media exposure 
of the fair was estimated to be around €175 000. Batibouw 
organises a press conference every year, where there are 
about 120 visitors.
Exhibitors are also surveyed. Eighty-four per cent of 
them in 2007 intended to participate at Batibouw 2008, 
14% had doubts and 2% said they would not participate. 
More than 83% of exhibitors gave a participation satisfac-
tion score of more than 7 on a 10-point scale (Figure 12.4). 
The exhibitors are satisfied with the number of professional 
visitors and even more satisfied about the quality of the 
professional visitors. Almost all exhibitors are also satisfied 
about the quality of the public visitors.
How to increase the effectiveness of a fair 
for the exhibitors
Batibouw goes to great trouble to make fair participation 
for the exhibitors more effective.
Helping the exhibitors to create fair participation 
awareness and traffic
The duty of a fair organiser is to get people into the fair. The 
priority of an exhibitor is its place at the fair. Batibouw offers 
a whole range of cost-efficient options to exhibitors so that 
they can promote both themselves and Batibouw on a scale 
that is not too expensive. For instance, FISA hands out stick-
ers to exhibitors that they can use in their mails to clients, 
and posters that they can hang up in their exposition halls. 
Exhibitors can use the Batibouw logo – the turtle – on their 
mail and their invoices.
Further, FISA has a deal with most Belgian media groups, 
both general and specialised. The media give exhibitors a 
discount in the months before the fair, if they put an ad 
with the red turtle logo in their magazines and newspapers. 
Sixty-three per cent of exhibitors made use of the Batibouw 
Figure 12.4  Exhibitors’ satisfaction score at Batibouw 2007
Source: Geert Maes, CEO, FISA.

516     CHAPTER 12  EXHIBITIONS AND TRADE FAIRS
is only a start because an exhibitor does not know what 
happens to those brochures afterwards. Some fairs are real 
selling fairs. However, Batibouw is less of a selling fair.
Exhibitors sometimes evaluate the success of fair par-
ticipation by the number of visitors to the stand. Exhibitors 
can also count the personal contacts. However, it is more 
relevant to measure the cost per useful contact at the fair. 
Based on a FISA study, the price per contact (based on stand 
prices and number of visitors) for Batibouw is less than €10. 
There are lots of magazines on building houses. Advertising 
in these media results in a certain cost per person reached. 
In terms of the cost per contact, to participate at Batibouw 
is less expensive than to advertise in a building magazine, 
and the exhibitor reaches the same target group. In any 
case, every exhibitor should work this out according to their 
particular situation, based on the full cost of fair participa-
tion and the number of useful contacts or sales leads made. 
Since the cost of fair participation is known to the exhibi-
tors, the cost per contact is easy to calculate.
The fair can have a strong impact on company and prod-
uct image, customer activation, brand awareness and creat-
ing an emotional link with the brand that an exhibitor can 
set up due to fair participation. Some people call Batibouw 
the biggest bar in the country. Professional visitors espe-
cially try to treat their potential clients in such a way that a 
positive impression of their company is created. However, it 
is difficult to isolate the effect of fair participation on these 
perception- and image-related indicators. The most impor-
tant indication of fair participation ROI for an exhibitor is 
the profits as a result of participation in the fair.
Exhibitors can also think of brand activation and CRM at 
their stand. For instance, an exhibitor for a brick company 
promised a cheque for €100 if a stand visitor promised to 
buy bricks from the company in the year to come. The com-
pany asked clients which bricks they preferred and also asked 
for their address. The cheques were an instrument to meas-
ure the number of people who came to their stand. It also 
allowed the company to set up a database of potential pros-
pects, with whom they could communicate all year long. But 
the cheques were more than that. They were also an instru-
ment for scheduling production. Based on the questions and 
answers about brick preferences, the marketing department 
at the fair could tell the production division which bricks had 
the most success, and thus which bricks should be produced 
more. These are techniques that do not cost a company a lot, 
but they are very valuable because they enable the company 
to obtain the addresses of potential future clients.
Questions
1.	 Give a short description of Batibouw, and the market and 
competitive situation it operates in.
2.	 Which fairs in the building industry could pose a new 
challenge for FISA and why?
Good organisation
The logistics of a fair are very complex. Therefore every year, 
the organisation produces a toolkit. This toolkit contains the 
regulations of the fair and a checklist for exhibitors on secu-
rity, water, electricity, parking subscriptions, etc. Most exhibi-
tors do not need the organisation to help set up their stand; 
they hire a stand building company. Some exhibitors create 
their own stand. They can ask the Batibouw organisation to 
supply what they need to build their stand. Also, during the 
fair logistical problems require fast and effective solutions. If 
there are any disturbances at the fair, the organisation tries 
to take care of them quickly. For example, at one time in 
one of the halls there were companies which were exhibiting 
tools that made a lot of noise. The exhibitors wanted to show 
their tools and used them in the halls. However, the noise 
was very disturbing for other exhibitors. So the organisation 
parsed a new regulation where exhibitors can demonstrate 
their tools, but they can do so only in a sound-proof cage.
The organisation is aware that some stands will have 
more traffic than others, depending on where they are situ-
ated. Some exhibitors explicitly ask to have a specific posi-
tion in the hall. The organisation, however, works as follows: 
the companies that have been exhibiting for the longest 
time at the fair get first choice. Eighty-five per cent of the 
exhibitors immediately register for the following year, and 
99% of them want to have the same place as the year before.
Controlling the profile of Batibouw’s exhibitors
Of course, exhibitors have to be part of the building industry. 
Batibouw only accepts manufacturers, exclusive importers 
or agents at the fair. When the organisation receives a new 
request from a company that wants to exhibit at the fair, it 
always checks out the company first. FISA also looks at the 
promotional materials of the company and visits its show-
rooms. The organisation can refuse to allow a company to 
participate, if it believes that the company is bad for the image 
of the fair or if it does not comply with the fair regulations.
How exhibitors can improve the 
effectiveness of their fair participation
Professional exhibitors know their objectives before par-
ticipation and work towards these. When the organisation 
asks exhibitors why they participate at a fair, the reply is 
often: ‘Because our direct competitors are there too.’ This 
is the wrong motivation. Other exhibitors say that they are 
participating because, if they do not, people will think that 
their company is not doing very well. There are not many 
exhibitors who come to the fair with real objectives like a 
clear view of the products to exhibit, the costs, the market 
potential and the number of contacts to be reached.
The return on investment of trade fair participation is 
often hard to measure. Some exhibitors measure their con-
tacts by counting the number of brochures distributed. That 

3.	 What would be other good ideas, besides the Batibouw 
building lunches, the ‘Red Turtle Art’ and the awards, 
to create a stronger link between Batibouw and its 
visitors?
4.	 How does Batibouw assist exhibitors to make their fair 
participation more effective? What do you think of these 
efforts? Try to come up with other activities or tech-
niques to help exhibitors.
References
1	 Smith, T., Gopalakrishna, S. and Smith, P. (1999) Trade 
Show Synergy: Enhancing Sales Force Efficiency. ISBM 
report 24–1999. Institute for the Study of Business Mar-
kets, Pennsylvania State University.
2	 http://www.thefranceshow.com (accessed 1 October 2012).
3	 Interview with CEO of Fairtec, KoenDamman, 9 May 
2007, www.fairtec.com.
4	 Groenendijk, J.N.A., Hazekamp, G.A.Th. and Masten-
broek, J. (1992) Public Relations & Voorlichting: Beleid, 
Organisatie en Uitvoering (Public Relations and Press 
Relations: Management, Organisation and Implemen-
tation). Zaventem: Samson bedrijfsinformatie.
5	 Shoham, A. (1992) ‘Selecting and evaluating trade 
shows’, Industrial Marketing Management, 21, 335–41.
6	 http://www.marketingcharts.com/direct/exhibition-
industry-rebounds-strongly-in-2011-21621/ (accessed  
1 October 2012).
7	 http://www.marketingcharts.com/direct/exhibition-
industry-rebounds-strongly-in-2011-21621/(accessed  
1 October 2012).
8	 www.statista.com, accessed 20 July 2015.
9	 Anderson, A.H. and Kleiner, D. (1995) Effective Mar-
keting Communication: A Skills and Activity-Based 
Approach. Oxford: Blackwell Business.
10	 Chapman, B. (2001) ‘The trade show must go on’, Sales 
and Marketing Management, 153(6), 22.
11	 Kotler, P. (1984) Marketing Management: Analysis, Plan-
ning and Control. London: Prentice Hall.
12	 How to Exhibit: Maximising the Power of Exhibitions. 
The Association of Exhibition Organisers (AEO) (2002) 
www.exhibitionswork.co.uk.
13	 Interview with CEO of Fairtec, KoenDamman, 9 May 
2007, www.fairtec.com.
14	 Duff, M. (2002) ‘European food expo beckons U.S. with 
trends not found at home’, DNS Retailing Today, 41(21), 
8–48. Also, http://www.sialparis.com/ (accessed 1 Octo-
ber 2012).
15	 Interview with CEO of Flanders Expo John Buyckx, 
20 April 2007; www.adventureaffair.be, www.flexpo.be 
(accessed 1 October 2012).
16	 Fishman, B. (2003) ‘International trade shows: the smartest 
ticket for overseas research’, Franchising World, 35(3), 25–8.
17	 Shipley, D. and Wong, K.S. (1993) ‘Exhibiting strategy 
and implementation’, International Journal of Advertis-
ing, 12, 117–30.
18	 De Pelsmacker, P., Van den Bergh, J. and De Schepper, 
W. (1997) Febelux Research on the Image of Exhibitions 
and Trade Fairs among Companies and Communication 
Agencies. Ghent: De Vlerick School voor Management.
19	 Greaves, S. (2002) ‘Unifying sales and branding at events’, 
Marketing (November), 25.
20	 Wenz-Gahler, I. (1995) Messenstand-Design (Trade Fair 
Stand Design). Leinfelden-Echterding: Alexander Koch.
21	 Van Den Tempel, W. (1985) ‘Beursdeelneming en Return 
on Investment’ (‘Trade fair participation and return on 
investment’), in Beurzen en Tentoonstellingen: Praktijk 
Handboek voor Communicati Fxposeren (Trade Fairs 
and Exhibitions: A Practical Guide to Expose and Com-
municate). Deventer: Kluwer.
22	 Klein, L. (2003) ‘How to make trade shows work for you’, 
National Underwriter, 107(1), 11.
23	 Kirchgeorg, M., Dornscheidt, W.M., Giese, W. and 
Stoeck, N. (2005) Trade Show Management, Gabler; 
Interview with CEO of Flanders Expo John Buyckx, 
20 April 2007; www.exhibitions.be; www.flexpo.be 
(accessed 1 October 2012).
24	 Tanner, J. (2002) ‘Leveling of the playing field: factors 
influencing trade show success for small companies’, 
Industrial Marketing Management, 31, 229–39.
25	 Shipley, D. and Wong, K.S. (1993) ‘Exhibiting strategy 
and implementation’, International Journal of Advertis-
ing, 12, 117–30.
26	 Saranow, J. (2003) ‘The show goes on: online trade shows 
offer a low-cost, flexible alternative for organizers – espe-
cially in these days of tight travel budgets’, Wall Street 
Journal, 28 April, R.4.
27	 http://www.nieuwsblad.be/article/detail.aspx?articleid=​
NL3PHU6K, http://www.nieuwsblad.be/article/detail.
aspx?articleid=BLRTO_20120511_9002 (accessed  
1 October 2012).
Sources: Kirchgeorg, M., Dornscheidt, W.M., Giese, W. and Stoeck, N. (2005) Trade Show Management. Wiesbaden: Gabler; Geert Maes, CEO FISA; www.batibouw 
.com (June 2009); www.beurskalender.be (June 2009); www.casius.be (June 2009); www.exhibitions.be (June 2009). 
This case was prepared with the collaboration of Lien Standaert.
5.	 How do exhibitors measure the effectiveness of their 
participation? What do you think of the way they do it? 
Try to come up with other measurement techniques.
6.	 A brick exhibitor gave cheques for €100 to stand visitors 
who promised to buy bricks from the company in the fol-
lowing year. What are the three functions of this promo-
tion campaign? Think of other CRM actions for different 
building companies that should have similar effects.
REFERENCES     517

Chapter outline
Chapter 13
Measuring campaign effectiveness
518

Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Understand the objectives, techniques and limitations of advertising pre-testing 
campaigns
● Understand the objectives, techniques and limitations of advertising post-testing 
campaigns
● Learn the techniques and procedures of advertising campaign evaluation research
● Gain insight into the way the effectiveness of online advertising campaigns, sales 
promotions, direct marketing, PR, sponsorship and trade fairs can be assessed
Introduction
Campaign effectiveness research is not always supported by those who are involved in 
the communications process. Creative professionals, for instance, are inclined to perceive 
research efforts as a potential threat and limitation to their creativity. Moreover, many 
marketing managers and other communications professionals believe that research cannot 
replace experience and intuition, and therefore is a waste of time and money. Finally, there 
is a widespread belief that the effects of communications efforts cannot be measured validly, 
and therefore one should not even try to do so. As in all prejudices, there is a core of truth, 
and a lot of ego defence and/or misunderstanding.
Obviously, campaign evaluation research should not lead to a situation in which all crea-
tivity is stifled, but should lead to more relevant, functional and, therefore, more effective 
creativity. Furthermore, research can never replace marketing knowledge, and even intuition, 
but should rather serve as an eye-opener and a correction to the ‘marketing myopia’ that is 
often mistakenly called ‘experience’. There is more truth in the belief about the problem of 
measuring the effectiveness of communications efforts. Their effect on sales, market share or 
profits often cannot be isolated, and the commercial pay-off of marketing communications is 
only visible after a certain period of time. Therefore, in campaign effectiveness research, very 
often ‘intermediate’ effects, such as brand awareness, brand knowledge, attitude, preference 
or purchase intention and activation, are measured, and they are assumed to be predictors 
of commercial success. In previous chapters it has been established, though, that positive 
intermediate effects are not always good predictors of commercial results. Nevertheless, 
the measurement of intermediate effects is frequently used. In spite of these fundamental 
caveats, it is still worthwhile carrying it out. Like all research, it avoids mistakes or allows the 
communications manager to control the process and to adapt strategies whenever necessary.
Three basic types of advertising research will be discussed: pre-testing, post-testing and 
campaign evaluation research. Most of the techniques discussed can easily be applied to 
other communications tools, such as public relations or sponsorship. After this general 
introduction to effectiveness testing, specific techniques to assess the results of campaigns 
using other tools than advertising, will be discussed.
Advertising research
Following the development of an advertising strategy, a number of advertising tools 
(print advertisements, television spots, posters, online ads etc.) are developed and tested. 
This process is called pre-testing. After the development of the campaign, it is placed 
ADVERTISING RESEARCH     519

520     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
in the media. The impact of each of the tools can be assessed in post-tests. Finally, the 
results of the whole campaign can be compared with its objectives in campaign evalua-
tion research.
Pre-testing of advertising
In a pre-test, advertising stimuli are tested before the ad appears in the media. The general 
purpose is to test an ad or different ads to assess whether or not they can achieve the purpose 
for which they are designed. The problems for which pre-testing can provide an answer are 
shown in Figure 13.1.
Often different concepts or executions of a new campaign are developed. Pre-testing helps 
with selecting the most effective one. As a final check, a number of characteristics of a finished 
stimulus can be tested before media placement. As discussed before, consumers are assumed 
to go through a number of persuasion stages before buying a product or becoming loyal to 
a brand. Advertising, and communications in general, should serve as a guide to accompany 
the potential consumers through these stages. To that end, communications stimuli should 
generate a number of intermediate processes or communications effects, such as creating 
attention, carrying over information, evoking acceptance of the message, credibility, positive 
affective reactions about the ad and the brand, activation, and purchase intention. In a pre-test 
the extent to which these intermediate effects are generated can be tested. Often, a campaign 
consists of a number of similar ads, i.e. different executions of the same basic communica-
tions strategy. Different executions are often used to keep attention to the campaign alive by 
altering the format of the ad. Evidently, not all formats are equally appealing. A pre-test can 
help in establishing the extent to which some executions are more effective than others, and 
assist in deciding upon the frequency of placement of the various ads.
Three basic categories of ad pre-tests can be distinguished (Figure 13.2): a number of 
desirable characteristics can be tested internally, and samples of consumers can be used to 
test the communications or intermediate effects, or to test behavioural effects.
A campaign can be tested internally by the advertising agency and/or the advertiser by 
means of a checklist or readability analysis. Pre-test checklists are used to make sure that 
nothing important is missing, and that the ad is appealing, powerful and ‘on strategy’. 
Table 13.1 contains an example of a checklist for internal evaluation. Every ad can be quali-
tatively judged on each criterion. Obviously, not every criterion will be equally important 
for every campaign. For instance, the number of times the brand name is mentioned may 
not be important at all in an image campaign, and in a provocative campaign ‘likeability’ 
may not be all that important.1
Figure 13.1  Objectives of pre-testing

PRE-TESTING OF ADVERTISING     521
Another type of internal test is the readability analysis. Good advertising copy is simple 
and easy to understand, especially since members of the target group are often paying 
only marginal attention to the text in an ad. This implies that advertising copy should be 
understood ‘at first glance’. Several methods have been developed to test this ‘readability’. 
For instance, a number of words in the text (e.g. every sixth word) can be removed, and a 
sample of consumers can be asked to fill in the missing words. The number of correctly 
reproduced words is an indication of the readability of the text. Research indicates that 
easy-to-read copy contains short sentences with short, concrete and familiar words, and 
lots of personal references.2
Communications or intermediate effects are measured in a sample of customers of the 
target group. The distinction can be made between physiological tests, recall tests, direct 
and indirect opinion measurement.
Figure 13.2  Pre-testing techniques
● Is the ad appealing at first sight?
● Does the ad have impact, ‘standout’, ‘stopping power’?
● Is the ad ‘on strategy’, i.e. consistent with the briefing?
● Is the essential selling proposition mentioned frequently enough?
● Is there a benefit-orientated headline?
● Is the brand name mentioned often enough?
● How appropriate and credible are the images, the characters, the storyline, etc.?
● What is the visual impression: is the ad likeable, is it pleasing aesthetically?
● Are headlines, captions and body copy consistent?
● Does the text tell the same story as the visual elements: is the ad cohesive?
● Is the product shown appropriately?
● Does the relative importance of the logo, brand name, slogan, pack shot in the ad correctly reflect their relative importance?
● What seems to be the intended message of the ad, and is it consistent with the objectives of the campaign?
Source: Partly based on Pickton, D. and Broderick, A. (2001) Integrated Marketing Communications. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
Table 13.1  A checklist for qualitative internal ad pre-testing

522     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
In a physiological test the reaction of the body to advertising stimuli is measured. Two 
types of physiological measurements can be carried out. The first involves the measure-
ment of arousal, i.e. the activation of the nervous system, which is merely an indication 
of the intensity of the effect evoked by an ad. However, arousal measurement does not 
allow an assessment of the direction (positive or negative) of the effect, but is an indica-
tion of the primary affective reaction, which is assumed to trigger further processing of 
the ad.3 Several techniques are used under strict experimental conditions. For instance, 
the higher the arousal, the more the pupil of the eye dilates. Pupil dilation measurement 
is therefore used to assess the amount of arousal during, for instance, a TV commercial. 
Another measure is the galvanic skin response. In this method, the varying humidity of 
the skin is measured by means of an electric current, on the basis of which the amount of 
arousal can be assessed. Other arousal measurement techniques are heartbeat and voice 
pitch analysis and electroencephalography. Most of these techniques are complicated 
and expensive, while the results are often difficult to interpret. Therefore, they are not 
frequently used.
When social desirability limits the validity of explicit attitude measurement, implicit or indirect methods can be used. 
They measure a person’s attitude without asking him or her for an explicit opinion. Implicit attitude measurements 
can to a certain extent predict behaviour that is spontaneous or uncontrolled. The Implicit Association Test (IAT) is 
an implicit attitude measurement technique that is based on the ease with which people make associations between 
attributes and target concepts. Images, words, logos, colours, etc., can be used as target concepts, while adjectives 
and nouns can be used as attributes, for instance likeable, dirty, etc. In the IAT, people are asked to react as quickly 
as possible to a series of target concepts and attributes. If a person spontaneously and easily links a concept to an 
attribute, the speed with which he or she reacts to a combination will be higher. The opposite can be expected if 
the combination between the concept and attribute is less obvious or even appears contradictory to the individual. 
A careful analysis of reaction times provides insights into the attitude of individuals towards the concepts and char-
acteristics of these concepts. The IAT can be used to measure the reaction of individuals towards stimuli that may 
contain sensitive elements, or to test ads for sensitive products or issues, such as environmentally-friendly buying 
behaviour, male/female stereotypes, hidden attitudes, racism, etc.4 The results can be used to adapt elements of the 
creative execution of the ad, such as the models or arguments used, the combination between slogans and pictures, 
the type of appeal, etc.
Research insight
Measuring attitudes indirectly: the Implicit Association Test
For an ad to be effective, it has at least to be noted, and a minimum of information has to 
be carried over. The second type of physiological measurement tries to measure the potential 
of an ad to be seen. By means of a tachistoscope, print ads can be shown for a very short 
period of time. After exposure, the subject is asked to reproduce as many ad elements as 
possible. The element that is most recognised after the shortest exposure time is supposed to 
be the most effective one. Eye camera research5 measures eye movements as a subject looks 
at a print ad, a website or a TV commercial. This technique registers what is looked at and 
for how long, and can be used to improve the structure or layout of an ad. It can also be used 
to test websites in-store communications tools and sponsorship activities.
In recall tests, such as the portfolio test, the extent to which an individual recalls a new 
ad or a new execution amid existing ads is tested. The ad to be tested is put in a portfolio, 
together with other ads. The subject is asked to look at the ads, and sometime later (20 or 
30 minutes), the recall test takes place. The subject has to name the ads and the brands, as 

PRE-TESTING OF ADVERTISING     523
well as the content of the ad that he or she can remember. Ads that are more frequently 
recognised are assumed to have drawn the attention better, and are therefore better ads.
Recall tests have a number of severe limitations. First of all, more than anything else, the 
memory of the individual as such is tested. People with a good memory will recall more ads 
and more of the content of the ads. This does not necessarily mean that the ads tested are 
good ones. Furthermore, product category involvement plays an important role. The more 
one is interested in a certain product (because one is planning to buy it in the near future, for 
instance), the more attention is paid to the ad, and the better it is recalled. Finally, very often 
the recall test is carried out very briefly after the exposure. The subject does not really have 
the time to forget the ad. Ideally, the time between the exposure and the recall test should be 
as long as the time between the exposure and the buying situation in real life, but this can 
hardly be organised in a controlled experiment like the portfolio test.
In direct opinion measurement tests, a jury of customers is exposed to a number of ads 
and asked to rate the ads on a number of characteristics. Most of the standardised ad test-
ing procedures of advertising agencies, which enable them to compare test results over time, 
are of this type. Ad elements that can be tested are: clarity, novelty, evoked feelings, evoked 
attitude towards the ad and the brand, interest, quality of the information, the extent to 
which an ad induces the person to buy the product, etc.6
Many ad testing scales have been developed. Most of them test at least three dimensions by means of various items: 
the affective reaction, the perception of informativeness and the clarity of the ad. In the following scale, for instance, 
all statements have to be scored on five- or seven-category scales (completely disagree–completely agree):
Research insight
Direct opinion measurement of the attitude towards the ad
This ad appeals to me.
It is clear what this ad tries to say.
This ad gives useful information.
It is not immediately clear who the sender of the message is.
This ad is interesting.
The baseline is easy to understand.
This ad is beautiful.
You have to look at the ad a long time before you understand 
what it is about.
This ad is believable.
This ad is confusing.
This ad draws the attention.
This ad is remarkable.
This ad tells me something new.
I think this ad is well made.
This ad fits the brand.
I think this ad is original.
This ad is boring.
This ad gives me a positive impression of the brand.
The subject may be asked to rate each ad on a number of scale items, to order them on 
the basis of a number of criteria or to pairwise-compare them on the basis of these criteria. 
The most important disadvantage of the direct rating method is that individuals are exposed 
to ads in a very unnatural environment. Therefore, they may be inclined to approach the 
ads too rationally compared with a real-life situation of ad exposure. They may even start 
to act and rate as ‘instant experts’, i.e. rating the ads from a professional advertiser’s point 
of view, as they perceive it. This phenomenon is also known as the ‘consumer jury effect’.

524     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
An example of an indirect opinion test is the theatre test. A group of test subjects is invited 
to a theatre to view a pilot programme of a new TV show. On arrival, they are invited to 
choose a present from a number of available items (competitive products in the same product 
category). Alternatively, if the product tested is too expensive, a lottery is organised and sub-
jects are asked to indicate what product they would choose should they win. After viewing the 
programme, in which the ad to be tested is also shown, the participants are asked to make their 
choice again, as an extra award or because ‘we made a mistake the first time’. The difference 
between what participants choose before and after the programme is attributed to the effect of 
the ad tested. Apart from being expensive, this test is potentially invalid, given the unrealistic 
situation of the measurement and the fact that participants know they are being tested.
A campaign can be pre-tested and subsequently adapted to the desired profile. In the following test, this procedure 
is carried out for a bank commercial. A consumer jury is randomly selected and assembled in a room. A video is 
shown with a new commercial for the bank. After registering a number of characteristics of the respondents (age, 
income, gender, education, profession, clientship of banks, etc.), the following questions are asked:
‘We talked to a number of people about this video. In that way we obtained a number of words by means of which 
they described it. We will read each pair of words. Please indicate each time which word of the pair you think 
adequately describes the video.’
I think this video is rather:
● dynamic – calm
● controlled – spontaneous
● boring – exciting
● mainstream – exclusive
● entertaining – informative
● conservative – new
● family-orientated – businesslike
‘May we first know what your ideal bank is?’
‘We also talked to a number of people about banks. Again, we obtained a number of words by means of which they 
described banks. We will again read these words pairwise. Please indicate which one of the two is most appropriate 
to describe your ideal bank.’
My ideal bank is:
● dynamic – calm
● traditional – progressive
● specialised – general
● family-orientated – businesslike
● exclusive – mainstream
On the basis of the differences in scores between the perception of the video and of the ideal bank of a particular 
target group, some characteristics of the campaign can be adapted and, if considered necessary, the campaign can 
be retested.
Business insight
A pre-test for a bank commercial

PRE-TESTING OF ADVERTISING     525
Finally, behaviour tests try to measure actual behaviour, as opposed to recall, arousal or 
attitudes. Apart from actual buying behaviour, the response to a direct response TV com-
mercial, to a direct mailing or to a direct response print ad can be measured. In a trailer test 
or coupon-stimulated purchasing test, respondents are randomly recruited in an experi-
mental and a control group. The members of the first group are shown a commercial that 
is being tested in a trailer in a supermarket car park. The control group has to answer a 
number of questions without being exposed to the commercial. Several experimental groups 
can be formed if different commercials have to be tested. Both groups receive a number of 
coupons as a reward for their co-operation. An individualised store card registers the items 
purchased. Ad effectiveness is measured by means of differences in redemption between the 
various coupons. Again, the participants know that they are being tested, and this might 
influence their buying behaviour.
A second example of a behaviour test is the split-scan test, in which a split cable and scan-
ner technology are combined to generate data on the effectiveness of advertising campaigns. 
In a split-scan procedure, the TV viewing behaviour of a panel of consumers is measured 
by means of a telemetric device. All members of the panel also receive a store card. The 
split-cable technology allows different random groups of panel members to be exposed to 
different campaigns. By means of a store card, the actual purchases of the panel members 
can be measured, and in that way the effectiveness of the different commercials can be 
assessed. The split-scan technology is very promising, because the actual behaviour of the 
same consumers that were exposed to the different ads can be measured in a controlled way 
(single-source data). Furthermore, other parameters can be manipulated or controlled, such 
as the frequency of exposure and the exposure of specific target groups.7
Although pre-testing procedures are very valuable, they have some limitations that should 
be taken into account when interpreting their results (Figure 13.3). A pre-test only offers the 
opportunity of selecting the best ad out of a series of ads tested. A pre-test will never lead 
to the best possible ad, but only to the best ad, given the executions tested. In that respect, 
pre-testing is only ‘a guide to better advertising’. Pre-testing is only useful when the ads are 
tested in an individual interviewing procedure. Since ads are processed individually, they 
should also be tested individually, and not in a group setting in which the influence of the 
other members of the group invalidates the test rather than being synergetic. Most pre-tests 
take place in an experimental setting. Consumers may behave differently when exposed to 
an ad in a real-life situation. Some pre-test methods, especially the explicit ones such as 
the direct rating method, are susceptible to consumer jury effects. In most pre-tests, the 
influence of external factors such as competitive action on the effectiveness of the ad is not 
Figure 13.3  Limitations of pre-testing

526     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
measured. Often the effectiveness of the ad is measured almost immediately after exposure. 
The effect of the elapse of time on ad effectiveness is not assessed. Except for procedures 
like the split-scan method, the effect of repetition or frequency of exposure on ad effective-
ness cannot be assessed.
In a pre-test, a number of elements can be measured that are considered to be important for the success of the 
campaign. However, before any judgement on the appropriateness of the campaign can be made, the results of the 
pre-tests should be benchmarked against other relevant campaigns. In the table below, the pre-test results of a new 
campaign for a prepacked sauce are given. Criteria such as attention, branding, communication, rational response 
and persuasion aspects are measured. The comparison is made between the new campaign and the average pre-test 
results of the same campaign in different countries, the average results of all other tested campaigns in the same 
country, and of all other food campaigns in this country. Furthermore, the pre-test results are benchmarked against 
normative action standards or pre-test objectives.
Business insight
Pre-testing a new campaign for a sauce mix
Pre-test scores of new campaign and benchmark campaigns for key criteria
New campaign
Index 
against 
country 
average
Action 
standards
Country of 
campaign 
average
Country of 
campaign 
average 
food
Attention
Active
3.98
99
105
3.83
3.66
Enjoyment
3.99
109
105
3.64
3.69
Branding
Brand linkage
4.18
109
110
3.90
3.88
Communication
Ease of understanding
3.73
3.65
3.70
Specific criteria:
–Are practical to use
81%
–Have a very good 
taste
58%
–Are very good in 
quality
49%
–Are available in a 
large range of variety
71%
–Offer you something 
really new
63%
Rational response
New information
3.15
2.59
2.67
Different
3.23
3.15
3.30
Relevant
3.06
2.85
3.02
Believable
4.05
3.66
3.79
Didn’t tell you enough
2.89
2.88
2.89
Persuasion
Persuaded me
25%
120
110
120

POST-TESTING OF ADVERTISING     527
Post-testing of advertising
A post-test is a test of the effectiveness of a single ad after placement in the media. Post-
tests are only meaningful if there is a before measurement or a control measurement as a 
benchmark. Three types of post-tests can be distinguished (Figure 13.4): measurement of 
exposure, communications effect tests and measurement of behaviour.
First of all, the extent to which an ad has reached its audience can be measured. Net 
reach, GRP, OTS and other exposure measures can be calculated. Normally, this type of 
effectiveness measurement is done not only after media placement, but also as a part of the 
media planning effort. Similarly, the amount of publicity generated in the press or sponsor-
ship exposure can also be measured and expressed in terms of reach or GRP.
In measuring the communications or message processing effects of an ad, two types of 
tests are used: recall and recognition tests. A recognition test is a test in which a sample 
of ads is presented to a consumer, who is asked to indicate whether he or she recognises 
the ad or not. The underlying assumption is that ads can only be effective when they are 
at least noted. A well-known recognition test procedure for print ads is the Starch test. 
Some 75 000 ads in 1000 issues of magazines and newspapers are assessed each year, 
using 100 000 personal interviews.8 Consumers who say they have read a specific issue 
in a magazine are interviewed at home. The magazine is opened at a random page, and 
for each ad a number of questions are asked. The procedure leads to four percentage 
scores for each ad:
● Non-readers: the percentage of people who do not remember having seen the ad.
● Noted: the percentage of readers who claim to have seen the ad.
● Seen/associated: the percentage of readers who claim to have read the product and brand name.
● Read most: the percentage of readers who claim to have read at least half the ad.
Obviously, the Starch test is very susceptible to the test subject’s honesty. However, 
research reveals that high ‘noted’ scores are positively correlated with a positive attitude 
towards the brand (r = 0.43) and a positive intention to buy (r = 0.52).9
In a masked identification test, part of a print ad, usually the brand name, is covered. The 
subject is asked if he or she recognises the ad, and if he or she knows what brand it is for. 
Recognition and correct attribution scores can then be calculated. Obviously, brand confu-
sion can be measured too. The combination of recognition and correct attribution scores 
leads to the useful score: the percentage of the consumer sample that both recognised the ad 
and attributed it correctly to the brand advertised. In Figure 13.5, an example of the results 
Figure 13.4  Post-testing techniques

528     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
of a masked identification test of a billboard ad for a new car is shown, together with the 
results of a number of categories of control ads.
A second type of communications effect measurement is the recall test. In an unaided 
recall test, consumers have to indicate which ads they remember having seen, in a specific 
magazine, on TV or on billboards. In an aided recall test, the consumer’s memory is helped 
by means of clues such as: What car ads did you see on TV yesterday? As such, the masked 
identification test can be regarded as an aided recall test. Unaided recall scores are usually 
lower than aided recall scores, which in turn are lower than recognition scores. Therefore 
they cannot be compared.
A well-known recall test is the Gallup–Robinson Impact test for print ads. Firstly, the 
respondents have to read a magazine at home. The following day, the respondents are called 
and asked to recall as many ads as they can. After that, a number of questions about the 
content of the ads are asked. The Gallup–Robinson procedure leads to three indicators of 
advertising effectiveness:10
● Proved name registration: the percentage of subjects who remember an ad without having 
seen it during the test.
● Idea penetration: the percentage of subjects who have understood the main idea in the ad.
● Conviction: the percentage of subjects who want to buy or use the product.
Another well-known recall test, used for audio-visual ads, is the Day After Recall (DAR) test. 
In this telephone interview procedure, a number of consumers are called. They are asked 
to indicate which ads they saw on TV or heard on the radio the day before, within a certain 
product category. In the second stage, brand names are mentioned, and the respondent has 
to indicate if he or she remembers having seen or heard an ad for the brand. Additionally, 
a number of questions about the ad content are asked. The resulting percentages of correct 
recall are always compared with some kind of benchmark, such as all commercials within 
the same product category or all commercials of the day before. In the triple association test, 
a product category and a selling proposition are given, and the respondent has to indicate 
a brand name, e.g. ‘What brand of petrol puts a tiger in your tank?’
Finally, the effect of an ad can be tested by means of behavioural measures. Especially 
in the case of direct response ads, the number of people calling a free telephone number 
announced in the ad, sending back a coupon or actually buying the product can be consid-
ered a measure of the effectiveness of the ad.
Figure 13.5  Masked identification test

ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN EVALUATION RESEARCH     529
Recall and recognition tests are useful and easy to carry out, but they have a number of 
severe limitations (Figure 13.6). In recognition tests, consumers can say what they like, they 
can lie, exaggerate or guess. This makes the results of recognition tests far from reliable. 
An ad that is part of a campaign of similar ads will be more easily recognised or recalled. 
In these circumstances, it is very hard to isolate the effect of one single ad. The underlying 
assumption that recognition or recall of the ad eventually leads to buying the product may 
be erroneous. Recognising or recalling marketing communications may be a necessary con-
dition to buy a product, but certainly not a sufficient one. Product involvement influences 
the results of the test. A consumer who is very interested in a certain product category will 
perform better in recognising ads for this product category. This does not imply anything 
about the effectiveness of that specific ad. Recall scores are very dependent on the time 
elapsed between exposure and recall measurement. Recall scores are nearly 100% imme-
diately after exposure, but studies indicate that they drop to about 25% the day after and 
to about 10% two days after exposure.11 Rational mass appeals are recalled better than 
complex and/or emotional appeals, certainly after one exposure. Recall is, in a number 
of cases, an irrelevant indication of advertising effectiveness. The only thing recall tests 
measure is whether the ad has been able to draw attention. Especially in cases in which it is 
sufficient for a consumer to recognise a picture or a brand in a shop to be inclined to buy 
the product, recognition tests are a much more valid and relevant measure of ad effective-
ness than recall measurements.
Advertising campaign evaluation research
Contrary to post-tests in which the effectiveness of only one ad is assessed, campaign eval-
uation research focuses on the effectiveness of a whole advertising campaign. Campaign 
evaluation research tends to become increasingly more relevant than post-tests. Integrated 
marketing communications imply that it is very difficult or even irrelevant to assess the 
effects of one single medium or ad. Rather, the effects of the whole communications mix 
should be assessed.
In campaign evaluation tests, not ad-related responses but brand-related effectiveness 
measures are the focus. As in post-tests, a before or control measurement is necessary to 
Figure 13.6  Limitations of post-testing

530     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
assess adequately the effect of a particular campaign. Again, communications effects as well 
as behaviour effects can be measured.
Communications effects measurements can be structured following the hierarchy-of-
effects logic: awareness, knowledge, attitude and intention to buy. Top-of-mind aware-
ness (TOMA) measurement is an unaided awareness telephone online test in which the 
consumer is asked which brand of a specific product category is the first one that comes 
to mind. Subsequently, the consumer is asked if he or she can name other brands in the 
same product category (again unaided awareness). Finally, a number of brands are men-
tioned, and the consumer has to indicate the ones he or she knows (aided awareness). The 
advertising campaign is not mentioned but, by comparing the awareness before and after 
a campaign, its effect on brand awareness can be assessed. Furthermore, brand awareness 
rates of competitive products are also measured, and can serve as a control measurement 
or benchmark.
Attitude change or the change of the brand’s image can also be measured. Often a cam-
paign aims at changing the target group’s opinion about certain aspects or attributes of a 
brand. Scale techniques can be used to measure this change in image components.
In one European country,12 the mobile phone operator market was dominated by three competitors with a com-
bined market share of almost 100%. The two largest companies had a combined market share of about 90%. The 
market was divided into two important segments, namely pre-paid and post-paid. In terms of the number of clients, 
the pre-paid segment had experienced much more rapid growth than the post-paid segment. Initially, 100% of the 
market was post-paid. By 2002, two-thirds of the customers used pre-paid cards. In 1996, the market leader had 
a relatively weak position in the pre-paid segment, and a very strong post-paid position. An image campaign was 
launched to build top-of-mind awareness, brand preference, emotional bonding and trust. Reliability and superior 
product quality (network, sound, number of clients, etc.) were stressed. Throughout the campaign, the results were 
monitored. Chart 1 shows top-of-mind brand awareness of the three competing brands. Chart 2 shows brand 
preference evolution.
Business insight
Testing an image campaign for a telecoms operator
Chart 1
Top-of-mind brand awareness

ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN EVALUATION RESEARCH     531
Finally, the communications effect of a campaign can be measured on the basis of the 
intention to buy of a target group of consumers. It is important that the question on the 
purchase intention is related to the near future or the next purchase, e.g. ‘The next time you 
buy coffee, what is the chance that you will buy brand X (as a percentage, or on a 10-point 
scale)?’ An alternative measure is the net promoter score, which is based on the question: 
‘To which degree would you recommend the following brand to your family or friends?’, 
measured on a 0–10-point scale. The net promoter score is calculated by subtracting the 
percentage of people scoring 0–6 from the percentage of people who scored 8–10.
Besides intention to buy and to recommend, the effectiveness of an advertising campaign 
can also be measured by means of activation measures. They measure the extent to which 
people actively react to advertising by, for instance, looking up further information, talk-
ing to friends (buzz), and going to a store. Below are a number of examples of activation 
measures.
Chart 3 gives the score of the market leader on a number of image attributes. The market leader has a better 
image on all the criteria measured.
Chart 3
Relative strengths of market leader
Chart 2
Brand preference

532     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
1.	 Following the campaign you just saw, would you consider doing any of the following?
	
Please tick all options that apply.
Search for information about the campaign online
Search for information about the campaign in magazines or other media
Search for information about the brand online
Search for information about the brand in magazines or newspapers
Search for information about other products of this brand online
Search for information about other products of this brand in magazines or newspapers
Visit the brand website
Visit a store for information about the brand
Visit a store for information about other products of this brand
2.	 Following the campaign you just saw, would you consider doing any of the following?
	
Please tick all options that apply.
Share the campaign with friends, family, colleagues or acquaintances online (e.g. through Facebook, Twitter, 
YouTube, blogs, etc.)
Post something about the brand online (e.g. through Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, blogs, etc.)
Start a conversation with friends, family, colleagues or acquaintances about the campaign
Start a conversation with friends, family, colleagues or acquaintances about the brand
Join a conversation with friends, family, colleagues or acquaintances about the campaign
Join a conversation with friends, family, colleagues or acquaintances about the brand
3.	 Why did you visit the brand website?
	
Please tick all answers that apply.
See the campaign again
Find out more about the brand and/or products
Find price information
Find a store or selling point
Participate in a contest
Entertain myself or relax (watch a movie, clip, etc.)
Buy a product from the advertised line
Buy another product of the brand
Other (please specify:. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .)
4.	 Following the campaign you just saw, did you do any of the following?
	
Please tick all options that apply.
Bought the brand in a store
Bought another product of the brand in a store
Bought the brand online
Bought another product of the brand online
5.	 How many different people would you say you talked to about this campaign in a positive way?
Almost everyone I know
The majority of my friends, family and acquaintances
Some of my friends, family and acquaintances
	
One or two people
Research insight
Activation measures

ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN EVALUATION RESEARCH     533
Most of the communications effect measurements are frequently used in tracking studies, 
in which comparable (random) samples of consumers are asked a standardised set of ques-
tions at regular intervals (e.g. every three months). As a result, the position of a brand and 
competing products can be tracked over time, and effects of subsequent campaigns can be 
assessed. As in all before–after measurements, problems of interpretation arise. The effect of a 
campaign cannot always be isolated. A deteriorating image, for instance, may be the result of, 
among others, a bad campaign, a price increase, bad publicity, competitors’ actions, an inap-
propriate sales promotion campaign or a bad distribution strategy. Furthermore, the effect of 
advertising campaigns may only become visible after some time. The performance of a brand 
immediately after the campaign may therefore underestimate its true impact in the long run.
Obviously, the ultimate objective of an advertising campaign is to make people buy the 
product and eventually to make a (better) profit. In behaviour tests the relation between 
advertising and buying behaviour is studied directly. Various behavioural measures of ad effec-
tiveness can be distinguished, the most obvious ones being sales and market share evolution. 
Again, as in all campaign evaluation measurements, it should be noted that the evolution of 
market share and sales may be attributable to other marketing mix instruments than advertis-
ing. The effect of an advertising campaign cannot always be isolated easily.
How many different people would you say you talked to about the brand in a positive way?
Almost everyone I know
The majority of my friends, family and acquaintances
Some of my friends, family and acquaintances
One or two people
Isolating the effect of an advertising campaign is not always obvious. The following two examples illustrate this.13
Example 1
A small bank advertised a savings account with an interest rate that was twice that of the major banks at the time. 
The campaign results (campaign in Year 1 and Year 2) were the following:
Business insight
How can the effect of an advertising campaign be isolated?
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Spontaneous brand awareness
7%
9%
10%
Aided brand awareness
45%
47%
66%
Correct attribution of account to bank
9%
36%
55%
The following chart indicates the evolution of the number of account holders, as well as the advertising periods.
On the basis of the communications effects, the communications campaign seems to have been successful. Obvi-
ously, the number of clients increased substantially each time an advertising wave took place. The question is: Is this 

534     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
Example 2
A chain of do-it-yourself stores launched a radio advertising campaign. The commercial results of the stores look as 
follows (campaign in Year 2, Year 3 and Year 4):
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Sales
100
131
159
183
Annual growth of sales
+31%
+21%
+15%
Number of transactions
100
128
165
189
Ticket size
100
106
110
118
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Sales
100
139
188
224
Annual growth of sales
+39%
+36%
+19%
Number of transactions
100
130
171
194
Ticket size
100
107
110
116
At first sight, this seems to be an impressive result. However, when a correction is made for the expansion of the 
number of stores that increased in the period under consideration, the following picture emerges:
The result still looks impressive, but not as impressive as the first set of figures in which the effect of a larger 
distribution network was included.
increase attributable to the advertising effort or to the intrinsic attractiveness of the product, i.e. the high interest 
rate, that is simply communicated to the target audience?

ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN EVALUATION RESEARCH     535
Apart from changes in sales, more specific behavioural effects can be measured, such as trial 
purchases and the degree of adoption of, or loyalty to, a brand.
Most of the aforementioned measures of communications results are effectiveness meas-
ures, while marketers will also be interested in efficiency measurement, i.e. the extent to 
which the investment in an advertising campaign has had a commercial result. More specifi-
cally, marketers might want to know how many sales for every pound (or euro, or dollar) 
spent on communications has resulted. Over a longer period of time, data could be collected 
An analysis combining awareness and behavioural measures to assess the effectiveness of advertising campaigns is 
as follows. Three indicators are measured:
AR = AW/TG
TR = T/AW
ADR = A/T
where: AR = awareness rate
AW = number of target group members that are aware of the brand
TG = number of people in the target group
TR = trial rate
T = number of target group members that have purchased the brand at least once during a given period
ADR = adoption rate
A = number of people that have purchased the brand at least a specific number of times during the same period
Evidently, the period under study and the number of times a consumer has to have purchased the product to 
be called a loyal consumer have to be determined in advance, and will depend upon the product category studied.
Suppose that for two competing brands the following results have been obtained after an advertising campaign:
Research insight
The ‘awareness–trial–retention’ framework
Brand A
Brand B
Awareness rate
70%
20%
Trial rate
40%
20%
Adoption rate
10%
70%
The commercial end-result is the same for both brands: 2.8% of the target group have become loyal to the 
brand. However, the three indicators show a more differentiated picture. Brand B was not very successful in 
building awareness and trial. One might say that the advertising campaign was not very effective. On the other 
hand, the marketing strategy seems to be on target: most people who have tried the product have become loyal 
to it. Brand A has had a successful advertising campaign, but something seems to be wrong with the rest of the 
marketing strategy. Maybe the product is of bad quality, the price too high or the distribution strategy inappro-
priate. It could also be that the product is a luxury item, for which in the short run trial is more important than 
repeat purchase.

536     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
on advertising budgets and sales per time unit (three months, a year, etc.), and the relation-
ship between the two may be estimated. This could result in the following:
S = 1.5 + 0.2 * A
where: S = sales in € million
A = advertising in € million
The conclusion would be that, over time, every euro invested in advertising has resulted in €0.2 
of extra sales. Additionally, the cost function of the company may be modelled, in order to be 
able to calculate the profitability of the advertising efforts. However, advertising efforts usually 
have carry-over effects: the efforts of today do not lead to extra sales during the same period only, 
but also to extra commercial results in future periods. This effect may be modelled as follows:
S(t) = 1.5 + 0.2 * A(t) + 0.8 * S(t - 1)
where: S(t) = sales in period t
A(t) = advertising investments in period t
S(t - 1) = sales in period t - 1
The coefficient of S(t - 1) represents the effect of advertising investments in the past 
on this period’s sales. This effect is assumed to decrease over time. The long-term effect of 
advertising can in this example be calculated as: 0.2 , 0.8 = 0.25. This implies that, in 
the long run, every euro invested in advertising leads to an increase in sales of €0.25. The 
short-term effect of advertising on sales in the same period is only €0.20.
Evidently, life is not so simple. Firstly, sales are influenced by more than communications 
alone, so the model will have to be extended. Additionally, the competitors’ efforts will have 
to be taken into consideration too. Consequently, estimating the profitability of advertising 
investments is a complicated task.14
As already indicated in the introduction, many of the effectiveness measures discussed 
in the previous sections can also be applied to other communication tools than advertising. 
However, for these tools, a number of specific tests were developed, that will be discussed in 
the next sections.
Measuring online advertising effectiveness
The company website is a way to reach customers directly and deliver information to them, 
take their orders and build relationships. The Internet is also a medium used to place advertis-
ing and to create a direct communications line with customers and prospects. For these rea-
sons, it is important for marketers to know how their website and online marketing campaigns 
are performing and how they can improve the effectiveness and efficiency of their site and digi-
tal strategy. As the Internet is an interactive and computer-supported medium, all information 
about site traffic is stored on the net server in server log files. Analysing these files is one way 
of tracking website performance. A lot of marketers feel that the results of online marketing 
actions are more measurable than those of most other traditional marketing actions.
Obviously, the purpose of online advertising is in many way the same as that of tradi-
tional offline ads and, consequently, the effectiveness of online campaigns can be measured 
by means of the same tools. Besides these, website communication and social media com-
munication require additional measurement instruments.
Website effectiveness
The most basic method to measure site effectiveness is by asking for feedback on the web-
site. This can be done by asking visitors to leave a contact email address or by inserting 
a feedback form on one of the web pages. Both methods will only elicit the most extreme 

MEASURING ONLINE ADVERTISING EFFECTIVENESS     537
(negative and positive) reactions, and are not representative of the site audience. Moreover, 
little feedback may be expected. Including a feedback form may provide more detailed feed-
back and more direction as specific questions and categories of information can be included 
in the feedback form.
To find out who really visits a website and what his or her evaluation of the site, the brand 
and the sales effects are, visitor surveys (online or offline) are necessary. Surveys may give 
socio-demographic, psychographic and webographic (with regard to the use of the Internet) 
profiles of visitors. They can also measure attitudes, satisfaction and intentions, and are a 
good way of tracking the effectiveness and success of a website. InSites Consulting (www.
insites-consulting.com), a leading European Internet research agency, developed a model 
to evaluate the performance of a website using scientifically tested questionnaires and con-
structs, adaptable to specific research questions and needs (see Figure 13.7). In pre-testing, 
usability testing and post-testing of websites, qualitative market research techniques such 
as focus groups and in-depth interviewing can be used in conjunction with quantitative 
Internet panel surveys to add research insights to the website visitor surveys. Website users’ 
input should be integrated with the design process to ensure targeted and effective website 
building.
Even without any research budget there is a possibility to gain insights into how many 
(unique) visitors your site has per day/week/month/etc., how visitors use your site, how they 
arrived on your site (from which site, using which searching words, etc.), from which coun-
tries, how you can keep them coming back, by using Google Analytics. Google Analytics is 
a reporting platform where the user can decide which parameters are of interest. Content 
reports give insights into which parts of the website are performing well, which pages are 
most popular, how much time the surfer is spending on these pages, in order to create a 
better experience for the visitor, your prospect or customer. Even social media (what your 
visitors are sharing and where) and mobile (know which mobile platforms work best, see 
where mobile traffic comes from) are now incorporated. You can analyse how visitors inter-
act with sharing features on your site. Conversion parameters give insights into the number 
of customers that the brand or the company attracts, how much it sells and how users are 
engaging with the site.15
Also, Google Analytics can be used for analysing an online advertising campaign. Adver-
tising Analytics is providing detailed insights to know if the advertising programme is work-
ing. All digital channels such as search, display, social, affiliate and email can be included to 
see the effect on conversion rates and return.16
Apart from these measures, the most important issue for marketers is what happens 
after users click through an online ad or visit a website. Does the online marketing strategy 
Figure 13.7  Assessing website marketing performance: the InSites Consulting model 
Source: InSites Consulting, www.insites-consulting.com.

538     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
lead to conversion? What is the effect of the e-marketing campaign on brand equity and 
purchase intention? For e-commerce sites, purchase behaviour is easy to link to e-marketing 
tactics but, for most companies and businesses, the effects on sales are difficult to trace as 
they often take place in the offline distribution system. Using post-campaign research that 
consists of an initial tracking of brand awareness, brand image and intention to buy before 
the campaign and a post-campaign survey tracking the same metrics can deliver this kind 
of information.
Measuring social media17
First of all, marketers need to know upfront what their qualitative and quantitative social 
media campaign goals are before they can measure how successful their efforts have been 
in achieving them. Is it selling more products, getting more positive reviews, driving more 
traffic to the website, establishing the brand or company as a leader, increaing the fan base, 
reaching specific target groups, increasing brand awareness or brand activation, etc.? Just 
like in any other effectiveness measurement context, the baselines have to be established: 
current sales figures, review counts, fan base, Facebook page visits, etc.
Plenty of tools are available to measure the results of social media efforts. Some are 
(freely) provided by the social media platform itself (e.g. Facebook and WordPress), some 
are paid services. It is important to use more than one tool to track social media efforts, as 
each individual tool gives specific insights into one or more aspects of social media presence. 
A distinction can be made between activity, interaction and performance measures.
● Activity metrics measure the activity of the company on social media: number, frequency 
and recency of updates, reactions, photos and videos posted, the creativity of the con-
tent, etc.
● Interaction metrics measure to what extent the target audiences engaged with the content 
of the company on social media: number, frequency and recency of reactions, tags, men-
tions, likes, shares, favourites, links, downloads, friends, followers, fans, shared updates, 
reviews, website visits, sentiment (the valence of the reactions), recommendations, etc.
● Return metrics measure to what extent social media activity has contributed directly or 
indirectly to the financial success. Essentially, these measures indicate costs and return 
of social media activity (return on investment), such as shifts in the attitude towards the 
brand, satisfaction, perceptions, sales, market share, and profit.
Another social media metrics framework distinguishes four categories of measures:
● Conversation rate:  the number of responses to a status update.
● Applause rate:  the number of times anyone shows positive appreciation to a social media 
post (likes, favourites).
● Amplification rate:  the number of times an update or a post is shared, retweeted, etc.
● Economic value:  the total short- and long-term return and cost savings of social media 
activity.
These types of measures are operationalised differently per social medium. Facebook’s 
statistical tool Insights tracks and analyses demographics, engagement, referrals, and click-
throughs. It breaks down the demographics and activities of a page’s fans. This allows 
companies to gain insight into how users engage with a specific post, where referrals are 
coming from, how well individual posts are doing, and how content is shared. For websites 
or blogs that are powered by WordPress, there are a number of plug-ins that help analyse 
traffic, e.g. WordPress.com Stats. They provide insights into how visitors are interacting 
with a site: which posts are the most popular, where incoming referrals are coming from, 
which key terms visitors are using to find a site, which outgoing links are clicked, etc. Twitter 
accounts can be managed and analysed via HootSuite. The pro version allows an integration 
of Facebook Insights and Google Analytics. This tool helps in seeing which of the tweets 

SALES PROMOTIONS EFFECTIVENESS     539
is getting the most engagement, and even attempts to calculate the ‘sentiment’ of Twitter 
followers towards your tweets.
Klout, a free external tool, uses an interesting set of criteria to determine what it refers to 
as a ‘Klout Score’. The scores range from 1 to 100 with higher scores representing a wider 
and stronger sphere of influence. Therefore Klout uses variables on Facebook, Twitter, 
LinkedIn and Google+ to measure what it calls ‘True Reach’ (size of your engaged audi-
ence), ‘Amplification Probability’ (the likelihood that your messages will generate action as 
retweets, @messages, likes, comments) and ‘Network Influence’ (how engaged your audi-
ence are). An overall score over 30 is considered good.
Google has different analytical tools that give very good insights. Next to Google Analyt-
ics, which tracks and analyses website and social media visitors, there is Google Webmaster 
Tools that gives insight into how Google indexes a site, which search terms are used to find 
a site, errors on a site, and more. You can get advanced metrics on specific search terms with 
Google Trends, and Google Alerts can keep you informed when certain terms (e.g. your 
brand, company, website name, or your book title) land high in search results. Real-time 
search engines and analytical tools like Social Mention give good insights into the kind of 
attention that posts and updates are getting. In addition, Social Mention shows the reach, 
sentiment and passion that followers have for a name or brand. These search engines also 
give insights into the key terms that are typically associated with a brand.
Sales promotions effectiveness
Sales promotions can be pre- and post-tested. Sales promotions pre-testing is very similar 
to advertising pre-testing. Consumers may be exposed to sales promotions ideas, in a focus 
group setting or elsewhere, and may be invited to express their opinion about them. How-
ever, since the objective of most sales promotions campaigns is to provoke immediate buying 
behaviour, most promotions research will focus on behavioural response measures. Promo-
tions are essentially aimed at stimulating trial purchase and at increasing sales with existing 
consumers. Therefore, effectiveness measures will focus on the evolution of sales compared 
with non-promotion periods, or on the comparison of different types of promotions as to 
their ability to generate extra sales.
When launching a new brand, or monitoring the sales evolution of an existing brand for 
which sales promotions campaigns are being used, the following analysis using consumer 
panel data can be carried out.18 It is based on a decomposition of the market share of the 
brand as follows:
Market share = (Attraction * Conviction * Domination * Intensity)/Shock absorption
where: Attraction = Number of buyers of our brand/total number of buyers of the product 
category.
Conviction = Number of loyal customers of our brand/number of buyers of our brand.
Domination = Average volume of our brand purchased per loyal customer of our brand/
average volume of the product category purchased per loyal customer of our brand.
Intensity = Average volume of the product category purchased per loyal customer of our 
brand/average volume of the product category purchased per buyer of the product category. 
If the intensity rate equals 1, the loyal customers of our brand are buying the same amounts 
of the product category as the average buyer of the product category.
Shock absorption = Total purchases in volume of our brand by loyal customers/total pur-
chases in volume of our brand.
The definition of a ‘loyal customer’ is based on repeat purchase within a specified period 
of time. All indicators are measured per period (monthly, bi-monthly, etc.). All measures are 

540     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
volume-based. The attraction rate measures the penetration of the brand and is a measure 
of the effectiveness of trial promotions. The conviction rate gives an indication of loyalty 
promotions effectiveness, more specifically the success of repeat-buying promotion cam-
paigns. The domination rate indicates to what extent loyal customers are truly loyal. The 
higher the domination index, the more exclusively loyal customers are loyal to a brand. It is 
an indication of the effectiveness of loyalty and basket-filling promotions. The intensity rate 
indicates the extent to which the brand is capable of attracting heavy users of the product 
category. If this indicator is larger than 1, the brand is capable of attracting a more than 
proportional amount of heavy users. As such, it is also an indication of the basket-filling 
capacity of promotional campaigns. The shock absorption index indicates to what extent 
the brand is vulnerable to competitive campaigns. The higher the shock absorption rate, the 
more the sales are based on loyal consumers, and the less vulnerable the brand is to switching 
behaviour caused by competitive actions. In Figure 13.8, an example is given of the launch 
of a new brand of detergent.
The effectiveness of promotions is often assessed by studying the evolution of sales over 
a period of time during which several types of promotions have been implemented. By 
studying the evolution of sales during the campaign, and comparing it with the sales level 
before and after the campaign, the extra sales volume generated by the campaign can be 
calculated. This type of analysis will also reveal potential ‘sawtooth’ effects, which follow the 
‘post-promotion dip’ that is often the result of some types of promotions. Basket-filling pro-
motions may induce consumers to buy large quantities of the product on promotion, after 
which they have enough stock for a number of weeks or months, and sales drop sharply in 
the post-promotion period. This phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 13.9. Obviously, if the 
only net result of promotion campaigns is that the post-promotion dip entirely compensates 
for the extra sales during the promotional period, the only thing that has happened is that 
the company has given up part of its profit margin. The success of a promotion campaign 
can be judged on the basis of the size of the positive difference between the extra sales during 
the promotional period and the drop in sales during the post-promotion dip.
Figure 13.8  Monitoring the effectiveness of sales promotion campaigns: the launch of a new 
detergent

DIRECT MARKETING EFFECTIVENESS     541
Figure 13.10 shows another example, based on retail panel data, of the baseline sales of 
a product, calculated on the basis of medium-term ‘normal’ sales, and the sales effect of 
promotion campaigns in subsequent months.
Obviously, the only relevant measure of promotions effectiveness is its long-term profit-
ability. Sales volumes, sales prices and promotion costs will have to be combined into an 
economic analysis of the profitability of promotion campaigns.
Direct marketing effectiveness
Direct marketing and interactive marketing are behaviour-orientated in nature, and therefore 
research into the effectiveness of direct and interactive marketing campaigns will invariably 
be tests of behavioural response measurement.
In direct marketing, which is essentially database-driven, the optimisation of a direct 
mailing campaign can be based on response scoring models, i.e. a procedure in which a 
number of indicators of behavioural response in the past are combined. A well-known 
Figure 13.9  The sawtooth effect of sales promotions campaigns
Figure 13.10  Baseline sales and the sales effect of promotion campaigns

542     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
response scoring model is the RFM-model. For all customers in a database, three behavioural 
response parameters are measured:
● Recency: the time elapsed since the last purchase.
● Frequency: the frequency with which a customer places an order.
● Monetary value: the average amount of money a customer spends per purchase.
The shorter the time elapsed since a customer placed an order, the more frequently he or 
she buys something; and the higher the average amount of money spent, the more positive 
the expected response is following the next mailing campaign.19 For each of the three vari-
ables, a number of categories can be defined, and each category can be given a ‘value’ or 
score representing the importance of each category for future response. This is illustrated 
in Table 13.2.
The values attached to each category are, to a certain extent, arbitrary, but they can also 
be derived from the analysis of past response behaviour. The RFM values can now be used 
selectively to mail those members of the target group that have the highest score on one or 
two of the three factors, or on a combination of all three. It can, for instance, be decided to 
mail only those customers that have a score of at least 80 on the recency value, as well as a 
score of 30 on the frequency factor. Response scoring models can improve the effectiveness 
of mailing or emailing campaigns. It is advisable, however, to pre-test a campaign before 
sending it out to a sample of target group members.
Some have criticised the RFM score model as a poor way to measure loyalty. One problem 
is that patterns of buying behaviour for frequently purchased goods are different than those 
for infrequently bought goods. RFM ignores the average time between purchases as a key vari-
able, while the probability that someone who is within historic range of buying frequency will 
buy again in the future is higher than for someone who is way past the average time between 
two purchases. RFM analysis would determine that someone who buys more frequently and 
has bought recently is more loyal, and therefore direct marketing activities and investments 
would be targeted at the wrong profile of customers. Take, for instance, two customers, Mr 
Smith and Ms Jones, who both start to buy goods from a company in month 1. During the 
first year they purchase at different rates: Smith buys again in the second, sixth and eighth 
months, whereas Jones purchases again in the eighth month. A simple RFM analysis suggests 
that Smith is more loyal and thus more interesting for direct marketing investments than Jones 
because his purchases are more frequent and recent. But Smith usually buys every 2.3 months 
and yet by month 12 he has not bought anything for four months. Jones, too, has not bought 
anything since month 8, but she normally does not purchase anything for seven months. On 
this basis, the chance that she will buy again in the future is higher than for Smith. This is a 
case of event-history modelling. In its simplest form, the formula to calculate the probability 
that a customer will keep on buying is tn, with n the number of purchases that the customer 
made during a period (in this case a year) and t the fraction of the period represented by the 
time between the customer’s first and last purchase. Unlike RFM, this model is particularly 
good at predicting how soon a customer’s buying activity will drop off and might prevent 
heavy over-investment in profitable but disloyal customers.
Recency
Score
Frequency
Score
Monetary value
Score
Last 6 months
100
Once a year
0
Less than €100
0
7–12 months
80
Between 2 and 4 times a year
30
More than €100
20
13–24 months
60
More than 4 times a year
70
25–36 months
30
37 months or more
0
Table 13.2  The RFM-model

DIRECT MARKETING EFFECTIVENESS     543
The second main disadvantage of a scoring model such as RFM is that the monetary 
value is mostly based on revenue rather than profitability. By multiplying the probability 
figure for each period (e.g. a quarter) by the historical average profit number, the sum will 
be the estimated profit for each customer over the next year.
After analysing the customers’ profitability and the projected duration of the customer 
relationship, all customers can be placed into one of the four categories in the matrix shown 
in Figure 13.11.
Figure 13.11  Categorising customers and relationships
Source: Reinartz, W. and Kumar, V. (2002) ‘The mismanagement of customer loyalty’, Harvard Business Review, 80 (7), 86-94. Copy-
right © 2002 by the Harvard Business Publishing, all rights reserved. Used by permission of Harvard Business Review.
The beads and jewellery-making supply retailer  Artbeads.com sends marketing emails each week. It used to send 
one single version for everyone on its list, often including discounts. To prevent customers from getting hooked on 
the discounts, the marketing team identified valuable segments. This allowed the team to send targeted emails and 
increase results, all on a small budget.
1. Target a high-value segment
Using the RFM-model is a good way to detect a valuable segment. Email subscribers are looked at according to 
one of three factors:
● Recency.  How recently has the subscriber made a purchase? For example, subscribers who have purchased in 
the last 72 hours may be more willing to respond to a targeted email campaign than others.
● Frequency.  How often does the subscriber purchase? For example, subscribers who purchased three or more 
times in the last six months might be more willing to respond than others.
● Monetary.  How much does the subscriber spend? For example, subscribers who spent 50% more than the aver-
age lifetime customer value last year might be more willing to respond than others.
Business insight
A 208% higher conversion rate for targeted emails over general emails to entire 
database using the RFM-model

544     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
Public relations effectiveness
Similar to most other communications instruments, the effectiveness of a PR campaign can 
only be measured if clear objectives have been defined. These objectives have to be measur-
able and related to the PR activity. This implies that short-term or long-term awareness, 
opinion and/or attitude or goodwill changes will have to be measured with the targeted 
publics. Evolution of sales or market share is seldom a good indicator, since they are not 
the main target objectives of PR activity. Furthermore, they are to a large extent influenced 
by other instruments of the marketing and communications mix. The result of PR activity 
can be assessed by means of three categories of performance measures: input, output and 
achievement indicators:21
Target one-time big spenders
For these, Artbeads.com looked to the ‘monetary’ factor. The campaign targeted people who had all the following 
characteristics:
● current email subscriber;
● made only one purchase in the last 18 months;
● purchase amount ranked in the top 25% of all orders placed in that period.
This amounted to less than 10% of the database but still to more than 6000 subscribers.
2. Craft email design and copy
Artbeads.com planned to send a one-time promotion with a personal touch to this audience in order to generate 
revenue and at the same time test the viability of the audience as an email segment.
The key design and copy features of the email for this campaign were:
● Personal tone. The email was written as a letter from the CEO, thanking the customer for his or her latest pur-
chase. The only image was a large picture of the CEO smiling.
● Make the customer feel special. The first name of the subscriber was used in the email subject line and greeting. 
Then Artbeads.com went a step further in the personalisation of the email by adding that the placed order was 
among the larger orders placed in the last 18 months.
● Give an exclusive discount. The email had only one single call to action embodied in a large button that linked 
to the homepage, which included a coupon code for an exclusive 20% discount.
● Add urgency to offer. The receiver had only three days to take advantage of the offer.
3. Send and track results
This targeted, segmented email campaign achieved the following:
● Open rate: 20.25%
● Click-through: 4.36%
● Conversion rate: 0.71% (conversion defined as ‘purchase’), which was 208% higher than all other rates obtained 
before, having a range from 0.04% to 0.23% for conversions.
Keep the list strong
Sending this kind of email to the entire list would have encouraged a large number of subscribers to start ignoring 
the company’s emails (or even mark them as spam).20

SPONSORSHIP EFFECTIVENESS     545
● Input indicators measure PR efforts, such as the number of news stories disseminated, 
the number of interviews given, trade meetings organised, supermarkets visited or bro-
chures sent. Input indicators measure efforts and not results. Therefore they are largely 
insufficient as measures of PR effectiveness. Nevertheless, they can be useful, since they 
can give a first indication of the activity undertaken.
● Output indicators measure the result of the PR activity in terms of media coverage or 
publicity. Examples of such measures are the press space or TV time devoted to the 
company, its events or brands, the length of the stories, the tone and news value of the 
headlines, readership/viewership levels, opportunity to see, tone of coverage, etc. Again, 
although output measures may be useful indicators of the result of PR activity, they do 
not give any information on how well the real objectives have been achieved.
● Achievement indicators measure the extent to which a pre-specified objective has been 
met with a public of interest. They are very similar to some of the measures that are 
being used in the assessment of advertising effectiveness. Examples include: the share of 
the target audience that has been reached, changes in awareness and knowledge, changes 
in opinions and attitudes, evolution of the image and goodwill of the company, and the 
extent to which behaviour has changed.
Sponsorship effectiveness
Sponsorship is to a certain extent similar to advertising in that one of its main objectives is 
to build brand awareness with specific target groups. Additionally, and equally important, 
brands try to improve their image by linking their name to the event sponsored. Further-
more, in a number of sponsorship projects, communications results are not only obtained 
during the sponsored event, but also as a result of their media coverage. Sponsorship research 
reflects these objectives and characteristics of this communications mix instrument.
Four types of sponsorship effectiveness can be distinguished (Figure 13.12). Two types of 
exposure can be distinguished: the number of people attending the event and the exposure 
resulting from the media coverage of the event. By counting the number of attendees at a 
sponsored event and/or studying the composition of the audience present, the number of 
consumers reached and the frequency of their exposure to the brand name can be estimated. 
If the sponsored event is covered by the media, the number of lines, pages or times the brand 
Figure 13.12  Types of sponsorship effectiveness measures

546     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
name is mentioned, or the number of seconds it is shown on TV or heard on the radio, can 
be calculated. On this basis, reach and frequency of exposure can also be estimated, as well 
as the monetary value of the exposure obtained. Evidently, frequency of exposure and reach 
only give an indication of the probability of having contacted parts of the target group, but 
nothing about the actual number of contacts, let alone of their quality or impact.
Communications results can also be measured. In this respect, sponsorship campaign effec-
tiveness measurements are very similar to the advertising campaign tests discussed previously: 
brand awareness, correct sponsor attribution and the effect on the image of the sponsored 
event and the sponsoring brand can be measured. Besides increasing brand awareness, asso-
ciating the brand with the sponsored event is the most important objective of a sponsorship 
campaign. As a result, measuring the percentage of the target group able to attribute correctly 
the name of the sponsoring brand(s) to an event is one of the most important measures of 
sponsorship effectiveness. In this type of test, a list of sponsored events is presented to a sample 
of consumers, who have to attribute (aided or unaided) the sponsors of the event. This results 
in an indication of the percentage of the target group that can correctly attribute sponsors to 
events, as well as measures of ‘sponsor confusion’. Correct (aided and unaided) sponsorship 
attribution can be very low, while sponsorship confusion is in some cases stunningly high.
Additionally, the purpose of sponsorship is to associate the sponsoring brand or company 
with the sponsored event. Sponsorship research can therefore also focus on the link between 
the image of the brand and the event with members of the target group.
The effectiveness of sponsorship can also be conceptualised by means of the ‘Persuasive 
Impact Equation’.22 This equation integrates a number of important sponsorship impact 
factors at the communications level:
Persuasive impact = Strength of the link * Duration of the link * (Gratitude felt due
to the link + Perceptual change due to the link)
The stronger the link between a sponsor and a sponsee, the more impactful it is. This 
strength refers to how well integrated the sponsorship campaign is integrated in the whole 
marketing communication effort. For instance, sponsorship strength can be increased by 
advertising the sponsorship to the target audiences, or by building word-of-mouth on online 
platforms. The longer the duration of this perceived link, the more the impact a sponsor-
ship will have. For instance, a sponsor of the Olympics can be associated with this event for 
a number of years, provided he keeps the link ‘alive’. Structural sponsors, who have been 
associated with an event for a long time, will be more persuasive. Additionally, the larger the 
gratitude felt as a result of the sponsorship, and the more positive the perceptual change of 
the image of the sponsor, the more the impact the sponsorship has achieved. Target audiences 
like sponsors, and frequently indicate that they are willing to buy sponsoring products.23
Although increasing sales or market share is not the primary objective of sponsorship, its 
long-term effectiveness can also be assessed by estimating the sponsorship’s commercial impact.
Finally, sponsorship effectiveness can also be measured on the basis of feedback from 
participating groups. Given the nature of some types of sponsorship, its effectiveness pri-
marily lies in the reaction of participants to corporate hospitality sponsorship projects or 
the opinion of employees about sponsorship programmes. This will particularly – but not 
exclusively – be the case in cultural or cause-related sponsorship.
Exhibition and trade show effectiveness
There are four major reasons for measuring the results of every exhibition:24
● To justify investments (by calculating return on investments, just like for any other item 
in the marketing budget).
● To help choose the right exhibitions.

EXHIBITION AND TRADE SHOW EFFECTIVENESS     547
● To improve trade show activities (before, during and after the show).
● To encourage goal-driven activities.
This means that results should be compared with the objectives. Sales figures from current 
clients as well as new customers, and market and competitive information gathered at the 
fair, are criteria to evaluate whether the exhibition brought value for money.25 Sometimes 
exhibiting companies evaluate a fair by asking their sales reps about the contacts they made 
during the fair. Often this leads to stories about jealous competitors or first contacts with 
important new customers ‘in the near future’. This is not the most objective or appropriate 
tool for analysing exhibition success. Others look at increases in sales returns after a fair, 
but this would only be a good evaluation if direct selling were the main goal of participat-
ing. Future sales returns cannot be predicted as many contracts have not yet been signed. 
The coverage or reach of exhibitions and trade fairs differs from that of traditional print or 
other media. Gross reach has to do with the number of exhibition visitors; net reach could 
be the number of stand visitors. But effectiveness does not depend on the number of visitors 
only, but also on the quality of visits.
In many companies, decisions on trade fair participation are largely uncontrolled and based on tradition, emo-
tions and local habits. In an international industrial marketing company,26 the management considered better 
planning and decision-making for trade shows and events based on formal ROI measurement to be a priority. 
The problem was that the customer relations management database only provided an incomplete picture of 
the selling cycle. Some data were available on lead intake (including the source: web, mailing, trade show), 
quotations and invoicing, but there were no other systematic data. The company had some idea, though, of the 
length of typical selling cycles for different product types: product C, twelve months; product B, nine months; 
and product A, six months (true product names disguised for confidentiality reasons). Other useful available 
metrics were the ratio of new versus existing contacts, the spread over different product groups and direct and 
indirect budgets allocated. Based on these limited data, the company built and tested an ROI calculation model 
based on the best available data and accepted by the sales division, and easy to implement and maintain without 
any new software or systems. This model was intended to allow for better decisions and planning with respect 
to the function of targets, budgets and, based on ROI measurement, smaller and more focused stands, and the 
consideration of alternatives such as road shows, master classes, webinars, better trade shows and events results, 
target-setting and show preparation, management and follow-up. The basic logic of this ROI model is given in 
the figure on the following page.
At most trade shows, the three product types A, B and C are presented. They are shown on the horizontal axis. As 
mentioned above, the average time between a first contact and a sale is on average six months for product A, nine 
months for product B and twelve months for product C. This is also marked on the horizontal axis. The logic of the 
system is that any effect a trade show can have would end after these time periods. However, the model allows for 
an ‘after effect’ of an extra 20% of sales after these periods. All ‘after effects’ are assumed to end after one year. The 
ROI measurement of trade show effectiveness is thus limited to a measurement cycle of 12 months. The vertical axis 
shows which percentage of sales of each type of product that was realised after the show can be attributed to show 
participation. Orders taken at the fair itself are not taken into account, because it is assumed that they are not the result 
of trade show participation and buyers at the show had already decided to place an order before the start of the fair.
At the show, a number of leads are explored (e.g. business cards, sales conversations). For new customers, it 
is assumed that 100% of these can be attributed to the fair. Based on previous experience and historical data, 
Business insight
Measuring the return on investment of trade shows

548     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
In order to be able to assess the effectiveness of trade fair participation, a number of 
research methods can be applied.27 During the course of the fair, the following research can 
be carried out:
● Counting the distributed information material (brochures etc.). This is a way to estimate 
the interest in the company and its products and services, and is also a technique to evalu-
ate image-building objectives.
● Counting the number of passers-by and stand visitors. This may be used for different 
objectives. Possible counting mistakes may occur when certain people visit the stand more 
than once to ask for additional information or after comparing other stands.
● Counting the number of personal contacts. This is especially appropriate when objec-
tives include sales leads and supporting new and current trade relations. The number 
of contacts and the quality of those contacts (hot/medium/cold prospects) should be 
distinguished.
for existing customers, it is assumed that only 75% of the new orders are fair-related. After 4–8 weeks, mainly 
depending on the size of the fair, return on fair participation begins to be measured. A sale made to a new cus-
tomer immediately after this period is 100% attributed to fair participation. This percentage declines linearly as 
time goes by and, for product A for example, only 20% is attributed to the fair after six months. Between six and 
twelve months, sales of product A are linearly decreasingly attributed to the fair, until the percentage reaches zero 
after twelve months. The same basic mechanism with different time intervals is used for the other two products, 
and for existing customers (starting at 75%). The percentage of sales attributed to the fair decreases over time. 
The logic behind this is that, as time passes after fair participation, the impact of other marketing efforts on sales 
becomes more important. Finally, the total impact of the fair is calculated as a weighted average of sales in the 
period following fair participation. The weights are the percentage for each point in time that can be found on 
the vertical axis. The impact of the fair on sales is separately calculated for new and existing customers and for the 
three types of products.
Trade shows and events ROI model

EXHIBITION AND TRADE SHOW EFFECTIVENESS     549
● Analysis of visitor flows to the stand. Through time-lapse video registration it is possible 
to observe and analyse behaviour and walk patterns of visitors during an entire exhibition 
day.
● Observing visitor behaviour. By observing stand visitors (where do they stop, what 
are they looking at, etc.?) it is possible to detect what visitors find important and what 
is catching their attention. Eye-camera tests and tachistoscope tests are tools that are 
used for this kind of observational research.
● Questionnaires for stand visitors. This offers all possible ways of measuring the effective-
ness for different objectives such as evaluating pre-exhibition communications impact, 
stand concept and response to informational and other needs, company image testing, 
etc. However, on-stand face-to-face interviewing could be quite annoying for visitors 
(taking up their time).
Other analytical tools can be used to measure the effectiveness of an exhibition after the 
fair:
● Questionnaires for stand visitors. Strengths and weaknesses, awareness and recall can be 
tested, and suggestions for further exhibitions may result from this kind of research. This 
implies that visitors’ personal data have been stored.
● Surveying stand personnel. Stand personnel can be interviewed about their perceptions of 
the contacts with visitors. However, it is not easy to filter out their subjective assessments 
of these contacts.
● Response analysis of sent invitations. How many of the invited people have visited the 
stand? What were the reasons why invited people did not come to the stand?
● Sales returns. What are the sales results of the fair? Is the increase in return large enough, 
compared with the objectives?
● Ratio analysis. Some ratios help to measure effectiveness of exhibitions:28
● Exhibition coefficient I = Value of transactions generated at the fair/Total fair costs
● Exhibition coefficient II = Yearly sales of the company/Yearly fair costs
● Visitor price = (Trade fair costs/Number of fair visitors) * 1000
● Stand contact price = Trade fair costs/Number of stand contacts
● Costs per stand worker29 = Trade fair costs/Number of stand personnel
● Costs per m2 = Trade fair costs/Amount of m2
When an exhibitor wants to make comparisons with other marketing and communica-
tions instruments over time, the next ratio30 may be helpful:
                 Sales efficiency quotient =
Order administration costs on the trade fair
Order administration cost through other sales channels or media 
The first condition to be able to measure effectiveness is the presence of quantitatively 
defined concrete objectives. A study of 311 Belgian companies revealed that 27% of the 
exhibition participants always set objectives before participating in exhibitions and trade 
fairs; 29% hardly ever set objectives; and 57% of all surveyed companies claim that they 
track the effectiveness of the exhibitions in which they participate.31
To conclude, trade show performance has traditionally been evaluated by outcome-based 
measures such as different sales-related activities (for instance, on-site sales and sales imme-
diately after the trade show). But, on the other hand, behaviour-based control systems can 
also be used to evaluate participation in a trade fair. In a behaviour-based control system, 
the process rather than simply the outcome is addressed. In this system, the stand personnel 

550     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
are directed to perform behaviours that are part of the marketing strategy. Four behaviour-
based dimensions can be identified:32
● Information-gathering activities including all activities related to the collection of infor-
mation about competitors, customers, industry trends and new products at the trade 
show.
● Image-building activities related to building corporate image and reputation at the trade 
show.
● Motivation activities directed at the motivation of company employees and customers.
● Relationship-building activities with established customers as well as new customers.
Summary
Communication campaigns can only be effective if they are accompanied by a well-structured 
research plan. During development of the campaign, and before it appears in the media, ads 
can be pre-tested. The major advantage of pre-testing is that it is a guide to better advertising. 
However, due to all kinds of limitations and the shortcomings of most of the techniques 
used, it can never lead to the best possible ad. Techniques used in pre-testing can be internal, 
such as readability analysis, or external (with consumers), such as physiological tests, recall 
tests and direct or indirect opinion measurement. After a specific ad has been placed in the 
media, post-tests can be carried out, such as exposure, recall and recognition tests, and 
behavioural measures. Not just a single ad can be tested, but a whole campaign. Campaign 
evaluation tests focus on the brand-related effects of the campaign, such as brand recall and 
recognition, attitude towards the brand, purchase intention and, most importantly, behav-
ioural or commercial measures, such as activation, trial, repeat purchase, loyalty, sales and 
market share. All these techniques and measures cannot only be used to test the effectiveness 
of traditional advertising, but also of other tools in the communications mix. Additionally, 
there are a number of specific techniques and measures to assess the results of other com-
munications tools, such as online advertising, sales promotions, sponsorship, PR, direct 
marketing and trade fairs.
Review questions
	 1.	 Discuss ad pre-testing techniques. What are the objectives and limitations of these meas-
urement procedures?
	 2.	 Discuss ad post-testing techniques. What are the objectives and limitations of post-testing?
	 3.	 What measures of brand-related campaign evaluation techniques can be used?
	 4.	 How can advertising efficiency be measured? Why is it so difficult to judge the effective-
ness and efficiency of an advertising campaign?
	 5.	 How can the effectiveness of an online and social media campaign be measured?
	 6.	 How can the launch of a new product and the accompanying sales promotions campaign 
be tracked?
	 7.	 How can the effects of a sponsorship campaign be measured?
	 8.	 What are the measures to judge the success of trade fair participation?
	 9.	 Explain the RFM model. How can it be used to prepare and evaluate a direct marketing 
campaign?

Case 13     551
Further reading
Davis, J. (2011) Advertising Research: Theory and Practice. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall.
Jugenheimer, D.W., Kelley, L.D., Hudson, J. and Bradley, S. (2014) Advertising and Public 
Relations Research. London: Routledge.
Malhotra, N. (2010) Marketing Research: An Applied Orientation. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
Smith, M. (2014) Targeted: How Technology is Revolutionising Advertising and the Way 
Companies Reach Consumers. New York: American Marketing Association.
 www.thearf.org
Case 13:
Win for Life: reviving and repositioning a scratch game
Win for Life, a scratch product of the 
Belgian National Lottery
Man’s natural inclination to gamble has always existed and 
will probably exist for all time. Any outright prohibition of 
gambling would inevitably have been counter-­productive 
and would have embroiled this sphere of activity in an 
element of wild and therefore socially dangerous clandes-
tinity. Being conscious of this reality, the Belgian Legislator, 
as early as 1851, preferred to authorise the organisation of 
certain games, and lotteries in particular, but under strict 
conditions. The National Lottery operates as a public-law 
limited company, and the conditions of its operation have 
been laid down by the Act of 19 April 2002 and, in addi-
tion, by the management contract between the public 
company and the Belgian State. Under these terms the 
National Lottery’s primary mission consists of organis-
ing, in the general interest and according to commercial 
methods, public lotteries, betting opportunities, compe-
titions and games of chance, but, in addition, the man-
agement contract includes a parallel mission of being a 
socially responsible public operator. The objective is to 
channel the various manifestations of gambling behav-
iour in Belgium, to prevent any excess, to protect vulner-
able customers and to make an active and autonomous 
contribution to the prevention and treatment of gambling 
addiction. The National Lottery endeavours in addition to 
help limit the total size of the games of chance market in 
Belgium by focusing its product development and mar-
keting policies not on the enlargement of the market, but 
on winning market share from private operators, whether 
they be Belgian or foreign, authorised or illegal. It is in 
this way that it has to generate, in a socially responsible 
manner, the funds enabling it to honour its financial obli-
gations with respect to the Treasury and the beneficiaries 
of its grants.
Between 2005 and 2010, the turnover of the National 
Lottery ranged between €1.1 and €1.2 billion (Belgian 
population: 10.8 million). Around €500 million of this 
turnover comes from people playing Lotto, the oldest and 
no doubt most famous star brand of the lottery. Euromil-
lions, a European-wide drawing game, similar to Lotto, 
but with much higher prizes and lower chances of win-
ning, accounts for around €300 million. Scratch games 
account for around €200 million. A scratch card can be 
purchased in retail outlets such as newspaper or tobacco 
shops, supermarkets and gas stations. By scratching parts 
of the surface of the scratch card, one can immediately 
check the prize. One of the most popular scratch games 
of the National Lottery is Win for Life.
People can buy Win for Life scratch cards in the shop 
for €3 per card. They can then scratch away the zones 
on the card. Depending on the symbols that appear, par-
ticipants can win the main prize, i.e. €2000 tax free per 

552     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
A new campaign to turn the tide
The National Lottery calculated that, without any changes, 
the turnover of WFL would drop by 15.6% in 2010. The 
aim instead was to develop an advertising campaign in the 
period April–December 2010 and realise an increase in 
turnover of 1%. The difference between the predicted drop 
in turnover and the 1% target increase amounts to €10.3 
million. It was decided to target the campaign at 18–34 year 
olds to make WFL more appealing to young people and to 
create a new WFL generation. Four commercial objectives 
were advanced:
1.	 Increase the penetration among the target age group 
from 19.3% in the second half of 2009 to 22.4% in the 
second half of 2010.
2.	 Increase the conversion rate (the number of people in 
the target group buying WFL divided by the number of 
people who know about it) from 20.75 in 2009 to 23.9 
in 2010.
3.	 Realise an immediate short-term impact on sales: 1% 
more sales in 2010 than in 2009.
4.	 WFL is an impulse product. This fourth objective of the 
campaign was to realise a long-term effect: sales should 
not drop between campaign waves.
The communication strategy was built on three angles:
1.	 From a rational attribute to an emotional prefer-
ence brand. WFL wants to be more attractive to young 
people by positioning it as a modern and aspirational 
brand that perfectly understands the new generations 
and takes their needs into account. Instead of focusing 
on the rational product attribute (win €2000 per month 
for the rest of your life – financial security), the campaign 
wanted to reposition WFL on the basis of an emotional 
benefit: from financial to mental security. Today, people 
do not just want to be rich as such. They want the secu-
rity of a comfortable life and to experience it without any 
worries. They want to live every day in the best possible 
way. WFL gives them peace of mind. This insight led to 
the campaign promise: ‘With WFL I am at ease for the 
rest of my life.’
2.	 From accidental to conscious purchase. WFL is an 
impulse product. It is therefore important to stay within 
the consideration set of people constantly to develop 
commitment and conscious purchase behaviour. WFL 
should have a high brand awareness based on frequent 
exposure.
3.	 Create urgency. Unlike the drawing games, there is no 
fixed ‘appointment’ with WFL. It was decided to make 
Friday ‘WFL day’, because retail outlets are most fre-
quently visited on this day, and partly because it is also 
Euromillions playing day.
month for the rest of their lives, or money prizes of €2500, 
250, 25, 10, 6 or 3. The chance of winning the main prize 
is 1 in 1 million. Overall, participants have a chance of 1 
in 4 to win a prize; 62.6% of the turnover is redistributed 
to the players.
Win for Life was launched in 1998 but, until 2009 (with a 
short revival in 2006), turnover had been steadily decreas-
ing. Based on consumer insights, the decision was taken to 
reposition and relaunch the product. This case describes 
the campaign that ran between April and December 2010, 
and discusses the effectiveness measures that were used to 
assess the success of the campaign.
Win for Life (WFL): a product in decline
After a relaunch in 2007, accompanied by a price increase 
of the card from €2.5 to €3, the turnover of WFL 
increased substantially. However, from 2008 to 2009, 
turnover sharply dropped by 13%, from €71.8 to €62.5 
million. There were several reasons for this decline. First 
of all, there was a decreasing penetration of the prod-
uct in the younger age groups (18–34). By contrast, the 
number of youngsters who know about WFL but do not 
buy it increased. Consequently, the conversion from 
‘knowing’ to ‘buying’ drops. Additionally, the number 
of retail outlets that sell WFL decreased steadily, mainly 
because of the disappearance of many newspaper 
shops, in 2009 about one per day on average. WFL is 
primarily sold through such shops. Further, the image 
of WFL became more negative every year. The rational 
brand parameters still score high: you can win ‘an extra 
monthly wage’ for the rest of your life. This is due to the 
fact that earlier advertising campaigns for WFL uniquely 
emphasised this rational proposition. However, a num-
ber of emotional parameters of the brand score more 
negatively every year:
‘WFL is a fun, playful brand’: 45% agreed in December 
2007; only 31% in December 2009.
‘WFL is a modern brand’: 40% agreed in December 
2007; only 27% in December 2009.
WFL ran the risk of losing its attractiveness to younger 
people and becoming an ‘old’ brand. Moreover, youngsters 
spend more than 40% of the budget they devote to gam-
bling on competing games, such as games in pubs, online 
and in casinos. These alternatives are much more geared 
towards the needs and motivations of this age group: an 
instant kick and fun and a wide availability in their living 
world. Moreover, draws are made on a fixed day of the 
week, which enables the development of a weekly routine 
and commitment of the players. Scratch games do not have 
this ‘routine’ element. Consequently, it is much more dif-
ficult to build commitment.

Case 13     553
The main campaign medium was radio. Radio advertis-
ing combines image and activation, and allows the brand 
to be cost-efficiently omnipresent for a long period. TV 
spots were used to effectively demonstrate the emotional 
proposition, and because the core target group of WFL are 
frequent viewers. WFL also sponsored music festivals and in 
that way reached more than 1 million youngsters during the 
summer of 2010. The Facebook page attracted more than 
5000 new fans during this festival period. This resulted in 
the following media mix: TV, 42%; radio, 38%; event spon-
sorship, 18%; point-of-sale, 2%.
A campaign with a huge impact
Despite a continuing decrease in the number of retail out-
lets (-240 in 2010), the campaign realised impressive com-
mercial results.
At the end of 2010, WFL turnover increased by 7.8% 
compared with 2009, thereby substantially exceeding the 
target increase of 1%. This accounts for an extra turnover of 
€4.9 million. Total sales of WFL in 2010 were €67.44 million. 
The penetration and conversion among the young target 
groups increased as projected (Table  13.3). Per campaign 
wave, sales increased substantially, but also, in between 
waves, sales remained high, a remarkable result for an 
impulse product (see Figure 13.13).
Table  13.3 shows the image of WFL in March 2010 
(just before the campaign), the objectives with respect to 
a number of relevant image parameters, and the results 
after the campaign. The campaign has improved the key 
image parameters substantially, well above the objec-
tives. Table  13.4 shows brand awareness and commitment. 
Also, ­spontaneous brand awareness and commit-
ment have evolved positively, well above the objectives.  
Table  13.5 shows the evolution of daily sales. Daily turnover 
These ambitions were translated into the following com-
munication objectives:
1.	 Increase image parameters and increase motiva-
tion to buy (Table 13.3, middle two columns). A major 
improvement in a number of emotional brand param-
eters is envisaged: exciting, sympathetic, modern, funny 
and playful, close to me, fits with me, like to play, etc.
2.	 Increase spontaneous brand awareness and com-
mitment. The aim was to increase spontaneous brand 
awareness from 53% in 2009 to 56.8% in 2010. The 
percentage of committed buyers (those who have an 
absolute preference for the brand and for nothing else) 
should increase from 14.1% in 2009 to 16.8% in 2010.
3.	 Increase the turnover per day, and make Friday a 
top-selling day. The target group of the campaign was 
18–34 year olds. The aim was to attract more of these 
people without losing the older age groups. In terms of 
motivations, most traditional WFL players are profit- 
and ­certainty-seekers. The campaign aims at convinc-
ing ‘homey’ people: those who are spontaneous, open, 
social, friendly and without worries, and are sensitive 
to the emotional benefit that the new campaign offers, 
namely peace of mind and a life without worries. All these 
groups strive in common for security and peace of mind. 
The campaign showed a happy couple with no worries. 
If anything minor goes wrong, WFL is there to solve it. 
The slogan of the campaign was: ‘you may rest assured’. 
The tone of voice of the campaign was humorous, slightly 
absurd and fresh. For consistency reasons, the two main 
characters were the same in all creative executions, the 
ads on radio and TV had very similar formats, a very rec-
ognisable tune (‘always look on the bright side of life’) 
was used in all spots, and the WFL logo was prominently 
shown.
18–34 year olds
Pre-test March 2010 (%)
Objectives 2010 (%)
Results 2010 (%)
Image parameters
Exciting
27
40.3
44
Sympathetic
18
30
41
Modern
20
32.4
41
Is a happy, fun, playful game
19
31.2
44
Is a brand that is close to me
15
26.4
30
Is a game that fits me
15
26.4
39
I want to play the game
23
35.8
45
WFL increases my peace of mind
57
68.4
73
Motivation to play
24
40.6
44
Table 13.3  WFL image pre-test, objectives and results

554     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
penetration in the 35+ segment increased from 14.7% 
in 2009 to 17.2% in 2010.
The return on investment (ROI) of the campaign 
was impressive. The campaign budget was €2.52 million.  
The increase in turnover between 2009 and 2010 was  
€4.9 million. This implies that the campaign cost was only half 
the sales increase. Since the gross margin on WFL is 37.4%, 
this means an increase in margin of €1.83 million. Thus, 72% 
of the campaign cost was paid back by the end of the cam-
paign. More than half a million people in Belgium played WFL 
in 2010, which is 22% of the 18–34 population, and 40 000 
more than in 2009.
In 2011, the WFL campaign received a Belgian Gold Effie 
award.
has increased substantially and Friday is an even stronger sell-
ing day than before the campaign. Sales per retail outlet have 
increased by 13% between 2009 and 2010.
The campaign even succeeded in increasing the buy-
ing behaviour of heavy WFL users. While on average a 
WFL player played 22.6 times during the last nine months 
of 2009 and 23.6 times during the last nine months of 
2010, the heavy user segment played 61.9 times in the 
same months in 2009 and 82.9 times in 2010. This is 
a remarkable increase, given the fact that heavy users 
account for the vast bulk of WFL turnover. One of the 
aims of the campaign was to attract new younger play-
ers without losing the traditional, older customers. 
Also in that respect, the campaign was successful. The 
Figure 13.13  Evolution of sales during and in between campaign waves
18–34 year olds
End 2009
Objectives 2010
Results 2010
Spontaneous brand awareness (%)
53
56.8
60
Commitment (% committed users)
14.1
16.8
17
Table 13.4  Spontaneous brand awareness and commitment: pre-test, objectives and results
Average (€)
Before the campaign
Average (€)  
During the campaign
During the campaign (index 
vs before the campaign)
Monday
167 801
186 804
111
Tuesday
165 054
186 493
113
Wednesday
162 187
197 053
121
Thursday
198 377
226 481
114
Friday
246 626
314 980
128
Saturday
211 836
251 207
119
Table 13.5  Evolution of daily WFL sales

5.	 Can you think of other relevant post-tests and campaign 
evaluation measures?
6.	 What might be the next step for the National Lottery? 
A new communications approach, a new creative 
approach, new objectives and effectiveness measures?
7.	 Imagine that you had to launch Win for Life in your own 
country. Would your communications strategy be differ-
ent? Would you set your objectives and measure your 
results differently? Why or why not?
Questions
1.	 Given the context in which Win for Life was relaunched, 
and the situation in 2010, would you say the objectives 
of the two campaigns are relevant and legitimate and in 
line with consumer insights?
2.	 Are the measurement of the results of the campaign 
consistent with the objectives? Why or why not?
3.	 Were the objectives of the campaign ambitious and were 
their results impressive? In other words, did Win for Life 
deserve to receive an effectiveness award?
4.	 The case does not give any information on campaign 
pre-testing. Design a series of relevant pre-tests for the 
two campaigns: what will you measure and how?
Sources: www.nationale-loterij.be (accessed 15 June 2012), information provided by Marc Frederix (Nationale Loterij), Win for Life Effie case.
References
1	 Pickton, D. and Broderick, A. (2005) Integrated Marketing 
Communications. Harlow: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
2	 Fill, C. (2002) Marketing Communications: Contexts, 
Strategies and Applications. Harlow: Financial Times/
Prentice Hall.
3	 van Raaij, F.W. (1989) ‘How consumers react to advertis-
ing’, International Journal of Advertising, 8(3), 261–73.
4	 See also: de Houwer, J. (2001) ‘A structural and process 
analysis of the implicit association test’, Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 37, 443–51; Maison, D. 
(2002) ‘Using the implicit association test to study the 
relation between consumers’ implicit attitudes and prod-
uct usage’, Asia Pacific Advances in Consumer Research, 
5, 650–54; Vantomme, D., Geuens, M., De Pelsmacker, P. 
and De Houwer, J. (2006) ‘Explicit and implicit determi-
nants of fair-trade buying behaviour’, Advances in Con-
sumer Research, 33, 699–703; Vantomme, D., Geuens, 
M., De Houwer, J. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2005) ‘Implicit 
attitudes toward green consumer behaviour’, Psycholog-
ica Belgica, 25(4), 217–39.
5	 For an overview of physiological tests, see Poels, K. and 
De Witte, S. (2006) ‘How to capture the heart? Reviewing 
20 years of emotion measurement in advertising’, Jour-
nal of Advertising Research, 46(1), 18–37.
6	 De Cock, B. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2001) ‘Emotions mat-
ter’, in ESOMAR, Excellence in International Research. 
Amsterdam: ESOMAR, 63–88.
7	 Aaker, D., Kumer, V. and Day, G. (2007) Marketing 
Research. New York: Wiley.
8	 Aaker, D., Kumer, V. and Day, G. (2007) Marketing 
Research. New York: Wiley.
9	 Zinkhan, G.M. and Gelb, B.D. (1986) ‘What starch scores 
predict’, Journal of Advertising Research, 26(4), 23–6.
10	 Duncan, T. (2008) IMC: Using Advertising and Promo-
tion to Build Brands. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
11	 Rossiter, J.R. and Percy, L. (1997) Advertising Com-
munications and Promotion Management. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
12	 Due to confidentiality requirements, the country and 
companies involved are not given.
13	 Due to confidentiality requirements, the names of the 
bank and supermarket are not given.
14	 For modelling approaches in advertising research, see 
Leeflang, P., Wittink, D., Wedel, M. and Naert, P. (2000) 
Building Models for Marketing Decisions. Boston, MA: 
Kluwer Academic; Hanssens, D.M., Parsons, L.F. and 
Schultz, R.L. (2001) Market Response Models: Econo-
metric and Time Series Analysis. Norwell, MA: Kluwer 
Academic.
15	 http://www.google.com/analytics/features/index.html 
(accessed 2 October 2012).
16	 http://www.google.com/analytics/features/advertising.
html (accessed 2 October 2012).
17	 http://www.socialmedia.biz/2012/03/19/4-steps-to-meas-
uring-social-media-success/ (accessed 2 October 2012).
18	 GfK Belgium.
19	 David Sheppard Association (1999) The New Direct 
Marketing: How to Implement a Profit-Driven Data-
base Marketing Strategy. Maidenhead: McGraw-Hill 
Education.
20	 h t t p : / / w w w. m a rke t i n g s h e r p a . c o m / a r t i cl e .
php?ident=32173 (accessed 28 September 2012).
REFERENCES     555

556     CHAPTER 13  MEASURING CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS
Amongst Trade Fair Participants). Cologne: Institütfür 
Marketing-Universität, Ausstellungs- und Messe-Auss-
chus der Deutschen Wirtschaft (AUMA).
28	 Postma, P. (1986) Marketing voor Iedereen (Marketing 
for Everyone). Amsterdam: Omega Books.
29	 Deelen, M. and Muys, W. (1991) Verkoopactief 
Deelnemene aan Beurzen (Sales-Active Trade Fair Par-
ticipation). Deventer: Kluwer Bedrijfswetenschappen.
30	 Meffert, H. and Ueding, R. (1996) Ziele und Nutzen 
von Messebeteiligungen: Zusammenfassung einer 
Empirisch Gestützten Untersuchung auf der Grundlage 
einer Befragung Deutscher Aussteller (Objectives and 
Usefulness of  Trade Fair Participation: Summary of 
an Empirical Study Amongst Trade Fair Participants). 
Cologne: Institütfür Marketing-Universität, Ausstel-
lungs- und Messe-­Ausschus der Deutschen Wirtschaft 
(AUMA).
31	 De Pelsmacker, P., Van den Bergh, J. and De Schepper, W. 
(1997) Febelux Research on the Image of Exhibitions 
and Trade Fairs among Companies and Communication 
Agencies. Ghent: De Vlerick School voor Management.
32	 Hansen, K. (1999) ‘Trade show performance: a concep-
tual framework and its implications for future research’, 
Academy of Marketing Science Review, 1999(8), 135–50.
21	 Haywood, R. (1998) Public Relations for Marketing Pro-
fessionals. London: Macmillan Business; see also Moss, 
D., Vercic, D. and Warnaby, G. (2003) Perspectives on 
Public Relations Research. London: Routledge.
22	 Crimmins, J. and Horn, M. (1996) ‘Sponsorship: from 
management ego trip to marketing success’, Journal of 
Advertising Research, 36(4), 11–21.
23	 Fill, C. (2013) Marketing Communications. Brands, 
Experiences and Participation. Harlow: Pearson 
Education
24	 How to Measure Exhibition Success: A Workbook for 
Marketers. The Association of Exhibition Organisers 
(AEO) (2002) www.exhibitionswork.co.uk (accessed 
May 2007).
25	 Anderson, A.H. and Kleiner, D. (1995) Effective Mar-
keting Communication: A Skills and Activity-Based 
Approach. Oxford: Blackwell Business.
26	 Due to a confidentiality agreement, the company name 
is not given.
27	 Meffert, H. and Ueding, R. (1996) Ziele und Nutzen von 
Messebeteiligungen: Zusammenfassung einer Empirisch 
Gestützten Untersuchung auf der Grundlage einer Befra-
gung Deutscher Aussteller (Objectives and Usefulness of 
Trade Fair Participation: Summary of an Empirical Study 

Chapter objectives
This chapter will help you to:
● Understand what morals and ethics mean both in general and in marketing 
communications practice
● Distinguish the different points of view with respect to ethics and the rules that marketing 
communications professionals may follow in order to behave in an ethical way
● Learn about the major ethical issues in marketing communications: stereotyping, 
controversial messages, targeting vulnerable groups such as children, and using covert 
marketing techniques such as stealth marketing and buzz marketing
● Understand how marketing communications tools such as advertising, public 
relations, selling, promotions and packaging are sometimes used in an unethical way
● Get an idea about regulation and self-regulation principles and organisations with 
respect to marketing communications
● Understand how companies may benefit from corporate social responsibility programmes
Chapter outline
Chapter 14
Ethical issues in marketing communications
557

558     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
Introduction
Marketing communications professionals are often accused of unethical behaviour. Busi-
ness practice and societal concerns sometimes clash, and certain marketing communica-
tions practices are therefore perceived as ‘wrong’. In order to behave well and be perceived 
as a ‘good citizen’, and in their own long-term business interest, companies should follow 
ethical standards and rules and apply them to their marketing communications practice. 
Among the most debated ethical issues are stereotyping, targeting vulnerable groups, using 
controversial messages and covert marketing. Indeed, marketing communications are often 
accused of building and maintaining stereotypical gender roles, of deliberately using shock-
ing images, of relentlessly and inappropriately targeting children and of using techniques 
such as stealth marketing, buzz marketing and brand placement that can be regarded as 
intrinsically deceptive or misleading. Unethical practices can be found in many market-
ing communications tools: deceptive advertising, dishonest public relations, fraud in sales 
promotions, misleading packaging and privacy-invading direct marketing and selling. To 
avoid negative consequences for customers, laws and regulations have been formulated, and 
many countries and industries have established self-regulation procedures and organisa-
tions to improve the ethical standards of marketing communications practice. Companies 
themselves may go beyond that and engage in corporate social responsibility programmes 
to position themselves as ethical and as good citizens.
Ethics and marketing communications
Every society has certain moral and value standards that act as behavioural guidelines for cit-
izens: what is right and wrong in different situations? A distinction should be made between 
morals and ethics. Morals are beliefs or principles that individuals hold concerning what is 
right and what is wrong. Morals direct people as they make decisions. Ethics are principles 
that serve as operational guidelines for both individuals and organisations. They are related 
to moral feelings of right and wrong.1 Ethics are generally not written down but rather held 
in the social consciousness (attitudes and feelings) of an organisation or a population.2 
Ethics is thus the study and application of morality: those practices and activities that are 
importantly right or wrong.
With respect to what is ethical or not, several approaches can be discerned.3 A classi-
cal distinction is the one between the deontological and the teleological approaches. The 
deontological approach focuses upon duties. Some actions are intrinsically right or wrong. 
The teleological approach focuses on consequences. Good or bad depends on what happens 
as a result of the action. This is very much an ‘end justifies the means’ approach and will 
lead to utilitarian points of view such as selecting actions that can be expected to result 
in the greatest good to the greatest number of people. The problem with a deontological 
approach is that it cannot handle conflicts of duty. For instance, in wartime, an individual 
may have the duty to hide another person from a hostile invader. At the same time, he or 
she has the duty to tell the truth about it. On the other hand, a teleological approach cannot 
handle considerations of justice, i.e. treating people as being of equal worth. McIntyre et al. 
developed a four-cell taxonomy based on the deontological (idealism) and the teleological 
(relativism) principle. Situationists score high in both relativism and idealism. Absolutists 
score low in relativism but high in idealism. Subjectivists score high in relativism but low in 
idealism. Exceptionists score low in both dimensions.4
Other ethical principles are distributive justice and ordinary decency. According to dis-
tributive justice, rewards are allocated in proportion to the contribution made to organi-
sational ends. Ordinary decency means that, for instance, lying, cheating and coercion 

ETHICS AND MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS     559
are always considered unethical. Still others distinguish three basic dimensions of ethical 
decision-making: moral equity (perceived fairness, justice, acceptability), relativism (guide-
lines, requirements of the social/cultural system) and contractualism (implied obligation, 
contracts, duties, rules).5
Ethical issues in marketing communications originate from the clash between business 
practice and social concerns, such as environmental and social values and societal notions 
about honesty, honour, virtue and integrity.6 Marketing and marketing communications 
have often been accused of creating a materialistic culture of conspicuous consumption, 
playing on emotions, simplifying real human situations into stereotypes, exploiting anxie-
ties, employing techniques of intensive persuasion that amount to (hidden) manipulation, 
maximising appeal and minimising information, trivialising, and generally reducing men, 
women and children to the role of irrational consumer (Photo 14.1).7
Photo 14.1  Stereotyping?
Source: Getty Images.

560     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
There is a decades-old debate concerning whether marketing communications mirror or 
shape society and whether the alleged criticisms are warranted. Those who claim that mar-
keting communications shape society argue that, through marketing’s persuasiveness and 
creativity, it creates a culture of consumption and materialism and overspending. It drives 
up the cost of products; it is used to sell inferior products and products that are not good 
for us (such as alcohol and tobacco); it sets unrealistic expectations, is done in bad taste and 
creates visual pollution (e.g. sex and violence used to gain attention to the message). Finally, 
it imposes American culture on other cultures. Those who say marketing communications 
mirror society claim that marketing’s persuasiveness is largely overestimated. Some claim 
that overspending is endemic in many societies and not just because of marketing. Also 
banks and consumer credit practices are to blame. Marketing may well emphasise materi-
alism, but is materialism necessarily wrong? Moreover, out of the thousands of messages 
that people see, only a few are remembered; nine out of ten new product introductions 
fail; companies spend a lot of money on marketing research to find out what consumers 
want, and then make and offer it. Most companies want loyal customers, and selling an 
inferior product is the best way to lose customers. Emerging social consciousness about 
the environment has led marketing communications to integrate this issue and argument 
into marketing campaigns and not vice versa. Marketing communications professionals go 
to a great deal of effort to reach only those consumers that they expect will be interested 
in the product and the message. ‘Freedom of speech’ advocates will argue that there is no 
need to establish standards of good taste and morality in marketing communications. Most 
of the time, marketing costs are only a small percentage of the selling price, and market-
ing increases competition which, in turn, lowers prices. Furthermore, for many people a 
product has an objective and a psychological value (for instance, a shirt of a famous soccer 
player is expensive, but some people like to pay extra money for the additional psycho-
logical benefit). On the other hand, people are free to choose not to pay the extra money 
for psychological value. Probably, the truth is between these extremes: if marketing com-
munications do not work, that would imply that all marketing investments are useless; if 
marketing communications work all the time with everyone, it means consumers do not 
have a conscious will.8
The notion of social acceptability changes over time and varies from one culture or 
country to another. For instance, a US study among college students in 2003 showed that 
they had less salient ethical concerns about advertising than in a similar study 25 years 
previously. This could be due to increased cynicism and scepticism on the part of the 
generation Y consumers that leads to lower expectations about ethicality in advertising. 
However, students still seemed to be equally critical, and questioned advertising and its 
truthfulness: 65% believed that advertising does not present a true picture of products, 
45% said that advertising is too misleading and 57% that it was too exaggerated.9 Fam 
and Waller interviewed 1014 students in four Asian countries about the deliberate use 
of controversial and offensive images in advertising that may offend some people and 
studied what makes ads controversial. They found that what makes people find images 
offensive is related to cultural characteristics. For instance, in collectivistic cultures, 
what could disrupt the harmony of society is considered to be very unethical. In more 
religious cultures or cultures that adhere to Confucian dynamism, higher ethical and 
moral standards are upheld.10 A US study among 235 marketing professionals revealed 
that several cultural characteristics determined marketers’ perceptions of the role of 
ethics and social responsibility in the overall success of the firm. Idealism, the pres-
ence of corporate ethical values, uncertainty avoidance and Confucian dynamism had a 
positive effect on the perceived role of ethics, while relativism and power distance had a 
negative impact.11 Not all individuals can even agree on what might create offence. It is 
in the areas of taste and decency that most difficulty arises in defining ethical marketing 
communications.12

ETHICAL DECISION-MAKING MODELS AND RULES     561
Ethical decision-making models and rules
Different views can be held on how to apply ethical decision-making in marketing (commu-
nications).14 Under the caveat emptor rule, anything is allowed that maximises profits within 
the law. This view implies that the law is the only benchmark for ethical behaviour, and that 
what is legal must therefore also be ethical. The ethics code view strives for standards on the 
basis of which companies’ and industries’ ethical performance is judged, or at least to which 
they aspire. This set of standards often contains ethical guidelines that go further than the 
law. In the consumer sovereignty approach, ethical marketing decisions are determined by 
the answer to three important questions. Is the target market vulnerable in ways that limit 
consumer decision-making (consumer capability) and are consumers’ expectations at pur-
chase likely to be realised? Do consumers have sufficient information to judge (consumer 
information) and can consumers go elsewhere? Would they incur substantial costs or incon-
venience by transferring their loyalty (consumer choice)? Finally, there is the caveat venditor 
principle which implies that the maximisation of consumer satisfaction or well-being should 
be the ultimate aim of marketing action. This point of view is the most ethical one in that 
its ultimate benchmark is doing everything in the best interest of the consumers.
A survey of 206 US advertising professionals studied the relative influence of four factors 
on decision-making about advertising content and policy. In general, legal considerations 
were found to be the most important. Overall, ethical issues appeared to be of minor impor-
tance, except for the oldest age group, for which they were the most important. Approval 
of management and peers and business considerations appeared to be moderately impor-
tant, except for the youngest age group, who felt that the latter was the most important.15  
A multi-country study of the opinion of advertising professionals about ethics in advertising 
revealed that ethical limits seem to be restricted to the codes of ethics, legislation, habits and 
customs, but not to natural law (common sense) or people’s values and beliefs.16
Others hold that any marketing communications decision should in any case be legal, 
decent, honest and truthful. Legal means that it should be allowed under the current regula-
tions and laws of the country in which the company operates. Decent means that it should 
not contain anything that is likely to cause widespread offence, fear or distress; for instance, 
the use of shocking claims or images for the sake of creating attention should be avoided, 
Durex ran a TV campaign on MTV across Europe in 2001. One of the ads featured an enormous sperm-like crowd 
­following a man walking down the street to meet his girlfriend. When the couple meet, the sperm crowd gets 
blocked by a huge latex wall. The sperm get trapped in a huge condom, after which the baseline ‘Durex: For a 
­Hundred Million Reasons’ appears. Since most US TV channels do not permit condom advertising, Durex ran a radio 
campaign in the USA instead. The ads were made up of playful interviews with couples who talked about their sexual 
experiences. For example, in one ad a girl giggled, ‘We were on vacation and I lifted my skirt’, to which her boyfriend 
responds, ‘Yeah, I think she was in her exhibitionist phase then.’ Due to media availability, ad theme and ad execution 
were completely different for Europe and the USA.13
Business insight
Durex TV and print campaign

562     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
unless a valid and acceptable reason is given. Honest and truthful implies that it should not 
exploit inexperience or lack of knowledge of consumers; no claims should be made which 
are inaccurate, ambiguous or intended to mislead whether through explicit statement or 
through omission. Although this principle seems obvious, it may be interpreted in a not so 
obvious way. For instance, UK law allows for obvious untruths or exaggerations that are 
unlikely to mislead because the audience would consider them as acceptable exaggerations.17
In Figure 14.1 an overview is given of a number of rules of thumb for marketers facing 
what appears to be an ethical dilemma.18 The golden rule states that, when faced with a 
decision that appears to have ethical implications, act in a way that you would expect oth-
ers to act towards you. The professional ethics rule states that you should take only actions 
that would be viewed as proper by an objective panel of your professional colleagues. The 
philosopher Kant’s categorical imperative means one should act in such a way that the 
action taken under the circumstances could be a universal law of behaviour for everyone 
facing those same circumstances. This rule is very similar to the deontological stance dis-
cussed above. The TV test means that a manager should always ask if he or she would feel 
comfortable explaining this action on TV to the general public. Finally, the outcomes rule 
judges the ethical quality of a decision in terms of performance, rewards, satisfaction and 
feedback. This is a relativistic point of view that is consistent with the teleological principle 
discussed above.
Several ethical issues in marketing communications warrant further discussion. They can 
be divided on the basis of marketing communications practices or for a number of market-
ing communications tools.19
Unethical marketing communications practices
Among commonly cited unethical communications practices are stereotyping, targeting 
vulnerable groups, covert marketing and controversial marketing communications messages.
Stereotyping
Stereotyping is an automatic perceptual bias enabling people to construct simplified images 
of reality. Men and women are often depicted in a stereotypical way, and therefore marketing 
communications are often accused of proclaiming and supporting conservative gender roles 
in society. Also, the elderly are often depicted as ignorant and helpless, and other cultures 
Figure 14.1  Rules of thumb when facing an ethical dilemma

UNETHICAL MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PRACTICES     563
and/or ethnic groups are often portrayed in a stereotypical way that may offend them and 
stimulate prejudices in society. But stereotyping can also be more subtle. For instance, child-
less women may be offended by ads directed to mothers. In one of the cases that was brought 
before the Jury of Ethical Practices (JEP) in advertising in Belgium, a woman complained 
about a government campaign promoting a healthy lifestyle using the slogan ‘a healthy 
person is worth two’. She claimed that she had been unhealthy for all her life and that she 
felt stigmatised by the slogan and the campaign. The jury expressed its sympathy with the 
lady’s health problems but ruled that the government used a perfectly acceptable metaphor 
and dismissed the complaint.
Source: Illustrated London News Ltd/Mary Evans Picture Library.

564     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
A study of 600 female role portrayals in online ads for global products concluded that 
women are generally portrayed in a stereotypical or decorative way and that sexism is 
prevalent in online ads worldwide. On websites directed at women, females were generally 
portrayed as decorative. Websites directed at men mostly showed women in a dependent 
or a traditional role. General-audience websites featured women mostly as housewives or 
equal to men.20 Lin studied stereotyping (role portraying) in Taiwanese ads featuring female 
models. The results showed that in domestic magazines the classical ‘girl next door’ role 
appeared to be very acceptable. This can be attributed to conservative Confucian beliefs 
about women’s role in society. However, trendy role models resulted in the highest prefer-
ence in foreign magazines. This can be explained by the fact that these magazines are read 
by women with higher levels of education and by women’s increasing participation in the 
labour force. These results indicate that stereotyping is perceived differently by different con-
sumers. It also suggests that advertising both reflects and determines and shapes culture.21
Advertising practitioners make use of stereotyping to quickly transfer the essential meaning of their messages. One 
of the stereotypes frequently used in advertising is gender stereotyping. ‘Gender’ refers to the personal appearance, 
personality attributes and socio-sexual roles that society understands to be ‘masculine’ or ‘feminine’.22 For example, 
women are often stereotyped as dependent on or subservient to men, as preoccupied with physical attractiveness, 
as sex objects, etc.23 Women are generally depicted as younger and thinner than men, and they are often represented 
as caretaking mothers or housewives.24 Women act as product users rather than experts and are often portrayed as 
passive and dependent on their male counterparts.25 Female characters occupy a more inactive, decorative role that 
is subordinate to that of the male character or voice.26 They are also more likely to be portrayed in sexually appeal-
ing roles than men27 and even serve as rewards to men for using a certain product.28 Men, on the other hand, are 
portrayed as older, less often married, and more experienced. They are more often represented as spokespeople or 
experts, meaning advertisers tend to put men in an autonomous, authoritarian and independent role.29
A Belgian study30 set out to see whether gender role depiction in Belgian TV advertising has evolved over time, 
in accordance with prevailing regulation. The largest commercial TV network in Belgium provided a database con-
taining all televised ads broadcast on Belgian commercial TV since 2002. From this database, commercials from two 
periods (i.e. January 2002 to April 2003 and January 2009 to April 2010) were randomly selected. Commercials of 
less than 15 seconds, commercials containing no adult characters, and movie trailers were omitted. Only characters 
playing a prominent role (being shown for at least three seconds) were coded. The total sample resulting from this 
procedure consisted of 493 TV commercials, 250 from the first period and 243 from the second period. In these 
commercials, 907 main characters were coded for analyses.
Of the 907 coded models, 47% were female and 53% were male. Both men (50%) and especially women (71%) 
were mostly presented as young and least in the older age category (11% of men, 8% of woman). Men (39%) 
appeared more frequently as middle-aged than women (21%). Women (19%) were depicted significantly more often 
as using the product than men (11%). Women (20%) are significantly more frequently depicted as sexual objects 
than men (5%). Almost half (44%) of the women in the ads were shown in a domestic setting, while this occurred 
significantly less frequently for men (30%). Men (27%), by contrast, are proportionally more frequently portrayed in 
a professional context than women (9%). Out of the 907 registered models a total of 129 were depicted in a working 
situation. This total entails 97 male characters and 32 female characters. Within the workplace, the majority of men 
(55%) are shown as interpreting a superior role, while women are most often shown in a subordinate role (57%). Men 
and women are also portrayed significantly differently in their roles within a family setting. Women (17%) are also 
more often depicted in a parental role than men (11%). Only 1% of the men in the ads are performing household 
Research insight
Gender role stereotypes in Belgian TV advertising

UNETHICAL MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PRACTICES     565
The use of models in marketing communications often supports the stereotype that hap-
piness depends on physical attractiveness, for instance by showing ‘before–after’ pictures for 
slimming and beauty products. Advertising to men often appeals to worries about virility 
(Viagra, hair transplants, hair colouring products). Idealised advertising and media images 
have been shown to affect how individuals think about themselves.31 In previous studies, 
images of thin women and buff men negatively impacted on mood and bodily perceptions 
of respectively women and men, through the process of social comparison.32 Models being 
Photoshopped to make them look more ‘ideal’ than they are is a common practice in adver-
tising (see, for instance, the Dove ad at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T4y5b7INvqE). 
According to Spurgin, advertisers are ethically obliged to avoid certain aesthetic results that 
are produced by computer-generated images of perfection because this is misleading. Most 
people are not aware of the fact that the picture only exists virtually. The author claims that 
this type of advertising is deceptive and violates the autonomy of those subjected to it.33
chores, while this percentage is significantly higher for women (12%). When women are shown in a family context, 
they are vastly portrayed as dominant within the family (90%), while this is only the case for 25% of the men shown 
in a family context. Almost all (99%) women and the majority of men (66%) were rated as ‘not muscular’. Men were 
coded significantly more often as ‘slightly muscular’ (27%) or ‘strongly muscular’ (5%) than women, though. While 
89% of women in the ads were judged to be underweight (versus 27% of men), men were most likely to be shown 
in a ‘normal’ weight class (66%, versus 9% of women). Overweight men (5%) and women (2%) were rare.
In comparison with the first period (2002–3), gender portrayal did not fundamentally change in the second 
period (2009–10). The study demonstrates that advertising on Belgian TV today is permeated by gender stereotypes. 
Notwithstanding societal and regulatory changes, advertisers still use stereotypical gender roles to convey their 
messages, and we see little decrease from the 2002 situation.
Gender role stereotypes refer to beliefs about the psychological traits, behaviours and occupational status that 
are regarded as differentially appropriate for men or women.34 Most previous studies have focused on female role 
portrayal and report inconsistent results.35 On the one hand, studies indicate that counter-stereotypical portrayals 
(e.g. egalitarian portrayals, ‘superwoman’) produce more positive affective responses and purchase intention than 
stereotypical ones.36 Other studies indicate that counter-stereotypical portrayals of women (and men) may strike 
viewers as irritating and offensive and run the risk of evoking negative emotions.37 A number of content analyses 
have shown that the use of stereotyping differs greatly between countries.38
An empirical study compared responses to male and female gender role stereotypes in Sweden and Germany, 
two countries that vary substantially in their cultural background. In comparison with the Swedish respondents, 
Germans scored higher on masculinity, power distance and assertiveness values. The study was based on a 3 (degree 
of gender stereotyping: counter-stereotypical, neutral, stereotypical) * 2 (model gender: male, female) between-
subjects experiment. An unknown brand of soda was selected as the advertised product. The questionnaire was 
provided in Swedish to Swedish participants (n = 507) and in German to German participants (n = 506). In each 
country, respondents were randomly exposed to one of the six test advertisements, and completed a number of 
online questions on the advertisement, the brand, and their cultural values.
Research insight
A cross-cultural analysis of consumer responses to male and female gender role 
stereotyping in advertising

566     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
Marcel Dorcel, the undisputed king of adult films in Europe, had a problem: sex sells, but sex is hard to sell because 
online everyone gets it for free. Why would people pay €9.99 per month for his high-quality streaming adult films, 
if they are not aware of what high quality really is? Marcel decided to give exclusive free access to his entire library, 
on one little condition: keep your hands on the keyboard.
The campaign was a huge success. People tried all kinds of tricks to be able to use their hands again, from sophis-
ticated devices, apples on spoons, to cats on the keyboard. The campaign got massive media attention. Traffic to 
Dorcel’s site was 27 times higher than before the campaign, and subscriptions 50 times higher. Twitter mentions 
skyrocketed and were 4000 times higher than before. The campaign won a Cannes Lion.43
Business insight
HandsOff with Marcel Dorcel
Controversial messages
Controversial or ‘shock advertising’ can be defined as advertising that deliberately rather than 
inadvertently startles and offends its audience, by means of deliberate norm violation – 
transgression of law or custom (obscenity) or moral/social code (vulgarity) – or by showing 
things that outrage the moral or physical senses (e.g. provocative or disgusting images).41 
Controversial advertising appeals, appeals that evoke negative emotions, or shock tactics 
are widely used as a creative technique to grab the attention of the public or to bring shock 
values to the brand.42
Based on the pooled data of the two countries, by means of regression analyses, the effects of the measured 
perceived degree of stereotyping, model gender, the measured levels of masculinity, power distance and assertive-
ness values at the individual level, and their interactions, were estimated on ad attitudes (Aad) and brand attitudes 
(Ab). Overall, consumers responded more positively to ads with higher perceived degrees of stereotyping, especially 
for male role portrayals. Responses to stereotyping become more favourable with increasing degrees of masculinity 
and power distance. For high-assertiveness individuals the gender of the model influences ad and brand attitudes, 
while this is not the case for low-assertiveness individuals. High-assertiveness individuals have better ad and brand 
attitudes towards a higher degree of stereotyping for male role portrayals and a lower degree of stereotyping for 
female role portrayals. Since high-assertiveness individuals stress equity, competition and performance,39 high-
assertiveness individuals could prefer men and women in a working setting, instead of a domestic setting, since a 
working setting stresses competition and a ‘can-do’ attitude.40
The whole point of using controversial ads is to break through the clutter, facilitate 
recall and have a positive (or at least not a negative) impact on advertising and brand 
attitudes. Controversial advertising can be divided into two broad categories: advertising 
for offensive products or ideas (e.g. politics, female hygiene products and alcohol; some 
may even say professional services like dentists, lawyers and doctors),44 and controver-
sial advertising executions (e.g. sexual appeals). Several authors defined various categories 
of controversial ads, in terms of ads for both controversial products and controversial 
imagery: unmentionables, socially sensitive or indecent, unethical advertising and unac-
ceptable advertising (causing offence).45 Waller found six reasons for advertising to be seen 
as offensive: racist, anti-social behaviour, sexist, too personal a subject, indecent language 

UNETHICAL MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PRACTICES     567
and nudity.46 Shimp and Stuart used a panel of 25 college students to establish six catego-
ries of disgusting advertising: gross depiction, indecent, sexually orientated, gross animal 
and human waste scenes, associational disgust presentation, disgusting political ads and 
miscellaneous.47 Several well-known brands are known to have used controversial appeals, 
the most frequently cited being Benetton, but also Calvin Klein, Citroën, Moschino, Esprit, 
Gucci, Sony PlayStation and Reebok.48 Disgust appeals are sometimes used in public service 
announcements, for instance AIDS awareness campaigns, in which case they can generate a 
lot of attention to and memory of the message.49 However, using disgust in a less congruent 
commercial setting does not necessarily lead to increased brand recall, but has been shown 
to have a negative effect on ad and brand attitudes, especially with high-affect intense and 
high-involvement consumers.50
In 2006, UNICEF in Belgium created a unique, but shocking TV commercial about the impact of war on children. 
The ad features the blue Smurf cartoon characters in a war setting. The ad starts out on a nice sunny day with the 
traditional Smurf song: ‘Hey, come to Smurf country, welcome to all. Yes, come to Smurf country, the country of 
pomp and circumstance’. Immediately after, the Smurf village is annihilated by warplanes. Smurfs are lying dead 
all over the street, a baby is crying without its mum or dad being around . . . The tagline of the spot reads ‘Don’t 
let war affect the lives of children.’ The ad was meant for the adult population and was aired only after 9 p.m. The 
objective of the campaign was to raise awareness about the many ways in which conflict destroys children’s lives in 
general, and to raise money for the rehabilitation of former child soldiers in Burundi in particular. Currently, about 
300 000 children are being used as child soldiers worldwide. Moreover, almost one in two of the 3.6 million humans 
killed in conflicts since 1990 are children. The campaign showed what many children are experiencing in real life. 
The ad featured Smurfs because Smurfs have been part of Belgian culture since 1958. Adult viewers immediately 
recognise the blue cartoon figures which make them think back to their youth. The emotional bond they have with 
the Smurfs made the ad more shocking. Smurfs were deliberately used here to enhance the impact and awareness 
of the campaign. The campaign has been in the news worldwide, receiving both positive and negative comments. 
Some think the ad featured unnecessary violence, others praised the creative approach to draw attention to the 
problem. One way or another, the campaign worked and received an award for its effectiveness.51
Business insight
UNICEF: Don’t let war affect the lives of children
Sex and nudity appeals are frequently used in advertising as a means to attract attention to 
the ad (Photo 14.2). Today, up to 38% of ads using men show the model in a sexual context.52 
Women, however, are even more likely to be portrayed in sexually appealing roles. Most 
previous research has concluded that scantily dressed or erotic appeals elicit a negative affec-
tive reaction of the public and result in decreased brand recall.53 Two experimental studies 
involving Belgian men and women explored how more revealing displays of a model’s body 
in advertising messages can impact on individuals’ body esteem. Samples of Belgian men and 
women were exposed to an advertising image containing a male or female model in either 
pyjamas or just underwear. The results showed that scantily dressed models had a negative 
effect on individuals’ body esteem compared with dressed models. When the models were 
dressed more revealingly, it was the opposite-sex model that had the most negative effect 
on participants’ body esteem, possibly due to an increased sexual salience. Scantily dressed 
models in advertising appear to affect the body esteem of both men and women.54 Some 
would deem this effect to be undesirable and thus unethical.

568     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
Covert marketing
Covert marketing is a firm’s marketing actions whereby consumers believe that the activities 
are not those of the firm. It exists in many forms, and is sometimes referred to as stealth 
marketing, buzz marketing, masked marketing or word-of-mouth marketing (these formats 
were discussed in Chapter 5). Stealth marketing is the use of marketing practices that fail 
to disclose or reveal the true relationship with the company that produces or sponsors the 
marketing message. Buzz marketing is giving people a reason to talk about the company’s 
products or services and making it easier for that conversation to take place.55 Also, covert 
forms of information gathering, such as placing ‘cookies’ on a person’s computer system 
to enable identification of this person when he or she next visits the website, are a form of 
covert marketing. In that respect, many forms of brand placement or native advertising (see 
Chapters 5 and 11) are covert techniques and could therefore be considered to a certain 
extent unethical. According to Nebenzahl and Jaffe, brand placement is the ultimate exam-
ple of unethical, inherently deceptive advertising, since it is both disguised and obtrusive. 
Often viewers are not aware of the fact that brands are intentionally placed in TV pro-
grammes or movies, and they often do not pay conscious attention to them. Therefore, there 
may be an implicit conflict between the need to make a placement effective and the need to 
protect consumers from being misled.56 Brand placement or native advertising disclosure, 
i.e. communicating to the viewers or readers that brands are placed in media content, may 
serve to increase the accessibility of the persuasive or commercial intent behind placed 
Photo 14.2  Using a controversial picture of a celebrity to support a ‘good cause’
Source: Getty Images.

UNETHICAL MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PRACTICES     569
brands, but may produce resistance to persuasive attempts and lead to counter-arguments 
undermining persuasive power.
Another example is a flog (fake weblog), when firms develop a fake consumer blog about 
the consumption of some product or service without stating the company’s role in the 
communication. These tactics are inherently deceptive and thus unethical because they are 
likely to mislead a reasonable consumer on material aspects of a company’s marketing 
efforts, and because they are intrusive or exploitative of social relationships or the kindness 
of strangers.57
In 2002, Sony Ericsson’s communications agencies hired 60 actors to pose as tourists in ten cities across the USA. 
Unsuspecting people were asked to take a picture of the fake tourists with the new T68i camera phone. After the 
person agreed, the actor demonstrated the use of the camera and began talking up its benefits and features. The 
actors did not identify themselves as being paid by Sony Ericsson. Other initiatives included actresses talking to 
strangers in trendy bars while using the phone and pairs of actresses playing an interactive version of the game 
‘Battleship’ at either end of a bar. In this way, many people got direct experience with the phone or learned about it 
through word of mouth. When exposed, the company did not apologise. It claimed that talking to strangers is not 
an offence, and the campaign was very effective.
In 2006, the US retailer Wal-Mart’s communications agency launched a blog sponsored by Wal-Mart called 
‘Working families for Wal-Mart’. The blog described the adventures of Laura and Jim, two ordinary people who 
travelled across the USA in a recreational vehicle, stopping at Wal-Mart locations, camping out in Wal-Mart car parks 
and talking to Wal-Mart staff who were, of course, all very positive about various aspects of Wal-Mart’s business 
behaviour (social contribution, environmental policy, etc.). Upon exposure, Laura and Jim claimed that they came 
up with the idea themselves, contacted ‘Working families for Wal-Mart’ and were then offered support for their trip 
(the vehicle, fuel, writing the blog, etc.). This is a typical example of a ‘flog’.
The most powerful form of marketing is an advocacy message from a trusted friend. In 2001, Procter & Gamble 
founded a teen network called Tremor. The network has 250 000 members who are considered to be ‘connectors’ 
in their social network of friends. Connectors are early adopters who have an extensive social network. P&G sends 
them samples and encourages them to promote them with friends, family and strangers. Tremor was so successful 
that P&G decided also to launch Vocalpoint, a network of 450 000 mothers that has actively supported campaigns 
for more than 10 P&G brands. Buzz marketing initiatives like Tremor and Vocalpoint successfully use word of mouth 
by giving products to consumers who, in turn, strongly advocate these products in their daily interpersonal reactions. 
P&G claims that this does not prevent members from disclosing P&G’s support, and that therefore these actions 
are not unethical.58
Business insight
Stealth marketing
Targeting vulnerable groups
One of the most debated ethical issues is marketing to children. Estimates suggest that chil-
dren in the USA spend on average four hours per day watching TV and are exposed to about 
25 000 commercials per year. The Internet has further expanded the exposure of children 
to advertising. Children are not only exposed to TV ads and online commercial content, 
but also to sales promotions, brand placement in movies, apps and games, integrated mer-
chandising plans, and in-school marketing. Sometimes adult products are also targeted at 

570     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
Source: We have the youngest customers in the business (colour litho), American School, (20th century)/Private Collection/ 
©The Advertising Archives/Bridgeman Images.
pre-adults (for instance, so-called ‘alcopops’). ‘Old Joe’, ‘Smooth Joe’ (Camel) allegedly 
induced many teenagers to smoke. Breweries promote their beer brands to college students 
during spring breaks, festivals, etc. A study in seven countries revealed that ‘tweens’ (ages 
9–14) consider TV as the single most important source of product information.59 Compa-
nies advertise in and around schools, air commercials during children’s programmes, target 
children on product packaging, on point-of-purchase displays and during sporting events, 
and place brands in programmes targeted at children. Schools accept and display brand mes-
sages, disguised as educational materials, in exchange for money, free equipment, curriculum 
materials, classroom videos, etc., that may contain biased or incomplete information that 
favours the company or its economic agenda.

UNETHICAL MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PRACTICES     571
Some say that advertising to children is inherently unfair and deceptive because children 
lack the cognitive skills and life experiences needed to resist persuasive claims and because 
marketers take advantage of a child’s inability to weigh evidence and make an informed 
decision. A counter-argument is that ads can help parents and children to make informed 
choices. In any case, children have a number of unique vulnerabilities. It is only by the age 
of five that they are able to distinguish between commercial and non-commercial content. 
By approximately eight years they are able to recognise the persuasive intent of advertising 
and to use this knowledge to interpret selling messages. It is only when children are aged 
10–12 that they acknowledge that advertising does not always tell the truth and that they 
become sceptical about advertising; in other words, they actively use their defence mecha-
nism. A new challenge is the blurring of advertising and entertainment. TV commercials 
focus on entertainment and image creation and are often linked to exciting website games 
(advergames) and brand characters. Brands targeted at children are placed in movies. Com-
mercially sponsored websites contain games and promotions designed for children. Research 
indicates that more than two-thirds of websites designed for children rely on advertising as 
their primary source of income. Research also reveals that primarily older children (11–12) 
are more likely to shape their product usage as a result of this branded entertainment or 
Advertising towards children and teenagers is often perceived as ethically problematic, because minors are often 
vulnerable and not cognitively developed enough to recognise advertising and understand its persuasive intent. 
Novel forms of advertising in which brand identifiers are integrated in entertaining content, or online or mobile 
applications in which data of site visitors are collected and used, may be especially problematic in that respect. But 
how do advertising professionals feel about this?
An online study of 90 Belgian advertising professionals, 36 of whom advertised to minors, revealed the following. 
The three most often used advertising techniques towards teenagers were contests, banners and brand websites. 
Children were mostly approached by means of contests, brand websites and free gifts. The vast majority of them 
feel that covert advertising techniques are not ethically justifiable to target children. Depending on the advertising 
technique, on average about 10% feel that using these covert techniques for minors is ethically wrong. This per-
centage is even higher for techniques such as location-based services, video advertising and in-game advertising. 
Most of them also believe that children and teenagers should be notified if these techniques are used. Half of the 
respondents feel this should be the case from the age of 7 onwards, while the other half thinks that this is only 
necessary from the age of 12 onwards, or even at a later age. Fifty per cent of the respondents claim to often have 
ethical concerns about advertising practices towards children, and 30% when it comes to advertising to teenagers.
The vast majority feel that protecting minors against unethical advertising behaviour should be done through 
a combination of legislation and self-regulation, and think that the school system also has the responsibility to 
enhance advertising literacy in children and teenagers. About 50% believe that advertising, in whatever form, should 
always be disclosed by means of a ‘cue’, an indication on or near the ad that discloses its persuasive intent. Almost 
everyone believes that social media platforms should check the age of children and teenagers, should involve 
parents to open an account, and should clearly explain what they do with the data they collect and the techniques 
that are used to do that (e.g. cookies). Almost everyone feels that online gathering of personal data from minors 
should not be allowed, or that at least parents should be asked for permission, both in the case of children and of 
teenagers. Almost 85% feel that collecting personal data from children for advertising purposes is ethically wrong, 
and 57% feel the same about collecting personal data from teenagers.60
Research insight
How do Belgian advertisers perceive advertising practices targeted at children  
and teenagers?

572     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
‘advertainment’. Disguising promotions as entertainment makes it harder for children to 
deploy defence mechanisms. This new evolution is an ethical issue because it is potentially 
misleading by concealing the true nature of the materials and omitting to disclose its com-
mercial intent.61 Children have not yet developed sensitivity to this type of promotional tool 
and they are more susceptible to placements than adults. A study in Canada and the USA 
revealed that parents in both countries consider the explicit plot-connected placement of 
ethically charged products such as alcohol, tobacco and fast food as the most unethical, and 
believe it should be subject to more regulation.62
Not only children, but also the elderly are sometimes victims of (tele)marketing fraud or 
hard-sell pitches with puzzling details, e.g. lotteries, investment offers and prize promotions. 
Moreover, people in developing countries can be treated in an unethical way, for instance in 
countries where there are fewer trade and product restrictions (e.g. tobacco, unsafe drugs).
Unethical use of marketing communications instruments
All marketing instruments can be used in a decent, ethical way, but some practices concern-
ing these instruments receive criticism because they are (deemed to be) unethical.
Advertising
Of all the marketing communications instruments, advertising is the one that receives most 
criticism because of its alleged untruthful, deceptive and manipulative nature. For instance, 
Sneddon argues that advertising as a whole spreads values that compromise both ‘deep’ 
autonomy (being an autonomous person) and ‘shallow’ autonomy (taking autonomous 
decisions).63 On the other hand, what psychological principle would explain that advertising 
makes people do things against their will? Persuasion is a legitimate form of human interac-
tion that all individuals and institutions perform and, as such, there is nothing unethical in 
trying to persuade a person to buy a product or a service or to engage in a certain (buying) 
behaviour. As already mentioned in one of the previous sections, advertising is often accused 
of being offensive and in bad taste, creating and perpetuating stereotypes, making people 
buy things they do not really need (but who is to decide what people need?), and playing 
upon people’s fears and insecurities, as in fear appeals.
It is estimated that in the USA the average child sees more than 40 000 TV commercials a year and that advertisers 
spend more than $12 billion per year to target the youth market.64 This is attributed to the strong contribution 
of children to the consumer economy. McNeal65 estimated that children aged 14 years old and under make 
$24 billion in direct purchases and influence $190 billion in family purchases. Ads for food during children 
programmes are estimated to be 37% of all ads in the USA and 49% in the UK.66 Furthermore, Lyna67 claims that 
97.5% of all food commercials appearing on weekend morning TV and 78.3% of weekend programming are for 
unhealthy foods.
Research insight
Advertising to children and obesity

UNETHICAL USE OF MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS INSTRUMENTS     573
Threat-based ads, commonly known as ‘fear appeals’, are often used in social marketing 
campaigns (traffic safety, AIDS campaigns, etc.). However, Hastings et al. state that any 
deliberate fostering of anxiety by marketing communications has ethical implications. 
Indeed, like any other ad that exerts emotional pressure, fear appeals can be regarded as 
manipulative. Further, fear appeals expose a person against his or her will to harmful or 
seriously offensive images. Any fear appeal that is not psychologically comfortable may be 
considered unethical. Moreover, fear may induce reactance, defensive avoidance and fatal-
ism. Research has also shown that fear appeals may lead to maladaptive social responses, 
for instance heightened anxiety among those most at risk and complacency among those 
not directly targeted. This may lead to fear control (i.e. ignoring or avoiding the message 
to avoid fear) instead of danger control (following the advice in the message). Finally, fear 
appeals may lead to increased social inequity between those who respond to fear campaigns 
and those who do not. Research has shown that the latter are more often better off than the 
former.75 On the other hand, the use of strong fear appeals may not be perceived as unethical 
if consumers feel they can use the recommended product or adopt the recommended behav-
iour to effectively eliminate the threat posed by the message (teleological view). Research 
shows that perceived efficacy to cope with the threat leads to an increase in perceived ethical-
ity and to a better attitude towards the message and the product.76
Another ethically charged practice is subliminal or supraliminal advertising. Subliminal 
messages are received subconsciously, below a person’s perceptual threshold, while supral-
iminal messages are above the noticeable perceptual threshold, but consumers are often 
unaware of their presence. An example would be subliminally or supraliminally inserting 
the word ‘sex’ or a naked person into an advertising message in an attempt to influence a 
person to buy a product. Although there is little or no proof that such messages work, they 
are often considered to be unethical. Subliminal and supraliminal presentations of stimuli 
are untruthful by omission: either people cannot observe what you are doing, or they can 
observe but they do not know what the persuasion process is.77
In general, advertising is expected not to be deceptive or misleading, exploit fear or 
superstition, further violence or discrimination, plagiarise, misuse quotations, statistics or 
research, or omit material facts (for instance, the health side effects of medication). A special 
category of potentially misleading advertising is puffery, the use of hyperbole or exaggera-
tion of attribute and benefit claims to promote a brand. Calling a product ‘the best’ is hard 
to prove, but rarely challenged. Puffery is sometimes called ‘soft-core deception’. On the 
other hand, puffery, just like metaphors, may be seen as a legitimate creative technique that 
is not misleading because any ‘reasonable’ consumer knows what is going on.
Attas explored the ethical quality of deceptive advertising. He claims that ‘deceptive’ is the 
wrong term. First of all, if no harmful behaviour follows from an ad, nothing blameworthy 
has happened. In other words, deception is not a normative concept; advertising should be 
There is widespread criticism that kids are targeted in relentless ways by food and drinks companies.68 Therefore, 
food advertising to children may be contributing to the increase in childhood obesity by promoting unhealthy foods 
(especially sugary cereals, sweets, fast food restaurants). In many countries obesity is a serious and increasing health 
problem. It is estimated that obesity accounts for $40 billion of treatment costs a year.69 However, obesity is a multifac-
tor phenomenon. A sedentary lifestyle and lack of physical activity (the ‘couch potato’ effect), family eating habits and 
attitudes towards (fat) food, genetic predisposition, peer pressure, quality of life, in-school food service, nearby retail 
outlets, socio-economic status, TV viewing and advertising have all been suggested to be determining factors of obe-
sity.70 The empirical evidence for the link between obesity and TV viewing and advertising is mixed at best.71 Eagle et 
al.72 state that TV viewing is correlated with obesity only to the extent that viewing may replace more active pastimes. 
Vandewater et al.73 in their study of 2831 children aged 1–12 concluded that TV viewing had no effect on obesity 
(measured as Body Mass Index), and other studies also found only a weak link between TV viewing and obesity.74 
However, food advertising on TV has been partially held responsible for what has been called the ‘obesity epidemic’.

574     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
judged by its consequences (i.e. teleologically). Some ads are indeed (un)intentionally mislead-
ing in the sense that they lead to false beliefs and material harm. However, sometimes adver-
tising is just miscomprehended, in which case this is a responsibility of both advertisers and 
consumers. The legal notion of deception ignores intention and focuses upon the consumer’s 
perception. The line between miscomprehension and misleadingness (an ethical problem) 
rests upon the ‘reasonable person standard’. In other words, an ad cannot be considered to be 
ethically wrong if a ‘reasonable person’ comprehends it correctly. The author claims that, for 
that reason, misleadingness is a normative issue and cannot be determined empirically. Who 
is going to decide on who is a ‘reasonable person’?78 Further, Koslow argues that consumers 
are sometimes sceptical about honest claims that they find hard to believe, even if they have no 
rational reason for doing so. Consumers are often too vigilant against potentially misleading 
advertisers. This is due to reactance and defensive avoidance (‘this message has a commercial 
intent; I will not be persuaded just like that; they shouldn’t think I am so easily convinced’).79
Public relations
Stakeholders expect companies to be open, loyal and credible and to have integrity. The 
term public relations sometimes seems to be used in a way that is almost synonymous with 
half-truth, insincerity and manipulation, and PR communications often seem to distract 
and obfuscate rather than inform. Often, the most ethically sensitive situation is when 
companies are faced with a crisis. How do companies react to negative publicity? Do they 
acknowledge problems, for instance with respect to unsafe products? No company should 
do things that harm its long-term reputation with its stakeholders. Firms that make a habit 
of using PR techniques to mislead stakeholder groups are in effect consuming in the short 
term the trust upon which their long-term profitable existence may depend.80
Another PR-related instrument that is ethically sensitive is corporate hospitality – 
entertainment and hospitality offered by the selling organisation to the buying organisa-
tion. Where does building closer relationships with stakeholders end and bribery begin? 
Some would say that corporate hospitality is far less serious than bribery, but on the same 
continuum.
Direct marketing
Direct marketing, and especially teleselling, is often accused of high-pressure sales tech-
niques, particularly when applied to vulnerable groups. Telesales calls sometimes intrude 
on personal privacy (e.g. unsolicited direct mails or calls, unwelcome sales approaches), 
and there is a general concern about the large amounts of personal data being collected 
and ending up in databases for (direct) marketing purposes. Also in these cases, respect for 
individuals, e.g. refraining from causing unwarranted distress or shock, ensures that mar-
keting communications remain within generally accepted boundaries of taste and decency.
In March 2003, Benetton and Philips announced that Philips was going to help Benetton embed computer chips in 
the clothes it sells, enabling individual garments to be tracked, potentially beyond the point-of-sale. This initiative 
was announced at a time when the following things also happened:
Business insight
The privacy issue and two big brands

REGULATION OF MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PRACTICES     575
Packaging
Packaging can be deceptive or misleading because label information suggests either desirable 
ingredients or attributes or less undesirable ingredients (low cholesterol). Usually, packaging 
graphics show the product as appealingly as possible, but sometimes this is not a true rep-
resentation of the product (for instance, a children’s toy seems larger than it is, the picture 
contains features that are not part of the product). Some packaging is unsafe for children 
or can be tampered with. Also, the environmental implications of some types of packaging 
may be considered as unethical. According to a US study, professionals judge packaging as 
unethical when using the word ‘light’ relating to texture and not to calorie content, packag-
ing store brands to mimic manufacturer-brand packaging, being aware of safety hazards 
and not doing anything about them, charging more per unit for a large package than a 
small package, and not attending to environmental problems when packaging materials are 
available to do so.82
Sales promotion
Failing to mail a free premium object or to provide a rebate cheque, making consumers 
believe that their odds of winning a prize in a contest are much greater than they actually are 
and advertising a promotion that is not sufficiently available are unethical practices. Connec-
tions, a tour operator that sells low-price long-distance flights, was faced with a consumer 
complaint because it was felt that the low-cost flights to Thailand as advertised were available 
only in small quantities and the other available tickets were substantially more expensive.
Regulation of marketing communications practices
Regulation of marketing communications is called for when the expectation is that, with-
out regulation, consumer decisions would be based on false or limited information. The 
advantages of regulation are that consumer choice is improved, product quality is improved 
● The US government confirmed that it was going to mine commercial databases for clues about terrorist 
organisations.
● The movie Minority Report with Tom Cruise featured talking billboards that track wherever you go.
● The US government threatened to block flights to America by European airlines that refuse to give the US govern-
ment access to passenger lists.
● Surveys indicated that a majority of consumers do not believe commercial companies are handling personal 
information about their customers in a confidential way.
Within two days, a consumer privacy group was calling for an immediate worldwide boycott of Benetton.  
CASPIAN, Consumers Against Supermarket Privacy Invasion and Numbering, warned the public that Benetton could 
easily link the serial number in a sweater to credit card information, and that this information would be available to 
anyone with access to the Benetton database. A number of consumers expressed their concern about the initiative. A 
website calling for a Benetton boycott and posters featuring messages such as ‘I’d rather go naked’ quickly appeared. 
Less than three weeks later, Benetton announced that it was ‘reconsidering’, and no chips were currently present 
in the garments produced. Philips removed all traces of the press release from its website. Companies should be 
increasingly aware of the perceptions of the general public, pressure group activities and the potential damage to 
the image of the company that occurs as a result of PR initiatives that do not take major concerns of these publics 
into account.81

576     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
(e.g. information on health issues has led to more healthy food) and prices are reduced 
(due to a reduction in a seller’s informational market power). Sometimes the distinction is 
made between regulation of deceptive marketing communications and regulation of unfair 
practices. Consumers are deceived when there is a claim–fact discrepancy and the false 
claim is believed by customers. Moreover, the message must be misleading, i.e. representa-
tion, omission or practice that is likely to mislead the customer, from the perspective of 
a reasonable consumer, i.e. by a reasonable number of the group to which the practice is 
targeted, and the deceptive practice must be material, i.e. important and likely to impact 
on consumers’ choice or conduct regarding the product and thus relate to a central char-
acteristic. Unfair marketing communications are acts or practices that cause or are likely to 
cause substantial injury to consumers, which are not reasonably avoidable by consumers 
themselves and not outweighed by countervailing benefits to consumers or competitors. 
They may go beyond questions of fact and relate merely to public values, e.g. offends 
public policy as it has been established by statutes, is immoral, unethical, oppressive or 
unscrupulous, or causes substantial injury to consumers, competitors or other business.83 
Each country has its own laws and regulations. A detailed discussion is beyond the scope 
of this book.
Self-regulation of marketing communications practices
In order to retain trust and credibility, marketing communications need to meet high ethi-
cal standards. The advertising industry in many countries has recognised this fact and has 
started to regulate its industry by establishing codes of practice or sets of guiding principles, 
a process called self-regulation. On top of legislation and government regulation, in many 
countries organisations or systems of self-regulation are in place. Table 14.1 summarises the 
pros and cons of self-regulation. Although the features and operation of the self-regulatory 
systems may be quite different in different countries, they all share the same goal: ‘ensuring 
legal, decent, honest and truthful advertising, prepared with a sense of social responsibility 
to the consumer and society and with proper respect for the rules of fair competition’.84 The 
ICC was the first to publish its International Code of Advertising Practice (ICC code) in 
1937. All the codes in use today, all around the world, are based on this code. Self-regulatory 
organisations (SROs), which are funded by the advertising industry, ensure that the rules are 
applied. If an advertiser is not willing to comply voluntarily with the decision of the SRO, 
media may be refused for future advertising, negative publicity may be used or the case can 
be referred to the appropriate statutory authority. Due to its flexibility, speed and low cost, 
self-regulation makes an ideal complement to the law.85
Pros
Cons
● Usually faster and less expensive, more flexible and up 
to date
● Does not require ‘injury’ to be proven as in law
● Assists and complements statutory regulation
● Generates greater moral cohesion than the law – 
whole industry co-operates to reflect current values 
and norms
● Helps minimise friction between consumers and 
businesses
● Media voluntarily participate in enforcing 
self-regulation
● Business competition and innovation are impaired by 
restrictions
● Voluntary regulations may only impose minimum standards 
and enforcement may be lax
● Lacks effective judicial and sanction tools
● System may have too few lay people and involve too many 
industry representatives with the potential of over-indulgent 
self-interest
Table 14.1  Pros and cons of self-regulation

REGULATION OF MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PRACTICES     577
ICC codes
The ICC has issued several codes, including an International Code of Advertising Practice 
(1997), Sales Promotion (2002), Direct Marketing (2001), Sponsorship (2003), Children and 
Young People (2003), Electronic Media (2004), etc.86 According to these codes, marketing 
communications should not contain statements or visuals which offend, denigrate, mislead 
or abuse the trust of consumers or another party. Consumers should be able to recognise 
the communication as a marketing tool. No testimonials should be used ‘unless they are 
genuine, verifiable, relevant and based on personal experience or knowledge’. All marketing 
communications tools should avoid imitation of competitive and non-competitive actions 
in case this imitation might mislead or confuse consumers. For sales promotions, it should 
be clear to consumers how they can obtain the promotional offer (i.e. what the exact con-
ditions are), the value and nature of the promotion should not be misrepresented, and 
any geographic, age, quantity or other restrictions should be clearly indicated. Concerning 
children and young people, marketing communications may not be framed in a way that 
takes advantage of their youth or lack of experience or that strains their loyalty towards 
their parents or guardians. In the case of direct marketing or sales promotions, no products 
should be delivered for which consumers have to pay unless consumers have requested the 
supply of these products. Also, no offers that could be perceived as bills or invoices for 
unordered products should be made. Moreover, data can be collected ‘for specified, explicit 
and legitimate purposes only’ and consumers should be provided with the opportunity to 
‘opt out’ from marketing lists or to require that their data cannot be handed over to third 
parties. This has a serious impact on the possibilities of creating or buying databases with 
the intent to use them for direct marketing purposes.
European Advertising Standards Alliance (EASA)
EASA,87 created in 1992, is Europe’s single voice for the advertising industry and acts as a 
co-ordination point for the self-regulatory bodies of the respective European countries. The 
latter should not imply that Europe will come under one general system for all its Member 
States, but rather that all main principles will be adopted. As the director-general of EASA 
puts it: ‘We must be careful of a one size fits all approach and allow markets the freedom to 
develop a system which responds to the EASA’s Common Principles as well as the needs of 
that particular country, its advertising concerns and consumers.’88 The EASA principles exist 
in addition to other European (and national) laws such as the prohibition of having more 
than 12 minutes of commercial messages an hour, the prohibition on tobacco advertising 
and the prohibition of associating alcohol consumption in advertising with driving, physical 
performance, social or sexual success or therapeutic qualities.
EASA has three major goals: to promote self-regulation; to support existing self-regula-
tory systems; to ensure that cross-border complaints are resolved speedily and effectively. 
For example, the Italian self-regulatory office ran an advertising campaign on TV, radio, 
press and poster sites with the tagline ‘We love advertising so much that sometimes we have 
to restrict it.’ The ads featured a heart covered by a seatbelt and had the purpose of inform-
ing Italian consumers of the role of the Istituto Autodisciplina Pubblicitaria. In Belgium, a 
website was launched inviting consumers to fill in an online complaint form.
In 2010, the 26 self-regulatory bodies that are members of EASA, received over 53 000 
complaints. The number of complaints remains relatively stable over the years (Figure 14.2). 
The countries with the highest adspend also received most complaints: the UK and Ger-
many account for 73% of all complaints. In 2010, one-third were based upon the alleged 
misleading character of the ads, and another 25% were deemed to be offensive (taste and 
decency). Nine per cent of the complaints were based on the inappropriateness for children, 
and another 9% had to do with discrimination and denigration. Seven per cent were related 
to gender portrayal. In the category ‘taste and decency’, the majority of the complaints were 
related to ads being offensive (61%), 19% on the basis of the alleged inappropriateness 

578     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
for children, and 18% because of gender issues (Figure 14.3). On average, at a European 
level, the electronic and information communications technology industry, the food and 
non-alcoholic beverages industry and the leisure and entertainment industry were the most 
complained about products/services. Audio-visual media services were the most complained 
about medium. Slightly more than one-third of the complaints were upheld (Figure 14.4).89
Although all codes and most national laws are based on the ICC code, regulations may 
differ greatly from one country to another, even within the EU. As a consequence, an ad or 
a communications practice such as direct marketing or sales promotions may be acceptable 
in one country, but may be prohibited elsewhere. Therefore, it is advisable for a company to 
be well briefed on local regulations.
The UK system of self-regulation has been called the most developed and effective self-
regulation system in the world. It results in about 12 000 cases a year being investigated. Of 
these, about 1000 have to be withdrawn or modified. In the USA, the combined actions of 
the Federal Trade Commission, the National Advertising Division, the National Advertising 
Review Board and the federal courts result in less than 300 adjudicated cases.
Figure 14.2  Evolution of complaints received by EASA members, 2005–10
Source: from Statistics Report 2010: European trends in advertising complaints, copy advice and pre-clearance, European  
Advertising Standards Alliance (EASA) (2010) http://www.easa-alliance.org/, European Advertising Standards Alliance—The single 
voice for advertising self-regulation.
Figure 14.3  Percentage of complaints received by EASA members in the ‘taste and decency’ 
category, 2010
Source: from Statistics Report 2010: European trends in advertising complaints, copy advice and pre-clearance, European  
Advertising Standards Alliance (EASA) (2010) http://www.easa-alliance.org/, European Advertising Standards Alliance—The single 
voice for advertising self-regulation.

REGULATION OF MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS PRACTICES     579
Figure 14.4  Outcome of complaints received by EASA members, 2010
Source: from Statistics Report 2010: European trends in advertising complaints, copy advice and pre-clearance, European  
Advertising Standards Alliance (EASA) (2010) http://www.easa-alliance.org/, European Advertising Standards Alliance—The single 
voice for advertising self-regulation.
Advertisers and communications professionals value freedom in marketing communications as a fundamental 
principle of a free-market economy. However, responsibility comes with freedom. The Belgian ACC, a professional 
organisation of communication agencies, adopted a moral code of conduct that encompasses ten principles of 
ethical communications, above and beyond the legal requirements that are laid down in advertising regulations. 
All members of the ACC endorse this code. These principles are:
● Marketing communications must not mislead the consumer.
● Marketing communications may not abuse the good faith of the consumer or, particularly in the case of children 
and youngsters, their lack of knowledge and experience.
● Marketing communications must be recognisable as such, whatever the medium or the format used. It must also 
be clear who the sender is.
● All marketing communications based on facts must be verifiable.
● Marketing communications may not discriminate against or insult people on the basis of race, nationality, religion, 
sex, sexual disposition or age.
● Marketing communications must respect people’s privacy.
● ACC members always strive for the best possible advice, without fear or prejudice, and always act in the best 
interest of their customers.
● ACC members always honour their commitments to customers, suppliers and employees.
● ACC members respect other professional codes in the industry, such as the ones of the Jury of Ethical Practices 
in advertising, the code for sponsoring and advertising on TV and the legal limitations on advertising towards 
children.
● ACC members respect each other.
Needless to say, this code of conduct is an ambitious one, and can easily conflict with old habits (such as certain 
types of humour in advertising) and emerging practices (such as data mining and product placement and branded 
entertainment) in marketing communications.90
Business insight
Code of conduct of the Belgian Association of Communication Companies

580     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
Corporate social responsibility
Companies that want to build an ethical reputation often invest in corporate social respon-
sibility (CSR), also referred to as ‘corporate citizenship’.91 CSR is an idea that includes the 
social, the economic and the environmental aspects of business activity (‘triple bottom line’). 
It is the integration of social and environmental values within a company’s core business 
operations and an engagement with stakeholders to improve the well-being of society.92 It 
is consistent with the need to engage effectively with a range of stakeholders (stakeholder 
dialogue). CSR programmes demonstrate actions that appear to further some social good, 
beyond the interests of the firm and that which is required by law. For instance, embody-
ing the product with socially responsible attributes (e.g. pesticide-free, non-animal-tested 
ingredients) or signals (e.g. fair trade label) that convey to stakeholders and consumers that 
the company is concerned about certain social issues. Companies believe that, in develop-
ing CSR programmes, they will build a positive image and reputation for themselves and 
that consumers, by buying their products, will support and reward them. This implies that 
companies undertake two things: eliminating negatives and doing positives (Table 14.2).93 
Companies communicate about their CSR initiatives as a means to defend their reputation. 
For instance, an experimental study showed that the use of a CSR claim in times of crisis 
is more effective, i.e. counters negative publicity, reduces consumer scepticism and leads to 
better attitudes towards a company and its products, the longer a company is involved in 
CSR matters.94 Effective CSR programmes combine sound business and social responsibility. 
This implies that a company should identify areas in which it can make a positive difference, 
make (local) media aware of efforts in order to enhance the chances of positive publicity, 
inform employees with the goal of having them report the company’s good deeds to their 
families, friends and neighbours, and invest in advertising to highlight company efforts.95
Image-destroying activities
Image-building activities
Discrimination
Empowerment of employees
Harassment
Charitable contributions
Pollution
Sponsoring local events
Misleading communications
Selling environmentally safe products
Deceptive communications
Outplacement programmes
Offensive communications
Supporting community events
Table 14.2  Building an ethical reputation: do’s and don’ts
Despite the efforts by governments, environmental organisations and companies, and consumers’ increased concerns 
about environmental issues, the current market shares of eco-friendly products (EFP) are still fairly low (approxi-
mately 1–6%).96 Research applying the Social Dilemma Theory to pro-environmental behaviours widely recognises 
altruistic drivers (i.e. care for the environmental consequences of purchasing) as the dominant, if not unique, posi-
tive antecedents of EFP purchasing.97 This theory also recognises the possible negative individual consequences of 
Research insight
Positive and negative antecedents of purchasing eco-friendly products by green  
and non-green consumers

CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY     581
pro-environmental consumption because consumers may bear individual loss when engaging in EFP purchasing (i.e. 
perceived personal inconvenience of purchasing EFP98). However, the Social Dilemma Theory mostly neglects how 
consumers may derive personal benefits from purchasing green goods. In contrast, research applying the Psychologi-
cal Egoism Theory to pro-environmental behaviours proposes that altruism implies obtaining personal pleasure from 
helping behaviour. Thus, it recognises ego-centric motives (positive self-interest) as the dominant antecedents of pur-
chasing EFP.99 Consumers are assumed to purchase EFP because of a strong self-interest in perceiving themselves as 
green consumers (green self-identity)100 and to avoid feeling guilty by obeying moral obligations (moral obligation).101
In an Italian study, a theoretical model was empirically tested that combined altruistic and ego-centric ante-
cedents of purchasing EFP. On the one hand, positive antecedents, both altruistic (i.e. care for the environmental 
consequences of purchasing) and ego-centric (i.e. green self-identity and moral obligation), exert a positive impact 
on consumers’ intention and EFP purchase behaviour. On the other hand, negative ego-centric antecedents (i.e. 
perceived personal inconvenience of purchasing EFP) exert a negative impact on consumers’ intention and EFP 
purchase behaviour. The model is shown in Figure 14.5.
This model was empirically validated in Italian samples of green (n = 453) and non-green (n = 473) consumers 
(i.e. consumers who engage in a set of pro-environmental behaviours for environmental reasons vs consumers who 
do not engage in these behaviours). In order to properly reach both green and non-green consumers, the authors 
and a team of research assistants delivered questionnaires during environmental activities (i.e. cleaning parks) or 
specific green days (i.e. the Day of the Earth) organised by different pro-environmental organisations (Greenpeace,  
Inachis, ISDE, Legambiente, LIPU, ProNatura, WWF), as well as in the street on ordinary days. Respondents were asked 
to complete offline self-administered questionnaires in which the variables in the model as well as the respondents’ 
‘greenness’ were measured. As to the latter, respondents were asked to indicate whether they did or did not engage 
in a set of eco-friendly behaviours (e.g. avoiding wasting water, recycling items, taking part in pro-environmental 
campaigns), and, if yes, to indicate the reason for which they engaged in each green behaviour (anchors range from 
1 to 5, with ‘1 = no’, ‘2 = yes, because I have to’, ‘3 = yes, because it saves me money’, ‘4 = yes, because it is better 
for the environment’, ‘5 = yes, because everybody does it’). To be considered green consumers, respondents should 
engage in the majority (750%) of Moons and De Pelsmacker’s set of eco-friendly behaviours for environmental 
reasons (‘4 = yes, because it is better for the environment’).102 All other concepts in the model were framed and 
formulated in the context of purchasing one particular product category: eco-friendly tissue-paper products (EFTPP). 
EFTPP products are paper napkins, toilet paper, scrolls, paper towels, and paper tablecloths.
The findings confirm the multiple determination of EFP purchasing and that EFP purchasing should be best viewed 
as driven by a mixture of altruistic and ego-centric positive antecedents.103 Ego-centric positive motives seem to be 
at least as important as altruistic ones, and negative motives seem to be at least as relevant as positive ones. Green 
self-identity, one of the two positive ego-centric antecedents, exerts the largest effect on the intention to purchase 
EFP in both samples, thus confirming the relevant role of ego-centric motivations in fuelling green consumption.
Figure 14.5  Positive and negative egocentric and altruistic 
motives for buying eco-friendly products.

582     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
Well-known CSR areas or techniques are cause-related marketing, green marketing and 
socially responsible or fair trade marketing. Cause-related marketing is the support of a social 
cause that a firm generates through financial interactions with its customers. For instance, 
a firm donates a certain percentage of its income or profits to a specific non-profit cause. 
Carefully selecting causes can have a positive impact on a firm’s sales. The impact can be 
even greater if a firm can find ways to utilise its products and services in the programme 
(see, for instance, the Procter–UNICEF case at the end of this chapter). Green marketing is 
the development and promotion of products that are environmentally safe: biodegradable, 
recycled, etc. Socially responsible marketing implies selling products that embody certain 
social ethical values, such as products free of child labour, produced in companies where 
trade unions are allowed, in decent social circumstances, and at fair wages.
Some remarkable differences in the decision process between green and non-green consumers emerged. Altru-
istic motives are more important for green than for non-green consumers. The effect of care for the environmental 
consequences of purchasing on intention to purchase EFP is significant for green consumers, whereas it is not 
significant for non-green consumers. Thus, for non-green consumers, the altruistic variable is not a significant 
motivational antecedent of EFP purchasing.
Negative ego-centric motives affect the purchase intentions of non-green consumers more than the intentions 
of green consumers, whereas the impact of negative motives on behaviour is stronger for green than for non-green 
consumers. The perceived personal inconvenience (PPI) of purchasing EFP mainly reduces non-green consumers’ 
intention to purchase EFP, whereas it mainly reduces green consumers’ EFP purchase behaviour. Non-green consum-
ers, who perceive personal inconvenience in buying green goods, are unlikely to form strong behavioural intentions. 
In contrast, the results of the negative impact exerted by PPI on green consumers’ EFP purchase behaviour show 
that although green consumers may have formed strong intentions to purchase EFP, they are inclined to actually 
purchase less EFP as a result of the negative effect of PPI.
Green and non-green consumer groups do not differ significantly with respect to the impact exerted by green self-
identity and moral obligation (the positive ego-centric antecedents) on EFP purchase intention and behaviour. One 
possible explanation for this is that green consumers may have been stricter with themselves when answering the ques-
tionnaire than non-green consumers. When asked whether they perceived themselves to be green consumers, they might 
have answered according to their ‘actual self’ due to the awareness that in their everyday life, they are still far from being 
fully green consumers. In contrast, non-green consumers might be aware to a lesser degree of what green consump-
tion means and might have answered according to their ‘ideal self’, reflecting social desirability bias or neutralisation.104
Green marketing communications should thus emphasise both egocentric and altruistic positive and negative 
motivations, and should communicate differently with green and non-green consumers.105
In a study conducted in Denmark, Belgium and Italy in 2013, a conceptual model was tested of the effects of self-
identity, care for the environment and green moral obligation, on the attitude towards and the intention to adopt 
electric cars.
Research insight
Green self-identity, environmental concern, moral obligation and electric car adap-
tion: evidence from Denmark, Belgium and Italy

CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY     583
Self-identity is a set of meanings attached to roles individuals occupy in the social structure, and unique ways in 
which they see themselves in these roles.106 According to Identity Theory,107 self-identity is a primary motivator of 
behaviour because individuals seek to maintain consistency with their identity standard through behavioural actions. 
Green self-identity (GSI) – an individual’s overall perceived identification with the typical green consumer – represents 
a mental model which may motivate the individual to engage in specific eco-friendly behaviours.108 Green self-identity 
may be considered as a ‘primary’ motive of pro-environmental behaviour,109 that is, a motivational ‘root’ that influ-
ences consumers in developing positive attitudes towards and intentions to engage in specific pro-environmental 
behaviours that express the green self-identity role.110 Therefore, the more consumers perceive themselves as green, 
the more they will develop a positive attitude towards eco-friendly electric cars, and the more they will be willing to 
adopt them.
In addition to the direct influence that green self-identity exerts on consumers’ attitudes towards and inten-
tions to perform specific eco-friendly behaviours, there are also indirect effects. According to the Theory of 
Ethics, consumers rely on moral philosophies of ‘teleology’ and ‘deontology’ in forming their evaluations in 
situations involving ethical issues.111 Teleological evaluation is based on the estimated goodness or badness of 
the consequences of a specific behavioural alternative, while deontological evaluation is based on the inherent 
moral righteousness of a specific behavioural alternative.112 The more consumers perceive themselves as green 
consumers, the more they will care about the environmental consequences of a specific consumption behaviour 
(teleological evaluation),113 and the more they will develop positive attitudes towards the adoption of eco-friendly 
electric cars. Additionally, the more consumers perceive themselves as green, the more they will perceive a spe-
cific environmentally unfriendly consumption behaviour as unethical behaviour a green consumer should not 
engage in (deontological evaluation – green moral obligation). Green moral obligation is a personal internal state 
construct that is concerned with the extent to which an individual feels a sense of responsibility to act morally 
when faced with an ethical situation, such as environmental protection.114 A consumer may adhere to specific 
eco-friendly principles because it is the right thing to do and the violation of these principles is intrinsically 
wrong.115 The more consumers perceive themselves as green, the more they will feel a moral obligation to avoid 
environmentally unfriendly consumption actions, and the more they will develop positive attitudes towards the 
adoption of eco-friendly electric cars.
In conclusion, green self-identity is assumed to have an effect on the attitude towards and the willingness to 
adopt an eco-friendly electric car directly, and through considerations of environmental concern and green moral 
obligation.
All well-known models of ethical behaviour assume a relationship between the cultural environment and ethi-
cal perceptions (such as eco-friendly consumer behaviour).116 A person’s (ethical) value system is indeed greatly 
influenced by cultural background. In a study in three countries, the proposed model was tested, and cross-country 
differences in the motivational processes to adopt an electric car were investigated. By means of an online survey, 
data were gathered in Belgium (600), Denmark (611) and Italy (794) from respondents owning a driver’s licence. 
Comparison of the three countries based on Hofstede’s national cultural dimensions
Country
Denmark
Belgium
Italy
Power distance (PDI)
18
65
50
Individualism (IDV)
74
75
76
Masculinity (MAS)
16
54
70
Uncertainty avoidance (UAI)
23
94
75
Long-term orientation (LTO)
46
38
34
Note: Scores for Hofstede’s dimensions are measured on a 0–100 scale

584     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
Normally, green marketing and social marketing programmes generate positive public-
ity and word of mouth for a company. According to a study by Hines and Ames, 51% of 
the population had the feeling of being able to make a difference to a company’s behaviour 
and 68% claimed to have bought a product or a service because of a company’s responsible 
reputation.119 On average, 46% of European consumers also claimed to be willing to pay 
substantially more for ethical products.120 However, there are differences as to the reported 
willingness to pay a price premium for different types of ethical products. For instance, 
American consumers agreed with a price increase of 6.6% for green products,121 while 
French consumers were willing to pay 10 to 25% more for apparel not made by children.122 
With these studies in mind, one could expect a high demand for ethical products. However, 
the opposite seems to be the case. People do not always put their money where their mouth 
is: there is often a substantial ‘attitude–behaviour’ gap: consumers like the idea of ethical 
products, but they do not always buy them. Most of the ethical labelling initiatives with 
respect to, for instance, organic food, products free from child labour, legally logged wood 
and fair trade products often have market shares of less than 1%.123
These three countries vary substantially in terms of their cultural characteristics. In the table on the previous page, 
the scores of the three countries on Hofstede’s cultural dimensions are shown.117
By means of structural equation modelling with multi-group analysis, the model was tested and compared 
between the three countries. The results show that the conceptual model is largely supported in all three samples. 
Furthermore, results reveal significant differences across the countries studied. For Danish consumers, primarily the 
greater the green self-identity, the more positive consumer attitude towards the adoption of electric cars is, which 
is also reinforced by the positive indirect effect of the care for the environmental consequences of using cars. For 
Belgian consumers, most importantly, the greater the green self-identity, the more consumers consider the environ-
mental consequences of using cars. Green self-identity thus influences consumer attitude towards the adoption of 
electric vehicles indirectly via the consideration of the environmental consequences of using cars. The direct effect 
of green self-identity on consumer intention to adopt electric cars is not significant. For Italian consumers, positive 
attitudes towards the adoption of electric cars are primarily influenced by green self-identity directly and indirectly 
via the mediating effect of green moral obligation, whilst the mediating effect of the care for the environmental 
consequences of using cars is more limited. In all the three samples, the attitude–intention relation is significant and 
rather strong. These differences can be explained by differences in cultural characteristics of the three countries.118
In order to develop positive attitudes towards the adoption of electric cars in Denmark, advertising should mainly 
emphasise how consumers may enhance their self-identity by adopting an electric car, and additionally address the 
specific positive impact of electric car usage on the environment. Advertising in Belgium should primarily focus on being 
an eco-friendly consumer means taking into account the negative environmental consequences of using cars, and opt 
for eco-friendly consumption choices. In Italy, policy makers and marketers should use advertising that emphasises 
Italian consumers’ green self-identity and status, and consumers’ adherence to ethical obligations and moral principles.
Fair trade can be described as an alternative approach to a trading partnership that aims for sustainable develop-
ment of excluded and/or disadvantaged producers. It seeks to do so by providing better trading conditions, raising 
awareness and campaigning. In the broadest sense, the concept incorporates environmental as well as social issues. 
Apart from paying fair wages in a local context and providing a safe and clean workplace (mainstream business), 
maximum fair trade practices should also encompass the development of sustainable businesses, empowerment of 
Research insight
Determinants of willingness to pay for fair trade products

SUMMARY     585
Summary
Marketing communications professionals should act ethically because it is in their best 
long-term business interest to be perceived as decent corporate citizens that are sensitive 
to the moral codes in the society where they market their products. Therefore they should 
set ethical standards and rules for themselves and follow them in every communications 
campaign and communications instrument. They should refrain from using controversial 
and shocking messages such as fear appeals and provocative ads just for the sake of gain-
ing attention. Covert marketing techniques, such as stealth and buzz marketing and certain 
forms of brand placement or native advertising, should be used with care and under full 
disclosure, so that the consumers are not deceived or misled. Men and women, elderly 
people and sub-culture groups should be portrayed in advertising with due care, in order 
not to stimulate discriminating or offensive stereotypes. Especially when targeting children, 
marketing communicators should take into account that they are often cognitively not devel-
oped enough to recognise the persuasive attempts of creative marketers, and can therefore 
be misled in an unacceptable way. Public relations officers, sales managers, salespeople and 
direct marketers should take care that they do not invade the privacy of customers and 
that they do not use unfair or deceptive practices. At the minimum, marketing profession-
als should strictly follow the legal and regulatory guidelines in the countries in which they 
operate, and should fully co-operate with the self-regulatory bodies and procedures that 
are in place. They may also become actively socially responsible by engaging in corporate 
social responsibility projects.
artisans, fostering well-being, establishing political and social justice, and developing equitable trade. In a narrow 
sense, fair trade means fair prices for the products of farmers in developing countries. In essence, it means buying 
products from farmers in developing countries on terms that are relatively more favourable than commercial terms, 
and marketing them in developed countries at an ethical premium. This higher price to the consumer is warranted 
by the higher price that farmers receive for their products and by the fair trade control mechanisms in the trade 
channel. Companies generally demonstrate their fair trade behaviour to consumers by means of marketing fair trade 
brands or by means of co-operating with fair trade organisations that accredit their fair trade products and allow 
them to market these products using a fair trade label.
In 2005, a conjoint analytic study was conducted to estimate the willingness to pay a price premium for fair-trade-
labelled coffee by Belgian consumers, and to identify the characteristics of those consumer segments who were 
willing to pay a substantial fair trade premium. In general, the brand appeared to be the most important attribute 
of the coffee, closely followed by flavour with fair trade label in third place. The willingness to pay for a fair trade 
label on coffee of the respondents indicated that about 10% of the sample wanted to pay the current price premium 
in Belgium of 27%. Clusters based on differences in preference were defined to estimate market opportunities for 
fairly traded coffee and to profile potential consumers. Profiling was done by means of demographic features: age, 
gender and education level, as well as personal values. Four clusters were identified. The fair trade lovers accounted 
for 11% of the sample and were predominantly aged 31–45 years. They were more idealistic and less conventional 
compared with other groups. The fair trade likers represented the largest group. They did not differ significantly 
from the rest of the sample in terms of demographic characteristics, but they were relatively more idealistic. The 
flavour lovers and the brand lovers each accounted for one-quarter of the total sample and were less idealistic and 
more conventional. In addition, brand lovers were more likely to be women. The fair trade lovers constituted the 
group that was most prepared to pay the actual price premium (slightly over 50% of them). Of the flavour lovers 
and the brand lovers, who account for 50% of the sample, only a small minority were prepared to pay the sample 
average price premium of 10% for fair trade coffee. The 11% fair trade lovers cannot be considered equivalent to 
actual market share, because the amount of coffee they buy relative to the total population is unknown. However, 
the authors concluded that, compared with the 1% market share held by fair trade coffee at that time, the 11% fair 
trade lovers constituted a substantially larger potential market than actually reached.124

586     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
Further reading
Brenkert, G.G. (2008) Marketing Ethics (Foundations of Business Ethics). Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Business Ethics: A European Review, http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1111/
(ISSN)1467–8608/issues
Business Ethics Quarterly, http://sbeonline.org/?page_id=633
Journal of Business Ethics, http://www.springer.com/social+sciences/applied+ethics/
journal/10551
Journal of  Consumer Affairs, http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1111/
(ISSN)1745–6606
www.societyforbusinessethics.org
Review questions
	 1.	 When setting ethical standards, individuals and companies can follow different princi-
ples such as the deontological, teleological, distributive justice and ‘common decency’  
principles. In what ways are they different and how could they lead to different marketing 
communications decisions?
	 2.	 When laying the groundwork for ethical decision-making, several rules and models can be 
used, such as the caveat emptor and caveat venditor rules, and the consumer sovereignty 
rule. Explain the difference between these rules. How would your decisions be different 
when you applied these different rules?
	 3.	 What are the main ethical concerns with marketing (communications)? To what extent are 
they correct or exaggerated?
	 4.	 What are the most important reasons to be careful with targeting marketing communica-
tions at children?
	 5.	 Controversial and shocking images are often considered as ethically problematic. What 
can be considered controversial in marketing communications and when would you con-
sider it an ethical problem?
	 6.	 Give examples of covert marketing. When and why can it be unethical? What could a 
marketing communications professional do to make these techniques and formats ethi-
cally acceptable?
	 7.	 Give examples of ethical problems in personal selling, direct marketing, public relations 
and packaging.
	 8.	 What are self-regulation procedures based on and how do they function?
	 9.	 What are corporate social responsibility programs? Give examples.

Case 14     587
P&G believes that this is both a worthy cause that is of 
interest to many of its stakeholders, and one for which it can 
offer expertise. Indeed, P&G has many existing programs 
in children’s education and development as well as deep 
expertise in health and hygiene. One of these programs is a 
long-term co-operation with UNICEF.
UNICEF: Unite for children
UNICEF, the United Nations Children’s (Emergency) Fund, 
provides help and support to children in need around the 
world. The organisation focuses on areas that relate to 
helping children in need, such as child survival and devel-
opment, child protection, basic education and gender 
equality, HIV/AIDS and children, and policy advocacy and 
partnerships. UNICEF works on projects related to child 
survival, nutrition and environmental interventions, quality 
education for children, protecting children from violence, 
exploitation and abuse, prevention and paediatric treat-
ment of HIV and AIDS, and policy analysis, leveraging of 
resources, and child participation. UNICEF, a Nobel Peace 
Prize winner, works in 158 countries and territories and is 
present in 36 industrialised countries. Ninety-three per cent 
of funds go directly to serve children.
One of the ways in which the organisation tries to 
achieve its goals is by teaming up with partners in joint sup-
port projects. This case describes the co-operation between 
UNICEF and Pampers in a maternal and neonatal tetanus 
vaccination programme.
Pampers and UNICEF: protecting 
vulnerable babies from neonatal tetanus
P&G’s Live, Learn and Thrive children support programme 
is brought to life through partnerships between Pam-
pers, P&G’s leading brand of disposable diapers, and sub-
brands like Kandoo, and organisations such as UNICEF. The  
brand–good-cause fit is obvious. UNICEF is the world’s 
leading children’s organisation that tries to advance human-
ity through programmes that ensure every child’s right to 
health, education, equality and protection. Improving  
the health of children is one responsibility among many  
in the fight against poverty. Healthy children become healthy 
adults: people who create better lives for themselves, their 
Procter & Gamble: branded consumer 
products help children in need
William Procter and James Gamble formed a humble, small, 
family-operated soap and candle company, inspired by the 
purpose of providing products and services of superior qual-
ity and value, in 1837. Today, Procter & Gamble is one of 
the leading global manufacturers and marketers of branded 
consumer goods. P&G commits itself to providing branded 
products and services of superior quality and value that 
improve the lives of the world’s consumers. As a result, it 
strives for leadership sales, profit and value creation, allowing 
employees, shareholders and the communities to prosper.
In 2008, P&G employed approximately 135 000 employ-
ees working in about 80 countries worldwide and provided 
products and services in over 180 countries. In 2007, sales 
were almost $55 000 million. Brands worth $23 billion are 
the core of the company’s product portfolio, and account 
for almost two-thirds of annual sales. They are in beauty, 
health care, fabric and home care, baby and family care, 
snacks, razors and blades, etc. The company has one of 
the strongest portfolios of trusted, quality, leadership 
brands, including Pampers®, Tide®, Ariel®, Always®, Whis-
per®, Pantene®, Mach3®, Bounty®, Dawn®, Gain®, Pring-
les®, Charmin®, Downy®, Lenor®, Iams®, Crest®, Oral-B®, 
Actonel®, Duracell®, Olay®, Head & Shoulders®, Wella®, 
Gillette®, Braun® and Fusion®.
One of the core values of P&G is to help to solve the 
world’s sustainability challenges. It does so through innova-
tions that enhance the environmental profile of products, 
by reducing the environmental footprint of their opera-
tions, and through contributions to help children in need. 
Indeed, in recent years, P&G decided to focus upon a cor-
porate cause where the need is great and there is a clear 
fit with P&G’s strengths, brands and current programs, i.e. 
improving life for children in need, ages 0–13, through the 
P&G Live, Learn and Thrive program. This program entails 
helping children in need to live by:
● helping to ensure they get off to a healthy start;
● providing them with places, tools and programs that 
enhance their ability to learn; and
● giving them access to programs that help develop the 
self-esteem and life skills that they need to thrive.
Case 14:
Pampers and UNICEF: helping protect babies together

588     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
outreach (i.e. media, stores, Internet, direct-to-consumer, 
etc.). The partnership focuses on a key idea that can make 
the difference in disadvantaged babies’ lives, and it nurtures 
both brands’ equity and strengthens the relationship with 
consumers and the public. Consumers are open to charity, 
especially at Christmas and other giving periods. The project 
offers a mechanism that overcomes consumers’ concern of 
‘where does all this money generated actually go?’
The relationship with UNICEF started in 2004 in Latin 
America with the ‘Mothers of the Heart’ campaign in Argen-
tina, Venezuela and Mexico. For every pack of Pampers 
purchased, Pampers and UNICEF donated in support of 
nutrition and education programmes for babies in need. 
This programme demonstrated the fit between Pampers 
and UNICEF values and a common vision of happy healthy 
children.
The idea of working with UNICEF then travelled to 
­Belgium in 2005 when Pampers teamed up with UNICEF 
in the fight against polio. Consumers were an integral part 
of the success of this programme. With every purchase of 
a Pampers Jumbo pack or Mega pack a polio vaccination 
was donated. Over 200 000 children could be vaccinated 
as a result of this campaign. The programme also benefited 
Pampers, mainly in confirming with Pampers consumers 
the Pampers equity of caring for babies around the world 
(Photo 14.3).
The UK/Ireland 2006 campaign
Campaign
In November–December 2006, the Pampers/UNICEF teta-
nus vaccination project started in the UK and Ireland, with 
the selling line: ‘Helping protect babies together’. The cam-
paign was supported by TV, radio, print, direct-to-consumer 
and Internet advertising and by in-store activity. The key 
communities and their countries. Improving the health of 
the world’s children is a core UNICEF objective.
Pampers is the world’s biggest children’s brand. Pam-
pers is sold in over 100 countries around the world. Each 
day Pampers are used by more than 35 million babies. The 
brand’s appeal is beyond functional benefits, and is awarded 
by mothers all over the world. Mums, Pampers and UNICEF 
help babies in need and care for babies’ development.
Of every 100 children born today, 26 will miss out on 
immunisations against basic childhood diseases. One of 
these basic immunisations is against tetanus. Maternal and 
newborn tetanus (MNT) are often a tale of two worlds. 
In the industrialised world, most mothers give birth in a 
medical facility having been routinely immunised both in 
their first year of life and, through booster doses, periodi-
cally. To them tetanus is a thing of the past (unless they step 
on a rusty nail and require a booster shot of the vaccine). 
But in the less developed countries, the disease remains 
endemic. Newborn tetanus is one of the leading causes of 
newborn mortality in the poorest areas of the world where 
most women do not have access to health facilities or 
immunisation services. Newborn (neonatal) tetanus occurs 
when newborns are infected as a direct result of unhygienic 
birthing practices, such as cutting the umbilical cord with 
unsterile instruments, handling it with dirty hands or treat-
ing it with contaminated dressings and traditional sub-
stances such as ghee, cow dung, ashes and mud. Mothers 
can also be infected with maternal tetanus during an unsafe 
or unsanitary delivery.
Once newborn tetanus has been contracted there is no 
real cure. In rural areas of less developed countries, almost 
all infants that are infected with newborn tetanus die. Even 
today over 95% of the babies that suffer from newborn 
tetanus and who have no access to treatment facilities will 
die. Over 80 years after the vaccine became available, some 
100 million women and thousands of unborn babies are 
still at risk from one of the most painful deaths known to 
medicine. About 5 to 7% of infant deaths or approximately 
128 000 newborns die annually from newborn tetanus, 
and thousands of women from maternal tetanus. Almost 
all these deaths occur in just 44 countries.
Between October and December every year, for each 
specially marked ‘1 pack = 1 life@saving vaccine’ pack of 
Pampers nappy and wipe product bought, Pampers pro-
vides UNICEF with funding for one life-saving tetanus 
vaccine. Two doses of the tetanus vaccine are needed to 
protect a woman and any baby born to her during a three-
year period. The baby is protected for the first two months 
of its life.
The partnership between Pampers and UNICEF rests 
upon common objectives and mutually agreed strategies. 
The two organisations help babies in need, aim to build a 
sustainable long-term relationship, and benefit from each 
other’s brand equity and from the broad range of channel 
Photo 14.3  Pampers and UNICEF join forces to help 
protect babies
Source: Pampers.

Case 14     589
Photo 14.4  Key visual of the 2006 Pampers/UNICEF campaign in the UK and Ireland
Source: Pampers.
visual of the campaign is shown in Photo 14.4. Thirty-second 
TV commercials were used during the whole campaign 
period to create awareness, drive an emotional bond with 
consumers and invite broad-scale participation. At the end 
of the campaign a 60-second commercial was aired to thank 
the consumers for their participation. Also, print was used to 
convey these messages. Further, in-store communications 
were used to create an experience with the initiative at the 
local level. Posters were put up at shop entrances, hang-
ing banners were used to connect with the consumers’ 
emotionality and make the vaccination drive credible, and 
shelf cards were used to help drive sales. There was massive 
support from retailers, resulting in unprecedented in-store 
support, visibility and amplification, with extra displays in 

590     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
The 2007–8 global campaign
In 2007 Pampers expanded its partnership with UNICEF to 
Western Europe, Japan and North America.
In 2008, Pampers committed to a three-year global part-
nership, expanding the tetanus vaccination programme 
between Pampers and UNICEF to Western Europe, the 
Middle East and Africa, Central and Eastern Europe and 
North America (Japan and China came in 2009) to help 
eliminate maternal and neonatal tetanus in the 44 remain-
ing countries by 2012. To accomplish that, funding for over 
300 million vaccines was procured (by 2008–9, 200 million 
vaccines were procured; over the 2009–10 campaign, Pam-
pers raised an additional 100 million vaccines). The basic 
simple mechanism remained the same: for every marked 
pack shipped P&G donated the cost of one tetanus vac-
cination at 7 cents. The global Pampers business unit pro-
vides global marketing direction, full advertising and PR 
templates and in-store materials, and support (as needed/
appropriate) that has been closely worked out and cleared 
with UNICEF International. Local customisation and exploi-
tation of these materials are worked out between local P&G 
subsidiaries and UNICEF National Committees. Local coun-
try branches could also engage local ambassadors to build 
ambassador-endorsed campaigns. P&G and UNICEF have 
also started a multi-brand initiative under the umbrella of 
most stores despite the difficult Christmas period with its 
traditional in-store communications overload. On-pack 
stickers were used to communicate the partnership and the 
mechanics and to drive the purchase decision. The cam-
paign was further supported by direct mailings, both from 
Pampers and from retailers, to drive the emotional bond 
via personalised communications, to drive consumers to 
the website for more information, and to enhance cred-
ibility. In that way, 1 million contacts with the campaign 
were included in the ongoing email campaigns. Banners 
were used to leverage the programme by building cred-
ibility and by encouraging longer-term participation via 
interaction and updates and by showing results and impact. 
Finally, public relations efforts were made to create buzz and 
awareness and to leverage on UNICEF PR activities.
Results
The campaign was a big success for UNICEF. A total number 
of 7.5 million vaccines were funded, versus the 6 million 
estimated from both Pampers sales and the participation 
of the trade.
Pampers also benefited from the programme from both 
the consumer support and sales. Figure 14.6 shows that 
Pampers brand equity was strengthened considerably as a 
result of the UNICEF campaign: scores on all important brand 
attributes increased during the period of the campaign.
Figure 14.6  Evolution of Pampers brand equity in 2006

Case 14     591
Preparing the fifth anniversary of 
UNICEF–P&G co-operation in Belgium
In 2008–9 the co-operation between P&G and UNICEF cel-
ebrated its fifth anniversary. Plans were made not only to 
continue the co-operation, but also to include campaign 
elements that would stress the long-standing joint cam-
paign. In September–October the campaign kicked off with 
a field trip to Ethiopia with the local ambassador Khadja 
Nin (a Belgian singer of Burundian descent) and press 
conferences and releases featuring, among others, Salma 
Hayek, the campaign ambassador for 2008. Press releases 
continued to appear in November and December 2008. 
The new Pampers Village magazine format was used for 
on- and offline relationship marketing. A Pampers–UNICEF 
micro-site was launched on which consumers could upload 
their own birthday song and win one vaccine per song. 
A professional toolkit for hospitals, paediatricians, gynae-
cologists, and the national organisation for childhood was 
produced and distributed. As usual, the campaign was 
supported through mass media advertising. In Novem-
ber–December, ‘Happy birthday’ TV commercials were on 
air, and print was used at the end of the campaign to thank 
the consumers and to communicate the number of vac-
cines donated.
‘Pampers has already exceeded the three-year MNT tar-
get, and pledges to raise additional 100 million vaccines 
needed to help eliminate MNT by 2012.’ Since 2006 Pam-
pers has successfully donated 200 million tetanus vaccines, 
protecting a total of 45.5 million women and their babies 
around the world from MNT. Pampers has committed to 
donate a further 100 million vaccines up to 2010, which will 
allow the target and protection of an additional 33 million 
women and their babies in at least 32 countries around the 
world. Pampers’ support for the global elimination of MNT 
began in 2006, and Pampers will continue to support the 
global initiative to eliminate MNT in at least 32 countries 
where newborns still suffer from this deadly, but prevent-
able disease.
Four† countries have now completed vaccination activi-
ties with the help of the Pampers funds, including Central 
African Republic, Cote d’Ivoire, Myanmar and Timor Leste. 
A further 16 countries are expected to complete activities 
with Pampers funds raised to date, namely: Burkina Faso, 
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, DR Congo, Ethiopia, Equa-
torial Guinea, Gabon, Indonesia, Kenya, Lao PDR, Maurita-
nia, Niger, Senegal, Tanzania and Uganda.
Every two seconds since the start of the campaign, Pam-
pers has provided a protective dose of the Tetanus Toxoid 
vaccine for a woman and her baby.
Since 2006, UNICEF has helped eliminate MNT in five 
countries, namely Egypt, Zambia, Bangladesh, Republic of 
Congo and Turkey.
the Pampers–UNICEF partnership to support the maternal 
and neonatal tetanus vaccination programme.
The 2008 campaign started in October 2008. The com-
munications platform was: ‘Together we can help give mil-
lions of babies in need a brighter tomorrow.’ The business 
objective was to drive the total Pampers product line (dia-
pers, wipes), putting mums at the heart of the campaign. The 
creative material for Europe was updated. Again, a mix of 
various above- and below-the-line communications tools 
was used, leveraging the P&G marketing tools: 30-second 
television ads, print campaigns, in-store posters, banners and 
shelf cards, direct mailings and the Internet. This time, direct 
mails were used to thank the consumers for their support at 
the end of the campaign in January 2009. Public relations 
materials and the website Pampers Village were used to cre-
ate extra buzz when celebrating the results in March 2009.
A public relations campaign was set up, with organised 
field visits with the media to developing countries to witness 
the campaign’s progress and the support of a celebrity mum 
as the spokesperson for the campaign. To create synergies 
between these PR initiatives and other instruments of the 
marketing communications mix, different elements were 
integrated, to bring to life the campaign in a truly holistic 
way and make mums in Europe experience the campaign 
through digital means:
● Make blogs from the press trips to the field.
● Make different reports and videos for the website to 
bring the initiative to life.
● Collect facts and figures on UNICEF and tetanus around 
the world for the website.
● Make a website section on the regional ambassador.
● Build relationships with top broadcasters.
● Arrange broadcast press trips for live interviews.
● Regional ambassador to be featured within broadcast.
● Develop additional POS materials featuring the Euro 
ambassador to leverage the ambassador in-store.
The campaign provided funds for more than 50 million 
doses of vaccine in 2007. By mid-2009, another 150 million 
vaccines for women and babies in 27 target countries were 
provided for.
In the UK 10.08 million vaccines were donated, 6.12 million 
in France and 7.26 million in Germany. Also, since 2006 the 
UNICEF campaign has been implemented in the UK. Fur-
ther, retail support was mixed.
The Pampers–UNICEF campaign also benefited the Pam-
pers brand image. A study among 300 mums of 0–3 year old 
babies in France revealed that those aware of the campaign 
scored Pampers considerably higher on various brand image 
attributes. Also in the UK, four key components of brand 
equity substantially improved vis-à-vis the competition.

592     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
3.	 Do you think it was a good idea also to use Lenor and 
Ariel to support the vaccination campaign in Germany? 
Why or why not? What other P&G products would be 
suitable to include in the campaign? Which ones would 
you certainly not include?
4.	 Who would be suitable ambassadors of a UNICEF–Pam-
pers campaign in your own country and why? How would 
you use them in an integrated communications campaign?
5.	 Can you think of other ideas for an integrated market-
ing communications campaign, except for the ones that 
were used in the 2007–8 campaign?
6.	 Do you have any other integrated marketing commu-
nications ideas to celebrate the fifth anniversary of the 
P&G–UNICEF co-operation?
Pampers and UNICEF are aiming for no country to have 
MNT as a public health problem, where babies die from a 
completely preventable disease. One case of newborn teta-
nus is one too many.
Questions
1.	 Do you believe there is a good fit between UNICEF 
and Pampers/P&G? What other companies could 
be good corporate partners of UNICEF? What other 
organisations could be appropriate ‘good-cause’ part-
ners of P&G?
2.	 Do you think the UK/Ireland campaign of 2006 was well 
integrated? What could have been done more to make 
it a better integrated campaign?
*Christine Edier, UNICEF International, http://www.who.int/immunisation_monitoring/diseases/MNTE_initiative/en/i (as at July 2009).
†Activities have been completed but a pre-validation data review may identify the need for small-scale targeted tests before claiming elimination, in which case 
they may join the list of 16 countries expected to complete activities soon.
Sources: www.pg.com (accessed 27 December 2008), www.unicef.org (accessed 27 December 2008), www.pampers.com (accessed 27 December 2008), www.uk.pg.
com (accessed 27 December 2008); Nicolas Frèrejean, P&G Belgium; Luc Suykens, P&G Belgium.
References
1	 Clow, K.E. and Baack, D. (2001) Integrated Advertising, 
Promotion & Marketing Communications. Upper Sad-
dle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
2	 Duncan, T. (2002) IMC: Using Advertising & Promotion 
to Build Brands. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill Irwin.
3	 Fill, C. (2006) Marketing Communications: Engagement, 
Strategies and Practice. Harlow: Pearson Education; 
­Rossiter, J.R. and Bellman, S. (2005) Marketing Com-
munications: Theory and Applications. French Forest, 
NSW: Pearson Education Australia.
4	 McIntyre, R.P., Capen, M.M. and Minton, A.P. (1995) 
‘Exploring the psychological foundations of ethical posi-
tions in marketing’, Psychology & Marketing, 12(6), 
569–82.
5	 Snipes, R.L., LaTour, M. and Bliss, S.J. (1999) ‘A model 
of the effects of self-efficacy on the perceived ethicality 
and performance of fear appeals in advertising’, Journal 
of Business Ethics, 19, 273–85.
6	 Shimp, T.A. (2000) Advertising, Promotion, Supplemen-
tal Aspects of Integrated Marketing Communications. 
Fort Worth, TX: Dryden Press.
7	 Duncan, T. (2002) IMC: Using Advertising & Promotion 
to Build Brands. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill Irwin.
8	 Duncan, T. (2002) IMC: Using Advertising & Promotion 
to Build Brands. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill Irwin.
9	 Beard, F.K. (2003) ‘College Student attitudes toward 
advertising’s ethical, economic, and social consequences’, 
Journal of Business Ethics, 48, 217–28.
10	 Fam, K.S. and Waller, D.S. (2003) ‘Advertising controver-
sial products in the Asia Pacific: what makes them offen-
sive?’, Journal of Business Ethics, 48, 237–50.
11	 Vitell, S.J., Paolillo, J.G.P. and Thomas, J.L. (2003) ‘The 
perceived role of ethics and social responsibility: a study 
of marketing professionals’, Business Ethics Quarterly, 
13(1), 63–86.
12	 Pickton, D. and Broderick, A. (2005) Integrated Market-
ing Communications. Harlow: Pearson Education.
13	 Galloni, A. (2001) ‘In new global campaign, Durex maker 
uses humor to sell condoms’, Wall Street Journal, 27 July.
14	 Pickton, D. and Broderick, A. (2005) Integrated Market-
ing Communications. Harlow: Pearson Education.
15	 Davies, J.J. (1995) ‘Ethics in advertising decision mak-
ing: implications for reducing the incidence of decep-
tive advertising’, Journal of Consumer Affairs, 28(2), 
380–402.
16	 Coutinho de Arruda, M.C. and Leme de Arruda, M. 
(1999) ‘Ethical standards in advertising: a worldwide 
perspective’, Journal of Business Ethics, 19, 159–69.
17	 Pickton, D. and Broderick, A. (2005) Integrated Market-
ing Communications. Harlow: Pearson Education.
18	 Laczniak, G.R. and Murphy, P.E. (1991) ‘Fostering ethi-
cal marketing decisions’, Journal of Business Ethics, 10, 
259–71.
19	 See, among others, Pickton, D. and Broderick, A. (2005) 
Integrated Marketing Communications. Harlow: Pearson 
Education; Shimp, T.A. (2000) Advertising, Promotion, 

REFERENCES     593
34	 Shaw, P., Eisend, M., and Tan, Y. (2014) ‘Gender-role por-
trayals in international advertising’, in Cheng, H. (ed.), 
The Handbook of International Advertising Research. 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
35	 Paek, H.-J., Nelson, M.R. and Vilela, A.M. (2011) 
‘Examination of gender-role portrayals in television 
advertising across seven countries’, Sex Roles, 64(3–4), 
192–207; Zawisza, M. and Cinnirella, M. (2010) ‘What 
matters more – breaking tradition or stereotype content? 
Envious and paternalistic gender stereotypes and adver-
tising effectiveness’, Journal of Applied Social Psychol-
ogy, 40(7), 1767–97.
36	 Jaffe, L.J. and Berger, P.D. (1994) ‘The effect of modern 
female sex role portrayals on advertising effectiveness’, 
Journal of Advertising Research, 34(4), 32–42; Whipple, 
T.W. and Courtney, A.E. (1985) ‘Female role portrayal in 
advertising and communication effectiveness: a review’, 
Journal of Advertising, 14(3), 4–17.
37	 Orth, U.R. and Holancova, D. (2004) ‘Men’s and wom-
en’s responses to sex role portrayals in advertisements’, 
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 21(1), 
77–88; Zawisza, M. and Cinnirella, M. (2010) ‘What 
matters more – breaking tradition or stereotype content? 
Envious and paternalistic gender stereotypes and adver-
tising effectiveness’, Journal of Applied Social Psychol-
ogy, 40(7), 1767–97.
38	 Moon, Y.S. and Chan, K. (2006) ‘Gender portrayals and 
the gender of nations: an extended study in Asian cul-
tures’, International Advertising and Communication, 
343–57; Paek, H.-J., Nelson, M.R. and Vilela, A.M. (2011) 
‘Examination of gender-role portrayals in television adver-
tising across seven countries’, Sex Roles, 64(3–4), 192–207.
39	 House, R.J., Hanges, P.J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P.W. 
and Gupta, V. (2004) Culture, Leadership, and Organiza-
tions: The GLOBE Study of 62 Societies. New York: Sage 
Publications, Inc.
40	 De Meulenaer, S., Dens, N., De Pelsmacker, P. and Eisend, 
M. (2015) ‘A cross-cultural analysis of consumer responses 
to male and female gender role stereotyping in advertis-
ing’, International Journal of Advertising, forthcoming.
41	 Waller, D.S. (2004) ‘What factors make controversial 
advertising offensive? A preliminary study’, Australia/
New Zealand Communication Association (ANZCA) 
Conference, Sydney; Fam, K.-S., Waller, D. and Yang, Z. 
(2009) ‘Addressing the advertising of controversial prod-
ucts in China: an empirical approach’, Journal of Busi-
ness Ethics, 88(1), 43–58.
42	 Dahl, D.W., Frankenberger, K.D. and Manchanda, R.V. 
(2003) ‘Does it pay to shock? Reactions to shocking and 
nonshocking advertising content among university stu-
dents’, Journal of Advertising Research, 43(3), 268–80; 
Waller, D.S., Fam, K.S. and Erdogan, Z. (2005) ‘Adver-
tising of controversial products: a cross-cultural study’, 
Journal of Consumer Marketing, 22(1), 6–13.
43	 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qEnhNudsn5w
44	 Clow, K.E. and Baack, D. (2001) Integrated Advertising, 
Promotion & Marketing Communications. Upper Sad-
dle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Supplemental Aspects of Integrated Marketing Com-
munications. Fort Worth, TX: Dryden Press; Clow, K.E. 
and Baack, D. (2001) Integrated Advertising, Promotion 
& Marketing Communications. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
20	 Plakoyiannaki, E., Mathioudaki, K., Dimitratos, P. and 
Zotos, Y. (2008) ‘Images of women in online advertise-
ments of global products: does sexism exist?’, Journal of 
Business Ethics, 83(1), 111–12.
21	 Lin, C.-L. (2008) ‘Sexual issues: the analysis of female 
role portrayal preferences in Taiwanese print ads’, Jour-
nal of Business Ethics, 83(3), 409–18.
22	 Kramer, Z.A. (2004) ‘The ultimate gender stereotype: 
equalizing gender-conforming and gender-nonconform-
ing homosexuals under title VII’, University of Illinois 
Law Review, 2004, 465–500; Eisend, M. (2010) ‘A meta-
analysis of gender roles in advertising’, Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, 38, 418–40.
23	 Ford, J.B., Kramer Voli, P., Honeycutt, E.D. Jr and Casey, 
S.L. (1998) ‘Gender role portrayals in Japanese advertis-
ing: a magazine content analysis’, Journal of Advertis-
ing, 27(1), 113–24.
24	 Harker, M., Harker, D. and Svensen, S. (2005) ‘Attitudes 
towards gender portrayal in advertising: an Australian 
perspective’, Journal of Marketing Management, 21, 
251–64.
25	 Lindner, K. (2004) ‘Images of women in general interest 
and fashion magazine advertisements from 1955 to 2002’, 
Sex Roles: A Journal of Research, 51(7), 409–21.
26	 Deachun, A. and Sanghoon, K. (2007) ‘Relating Hofst-
ede’s masculinity dimension to gender role portrayals 
in advertising’, International Marketing Review, 24(2), 
181–207.
27	 Reichert, T., Lambiase, J., Morgan, S., Carstarphen, M. 
and Zavoina, S. (1999) ‘Cheesecake and beefcake: no 
matter how you slice it, sexual explicitness in advertising 
continues to increase’, Journalism & Mass Communica-
tion Quarterly, 76(1), 7–20.
28	 Courtney, A.E. and Whipple, T.W. (1983) Sex Stereotyp-
ing in Advertising. Lexington, KY: Lexington Books.
29	 Harker, M., Harker, D. and Svensen, S. (2005) ‘Attitudes 
towards gender portrayal in advertising: an Australian 
perspective’, Journal of Marketing Management, 21, 
251–64.
30	 Verhellen, Y., Dens, N. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2013) ‘A 
longitudinal content analysis of gender role portrayal 
in Belgian television advertising’, Journal of Marketing 
Communications, DOI: 10.1080/13527266.2013.871321.
31	 Tiggemann, M. and McGill, B. (2004) ‘The role of social 
comparison in the effect of magazine advertisements on 
women’s mood and body dissatisfaction’, Journal of 
Social and Clinical Psychology, 23, 23–44.
32	 Bessenoff, G.R. (2006) ‘Can the media affect us? Social 
comparison, self-discrepancy and the thin ideal’, Psy-
chology of Women Quarterly, 30, 239–51.
33	 Spurgin, E.W. (2003) ‘What’s wrong with computer-gen-
erated images of perfection in advertising?’, Journal of 
Business Ethics, 45, 257–68.

594     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
56	 Bhatnagar, N., Aksoy, L. and Malkoc, S.A. (2004) 
‘Embedding brands within media content: the impact of 
message, media, and consumer characteristics on place-
ment efficacy’, in Shrum, L.J. (ed.), The Psychology of 
Entertainment Media. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, 99–116.
57	 Sprott, D.E. (2008) ‘The policy, consumer and ethical 
dimensions of covert marketing: an introduction to the 
special section’, Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 
27(1), 4–6; Martin, K.D. and Smith, N.C. (2008) ‘Commer-
cializing social interaction: the ethics of stealth marketing’, 
Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 27(1), 45–56.
58	 Martin, K.D. and Smith, C. (2008) ‘Commercializing 
social interaction: the ethics of stealth marketing’, Jour-
nal of Public Policy and Marketing, 27(1), 45–56.
59	 Lindstrom, M. and Seybold, P.B. (2003) Brand Child. 
London: Kogan Page.
60	 Daems, K. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2015) Advertising Pro-
fessionals’ Opinions About Advertising to Children and 
Teenagers. Adlit Research Report, University of Antwerp.
61	 Moore, E.S. (2004) ‘Children and the changing world of 
advertising’, Journal of Business Ethics, 52, 161–7.
62	 Hudson, S., Hudson, D. and Peloza, J. (2008) ‘Meet the 
parents: a parents’ perspective on product placement 
in children’s films’, Journal of Business Ethics, 80(2), 
289–304.
63	 Sneddon, A. (2001) ‘Advertising and deep autonomy’, 
Journal of Business Ethics, 33, 15–28.
64	 Rice, F. (2001) ‘Superstars of spending: marketers clamor 
for kids’, Advertising Age, 1 February, S1; Kunkel, D., 
Wilcox, B.L., Cantor, J., Palmer, E., Linn, S. and Dow-
rick, P. (2004) ‘Report of the APA task force on advertis-
ing to children’, http://www.apa.org/releases/childrenads.
pdf (accessed June 2009).
65	 McNeal, J. (1998) ‘Tapping the three kids’ markets’, 
American Demographics, 20(4), 37–41.
66	 Furnham, A., Abramski, S. and Gunter, B. (1997) ‘A 
cross-cultural content analysis of children’s television 
advertisements’, Sex Roles, 37, 91–9.
67	 Lyna, A. (2005) ‘TV confuses children about which foods 
are healthy, new study finds’, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign news release (6 June 2005), http://
www.news.uiuc.edu/news/05/0606kidfood.htm (accessed 
28 July 2005).
68	 Bijmolt, T.H.A., Claassen, W. and Brus, B. (1998) ‘Chil-
dren’s understanding of TV advertising: effects of age, 
gender and parental influence’, Journal of Consumer 
Policy, 21(2), 171–94; Clarke, B. (2003) ‘The complex 
issue of food, advertising, and child health’, International 
Journal of Advertising and Marketing to Children, 5(1), 
11–16; Clarke, B. (2005) ‘Responsible marketing,’ Young 
Consumers, 6(4), 3–4.
69	 Eagle, L.C., Bulmer, S.L., de Bruin, A.M. and Kitchen, 
P.J. (2004) ‘Exploring the link between obesity and adver-
tising in New Zealand’, Journal of Marketing Commu-
nications, 10(1), 49–67.
70	 Lvovich, S. (2003) ‘Advertising and obesity: the research 
evidence’, International Journal of  Advertising and 
45	 Wilson, A. and West, C. (1981) ‘The marketing of 
“unmentionables”’, Harvard Business Review, 59(1), 
91–102; Rehman, S.N. and Brooks, J.R. (1987) ‘Attitudes 
toward television advertising for controversial products’, 
Journal of Healthcare Marketing, 7(3), 78–83; Triff, M., 
Benningfield, D. and Murphy, J. (1987) ‘Advertising eth-
ics: a study of public attitudes and perceptions’, Proceed-
ings of the 1987 Conference of the American Academy 
of Advertising. Columbia, SC: AAA.
46	 Waller, D.S. (1999) ‘Attitudes towards offensive advertis-
ing: an Australian study’, Journal of Consumer Market-
ing, 16(3), 288–94.
47	 Shimp, T.A. and Stuart, E.W. (2004) ‘The role of disgust 
as an emotional mediator of advertising effects’, Journal 
of Advertising, 33 (Spring), 43–53.
48	 Dens, N., De Pelsmacker, P. and Janssens, W. (2008) 
‘Disgust or conquer? Exploring consumer reactions to 
incongruent mild disgust appeals’, Journal of Marketing 
Communications, 14(4), 269–89; Pope, N.K.L., Voges, 
K.E. and Brown, M.R. (2004) ‘The effect of provoca-
tion in the form of mild erotica on attitude to the ad 
and corporate image: differences between cause-related 
and product-based advertising’, Journal of Advertising, 
33(1), 69–82.
49	 Dahl, D.W., Frankenberger, K.D. and Manchanda, R.V. 
(2003) ‘Does it pay to shock? Reactions to shocking and 
nonshocking advertising content among university stu-
dents’, Journal of Advertising Research, 43(3), 268–80.
50	 Dens, N., De Pelsmacker, P. and Janssens, W. (2008) 
‘Disgust or conquer? Exploring consumer reactions to 
incongruent mild disgust appeals’, Journal of Marketing 
Communications, 14(4), 269–89.
51	 www.unicef.org, Cuckoo Awards, 2006.
52	 Reichert, T. and Carpenter, C. (2004) ‘An update on sex 
in magazine advertising: 1983 to 2003’, Journalism and 
Mass Communication Quarterly, 81, 823–37.
53	 Dens, N., De Pelsmacker, P. and Janssens, W. (2007) 
‘The differential effects of scarcely dressed male and 
female models in advertising’. Proceedings of the SCP 
Annual Conference. Las Vegas, NV: SCP; LaTour, 
M.S. and Henthorne, T.L. (2003) ‘Nudity and sexual 
appeals: understanding the arousal process and adver-
tising response’, in Reichert, T. and Lambiase, J. (eds), 
Sex in Advertising: Perspectives on the Erotic Appeals. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 91–106; 
Reichert, T. and Lambiase, J. (eds) (2003) Sex in Adver-
tising: Perspectives on the Erotic Appeals. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; Saad, G. (2004) ‘Applying 
evolutionary psychology in understanding the represen-
tation of women in advertisements’, Psychology & Mar-
keting, 21, 593–612.
54	 Dens, N., De Pelsmacker, P. and Janssens, W. (2009) 
‘Effects of scarcely dressed models in advertising on body 
esteem for Belgian men and women’, Sex Roles: A Jour-
nal of Research, 60(516), 366–78.
55	 Martin, K.D. and Smith, N.C. (2008) ‘Commercializing 
social interaction: the ethics of stealth marketing’, Jour-
nal of Public Policy and Marketing, 27(1), 45–56.

REFERENCES     595
86	 http://www.easa-alliance.org (accessed 3 October 2012).
87	 EASA (2005) Advertising Self-Regulation in Europe, The 
Blue Book, 2005. Brussels: European Advertising Stand-
ards Alliance.
88	 ‘EU enlargement expands opportunities for advertising 
self-regulation’, Press release, 20 May 2003 (www.easa.
iccwlo.org).
89	 http://www.easa-alliance.org/Publications/Statistics/
page.aspx/375 (accessed 3 October 2012).
90	 ACC (2006) Code of Conduct.
91	 Van Oosterhout, J.H. (2008) ‘Transcending the confines 
of economic and political organization? The misguided 
metaphor of corporate citizenship’, Business Ethics 
Quarterly, 18(1), 35–42.
92	 O’Riordan, L. and Fairbrass, J. (2008) ‘Corporate social 
responsibility (CSR): models and theories in stakeholder 
dialogue’, Journal of Business Ethics, 83(4), 745–58.
93	 Clow, K.E. and Baack, D. (2001) Integrated Advertising, 
Promotion & Marketing Communications. Upper Sad-
dle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
94	 Vanhamme, J. and Grobben, B. (2008) ‘Too good to be 
true! The effectiveness of CSR history in countering 
negative publicity’, Journal of Business Ethics, 85(2), 
273–83.
95	 Clow, K.E. and Baack, D. (2001) Integrated Advertising, 
Promotion & Marketing Communications. Upper Sad-
dle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
96	 Nielsen (2011) The ‘Green’ Gap Between Environmental 
Concerns and the Cash Register.
97	 Gupta, S. and Ogden, D.T. (2009) ‘To buy or not to buy? 
A social dilemma perspective on green buying’, Journal 
of Consumer Marketing, 26(6), 376–91.
98	 Follows, S.B. and Jobber, D. (2000) ‘Environmentally 
responsible purchase behaviour: a test of consumer 
model’, European Journal of Marketing, 34(5/6), 723–46.
99	 Steenhaut, S. and van Kenhove, P. (2006) ‘The mediating 
role of anticipated guilt in consumers’ ethical decision-
making’, Journal of Business Ethics, 69, 269–88.
100	 Freestone, O.M. and McGoldrick, P.J. (2008) ‘Motiva-
tions of the ethical consumer’, Journal of Business Eth-
ics, 79(4), 445–67.
101	 Steenhaut, S. and van Kenhove, P. (2006) ‘The mediating 
role of anticipated guilt in consumers’ ethical decision-
making’, Journal of Business Ethics, 69, 269–88.
102	 Moons, I. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2012) ‘Emotions as 
determinants of electric car usage intention’, Journal of 
Marketing Management, 28(3–4), 195–237.
103	 White, K. and Peloza J. (2009) ‘Self-benefit versus other-
benefit marketing appeals: their effectiveness in gener-
ating charitable support’, Journal of Marketing, 73(4), 
109–24; Bamberg, S. and Möser, G. (2007) ‘Twenty years 
after Hines, Hungerford, and Tomera: a new meta-anal-
ysis of determinants of pro-environmental behaviour’, 
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 27(1), 14–25.
104	 Chatzidakis, A., Hibbert, S. and Smith, A. (2007) ‘Why 
people don’t take their concerns about fair trade to the 
supermarket: the role of neutralisation’, Journal of Busi-
ness Ethics, 74(1), 89–10; White, K., MacDonnell, R. and 
Marketing to Children, 4 (January/March), 35–40; 
Young, B. (2003) ‘Does food advertising make children 
obese?’, International Journal of Advertising and Mar-
keting to Children, 4 (April/June), 19–26; Eagle, L.C., 
Bulmer, S.L., de Bruin, A.M. and Kitchen, P.J. (2004) 
‘Exploring the link between obesity and advertising in 
New Zealand’, Journal of Marketing Communications, 
10(1), 49–67.
71	 Vandewater, E.A., Shim, M. and Caplovitz, A.G. (2004) 
‘Linking obesity and activity level with children’s television 
and video game use’, Journal of Adolescence, 27, 71–85.
72	 Eagle, L.C., Bulmer, S.L. and Hawkins, J.C. (2003) The 
‘Obesity Epidemic’: Complex Causes, Controversial 
Cures – Implications for Marketing Communication. 
Auckland, Massey University: Technical report, 3 March; 
Eagle, L.C., Bulmer, S.L., Kitchen, P.J. and Hawkins, 
J.C. (2004) ‘Complex and controversial causes for the 
“Obesity epidemic”: the role of marketing communica-
tions’, International Journal of Medical Marketing, 4(3), 
271–87.
73	 Vandewater, E.A., Shim, M. and Caplovitz, A.G. (2004) 
‘Linking obesity and activity level with children’s televi-
sion and video game use’, Journal of Adolescence, 27, 
71–85.
74	 Clarke, B. (2003) ‘The complex issue of food, advertising, 
and child health’, International Journal of Advertising 
and Marketing to Children, 5(1), 11–16; Young, B. (2005) 
‘The obesity epidemic reviewed’, Young Consumers, 6(3), 
50–5.
75	 Hastings, G., Stead, M. and Webb, J. (2004) ‘Fear appeals 
in social marketing: strategic and ethical reasons for con-
cern’, Psychology & Marketing, 21(11), 961–86.
76	 Snipes, R.L., LaTour, M. and Bliss, S.J. (1999) ‘A model 
of the effects of self-efficacy on the perceived ethicality 
and performance of fear appeals in advertising’, Journal 
of Business Ethics, 19, 273–85.
77	 Rossiter, J.R. and Bellman, S. (2005) Marketing Commu-
nications: Theory and Applications. French Forest, NSW: 
Pearson Education Australia.
78	 Attas, D. (1999) ‘What is wrong with “deceptive” adver-
tising?’, Journal of Business Ethics, 21, 49–59.
79	 Koslow, S. (2000) ‘Can the truth hurt? How honest 
and persuasive advertising can unintentionally lead to 
increased consumer skepticism’, Journal of Consumer 
Affairs, 34(2), 245–68.
80	 Fill, C. (2006) Marketing Communications; Engagement, 
Strategies and Practice, Harlow: Pearson Education.
81	 http://groups.yahoo.com/group/brandhut/ (accessed May 
2003).
82	 Shimp, T.A. (2000) Advertising, Promotion, Supplemen-
tal Aspects of Integrated Marketing Communications, 
Fort Worth, TX: Dryden Press.
83	 Shimp, T.A. (2000) Advertising, Promotion, Supplemen-
tal Aspects of Integrated Marketing Communications, 
Fort Worth, TX: Dryden Press.
84	 http://www.easa-alliance.org (accessed 3 October 2012).
85	 EASA (2003) Advertising Self-regulation: The Essentials. 
Brussels: European Advertising Standards Alliance.

596     CHAPTER 14  ETHICAL ISSUES IN MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 28(1), 1–9; Kil-
bourne, W.E. and Pickett, G. (2008) ‘How materialism 
affects environmental beliefs, concern, and environ-
mentally responsible behaviour’, Journal of Business 
Research, 61(9), 885–93.
114	 Haines, R., Street, M.D. and Haines, D. (2008) ‘The influ-
ence of perceived importance of an ethical issue on moral 
judgment, moral obligation, and moral intent’, Journal 
of Business Ethics, 81(2), 387–99.
115	 Peloza, J., White, K. and Shang, J. (2013) ‘Good and 
guilt-free: the role of self-accountability in influencing 
preferences for products with ethical attributes’, Journal 
of Marketing, 77(1), 104–19.
116	 Hunt, S.D. and Vitell, S.J. (2006) ‘The general theory 
of marketing ethics: a revision and three questions’, 
Journal of Macromarketing, 26(2), 143–53; Kilbourne, 
W.E., Beckmann, S.C. and Thelen, E. (2002) ‘The role 
of the dominant social paradigm in environmental atti-
tudes: a multinational examination’, Journal of Business 
Research, 55(3), 193–204.
117	 www.geert-hofstede.com.
118	 Barbarossa, C., Beckmann, S.C., De Pelsmacker, P., 
Moons, I. and Gwozdz, W. (2015) ‘A self-identity based 
model of electric car adoption intention: a cross-cultural 
comparative study’, Journal of Environmental Psychol-
ogy, 42, 149–60.
119	 Hines, C. and Ames, A. (2000) Ethical Consumerism: A 
Research Study Conducted for the Co-operative Bank by 
MORI. London: MORI.
120	 MORI (2000) European Attitudes Towards Corpo-
rate Social Responsibility: Research for CSR Europe.  
London: MORI.
121	 The Roper Organization Inc. (1990) The Environment: 
Public Attitudes and Individual Behavior. Research 
report commissioned by S.C. Johnson & Son, Inc.
122	 CRC-Consommation (1998) Commerce Ethique: les 
Consommateurs Solidaires. Paris: CRC.
123	 MacGillivray, A. (2000) The Fair Share: The Growing 
Market Share of Green and Ethical Products. London: 
New Economics Foundation.
124	 De Pelsmacker, P., Driessen, L. and Rayp, G. (2005) ‘Do 
consumers care about ethics? Willingness to pay for fair 
trade coffee’, Journal of Consumer Affairs, 39(2), 361–83.
Ellard, J. (2012) ‘Belief in a just world: consumer inten-
tions and behaviors toward ethical products’, Journal of 
Marketing, 76(1), 103–18.
105	 Barbarossa, C. and De Pelsmacker, P. (2014) ‘Positive 
and negative antecedents of purchasing eco-friendly 
products: a comparison between green and non-green 
consumers’, Journal of Business Ethics, 69, 269–88.
106	 Stets, J.E. and Burke, P.J. (2003) ‘A sociological approach 
to self and identity’, in Leary. M. and Tangney, J. (eds) 
Handbook of Self and Identity. New York: Guilford 
Press, 128–52.
107	 Stryker, S. and Burke, P.J. (2000) ‘The past, present, and 
future of an identity theory’, Social Psychology Quar-
terly, 63(4) 284–97.
108	 Arnocky, S., Stroink, M. and DeCicco, T. (2007) ‘Self-
construal predicts environmental concern, cooperation, 
and conservation’, Journal of Environmental Psychol-
ogy, 27(4), 255–64; Clayton, S. (2007) ‘Domesticated 
nature: motivations for gardening and perceptions of 
environmental impact’, Journal of Environmental Psy-
chology, 27(3), 215–24.
109	 Moisander, J. (2007) ‘Motivational complexity of green 
consumerism’, International Journal of Consumer Stud-
ies, 31(4), 404–9.
110	 Rise, J., Sheeran, P. and Hukkelberg, S. (2010) ‘The 
role of self-identity in the theory of planned behavior: 
a meta-analysis’, Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 
40(5), 1085–105; Bartels, J. and Hoogendam, K. (2011) 
‘The role of social identity and attitudes toward sustain-
ability brands in buying behaviors for organic products’, 
Journal of Brand Management, 18(9), 697–708.
111	 Vitell, S.J., Singhapakdi, A. and Thomas, J. (2001) ‘Con-
sumer ethics: an application and empirical testing of 
the Hunt–Vitell theory of ethics’, Journal of Consumer 
Marketing, 18(2), 153–78.
112	 Chan, R.Y.K., Wong, Y.W. and Leung, T.K.P. (2008) 
‘Applying ethical concepts to the study of “green” con-
sumer behavior: an analysis of Chinese consumers’ 
intentions to bring their own shopping bags’, Journal of 
Business Ethics, 79, 469–81.
113	 Hansla, A., Gamble, A., Juliusson, A. and Gärling, T. 
(2008) ‘The relationships between awareness of conse-
quences, environmental concern, and value orientations’, 

Glossary
Ability (MAO factor): the resources needed to achieve a 
particular goal.
Achievement indicators of public relations effectiveness: 
measure the extent to which a pre-specified objective has 
been met with a public of interest. Examples include the 
share of the target audience that has been reached, changes 
in awareness and knowledge, changes in opinions and 
attitudes, evolution of the image and goodwill of the 
company, and the extent to which behaviour has changed.
Action advertising: tries to stimulate consumers to buy a 
product immediately.
Action communications: seek to influence the buying 
behaviour of target groups and to persuade the consumer to 
purchase the product. The primary goal is to stimulate 
purchases.
Action costing budgeting: a budgeting method in which a 
programme or activity is planned, and the cost to carry it out 
is calculated.
Activation measures: measure the extent to which people 
actively react to advertising by, for instance, looking up further 
information, talking to friends (buzz) and going to a store.
Addressable media: media by means of which it is possible 
to communicate individually with each customer or prospect.
Advergames: a rich media type of brand-related online 
entertainment used as a tool for brand interaction and 
experience. Advergames use interactive game technology to 
deliver embedded messages to consumers. The advertising 
message can then become an integral part of playing the 
game.
Advertising: any paid, non-personal communication through 
various media by an identified company, non-profit 
organisation or individual.
Advertising clutter: the percentage of a medium vehicle that 
is advertising.
Advertising/performance allowances: monetary incentives 
aimed at encouraging the retailer to advertise the 
manufacturer’s brand and provided when proof of the ad is 
produced.
Advertorials: informative ads with an editorial approach but 
also a clearly identified advertiser.
Affect-as-Information model: a model that posits that 
consumers may use feelings as a source of information to 
form an overall evaluation of a product or brand, not by 
means of a simple association, but through a controlled 
inferential process or, in other words, in an informed, 
deliberate manner.
Affiliate marketing or affiliate networking: performance-
based marketing technique on the Internet in which a 
business rewards one or more affiliates for each visitor 
brought about by the affiliate’s own marketing efforts.
Affordability budgeting method: ‘leftover’ resources, after all 
input costs (i.e. human resources, operational and financial 
costs) are invested in communications.
Aided brand awareness: the percentage of people that indicate 
a brand as one that they know in a certain product category.
Ambush or parasitic marketing: an organisation deliberately 
seeking an association with a particular event without being 
an official sponsor of the event to persuade the audience that 
the ambusher is a legitimate or major sponsor. A company 
may be a minor sponsor of an event but, by spending 
considerable budgets on advertising support, it creates the 
impression of being an important sponsor.
Anchor deals: the presence of a brand on certain content 
sites and portals as a supplier of brand-related content 
continuously for a long period.
Apps or mobile applications: software applications, usually 
designed to run on smartphones and tablet computers.
Arbitrary budgeting method: whatever the general manager 
or managing director decides will be implemented.
ATR model: Awareness S Trial S Reinforcement. Marketing 
communications first arouse awareness, then induce 
consumers towards a first trial purchase and then reassure 
and reinforce those users after their first purchase.
Attitude: a person’s overall evaluation of an object, a 
product, a person, an organisation, an ad, etc. An attitude 
towards a particular brand (Ab) can be considered as a 
measure of how much a person likes or dislikes the brand, 
or of the extent to which he or she holds a favourable or 
unfavourable view of it.
Augmented product: the ‘service layer’ on top of the tangible 
product. It includes elements such as prompt delivery, 
installation service, after-sales service and management of 
complaints.
Banner ads: graphic images (animated GIFs or Java applets) 
used as advertisements.
Bastion brand: flagship brand of a company that provides most 
profit for the company, often follows a premium price strategy, 
is characterised by a high level of psycho-social meaning and is 
generally considered as a high-performance brand.
Behavioural segmentation: dividing the market into 
segments referring to product or brand preferences or use, or 
involvement with product categories.

598     GLOSSARY
B@coefficient analysis: analysis by means of which the 
relationship between the number of exposures to an 
advertisement and the degree of memorisation (i.e. the 
percentage of the target group that remembers the ad) is 
studied.
Billboarding: mentioning the name of a sponsor in or near a 
television programme.
Brand: a name, term, sign, symbol or design, or a 
combination of these, intended to identify the goods or 
services of one seller or group of sellers, and to differentiate 
them from those of a competitor. A brand is a set of verbal 
and/or visual cues, and as such it is a part of a product’s 
tangible features. It is an identifier that adds either rational 
and tangible dimensions (related to product performance) or 
symbolic, emotional and intangible dimensions (related to 
what the brand represents) that differentiate it from other 
products designed to fulfil the same need.
Brand activation: the seamless integration of all available 
communication means in a creative platform in order to 
activate consumers by stimulating interest, initiating trial and 
eventually securing consumer loyalty through interaction 
with target audiences. It is a marketing process of bringing a 
brand to life through creating brand experience.
Brand attitude: the perceived value of a brand to a consumer.
Brand awareness: the association of some physical 
characteristics such as a brand name, logo, package, style, 
etc., with a category need.
Brand community: a specialised, non-geographically bound 
community, based on a structured set of social relationships 
among users of a brand.
Brand confusion: the fact that a communication for brand X 
is regarded by the consumer as being a communication for a 
different brand, Y.
Brand dilution: when the brand name is used for so many 
different product categories that the brand personality 
becomes fuzzy and the brand’s value deteriorates.
Brand equity: the value of a brand, the value added to a 
product by virtue of its brand name.
Brand experience: sensations, feelings, cognitions and 
behavioural responses evoked by brand-related stimuli that 
are part of a brand’s design and identity, packaging, 
communications and environments.
Brand extension or brand stretching: when an existing brand 
is used to market products in a different product category.
Brand feelings: consumers’ emotional responses to the brand.
Brand imagery: how consumers think about a brand in an 
abstract way rather than what consumers believe the brand 
really does. Brand imagery pertains to intangible brand 
aspects that can become linked to the brand by customer 
experience, marketing communications, word of mouth, etc.
Brand knowledge: target consumers are aware of the most 
essential brand characteristics, features and benefits.
Brand loyalty: the mental commitment or relation between a 
consumer and a brand.
Brand mark: the element of a brand that cannot be spoken, 
often a symbol, design or specific packaging.
Brand name: that part of a brand that can be spoken, 
including letters, words and numbers.
Brand personality: the set of human personality traits that 
are both applicable to and relevant for brands.
Brand placement: the paid inclusion of branded products or 
brand identifiers through audio and/or visual means within 
mass media programmes.
Brand portfolio: the set of all brands and brand lines that a 
company possesses.
Brand websites: sites with specific brand-related information 
and/or services.
Broad brand awareness: the brand comes to mind often, in 
different usage situations.
Broadcast or programme sponsorship: a brand can sponsor 
a sports programme, the weather forecast or a ‘soap’.
Buttons: very small banner ads, rectangles or squares.
Buy-back allowance: to stimulate the retailer to put a new 
brand or a renewed version of the product on the shelves, 
the manufacturer sometimes offers to buy back the ‘old’ 
product, or commits to buying back the stock of the new 
product that is not sold during a specific period of time.
Buzz marketing: giving people a reason to talk about your 
products or services and making it easier for that 
conversation to take place.
Campaign evaluation research: advertising tests that focus 
on the effectiveness of a whole advertising campaign.
Capitation rating or achievement targeting budgeting: 
audiences to be reached and objectives to be achieved are 
defined. Experience with previous campaigns is used to 
calculate the budget required to achieve these objectives.
Cash refunds: discounts offered to the consumer by means 
of refunding part of the purchase price after sending a proof 
of purchase.
Catalogue: a list of products or services presented in a visual 
and/or verbal way. It may be printed or electronically stored 
on a disk, a CD-ROM or a database, or even be visualised on 
a website, where the pages can be virtually turned.
Categorical imperative: the philosopher Kant’s ethical 
principle that one should act in such a way that the action 
taken under the circumstances could be a universal law of 
behaviour for everyone facing those same circumstances.
Category spending: the advertising spending in a product 
category.
Cause-related marketing or sponsorship: the support of a 
social cause that a firm generates through financial 
interactions with its customers.
Caveat emptor: an ethical view that any marketing action 
that is legal is also ethical.
Caveat venditor: an ethical view which implies that the 
maximisation of consumer satisfaction or well-being should 
be the ultimate aim of marketing action.
Celebrity endorsement: Celebrities are used in marketing 
communications to endorse a product.
Central-route processing: if motivation, ability and 
opportunity to process a message are all high, the elaboration 
likelihood is said to be high and consumers are expected to 

GLOSSARY     599
engage in central route processing. This means that they are 
willing to elaborate on the information, evaluate the arguments 
and find out what the information really has to offer.
Co-branding: two or more brands are simultaneously 
presented on one product.
Co-creation: soliciting input from customers for new 
products.
Collaborative projects: social media type, the main idea of 
which is that the joint effort of many actors leads to a better 
outcome than any actor could achieve individually; also 
referred to as ‘the wisdom of crowds’ (e.g. Wikipedia).
Collective advertising: when a government takes the 
initiative for a campaign.
Collectivistic culture: culture in which people belong to 
strong, cohesive in-groups (often extended families) who  
look after and protect each other in exchange for 
unquestioning loyalty.
Communications audit: all forms of internal and external 
communications are studied to assess their consistency with 
overall strategy, as well as their internal consistency.
Communications content research: used to help 
communications creatives generate ideas about the content 
of new communications stimuli.
Comparative advertising: an advertisement that directly or 
indirectly compares one brand with others. A direct 
comparative ad explicitly names the comparison brand 
(often a well-known competitive brand) and claims that the 
comparison brand is inferior to the advertised brand with 
respect to a specific attribute. An indirect comparative ad 
does not explicitly mention a comparison brand, but 
argues to be superior on a certain attribute compared 
with other brands.
Competitive parity budgeting analysis: companies look at 
the amount of money that competitors spend on 
communications and then copy their budgets.
Competitive tendering budgeting: a marketing 
communications programme is decided on and different 
agencies are requested to file a proposal and a budget.
Competitor communications strategy research: competitive 
ads, promotions, budgets and shares of voice, target groups, 
positioning, communications strategies, media strategies, PR 
material, etc., are collected and analysed to judge 
competitive (communications) strategies in order to define 
target groups and positioning strategies more clearly for the 
company’s own products.
Conference-bound exhibitions: small exhibitions linked to a 
conference. They have a low reach, but may be highly 
effective as a result of their high selectivity on the target 
group.
Confusing positioning: inconsistent communications or an 
inconsistent choice of distribution channels would give a 
customer a confused image of a company or brand.
Consistency in marketing communications: marketing 
instruments combined in such a way that the company’s 
offering is consistently marketed. In other words, all 
marketing instruments have to work in the same direction, 
and not conflict with each other.
Consumer brand equity: the underlying customer- and 
marketing-related components of brand equity.
Consumer promotions: sales promotions by manufacturers 
or retailers targeted at end-consumers.
Consumer sovereignty: an ethical view that ethical marketing 
decisions are determined by the answer to three important 
questions. Is the target market vulnerable in ways that limit 
consumer decision-making (consumer capability) and are 
consumers’ expectations at purchase likely to be realised? Do 
consumers have sufficient information to judge (consumer 
information) and can consumers go elsewhere? Would they 
incur substantial costs or inconvenience by transferring their 
loyalty (consumer choice)?
Content communities: the main objective of content 
communities is sharing content between users. Content 
communities share different media types, such as text, 
photos, videos and presentations (e.g. YouTube, Flickr, 
Instagram).
Content sponsorship: placing an advertiser’s message in an 
area on a website that stands out from other advertisements, 
for instance a fixed and exclusive presence in a chosen 
section that is relevant to the advertiser’s brand.
Continuous advertising schedule: the advertiser spends a 
continuous amount of money throughout the whole 
campaign period.
Contractualism: an ethical principle that focuses upon 
implied obligation, contracts, duties and rules.
Controversial or shock advertising: advertising that 
deliberately startles and offends its audience, by means of 
deliberate norm violation – transgression of law or custom 
(obscenity) or moral/social code (vulgarity) – or by showing 
things that outrage the moral or physical senses (e.g. 
provocative or disgusting images).
Co-operative advertising: two manufacturing companies, or 
a retailer and a manufacturer, jointly develop an advertising 
campaign.
Core product: the unique benefit that is being marketed. It is 
the position, the unique place in the mind of the consumer, 
that will be focused upon.
Corporate behaviour: the way in which the employees of a 
company behave. It is an important factor in making the 
corporate identity visible.
Corporate branding: the name of the company used for all 
the company’s products.
Corporate communications: the total integrated approach to 
the communications activity generated by all functional 
departments of a company, targeted at all stakeholders of the 
company, and aimed at establishing and maintaining the link 
between strategic objectives, the corporate identity and the 
corporate image in line.
Corporate culture: the deeper level of basic assumptions and 
beliefs that are shared by members of an organisation, that 
operate unconsciously and define in a basic ‘taken-for-granted’ 
fashion an organisation’s view of itself and its environment.
Corporate design: see Corporate symbolism.
Corporate identity: the set of meanings by which a company 
allows itself to be known and through which it allows people 

600     GLOSSARY
to describe, remember and relate to it. It is the way the 
company chooses to present itself to its relevant target 
audiences by means of symbolism, communications and 
behaviour.
Corporate image: the stakeholder’s perception of the way an 
organisation presents itself. It is the result of the interaction of 
all experiences, beliefs, feelings, knowledge and impressions 
of each stakeholder about an organisation. It is a subjective 
and multidimensional impression of the organisation.
Corporate personality: the values held by personnel within 
the organisation; the collective, commonly shared 
understanding of the organisation’s distinctive values and 
characteristics. It encompasses corporate philosophy, mission, 
strategy and principles.
Corporate public relations: mainly maintaining good 
relations and creating goodwill with all kinds of audiences 
who may be important for the company in the long run.
Corporate reputation: the evaluation or esteem in which an 
organisation’s image is held. It is based on experience with 
the company and/or exposure to communications, behaviour 
and symbolism. While corporate image can be quite transient 
and short-term in nature, corporate reputation is more firmly 
embedded in the mind of an individual.
Corporate social responsibility (CSR): also referred to as 
‘corporate citizenship’. CSR is an idea that includes the social, 
the economic and the environmental aspects of business 
activity (‘triple bottom line’). It is the integration of social and 
environmental values within a company’s core business 
operations and an engagement with stakeholders to improve 
the well-being of society.
Corporate strategy: long-term strategic objectives of a 
company.
Corporate structure: organisational structure and brand 
structure. Organisational structure is concerned with the lines 
of communication and reporting responsibilities within the 
organisation. It relates to the degree of centralisation and 
decentralisation, and often has a major influence on brand 
structure.
Corporate symbolism or corporate design: a consistent 
house style on business cards, letter heads, vehicles, gifts, 
clothes, equipment, packaging, etc. It is an integral part of the 
corporate identity, or at least of the way in which it is made 
visible.
Cost per thousand: calculated by dividing the cost of the 
medium (the air cost of a 15- or 30-second commercial, the 
cost of a one-page magazine ad, etc.) by the medium’s total 
reach, expressed in thousands of contacts.
Cost per thousand in the target market: calculated by 
dividing the cost of the medium (the air cost of a 15- or 
30-second commercial, the cost of a one-page magazine ad, 
etc.) by the medium’s useful reach in thousands contacts.
Coupons: vouchers representing a monetary value with 
which the consumer can get a discount on a specific product.
Creative brief: a document provided by the advertiser that 
forms the starting point for the advertising agency to develop 
a campaign.
Creative idea: an original and imaginative thought designed 
to produce goal-directed and problem-solving 
advertisements and commercials, a proposition which makes 
it possible to communicate a brand’s position in an original, 
attention-getting, but easy-to-catch way.
Culture: the collective programming of the mind which 
distinguishes the members of one group or category of 
people from those of another.
DAGMAR model: a model that describes nine effects of 
marketing communications that should be reached 
consecutively: category need, brand awareness, brand 
knowledge, brand attitude, purchase intention, purchase 
facilitation, purchase, satisfaction, brand loyalty.
Database: a collection of interrelated data of customers and 
prospects which can be used for different applications such 
as analysis, individual selection, segmentation and customer 
retention, loyalty and service supports.
Day After Recall (DAR) test: advertising post-test by means 
of a telephone interview. A number of consumers are called. 
They are asked to indicate which ads they saw on television 
or heard on the radio the day before, within a certain product 
category. Brand names are mentioned, and the respondent 
has to indicate if he or she remembers having seen or heard 
an ad for the brand. Additionally, a number of questions 
about the ad content are asked.
Dealer loaders: additional materials are offered to the retailer 
during a promotional campaign, for instance a refrigerator 
during a soft drinks promotion. After the promotion, the 
retailer can keep the extra equipment.
Decent marketing communications: those that do not 
contain anything that is likely to cause widespread offence, 
fear or distress.
Deceptive marketing communications: consumers are 
deceived when there is a claim–fact discrepancy and the false 
claim is believed by customers. Moreover, the message must 
be misleading, i.e. representation, omission or practice that is 
likely to mislead the customer, from the perspective of a 
reasonable consumer, i.e. by a reasonable number of the 
group to which the practice is targeted, and the deceptive 
practice must be material, i.e. important and likely to impact 
on consumers’ choice or conduct regarding the product and 
thus relate to a central characteristic.
Deep brand awareness: the brand comes to mind easily and 
enjoys high top-of-mind awareness.
Demographic segmentation: divides the market on the basis 
of sex, age, family size, religion, birthplace, race, education, 
income or social class.
Demonstration advertising: an advertisement in which 
consumers are shown how a product works.
Deontological approach (idealism): ethical principle that 
focuses upon duties. Some actions are intrinsically right or 
wrong.
Direct mail: written commercial messages, personally 
addressed and sent by mail.
Direct marketing communications: contacting customers 
and prospects in a direct way with the intention of generating 
an immediate and measurable response or reaction. ‘Direct’ 
means using direct media such as mailings (including 
emailings), catalogues, telephone or brochures, and not 
through intermediaries such as dealers, retailers or sales staff. 

GLOSSARY     601
An immediate response is possible via the Internet (email/
website/social media), answering coupons, phone or a 
personal visit of the customer to the store or retailer.
Direct opinion measurement test: a jury of customers is 
exposed to a number of ads and asked to rate the ads on a 
number of characteristics.
Direct public relations: aimed directly at the stakeholders 
of interest.
Direct response print advertising or coupon advertising: 
placing an advertisement in a newspaper or a magazine with 
the following characteristics: direct feedback from the reader 
(respondent) to the advertiser by returning a coupon, calling 
a phone number, visiting a website, participating in a contest; 
a clear link between the response (feedback) and the 
message advertised; identification of the respondent.
Direct response television (DRTV): television used as a 
medium to generate reactions.
Distributive justice: ethical principle that holds that rewards 
are allocated in proportion to the contribution made to 
organisational ends.
Double-spotting: two spots are placed within the same 
programme to increase the likelihood of obtaining the 
effective frequency.
Dramatisation advertising: an advertisement similar to 
slice-of-life advertising. Both first present a problem and 
afterwards the solution, but a dramatisation builds suspense 
and leads consumers to a climax.
Dual branding strategy: a branding strategy in which two 
brand names are used.
Dual mediation model: the evaluation of an ad has not only 
an immediate impact on the evaluation of the brand, but also 
an indirect effect on brand attitude via brand cognitions. The 
reasoning behind this model is that consumers who hold a 
positive attitude towards the communication are more likely 
to be receptive to arguments in favour of the brand 
advertised.
Dual or second screening: when people interact with their 
TV via their PC.
E-communications: electronic ways to communicate 
interactively with different stakeholders.
Effective frequency: the minimum number of exposures, 
within a purchase cycle, considered necessary to motivate the 
average prospect in the target audience to accomplish an 
advertising objective.
Effective reach: the number of target consumers of an 
advertising campaign who are expected to be exposed to the 
advertiser’s message at an effective frequency level.
Effectiveness goals of communication: goals that should be 
reached at the brand level: awareness, knowledge, brand 
attitudes, buying intentions, sales, market share.
Elaboration Likelihood model (ELM): a model that explains 
how a message can lead to attitude change. The model is a 
dual-processing model in that it distinguishes two routes to 
persuasion, a central and a peripheral one, based on 
motivation, ability and opportunity to process the message.
Emotional advertising appeals: advertisements whose main 
purpose is to elicit affective responses and to convey an image.
Emotional selling proposition (ESP): a non-functional 
benefit used in marketing communications, usually a unique 
psychological association to consumers.
Endorsement branding: two brand names of the same 
company are used, one of them serving as a quality label or 
endorsement.
Erotic advertising: an appeal that contains one or more of 
the following elements: partial or complete nudity, physical 
contact between two adults, sexy or provocatively dressed 
person(s), provocative or seductive facial expression, 
suggestive words or sexually laden music.
Ethics: principles that serve as operational guidelines for both 
individuals and organisations.
Ethics code: an ethical view that strives for standards on the 
basis of which companies’ and industries’ ethical performance 
is judged, or at least to which they aspire. This set of 
standards often contains ethical guidelines that go further 
than the law.
Event marketing: using a number of elements of the 
communications mix to create an event for the purpose of 
reaching strategic marketing objectives.
Event-related sponsorship: sponsoring various types of 
event-related phenomena, such as a soccer competition, a 
team, an athlete, shirts, a golf tournament, skiing, a baseball 
game, an exhibition, a series of concerts, a philharmonic 
orchestra, an artist, a rock concert, a beach festival or an 
annual traditional crafts exhibition.
Experiential hierarchy-of-effects model: consumers’ 
affective responses towards a product lead them to buy it 
and, if necessary, reflect on it later. This leads to an affective–
conative–cognitive sequence.
Expert endorsement: an advertising format in which an 
expert appears who endorses and commends a product.
External public relations: directed towards various types of 
external target groups. Three important types of external 
corporate PR and PR target groups can be distinguished: 
public affairs, financial and media PR.
Extra volume or BOGOF (buy one get one free) promotion: 
an extra quantity of the product is temporarily offered at the 
same price.
Fear appeal advertising: an advertisement that refers the 
consumer to a certain type of risk (threat) that he or she might 
be exposed to and which he or she usually can reduce by 
buying the product or avoiding the behaviour (coping efficacy).
Feminine culture: culture in which caring for others and 
quality of life are central values.
Fighter brand: a brand sold at a lower price, situated 
between the price of the bastion and discount brands. Its 
quality perception is usually lower than that of the bastion 
and flanker brands.
Financial brand equity: the financial value of the brand for 
the company.
Financial public relations: directed towards financial 
audiences, those groups that are potential shareholders, 
investors or (potential) advisers to shareholders and 
investors, such as financial consultants and banks. They are 
vital for the establishment of the long-term money-raising 

602     GLOSSARY
potential of a company. A crucial objective towards these 
audiences is to build and maintain the confidence that is 
necessary to give the company an image of an interesting 
investment.
Fishbein model: a model of attitude formation in which 
brand attitudes are made up of three elements: relevant 
product attributes, the extent to which one believes the 
brand possesses these attributes, and the evaluation of these 
attributes or how good/bad one thinks it is for a brand to 
possess these attributes. More specifically, brand attitude is 
represented by the weighted sum of the products of brand 
beliefs and attribute evaluations.
Flanker brand: follows a similar price–profit ratio as the 
bastion brand, is also characterised by a high psycho-social 
meaning and perceived performance level, but usually 
appeals to a different, smaller market segment (niche).
Flighting advertising schedule: advertising concentrated in 
only a few periods and not during the whole campaign 
period.
Flog: fake weblog, when firms develop a fake consumer blog 
about the consumption of some product or service without 
stating the company’s role in the communication.
Foote–Cone–Belding (FCB) grid: buying behaviour model in 
which four different buying situations are distinguished, 
based on two dimensions, i.e. the high–low involvement and 
the think–feel dimension.
Free in-mail promotion: the customer receives a (nearly) free 
gift in return for a proof of purchase which has to be sent to 
the manufacturer.
Frequency: indicates how many times a consumer of the 
target group, on average, is expected to be exposed to the 
advertiser’s message within a specified time period.
Full market coverage: a company tries to target all customer 
groups with all the products they need.
Gallup–Robinson Impact test: a recall test for print ads. 
People are called and asked to recall as many ads as they can. 
After that, a number of questions about the content of the 
ads are asked: proved name registration, idea penetration and 
conviction.
Generic advertising: campaigns that promote a whole 
product category.
Generic brands: indicate the product category. In fact, the 
concept is a contradiction in terms. Generics are in fact 
brandless products.
Geographic segments: divides the market based on 
continents, climate, nations, regions or neighbourhoods.
Globalised communication campaign: see Standardised 
campaign.
Glocalisation: ‘think global, act local’. The marketer has a 
global vision and positioning, but adapts certain aspects of 
the communications mix to the local context.
Golden rule: when faced with a decision that appears to have 
ethical implications, act in a way that you would expect 
others to act towards you.
Green marketing: the development and promotion of 
products that are environmentally safe: biodegradable, 
recycled, etc.
Gross rating points (GRP): gross reach of an advertising 
campaign expressed as a percentage of the target group. The 
weight of a campaign is typically expressed by GRP.
Gross reach: the sum of the number of contacts in the target 
group that an advertising campaign reaches, regardless of 
how many times an individual is reached. In other words, a 
person who is reached by medium x and medium y counts 
as two.
Heuristic evaluation: when consumers do not have the time 
to compare all available brands on relevant attributes, they 
may infer from one specific attribute that the brand is a 
high-quality brand and therefore form a positive attitude 
towards it.
Hierarchy-of-effects model: a model of consumer behaviour 
that assumes that things have to happen in a certain order, 
implying that the earlier effects form necessary conditions in 
order for the later effects to occur. According to the 
traditional hierarchy-of-effects models, consumers go 
through three different stages in responding to marketing 
communications, namely a cognitive, an affective and a 
conative stage, or a think–feel–do sequence.
High-context cultures: cultures in which words are one part 
of the message, the other part is formed by body language 
and the context, i.e. the social setting, the importance and 
knowledge of the person.
Historical comparison budgeting: budgeting based on what 
has been spent in previous periods, possibly adjusted as a 
function of changed circumstances.
Honest and truthful marketing communications: those that 
do not exploit inexperience or lack of knowledge of 
consumers; no claims should be made which are inaccurate, 
ambiguous or intended to mislead whether through explicit 
statement or through omission.
Horizontal trade fairs: exhibitors from one single industry 
exhibit their products and services to professional target 
groups, such as sales agents or distributors, from different 
industries.
Humorous advertising: an appeal created with the intent to 
make people laugh, irrespective of the fact that the humour is 
successful (people indeed perceive the ad as humorous) or 
unsuccessful (people do not think the ad is funny).
Idea advertising: when mostly not-for-profit organisations 
promote ideas.
Image or theme communications: the advertiser tries to 
improve relations with target groups, increase customer 
satisfaction or reinforce brand awareness, brand attitude, 
brand image and brand preference.
Inbound telemarketing: interested customers or prospects 
use the phone to contact the company and ask for product 
information, order a product, ask for help with a problem or 
file a complaint (incoming calls).
Income proportion budgeting: a pre-specified proportion of 
margin or sales is devoted to marketing communications.
Indirect public relations: tries to reach stakeholders of 
interest indirectly through other publics. In that respect, 
employees, consultants and especially the media can be 
considered as indirect PR audiences.

GLOSSARY     603
Individualist culture: culture in which there are loose ties 
between people and in which people look after themselves 
and their immediate family only.
Industrial advertising: aimed at a company that buys the 
products to use in its own production process.
Industry comparison budgeting: the industry average is used 
as a benchmark to decide the marketing communications 
budget.
Industry identity: underlying economic and technical 
characteristics of an industry, such as industry size, growth, 
competitiveness, culture and technology levels.
Inertia budgeting analysis: keeping budgets constant year on 
year, while ignoring the market, competitive actions or 
consumer opportunities.
Informational buying motives: buying motivations that are 
aimed at reducing or reversing negative motivations such as 
solving or avoiding a problem, or normal depletion.
Ingredient branding: a brand of a basic ingredient of a 
product is mentioned next to the actual product’s brand 
name.
Input indicators of public relations effectiveness: measure 
PR efforts, such as the number of news stories disseminated, 
the number of interviews given, trade meetings organised, 
supermarkets visited or brochures sent. Input indicators 
measure efforts and not results.
In-script sponsoring: a specific form of product placement in 
which the sponsoring brand becomes part of the script of the 
programme.
Institutional advertising: government campaigns.
Integrated marketing communications: a concept of 
marketing communications planning that recognises the 
added value of a comprehensive plan that evaluates the 
strategic roles of a variety of communications disciplines, 
e.g. general advertising, direct response, sales promotion 
and public relations – and combines these disciplines 
to provide clarity, consistency and maximum 
communications impact.
Interactive (digital) television or i(D)TV: television content 
that gives viewers the ability to interact with programmes and 
to use a number of interactive services such as t-government, 
t-banking, t-commerce, t-learning information, games, 
video-on-demand and communication (t-mail), all supported 
by a set-top box.
Internal public relations: aimed at internal stakeholders, 
such as employees and their families and shareholders. The 
main purpose of internal public relations is to inform 
employees about the company’s strategic priorities and the 
role they are playing in them, and to motivate them to carry 
out these objectives.
Internet: the computer network infrastructure that enables 
the exchange of digital data on a global scale.
Interstitials: banner ads that appear temporarily when 
loading a new web page.
Involvement: the importance people attach to a product or a 
buying decision, the extent to which one has to think it over 
and the level of perceived risk associated with an inadequate 
brand choice.
Issues audit: issues are those potential areas that could have 
an important impact upon the operations of the company. An 
issues audit identifies all that might be of consequence and 
helps the company to react and to plan ahead.
Keyword buying: see Search engine advertising.
Law of extremes theory: assumes that the relationship 
between the attitude towards the ad and the attitude towards 
the brand follows a J-shaped curve. The latter means that not 
only a very positive, but also a very negative, attitude towards 
the ad can eventually lead to a positive attitude towards the 
brand, while communications evoking a moderate instead of 
an extreme attitude towards the ad result in a less positive 
brand attitude.
Legal marketing communications: those that are allowed 
under the current regulations and laws of the country in 
which the company operates.
Lifestyle segmentation: dividing the market on the basis of 
how people organise their lives and spend their time and 
money. Lifestyle measurement is based on the activities, 
interests and opinions (AIO) of consumers. Activities include 
how people spend their money and time, e.g. work, leisure, 
product use, shopping behaviour, etc. Interests can be in 
fashion, housing, food, cars, culture, etc. Opinions are 
attitudes, preferences and ideas on general subjects such as 
politics or economics, on more specific subjects, or on 
oneself and one’s family.
Lifetime value of a customer: the net present value of the 
profits a company will generate from a customer over a 
period of time.
Line extension: a new product introduction in an existing 
product category using the same brand name.
List price: the ‘official’ price of a product.
Lobbying: the activities that companies undertake to 
influence decisions of government bodies or the opinion of 
pressure groups in a positive direction.
Low-context cultures: cultures in which a lot of emphasis is 
placed on words. One is as accurate, explicit and 
unambiguous as possible so that the receiver can easily 
decode the message and understand what is meant.
Low-involvement hierarchy-of-effects model: consumers, 
after frequent exposure to marketing messages, might buy 
the product, and decide afterwards how they feel about it 
(cognitive–conative–affective hierarchy).
Management judgement test: ad execution proposals are 
presented to a jury of advertising managers, to check whether 
all the crucial elements of the strategic brief are correctly 
represented in the execution elements proposed.
Manufacturer advertising: initiated by a manufacturing 
company that promotes its own brands.
Manufacturer brands: brands developed, owned and 
marketed by manufacturers of the product.
Marginal budgeting analysis: investing resources as long as 
extra expenses are compensated by higher extra returns.
Market segmentation: dividing a market into more 
homogeneous sub-groups on the basis of potentially relevant 
factors, in that the members of one group share the same 
need and react in the same way to marketing stimuli and 

604     GLOSSARY
differ in their reactions to these stimuli from the members of 
other segments.
Market specialisation: a company concentrates on one 
market segment and sells different products to that group of 
customers.
Marketing: the process of planning and executing the 
conception, pricing, promotion and distribution of ideas, 
goods and services to create and exchange value, and satisfy 
individual and organisational objectives.
Marketing communications: all instruments by means of 
which the company communicates with its target groups and 
stakeholders to promote its products or the company as a 
whole.
Marketing public relations: targeted at commercial 
stakeholders, such as distributors, suppliers, competitors and 
potential customers, and more in direct support of marketing 
communications than corporate PR.
Masculine culture: culture in which assertiveness, 
competitiveness and status are valued highly.
Masked identification test: advertising test in which part of a 
print ad, usually the brand name, is covered. The subject is 
asked if he or she recognises the ad, and if he or she knows 
what brand it is for. Recognition and correct attribution 
scores can then be calculated.
Mass communications: the message transfer takes place with 
a number of receivers who cannot be identified, using mass 
media to reach a broad audience.
Media mix: the way advertising spending is allocated across 
different media.
Media plan: specifies which advertising media and vehicles 
will be purchased when, at what price and with what 
expected results. It includes such things as flow charts, the 
names of specific magazines, reach and frequency estimates 
and budgets.
Media public relations: developing and maintaining good 
contacts with radio, television and the (trade) press.
Medium context of advertising: characteristics of the 
content of the medium in which an ad is inserted, as 
they are perceived by the individuals who are exposed 
to the ad.
Medium selectivity: the extent to which a medium is 
directed towards the target group. Medium selectivity can be 
represented by a selectivity index showing how well the 
target group is represented in the medium reach, relative to 
the universe.
Mere exposure effect: prior mere exposure to stimuli (such 
as brands) increases positive affect towards these stimuli.
Micro-sites: a temporary brand site that is used for a short 
period during a product launch.
Mobile marketing or wireless advertising: all the activities 
undertaken to communicate with customers through the use 
of mobile devices to promote products and services by 
providing information or offers.
Morals: beliefs or principles that individuals hold concerning 
what is right and what is wrong.
Motivation (MAO factor): willingness to engage in behaviour, 
make decisions, pay attention, process information.
Multi-branding: a brand strategy in which different brands 
are used for products or product ranges in the same product 
category.
MUSH sponsorship: sponsorship of good causes: Municipal, 
University, Social, Hospital.
Net promoter score: based on the question ‘To what degree 
would you recommend the following brand to your family or 
friends?’, measured on a 0–10-point scale. The net promoter 
score is calculated by subtracting the percentage of people 
scoring 0–6 from the percentage of people who scored 8–10.
Net reach: the sum of all people in the target group reached 
at least once by an advertising campaign (a person reached 
by both media x and y counts as one).
Non-addressable media: media by means of which it is not 
possible to communicate individually with each customer or 
prospect.
Objective-and-task budgeting analysis: starts from 
communications objectives and the resources that are 
needed to reach these planned goals. All needed investments 
are then added and this will lead to the overall 
communications budget.
Off-invoice allowances: direct price reductions to the trade 
during a limited period of time.
One-to-one marketing: getting the right product through the 
right channel at the right moment to the right customer.
Online advertising: commercial messages on specific rented 
spaces on websites of other companies.
Opportunity (MAO factor): the extent to which the situation 
enables a person to obtain the goal set.
Opportunity to see (OTS): the average probability of 
exposure that an average reached target consumer of an 
advertising campaign has. It is calculated by dividing gross 
reach by net reach.
Opt-in: a principle implying that receivers of email have 
voluntarily agreed to receive commercial emails about topics 
that they find interesting. They do so by subscribing on 
websites and checking a box.
Opt-out: a principle implying that receivers of email have to 
uncheck the box on a web page to prevent being put on an 
email list.
Ordinary decency: an ethical principle that means that lying, 
cheating and coercion are always considered unethical.
Outbound telemarketing: the marketer is taking the initiative 
to call clients or prospects (outgoing calls).
Outcomes rule: the ethical quality of a decision is judged in 
terms of performance, rewards, satisfaction and feedback.
Outdoor advertising: media such as billboards and 
transit media in the form of messages on buses, trams, 
in stations, etc.
Output indicators of public relations effectiveness: measure 
the result of the PR activity in terms of media coverage or 
publicity. Examples of such measures are the press space or 
television time devoted to the company, its events or brands, 
the length of the stories, the tone and news value of the 
headlines, readership/viewership levels, opportunity to see, 
tone of coverage.
Overpositioning: extreme positioning on one benefit.

GLOSSARY     605
Pay per click advertising model: keyword buying online 
advertisers only pay for each click-through on their 
sponsored link.
Perceived behavioural control (PBC): the perceived ease or 
difficulty of performing a behaviour. It is assumed to reflect 
past experience as well as anticipated impediments and 
obstacles.
Percentage of sales budgeting analysis: budgets are defined 
as a percentage of the projected sales of the next year.
Perception–Experience–Memory model: a model that links 
the effect of marketing communications to previous and 
current perception, experience and memory.
Peripheral-route processing: if the motivation, ability or 
opportunity to process a message is low, consumers are more 
likely to process the information peripherally. The result of 
the latter is no real information processing, but an evaluation 
based on simple, peripheral cues, such as background music, 
humour, an attractive source or endorser, the number of 
arguments used, etc.
Personal communications: message transfer directed to 
certain known and individually addressed persons.
Physiological advertising test: test by means of which the 
reaction of the body to advertising stimuli is measured. 
Examples are: pupil dilation, galvanic skin response, heartbeat 
and voice pitch analysis, and electroencephalography.
Podcast: a sound file with an RSS feed that can be listened to 
by any MP3 or audio player. This technology makes it easy for 
people to create their own audio recordings and post them 
on the Web.
Point-of-purchase communications: communications at the 
point-of-purchase or point-of-sales (i.e. the shop). They 
include several communications tools such as displays, 
advertising within the shop, merchandising, article 
presentations, store layout, etc.
Pop-unders: banner ads that appear in a separate window 
beneath the visited website.
Pop-ups: banner ads that appear in a separate window on 
top of the visited website.
Positioning: defining a unique and relevant position for a 
product in the mind of the target group, the way a product is 
perceived by the target group on important attributes, or the 
‘place in the mind’ a product occupies relative to its 
competitors.
Post-experience model: the model assumes relations 
between the current purchase on the one hand, and previous 
purchase, previous advertising, previous promotion, current 
advertising and current promotion, on the other.
Post-test: a test of the effectiveness of a single ad after 
placement in the media.
Power distance: the extent to which authority plays an 
important role, and to what extent less powerful members of 
the society accept and expect that power is distributed 
unequally.
Premium: small gifts that come with a product offered in-, 
on- or near-pack.
Press kit/press release: a set of documentation, containing 
photos, reports and a press release, which is sent to 
journalists or presented at a press conference. A press release 
is a document that contains the material that the company 
would like to see covered in the press.
Prestige brand: high-quality, luxurious brand targeted at a 
smaller segment, looking for status and high psycho-social 
meaning.
Pre-test: advertising stimuli are tested before the ad appears 
in the media. The general purpose is to test an ad or different 
ads to assess whether or not they can achieve the purpose for 
which they are designed.
Pre-test checklists: used to make sure that nothing important 
is missing in the proposed advertising concept, and that the 
ad is appealing, powerful and ‘on strategy’.
Price cut on the shelf: consumer promotion in which the 
consumer gets an immediate discount when buying the 
product.
Private label brands (also called own-label brands, store or 
dealer brands): brands developed, owned and marketed by 
wholesalers or retailers.
Problem solution advertising: an advertisement that shows 
how a problem can be solved or avoided.
Process goals of communication: conditions which should 
be established before any communication can be effective. 
All communications should capture the attention of the 
target group, then appeal or be appreciated, and last but not 
least be processed and remembered.
Product confusion: attributing a stimulus to a wrong product 
category.
Product specialisation: a company concentrates on one 
product and sells it to different market segments.
Professional ethics: only take actions that would be viewed 
as proper and ethical by an objective panel of professional 
colleagues.
Psychographic segmentation: segmenting markets using 
lifestyle or personality criteria.
Public affairs: a management function directed towards 
the societal and political relations of the company. It is 
aimed at continuously studying trends and issues related 
to government decision-making and opinions and 
attitudes of the general public. Good contacts with the 
general public and the local community are a part of the 
public affairs activity.
Public or general fairs: exhibitions and fairs that are open to 
the general public. There are two kinds of public fairs: general 
interest fairs and special interest fairs.
Public relations: a communications tool that is used to 
promote the goodwill of the firm as a whole. It is the 
projection of the personality of the company, the 
management of reputation. Public relations is the planned 
and sustained effort to establish and maintain good 
relationships, mutual understanding, sympathy and goodwill 
with publics, audiences or stakeholders. It is those efforts 
that identify and close the gap between how the 
organisation is seen by its key publics and how it would like 
to be seen.
Publics or stakeholders: besides customers and potential 
customers, groups of people that the company is not directly 

606     GLOSSARY
trying to sell products to (that is why these groups are 
sometimes called secondary target groups), but that are 
perceived as influencing opinions about the company.
Puffery: the use of hyperbole or exaggeration of attribute and 
benefit claims in advertising to promote a brand.
Pull advertisements: messages shown to users as they are 
navigating WAP or wireless sites and properties.
Pulsing advertising schedule: a certain level of advertising 
takes place during the whole campaign period, but during 
particular periods higher advertising levels are used.
Purchase facilitation: assuring buyers that there are no 
barriers hindering product or brand purchase.
Purchase intention: the intention of the buyer to purchase 
the brand or the product or take other buying-related actions 
(going to the store, asking for more information).
Push advertising: messages that are proactively sent out to 
wireless users and devices like alerts, SMS messages or even 
voice calls.
QR-code: a black and white square on print advertisements 
(Quick Response code). The QR-code can be scanned by 
smartphones and provides quick and effortless access to the 
brand’s website.
Rational advertising appeals: advertisements that contain 
features, practical details and verifiable, factually relevant 
cues that can serve as evaluative criteria.
Reach goal of communication: how to reach the target 
groups in an effective and efficient way.
Readability analysis: advertising test that checks whether the 
advertising copy is simple and easy to understand ‘at first 
glance’.
Recall tests: the extent to which an individual recalls a new 
ad or a new execution amid existing ads is tested, e.g. the 
portfolio test.
Receiver context of advertising: the situational 
circumstances in which a person is exposed to an 
advertisement (e.g. at home, in the company of friends, on 
the way to work, when in a bad mood, etc.).
Recognition test: a sample of ads is presented to a consumer, 
who is asked to indicate whether he or she recognises the 
ad or not.
Reinforcement model: according to this model, awareness 
leads to trial and trial leads to reinforcement. Product 
experience is the dominant variable in the model, and 
advertising is supposed to reinforce habits, frame experience 
and defend consumers’ attitudes.
Relationship marketing: brings quality, customer service and 
marketing into close alignment, leading to long-term and 
mutually beneficial customer relationships.
Resources costing budgeting: a budgeting method in which 
management decides what resources are needed (an extra 
press officer, or an event co-ordinator) and calculates the 
costs implied.
Retail advertising: when a retailer takes the initiative to 
advertise to consumers.
RFM-model: a direct marketing response scoring model in 
which, for all customers in a database, three behavioural 
response parameters are measured: Recency, the time elapsed 
since the last purchase; Frequency, the frequency with which a 
customer places an order; Monetary value, the average 
amount of money a customer spends per purchase.
Rich media ad: an Internet ad using animated content such 
as audio/video, Flash, Java, etc., to create special effects, 
interaction, or moving or floating ads.
Roadblocking: placing the same ad across many channels at 
the same time.
Rossiter–Percy grid: a buying behaviour model that classifies 
buying decisions in four categories, based on the dimensions 
high–low involvement and fulfilling a transformational or 
informational buying motive.
Routinised response behaviour model: a model that 
assumes that a large number of product experiences can lead 
to routinised response behaviour, especially for 
low-involvement, frequently purchased products.
Sales force promotion: sales promotion targeted at the sales 
force, offering them incentives to market the product well.
Sales promotions: sales-stimulating campaigns, such as price 
cuts, coupons, loyalty programmes, competitions, free 
samples, etc.
Sales response models: depict the relationship between the 
size of the communications budget and sales.
Sampling: consumer promotion technique that consists of 
distributing small samples of a product, sometimes in a 
specially designed package free of charge or at a very 
low cost.
Savings cards: consumer promotion techniques on the basis 
of which customers receive a discount provided they have 
bought a number of units of the brand during a specific 
period of time.
Search engine advertising (SEA): Internet advertising on 
large search engines such as Google, Yahoo!, Bing, etc., that is 
triggered by specific keywords and search terms and which 
appears alongside and sometimes above or below the search 
results.
Search engine optimisation (SEO): a number of techniques 
to improve the listing of a brand or a company in search 
engines.
Selective advertising: campaigns that promote a specific 
brand.
Selective specialisation: a company chooses a number of 
segments that look attractive. There is no synergy between 
the segments, but every segment looks profitable.
Self-generated persuasion: the consumer is not persuaded 
by strong brand arguments, but by his or her own thoughts, 
arguments or imagined consequences. These thoughts go 
beyond the information offered in the ad. The consumer 
combines the information in the message with previous 
experience and knowledge, and tries to imagine him- or 
herself consuming the product and the consequences 
thereof.
Self-liquidators or self-liquidating premiums: presents that 
can be obtained in exchange for a number of proofs of 
purchase, and an extra amount of money.
Self-reference criterion: our unconscious tendency to refer 
everything to our own cultural values.

GLOSSARY     607
Self-regulation: a process in which the advertising industry 
regulates itself by establishing codes of practice or sets of 
guiding principles, the aim of which is ensuring legal, decent, 
honest and truthful advertising, prepared with a sense of 
social responsibility to the consumer and society and with 
proper respect for the rules of fair competition.
Share of voice: the ratio of own communications investments 
divided by the communications investments of all market 
players.
Shoskele: a floating Internet ad that moves over the browser 
in an animated way.
Signalling theory: consumers take advertising repetition as a 
signal of the quality of a brand.
Skyscrapers: a thin and small banner ad, typically along the 
right side of a web page.
Slice-of-life advertising: an advertisement that features the 
product being used in a real-life setting, which usually 
involves solving a problem.
Slotting allowance: a one-time, upfront fee that is charged by 
retailers before they allow a new product on their shelves to 
cover the start-up costs of entering a new product into their 
system.
Social media: a collection of emerging technologies enabling 
social networking by offering Internet users the ability to 
collaborate, add, edit, share and tag content of different kinds 
(text, sound, video, images).
Social networking sites: applications that enable users to 
connect on the Internet by creating personal profiles, inviting 
friends to have access to those profiles, sending emails and 
instant messages between each other. These personal profiles 
can include photos, video, audio files, blogs, links to websites, 
and in fact any type of information (e.g. Facebook, Pinterest).
Social TV: given the popularity of social networks, people are 
frequently talking about TV shows at the same time as they 
are watching them.
Socially responsible marketing: selling products that 
embody certain social ethical values, such as products free of 
child labour, produced in companies where trade unions are 
allowed, in decent social circumstances, and at fair wages.
Split-scan test: an advertising test procedure in which the 
television viewing behaviour of a panel of consumers is 
measured by means of a telemetric device. All members of 
the panel also receive a store card. By means of a store card, 
the actual purchases of the panel members can be measured, 
and in that way the effectiveness of the different commercials 
can be assessed.
Sponsorship: an investment in cash or kind in an activity, in 
return for access to the exploitable commercial potential 
associated with this activity.
Stakeholders: see Publics.
Standardised campaign or globalised communication 
campaign: a campaign that is run in different countries, using 
the same concept, setting, theme, appeal and message, with 
the possible exception of translations.
Starch test: an advertising recognition post-test for print 
advertising in which participants are asked to indicate 
whether they have noticed an ad, associated it with a brand 
and read most of the text.
Stealth marketing: the use of marketing practices that fail to 
disclose or reveal the true relationship with the company that 
produces or sponsors the marketing message.
Stereotyping: an automatic perceptual bias enabling people 
to construct simplified images of reality.
Store atmospherics: the effort to design buying 
environments to produce specific emotional effects in the 
buyers that enhance their purchase probability.
Strategic advertising research: research that is aimed at 
collecting information about the market environment, the 
market, the product and consumer behaviour, as preparation 
for developing an advertising campaign.
Subjective norm: the belief one holds regarding what 
different reference groups consider as socially desirable 
behaviour, weighted by the consumer’s need or willingness to 
behave according to the norms of the particular reference 
group. The latter is referred to as social sensitivity.
Superiority of the pleasant hypothesis: negative ad-evoked 
feelings, such as irritation, have a negative influence on ad- 
and brand-related responses.
Superstitials: banner ads in the form of additional pop-up 
browser windows that are opened when a new web page is 
opened.
Synergy in marketing communications: marketing mix 
instruments have to be designed in such a way that the 
effects of the tools are mutually reinforcing.
SWOT analysis: an internal analysis of the strengths and 
weaknesses of the company or brand and an external analysis 
of opportunities and threats in the marketplace.
Talking head advertising: an advertisement in which the 
characters tell a story in their own words.
Tangible product: the core product is translated into product 
features, a certain level of quality, the available options, 
design and packaging.
Targeting: the selection of target groups to focus upon, on 
the basis of an analysis of market segment attractiveness and 
for which the company has relevant strengths.
Telemarketing: any measurable activity using the telephone 
to help find, get, keep and develop customers.
Teleological approach (relativism): ethical principle that 
focuses on consequences. Good or bad depends on what 
happens as a result of the action.
Teleprospecting: searching for prospects by phone.
Telesales: actively calling consumers or companies with the 
purpose of selling products or services.
Testimonial advertising: an advertisement that features 
ordinary people saying how good a product is.
Theatre test: an indirect advertising opinion test in a theatre 
setting in which participants are asked to make a brand 
choice before and after exposure to a tested advertisement.
Theme advertising: attempts to build a reservoir of goodwill 
for a brand or a product.
Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB): a model of buying 
behaviour that, besides attitudes and the subjective norm, 
also considers perceived behavioural control as a 
determinant of behaviour. This model is relevant to predict 

608     GLOSSARY
behaviours over which people have incomplete volitional 
control.
Theory of Reasoned Action (TORA): an extension of the 
Fishbein model. The model provides a link between attitude 
and behavioural intention. The latter is determined not only 
by attitudes, but also by the subjective norm (the influence of 
relevant others).
Think–feel dimension: the extent to which a decision is 
made on a cognitive or an affective basis.
Top-of-mind brand awareness (TOMA): the percentage of 
people for which a brand of a specific product category is the 
first one that comes to mind.
Top topicals: newspaper ads referring to recent events.
Total reach of a medium vehicle: the number or percentage 
of people who are expected to be exposed to the advertiser’s 
message in that medium vehicle during a specified period.
Tracking study: advertising effectiveness study in which 
comparable (random) samples of consumers are asked a 
standardised set of questions at regular intervals. As a result, 
the position of a brand and competing products can be 
tracked over time, and effects of subsequent campaigns can 
be assessed.
Trade advertising: advertising aimed at a company that buys 
products to resell them.
Trade fair: exhibitions and trade shows open to people working 
in a certain field of activity or industry. It is a place where 
manufacturers and retailers of a certain product category or 
sector meet each other to talk about trade, to present and 
demonstrate their products and services, to exchange ideas and 
network, and actually to buy and sell products.
Trade mart: a hybrid kind of exhibition, i.e. half-exhibition, 
half-display, with a high frequency. Participants rent a 
permanent stand and aim to sell. Participants in trade marts 
have samples permanently on display.
Trade promotions: sales promotions by manufacturers to 
persuade channel members to include the product in their 
mix, to give it appropriate shelf space and to assist in 
promoting the product to the end-consumer.
Trailer test (or coupon-stimulated purchasing test): 
respondents are randomly recruited in an experimental and a 
control group. The experimental group is exposed to a new 
advertisement, while the control group is not. After shopping, 
the items purchased by the two groups are compared.
Transaction-based sponsorship: cause-related marketing or 
point-of-purchase politics: a type of sponsorship in which the 
company invests a pre-specified amount of money in a ‘good 
cause’ every time a consumer buys one of the company’s 
products.
Transformational buying motives: positive buying 
motivations, such as sensory gratification, social approval or 
intellectual stimulation.
TV test: ethical rule of conduct which implies that a manager 
should always ask if he or she would feel comfortable 
explaining his or her action on TV to the general public.
Twitter: a micro-blog and at the same time a free social 
network service. Twitter enables users to send and read users’ 
updates known as tweets. These are text-based posts of a 
maximum of 140 characters that are displayed on the user’s 
profile page and delivered to other users (called followers) 
who subscribe to them.
Two-factor model: an inverted-U relationship exists between 
the level of exposure to an advertising campaign, on the one 
hand, and advertising effectiveness (cognitive responses, 
attitudes, purchase), on the other. Wear-in and wear-out 
effects explain the nature of this relationship.
Unaided brand awareness: the percentage of consumers that 
can name a brand in a certain product category.
Uncertainty avoidance culture: the extent to which people 
feel uncomfortable with uncertainty and ambiguity and have 
a need for structure and formal rules in their lives.
Underpositioning: a company fails to make a clear 
differentiation with competitors.
Unfair marketing communications: acts or practices that 
cause or are likely to cause substantial injury to consumers, 
which are not reasonably avoidable by consumers themselves 
and not outweighed by countervailing benefits to consumers 
or competition. They may go beyond questions of fact and 
relate merely to public values, e.g. offend public policy as it 
has been established by statutes, are immoral, unethical, 
oppressive or unscrupulous, or cause substantial injury to 
consumers, competitors or other business.
Unique selling proposition (USP): a functional benefit used 
in marketing communications; usually functional superiority 
in the sense that the brand offers the best quality, the best 
service, the lowest price, the most advanced technology.
Useful reach of a medium vehicle: the number or 
percentage of people from the target group of a campaign 
who are expected to be exposed to the advertiser’s message 
in that medium vehicle during a specified period.
Useful score: advertising processing measure in which the 
percentage of the consumer sample that both recognised the 
ad and attributed it correctly to the brand advertised is 
measured.
Value marketing: a strategy in which a company links its 
activities to a philosophy of general societal interest. The 
company positions itself on the basis of a value system that is 
often not product-related.
Vertical trade fairs: different industries present their goods 
and services to target groups belonging to one single field of 
activity.
Video-on-demand (VoD): services include the online retail 
and rental of audio-visual works, primarily feature films, 
audio-visual fiction, documentaries, educational programmes, 
cartoons, etc.
Viral marketing: a set of techniques that is used to spur 
brand users and lovers, game participants or advocate 
consumers among the target group to promote their 
favourite brand to friends and relatives. They are put to work 
to spread the word about the brand or product by using 
email, SMS, ‘tell or send to a friend’ buttons or via different 
social media sites as Facebook, Google+, YouTube, review 
sites and influential blogs.
Virtual game worlds: games that require their users to 
behave according to strict rules in the context of a massively 
multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) (e.g. ‘World 
of Warcraft’).

GLOSSARY     609
Virtual social worlds: a group of virtual worlds allowing 
inhabitants to choose their behaviour freely and essentially 
live a virtual life similar to their real life. Again, virtual social 
world users appear in the form of avatars and interact in a 
3-D virtual environment (e.g. Second Life).
Virtual worlds: Internet platforms that replicate a 3-D 
environment in which users can appear in the form of 
personalised avatars and interact with each other as they 
would in real life.
Warm advertising: an advertising appeal that consists of 
elements evoking mild, positive feelings such as love, 
friendship, cosiness, affection and empathy.
Wear-in: at low levels of exposure to advertising, consumers 
develop negative responses (e.g. counter-arguments) due to 
the novelty of the stimulus. After a few exposures, the 
reaction becomes more positive.
Wear-out: at high levels of exposures to advertising, 
consumers develop negative responses, due to boredom, 
irritation, etc.
Web 1.0: the World Wide Web as an information source with 
static websites.
Web 2.0 or social media (networks): a concept of the Web as 
a participation platform on which users participate and 
connect to each other using services as opposed to sites.
Weblogs, or blogs: frequently updated personal web journals 
that allow owners to publish ideas and information.
Wireless advertising: see Mobile marketing.
World Wide Web (WWW): the interactive and graphical 
communications medium on the Internet. The Web is 
characterised by the use of hypertext mark-up language 
(HTML) that allows documents consisting of text, icons, 
sounds or images to be shared by different users, 
regardless of the computer operating system they use. The 
hyperlinks (text- or image-based) make it possible to 
navigate quickly through documents and pages by simple 
mouse-clicking.

610     Index
Index
Page references to Figures or Photos will 
be in italics followed by the letter ‘f ’, while 
references to Tables will be followed by 
the letter ‘t’.
 
Aaker, Jennifer 62
Abercrombie & Fitch 388
Abernethy, A.M. 210
ability (MAO factor) 86, 93, 597
above-the-line advertising 4, 203
Absolut Vodka 17f, 23, 43, 62
AC Nielsen 176
Accenture, Tiger campaign 164
achievement indicators of public relations 
effectiveness 545, 597
action advertising 203, 597
action communications 4–5, 597
action costing budgeting 451, 597
activation measures 531, 532–3, 597
Activemedia 227
activities, interests and opinions (AIO) 603
activity metrics 538
adaptation 14
’Addiction is not Fashionable’ protest 
campaign 155
addressable media 411, 414, 597
Adidas 391–2
Adidas-Salomon 59
ADMARS (accessible, differentiated, 
measurable, actionable, relevant 
and substantial) 144
adolescents
advertising practices targeted at 204, 571
and social network sites 306
Tremor (teen network) 569
adstock (cumulative investments) 166
Adventure Affair, repositioning 504
advergames 273–4
see also games
children’s attitudes towards traditional 
and hybrid advertising 136
defining 84, 597
sponsorship 483
wear-in and wear-out effects 324–5, 609
Advertiser Funded Programme (AFP) 277
advertising 201–59
see also advertising agencies; advertising 
clutter; advertising idea; 
advertising media mix, optimising; 
advertising/performance 
allowances; attitude towards the ad 
(Aad)
above-the-line 4, 203
action 203, 597
adaptation, consumer responses to 
different degrees of 17–18
ambient 226, 246
banner ads 267, 597
blocks 346
and brand confusion 244–5, 598
business-to-business context 230–2 
campaigns see campaigns
carousel ads 297
cinema 327, 342
collective 202, 599
comparative 213–14, 599
compared to sponsorship 467
context 345
continuous advertising schedule 331, 
333, 599
controversial/shock 221, 566–7, 599
co-operative 202, 599
coupon 601
creativity in 206–7
creative platform 203–8, 246
in cross-cultural environment see  
cross-cultural environment, 
advertising in
cues causing consumers to perceive 
brands as more global 53–4
defining 3, 246, 597
demonstration 211–12, 600
direct opinion measurement test 523, 
601
direct response print 411, 601
display 262, 272
dramatisation 212, 601
emotional see emotional advertising 
appeals
endorsement 222–9
erotic see erotic advertising
fear appeal 219–20, 574, 585, 601
firm profitability, and winning a Clio 
Award 208
flighting advertising schedule 332, 
333, 602
generic 203, 602
humorous 214–16, 235, 602
indoor 339
industrial 202, 603
in-game, in fantasy games 274–5
institutional 203, 603
integrated formats, persuasion 
knowledge for 276–7
integrating in IMC 246 irritation evoked 
by 242–4
long- and short-term effects, calculating 
167–8
manufacturer 201, 603
medium context 345, 604
misleading 573
whether money used efficiently 325–6
native 227, 246
new formats 225, 246
online see online advertising outdoor 6, 
336, 338, 341, 604
pay per click advertising model 268, 605
personalised, on social networking 
sites 310
physiological advertising test 605
pleasant emotional ads, effects on
consumers 103–4
post-testing see post-test
pre-testing see pre-testing
probability markers see probability 
markers
problem solution 212, 605
programmatic 272
pull advertisements 606
pulsing advertising schedule 331, 332f, 
333, 606
rational advertising appeals 209–14, 606
receiver context 345, 606 research 
519–20
responses to advertising adaptation 237–8
rich media ad 267, 606
search engine 606
selective 203, 606
slice-of-life 212, 242, 607
stealth 28, 228, 246
stereotyping in see stereotyping in 
advertising
strategic advertising research 607
street 226–7
strong and weak theory 241
talking head 211, 607
target groups 204–5
testimonial 212, 242, 607
theme 203, 607
trade 202, 608
traditional and hybrid, children’s 
reaction towards 136
types 201–3, 201f
warm 217, 609
wireless 604
advertising agencies 2, 4

 index     611
see also specific agencies, such as Indoor 
Media
campaign implementation 229
corporate image 25
creative brief 600
creative platform 203
long commercials 230
new formats 225
online communication objectives 263
pre-testing 520, 523
advertising clutter 336, 345, 597
advertising idea 185, 602
advertising media mix, optimising 142–4
Advertising Standards Authority 424
advertising/performance allowances 
375, 597
advertising-to-sales (A/S) ratio 176
advertorials (native advertising) 227, 
246, 597
online advertising 270
online communications 271
aesthetic products 388
affect
affect-as-information model 101, 597
affective attitude formation 101–7
in Alzheimer’s disease message 
processing 217–19
Affect Infusion model (AIM) 89, 218–19
affective–conative–cognitive sequence 79
affiliate marketing/affiliate networking 
268, 597
affordability budgeting method 169, 
170, 597
agenda-setting, as PR tool 447–8
aided brand awareness 530, 597
AIO (activities, interests and opinions) 140
Ajzen, I. 92, 112
Albert Heijn (Dutch retailer) 340
AlldaysTanga campaign 212
allowances
advertising/performance 375, 597
buy-back 375, 598
off-invoice 375, 604
slotting 375, 607 
Almera car (Nissan) 205
Amazon.com 269, 309
ambient advertising 226, 246
ambush (parasitic) marketing 474, 481, 
489, 597
American Association of Advertising 
Agencies 7
American Marketing Association 43
Ames, A. 584
AMEX card 367
amplification rate 538
Amstel Light beer 216
analysis of variance (ANOVA) 136
anchor deals 271–2, 597
’Angry Birds’ game 50–1
Anheuser-Busch 174
anticipation 108
anti-cycle budgeting 175
anti-smoking campaigns 90
Apple 22, 49, 135, 380
’Think differently’ campaign 390
approach-avoidance behaviour, 
consumers 386
apps/mobile applications 597
arbitrary allocation/budgeting method 
168–9, 597
Arch deluxe brand (McDonald’s) 61
Ariel washing powder 444
Armani underwear 51
arousal measurement 522
AS Adventure 22, 135, 340, 423
aspiration group effect 222
atmospherics, store 384–6, 607
ATR (awareness–trial–reinforcement) 
model 161, 241, 597
Attas, D. 573–4
attitude towards the ad (Aad)
and attitude towards the brand 
214, 468
creative strategy 185
direct opinion measurement 523
emotional appeals 214–22
erotic advertising 216
irritation, ads evoking 243
law of extremes theory 243, 603
media planning 324
negative 243, 603
pleasant emotional ads 103 positive 
217, 348
transfer 102
attitudes
see also attitude towards the ad (Aad) 
versus accessibility, and brand 
choice 106–7
affective attitude formation 101–7
behavioural attitude formation 107–10
brand see brand attitude
cognitive attitude formation 90–100
defining 82, 597
formation and change 82–90
perceived usefulness affecting 280
and values 235
Audi (R8) 162
augmented product 3, 597
autonomy 572
Avis 178
avoidance behaviour 386
awareness–trial–reinforcement (ATR) 
model see ATR (awareness–trial–
reinforcement) model
’awareness-trial-retention’ framework 535
Axe (Unilever’s body spray brand) 132–3
 
baby boom generation 134, 135
baby buster generation 135
Bacardi, don Facundo 45
Bacardi Breezer 105
Bagozzi, R.P. 93
banner ads 267, 597
Barco (display hardware and software 
manufacturer) 69–74
see also brands
customer centred principle 70
digital cinema 71–4
one brand principle 70
one company principle 70
past and present brand 69–70
strategy 70–1
bastion brands 57–8, 68, 597
Batibou (Belgian building and 
construction fair) see FISA/
Batibouw company, Belgium
Bavaria (dutch beer brand), DutchDress 
versus V-dress for World Cup 
(South Africa) 372
BBDO darwin (Belgian advertising agency) 
248
Beats™ electronics LLC 56
beer/lager brands 235
Amstel Light 216
Budweiser 174
Carlsberg 87
Grolsch 339
Heineken 9, 476
Labatt Ice 95
Maes 350–5, 351f
Miller 207
Rugbeer 389–90
Zywiec 488
behavioural attitude formation
high-elaboration likelihood 107–9
low-elaboration likelihood 109–10
behavioural segmentation 141, 597
Belgian Association of Communication 
Companies, code of conduct 579
Belgian Post (Bpost)
e-commerce market 395–9
’Love Letters’ direct mail and online 
campaign 410–11
Belgium
see also Belgian Association of 
Communication Companies; 
Belgian Post (Bpost); FISA/ 
Batibouw company, Belgium; Maes 
(Belgian lager beer)
Antwerp zoo, birth of elephant at 229
combining television brand placement 
with sponsorship messages 9–10
consumer goods retailing industry 492
digital job exhibition, Ghent 510
gender role stereotypes in Belgian TV 
advertising 564–5
Jury of Ethical Practices ( JEP) 563
music festivals 491–2
national Lottery and Win for Life scratch 
product 551–5
optimal media mix allocation for 
campaign recognition in 
Wallonia 345
Procter & Gamble, co-operation with 
UNICEF 591–2
Soccer Association 478
specific brands, institutions or 
organisations
BBDO Darwin (advertising agency) 248
Carrefour Group 491–3
Deus (Belgian rock band) 452
Indoor Media (advertising agency) 339
InSites Consulting (research agency) 
23, 140, 263, 445–6
KBC (bank) 442

612     Index
Belgium (Continued)
Kinepolis (cinema group) 27
Lay (salted snacks retailer) 107, 392–3
Lotus Bakeries 428–32
Rapid-Affichage (agency) 227
Telenet (Internet provider) 413
Tomorrowland (music festival) 302
trade fairs 502–3
below-the-line communications see action 
communications
Ben & Jerry’s 297
Benetton ads 221, 5757
Berlyne, d.e. 324
Berners-Lee, Tim 261
b@coefficient analysis 326–7, 327t, 598
Bic brand 51
Bieber, Justin 299
’big data,’ growth of 262
billboarding 479, 600
billboards 336, 338
black humour 235
blacklists 424
Blitz, Gérard 113
blogs 28, 294, 295–6, 609
Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis 
and Malaria (Born HIV Free 
campaign) 462–3
’Blonde Salad, The’ (Chiara Ferragni) 295
Bluetooth 364
BMW 132
BOGOF (Buy One Get One Free) 370, 601
Bond movies, and sponsorship 483
boomerang effect 214
Bounce 208
brand activation 359–403
see also Mars bar
brand experience 387–93
consumer promotions 365–74, 599
defining 3–4, 598
integrated marketing communications 
393
integrating in IMC 393
point-of-purchase communications 
377–86
sales promotions 360–5, 606
trade promotions 375–7, 608
brand analysis 59
brand appeal 57
brand association 63
brand attitude
see also attitude
and attitude towards the ad 214, 468
versus brand accessibility 106–7
and brand placements 482, 484–5
defining 598
marketing communications objectives 
154–6
online communications 263
brand awareness 60–1, 66, 117, 263
advergames 273
aided 530, 597
broad 60, 66, 598
deep 60, 66, 600
defining 598
dual 152–3
large ads boosting 267–8
marketing communications objectives 
151–3
top-of-mind brand awareness (TOMA) 
172, 608
unaided 152, 530, 608
brand charisma 43
brand community 598
brand confusion 244–5, 598
brand dilution 51, 600
brand equity 58–64, 68, 387
see also consumer brand equity
building a strategic brand portfolio 58
defining 58, 598
financial 58, 58–60
and marketing communications 65–8
brand experience 387–93, 598
experiential marketing 387–92
brand extension/brand stretching 51, 
211, 598
losers and winners 52
brand feelings 62, 598
brand imagery 61, 263, 598
brand knowledge 153, 598
brand loyalty 60, 65, 142, 158, 263, 598
see also loyalty programmes loyalty 
pyramid 63, 63f
brand mark 43, 598
brand name 43, 44, 598
brand personality 62, 598
Brand Personality Scale (BPS) 62
brand placement 9, 226, 246, 479, 
585, 598
and brand attitudes 482, 484–5
brand portfolio 57–8, 598
brand recall 152
brand skills 43
brand strategies 49–56
’Angry Birds’ game 50–1
brand strength index 60t
brand websites 264–6, 310–11, 598
Brandchannel 49
branded content 27
branded entertainment 481–6
branding
see also brands
benefits of 64–5
co-branding 56, 68, 599
combining television brand placement 
with sponsorship messages 9–10
corporate 52, 68, 599
dual branding strategy 601
endorsement 56, 601
entertainment 9–10, 481–6
ingredient 56, 603
multi-branding 52–3, 128, 604
brands 43–9
see also aided brand awareness; 
bastion brand; brand activation; 
brand appeal; brand association; 
brand attitude; brand awareness; 
brand charisma; brand confusion; 
brand dilution; brand equity; 
brand experience; brand 
extension/brand stretching; brand 
feelings; brand imagery; brand 
knowledge; brand loyalty; brand 
mark; brand name; brand 
personality; brand placement; 
brand portfolio; brand recall; 
brand skills; brand websites; 
branded content; branding; broad 
brand awareness; co-branding; 
consumer brand equity; corporate 
branding; deep brand awareness; 
dual branding strategy; products; 
top-of-mind brand awareness 
(TOMA); unaided brand awareness
advertising cues causing consumers to 
perceive as more global 53–4
analysis 59
attitudes versus accessibility, impact on 
choice 106–7
bastion 57–8, 68, 597
defining ‘brand’ 43, 598
differentiation 28, 47, 53
fighter 57, 58, 68, 601
financial brand equity 601
flanker 57, 58, 68, 602
generic 46, 602
global 15–16, 53–4, 223–4
hardware 18
high-equity 64–5
impactful and fast-growing 49
Internet, using to launch 271
leading 47
local 54
manufacturer 45, 68, 603
new brands or products, budgeting 
strategies 176–86
own-label see private label brands 
placed in user-generated content 
298–9
positioning 44
prestige 57, 58, 68, 605
private label 45–6, 61, 605
relative importance 60t
social network opportunities for 307
software 18
strong, building of 47–8
successful 47–9
switching 3
top brands 47, 48t
well-known 5–6, 60, 64, 444, 567
breakfast cereal brands
see also Kelloggs cereals Cheerios 138–9
Fitnesse 79
Nesquick 51
Variety 150–1
Breast Cancer Foundation 480
Brent Spar oil platform, sinking of 443
British Airways 66
British Association of Publishing 
Agencies 340
broad brand awareness 60, 66, 598
broadcast or programme sponsorship 474, 
479, 598
budgets/budgeting
action costing budgeting 451, 597
campaign budget 165

 index     613
Christian Dior 155–6
Chubbies (online retailer of shorts and 
shirts) 301
cigarette advertising 163
see also Nicorette
cinema advertising 326, 342
Citroën 13, 16, 216, 567
Claiborne, Liz 57
classic conditioning theory 104
clickstream/behavioural data 272
client-driven mailings 422
Clinique (beauty brand) 264
Clio Award, winning 208
Club Med (Club Méditerranée) 
113–19, 118f
campaign 115–16
well received by target group 116–17
consumer non-understanding of 
brand 114
image 118f
moving in right direction 117
origins 113
as strong brand with rich history 113
CNN 62
co-branding 56, 68, 599
Coca-Cola 9, 16, 83, 87, 142
brand strategies 53, 54, 55, 56
Coca-Cola Classic 145
Coca-Cola Zero, aimed at men 67, 145
Cola Light 67, 95, 145, 217
cross-cultural environment, advertising 
in 232–3
marketing communications planning 
151, 171, 175, 177
co-creation 391, 601
cognitive attitude formation
high-elaboration likelihood 90–8
low-elaboration likelihood 98–100
cognitive humour 216
cognitive processing style 328–9
cognitive–affective–conative sequence 79
Cola Turka 54
collaborative filtering 272
collaborative projects 294–5, 599
collective advertising 202, 599
collectivistic culture 236, 599
’Collegia Mercatorum’ 499
Colora, retail chain for paint and 
wallpaper 228
colours
cross-cultural variations 234
point-of-purchase (POP) 
communications 386
Colruyt, Jef 22
Comfort Bultex 231
commercial objectives 148
communication
communications budget affecting 
campaign results 165–8
control and evaluation tactics 186
effectiveness goals 147, 601
process goals 147, 605
reach goal 147, 606
strategies, new brands or products 176
tactics 186–7
standardised 14–20, 607
telecoms operator, testing image 
campaign for 530–1
viral 278–9
website effectiveness 536–8
weight 328
 Canal + (French cable network) 264
capitation rating/achievement targeting 
budgeting 451, 598
Carli, L. 133–4
carousel ads 297
Carrefour Group 85, 490–3
in Belgium 491–3
cash & carry stores 491
convenience stores 491
festival shops 492–3
hypermarkets 491
music festivals 491–2
supermarkets 491
tapping into point-of-sale opportunity 
492–3
as world leader in distribution 490–1
cars see motor industry/car brands cash 
refunds 368, 598
Casius (Internet company, Benelux 
countries) 512
catalogues 418, 598
#CatchMagicHour hashtag, Instagram 
265
categorical imperative 562, 598
category spending 322, 598
category wants, developing 150–1
Catherine & Liliane (French satiric couple) 
264
cause-related marketing/sponsorship 474, 
479–80, 582, 598
caveat emptor 561, 598
caveat venditor 561, 598
celebrities 100, 216, 299
celebrity endorsement 222–4, 598
CenterParcs 177
central-route processing 86, 101, 598
Centre for exhibition Industry Research 
(CeIR) 501
Centrino duo PCs 156
Champions League soccer 6
chance games 369–70
characters 44
Charmin 208
Chartered Institute of Public Relations 
(UK) 435
Cheerios breakfast cereal 138–9
children
advertising practices targeted at 204, 
571, 585
in changing media environment 276–7
dental hygiene, promoting 83–4
impact on buying behaviour 132
obesity, and advertising to children 
572–3
reaction to traditional and hybrid 
advertising 136
China
Chinese people and marketing 13
global brands, Chinese image of 15–16
capitation rating/achievement targeting 
budgeting 451, 598
communications budgeting methods 
168–74
communications budget affecting 
campaign results 165–8
competitive parity budgeting 170–2, 
599
competitive tendering budgeting 451, 
599
contingency budgets 175
experimental budgeting 173–4
factors influencing budgets 174–5
historical comparison budgeting 
450, 602
income proportion budgeting 451,  
602
industry comparison budgeting 451, 
603
marginal budgeting analysis 168
new brands or products, budgeting 
strategies 176–86
objective-and-task budgeting analysis 
487, 604
public relations 450–1
resources costing budgeting 450, 606
sponsorship 487–9
Budweiser beer 174
Bulgari 57f Burberry 297
Burnett, Leo 163
business-to-business context, advertising 
230–2
buttons (small banner ads, rectangles or 
squares) 267, 598
Buy One Get One Free (BOGOF) 601
buy-back allowance 375, 598
buzz marketing 27–8, 229, 246, 568, 598
Cadbury Snack brand, repositioned 183
Caja Madrid, ‘La dolce Vita’ direct mail 
409
Calvin Klein 85, 567
Camp Jeep 64
campaign evaluation research 598
campaigns
see also advertising; specific campaigns, 
such as Accenture, Tiger campaign
advertising research 519–20 ’awareness-
trial-retention’ framework 535
budget 165
communications budget affecting 
results of 165–8
evaluation research 519, 529–33
health 89–90
implementation 229
isolating effect of 533–4
localisation 14–20
measurement of effectiveness 518–56
media mix investments to maximise 
recognition 343–4
online, impact measurement 269–70
online banking, KBC involving
employees in advertising campaign 
promoting 442
social media measurement 538–9

614     Index
corporate reputation 24, 600
corporate social responsibility (CSR)  
580–4, 600
in the Netherlands 475
corporate strategy 24, 600
corporate structure 600
corporate symbolism/design 23, 600
cost per thousand (CPT) 333–4, 600
Côte d’Or 54–5
country-of-origin effects, automatic and 
unintentional 100
coupon advertising 601
coupons 367–8, 430, 600
coupon advertising see direct response 
print advertising
coupon-stimulated purchasing test (trailer 
test) 608
covert marketing 568–9, 585
Crawford, Cindy 223–4
creativity, in advertising 206–7
creative brief 184, 185f, 187, 229, 600
creative execution 312
creative idea 185, 186f, 600
creative platform 203–8, 246
non-strategic 206
crisis communications 451–3
issues audit 452, 603
pre-crisis communication rules 452t
rules 452–3
cross-cultural environment, advertising in 
232–40
colours 234
cultural dimensions 236–40
environmental concern 239, 240
eye contact 234
gender roles 235–6
gestures 234
high- and low-context cultures 236, 
602, 603
personal space 233–4
power distance 237–8, 605
religion 235
responses to advertising adaptation 
237–8
self-brand congruity 237–8
sense of humour 235
timing 233
values and attitudes 235
verbal language 233
crowd sourcing 392
cues, advertising 53–4
culture 13, 600
customer media 340
customer relationship marketing (CRM) 
152, 309
Lotus Bakeries, changes to CRM 
programme 430–1
content and tone of voice 430
coupons 430
database 430
extension to online media 430
Nivea 416
Nivea ten-year CRM (1998–2008) 416
software tools 138
customers see consumers
needs 85
pleasant emotional ads, effects on 
103–4
point of view 8
responses to different degrees of 
adaptation 17–18
responses to eWOM messages on social 
networking sites 307–8
responses to personalised advertising 
on social networking sites 310
satisfaction 158–9
types 392
user status 142
consumption, culture of 560
content communities 296, 599
content marketing, and storytelling  
227–8, 246
content sponsorship 271, 599
contests 369
context effects 345–9
split-screen TV formats 346–7
context responses, intensity 348
context/target targeting 272
contingency budgets 175
continuity, media planning 331–3
continuous advertising schedule 331,  
333, 599
contractualism 559, 599
controversial/shock advertising 221, 
 566– 7, 599
conversation rate 588
Converse 135
Convex Group 227
conviction 528
Coop (Swiss retail chain), unaddressed 
mail-only campaign 412
co-operative advertising 202, 375, 599
Coral (detergent brand) 164
core product 3, 599
Corega, market leader in fixatives and 
denture care 224–5
corporate behaviour 24, 599
corporate branding 52, 68, 599
corporate citizenship see corporate social 
responsibility (CSR)
corporate communications
defining 599
integration of 20–5
sponsorship 473
corporate culture 599
corporate design see corporate 
symbolism
corporate hospitality 473–4, 574
corporate identity
and corporate image 24
definitions 599–600
integration of corporate 
communications 21, 22
visualisation of 23
corporate image
and corporate identity 24–5
defining 600
factors influencing 25
corporate personality 21, 600
corporate public relations 440, 600
Communication Agency Tracking study 31
communication objectives 148, 153
communications see communications
audit; communications budgeting 
methods; communications content 
research; communications mix; 
marketing communications
communications audit 128, 59
communications budgeting methods 
168–74
affordability 169, 597
arbitrary allocation 168–9, 597
competitive parity budgeting 170–2, 
599
experimental budgeting 173–4
inertia budgeting method 168
marginal budgeting analysis 168, 603
objective and task method 173–4
percentage of sales 169–70, 173, 605
communications content research 129, 
599
communications mix 3–6, 435
Compaq 341
comparative advertising 213–14, 599
competition, situation analysis 128
competitive parity budgeting analysis 
170–2, 599
competitive tendering budgeting 451, 
599
competitor communications strategy 
research 129, 599
ConAgra Foods, Feeding Children Better 
programme 479
conference-bound exhibitions 500, 599
confusing positioning 179, 599
congruity theory 468
Connery, Sean 224
consistency in marketing communications 
7, 599
consumer brand equity 58, 60–4, 599
consumer market segmentation variables 
130t
consumer promotions 365–74
categories 365
contests, sweepstakes and lotteries 
369–70
defining 599
monetary incentives 366–9
objectives and target groups 363–4
consumer research 181
consumer sovereignty 561, 599
consumer-generated content 294
consumers
see also consumer brand equity; 
consumer promotions; consumer 
research; consumer sovereignty; 
consumer-generated content
advertising cues causing consumers to 
perceive brands as more global 
53–4
age 134
approach-avoidance behaviour 386
customer retention and loyalty 409–10
generations 134
lifetime value of a customer 424, 603

 index     615
Edison Media Research 296
Efes Pilsen 54
effective frequency 325, 601
effective reach 330, 601
effectiveness goals of communication 
147, 601
effectiveness measurement, advertising 
campaigns 518–56
see also Win for Life (WFL) advertising 
research 519–20
’awareness-trial-retention’ framework 535
direct marketing 541–3
direct opinion measurement test 523
evaluation research 529–33
exhibitions and trade fairs 546–50
Implicit Association Test (IAT) 522
isolating effect of campaign 533–4
online advertising 536–9
post-testing of advertising 527–9
PR effectiveness 544–5
pre-testing of advertising 520–6 
RFM-model 542, 543–4, 606
sales promotions 539–41
social media measurement 538–9
sponsorship 545–6
telecoms operator, testing image 
campaign for 530–1
website effectiveness 536–8
Ehrenberg, A.S.C. 109, 161
Elaboration Likelihood model (ELM) 86, 
86f, 89, 112, 601
electric cars
adaptation 239–40, 582–4
anticipated experience positioning for 
179–81
usage intention, predicting 93
electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) 307–8
see also word-of-mouth 
communications (WOM)
Elsève hairspray 63
email, substitution of letters by 414
email lists, removal from 424
emoji Literacy Campaign, domino’s Pizza 
304–5
emotional advertising appeals 209,  
214–22, 246
affect in Alzheimer’s disease message 
processing 217–19
defining 601
eroticism 216–18
fear 219–20, 601
higher-level emotional values, TV 
advertising 4–5
humour 214–16, 602
music 222
pleasant emotional ads, effects on 
consumers 103–4
shock tactics 221
warmth 217, 609
emotional conditioning 104–5
emotional selling proposition (eSP) 177, 
212, 601
endorsement
celebrity endorsement 222–224, 598
endorsers 222–9
database, importance of 406, 407, 426, 
541
defining 406
direct response print advertising  
411–12, 601
direct response radio advertising 413
direct sales 408
effectiveness 541–3
ethical issues 574
integrating communications in IMC 426
loyalty programmes 410, 421, 425–6
as a marketing communications 
technique 406–8
mass media versus direct media 407t
media and tools 411–19
new interactive media 419
non-addressable media 411–13, 604
objectives and target groups 408–11, 
426
relationship marketing 424–6, 606
sales or distribution support 408, 409f 
telemarketing 417, 602, 607
telesales 417, 574, 607
versus traditional mass media 
communications 407
Direct Marketing Association (DMA) 
415, 424
Code of Practice 424
direct marketing communications 4, 600
direct opinion measurement test 523, 601
direct public relations 440, 601
direct response print advertising 411–12, 
601 
direct response radio advertising 413
direct response television (dRTV) 413, 601
direct sales 408
disgust appeals 567
display advertising 262, 272
distributive justice 558, 601
DMA see direct Marketing Association 
(DMA)
Domino’s Pizza/Domino’s Pizza School 
266, 304–5
door-to-door advertising 341
Dorito crisps 63
double-spotting 333, 601
dove brand 177
dramatisation advertising 212, 601
Dreft brand 53, 54, 212
drive models 220
dual brand awareness 152–3
dual branding strategy 56, 601
dual mediation 102f, 601
dual or second screening 601
Dulux 54
Duracell batteries 130
Dutch national Institute of Finance 
Information 440–1
 
eco-friendly consumer behaviour 240, 
580–2
e-commerce market/communications 3, 
395–9 
economic value 538
economies of scale 24
 da Vinci Code (dan Brown), book and film 
450
DAGMAR model 149, 160–1, 241, 600
Dahl, Sophie 216
Daimler Chrysler 104
Danone yoghurt 63
data collection 273
data envelopment analysis (deA) 326
data sources 420
database marketing 419–24
see also direct marketing
client-driven mailings 422
definitions 419, 600
event-driven 423
importance of database to direct 
marketing 406, 407, 426, 541
multi-channel 422
pitfalls, potential 420
privacy concerns 423–4
product-driven mailings 421–2
untargeted marketing 421
database technology 28
Day After Recall (DAR) test 528, 600
Daz detergent 242
DBS 55
de Medici family, Florence 467
dealer loaders 375, 600
decathlon 22
decent marketing communications 561, 
600
deceptive marketing communications 
573–4, 576, 600
deep brand awareness 60, 66, 600
deepblue (consultant), Communication 
Agency Tracking study 31
degree of overall similarity of strategy 
(dOSS) 245
dell 309
demographic segmentation 132, 600
demonstration advertising 211–12, 600
density of ad 243
dental hygiene, promoting 83–4
denture care market 224–5
deontological approach (idealism) 239, 
558, 600
Desperate Housewives producers, contract 
with Ford 479
detergent brands 164, 242, 444
Deus (Belgian rock band) 450
digital age, marketing communications in 
110–12
digital media 342
direct mail 94, 262, 407, 414, 415, 600
Caja Madrid, ‘La dolce Vita’ direct mail 
409
’Love Letters’ direct mail and online 
campaign (Belgian Post) 410–11
personalised website (PURL) 416
direct marketing 28, 405–33, 600
see also database marketing; direct mail;
Lotus Bakeries
addressable media 411, 414
catalogues 418, 598
customer retention and loyalty  
409–10

616     Index
Fishbein, M. 92
Fishbein model 91, 108, 112, 602
Fitnesse breakfast cereal 79
fitting cubicles, advertising in 339
fixatives and denture care market 224–5
flanker brand 57, 58, 68, 602
flighting advertising schedule 332, 333, 602
flog (fake weblog) 569, 602
floor ads/graphics 383
Foot Locker 380
Foot-Cone-Belding (FCB) grid 80, 81, 85, 
161, 602
forbidden-fruit effect 67
Ford Motor Company 107, 479, 480
foreign markets, openness to 17–18
Fortis Bank and Insurance 453–4
’Foursquare’ (web and mobile application) 
276
fragmented media 28
framing 108
Franke, G.R. 210
free in-mail promotion 371, 602
frequency 322–30, 602
Frisk Mints 207
full market coverage 146, 602
functional needs 85
 
Gallup-Robinson Impact test 528, 602
galvanic skin response 522
Game of Thrones (epic fantasy drama 
series) 273–4
games
see also Rovio (Finnish developer of 
computer games); Software 
entertainment (German game 
producer); ‘Wii Fit’ (games series, 
nintendo)
advergames see advergames
’Angry Birds’ 50–1
chance 369–70
and children 84
fantasy 274–5
’gamification’ 276
sponsored 274
using as marketing communications 
tools 273–4
virtual game worlds 608
Gates, Bill 22
gender factors
Coca-Cola Zero, aimed at men 67, 145
cross-cultural environment, advertising
in 235–6
influence of gender on effectiveness of 
probability markers in advertising 
133–4
General Mills 138, 139, 175
Generation X 135
Generation Y 135, 138
generic advertising 203, 602
generic brands 46, 602
geographic segments 131, 602
gestures, cross-cultural variations 234
Gillette brand 48, 53, 62, 177, 389
Gilly, M. 138
global ad spending 262
expectation 108
experience positioning 179–81
experiential hierarchy-of-effects model 
79, 601
experiential marketing
acting 391–2
feeling/relating 389–90
objectives and dimensions 387–92
sensory marketing 388–9
thinking 3890
experimental budgeting 173–4
expert endorsement 222, 242, 298–9, 601
external data 420
external public relations 440, 601
extra volume 370, 601
Exxon Valdez disaster 443, 451
eye camera research 522
eye contact, cross-cultural variations 234
 
Facebook 182
demographics and usage of social 
network sites 306–7
Facebook Messenger 301
marketing communications planning 
135, 136, 139
online communication 294, 296, 297, 
300–2, 309, 311
Faces and Voices of Recovery MOMStell 
155
fair trade products, determinants of 
willingness to pay for 584–5
Fairtec 502–3
Fairy brand 53
Fam, K.S. 560
fan branding 227
fantasy games, perceived congruity in 
in-game advertising 274–5
fashion brands 297
FCUK slogan (French Connection) 221
fear appeal advertising 219–20, 601
ethical issues 572, 573, 585
Febreze 66, 211–12
feel campaigns 389–90
feelings transfer 102–4
Fei-Chang 55
feminine culture 238, 601
Ferragni, Chiara 295
fighter brand 57, 58, 68, 601
financial analysis 59
financial brand equity 58, 601
financial public relations 443, 448, 601–2
FISA/Batibouw company, Belgium 512–17
see also exhibitions and trade fairs; trade 
fairs/shows
company profile 512–13
controlling profile of exhibitors 516
good organisation 516
helping exhibitors to create fair 
participation awareness and traffic 
515–16
history 513
increasing effectiveness of fair for 
exhibitors 515–16
increasing effectiveness of fair for 
organiser and visitors 513–15
endorsement (Continued)
endorser type and brand globalness 
effects in India 223
expert 222, 242, 298–9, 601
endorsement branding 56, 601
Enis, B. 138
entertainment, branding of 9–10
environmental concern 239, 240
erotic advertising 105, 216–18, 567, 601
Esprit 567
ethical issues in marketing 
communications 557–96
see also stealth advertising controversial 
messages 566–7
ethical decision-making models and
rules 561–2
ethics, defining 558, 601
ethics code 561, 601
reasonable person standard 574
stereotyping 562–5, 607
unethical practices 228, 562–72
unethical uses of marketing
communications instruments 572–5
Etsy (e-commerce website) 303
Eurocard/Master Card 5–6
European Advertising Standards Alliance 
(EASA) 577–8, 578f, 579f
Common Principles 579
European letter mail market, liberalisation 
of 414
European Milk Forum (eMF) 248–51
see also advertising context of campaign 
248
first stage of campaign, results 249–50
’Milk. A force of nature’ approach 248–9
objectives of campaign 248
second stage of campaign, preliminary 
results 250–1
event marketing 468, 601
event-driven database marketing 423
event-history modelling 542
event-related sponsorship 474, 476–8, 601
exhibitions and trade fairs 418–517
see also trade fairs/shows
conference-bound exhibitions 500, 599
defining 4, 499, 608
effectiveness measurement of
advertising campaigns 546–50
integrating in IMC 510–11
limitations 509
objectives and target groups 501–6
origins 499
planning an exhibition 506–9
and public relations 505
relationship marketing and exhibitions 
505
RFID 2007 500
role of exhibitions in marketing 
communications 501
target groups 501–6
trade mart 500, 608
types 499–500
exorbitant communications investments 
166
expectancy–Value model 91

 index     617
identity theory 239
IGA see in-game advertising (IGA)
IKEA 130, 418
image or theme communications 4, 602
IMC see integrated marketing 
communications (IMC) Implicit 
Association Test (IAT) 522
inbound telemarketing 417, 602
income proportion budgeting 451, 602
India
brand globalness effects and endorser 
type 223
glocalisation as best branding strategy 
in 19–20
indirect public relations 440, 602
individualist culture 236, 603
Indoor Media (Belgian advertising agency) 
339
industrial advertising 202, 603
industry comparison budgeting 451, 603
industry identity 22, 603
inertia budgeting analysis 168, 603
infomercials (programme-length
advertising and selling) 3, 227
information classification 209, 210t, 242
informational buying motives 81, 603
Infratech (Dutch trade fair) 508–09
in-game advertising (IGA)
see also games
in fantasy games 274–5
sponsorship 483
ingredient branding 56, 603
input indicators of public relations 
effectiveness 545, 603
in-script sponsoring 603
InSites Consulting (Belgian research 
agency) 140, 263, 445–6
Instagram 297, 306, 311
institutional advertising 203, 603
in-store displays, virtual store environment 
384
integrated communications plan 127
integrated marketing communications 
(IMC)
see also communications mix; marketing 
communications
barriers to integrated communication 
30–2
benefits of 7
concept/definitions 2, 6–12, 603
consistency 7
drivers 26
factors leading to integrated marketing 
and corporate communications 
26–9
integrating across cultures 13
integrating advertising in 246
integrating brand activation in 393
integrating direct marketing
communications in 426
integrating exhibitions and trade fairs in 
510–11
integrating public relations in 454
integrating sponsorship in 489
levels of integration 29–30
relationship marketing 424–5
Harrods 303
Head & Shoulders shampoo brand 44, 
58, 212
headlines, advertising 369
headvertising 227
health campaigns, self-regulatory focus 
89–90
hedges 87, 88, 133–4
hedonic needs 85
hedonic services 88
Heineken beer brand 9, 476
Heinz Baby Club 425
Heinz Plant Bottle 56
Henkel 53
Hertz (market leader in car and truck 
rental) 178
heuristic evaluation 98–99, 602
heuristic processing 133
Heuristic–Systematic model (HSM) 89
hidden advertising formats 225, 227
hierarchy-of-effects models 79–82, 602
advantage 81
attitude formation and change 82–90
and attitudes 82–3
DAGMAR model 149, 160–1, 241, 600
experiential 79, 601
low-involvement 79, 603
probability markers, effects 87–8
high-context cultures 236, 602
high-elaboration likelihood
affective attitude formation 101
behavioural attitude formation 107–9
cognitive attitude formation 90–8
high-equity brands 64–5
high-penetration brands 160
Hines, C. 584
historical comparison budgeting 450,  
602
Hitachi 437
Hofstede, G. 13, 88, 236, 238, 240
homepage styling 271
homophily 111, 308
honest and truthful marketing 
communications 602
horizontal trade fairs 499–500, 602
household life-cycle criteria 138, 140f 
HSBS 55
HTC 56
humorous advertising 214–16, 235, 602
hypertext mark-up language (HTML) 261
Hyundai 47–8
 
IBM 44, 48
ICC see International Code of Advertising 
Practice (ICC)
ice-cream brands Ben & Jerry’s 297
Godiva 51
Häagen-Dazs 87, 105
Magnum 49
idea advertising 602
idea penetration 528
identity
corporate see corporate identity 
industry 22
global brands 223
advertising cues causing consumers to 
perceive brands as more global 53–4
Chinese image of 15–16
Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis 
and Malaria (Born HIV Free 
campaign) 455–64
see also public relations bloggers 462–3
campaign results 458–63
campaign website 460–1
communications plan 456–58
digital aspects 457
media 457–8
offline operations 458
partner activation 457
social media platforms and website 
457, 458
need for a different communications 
strategy 455–6
social media 461–2
street marketing 460
and traditional mass media advertising 
459–60
and YouTube channel 460
global localisation 18
globalisation 14–16, 17, 53
advertising cues causing consumers to 
perceive brands as more global 
53–4
brand names 44
globalised communication campaign
see standardised campaign KOF 
index 18
glocalisation
as best branding strategy in India 19–20
defining 16, 602
Godiva ice cream 51
golden rule 602
Goodyear 16
Google 49, 189, 268, 444f, 539
Google Alerts 539
Google Analytics 537, 539
Google Trends 539
Google + 136
Goretex 56
Gorn, G. J. 222
Graspop music festival, Belgium 491, 492
green marketing 582, 584, 602
Grolsch (beer brand),Netherlands 
campaign 339
gross rating points (GRP) 245, 413, 602
media planning 328, 330, 343
gross reach 330–1, 602
GRP see gross rating points (GRP) Gucci 567
Guinness, sponsors of football 477f
Gulf Stream Gear, keyword advertising 
campaign 268
 
H&M 14f
Häagen-Dazs ice cream brand 105
erotic advertising 87, 105
Hall, e.T. 233
Handicap International 94
Harley-Davidson 51, 64, 155, 228, 390
Harley Owners Club 424

618     Index
direct marketing 410, 421, 425–6
online communication 309, 310
Lux brand 171–2
 
macro-environment, situation analysis 128
Maes (Belgian lager beer) 350–5, 351f
see also media planning
character in decline 350
new beer 352–3
objectives 350
results of campaign 353
magazine advertising 339–40, 372–3 
Magnum ice cream 49
Malaysia, gender roles 235, 236
Mamas & Papas, customer relationships 
420–1
management judgement test 603
manufacturer advertising 201, 603
manufacturer brands 45, 68, 603
MAO (motivation, ability and opportunity) 
100, 597, 604
attitude formation and change 85, 86, 
87, 89
low-elaboration likelihood, cognitive 
attitude formation 98–100
mapping 177
Marc Jacobs (luxury designer brand) 278
Marcel Dorcel (adult film producers) 566
marginal budgeting analysis 168, 169f, 603
market analysis 59
market segmentation 129, 130–44, 603–4
market specialisation 604
marketing
ambush/parasitic 474, 481, 489, 597
buzz marketing 27–8, 229, 246, 568, 598
and Chinese people 13
content 227–8
covert 568–9, 585
database see database marketing
defining 604
event 468, 601
experiential 387–92
green 582, 584, 602
and instruments of the marketing 
mix 2–3
mobile 604
multi-channel 408
outbound telemarketing 604
relationship 606
sensory 388–9
socially responsible 582, 607
stealth 568, 607
untargeted 421
value 468, 608
viral 229, 277–8, 608
marketing communications
action communications 4–5, 597
alternating performance and imagery 
communications 67
and brand equity 65–8
classic versus integrated 11, 12t
compared to public relations 436
corporate see corporate
communications cost-effective 
project 493
Labatt Ice 95
Ladies Gossip (website) 420
Lag Machine (virtual reality headset) 
278–9
lager brands see beer/lager brands 
language 88, 133–4, 233
Larios 55
law of extremes theory 243, 603
Lay (salted snacks retailer) 107
Lay (salted snacks retailer, Belgium) 107, 
392–3
leading brands 47
Leekens, Georges 478
legal analysis 59
legal marketing communications 603
Lego brand 62, 388t, 390
Lever Fabergé 164
leveraging effect 474
Levi’s brand 95, 130
life-cycle segmentation 138
lifestyle segmentation 140, 603
lifetime value of a customer 424, 603
Likert scale 91
Lin, C.-L. 564
line extension 49, 50, 603
lingerie shops, purchase facilitation 157
LinkedIn 306, 309
list price 3, 603
Listerine Zero 271
LivePerson software 309
’living with lag’ campaign (ume.net) 
278–9
lobbying 447, 603
local brands 54
localisation 14–16, 17
logos 23, 44
long-term orientation 238
L’Oréal 177, 338f
LOT (Polish Airlines) 302
lotteries 369
Lotus Bakeries 415, 428–32
see also direct marketing
applying e-CRM, LotusFriends Platform 
430–1
results of e-CRM approach 432
CRM programme, changes to 430–1
content and tone of voice 430
coupons 430
database 430
extension to online media 430
Louis Vuitton 48, 177, 295
Love Has no Labels campaign, Ad Council 
279
Love Singapore Movement 82
low-context cultures 236, 603
low-elaboration likelihood
affective attitude formation 101–7
behavioural attitude formation  
109–10
cognitive attitude formation 98–100
low-involvement hierarchy-of-effects 
model 79, 603
loyalty programmes 4
see also brand loyalty brand activation 
364, 368
integrated marketing communications 
(IMC) (Continued)
perception of in US motor carrier
industry 11
pyramid 6, 7
and role of communication agencies 31
stages in development 7f 
standardisation or adaptation 
14–20
synergy 7, 12, 607
Intel 56, 156
Intelligent Lemon, UK design company 
420
interaction metrics 538
interactive (digital) television/i(d)TV 603
Interbrand 48
internal data 420
internal public relations 440, 441, 447, 603
International Code of Advertising Practice 
(ICC) 576, 577, 578
Internet 261, 263, 271, 310, 603
see also brand websites; online 
communications; social networking 
sites; World Wide Web (WWW)
and relationship marketing 309–10
interpretation 108
interstitials 267, 603
involvement 80, 110, 603
IPA Bellwether, UK 407
iPhone (Apple) 22
irritation evoked by advertising
causes 242–3
consequences of ads evoking 243–4
issues audit 452, 603
 
Jackson, Michael 224
Japanese language 233
Jeep 64, 390
Jetair 114
jingles 44, 66, 222
JMP software package 343
Johnny Walker, sponsors of golf 477f
Johnson & Johnson 271
Jones, John Philip 166, 167, 171
Junco, R. 135
’junk mail’ 66
Jury of Ethical Practices ( JeP), Belgium 563
 
Kant, Immanuel 562
KBC (Belgian bank) 442
Keller, K. L. 43
Kelloggs cereals 49, 56, 150, 178
keyword buying see search engine 
advertising (SeA) KFC Romania 279
Kinepolis (Belgian cinema group) 27
Klout (external measurement tool) 539
Kobs, J. 406
Kodak 44
KOF index of globalisation 18
Komatsu 15
Komen, Susan G. 480
Koslow, S. 574
Kotex 303
Kraft 16
Kryptonite 296

 index     619
Mitchell, A.A. 102
mixture-amount model, media mix 
investments 343–4
mobile marketing 153, 300, 604
monetary incentives 366–9
moral equity 559
morals 558, 604
Moreau, C.P. 93
Morgensztern 326, 327
Moschino 567
motivation (MAO factor) 85, 604
motivational frequency 325
motor industry/car brands
see also Ford Motor Company Audi 
(R8) 162
BMW 132
car insurance 132
Citroën 13, 16, 216, 567
Ford 107, 479
Hyundai 47–8
Mazda 107
Mercedes Benz 43, 130, 297–8
Mini 152
Nissan 58, 205–6, 207
Opel Safira 96
Porsche 911 162
Rolls-Royce 177
Toyota 152
Volkswagen 9, 16, 58, 207, 235
Volvo 130, 178
Motorola 153
Mountain dew 44
MTV 62
multi-branding 52–3, 128, 604
multi-channel database marketing 422
multinationals 175
multiple attribute models 91–7
MUSH sponsorship 474, 604
music, in advertising 222
music festivals 491–2
festival shops 492–3
MySpace 156, 300
repositioning of 181–2
 
National Association of Broadcasters 
show, Las Vegas 506
national symbols 16
native advertising 227, 246, 599
online advertising 270
online communications 271
near-pack premiums 372
needs 85
negative online reviews, organisational 
responses to 158–9
Nespresso coffee 63, 100
Nesquick cereals 51
Nestlé 383
net promoter score 531, 604
net reach 604
Netherlands, the
Grolsch beer brand 339
Heineken beer brand 9
Philips ShopLab project 382
value segmentation 140–1
value segmentation in 140–1
McNeal, J. 572 
means–end chain 62, 62t
Mecca Cola 55
media mix 322, 604
media multitasking, effect on cognitive 
processing style 328–9
media objectives 322–35, 349
media planning 321–58
see also Maes (Belgian lager beer); 
newspaper advertising; television 
advertising
advergames 324–5
and advertising media 336, 337t
category spending 322, 598
cinema 342
cognitive processing style, effect of 
media multitasking on 328–9
context 345–9
continuity 331–3
cost per thousand useful contacts  
333– 4, 600
criteria 337t
defining 321
digital media 342
door-to-door advertising 341
frequency 322–30, 602
indoor media, advertising in toilets and 
fitting cubicles 339
magazine advertising 339–40
media plan, defined 606
medium as message 348–9
medium selectivity 334–5, 604
mixture-amount model, media mix 
investments 343–4
multitasking, effect on cognitive 
processing style 328–9
outdoor advertising 6, 336, 338, 341, 
604
process 321–2
radio advertising 342
reach see reach
steps 321, 349
television advertising 341–2
weight 328–9
media public relations 443, 447, 448–9, 
604
media selection 335–44, 349
medium context of advertising 345, 604
medium selectivity, calculating 334–5, 
604
megalogues 418
memorisation 326, 327f
Mental Accounting Theory 377
Mercedes Benz 43, 130, 297–8
mere exposure effect 105–7, 468, 604
message strategy, new brands or products 
176–7
Michelin 44
micro-sites 265, 311, 604
Microsoft 390, 475
Miele brand 16, 67, 83, 87, 130, 177
Millennials 135, 136, 137, 297
Miller beer 207
Mingus, Charlie 185
misleading advertising 573
decent 561, 600
deceptive 573–4, 576, 600
defining 604
in digital age 110–12
direct marketing see direct marketing
e-communications 601
ethical issues 557–96
honest and truthful marketing 602
image or theme communications 4, 602
integrated marketing see integrated 
marketing communications (IMC)
legal 603
mass communications 604
media, through 447
whether mirroring or shaping society 
560
non-traditional forms 27–8
objectives 147–61, 473
online see online communications
personal 447, 605
personal versus mass marketing 5t
point-of-purchase see point-of-
purchase (POP) communications
regulation of practices 575–9
role of exhibitions in 501
synergy in 7, 12, 607
unethical uses of marketing 
communications instruments 
572–5
unfair 576, 608
marketing management 130
marketing mix
4 Ps/Cs 2
and IMC 10f
instruments of 2–3
and integrated marketing 
communications 10f
marketing public relations 440, 444–5, 
449–50, 604
markets
see also share of market (SOM)
cost per thousand in target market 600
foreign, openness to 17–18
full market coverage 146, 602
geographic segments 131
situation analysis 128
specialisation 146
Marlboro 163
Mars brand 44, 52, 53
Martini 105, 216
masculine culture 238, 604
masked identification test 527, 528f, 604
mass communications 4, 604
mass media versus direct media 407t
massively multiplayer online role-playing 
game (MMORPG) 308–9
MasterCard 440–1
Mastrodicasa, J.M. 135
materialism 560
Mazda 107
McCartney, Paul (YouTube concert) 460
Mcdonald’s restaurant brand 24, 53,  
66, 87
MCI, Friends and Family loyalty 
programme 426

620     Index
perceived behavioural control (PBC)  
93–4, 605
perceived ease of use (PEOU) 93
perceived usefulness (PU) 93
percentage of sales budgeting analysis 
169–70, 173, 605
Perception–experience–Memory model 
107–8, 605
perceptual interference, TV advertising 
346
perceptual processing, level of 329
peripheral-route processing 89, 605
Pernod-Ricard 55
Perrier brand 66
personal communications defining 4, 605
versus mass marketing communications 
5t
personalised advertising 310
public relations 447
personal space, cultural variations 233–4
personalised website (PURL) 416
persuasion 110
self-generated 98, 606
Persuasion Knowledge Model (PKM) 276
Perugini, M. 93
PEST model 128
Philip Morris 58, 163
Philips grooming kits, and facial hair 389
Philips ShopLab project (the netherlands) 
382
photo communities 296
physiological advertising test 522, 605
Pinterest (content platform) 302–4, 309, 
311
planning, marketing communications 
125–99
see also Yellow Pages, new Zealand 
communication tactics 186–7
communications budget affecting 
campaign results 165–8
communications budgeting methods
see communications budgeting 
methods
effective segmentation requirements 
144–7
exhibitions 506–9
integrated communications plan 127
market segmentation 130–44
media planning see media planning
new brands or products, budgeting 
strategies 176–86
objectives 147–61
process 126
product life cycle stages, marketing 
communications objectives 161–5
segmenting-targeting-positioning (STP) 
129–30, 144
situation analysis 127–9
Playtex lingerie brand, rebranding of 
targets over 50 183
pledges 87, 88
podcast 296, 605
point-of-purchase (POP) communications 
156, 377–86
online communications
see also online advertising 
advergames 273–4, 597
balance and sequence in online reviews 
280
brand websites 264–6, 310–11, 598
defining 4
events and web(sem)inars 272–3
in-game advertising in fantasy games, 
perceived congruity 274–5
games, using as marketing 
communications tools 273–4
growing importance of online media 
261–2
homepage styling 271
micro-sites 265, 311, 604
objectives 263
perceived usefulness affecting attitudes 
and intentions 280
search engine optimisation (SeO) 266, 
604
tools 263–94
viral marketing 277–8, 608
online shopping, ongoing boom in 414
online trade shows 510
Opel Safira 96
operant conditioning principles 469
Opium 216
opportunity (MAO factor) 86, 93, 604
opportunity loss 219
opportunity to see (OTS) 329, 604
opt-in/opt-out 604
ordinary decency 558–9, 604
Oslo Sporveier 207
outbound telemarketing 417, 604
outcomes rule 604
outdoor advertising 6, 336, 338, 341, 604
output indicators of public relations 
effectiveness 545, 604
overpositioning 179, 604
overspending 560
own-label brands see private label brands
 
P&G see Procter & Gamble (P&G) 
packaging, ethical issues 575
Pampers and UNICEF 587–92
see also Procter & Gamble
global campaign (2007–08) 590–1
neonatal tetanus, protecting vulnerable 
babies from 587–8
and Procter & Gamble 587
UK/Ireland 2006 campaign 588–90
parasitic marketing see ambush (parasitic) 
marketing
Pavlov, I. 104
pay per click advertising model 268, 605
Peak Performance (outdoor garment 
brand) 265
penetration supercharge 171
Pepsi/PepsiCo 55, 109, 145, 224
see also Coca-Cola
marketing communications planning 
171, 175, 177
online advertising 271–2
new brands or products, budgeting 
strategies 176–86
communication 176
creative 184–6
message 176–7
positioning 177–83
developing 179–83
newspaper advertising 340–1
Nicorette 207, 215f
Nielsen 45–6
Nike 44, 53, 380
Nintendo 135, 146–7
Nissan/Nissan Qashqai 58, 205–6, 207
Nivea 15, 44
CRM programme, ten year (1998–2008) 
416
Nivea Beauté 162
Nivea for Men 502
sunburn awareness 373	
Nokia 153
non-addressable media 411–13, 604
non-functional benefits 177
non-verbal language 233
NOP World 472
Nutrasweet 56
 
Obama, Barack, campaign of 137
obesity, and advertising to children 572–3
objective-and-task budgeting analysis 487, 
604
objectives of marketing communications 
147–61
brand attitude see brand attitude
brand awareness see brand awareness 
brand knowledge 153, 598
brand loyalty 158, 598
category wants, developing 150–1 
and product life cycle stages 161–5 
purchase facilitation 156, 157, 606
purchase intention 156, 606
satisfaction 158–9
sponsorship 473
off-invoice allowances 375, 604 
Ogilvy & Mather 82
Oil of Olay 61
Ola brand 136
Old Spice 208–9
Olson, J.C. 102
OnePiece (Norwegian clothing brand) 278 
one-to-one marketing 421, 604
online advertising 266–72, 311, 604 
see also online communications 
clickstream/behavioural data 272
collaborative filtering 272
context/target targeting 272
effectiveness, measuring 536–9 
impact measurement of online 
campaigns 269–70
large ads boosting brand awareness 
267–8
registration/customer data 272
targeting 272
web server/browser 272
online banking 442 

 index     621
promotions
consumer see consumer promotions 
free in-mail 371, 602
product see product promotions
sales see sales promotions
sales force 365, 606
trade see trade promotions
propositions 30
Prospect Theory 377
Protection Motivation Theory (PMT) 220
protest campaigns 155–6
proved name registration 528
proxemics 233
psychographic clusters, the Netherlands
conservatives 141
hedonists 140, 141
idealists 141
popu kids 140, 141
social explorers 140, 141
wizz kids 141
psychographic segmentation 140, 605
public affairs 443, 447, 605
see also public relations
public or general fairs 499, 605
see also trade fairs/shows
public relations 434–65
see also Global Fund to Fight Aids,
Tuberculosis and Malaria (Born HIV 
Free campaign); public affairs
achievement indicators of effectiveness 
545, 597
agenda-setting 447–8
budgets 450–1
challenges 438
as a communications tool 435–39
compared to marketing
communications 438
corporate 440, 600
crisis communications 451–4
defining 4, 435, 605
direct 440, 601
effectiveness measurement of 
advertising campaigns 544–5
ethical issues 574
exhibitions and trade fairs 505
external 440, 601
financial 443, 448, 601–2
indirect 440, 602
input indicators of effectiveness 
545, 603
instruments and channels 446–50
integrating in IMC 454
internal 440, 441, 447, 603
marketing 440, 444–6, 449–50
media 443, 447, 448–9, 601
media relations, effective 449t news 
release, writing 449t objectives and 
tasks 442t
output indicators of effectiveness 
545, 604
personal and oral communications 447
research priorities, academics and
professionals 391
strengths 436f
trailer test (coupon-stimulated 
purchasing test) 525, 608
price issues 3
price cut on the shelf 366–7, 605
PriceWaterhouseCoopers see PwC 
(PriceWaterhouseCoopers)
print advertising 6
privacy concerns, database marketing 
423–4
private label brands 45–6, 61, 605
private messaging apps 296
probability markers
effects 87–8
gender influence on effectiveness in 
advertising 133–4
problem solution advertising 212, 605
process goals of communication 147,  
605
Procter & Gamble (P&G) 66, 175, 208, 
444
bastion shampoo brand (Pantène) 58
co-operation with UNICEF in Belgium 
591–2
globalising and standardising at 18–19
multi-branding 52–3
Old Spice ad 208
stealth advertising/marketing 28, 569
Sunny delight 502
Wash & Go shampoo brand 177, 212
Western brand thinking 53
zero-couponing strategy 368
product confusion 244, 605
product life cycle stages, marketing 
communications objectives 161–5
decline 163–4
growth 162–3
maturity 163
product match-up hypothesis 224
product performance 219
product placement see brand placement
product promotions 370–4
’vices’ and ‘virtues’ 371
product specialisation 146, 605
products
see also brands; product confusion;
product life cycle stages, marketing
communications objectives;
product match-up hypothesis;
product performance; product
promotions; product specialisation
aesthetic 388
augmented 3, 597
of competition, refusal to buy 22
core product 3, 599
eco-friendly, purchasing 580–2
fair trade 584–5
new, budgeting for 176–86
product-driven mailings 421–2
situation analysis 128
tangible 3, 607
technological 392
professional ethics 605
profitability 208
programmatic advertising 272
colour, impact on consumers’ approach 
386
defining 4, 605
objectives and target groups 380–2
point-of-purchase as a communications
tool 379–80
sales promotions 393
store atmospherics 386–7, 609
in-store displays in a virtual store 
environment 384
tools 382–4
unplanned buying, factors driving up 
378–9
pop-ups/pop-unders 267, 605
Porsche 162, 177
portfolio test 522
positioning
see also repositioning; segmenting- 
targeting-positioning (STP)
of brands 44
confusing 179, 599
Day After Recall (DAR) test 528, 600
defining 130, 605
electric cars 179–81
experience 179–81
new brands or products, budgeting 
strategies 177–83
overpositioning 179, 604
target groups 147
underpositioning 179, 608
positioning strategies, new brands or 
products 177–9
developing 179–83
post-experience model 107, 108, 112, 
605
post-testing of advertising 527–9
Gallup-Robinson Impact test 526, 602
limitations 529
masked identification test 527, 528f, 605
post-test, defining 527, 605
recall test 528, 529, 606
recognition test 527, 606
Starch test 527, 607
useful score 527, 608
power distance 236, 237–8, 605
Prada 380
pre-experience model 108
Premier Pages 309
premium 371–2, 605
self-liquidating 373, 606
press kit/press release 448, 605
prestige brand 57, 58, 68, 605
pre-testing
advertising 522–8
bank commercial 524
checklists 520, 521t, 605
limitations 525–6
objectives 520
physiological advertising test 522, 605
readability analysis 521, 606
sauce mix campaign example 526
split-scan test 525, 607
techniques 520, 521f
theatre test 524, 607

622     Index
scanning technology 28
Schiffer, Claudia 216
Schultz, don 6
Screenvision 230
search engine advertising (SEA) 268, 606
search engine marketing (SEM) 268
search engine optimisation (SEO) 266, 606
segmentation
behavioural 141, 597
concentration on one segment 146
demographic 132, 600
effective, requirements for 144–7
geographic segments 131
life-cycle 138
lifestyle 140, 603
market see market segmentation 
psychographic 140, 605
selective specialisation 146, 606
targeting strategies 146
value see value segmentation
segmenting-targeting-positioning (STP) 
129–30, 144
selective advertising 203, 606
selective specialisation 146, 606
self-brand congruity 15, 236, 237–8
self-enhancement 236
self-generated persuasion 98, 606
self-identity 582–4
green 239–40
self-liquidators/self-liquidating premiums 
373, 606
self-reference criterion 13, 606
self-regulation 576, 607
health campaigns 89–90
UK system 578
semantic interference, TV advertising 346
senior citizens, advertising practices 
targeted at 204–5
sensory marketing 388–9
sentimental humour 216
shampoo brands
Head & Shoulders 44, 58, 212
Pantène 58
Wash & Go 177, 212
share of market (SOM) 170, 171, 172, 176
share of voice (SOV) 607
marketing communications planning 
170, 171, 172, 176
media planning 322
Sharon, Ariel 444
shelf coupon dispensers 383
Shimp, T.A. 567
Shiseido digital Cosmetic Mirror 
(interactive terminal installation) 
381
shock tactics 221
short-term orientation 238, 362
shoskele 267, 607
SIAL show, Paris 503
signalling theory 323, 607
Simms (game) 85
situation analysis 127–9
skyscrapers (banner ads) 267, 607
slapstick humour 235
slice-of-life advertising 212, 242, 607
relativism 559
religion, and advertising in cross-cultural 
environment 235
repeat purchases 310, 369
repositioning
Adventure Affair 504
Cadbury Snack brand 183
M + R trade fair 502–3
MySpace 181–2
residential neighbourhoods, UK (Acorn 
profiles) 131
resources costing budgeting 451, 606
retail advertising 606
return metrics 538
RFM-model 542, 543–4, 606
rich media ad 267, 606
Rihanna 299
roadblocking 333, 606
Robijn (detergent brand) 164
Robinson list 424
Rock Werchter music festival, Belgium 
491, 492, 493
Rodania 177
Rolling Stones, ‘50 and Counting ’ tour 488
Rolls-Royce 177
ROMI (return on marketing 
communications) 7
Rossiter–Percy grid 81, 85, 606
routinised response behaviour model 109, 
606
Rovio (Finnish developer of computer 
games) 50
Rowling, J.K. 135
Rugbeer campaign, Salta Cerveza 389–90
 
sales
advertising-to-sales (A/S) ratio 176
direct 408
percentage of sales budgeting analysis 
169–70, 173, 605
promotions see sales promotions repeat 
purchases 310, 369
sales force promotion see sales force 
promotion
support 408
telesales 417, 574, 607
unplanned buying, factors driving up 
378–9
sales force promotion 365, 606
sales promotions 111, 360–5, 393
defining 4, 606
whether effective 376–7
effectiveness 539–41
ethical issues 575
growing importance 360, 361f, 362
magazines 372–3
objectives and target groups 363–5
point-of-purchase (POP) 
communications 393
sales response models 165, 606
salience framework 110
Salta Cerveza, Rugbeer campaign 389–90
sampling 370, 606
Samsung 52, 153
savings cards 369, 606
public or general fairs (Continued)
target groups, objectives and tasks 
439–46
trends and challenges 438f
weaknesses 437f
publics (stakeholders) 4, 435, 605–6
puffery 573, 606
Pukkelpop music festival, Belgium 491, 
492, 493
pull advertisements 606
pulsing advertising schedule 331, 332f, 
333, 606
pupil dilation measurement 522
purchase facilitation 156, 157, 606
purchase intention 156, 606
push advertising 606
PwC (PriceWaterhouseCoopers)
business-to-business consultancy 
services, advertising 230–1
ending of contract with ‘unreliable’ 
soccer coach 478
wear-in and wear-out effects 324
 
qualitative criteria, media selection 335–6
Quantel (software manufacturer) 506
quantitative criteria, media selection 335
Quick Response code (QR-code) 412, 606
 
radio advertising 342, 413
Radio Frequency Identification (RFId) 
2007 500
Radio news Releases (RnRs) 448
Rapid-Affichage (Belgian agency) 227
rational appeals 209–14, 246
reach of media vehicle 327–30
effective 330, 601
goal 147, 606
gross 330–1, 602
net 604
reach goal of communication 147, 606
total 327, 608
useful 328, 608
readability analysis 521, 606
recall tests 522–3, 528, 529, 606
receiver context of advertising 345, 606
recognition test 527, 606
rectangles (banner ads) 267
Red Bull 67, 108
Reebok 567
reference catalogues 418
refutation, necessity of 96–8
regression models 142–4, 343
regulation of marketing communications 
practices 575–9
self-regulation 576, 607
reinforcement model 606
relational advertising appeals 606
Relational Quality (RQ) model, apparel 
context 95
relationship marketing
customer retention and loyalty 409
defining 606
and direct marketing 424–6
and exhibitions 505
and Internet 309–10

 index     623
gender role stereotypes in Belgian TV 
advertising 564–5
store atmospherics 384–6, 607
storytelling 228
strategic advertising research 607
street advertising 226–7
strong theory of advertising 241
Stuart, E.W. 567
Stuart, John 58
subjective norm 92, 607
subliminal/supraliminal advertising 573
subscriber lists 420
superiority of the pleasant hypothesis 
243, 607
superstitials 267, 607
sweepstakes 369
SWOT analysis 607
symbolic needs 85
symbols 44
synergy in marketing communications 7, 
12, 607
 
talking head advertising 211, 607
tangible assets 59
tangible product 3, 607
target audience 190, 312
target groups
advertising 204–5
children and teenagers 571, 585
direct marketing 408–11
erotic advertising 217–18
exhibitions and trade fairs 501–6
market segmentation 139
point-of-purchase (POP) 
communications 380–2
public relations 439–46
sales promotions 363–5
selection 147
sponsorship 471
vulnerable 569–72
targeting, defining 130
targeting strategies 146, 607
see also target groups
Taylor nelson Sofres 213
technological products 392
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) 93
Technorati (search engine for blogs) 295
teenage motherhood 85
see also adolescents, advertising 
practices targeted at
TELE” (Luxembourg fixed-line operator) 
177
telefactoring 417
telemarketing 417
defining 417, 607
functions 417, 417t
inbound 417, 602
outbound 417, 604
Telenet (Belgian Internet provider) 413
teleological approach 239–40, 558, 607
teleprospecting 417, 607
telesales 417, 574, 607
television advertising
brand placement, combining with 
sponsorship messages 9–10
Sony Ericsson
hand-held market 153
stealth advertising/marketing 28, 569
Sony PlayStation 567
SOSTAC (situation, objectives, strategy, 
tactics, action, control) 127
SOSTCE (situation, objectives, strategies, 
tactics, control and evaluation) 127
source attractiveness 224
source credibility 111, 224, 308
SOV see share of voice (SOV)
spam 424
specialisation
market 604
product 605
selective 606
Speedo, QR-codes 412
Spice Girls 224
split-scan test 525, 607
sponsored magazines 228, 340
sponsorship 466–97
audience structure 471f
branded entertainment 481–6
broadcast or programme 474, 479, 598
budgets 489–91
cause-related 474, 479–80, 598
combining television brand placement 
with sponsorship messages 9–10
communications tool, cause-related 
programme as 479
compared to advertising 467
content 271, 599
corporate hospitality 473–4
CSR campaigns, the Netherlands 475 
definitions 4, 467–8, 607
description 468–9
effectiveness measurement of 
advertising campaigns 545–6
effects 468
event-related 474, 476, 478, 601
growing importance 469–71
integrating in IMC 489
MUSH 474, 604
objectives 472–4
in-script 603
selection criteria 486–7
target groups 471
transaction-based 474, 608
types 474–88
S-shaped sales response model 166
St Michael 45
stakeholders see publics (stakeholders)
standardised campaign 14, 223, 607
Starbucks Coffee 131, 306
Starch test 527, 607
STAS (short-term advertising strength) 167
stealth advertising 28, 228, 246
see also ethical issues in marketing 
communications
stealth marketing 568, 607
stereotyping in advertising 562–5, 585, 
607
cross-cultural analysis of consumer 
responses to male and female 
gender role stereotyping 565–6
SlideShare 273
slogans 23, 66, 221, 369
translation mistakes 234
slotting allowances 375, 607
SMART (Strategic, Measurable, Actionable, 
Realistic and Timely) 150
’smart ads’ 268
Smart car 152
’Smart Study – Money Management,’ PR 
campaign (MasterCard) 440–1
Smartees (smart sessions for marketing 
research industry) 445–6
smartphones 301
Smith, Will 224
Snapchat 296, 306
Sneddon, A. 572
social acceptability 563
Social dilemma Theory 580, 581
social media 294–309, 607
ad spending 267
blogs 295–6, 609
brands, placed in user-generated 
content 298–9
classification 294, 295t
collaborative projects 294–5, 599
content communities 296, 599
demographics and usage of social
network sites 306–7
electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) 
307–8
emojis, endangered 305
Facebook 300–2
Global Fund Born HIV Free campaign 
457, 461–3
LinkedIn 306
measurement 538–9
prominence and endorser expertise, 
effect of 298–9
relationship marketing and Internet 309
social network opportunities for brands 
307
social networking sites see social 
networking sites
Target beacons 305–6
Twitter 304–6
virtual worlds 308–9, 609
social networking sites 300, 607
consumer responses to eWOM 
campaign 307–8, 310
eWOM messages on 307–8
personalised advertising on 310
usage 306–7
social TV 294, 607
social validation theory 159
socially responsible marketing 582, 607
Social Mention 539
societal marketing see value marketing
soft drinks market
Coca-Cola see Coca-Cola Fanta 151
Lipton Ice Tea 151
Pepsi see Pepsi/PepsiCo
Red Bull 67, 108
Software entertainment (German game 
producer) 27
SOM see share of market (SOM)

624     Index
values, and attitudes 235
Van Cleef & Arpels 177
Vanderhook, Tim 182
VantagePoint (deus) 450
Vaughn, R. 80
verbal language 233
vertical trade fairs 500, 608
Vicks, reviving sales of 157–8
Victoria’s Secret (American undergarment 
brand) 272–3
video ad spending 267
video content communities 299
Video news Releases (VNRs) 448
Video-on-demand (Vod) 608
VIER Stalker 312
Vimeo 299, 300
viral campaigns 278–9
viral marketing 229, 277–8, 608
Virgin Atlantic 209
Virgin Coke 177
Virgin Festival buddy 488–9
virtual game worlds 608
virtual social worlds 609
virtual store environment, in-store 
displays 384
virtual worlds 308–9, 609
Vocalpoint (network of mothers) 569
Volkswagen 9, 16, 58, 207, 235
Volvo 130, 178
vulnerable groups, targeting 569–72
 
Walkers snack brand 33–8
see also integrated marketing 
communications (IMC); marketing 
Communications
and AMVBBDO 33, 34
campaign results 36–7
creative idea 34
key business challenge 34f
new approaches 33
phasing plan and content distribution 
strategy 34–6 
’singles’ segment of business 33
teamwork 34
Waller, D.S. 560
Wal-Mart 28, 569
warm advertising 217, 609
Wash & Go shampoo brand 177, 212
weak theory of advertising 241
wear-in and wear-out effects 106, 243, 
324, 609
advergames 324–5, 597
Web 1.0/Web 2.0 294, 609
web server/browser 272
weblogs see blogs
web(sem)inars, online advertising 272–3
weight of media vehicle 328–9
WhatsApp 296 
’Wii Fit’ (games series, Nintendo) 146–7
Win for Life (WFL) 551–5 
see also effectiveness measurement, 
advertising campaigns
campaign 552–4
impact 553–4
product in decline 552
Tremor (teen network) 569 
Tribord 374
triple bottom line 580, 600
Tropicana juice brand 8
TV test 608
TV2 (Danish TV channel) 334, 335
Twitter 182, 294, 296, 304–6, 309, 311, 608
Project Lightning 305
two-factor model 608
two-sided messages 96–8
 
unaided brand awareness 152, 530, 608
uncertainty avoidance culture 88, 238, 608
underpositioning 179, 608
unethical uses of marketing 
communications instruments 
572–5
see also ethical issues in marketing 
communications
direct marketing 574
obesity, and advertising to children 
572–3
packaging 575
public relations 574
sales promotions 575
unfair marketing communications 576, 
608
UNICEF 567
co-operation with Procter & Gamble in 
Belgium 591–2
and Pampers 587–92
Unilever
Axe (body spray brand) 132–3
globalising and standardising at 18–19
Lux brand 171–2
Western brand thinking 53
unique selling proposition (USP) 177, 178, 
608
United States
brand loyalty 158
branding 58, 62
Coca-Cola Zero 145
fair conference formula 500
gender roles 235
high-context cultures 236
market segmentation 135
media multitasking 328
national Association of Broadcasters 
show, Las Vegas 506
online communications 262, 267
Pinterest (content platform) 303
self-regulation 578
sense of humour 235
smartphones 287
untargeted marketing 421
UPS (carrier and delivery company) 470
URLs 44
useful reach of a medium vehicle 328, 608
useful score 527, 608
utilitarian services 88
 
Valentine paint brand 54
value marketing 468, 608
value segmentation, in the netherlands 
140–1
television advertising (Continued)
direct response television (DRTV) 413, 601
gender role stereotypes in Belgian TV 
advertising 564–5
higher-level emotional values 4–5
interactive (digital) television/i(d)TV 603
media planning 341–2
social TV 294, 607
split-screen formats 346–7
Terror Management Theory 220
testimonial advertising 212, 242, 607
Tetrapak 56
Texaco 44
Thai language 233
The Body Shop 22
theatre test 524, 607
theme advertising 203, 607
Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB) 92–5, 
112, 391, 607
Theory of Reasoned Action (TORA) 92, 
96f, 608
think campaigns 390
think-feel dimension 80, 608
Thomas Cook 114
thought-starter lists 129
threat-based advertising see fear appeal 
advertising
’360 degrees communication’ 6, 27, 31, 37f
Thumbs Up (soft drink, India) 54
tie strength 111, 308
Tiger campaign, Accenture 164
Timberland 83
time orientation 233
toilets, advertising in 339
Tomorrowland (Belgian music festival) 302
top topicals 340, 608
top-of-mind brand awareness (TOMA) 
81–2, 530, 608
and budgets 172, 173f
Torfs, Barbara 22
total reach of a medium vehicle 327, 608
touching, cultural variations 233–4
Toyota 58
tracking study 533, 608
trade advertising 202, 608
trade fairs/shows
see also exhibitions and trade fairs
Adventure Affair, repositioning 504
description 608
horizontal trade fairs 499–500, 602
M + R trade fair, repositioning 502–3
online trade shows 510
public or general fairs 499
return on investment, measuring 547–8
vertical 500, 608
trade mart 500, 608
trade promotions 364–5, 375–7, 608
trailer test (coupon-stimulated purchasing 
test) 525, 608
transaction-based sponsorship 474, 608
transformational buying motives 81, 608
transformational cues 347
transit media 336, 338f
travel agencies 303
Travellers Content (website) 420

 index     625
Strategic thinking 190
target audience 190
Treehouse Restaurant campaign (2008) 
189–90
in trouble 189–90
winning idea 190–1
winning media strategy and marketing 
mix/execution 191
Yellow Chocolate campaign 191–5
Yoplait non-fat yoghurt 49
YouTube 299, 300, 301
Yves Saint Laurent 216
 
zapping 333, 485
zero-couponing strategy 368
Zuckerberg, Marc 300
Zulu (danish TV channel) 334, 335
Zynga (company) 50
Zywiec (Polish beer brand) 488
’World of Warcraft’ (MMORPG) 308
World Wide Web (WWW) 261, 609
see also Internet; Web 1.0/Web 2.0
Wyborowa 44
Wyvern direct Response (UK direct 
marketing company) 420
 
XL commercials 230
 
Yahoo! 268, 271
Yankee Group 324
Yellow Pages, new Zealand 189–95
see also planning
business performance 194–5
campaign objectives 190
participation 191–2
product usage 192
results/return on investment 191
staff and customer engagement 192, 194
as scratch product of Belgian National 
Lottery 551–2 
wireless advertising see mobile marketing 604
Wolverine World Wide 155
WOM see word-of-mouth 
communications (WOM) 
Wood, S.L. 93
Woods, Tiger 224
Woolmark 56
word-of-mouth advertising (’word-of-
mouse’ advertising) 277, 280
word-of-mouth communications (WOM) 
158, 159, 229, 280, 425
electronic see electronic word-of-mouth 
(eWOM)
World Championships Football, sponsors 
preventing ambush marketing 481
World Cup sponsorship and brand 
perception 472


