ON THE ROAD OF SILVER
Mark Bourne
It was shortly after Mrs. Batchett left the planetarium that she saw the fairy, the elf, and t
gnome. Which was probably kismet, because by five o'clock it had already been a bad day 
the planetarium.
While the final group of fourth graders was herded through the exit doors-leaving anothe
flurry of museum programs and school handouts littering the seats and floor-Mrs. Batchett r
the star projector for that evening's feature show. When the exit door shut behind the final
youngster, she dimmed the house lights to make sure the Spring constellations were in the
correct part of the sky. Artificial night flooded the domed room. The familiar routine of pla
Boötes and Virgo and this season's planets just so in the scaled-down sky never failed to ig
a bone-deep spark within Mrs. Batchett. Even after twenty years as a science teacher, and t
more here at Portland's Northwest Museum of Science and Technology, the planetarium sky
filled her with a pleasing, serene sense of awe. The artificial sky wasn't as good as the real
thing, but it would do for a daytime, all-weather stand-in. She could never tire of sharing th
sense of wonder, of seeing it sparked in the minds of the children who came to the planetari
Mrs. Batchett wheeled the stars into position, made tonight's full moon rise with the turn of
dial, checked her pointer (the bulb had been flickering lately), and brought up the lights.
Sam Peterson approached from the opposite side of the room.
"Good afternoon," Mrs. Batchett called. "Did you enjoy the show?" She tried to keep the
surprise out of her voice.
He smiled. "Very much, Roberta." Then crooked a finger at her. "May I see you in my
office?"
She followed her department manager upstairs.
Though he had been at NMST for only six months, Sam Peterson was the very model of 
modern museum manager. His stylish suit enclosed a middle-aged athlete's body and accen
his GQ good looks. His pristinely ordered desk had a corner-near the leather-cased,
gold-embossed EverOpen™ dayplanner-dedicated to the latest magazines and journals for 
90's executive." On the wall facing the desk, four different calendars hung like prisoners in
dungeon. Framed certificates, awards, and a photo of Peterson coming in second at the
city-sponsored Jog-o-thon hung in descending order of size. Nearby was a poster proclaimi
The Seven Cardinal Virtues of a Great Boss, cheerily illustrated with specially researched
colors designed to elicit comfort in all employees who gazed upon it. Against another wall
the expensive sofa dedicated to the power naps taken from 1:15-2:15 P.M. daily. The air w
sweetened by hidden cakes of "spring garden" air freshener. If this office was a shrine to th
latest trends in corporate efficiency and appearances, Peterson was its high priest. Mrs.
Batchett took the chair that might as well have been labeled Sacrificial Altar.

"Now, Mrs. Batchett-Roberta," Peterson said, sitting in his tan leather chair. "Would you
like something? Cappuccino? A latté?" Charm oozed from him like yogurt through a coland
"No thank you."
"Roberta, you've done fine work here in the planetarium. School group attendance is
strong-" Even though you cut the new programs I hoped to produce, Mrs. Batchett replied
silently; "-and we keep getting splendid thank you letters from the kids and their teachers. T
volunteers say you've done a fine job teaching them the ropes of performing the shows. Tha
shows teamwork, Roberta, and teamwork is important. Especially now in the museum's cur
fiscal reevaluation." Crisis, you mean. I don't like this. He just got out of a meeting. I can sm
it.
"Roberta, I just got out of a meeting with the other senior managers. All departments are
being forced to cut-themselves to the bone and find new sources of income. The Exhibits st
is scrapping their interactive evolution exhibit for a traveling show called DinoMania. I'm
afraid that we too have to restrategize our paradigms. It's my job to analyze operational
priorities in regards to revenue enhancement."
Which means?
"Which means that we're forced to make some changes on our end also."
Such as cutting the Senior Managers' "Effectiveness Enhancement Retreat" at Timberline
Lodge ski resort?
Peterson put on his face that said I'm Really Really Sorry To Have To Say This But.
"Roberta, I'm really really sorry I have to say this, but I'm afraid we're forced to let you go
nothing personal and it doesn't reflect on your outstanding job performance. The team simpl
has to cut back somewhere. Because you've been so valuable to us, you'll receive two wee
severance pay, which not all the other layoffs around the museum will be getting." He looke
pleased with himself about that.
Roberta said nothing. She had expected this for weeks. Ever since the subject of, oh Lor
it first came up.
Peterson leaned toward her. His hair was as perfectly sculpted as a topiaiy. "You'll be g
to know that the school groups will still be coming. Don't you worry about that. Starting nex
week, well be replacing the educational programs with laser light shows. We just hired La
Euphoria, Inc. to set up shop in the planetarium."
There it was-it. Peterson opened a slick color brochure and handed it to Mrs. Batchett.
Since when do you spell "laser" with a "z," Mrs. Batchett wondered.

"They guarantee to increase our revenue by eighty percent with a gate-share contract. Se
They do it all-Lazer MetalDeath, Lazer Pink Floyd, Lazer Grunge, Lazer Dead Rock Gods.
Their biggest hit right now is Lazer Cowboys. It has this animated Garth Brooks that's
supposed to be really something. All the major planetariums are contracting them."
One "contracts" the plague. Mrs. Batchett chewed the inside of her left cheek.
Peterson removed the brochure from her hand. "Their staff rep will be moving into your
office day after tomorrow, so if you could, um…"
"Yes sir," Mrs. Batchett said. She stood and turned toward the door.
"Oh, Roberta." She pivoted toward him. "Roberta, if you please, don't mention the
severance pay to anyone. Might look bad, you know." He opened a drawer in his desk. Mrs
Batchett noticed how silently the desk operated. He withdrew a slip of colored paper-boar
and handed it across the desk to her. He smiled warmly and his eyes by God twinkled. I be
learned that at a seminar.
"Here," he said. "Have a free pass to the gala premiere. Lazer Yanni. I hear it's kind of l
space music. You'll love it."
She took it. "Thank you," she said, then cursed herself for it. The door shut behind her on
noticeably well-oiled hinges.
 
"mumblemumblemumblemumbleHello dear," Prof. Lawrence Batchett said. He didn't ev
glance up from the stack of final exams he was grading at the dining room table. He resume
mumbling incoherently, though Mrs. Batchett heard the phrases "It's not Chaucer's 'Cantalou
Tales'!" and "William Shakespeare did not defeat King Harold at the Battle of Hastings!"
bubble up from his murmuring drone. Prof. Batchett pushed his glasses up his nose, ran a ha
through hair that had not existed for ten years, and stroked his graying goatee. It was his ritu
signifying the urge' to commit murder most foul against yet another year's worth of Brit lit
students. He had even removed his favorite tweed jacket-the one with the leather patches at
elbows-and the necktie decorated with hand-painted images from the Bayeaux Tapestry. A 
sign of distress.
Mrs. Batchett placed her purse and the Teddy-Bear-in-a-spacesuit a second-grade class
given her onto the coffee table. She studied the back of her husband's head from across the
room. His hair was now reduced to a silver crescent moon that barely managed to cover th
skin between one ear and the other. He frequently claimed that he liked looking the part of t
distinguished Reed College English Professor, but Mrs. Batchett had once seen him in the
bathroom trying on hairpieces borrowed from Dr. Stengler in the Physics Dept. He pounded

fist on the table, said something about King Arthur never meeting the Knights of Ni in the bo
and continued mumbling and shaking his head.
"I got laid off today," she announced. "Enhancement stratagems were datatized. Paradigm
were reassessmentized. The Universe Around Us' is now Lazer BrainDamage."
Lawrence scribbled red revenge across the face of an exam. "No thank you, dear," he sa
into the papers. "I just had some."
Mrs. Batchett sighed. She went upstairs, changed clothes, returned downstairs wearing h
broad-brimmed gardening hat, and exited through the back door.
"Titania and Oberon were not invented by Neil Gaiman!" was the last thing she heard as
door slammed shut behind her.
It had rained the night before, so the garden smelled of earth and green. Mrs. Batchett
relished the feel of moist soil between her fingers and against her knees, and the sound wee
made when she pulled them up. The irises were doing well. So were the foxgloves. New
clusters of magenta and white rhododendrons had bloomed. Nearby, a bee hummed a relaxe
mantra. The world of lazers-with-a-z and Beowulf seemed far from here. With Robby and
Sylvia grown and living in distant cities, these were her children now. Here was her privat
world, where she was in control and esteemed for her efforts.
With a satisfied hand-brushing, Mrs. Batchett looked across the yard at her other garden
Oh, damn!, she huffed and stood too quickly. Her knees complained loudly to her. After the
first fifty years, some things didn't happen as easily as before.
Slugs had been in the garden again. What had once been healthy daylilies were now ragg
stripped leaves and ravished, chewed buds. The primroses and hostas were also destroyed
Narrow trails of slime laced through the remains.
"God damn it!" Mrs. Batchett did not swear often. She had laid down a new box of Cony
Slug Death (Original English Formula) just last week. She began pulling the useless stems f
the slime-tainted curt. As she yanked and tugged, she felt the tears well up in her eyes and s
down her face. She shredded a handful of stems in her hands, then sat in the dirt and let her
cry. No one could hear her in the garden. Prof. Batchett wouldn't hear her.
Soon she was cried out, but the pent-up anger still sat like a rock in the pit of her stomac
She sat with her eyes shut and a headache pounding behind her eyes. I'll probably start
menopause today, too. When at last she opened her eyes, the first thing she saw was the fair
staring at her. The second thine was the lithe, ethereal elf standing on the coil of garden hos
The third was the gnome squatting on a wicker lawn chair and picking its teeth.
"Weep not, my Mistress," said the fairy, fluttering off the ground. Its voice was rich and

feminine, though its naked body was smooth "and genderless. It was no taller than the dayli
had been. Delicate, leaflike wings stroked the air soundlessly and the being lit on toe groun
next to Mrs. Batchett. Its wide blue eyes were level with hers. Mrs. Batchett felt its gaze as
frowned mournfully at her. "Mistress, the mortal world has surely changed you. No longer 
you bear the scars from when you spilt Fir Bolg blood onto the Plain of Pillars." Its voice h
an Irish lilt. "Your face no longer glows with the wine of victory, nor your arms hoist the
wizard-forged weapons engraven in gold with your true name." It smiled at her and touched
sleeve with a long, slender hand. "But all this is mere appearance, rough-hewn human glam
We bring you a gift from those of Tir na n-Og who knew you in your life of glory."
During all this, Mrs. Batchett remained still, unflinching. Her heart pulsed in her chest,
though, and she felt dizzy. Oh, great. First I hallucinate. Then I have a stroke. Or maybe I've
already had the stroke and that's why I'm hallucinating: It's nice to die in the garden but only
the slugs are gone. Lawrence won't notice I'm dead until it's time to rake leaves in the fall.
The elf-she recognized the beings, though she didn't know why-strolled gracefully to her
removed her sun hat. Its fingers were cool against her forehead. Mrs. Batchett suddenly kne
with crystal certainty that she wasn't hallucinating. She knew that these beings meant her no
harm, that their presence in her garden was as natural as the moon in the night sky or slugs i
the flower beds or the feel of a mighty bejeweled steed between your legs and a sword in y
hand.
"Remember," the elf said with a voice like wind through trees. "When you cleaved the
skulls of the Fomorii in the Second Battle of Magh Tuiredh. Remember how you saved my
people by defeating the Roth Hugar on the icy shores or Thambulir."
Mrs. Batchett remembered, and shivered at the memory of cold seaspray against bare,
flayed flesh.
The fairy sat cross-legged in the air Wore her. "Remember," it said, "when your father L
Orgetlann the Tireless gave you his armor and shield, created in the Oldest Times by Goibn
himself. Remember the sword, Dagda's Arm, and its power over all earthly beings."
She remembered her father. Not the car salesman from Montana, but her father before in
former life: the warrior king who loved her and taught her the warrior's arts by the time of h
first bloodmoon. Her mother wasn't the schoolteacher who died from a lifetime of sucking
cigarettes, but a queen of the line of Arianrod who first taught her about the stars and the qu
power of the moon.
"Remember," the elf continued, "your training by the very hand of Scathach on her warri
isle. And your achievements in the ways of magic and inner arts on Emhain, the Isle of Wom
Remember when you were of our kind, the Daoine Sidhe, not of this mere mortal world, an
the powers granted to you at your birth. When Faerie and the Earth-realm touched one anoth
Before we were driven away by cross and machine. Before you left us for the love of a mo

warrior."
Her lover: the great, learned Ton n'Uthara, who had fought against her, then alongside he
before they beaded and wedded each other on the cliffs of Scathach's isle. All the Tuatha D
Danaan had attended the wedding. Even Finvarra, King of Eirinn Faerie, had kissed her
goodbye with a tear in his eye after the ceremony.
"Yeah," piped up the gnome who, throughout the foregoing, had been clipping his toenai
"And don't forget the time you saved my village by conking that ol' dragon Ruadnerra on hi
bean with your bare fist!" The gnome grabbed his knees and rocked with laughter. "And the
you commanded all the birds in the land to peck off his golden scales and rain them down o
to make up for the damage that ol' fire-farter had caused! Hoo!" He fell off the wicker chair
rolled guffawing into the rhodies. The elf gave him a reprimanding stare.
She remembered it all, as if it were a recurring dream first dreamt long ago. She sat ther
the garden, watching the fairy, the elf, and the gnome, and remembered a former existence a
Nnagartha of the Golden Strength, a fairy warrior princess clad in dragon-hide leather and
magic-fired armor. Who fought beside fellow warriors of Faerie and of Earth. Who could
command the creatures of land and sky. Who forsook her faery nature for the love of a man 
no other man, and had been condemned to remain in the human world after her people left i
Tir na n-Og-land of joy, of everlasting youth and flowers, where hydromel flows in the
riverbeds and where warriors eat and drink of fairie dishes in the companionship of their o
kind.
I've been reading too many romances and fantasy novels, she mused. But her copies of
Love's forceful Sword and Mistress of the Dragon's Quest ("First Book in the Dragon's Que
Trilogy") lay unopened on her nightstand, a forgotten gift ("You just gotta read 'em!") from 
annoying Marge Tarkelson next door.
I'm kidding myself, she realized. Because she remembered. Because the fairy, the elf, an
the gnome were in her garden. Because even the gnome stared at her worshipfully while he
scraped out the crevasses between his bulbous toes. She reached out her arms to her old
friends. She was strong enough in the inner arts to not be embarrassed by trie loose, weak f
that hung where a warrior's muscles should have been.
"You said something about a gift," she said, taking the fairy's hand.
 
"Since when did Beowulf fight NanoMan?" Prof. Batchett had reached the stage where h
forgot to remove the pen from his hand when he rubbed his head. So his scalp was
crosshatched with thin red lines. Though the sun had set behind the hills in the west, he
obviously had not budged from his chair since Mrs. Batchett had last seen him. A growing 
of red-slashed exams littered the floor beneath the dining room table. An equal-sized pile o

ungraded papers still covered her place at the table. No matter. She had other things to do.
Tonight was a warrior's night! Still, thanks to two decades of marital courtesy, she turned o
the overhead light for Prof. Batchett.
One-hundred-watt radiance reflected off the rune-embossed golden armor hemispheres t
shielded her breasts. Shards of rainbow light danced across her mail of dragon's scales.
Perhaps that was her own shimmering aura she saw in the chrome of the toaster. Her helme
one hand, the frightful steel of Dagda's Arm in the other, Mrs. Batchett approached Prof.
Batchett.
"Don't wait up for me, Lawrence," she declared. Such power in her voice! She hadn't he
that in a long time. Centuries, actually. "For tonight, for as long as the full moon gazes upon
earth, I, Nnagartha of the Golden Strength, shall strike terror once again in the hearts of evi
My people still remember me and have thus granted me this solitary reprieve from the dull
shackles of the mortal world. Beware, dark denizens of the nether-realms! Stand guard,
dragons and wyrms who despoil the lands of the innocent and virtuous! Take flight, ye host
the Unseelie Court, ye bogles and banshees and blood-devouring Leanan-Sidhe who tormen
those weaker than myself! This night you shall remember she who defeated you before!" W
mighty lofting of Dagda's really big Arm, she carved a neat slit into the dining room ceiling
Prof. Batchett wrote CHAUCER, NOT DAUMER! into a margin. "That's nice, dear. Tel
them I said hello."
He didn't notice the fairy and the elf following his wife out the back door. Or the gnome
raiding the refrigerator and rescuing a pint of Häagen-Dazs from merely mortal consumptio
 
Twilight darkened into true night. The real Bootes and Virgo faded up in the sky's tranqu
dome. Moonlight shone on armor and glittering dragonflesh. Mrs. Batchett felt her power
strengthening. It returned to her from the moon, from the stars, from the magic of a world
removed from this mundane, new world of dayplanners and Brit Lit 101. Though it would t
three stout men to lift Dagda's Arm, she brandished it with ferocious grace, tracing the
memories of ancient battles through the night air. From up here on the roof, the city lights of
Portland glimmered like the jewels in the Castle of Ragnok Rur, where she lost her best
bowmen to the bloody blade of Redcap. By the time her vengeance was through, the hideou
goblin's infamous cap had been re-dyed in its own blood. Between her and the city snaked t
Willamette River. Wavering moonlight blended with electric-borne sparkles across its surf
Its waters led to the Columbia a few miles to the north. And from there to the Pacific. Mrs.
Batchett thirsted again for the roar of the sea and the crash of waves on rocky shores. She h
been the one to tame the Aughisky, the kelpie sea-demon that had murdered hundreds befor
met Nnagartha of the Golden Strength. The moon rose higher. Dagda's Arm cut through the 
Mrs. Batchett moved with a dancer's ease on the angled rooftop. Her foes did not come. Ab
the lights of Portland, that pair of flying glowing eyes was a jet descending toward the airp

not a dragon seeking her out for its bloody revenge. No warrior hordes advanced from
suburban Beaverton. Not a single Black Wizard hurled flaming magic death at her from the
condominiums behind the marina. Mrs. Batchett wiped a tear from her cheek when she real
that the mighty Ton n'Uthara was not at her side to help her protect the people in another ho
of need. Progress is boring, she snarled. There was no need for her kind in the world these
days. With a stroke of her blade, she sliced the stainless steel rooster cleanly from the wea
vane.
She looked to the lights near the river. Yes! There! There was a final place that needed h
Between here and the river, standing proud along the nearest shore, was a besieged castle. 
was a fortress of good that was being usurped by a dark prince who fought with cowardice
armored in data displays and meeting agendas, who hoisted false banners made of spread
sheets and revenue reports-who sought to replace the true magic of knowledge with pander
to the dull demands of the local peasantry and their ill-spent gold. She would be the citadel
rescuer. Generations of grateful searchers for truth would never forget this night.
She leapt to the ground, landing smoothly on her feet in a crouching stance. If the evil wo
find you, it is necessary to find the evil.
 
By the time the enchantment was finished, even she had to rest. She sat in the wicker gar
chair and noticed the position of the moon. Nearly midnight It had taken two hours to gather
focus her strength and to remember how to direct it through Dagda's Arm. The sword still
glowed with silvery luminescence from where she had stuck it into the earth near the
slug-ravaged flowers. She was satisfied. She hadn't felt such power since she helped that
nattering Christian, Patrick Somethingorother, drive all the snakes from her people's land. T
had been toward the end, though, just before her people left the earthly realm forever. She
wondered for the first time what part, if any, the Christian's "miracle" had played in that. Th
time, things would be different. This miracle was all hers.
First, she heard them coming. A soft rustling among the earth and leaves. Then greater
movement beneath the soil caused it to ripple like living flesh. There! In the moonlight, sma
glistening things were moving through the grass toward her sword. And there! Several mor
wet, rubbery things emerged from the earth, drawn to the force emanating from Dagda's Arm
And from out of the rhododendrons came an advancing surf of more writhing wormlike
gastropods as fat and round as dismembered brown fingers. The thick trail of slime behind
them glittered like liquid silver in the moon's light.
"Disgusting!" the gnome muttered, spitting out a mouthful of Häagen-Dazs Irish Cream
Splendor.
Mrs. Batchett took Dagda's Arm and hoisted it skyward and toward the river. It was tim
march.

 
The slugs came to her. Through the wealthy Eastmoreland neighborhood, she drew them
away from the manicured lawns, out of the professionally-serviced gardens, and into the str
in front of the stately homes. Their path was marked by a sheen of silver that glistened bene
the street lamps. She gathered more as she led them through the Reed College grounds, acro
the local golf course, and through the famous Crystal Springs Rhododendron Gardens. Nigh
noises gave way to the sounds of moist slithering behind her.
At her side, the fairy, the elf, and the gnome accompanied her in awestruck silence.
By the time she took a left turn at 28th and Holgate, her army covered the width of the st
and, at its center, was as high as her waist. The midnight moon added a lustrous sheen to th
growing mass. Her sword lit their way, a beacon summoning them from near and far, bringi
them to her by the power that once called birds to peck gold from a dragon's flesh and push
million snakes to a watery doom. Occasionally, a late-night traveler was forced to steer his
automobile away from the invisible shield Dagda's Arm projected in front of Mrs. Batchett
jogger, her suit aglow with reflectors, stopped stunned by the side of the road. Mrs. Batche
ignored the sound of the poor waif's retching. She felt young again and strong. She was ridd
this world-or at least several neighboring counties-of an old enemy. And she would use thi
enemy to brine vengeance on another.
As she marched, she smiled at the slimy noises that grew behind her. She would lay a ro
of silver through the tyrant's gates.
 
The sparse traffic halted on McLoughlin Boulevard. Engines died and headlights faltere
the intersection where Dagda's Arm erected its invisible wall. Mrs. Batchett marched on. T
mindless mass following her spread itself across all four inbound lanes. Still it grew. Four
lanes of slick mucus remained in its wake.
At McLoughlin and Clay Street she turned left. Cars were frozen at the unchanging traffi
lights. She took a shortcut through the Burger King parking lot. A group of teenagers, partyi
on the hood of a decaying Galaxie 500, put down their beers and their joints. Three of them
swore to never touch the stuff again. Four more wondered where to get more of it for tomor
night.
Soon she reached Clay and Eastbank Avenue. From there she could hear the Willamette
brushing against, its shoreline. She could smell the river. Across the water, downtown Port
was alight with a million artificial stars. It would be a short path from here to the water and
destruction of the slogging mountain behind her. But not yet, not yet. The moon was low in t
sky. She must act quickly, before her powers-and her true self-vanished. She turned left and

proceeded past the huge glowing sign that named the corrupted lair of her last unvanquished
foe: NMST. Lights were on inside the complex. As she approached the main entrance door
she licked her lips at the sound of the dragon's pulsing roar. Tonight was obviously Lazer
Metalhead night.
 
Mrs. Batchett found her husband in the dining room, reading the morning paper. He wore
same clothes she had last seen him in. His head was a red maze of crisscrossed lines. Morn
sunlight slanted through the Venetian blinds and spilled onto a tidy tower of exams on the fl
The uppermost page had Try again next year scrawled across the top. Prof. Batchett turned 
page of the newspaper.
"Morning, dear, he said sleepily. Take an early walk? Good idea. They say it's going to 
lovely day." If he had looked up, he might have noticed what she was wearing: her gardenin
clothes and sun hat. The knees of her work pants were caked with day-old earth. He might h
noticed how tired she looked, and how the wrinkled flesh beneath her eyes carried what he
might have recognized as dark folds of regret, as if his wife had recently lost something spe
to her. But he didn't. He did, however, slightly nod the paper in her direction.
"You should read the front page, dear. You'd find it interesting." He made sure she got a
good view of the banner headline:
 
SLUGS MIGRATE TO THE WILLAMETTE
SCIENTISTS BAFFLED BY SUMY SUICIDE
 
The article included color photos of the NMST lobby. It looked as though someone had
spilled a truckload of silvery mayonnaise across the floor and ticket counters. Another head
caught her eye.
 
NMST ON MIGRATION ROUTE
SLUGS COULD BE ATTRACTED TO LAZER VIBRATIONS, SAY EXPERTS
 
Mrs. Batchett found the strength to smile. "Sounds logical. Does it say, um, if there were

witnesses?"
Prof. Batchett flipped to an inside page. "Not really. There was a, let's see, 'lazer rock s
in progress-since when does one spell 'laser' with a z?-but the ticket taker was out smoking
the new DinoMania exhibit. The only one who saw anything was some kid on his way to th
planetarium from the men's room."
"And?"
"And he says he saw-where is it?-This cool warrior chick like off Deathbreath's latest
album cover.'" Prof. Batchett put on the voice he used to imitate his most culturally damage
students. " 'It was really cool. Had a glowing sword and everything. There was these three
little dudes with her, man, and a zillion radical slugs just squooshing behind her. Bogus pro
Can't wait to see the lazer show, dude.'"
Mrs. Batchett tried to hide the worry in her voice. "Did he say anything else?"
"Only that he just Went back to the planetarium. He claims it was his third rock-and-roll
hallucination. A 'head trip,' I believe is the common vernacular. By the time the show was
over, the slugs were out the opposite doors, on their way to the open sea, and the lobby wa
unfit for human habitation. Seems quite a few of the revelers lost their Jack Daniels when th
exited the planetarium. It'll take the museum a week just to clean up. They're going to create
interactive exhibit from some of that slug slime, though, to explain what happened as soon a
they can think up something convincing. The city's going to be washing down the streets all
They say the whole thing might have started in our neighborhood. Yuck."
"Were all the slugs killed?" Mrs. Batchett had to know. She also wanted to prolong wha
was already the longest conversation she and her husband had had in weeks.
"Almost," he said. He indicated a photo at the bottom of the page. It depicted an office.
Hundreds-no, the article said thousands-of dead slugs covered the desk, dripped from the
formerly tan leather chair, and blanketed every inch of floor and shelf space. A local biolog
posed with the coated remains of an EverOpen™ dayplanner.
 
SOME SLUGS DETOUR
 
"They must have liked the air freshener," expert claims.
 

Mrs. Batchett let herself smile. It had been difficult getting them all piled onto the deskto
She placed a hand on her husband's shoulder. Silently he flipped through pages to the bo
review section. She felt his shoulder tighten beneath his shirt. "A comic book adaptation of
Paradise Lost? That's an outrage!" He flattened the newspaper against the table top and
lowered his head toward the offending article.
"I'm going out back," Mrs. Batchett sighed.
Prof. Batchett mumbled something and pounded his fist on the table.
 
"You cannot come with us, Mistress." The fairy wiped a tear from its eyes, then flew to
where Mrs. Batchett sat in the dirt. It brushed away the larger tears it found on .her cheek. "
sad. Your father and mother asked us to tell them about you after we've returned. King Finv
would love to have you beat him in a royal chess match again. You have friends there who
miss you. We all miss you."
"But why can't I go?" New buds were already appearing on the tattered daylilies. They w
sate now. That wasn't enough.
The elf placed a hand on her knee. "It's the law you agreed to in your former life. You
married a mortal warrior. True, he was a great and powerful man, a man of learning and a
friend to all in need. When our world and theirs split in twain, you chose to be with him
forever. You are condemned to this mortal realm-" The elf paused and look thoughtful for a
few heartbeats. "Unless you can persuade him to accompany you to Tir na n-Og. Only then m
both of you live together as you once did, as who you once were."
With strength born of frustration rather than Faerie, Mrs. Batchett tossed a handful of we
out of the garden. "But how can I do that?" she shouted. "That was another life. He's dead a
gone now." And so am I, she almost said out loud.
The fairy looked at the elf. The elf looked up at the morning sky. It seemed to be
contemplating deep mysteries.
"Hoo!" The gnome was clutching his feet, rocking with laughter. "Tell her!" it said, gasp
for breath between bouts of gnomish hysteria. "Go ahead! Sod the rules! You know you wan
to!"
"Tell me what?"
The fairy stepped toward the elf. The gnome held its breath and grinned. The elf chewed
lower lip. It glanced around, then looked Mrs. Batchett in the eyes. "When you married Ton

n'Uthara, it was for all time. Just as you are here now in this mortal form, so too does he w
the solid earth."
Mrs. Batchett felt her heart beat quickly behind her breast, and for the first time in years 
did not worry her. "He's alive? Now? Where?"
The gnome was unable to contain himself. He told her.
After Mrs. Batchett got over the shock, she turned her head and cupped her hands to her
mouth.
"Oh, honey!" she called. "Could you come out here? I want to discuss British mythology

