
Aniara 


Harry Martinson Aniara 
A Review of Man ill Time and Space 
Adapted from the Swedish by 
HUGH MACDIARMID and ELSPETH HARLEY SCHUBERT 
Introduction by 
Dr Tord Hall 
Reader of Mathematics at Uppsala University 
Hutchinson of London 

HUTCHINSON & CO. (Publishers) LTD 
178-zoz Great Portlalld Street, Lolldoll, W.1 
London Melbourne Sydney 
Auckland Bombay Toronto 
Johannesburg New York 
First published ill Great Britair1 1963 
First published in Swedell by Albert Bollllier 1956 
© Albert Bonnier 1956 
English translation 
© Hutchinson & Co. (Publisliers} Ltd 1963 
This book has beell set ir1 Bembo type face. It has 
beell prillted ill Great Britaill by Tile Allchor Press, 
Ltd, iu Tiptree, Essex, 011 Alltique Wove paper 

Introduction by Dr Tord Hall 
The poem you arc going to read is about Mankind­
and thus appeals directly to the imagination-but 
since both the narrative and the scenes have a highly 
technical background, a brief survey of the author's 
scientific thought may make it easier to follow Aniara 
and her passengers on their journey. 
Aniara had long challenged the author's imagi­
nation, although it was not published until 1956. 
From Martinson's frrst volume of poetry, Ghost 
Ship (1929) onwards, a cosmic trend can be dis­
cerned in his works. Occasional articles and poems 
during the 'thirties again revealed his deep interest in 
science, even if his first consistent efforts in the new 
style did not bear fruit until 1953 with the publi­
cation of Cicada (which contained the first twenty­
nine songs in Aniara). A shortened version of the 
epic, in libretto form, was adapted in 1959 for the 
opera of the same name. 
The 102 Songs of Aniara form a symbolic poem 
about our own age, and the symbols have been taken 
from modern science. The work is not only exciting 
as a technical saga, but also as a folk-tale, in which the 
moral story of technical exploits is entertainingly 
spiced in oJ;"der to make it more palatable. 
V1l 

The 'goldonda', Aniara, with eight thousand 
emigrants on board, plies to and fro between the 
radiation-poisoned Earth and Mars. The take-off is 
achieved-not as in the days of Ikaros, nor as· in our 
own time, by means of stage rockets-but as may 
conceivably occur in the far-distant future, the future 
in which Harry Martinson has set his plot in order 
to obtain a poetic distance from the present. The 
goldonda is towed up by gyrospiners towards the 
zenith's light, 
'where powerful magnetrines annul 
Earth's pull. . . . ' 
The anti-gravitational field thus engendered out­
weighs the force of gravitation, and Aniara, con­
tained in a kind of magnetic bottle, glides up through 
space like an air bubble through water. 
During one of her routine journeys the goldonda 
runs into trouble, almost colliding with a previously 
undiscovered 'asteroid' Hondo. She saves herself by 
making a sudden swerve. Further complications 
arise in the form of meteors and other 'space gravel', 
and Aniara, with her rudder jammed, thunders on in 
the direction of the distant Lyra-poetry's own con­
stellation-right out of the circle of planets, into the 
void. 
Vlll 
'Thus it was when the solar system closed 
its gateway of purest crystal and cut off 
the space ship Aniara from all 
the associations and promises of the Sun.' 

The pilots-the leaders on board-soon realize 
that there is no way back, and gradually the terrifying 
news spreads to the unsuspecting passengers. After a 
period of panic and desperation, they resign them­
selves to their fate. Life goes on as usual, and the all­
night vigil of Midsummer is kept-although no sun 
rises. Many seek consolation in escapist reveries. 
These dreams are conjured forth by the 'Mirna', and 
the poet himself, having taken over the role of priest, 
'looks after the Mirna, calms the emigrants and livens 
them with pictures from far distance'. 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
One may pause here to consider some of the 
changes which have taken place in the scientific view 
of the world during this century, and what new 
possibilities of expression they have made available 
to the poet. 
The accepted concept of cause and effect has been 
challenged by Planck and Bohr, and by the radio­
active 
decay. 
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle 
would appear to exclude determinism as defmed in 
classical physics. Meanwhile, Einstein's formula of 
1905, showing the equivalence of mass and energy­
an atom is as unsubstantial as a ray of light-has 
shattered the old robust concept of matter, and de 
Broglie's wave-theory of matter emphasizes still 
further the fundamentally dream-like character of 
the material world. A lump of lead is woven of 
'such stuff as dreams are made on ... . ' 
lX 

The mechanical nineteenth-century model of the 
universe has vanished, borne away in the smoke 
wreaths of mathematical symbols. The physicist of 
today does not think according to a given model, but 
instead employs abstract mathematical concepts such 
as tensors, matrices and potentials. These concepts 
have no physical reality, nor do they offer an ex­
planation of the universe; they merely describe, 
better than did the old model, the behaviour of the 
observable objects in different situations. 
For a poet, this scientific evolution has a positive as 
well as a negative side. The negative aspect is the 
totally abstract character of the modern concept of 
· 
the world-for the desire of the poet is always to 
reveal, and to create a picture, convey a vision. The 
positive aspect is the opportunity now offered him to 
fashion scientific data according to his own fancy-a 
direct result of the physicist's inability to lay down 
any defmite rules for a picture of the micro or the 
macro cosmos. 
Perhaps it would be more illuminating to com­
pare these aspects with two parallel lines, which, in 
the world of the new geometries, may conceivably 
meet-in a vision. 
The excellent popularizations of Eddington, Jeans, 
Gamow, Hoyle, and others, are the chief sources 
from which Harry Martinson has taken his basic ideas 
of scientif1c evolution. We shall briefly touch on the 
use of, for instance, the indeterministic character of 
modern physics, the law of entropy, and the advances 
X 

of astronomy in Aniara, but some explanation must 
first be given of the actual terminology employed in 
the poem. 
Martinson has created dozens of new words. This 
in itself is not original, as the same technical exoticism 
can be found in most books of science fiction, although 
on a smaller scale. A scientific motivation exists for 
even apparently meaningless combinations of letters. 
This is conditioned by the semantic difficulties which 
arise when we apply everyday words to the world 
of the atom. Relying on experience in macrocosmos, 
we have invented concepts such as particle, wave, 
velocity, position, time, etc., and transposed them 
without further ado to microcosmos. Yet we have 
no guarantee whatever that these concepts represent 
what really happens inside the atom. 
The majority of physicists will agree that in all 
probability they do not. Eddington, who has in­
spired much of the terminology in Aniara, says in his 
book The Nature of the Physical World (1928), with 
regard to the movements of the electron round the 
nucleus: 'Something unknown is doing we don't 
know what-that is what our theory amounts to.' 
(It did not amount to more in 1928, nor does it to­
day.) Immediately after this-from the epistomo­
logical viewpoint-highly unsatisfactory statement, 
Eddington quotes from Lewis Carroll's Through the 
Looking Glass: 
'T'was brillig and the slithy toves 
did gyre and gimble in the wabe.' 
XI 

The object of these lines, in themselves quite mean­
ingless, is to give the reader mental associations in the 
direction intended by the author. Eddington goes on 
to show that Carroll's verses may be as efficient as 
(or even more efficient than) prose in describing an 
atomic process--on the condition that one attaches 
numbers to the words. 
According to this line of thought, the new words 
in Aniara are symbols which conjure up pictures of 
objects and happenings beyond the range of the 
reader's imagination. All words are, in a sense, 
symbols-but whereas the word monkey, for in­
stance, evokes a familiar image for most people, 
expressions such as phototurb, protator, gopta, or atom, 
give, in their context, at most a vision. Here lies a 
poetic playground in which Harry Martinson loves 
to romp. 
The new words do not have to have any given 
significance, and the reader is free to test his own 
imagination with varying interpretations. For sym­
bols-unless they are purely logical-can obviously 
be read in many ways, and among the different 
variants there may well be those of which the author 
himself was not at f1rst aware. A few interpretations 
-mainly as given by Martinson hin1self-a ppear in 
the glossary. 
Mima, the ingenious 'transmitter' on board, is the 
main source of comfort to Aniara' s passengers, and 
Xll 

their sole remaining contact with the earth. From a 
technical viewpoint, her prototype is a mathematical 
computer or 'electronic brain'. In fmding names for 
her component parts, the author gives his fancy full 
scope: 'the Cantor works have octopus feelers', the 
'ninth protator' signals movement, and so on. 
Mirna is equipped with miraculous powers. She 
can intercept and reproduce events from other worlds 
in distant galaxies, and her pictures are capable, like 
dreams, of dissipating both the passengers' memories 
of Douris-Earth-which, in spite of all, they long 
for-and their realization of the hopeless plight in the 
present. Gradually, the inmates of Aniara become a 
sect of Mima-worshippers, who kneel beside the 
Goddess's pedestal each tin1.e pure terror threatens to 
annihilate them. Mirna herself is incorruptible, and 
faithfully reproduces all that comes her way. 
But, 
'perpetually through space sweep evil rumours. 
Good rumours always leave less trace . . .  ' 
and for this reason the poet, 'the faithful Mirna's blue 
liturgist', occasionally tinkers with the transmission. 
He bottles 'every memory that's suitable', administer­
ing now and then, as a cure for Angst, a dose of 
M. 
' 'd 
' 
1ma s 
ream preserves . 
One sees, on closer examination, that Mirna only 
superficially resembles a modern mathematical com­
puter; a large number of her activities lie beyond 
human analysis, and have been invented by Mirna 
Xlll 

herself--whose powers are 'three thousand and 
eighty times greater than anything a human being 
could achieve, if he or she could take the Mirna's 
place'. 
When the atomic bomb smashes Dourisburg, 
Mirna collapses under the strain of the ghoulish news 
she has to break. 'She suffered with the very stones', 
'for she had seen the hot white tears of granite 
when stones and ore are vaporized. 
It wrung her heart to hear these stones lament.' 
The simplest interpretation of Mirna is that of a 
universal conscience, or soul, with whom the poet 
communicates. 
The pantheistic structure of Martinson's Cosmos 
is most clearly indicated in Song 13, in which 
the 'Chief Astronomer' describes Aniara's journey 
through the curved space of the universe by com­
paring it with a crystal bubble moving imperceptibly 
round the circun1ference of a glass bowl. 
Another theme in Aniara is the indeterministic 
character of present-day science. In the ambiguous 
47th Song, 'a philosopher of point-sets, nay, a mystic 
of the school of transfinite numbers' tiptoes quietly in 
to Isagel, the Isis-Urania of modern mathematics and 
astronomy, with a question about 'the frequency 
of wonders in Cosn1os, gauged by point-set mathe­
matics'. Robert, the robot, who is a decent chap, 
receives his instructions from Isagel, and begins 
energetically shifting and sorting-out the 'point-set 
XIV 

load' on the 'Go pta waggon'. But Robert's efforts 
bring no solution-it appears, unfortunately, that the 
frequency of wonders corresponds to the frequency 
of chance, 
'that Chance and Miracle 
have a common source, and consequently 
the same answer would seem valid for both'. 
This theme recurs in the 55th Song, when an 
astronomer on the 'star deck' holds a popular lecture 
for listeners who are, for the most part, lethargic or 
scornful. The astonomer- 'modest in his know­
ledge'-
' describes to us how the universe plays dice 
in distant solar systems with the scalding novas'. 
A contrary opinion to this was expressed, for 
instance, by Einstein, during a famous discussion at 
a physicists' congress in Brussels, in 1927, when he 
ironically asked Bohr and others whether they really 
believed that God plays dice ('- - ob der Iiebe Gott 
wiirfelt'). Einstein was, towards the end of his life, 
almost the only defender of this deterministic view­
point. Aniara' s author does not accept his attitude, 
but he does accept another philosophy which is often 
linked with determinism, namely pantheism. In­
determinism, on the other hand, fuses with pan­
theism in the 88th Song, when Isagel, 'the ruler 
of pure thought, our spirits' succour', who was 
also 
'the Mirna's very self, the Mirna's soul', is 
XV 

summoned by 'a messenger from the Mansions of 
Eternity': 
'Invisible to us, she glided quietly 
_ 
into the region of the Laws of Numbers 
where endless, unexplored reserves await us 
when the Powers of Chance decide the hour has 
' 
come. 
According to the second law of thermo-dynamics 
-the law of entropy-the evolution of Cosmos 
moves unhesitatingly from order towards chaos. 
Suns issue from the wombs of dark nebulae, speed 
proudly on their blazing courses, and disappear again 
into the darkness from which they came. The 77th 
Song is a mournful variation on this desolate theme, 
which also appears, for instance, in the last line of the 
epic, and in the Song of Disintegration ( 8 3). 
'Hear the rusty trombones. Hear how the zittras 
are playing 
of the Sphinx, marred and ravaged by lepra above 
desert sands, 
to comfort the races which have seen all their 
customs disintegrate 
like boulders obscenely devoured by the lnerci­
less ages'. 
Thus Harry Martinson applies the second law of 
thermo-dynamics not only to dead objects but to 
Man himsel£ Also in our souls, he says, the entropy 
of evil is continuously expanding, and the dark 
XVl 

instincts of destruction point the way to death and 
chaos. Who knows whether they have not already 
become so strong that neither good deeds, tenderness 
nor love, in the long run, can continue to oppose 
them? That deadly minus sign, the spear of emptiness, 
has pierced us all. Before Man, 'the King of Ashes', 
God and Satan flee, hand in hand. 
In Song 62 the author speaks of 'the long battle 
light wages against darkness without end'. The com­
bination light-darkness forms a 'Leitmotif ' which 
gives associations to the sinister law of entropy and 
also to Gnosticism and Manicheism. Yet, throughout 
Aniara-as a consequence of modern science-like an 
arrow pointing to the future, runs an awareness of the 
inherent danger of lucidity, of all light. We have, as it 
were, becon1e conscious not only of the visible light, 
which was once a divine element, but also of an 
invisible, dark illumination-the light of roentgen 
and gamma rays-which, though admittedly a healer, 
is also a deadly threat to our existence. Earlier, the 
words lucidity and light were associated with such 
concepts as harmony and Olympic peace. We 
imagine Goethe, for instance, as a representative of 
this sublimity. Today, science has placed Man in 
quite 
another 
position-consciously, 
or 
uncon­
sciously, we associate lucid realization of our plight 
with the word Angst. 
The association is understandable; for although 
science continues to advance, the ethical progress of 
Man-gauged by the behaviour of the different 
A.-B 
XVll 

conntries towards each other-has lagged behind, 
seeming to remain roughly where it was during the 
Stone Age. We are now facing the consequences of 
this nnequal race, in the fear that Man will not be 
able to control the destructive weapons produced by 
science. Aniara is the tragedy of a generation which 
cannot solve this problem. 
Harry Martinson is a pioneer of the poetry of the 
Atomic Age. No poet before him has tackled the 
formidable task of studying Man with the aid of 
modern science; of penetrating his soul with gamma 
rays, of testing his mind with 'electronic brains', or 
observing him in the astronomical perspective of the 
two-hundred inch reflector at Mount Palomar. In 
Aniara, poetry and science have become organically 
fused, and it is to the fact that the images culled from 
science fit so neatly into its general pattern and pur­
pose that the poem owes its overwhelming impact. 
What the reader witnesses-at a distance too short to 
be entirely comfortable-is a poetic nuclear ex­
plosion; the songs follow each other in blast waves; 
in their wake, he senses the hurricane draughts, the 
seething heat and the gradual aftermath of radiation 
in a work whose symphonic breadth derives from 
one shuddering theme-Man's journey through his 
own e1nptiness, humanity's fall away from earth, 
into the trackless void. 
XVlll 

1 My first remembered meeting with my Douns 
shines with a light stronger than light itself. 
And yet with a simplicity in meeting 
that all may have in any transit hall 
where the forced emigrants are herded off 
to their fell gangways for the planet Mars 
and to the tnndras. Earth must have a rest 
for all her poisons, lannch her refugees 
out into space, and keep her quarantine. 
She writes out the embarkation cards, 
her five small fmger-nails gleaming 
like dim lamps in the hall's half-light, 
and says: 'Please sign your name just here 
where the light of my blondeness falls 
on this card, which you must keep. In case 
any trouble should occur to jolt 
both space and time you must come back 
and write your impressions of it here 
in this space, look, set apart for that. 
'Now you must state precisely what 
particular part of Mars you want to reach, 
as the form states you may each take 
a pot of non-infected soil 
with you, and I'll seal up also 
I 

at least three cubic feet of earth 
for every passenger on board.' 
She looks at me with the disdain 
beauty so easily assumes 
on seeing whichever way she looks 
the clun1sy movements of the folk 
thronging the stairs to the starting points. 
And watches the ever-increasing crowds 
huddling like sheep through the exit there 
bound helplessly for other worlds. 
The sheer absurdity of living 
stands out so appallingly then for us 
who've tried year after year to find 
some chink through which a ray of hope 
n1ight reach this hideous hall where now 
these flocks of numbered emigrants 
start up whenever the siren blows. 
2 Goldonda Aniara' s closed. 
The usual signal goes to quit 
our gravitational field, and now 
her gyrospiner starts to tow 
her up towards the Zenith's light 
where powerful magnetrines amm1 
Earth's pull. Soon zero signal's given. 
The space-ship's free, and weightless 
2 

floats upwards like a bubble or a cork 
vibrationless and undisturbed 
away from Earth, a normal start. 
A simple gyromatic job 
with no sense of adventure now. 
Who could foresee that just this flight, 
al in the day's work as it seemed, 
was singled out to be unique 
and doomed to bear us all away 
from Earth and Sun, Venus and Mars, 
and life's entire environment? 
J A swerve to avoid the asteroid 
Hondo (claimed as 'discovered' thus) 
jerked us off route. So we missed Mars, 
bypassed its orbit, and avoiding 
the field of Jupiter set course 
on the field ICE-twelve 
in Magdalena's outer ring. 
But meeting then with a dense swarm 
of leonides fell back even more 
to Yko-nine, 'till in the field 
of Sar-sixteen we needs gave up 
our effort to tum round since we 
just on the point of turning saw 
a ring of boulders which gave us 
the echographic picture of 
3 

a torus, whose empty centre now 
we wildly sought-and fmally found, 
but only at so steep a tilt 
the intersection brought disaster 
to our Saba-aggregate, peppered 
by a great hail of leonides and meteors. 
So when the ring of boulders 
left focus, and space was clear again, 
we'd passed the point of no return, 
our course pointing to Lyra now 
and no change of direction could 
be thought o£ We lay in 'dead space'. 
Luckily our machinery 
still worked all right-our central heating 
and lighting both unharmed altho' 
some of the instruments had been destroyed 
while others were repairable perhaps. 
Our unhappy fate was certain now, 
our only hope the Mirna would 
keep going to whatever end. 
4 Thus it was when the solar system closed 
its gateway of purest crystal and cut off 
the space-ship Aniara from all 
the associations and promises of the Sun. 
So at the mercy of impassive space 
we sent our hailing signal 'Aniara' 
4 

through crystal-clear infmity, 
but we could make no contact now. 
Though space's vibrations obediently spread 
Aniara' s last call in ever-widening rings, 
since these and Aniara were concentric 
the call simply vanished in the void. 
Sent in anguish by us in Aniara 
our hailing signal just echoed and re-echoed 
Aniara . . . Aniara . . . 
5 The pilots are more resigned than we, 
being fatalists of the new sort space 
creates through the hypnotic power 
of seemingly unchanging stars 
on man's passion for riddles, since Death 
accepted as inevitable fits 
naturally into their scheme of things. 
But even so now, in the sixth year of our flight, 
one can see how even they look down 
as from a precipice of fear. 
In their unguarded moments sometimes, 
able to read their expression, I can see 
despair shines like the glow of phosphor 
in their still ceaselessly questing eyes. 
This shows most clearly in the case 
J 

of the woman pilot. She often sits 
gazing at the Mirna: and then 
a change comes in her lovely eyes. 
They become mysterious, the irises 
full of melancholy ftre, a hungry fire 
seeking fuel to preserve the light of her soul. 
She told me once, about a year ago, 
she herself was ready to resign, 
accept her fate and prepare for death. 
She suggested we should have a farewell feast 
and then just disappear. Many agreed. 
But the passengers, and all 
the naive emigrants who, even now, 
hardly realize their hopeless plight, 
are the un-relinquishable trust 
of the leaders in their forward cabin 
whose duty is eternally inescapable now. 
6 We see through the Mirna life exists 
in many different places, though where 
the Mirna cannot show. Pictures appear, 
fragments of landscapes and we catch 
snatches of language spoken somewhere. 
But where? Our Mirna does her best 
and searches, searches constantly. 
Her electronic equip1nent registers, 
her lenses give their basic report 
6 

to her selective cells, and they 
assemble and project what they can, 
pictures, sounds, and scents in a rich stream, 
but cannot show where these come from. 
That is always beyond the scope 
of the po·wers given to a Mirna. 
To usc a metaphor, she gets 
her fish in other seas than those 
we are sailing through now, and makes 
her space-catches in the forests and valleys 
of undiscoverable worlds. 
I (the Mimarobe) look after the Mirna, 
calm the emigrants and liven them up 
with pictures from far distance 
of many things no human eye 
is formed to sec. The Mirna never lies. 
Her selective transmitting power they know 
is incorruptible and cannot lie 
and is three thousand and eighty times greater 
than anything a human being could achieve 
if he or she could take the Mirna's place. 
Yet every time I start the Mirna 
they prostrate themselves as before an altar, 
and I have often heard them whisper, 
'Imagine-if only one were like the Mirna!' 
It's well the Mirna has no feelings 
and no vanity built into her 
A.-c 
7 

but simply goes on as usual 
transmitting pictures, sounds, and scents 
caught up from undiscovered lands, 
and does this quite impervious 
to flattery or worship, unaffectedly aloof 
she does not notice how in this dark room 
(the compartment in which the Mirna's housed) 
members of a special cult gather 
to caress her, stroke her pedestal, 
beg from her, the noble Mirna, 
a word of comfort or advice 
about their journey, now in its sixth year. 
Then suddenly I see all's changed. 
The emigrants have begun at last 
to understand that 'what's been has been', 
their earlier lives irrevocably gone, 
the only world open to us now 
this world we journey in with Mirna 
that has no landfall and no goal 
save death by vanishment in endless space. 
We journey on towards certain death. 
Even so the Mirna still comforts 
all these souls, preparing them in peace 
and resignation for the last hour 
which comes to every human being 
no matter where he or she 
may find temporary refuge. 
8 

7 We still cling to the habits of our time 
on Earth, the customs we followed in 
the land of Do uris. We divl.de our time 
in day and night, pretend to see 
daybreak, twilight, sunset, though space 
surrounds us with everlasting night, 
so bitterly cold that those who still 
live in Douris have never felt its like. 
Our hearts are synchronous with the clock 
that follows sunrise, moonrise, and the set 
of both as seen from Do uris' plains. 
Now it is summer night, Midsummer Night, 
and the people keep vigil hour by hour. 
But in the Assembly Hall all but those 
who keep watch in infmity 
are dancing-dancing 'till the sun goes up 
on Douris. Then suddenly they know 
the sun did not go up, that life, 
already a dream in Douris, is 
even more a mere dream here, and now 
the dance hall is filled with sobs 
and vain hopes no one any longer tries 
to conceal. Dancing and music cease. 
The hall is deserted. All throng 
to our Mirna and for a short time 
our Mirna can ease the pressure of despair, 
dispel the memories of life on Do uris, 
for the world Mirna shows glimpses of 
can often take the place of the world 
we remember but have left forever. 
9 

If this were not so the Mirna 
could never hold us, and be worshipped 
as a holy being, nor would the women 
approach to stroke her pedestal 
in bliss and trembling. 
8 Our souls are wasted by dreams, the ceaseless chafmg 
for lack of reality of dream against dream, 
and each new dream's a ladder 
to the next dream-filled air-pocket. 
Everywhere far distant is our home. 
Our support lies beyond all boundaries. 
I pour out my need to Douris' valleys 
-and our perpetual longing to be there 
is health itself, the art of living here. 
We seldom think now of our immense 
proud wonder of a space-ship. Only 
during funeral speeches do we suddenly 
realize that this is actually our world. 
Then many a sombre thought swoops below 
the vaulting of these indifferent rooms 
which, filled with the echoes of their own life, 
glide on forever through unfathon1able space. 
We hurry to the Mima-to receive 
the comfort she can let us see but never reach. 
So thousands flock in never ending streams 
through every opening to where Mirna's housed. 
Perhaps in a flash we may remember then 
10 

the ship's length is sixteen thousand feet, 
her breadth three thousand, and the number 
of passengers aboard her eight thousand! 
That everything was built for emigration 
on a vast scale; and that this ship 
is only one of many thousands 
all of the same construction and size 
which ply regularly to Mars and Venus 
-that we alone have been flung off course 
until one day the Chief Star-master told us 
we were in the inner astronomical field 
no longer, but everything possible would be done 
to make life in the outer astronomical field 
a voyage of discovery and a step, 
the longest so far, towards the next astronomical 
field. 
When, later, it became clear to the leaders 
that there was no means of return 
to iner space and that the laws 
of outer space were of another kind 
to those which clearly govern the routine 
of inner space, there was panic at first, 
then apathy, which, between bouts of desperation, 
spread its frozen insensitivity, its cold doldrum 
world 
of lifelessness, until the Mirna, 
like a friend in need, to everyone's relief 
threw open her treasury of visions. 
II 

9 Certain features have developed in the Mirna 
of a kind hitherto unknown to human thought, 
such as, for example, the third Veben' s function 
in the focussing apparatus, and the ninth -
Protator' s signal of movement in the phase 
of unfocussed vibration before 
the selective cells take charge of everything 
and distribute and assemble it. 
The inventor himself was shattered completely 
the day he found half the Mirna he'd made 
lay beyond analysis and had been 
invented in fact by the Mirna herself! 
Oh, well, as we all know, he changed 
his title. He was modest enough to admit 
once the Mirna had taken form 
she was superior and he himself 
a mere machine-minder, a mimator. 
He died, but the Mirna stil lives on. 
He died, but she developed her own style 
and carried on in the knowledge of herself 
and of her possibilities and limitations; 
a telegrator, with no conceit, industrious, 
capable, a patient searcher, oobribable, 
clear-sighted, a filter of truth, beyond reproach. 
Who can be surprised then if I, 
the mechanic, Mirna's guardian in Aniara, 
am moved, when I see how men and women 
fall on their knees in holy faith before her. 
I pray myself when they pray to Mirna 
that what is happening is true, and that 
12 

this consolation Mitna gives is a glimpse 
of the light of true consolation 
seeking us in this lonely house of space. 
1 0 The empty sterile universe is terrifying, 
its stare, concentrated on us, glassy, 
the immitigable glare of nothingness. 
Seen through Aniara' s rounded crystal windows 
the stellar system seems rigid, immobile. 
So it becomes vital for us to preserve 
our dream pictures of Do uris' valleys, and here 
in the motionless ocean of space 
jealously preserve every memory, 
every pulse of feeling. 
The faintest sigh seems like a balmy wind, 
al tears are fountains, and the ship herself 
a hind leaping forward in silence 
towards the constellation of the Lyra 
whose stars do not seem to move 
a fraction of an inch either to right or left 
and whose distance away is so immense 
in time and space our minds cannot conceive it. 
It seems that everything's congealed, 
fast-frozen in mountains of infinity 
like specks of diamond dust inside 
a crystal enfolding eternity 
in massive halls of endlessness. 
And all our words, worn out by use 
IJ 

and employed to describe mountains, 
expanses of water, and landscapes 
to which they were never adequate 
have been exhausted by a race 
which could not foresee a time would come 
when these words so carelessly squandered 
would be needed just where they really apply 
-on this space-ship bound for the Lyra. 
What then is left to us, who need 
every word we can find to express 
these boundless reaches of the autumn of space? 
To comfort ourselves we must seek 
for other words-for words instead 
which can reduce and minimize. 
So the word Star becomes obscene 
and the slang terms for a woman's paps 
or vagina respectable. 
Indecent too the brain which caused 
our deportation into space. 
1 1  A spokesman for the Leaders now stands up 
before the people in the great halls 
of the ship's stern. He tells them not 
to despair, but to understand their fate 
in the clear light of scientific knowledge. 
He says that this is not the frrst time 

the like has happened-sixty years ago 
a big Goldonda having on board 
no fewer than fourteen thousand souls 
was lost. Going towards Orion's Belt 
her instruments disintegrated. 
She dived at wildly increasing speed 
towards Jupiter-and was engulfed 
in its deserts and buried under 
the giant star's heavy casing 
and deadly mattresses of frozen hydrogen 
which, to a depth of about a thousand miles, 
armour that evil star with ice-cold gas. 
Things could have been just as bad here 
but we arc luckier, he says, 
not having crashed on to any star 
-our journey lies ahead of us, 
a lifelong journey to an end 
from which there is no possible escape. 
1 2 The jazz bands goad us in a crazy dance. 
The girl I partner uses every chance. 
She hails from Dourisburg and says quite frankly 
that though she's danced up here for several years 
in Aniara, 'there's no difference in this Yurg 
from what we used to dance in Dourisburg.' 
So long as we arc dancing we are clear 
that everything is wonderful up here. 
IJ 

There's Daisi Doody swaying from the hips 
with all the slang of Do uris on her lips, 
glorious nonsense, just as in the Yurg 
we danced, or thought we did, in Dourisburg. 
You gamnu down, dear, and go jail and dori. 
You've never seen me dozzled like a lori ! 
No chadwick bothers me, you know, pouts Daisi, 
I piv in pisty, lollop on my lazy, 
never quarrel with my morals, as I fondle with my 
rondles 
and wathed in tari gimble with my gondles. 
I feel bewildered as we sway and swing, 
the grief I nourish threatens to take wing 
as, with this human child, I dance the Y urg 
and baffle space with slang from Dourisburg. 
1J In the sixth year Aniara flew on 
with unbroken speed towards the Lyra. 
The Chief Astronomer addressed 
the emigrants on the scope of space. 
He held a delicate glass bowl. 
Slowly we realize the space 
we travel in is a different kind 
to what we always pictured in our minds 
when the word 'space' caught our imagination 
16 

on earth-it dawns upon us now 
the extent to which we are cut off 
must be far greater than we first feared 
-that knowledge was a blue naivety 
which from a measured dose of thought 
inferred the Mystery had form. 
We gather now what we call space, 
this glassy void round Aniara' s hull, 
is Spirit, everlasting and elusive, 
and we are lost in oceans of the Spirit. 
Our space-ship Aniara is borne on 
in something that has no container 
and needs no directing brain-stuff. 
She is borne on in something which exists 
but need not follow in the ways of thought, 
through God and Death and Mystery she goes, 
our space-ship without trace or goal. 
Oh, could we but turn back to our base 
now we have fathomed what our space-ship is 
-a tiny bubble in a glass of God. 
Listen to what I know about glass 
and you'll see. In every glass 
which stands for long enough, untouched, 
a tiny flaw or bubble may appear 
that moves with infinite slowness to a point 
within the glass, and in a thousand years 
the bubble's made a journey in its glass. 
So too in boundless space, a gulf 
of light-years forms the arcades 
IJ 

which enclose the bubble Aniara. 
Although she travels at tremendous speed, 
swifter than a planet in its course, 
by the standards of the universe 
her speed is no whit greater than that 
the bubble achieves in its glass. 
Appalled by this perception 
I stumble shivering from Mirna's hall 
back to the lights of the Dance Hall 
to find Daisi there. I plead 
for the shelter of her arms again. 
I beg for entry to a hair-clothed vagina 
where the cold certainty ofDeath 
may be forgotten. What remains of life 
in Mirna's Hall at least is there 
in Daisi' s warmth. Do uris still lives here 
when in each other, free from cold and danger, 
we forget the vacancy ronnd Aniara. 
14 A group called Ticklers has been formed. 
They meet to tickle and be tickled. 
Most are women, though the leaders are men 
and are called the kindlers, 
an ancient word from pre-Goldondic days. 
The word appears in the 'Blue Archive'. 
It is connected in some way with food 
in an ancient sense, and with flatnes. 
IS 

More I do not know-as a child 
at school I remember seeing 
a naked flame on one occasion. 
It was lit from a piece of wood 
which was shown round. It spread smoke 
and even a little heat. Then when 
everyone had seen it the twig was dipped 
in water and the pretty flame put out. 
Wood was rare then. It was plentiful 
in pre-Goldondic days, but since 
owing to the radiation disaster, scarce. 
We were quite excited, I recall. 
As we stood there in a ring and saw 
the tiny twiglet flame. But that 
was long ago-Alas, so very long ago. 
15 I tum off the Mirna, go my rounds, and listen 
to the emigrants and to the crew, 
and hear an old space-sailor's tale 
ofNobby-obviously his love story-
She was hardly good-looking, my little Nobby, 
pale and scarred by radiation bums. 
Tainted three times, she very nearly 
fluttered away but was hauled back 
each time, thanks to gammosan 
and Tebe rays-and after a few years 
in the bleak wards of the hospital barracks 
on Tundra Two, caught a cheap goldonda back 
If} 

from Mars to Earth, and there began 
her refugee help-her endless money-box 
collections for the needy on Mars and Venus. 
Mars' folk need protecting from the cold, 
Venus' folk from their swampy climate. 
Did she wear herself out? You bet she did. 
To go on I fell very much in love 
with little Nobby, and cannot forget 
the poor snatched chances we ever got 
for love's dream on Tundra Two, the few 
times I was there-a mere volunteer 
in the fifteenth Goldonda then, named Max, 
built for the Venus trip but later rebuilt 
for refugee and rescue runs to Tundra Two. 
The thirty-second war had just ended. 
Control plan three was carried through. 
You all know how things were-a new 
Dick at the helm, tortures in the cells 
for those who hadn't voted for him. The rest, 
already sufficiently subdued, their rucksacks donned, 
were hustled off on convict-goldonda seven 
for three years' turf-digging on Tundra Nine, 
one of the worst tundras to be found 
on the whole slum-planet. We were there once. 
But enough of administrative pretence! The way 
the card-index was juggled with was worst. 
The hard and heartless, and the kindly ones 
were changed in the card-index many times. 
At regular intervals human goodness 
20 

was shuffied to a card-index for evil, 
and in this ghoulish jungle of controls 
one must admire the Mirna who can restore 
to proper order such a contrived chaos, 
for every one played at least four parts 
in the hide-and-seek of these spectral politics. 
1 6 Through swing-doors which continually revolve 
as swing-doors do when a stream of folk goes 
through, 
a few voices are heard above the general din, 
all sound-of despair or faith or courage-merges 
in and is lost. 
And one hears scattered voices singing songs 
whose nature shows they are still sung 
with some mystic hope seeking immunity 
in the vacancy of space or through the Mirna's 
VISIOnS. 
'Soon they'll be here, my happy cast-iron days, 
when I can stand proof against the fire and cold 
which threatens to destroy my peace of mind. 
Soon they'll be here, my happy cast-iron days.' 
But the murmur grows, and all flock to the Mirna 
shouting as though in grievous lamentation 
till Mirna's comfort comes from hidden worlds 
in pictures drawn from an inconceivable source. 
21 

The shores of bliss reflected by the Mirna 
shone for us hour by hour in all their glory 
but now the world of bliss has passed away. 
Slung out towards a new infmity, 
this saga was submerged in darker shadows 
by waves which even Mirna cannot stay. 
And we are left to shiver, weak, alone. 
1 7 The profound plunges you may seem to make 
into imagined depths on which you can stake 
some hope are all entirely without value here, 
for there are no depths here to reach. 
Here we can follow every dive you take 
and measure just how far, how deep, it goes. 
Such dives make no impression on the crystal 
where we can see any such manceuvre is 
a turn-back to the point from which you dived. 
Such feats do not convince us any more. 
The man who is space-conscious seldom dives. 
But should he ever essay to explore the void 
he very soon comes back and divests himself 
of such equipment as science seems to offer 
for even the briefest dip into this sea. 
His thought is merely to obtain a view 
of this illimitable vacancy's sole cloud, 
the long stiff cloud of white metal 
22 

which, luminous with reflected light, lies still, 
or seems to lie, although in truth she tnoves 
at a speed which would stand on end the hair 
of those who do not realize how fast we go 
towards the Lyra in our space-ship Aniara. 
I was sent out once to make a check 
of the Mirna's cell-works, and frmn this direction 
seven to eight thousand metres radially 
Aniara looked majestic as she lay. 
From space's sea I saw with deep emotion 
our poor old dhow, so far from Douris' land 
as she drew patiently on towards the Lyra 
from space's Zanzibar, with the slave-burden of 
our time. 
This kind of ivory is heaviest of all 
where branded with the hard name of association 
from an unreachable and hostile world 
it grimly hampers Aniara' s voyage. 
18 Attempts at respite through the flight of thought 
and constant transference from. dream to dream 
was often our method of seeking relie£ 
With one leg steeped in a flood of feeling 
and one supported by a lack of feeling 
we often stood. 
I questioned myself but quite forgot to answer. 
I dreamt of life but quite forgot to live. 
A.-D 
23 

I ranged the universe-but could not travel farther 
for I was imprisoned here, in Aniara. 
1 9 The woman navigator enters 
the Mirna room, and gives a silent sign 
that I should switch on the Mirna. 
How sovereign she is, and how aloo£ 
She wounds, but as a rose may wound, 
not always, as expected, with its thorn. 
A rose will always wound you with its rose, 
although the sore may seem a thorny scar. 
Perhaps more often it will be a mark 
of sheerest beauty, beauty's fire alone. 
How gracious Douris, now in this sixth year, 
changed more and more into a distant star, 
a sun which like a spark burns in my eye, 
and with its immeasurable golden needle pierces 
my heart through all the reaches of the intense inane. 
She blazed more broadly once when she was nearer 
but stings more sharply now she is so far away. 
I start the Mima, sit awhile, and wait 
to see how gradually the expression brightens 
in curious transformation on the face 
of this lovely woman pilot who with such aloofness 
surrounds each changing aspect of her beauty. 
But Mirna works and Mirna explains all. 
The pale cheeks of the fair one flush and redden. 
24 

She is filled with heavenly intoxication 
when Mirna shows her all that still exists 
unreachable in boundless space. 
She smiles, she laughs ecstatically, helplessly, 
as though she were suddenly seized by God, 
but just as she seems near the acme of bliss 
the third veben switches Mirna's focus 
and other worlds crowd in upon the Mirna. 
The lovely woman's colour changes swiftly. 
I close the Mirna. She is meant to comfort 
and not to tantalize her human watchers 
with glimpses of worlds like that they've left. 
Problems and experiences which absorbed us all 
in the far-off days while we were still in Douris 
are not what should be shown this woman now. 
I caress her then by switching off the Mirna 
because the Mirna's truth is incorruptible 
showing the sheer truth of all created things. 
The woman rises, nods me 
her silent thanks for shutting off the Mirna. 
She turns round in the door, tells me to call 
her back someti1ne when Mirna intercepts . . . 
Intercepts what she does not say, but I can guess. 
Friendly familiar Douris, kind Douris, 
far-distant Douris, now a noble planet, 
on which we long to land. Now she's a pin-point 
star. 
2J 

Oh, ifi only knew from where she glimmers 
now in this sixth year of our fugue so wholly 
merged 
with suns of space, that I can never fmd 
that star again! The noble planet, Douris! 
2 0 All one has dreamt so long of intercepting, 
remote, unseizable visions of old agonies 
and happinesses so long exhausted 
come to us on spent waves through the Mirna. 
On far, forgotten waves the picture's turned 
and cast in a mysterious echograph 
in labyrinthine curves through the void, 
and all the rumours of space reach us here. 
Perpetually through space sweep evil rumours. 
Good rumours always leave less trace, 
for goodness does not belong to the life of action, 
its light is the same light this year and every year. 
21 But doubt is an acid which corrodes 
more dreams than any dreamer can conjure up 
and only through the Mirna can we see 
and relive the warmth and beauty of our dreams. 
I treasure therefore every memory I can 
that has consolation's glow, and recalls life, 
26 

and each time terror tiptoes through the ship 
and fear and despair tear at our nerves 
I serve a few of Mirna's dream-preserves. 
2 2 The doctor who keeps watch over our eyes 
and sees the zest for life grow dim in them 
is perplexed by lacus lacrimalis 
where crocodiles are no more to be seen. 
A flood of tears like this in Mirna's halls 
pays tribute to the distant scenes of Do uris. 
And yet it almost seen1s as tho' these tears 
despite their obvious sincerity are cold. 
Like crystal water risen from great depth 
they fall with a too-pure transparency 
like virgin rain which never touches earth. 
Our disillusioned weeping in the Aniara of our 
thoughts! 
2 J We found support from the Chief Astrolabe. 
He knew all about the light of distant stars. 
But suddenly the star of reason was extinguished 
in the Chief Star-master's own brain. 
Pressed to his death by our expectancy 
his mind gave way and died of spiritual need. 
27 

2 4 Frustration storms on in its own way, 
blasphemes and curses space and time. 
But many think already that we suffer 
just punishment as we fly on to the Lyra_, 
for we ourselves by the hard laws of space 
have shut ourselves in the sarcophagus 
where we must conduct our living burial 
till all our vanity lays down its sceptre. 
After a millennium or a myriad years 
some distant sun will capture a grey moth 
which flies towards it as tho' to the lamp 
of autumn long ago in Douris' valleys. 
Then our space journey will come to an end. 
We'll all sleep heavily in Aniara 
and things will quickly change in Mirna's hall. 
2 5 The sarcophagus bears us quietly on. 
We cannot harm the planet as before 
nor even spread again the peace of death. 
Here we can question freely and answer truthfully 
while our lost space-ship Aniara 
flies on through lonely space, time left behind. 
2 6 The stone-deaf Mute began thus to describe 
the worst sound he had heard. 'You could not hear it. 
Yes, just before my ear-drums burst apart 
28 

the last sound came-a sigh of surging reeds­
when the Phototurb burned and blasted 
Dourisburg.' 
'You could not hear it,' whispered the Deaf Mute. 
' My ear was not in time to hear 
when souls were tom apart 
and bodies hurled away 
as six square miles of townland twisted 
themselves inside out 
as the Phototurb destroyed 
the mighty town which once was Dourisburg.' 
Even thus he spoke, the deaf mute who was dead 
and since it's said that stones cry out in anguish 
this was the dead man calling through a stone. 
He shouted through the stone: Can you hear me? 
He shouted through the stone: Can't you hear me? 
I come from that great city, Dourisburg. 
And then the blind man started to describe 
the appalling fiery glare 
that burned out his eyes. 
Describe it he couldn't. 
He mentioned but one detail: He saw with his neck. 
His whole scalp, flayed open, was an eyeball 
which, dazzled beyond the bounds of bursting, 
was lifted, whirled away in blinded trust, 
in the sleep of death. But that was not a sleep. 
Even so his words arc like the deaf mute's 
and since it's said that stones cry out in anguish 
29 

so he cries out through stones with the deaf-mute. 
They cry out through stones to each other. 
They cry out from the stone-pits with Cassandra. 
I dash towards the Mirna as tho' I might 
arrest the frightful action with my anguish, 
but Mirna shows it all, uncompromising, 
transmits to the last picture, fire and slaughter. 
And turning to the passengers I scream 
my agony of pain at Douris' destruction. 
There is protection against almost anything, 
against fire and damage caused by storm and cold. 
Yes, count up everything you can think of, 
but there is no protection against man! 
When it is really necessary no one sees clearly any-
how. 
No, only when the point was to destroy, 
to obliterate all that the heart had saved 
of dreams to live on through cold evil years. 
Mirna's put out of action by a sheer blue blaze. 
And I'm struck dumb by what's befallen 
the wretched Earth-the blaze shoots here 
into my heart as into an open sore, 
and I, our faithful Mirna's blue liturgist, 
with frozen blood the hideous tidings hear 
Douris has perished in distant Dourisburg. 
JO 

2 7 I seek a last comfort of Daisi now 
for she's the only woman left who can speak 
our lovely Dourisburg dialect, while I 
am the last man who understands what Daisi, 
alluringly, with nimble tongue, still prattles 
in the happy idiom of our lost city. 
' Come rockasway and shimble,' coaxes Daisi. 
' Droom dazily, come hillo in my billows. 
I don't quarrel with my morals, as I fondle with my 
rondles 
and wathed in tari gimble with my gondles.' 
And I who know how Dourisburg has been 
devastated forever by the Phototurb 
am content that Daisi's just the way she is. 
What would be the sense of breaking the enchant-
ment 
Daisi, unsuspectingly, has kept so well 
that she, lying carelessly at her ease, 
or swaying in sensual bliss after the dance, 
has no idea that since some hours ago 
she is the widow of great Dourisburg? 
She asks me to sing to her, and I start 
the Cast-Iron Ballad I used to know 
about the town of Gond, destroyed by war. 
But Daisi prattles, unsuspecting, gay, 
her whole being is so manifestly meant 
only to sing the praise of dancing, and dance the yurg. 
31 

What were I but a monster if I shattered 
the living magic she conjures up 
from her own breast, her joyfully sensual heart? 
. 
She prattles as in fever till she falls asleep. 
Around our place of vigil Aniara is still, 
tho' not in sleep. Clear thought is still awake 
mindful of the far earth now lost forever, 
and only Daisi' s heart beats free of danger 
while nightmare clearness reigns in Aniara. 
2 8 For several days after Douris' destruction 
the Mirna showed disturbance from the Phototurb 
and the third veben fought as against a cloud 
of deepening distant shame. On the third day 
the Mirna prayed deliverance from the sight. 
On the fourth day she gave me some instructions 
about the octopus feelers of the Cantor works, 
not till the fifth day was she calm again, 
receiving a broadcast from a better world, 
and once more her cell-works glowed serenely. 
But on the seventh day there came a surging 
from Mirna's cell-works I'd never heard before, 
the indiferent third veben' s tacis 
switched off, then reported itself blind, 
and suddenly the Mirna called me forward 
to the inner barrier, and with apprehension 
I went towards her, towards the awful goddess. 
32 

And as I stood there, shaking and cold with fear, 
and full of anxiety for her condition, 
the Mirna's phonoglobe began to speak 
suddenly to me, in the dialect 
she and I used most, for every-day purposes. 
She bade me tell the Leaders here that she 
for sometime past had felt as guilty as the very 
stones 
for she had heard them crying out 
as stones will do, on distant Douris' plains 
and she had seen the hot white tears of granite 
when stones and ores are vaporized, 
it wrung her heart to hear these stones lament. 
Her cell-works dimmed and damaged by the cruelty 
which in his evil only man can show, 
she came, as might be expected, to the point 
where she .at last, as even Mimas must, broke 
down. 
The indifferent third veben' s tacis 
sees a thousand things no human eye can see. 
Now, in the name of these, the Mirna 
craved for surcease. She will not speak again. 
2 9 But it was all too late. I could not keep 
the crowd from rushing in to Mirna's hall. 
I shouted, yelled to them to tum back 
33 

but none of them obeyed me, for, though all 
would gladly have fled in terror, yet 
they were irresistibly drawn to see the worst. 
A flash of blue frre leapt from Mirna's screen. 
A rumbling echoed through Mirna's hall 
like thunder long ago in Douris' valleys. 
A wave of horror broke upon the crowd 
and many emigrants were crushed and trampled 
when Mirna died in space's Aniara. 
The fmal words she uttered were a message 
sent by the Victim of Disintegration. 
She let this witness testify for himself 
and stammering, incoherent, tell 
how ghastly fission is in mind and body, 
how time comes surging in, and surges on, 
how time comes surging at the wail of life, 
prolonging the grim second of one's dissolution, 
how terror whirls about, 
how horror blows away, 
how ghastly fission is in mind and body. 
J 0 A time of bitterest misery ensued, 
and long I sat in silence, brooding 
in Mirna's hall to which the evil sent 
the storm of its dark rays from uttermost space. 
34 

Despairingly I struggled to repair 
our hallowed Mirna's mechanism of skill and com­
fort 
and with the tensor calculus strove 
to revive the miracle's centre in her breast. 
But the voice of her phonoglobe was silent now, 
and her sensostat only received messages 
from some Bceotian spirit of such dullness 
that it lay far below both man and God. 
And now too I was pestered by the mob 
who crowded in, flinging jeers and curses 
upon me, crushed already in the pit 
by all that reached my heart from distant spheres. 
Even Chefone, the Goldonda' s ruthless master, 
came in to me and mocked me every day 
and though his malignant triumph was quite clear 
threatened me with the penalties of the law. 
He often tried to make a mystery 
of his own role in our Goldonda' s world 
and devilishly to force all souls 
to believe that we were bonnd for Hades. 
He succeeded in this, and backed 
by the grim ghoulishness of space 
gave the impression of a man who drives 
his people with delight to defeat and extinction. 
3J 

31 Chefone now instigated persecution 
and I and many others had to frnd 
a hiding place deep down in the Goldonda 
till the vials of his wrath ran out. 
Down there dwelt experts in every branch 
connected with the tensor of the Fourth Degree, 
the while those who continually corrupt 
pure thought bathed in vainglory. 
Confused and unconvincingly they tried to prove 
that Mirna's tragic fate was all our fault. 
Her flow of pictures had been disturbed 
by each ego thinking its own thoughts 
defiling her screen, thus dimming her comforting 
glow 
and obscuring the space waves, Mirna's radiation. 
Protesting our innocence we did our best 
to explain and instruct, using technical terms 
yet in the language of the com.mon man 
strove to achieve a measure of lucidity. 
But this new language, meant to explain all, 
became nonsense to ourselves, a Blind Man's Buff 
of words avoiding words, putting obscurity 
into the lucidity which is the soul of space. 
So next we tried to draw, as if for savages 
and prehistoric races of the kind 
Jb 

one reads of as belonging to the aeons 
of past existence and a primitive stage. 
We made these hieroglyphics look like trees and 
plants, 
we sketched the ramiftcations of a river, 
hoping by these means to devise a text 
which people, needing such visual aids, might 
understand. 
But when we ourselves heard only alien sounds 
in a tongue stripped of all formulas 
we scarcely understood the very lessons 
with which we'd tried to give a helping hand. 
And fmally this court of arbitration 
which was to absolve us from space's doom 
became differentiated in absurdum 
and the bridge between us as empty as before. 
J 2 With a system for the analytic testing 
of Mirna's whole cycle of formulas, phase by 
phase, 
I became in due course such an expert 
at watching everything everywhere as through 
glass 
that in the third year following the day 
of Mirna's demise in Aniara' s halls 
37 

I managed to hit on the trans-Tho mist principles 
which govern human rise or fall. 
On this discovery I went almost mad, . 
the wild intoxication of deep unreal joy 
transformed my soul into an all-seeing eye 
taking in the whole house of space at once. 
I was brought up from my prison in Aniara' s hold 
-where the woman pilot also was confmed­
back to the hall of our once-hallowed Mirna, 
and rumours spread. I heard the jubilant laughter. 
They all spoke of this great discovery 
and of Mirna's come-back in the starry night. 
3 3 But beyond every solution lurks a mystery. 
I exulted all too soon in Mirna's hall. 
I saw the key indeed, but as through reaches 
of clear glass and fathomless monntain crystal. 
Without the aid of Mirna, once my guide and 
helper, 
I faltered, weak and poor in spirit; 
the power of thought in consternation ebbed away. 
Deprived of Mirna, I saw a mirrored world 
which glimmered and died out on Mirna's screen. 
By Mirna's ruin, as though fallen among fires, 
I saw her breast, a blackened burnt-out shell. 

3 4 I have no name myself. Attached to Mirna 
I am known therefore as the Mimarobe. 
The oath I took is called goldondevan. 
The name I used to bear was erased at the first 
testing 
and must forever be forgotten. 
With Isagel, the woman pilot, things 
have so fallen out that her position 
decides her name, which is a code-word. 
Her true and secret name, the one she whispered 
close to my ear, I cannot here betray. 
Her eyes reflect the inaccessible 
yet gentle light of things unspoken, 
the light so often seen in mysterious things 
when beauty has surpassed the mystery. 
And as she draws the graphs, her nail-tips glimmer 
like opaque lamps in the half-light of the halls. 
She says: Please follow the graphs here with your 
numbers 
where the dark shadow of my sorrow falls. 
And then she rises from her Gopta table 
and the radiance of her thoughts illuminates me. 
Our glances meet, and, soul to soul, in silence 
we stand. I worship Isagel. 
A.-B 
3.9 

3 5 The inexorability of space drives us 
to practices and beliefs we have not had 
since pre-goldondic days, now half-forgotten, 
and Aniara' s four religions 
with priests, cruciftxes, and temple bells, 
the Cult of the Vagina, clamouring Yurginor, 
the Sect of Ticklers, perpetually laughing, 
reappear in space, crowding on each other's heels 
to fill the vast deserts of eternity. 
And I who, in my role of Mimarobe, 
am held responsible for all illusions 
which have been broken, must make room 
in Mirna's crypt, and hold everything in line, 
when the lustful libidinous women and voluptuaries 
in the sex dance of the Cult surround their god. 
36 I look at the women embdlishing their beauty. 
(For many of them this is not so hard) . 
Here wanders Y aal, a dormiftd Y urginna, 
whose power of love is now at its prime 
and there stands Libidel, from Venus' green 
perpetually fertile jungle spring. 
And close beside Chebeba, Yurg-obsessed, 
and with a Candian jewel on her thigh 
stands dormijunen Gena. Round her surge 
the flock of novices whon1 she instructs. 

At one time I developed the idea 
of so placing a thousand 1nirrors that they 
could give us everything that 1nirrors can 
of bright reflection and seelningly-widened space 
which optically magnifies every inch 
to an illusory depth of smne eight thousand inches, 
and when we had furnished twenty halls like this 
with mirrors taken from another eighty 
the results were so magnificent 
that for four long years with mirror glass 
I could entrance the soul-distraught. 
To keep our minds off our fatal joun1ey 
and turn them to the happy world of mirrors 
I introduced so many to the bliss 
induced by mirrors in a house of mirrors 
even I myself found time for Yurg 
with Daisi Doody from far Dourisburg. 
And even with Chebeba and with Y aal 
I and my reflections danced in Mirna's hall. 
They come in relays. I see them livened 
by Yurg and Cult, and cannot but adlnire 
when, Yurg-entranced, they circle between Inirrors 
reflected eightfold in a Inirrored world. 
From all directions, swaying in the Yurg, 
they seem themselves a dancing heavenly host 
in all the glory of eightfold reflection. 
Chebeba eight times over, eight times Yaal, 
and Gena eight times in an octagonal hall. 

See Libidel with skilled nnerring hand 
as she eggs on a man from Dourisland. 
And now Chebeba when in Y urgian bliss 
she whirls across to mirrored nothingness . 
where eight Chebebas, dancing in to meet 
show her eight times again her breasts and feet. 
For everything must shimmer like a mirage 
when mirrored dance is danced on mirrored limbs; 
illusions point the way through Yurgian halls 
to mirrored valleys and to mirrored plains. 
J 7 Desire and piety go hand in hand. 
On rolls the chariot, drawn by a team 
of men and women members of the Cult. 
The chaste staff lifted by Isagel 
is held up with the Lantern of the Cult 
when Libidel, her retinue eight libidinnor, 
glides to the ceremony, lies down in readiness. 
Later, when all are warmed by vaginal fire 
and lie there drowsily and in content, 
Isagel, with her lowered staff, moves forward 
and touches with the lantern thrice three times 
our holy shrine, our blessed Mirna's grave. 
Then comes a sigh like wind-swept reefs when Y aal, 
peace in her bosom, absolved frmn desire, 
kneels lingering by the shrine, supplicating 
with tender whisperings the Goddess's bier. 

What peace in her expression as she hears 
the dutiful singing of the Day of Days, 
and Isagel and Libidel and Gena 
circle the grave in chorus with Chebeba! 
J 8 In her dressing room behind Mirna's hall 
lovely Libidel sat one winter night, 
a watch upon her thigh, beside her a Buddha cat; 
a glistening jewel in the hollow of her navel. 
In her bosom flashed a heart-shaped pendant. 
Her breasts, warming the coldness of the stone, 
bore round her nipples a dark ring of charcoal 
well calculated for the glow of Tyrsos lamps. 
But watchful envy lay in ambush, waiting 
and purring quietly its panther song, 
ready to tear to shreds the legend of her beauty 
and scatter it in triumph to the winds. 
Her subtle lines still granted her the right 
to lead the Cult, but the day was drawing near 
when bikinillan would but enhance their failings 
and could no longer intrigue the devotees. 
But now she began to hide the promise 
which lay but a few inches from the sacred centre 
43 

and a Xinombric complement draped round her 
hips 
helped to distract the mind of the beholder. 
But many connoisseurs among the pious 
nourished in secrecy their growing doubts. 
No longer did they queue as formerly 
to enjoy her favours when she led the Cult. 
Libidel, apprehensive, smooths her hair. 
Her jewelled navel now seems like a sore 
but she hopes, all the same, her ample breasts 
in fellowship with graceful thighs 
will keep her for another year at least 
at the high altar of the Cult, tho' even now 
her autumn shows grim signs of its approach. 
In sunrose sarathasme and plyell 
the luscious Yaal stands quietly by her side, 
still young enough to wait for her high day, 
the time when she herself, one dazzling night 
of shooting stars, will succeed Libidel. 
J 9 A discovery not hitherto foreseen 
was made by Isagcl, the woman pilot, 
one monung she sat quietly in the Gopta room 
where she was working on her Jender graphs. 
44 

She called out suddenly and bade me come 
to the Jender table where, at lightning speed, 
she caught, and sealed provisionally, her fmding. 
She shrieked for joy, and pressed to her heart 
the lively, struggling inspiration 
which safely delivered now, had been conceived 
through love of the Law of Great Numbers. 
When I studied this child I could see clearly 
that it was healthy, with the strength of form 
which always characterizes Isagel's work 
in the world of higher mathematics. 
If this discovery had been made in Douris, 
if only Douris' valleys could have been 
a dwelling place for artisans of numbers 
it would have made a great sensation at once 
and deeply changed the Gopta calculus. 
And as we sat and discussed with each other 
the possibilities this discovery would have opened 
if only we had not been here in space, 
trapped in the emptiness we were falling through, 
we both grew sorrowful, but still retained 
the desire born of pure thought, the kind of joy 
which we could quietly share together 
during the time still left to us in life. 
But now and then my Isagel would weep 
to think of this overwhelming, endless space 
where everything can only fall forever, 
41 

as she herself must fall-and n1ust fall with her 
this great problen1, now solved and clearly mastered. 
THE SPACE SAILOR ' S  STORY 
4 0 The transport to Tundra Three took some nine 
years. 
Evacuation Gond as much as ten. 
I was myself on board the eighth goldonda. 
We flew alternately with other space-ships, 
Benares, Canton, Gond, and a few more. 
In about five years we moved three million 
fear-stricken humans to the novel planet. 
Those memories throb like raw sores . . .  
Mostly memories of the embarking times . . .  
The same frantic scenes repeated every time 
when tears and anguished prayers were blended 
with the gay songs of green-dad Space Cadets. 
When the day's quota of refugees from Gond 
is hustled complete with index passports and 
identity discs 
away from all the sin and shame of Earth, 
they shiver and, in spite of all, recoil . . .  
But forced on by the weight of their own nun1bers 
they con1e to the goldondas's human corrals 
where a few hardened Venus vets 
exanune them and with a rollicking wink 
tease then1 with 'Ha, ha, ha,' and 'Welcmne home 

to Heaven's kingdom fronĦ Jerusalem.' 
All apprehension is explained away 
until each index card has been adapted 
to the soul it represents through tests and then 
placed in the microrolls which automatically 
register every plus and every minus. 
And so they lift for heaven's endless reaches 
to be hardened on the tundra planet's beaches. 
Others to Venus' s quagmires are transported. 
What happens in both places is well known. 
In murky mines imprisoned crouch the peoples 
who, used and misused like mere articles, 
are sorted out and driven roughly down 
to the Caverns at Y gol. 
Inconceivable, this form of torture 
defies description both in words and pictures, 
with stony executioners in daily charge 
of locks, of taps, electric switches, 
and glass-constructed peepholes trained upon the 
Caverns 
beside whose outer walls the serfs of death 
unblinking, sluggish and unmoved 
peer in with chilly devils' eyes to follow 
the captives' struggle 
against walls of stone. 
Now let's go on (too late to draw back) 
to Tundra Two, where the plexi barracks are, 
47 

where Nobby and I once planned to wander 
in the Martian landscape's ray-untainted Spring. 
There proudly flourishes the black ice-tulip 
impervious to the marshy planet's chill . 
. 
while on the tundra the throaty cockerel crows 
its saga of the tundra's sterile state. 
Pathetic, starved, and yet by all revered 
that bird knows much about both cold and need. 
The only form of growth is arctic wilow 
-if we may pause to think of vegetation­
struggling, dwarf, hard as wrought-iron 
with black, inedible, unappetizing leaves 
well-hardened for these frore bare fields, 
digestible only by the cockerel whose gizzard 
is connected with a chain of stomachs. 
And when it gorges on these scanty leaves 
it seems as though one had heard the key 
turning finally in the door of life. 
For all one then can see is the shuttling gizzard, 
and when the bird swallows, one watches, 
fascinated; 
it sometimes even wrings a laugh from one. 
Yet to this land of poverty and hardship 
my Nobby was attached with all her soul. 
For bitter years of want set other standards 
than those applied when Nature is benign. 
Among the scrapings of the frozen planet 
in the willow's sighing she found fortitude. 
48 

She wandered on the moors and sang of Spring 
when the cold grew milder and the cockerel crew 
and willow trailers crept across the tundras 
hungrily stretching to a half-grown sun. 
She often sent odd willow leaves to Earth 
and wrote; leaves from the forests of the soul. 
Behold, Spring winds blow o'er the spirit's fields, 
my heart brims over. No doubt you can guess why. 
These were the days when evil Gond was twisted 
into a spiral by the Phototurb. 
A seething coil of fiery gases, 
a town in headlong flight through Douris' valleys. 
Against all that the extreme coolness 
and icy air surrounding Tundra Two 
was surely preferable, and the cockerel's 
scraggy and wizened shape might seem a Blue Bird. 
No wonder Nobby found contentment there, 
in comparison with Earth's blackness. 
The girl herself was clever indeed 
to wreȕt anything out of this existence. 
I don't think there were more than two 
kinds of life on the whole planet. 
Picture her wandering among the prison barracks 
where crowds of rough men like starving wolves 
tear off the saucepan lid and strive to devour 
the cockerel, skinny and uncookably tough, 
which defies every trick of tundra cuisine. 
49 

But Nobby was a girl unlike all others. 
She found it meaningless to blame 
men who would soon be buried in the tnndra 
forgotten by their fellows. 
. 
Nob by's existence was clearly reflected in the 
nurror, 
in no way polished up or glorified 
yet never sullied by the despairing look 
every prisoner, shocked and frightened, gave 
to the impassive glass. 
I love to linger with the happy memory 
of this courageous woman who took part 
in everything once known as suffering and 
sacrifice 
but now called something more prosaic, 
for when the altar gets too bloodstained 
the thin veneer of holiness falls off. 
That was the last Spring that Nature bloomed. 
She died that very Spring, stricken by a wind 
which blew hot hurricanes between the mountains 
and with great thunder filled the land of Rind. 
A sunclap sounded, lightning threw its forkings. 
I still can hear the screaming: sombra, sombra, 
of human beings, already dazed and blinded, 
who fled towards their God in search of succour. 
They did not know God too was in the flame 
of substances which, blasted and polluted, 
punished Xinombra with prin1aeval fire. 
JO 

The power of matter was all-engulfmg. 
The unforgettable years can1e upon us 
when everything was flooded by it. 
One saw souls trying to maintain a stand 
helped by their heritage of faith, 
but the giant outflow drowned them one by 
one. 
The faith and principles held in their hearts 
were robbed of meaning by the flood, 
the drama of their own lives swallowed up 
and drowned in the general 
all-overwhelming wave of impotence. 
They were reduced to cells within a state 
which made demands upon them as before 
but now without caring that it had destroyed 
the moral being from which it craved a tribute. 
And thus a human being condemned 
to exile far away on Tundra Two 
knew damn all of the nature of his crime 
but all the more about the giant's grim demands, 
and about the hopeless fate awaiting him 
in the jaws of a mine 
and in the giant castle made of glass 
which, for the sake of ceaseless supervision, 
rotated at the cesiun1 mineshaft' s edge 
in the town of Antalex, 
metropolis of this land of punishment. 
JI 

God's Kingdom never was of that dark world 
and receded further as the years rolled on 
and those who could made their way to the 
Heavens 
with bodies first when souls were barred. 
And we observed how many a tough tyrant 
surged up in time from these valleys down on Rind; 
we had to contend with boorish ruthless fellows 
who used their elbows to get through the goldonda 
gate. 
Surely the pious should have stood together 
against such fellows, and shown their teeth in 
time. 
But their desire for peace at any price was far too 
great 
and ruffians soon gave them their quietus. 
And unassuming souls in every country, 
taken by surprise, died at their rough hands. 
The shy and timid and the gentle-mannered 
were often left marooned in gamma-poisoned parts 
and found another way of reaching Heaven. 
They never found their way to Mirna's halls. 
A sailor of the spheres, I saw this happen, 
I who for thirty years have cruised in space 
between the Earth and the bare barren tundra. 
A job like this is bound to leave some trace. 
J2 

41 
During the years one's metnory collects such facts, 
none of them based on anything but truth. 
Without the precious image of my Nobby 
what would life have been worth to me? 
For love of others she has sewn and washed 
for tundran prisoners, in pure self-denial. 
That is why I have told you the tale 
of Nob by, the Good Samaritan. 
THE CHILD 
Chebeba sat in her most fruitful year 
in deepest bliss beside a tiny bier 
where lay the little rosy bud 
that she had saved from growing up 
in Aniara' s realm. 
Then entered Yaal, she too at her prime. 
She saw the fair dead child upon its bier 
and said in tones that were both hard and clear: 
You are going home. But we must stay on here 
in Aniara' s realm. 
Then Gena came in too, declaring: 
To you, my child, I will in reverence go 
and play no part, but stand here without guile 
before you, w.ho, released from sin and wrong 
sleep quietly in Aniara' s realm. 
JJ 

Y aal tiptoed out. Then Heba took her place. 
She could say nothing, only stood and gazed, 
watching the tiny child so peacefully 
sleep on in space, borne towards the DȖy <?f Days, 
borne on, away 
from Aniara' s realm. 
42 is omitted, in agreement with the author, as 
untranslatable. 
4 3 While Mirna lived we were as trolls 
who, crowding about Mirna, chose 
to see and hear, without any risk, 
all the woe and struggle in the land of Gond, 
and who, whenever excitetnent ran high 
and the taste of blood was salt in every tnouth, 
urged Mirna's guardian to switch the knobs 
and change the picture, taking another wave-
length 
to see smnething new. Our 1nenu thus becatne 
a balanced diet, in which death at sunset 
alternating with happiness at dawn, 
answered questions which in fear and tonnent 
were broadcast frmn some far retnote city. 
The reconciliation of opposites then appeared 
J4 

as something pretty good, and the land of Gond 
a country which had seen better days 
but was laid open now to evil's sway. 
Making full use of Mirna's incorruptible eye 
we shared all the sensations of Xinombra 
when, during our space travels, we changed 
others' agonies into mere sounds and pictures. 
And although Mirna, at Xinombra' s fate, 
was seen to shudder as once at Dourisburg' s, 
we travellers watched the holocaust, 
the hyena in us getting its full due, 
we joined the lion, risk free, as he pounced 
and growling, wiped out qualms of conscience. 
The number of slaughters we saw in this way, 
the number of battlefields we wallowed in, 
is legion. Though we could see the fallen lie before 
us 
we trampled on in order to be present 
at the next phase of the battle. 
Our faithful Mirna reproduced it all 
relentlessly, without any censoring, 
and if sometimes we turned quite stiff 
with terror, and felt horrified by many a deed, 
the deeds themselves were actually so many 
that memory retained only the very worst. 
These were known as the Extremes, and then 
lost in the tide of horrors flowing between. 
A.-F 
JJ 

44 In Hall No. 7 is the Blue Archive of Thought 
but seldom visited, tho' there are things there 
that can bear long thinking about still. 
There a man stands called the Friend of Thought 
ready to teach each one who may so wish 
the elements of the laws of thinking. 
H.e points in sorrow to a set of thoughts 
which might have saved us had it been used 
in time for cultivation of the spirit, 
but which, since spirit was lacking, 
was put aside in some forgotten lumber-room; 
but as our emptiness here was never-ending, 
there were always some who came and asked to 
see 
an occasional ancient train of philosophy 
which might, they imagined, be given a 
new significance and occupy the mind a little. 
4 5 The Cynic, who is always close to hand 
to calculate our minimum of hope 
is ahead of every flight of thought 
and pulverizes the goal of our hopes 
in ways so comic that the thought itself 
somersaults and falls like a skater on sheer ice. 
But then the brain laughs as the brain will do 
like an intellectual snob, caught out in a slip of 
thought, 
or as a savage quite nonplussed by calculations. 
J6 

A shrug mimicking his victims in the past, 
is the Cynic's sole answer, or an icy grimace, 
reflex of his bitter loneliness. 
·4 6 Daily we listen to the phonodiscs---<:oins 
supplied to all on board and played 
by the Fingerspeakers worn on our left hands. 
We exchange discs of many different values. 
Everyone plays whatever he has, and though 
a space dime scarcely weighs an ounce 
it sings like a cicada on every hand 
grown soft and white through lack of useful work. 
Thanks to this device we still retain 
some little contact with the past. 
The gaster-penny still croons out its rondi 
and the rindel-penny still tunes up its gondi. 
Her hand held dose by her lovely cheek 
and the Fingerspeaker murmuring in her ear, 
sits Heba, listening idly to a space dime. 
She gives a sudden shiver, changes the coin, and 
soon 
a stream of yurgian music fills her head. 
I asked her later, when I went my round, 
why she had trembled. I heard, she told me, 
a cry for help, a prayer for mercy. A scream, 
transmitted through the disc, from Gond. 
!7 

4 7 A philosopher of point sets, nay, a mystic 
of the school of transfmite numbers, often comes, 
his question card completed, to the Gopta centre, 
then quietly bows to clear-eyed Isagel 
and tiptoes out in Aniara' s hall. 
And Isagel, who fmds the question reasonable, 
accepts his flock of formulas and readjusts them 
to the third thought-combination of the Gopta table. 
And when she has transformed the group of 
numbers 
and carefully goptated tensor classes, 
she places them upon the Gopta waggon 
and harnesses it to the space-lackey, Robert, 
our Brains Trust's faithful ox. 
When the philosopher himself comes back 
the only thing that Isagel can say 
is that, despite all Robert's frenzied efforts, 
no Go pta can explain the problem set. 
For the question concerns the frequency of wonders 
in the Cosmos, gauged by point set mathematics. 
But it appears that Chance and Miracle 
have a common source, and consequently 
the same answers would seem valid for both. 
And then the point set man, as we have called him, 
bows sorrowfully in quiet acceptance 
and tiptoes off to Aniara' s halls. 
}8 

48 A poetess appeared within our world 
and the beauty of her songs lifted us quite 
out of ourselves into the world of spirits. 
She gilded our drab prison bars with fire, 
brought Heaven to the dark rooms of our hearts, 
changing each word from smoke to red-hot flame. 
She had come to us from the land of Rind 
and the strange myths woven about her life 
warmed us like sacred wine. 
She herself was blind from birth, a child 
of a thousand nights without a trace of day, 
yet her blind eyes seemed in themselves to hold 
the depths of a dark well, the nucleus of all song. 
And the miracle she brought with her 
was the game of the human soul with language, 
the visionary's play with joy and sorrow. 
And we were enraptured by her songs of bliss 
and blinded by the glory she revealed 
in the infmity of space, where she, though blind, 
and trapped by night, composed the Songs of Rind. 
THE B LIND POETE S S  
49 The long road I've come from Rind 
to here has the same night-colour 
as the paths I trod in Rind itsel£ 
19 

Dark as before. Dark as always. 
But our darkness grew cold. 
Therein lay the difference. 
All accustomed darkness deserted me 
and against my forehead 
and against my breast, 
which was a part of Spring, 
the cold darkness struck 
and stayed forever. 
A dreary moaning from Rind's aspens 
surged in the night. I began to shiver. 
This was in autumn. Some spoke 
of the fire of maples, some whom I heard 
passing, praised the sunset hues 
on a nearby valley. 
They said it was crimson, pale 
with spreading rays, purple in the evening. 
Against it, forests flamed in the night. 
They told too how shadows under the trees 
gradually whitened after frost 
as though grass were summer's hair 
rapidly ageing, 
so they described to me the look of things. 
A silvering of hoar frost and gold 
that flashed and glinunered each time summer paid 
her debt to her grey creditor, the cold. 
And autumn's gay extravagance was also painted: 
all gold thrown into summer's grave. 
This flaming grandeur, so they said, 
had the gaudiness of a gypsy funeral 
6o 

with its riot of red and yellow streamers 
and gilded banners brought from Ispahan. 
But I myself stood still and cold there in the dark-
ness 
and only felt all that was near to me 
vanish before a dark and icy wind 
while the last shudder of the aspen leaves 
told me that in the land of Rind 
summer would soon lie dead. 
Then the wind changed 
and in the night 
a terrible black heat swept in. 
I fell into the arms of one 
who came rwming. 
That frightened me. 
How could I tell in the hot darkness 
who it was? 
He caught me as I fell and held me 
-whether a devil or a man I knew not­
while the rumbling increased 
and the hot wind, black as before, 
grew to a tempest. 
He who held me shouted frantically 
in a voice which yet seemed far away: 
'Protect your eyes. It's coming. It will blind you.' 
I made my own voice as loud as I could 
and shouted back at him: I am already blind. 
I have never seen. 
01 

Then he let me go, ran for his life. 
I cannot say where, in the hot blast of darkness 
which was suddenly swallowed up 
by fearful thunder claps 
crashing towards me, a blind woman ! 
I fell again, began to crawl 
and struggled on through Rind's forests. 
At length I reached a stony crevice 
where no trees fell and the heat was not too great. 
There I lay, almost happy, between stones 
and prayed to Rind for help. 
And through the roaring, mirabile dictu, 
someone came to my pit 
and carried me away to a dosed carriage 
and conveyed me through the night 
to Rindon' s airfield. 
There was a refugee committee there, nigh stricken 
dumb, 
their voices cracked by tiredness and shouting. 
I whispered my number and name, and they told 
me to follow 
the crowd which surged to the goldonda exits. 
The years which followed sealed my fate, 
for, on the Martian tundra, I learnt how 
as a messenger from Rind, to soften the guards 
with my songs of grief over a cruel doom. 
By touching faces with my hands 
I learnt to tell great sufferers from others 
and at length returned to Rind 
62 

to gather, by my singing, 
money for the Tundra refugees. 
The land in Rind was bare. All vegetation stunted, 
but iron wills insisted on their plan 
to save some ground with a new substance 
the scientists had given them-Geosan they called 
it. 
How this worked I do not know. 
Many said it was a complete failure. 
Man to man the plan was defined as something 
everybody hoped for 
but no one could achieve. 
Thus I left my home, the source 
of all my songs of Rind. I applied 
for a post as singer in the Third Saloon. 
There I work now. I sing 'Alas, the valley,' 
and 'Tiny Bird In the Bower of Roses' 
as well as the Cast Iron Ballad, which the 
Gondians 
so often sing aboard our space goldonda. 
Each fight for Heaven is a fight for joy. 
The goal of every heart is Paradise. 
How fearful then if treacherous influences 
lead and persuade the selfish and the angry 
into this fight, thus darkening our way 
with banners of hate, revenge, and malice. 
How hard it is for man to feel a keen 
and natural desire to maintain truth ! 
How hard it is to know one's duty early ! 

How hard to join in Mass at the high altar 
invoking so a God of whose strange laws 
we know no more than that He suffers deeply 
in every act that does not wholly please <m. 
How hard to fuse one's faith with daily living ! 
How hard to understand God's sacrifice ! 
How difficult in secret not to wonder-
Has not the blood of sacrifice run dry, 
and why are executioners still with us? 
How difficult in secret not to wonder! 
How hard to understand the words of mercy 
for us who have never spoken with the dead 
or had an answer from the grave 
where fairies never tiptoe in with wands, 
where only one has burst the bonds of death 
to meet his God, while all the others, blind 
and silent in the foulness of dissolution 
must lie in dust until the Judgement Day ! 
How hard to trust in life beyond the grave ! 
How right to wish for life beyond the grave 
for this is proof of joy in living 
and the desire to taste life's beauties further, 
not just to die like fireflies on the shore ! 
How right to show an honest joy in living ! 
How right to value living over death ! 
64 

How harsh the grip of the tomb ! 
How easy to trust in life beyond the grave! 
Committed to the earth they lie in ranks 
in the blind ground beneath the winds of Spring 
and there in unison they join the chorus 
of all the blind chanting the songs of Rind. 
With limbs already mouldered into dust 
they praise each day in song the God 
who, although blind, knows al and never needs to 
see 
the bodies to which He granted spirit. 
Slowly the flesh wil crumble into dust. 
Only the bones endure. 
But time goes on, and soon 
even the bones will mingle with the earth. 
And soon their song choir wil dissolve 
into the treetops from where every leaf 
will tell the winds that pass 
how death hidden in summer sings for joy. 
Forgetful of itself the summer fades 
so too the spirit of Life, elusive as 
delicate summers which have flowered away 
to come again with every changing year. 
We listen, entranced, while the blind girl speaks. 
Some murmur as they stand: 

What gracious words she tells her story in, 
what gracious words come from the land of Rind 
-but they are only words, borne on the wind. 
5 0 Sandon, the High Comedian, refreshed and 
delighted 
all of us the light-years had touched and blighted. 
When the blaze of our sun was turned away from 
the outcast group 
Sandon stood up to our paralysed loss of hope. 
And, in the hull of our joy, in the glare of strange 
suns after, 
Sandon the Clown would explode with bursts of 
his zany laughter. 
And we bawled Bravo ! when he came on stage 
with his three-legged trolley 
and he shouted zanily back at our plaudits, volley 
on volley. 
But the grave is a joker too. Clowns all go off stage 
by and by. 
And Sandon, Comedian, has gone to his grave in 
the streams of the sky. 
66 

51 
Sandon the Clown, used up, worn down, gave up 
his art, his breath, 
under the heavy burden of human fate, to the 
zany death. 
A lady of the world, a graceful gold leaf 
on a delicate branch of the nobility of Yedis, 
exquisitely formed, her hair parted 
to show one half blue, the other black, 
with a gleaming, jewelled comb of rarest Y abian 
fire-agate 
in the upward sweep of her high crown of hair, 
describes to another Yedian lady 
how from a palanquin above the heights of Geining 
she once looked out 
across the inland sea of Setokaidi 
and watched the moon sail up, a f1gured lantern, 
dripping with autumn gold. 
I came upon these ladies 
one day, when sorting fragments of the mima 
and working with them in solitude. 
Once upon a time the mima must have shown their 
features, 
catching the serene beauty of the Y edis-eyed, 
echoing the language they once spoke 
by Setokaidi' s inland sea. 

Alas, that Mirna is extinct. 
Alas, the Mighty One is dead. 
I cannot understand it. It is inexplicable. 
The goddess crushed by grief. And we _are_ danmed. 
52 Look at her, sweeping past 
draped in the appropriate sleekness of the latest 
fashion, 
surely forever worthy to remain 
by seas that curve from Teb to Cape Atlantis, 
an Aphrodite with eternal life, 
untouched 
by time and salt! 
Do not believe it. 
That woman has been dust 
four milion years, and nothing, 
not even the great age of culture 
which gave her birth, has left the faintest trace. 
What radiance ! 
Lord God, how do you do it? 
Look at those graceful modem clothes. 
Heba, do you see 
that gorgeous belt 
and mark the tailoring of the waistline? 
What testimony 
' 
. 
to woman s gemus 
for making her clothes live their own life 
68 

in time, throughout the seasons, 
a life 
so subtly and beautifully moulded 
that its true background is the sea 
by Cape Atlantis! 
Lord God, how do you do it? 
Whose is the sharpest pain? 
-Thine, who harvests all, 
ours, who see and know 
how all is harvested? 
Thy mighty power-our helplessness. 
Switch off. Let's go back to our yurg. 
Did you notice 
the cut of that dress might well be used 
in our Tarry line, the Yibb, the Sesi-Yedi 
and other tailoring 
from Dourisburg? 
THE SPEAR 
53 In the eleventh year we saw a vision; 
the slenderest, the tiniest of sights; 
a spear that travelled through the universe. 
It came from the same direction as our goldonda 
and did not swerve aside but held its course. 
Its speed was greater than that of the goldonda 
and consequently the spear 
rapidly drew ahead of us. 

Afterwards we sat for a long time in groups 
talking excitedly to one another 
about the spear, its path, its origin, what it por­
tended. 
. 
. 
But no one knew, and no one could know. 
One made a guess but nobody believed him. 
In some way there seemed nothing to believe, 
as an object of belief the sight was meaningless. 
It merely whizzed across the universe. 
The spear of emptiness went on its aimless course 
but even so this spectacle 
had power to change the minds of many of us; 
three went quite mad, a fourth one took his life, 
another set up a new sect, 
a noisy, boring, unaesthetic crowd 
who long disturbed the peace in Aniara. 
And thus, in spite of all, the spear had pierced us. 
CHEF O NE ' S  GARD E N  
54 In 
.
order to keep in touch with the corps of 
mventors 
the leaders entertained them to dinner in 
'Perpetual Spring', 
A winter garden of a type often seen in goldondas 
and popularly called 'flying gardens of space'. 
70 

The best of humanity mounts guard there over life, 
tiny gardens of Eden where nothing withers or 
dwarfs. 
And where among blossom and greenery, a man 
can find rest 
from the glassy technique and cold staring darkness 
of space. 
There sit our Leaders now, absorbed with the 
inventors 
in how best to safeguard 'Perpetual Spring'. 
And how to cultivate still more of delicate life 
and protect our inherited share of 'the gardens of 
' 
space . 
First they all looked about them, out there in the 
wondrous park, 
framed by pillars and archways, merged with the 
grass-covered earth. 
The illusion was such that the Spring heaven glowed 
and the stream 
ran a carefully planned circle in the shade of 
enchanted green hedges. 
The dove fluttered high to the heaven last seen by 
our eyes. 
A nude woman sat by the hyssop-blue risings. 
A.--G 
71 

With her gracefully curved breasts, in a posture 
enhancing her beauty, 
she seemed to me wonderfully fair, for the evening 
was near. 
Yes, that woman was lovely indeed, a delight to the 
eye, 
and just for this reason I moved even closer to 
see. 
Yet in spite of the wines I had recently tasted, the 
sight 
of such beauty has rarely awakened such pain in my 
breast. 
I rubbed at my eyes, half-believing I was still not 
fully awake; 
for this was the nymph of the Mountain, the prey 
of the Dragon. 
The hackneyed old song which nobody now 
wanted to sing 
was suddenly apt in the oceans where Goldondas 
SWim. 
We can dis1niss the sage after noting the woman is 
nude. 
But who can dismiss magic 1nountains, make light 
of the Dragon? 
72 

Still, as guest of the Leaders, I wanted at least to 
fmd out 
how dragons behave, how they function, what they 
are about. 
I said to her: Beautiful creature, so lovely, so 
naked, 
does the park you are in belong by some chance to 
the Dragon? 
She answered: I come of the people in hell-fire who 
once shouted 'Sombra', 
and you of the people who blasted all life in 
Xinombra. 
I hate all your people, as deeply and fiercely as I 
treasure 
every tree, every plant in these space-circling 
gardens of pleasure. 
And then as I stood there, the halls of Chefone 
darkened 
and shame added its weight to my woeful load of 
sorrows. 
I shrank from the look the woman slave threw 
me 
and nothing that happened thereafter had any 
importance. 
73 

I bowed to her silently, made my way back to the 
path 
where a myriad birds winged their songs to the 
dome of the sky. 
I guessed that Chefone had no thought of me or my 
place 
as I tiptoed away from the 'flying gardens of 
' 
space . 
But my thoughts lingered long with that woman, 
so graceful and naked 
and for long I felt shame, as though I in myself 
were the Dragon. 
55 On the planetarium deck, domed by the arch 
of a plexi-roof, transparent to the sky, 
lifts are unloaded of those who wish to stroll 
at leisure to and fro upon the star-deck 
and watch a nova's fire, the glow of which 
comes to us from the coils of Berenice's hair. 
And the astronomer-modest in his knowledge­
describes to us how the universe plays dice 
in distant solar systems with the scalding novas 
which, tired of ceaselessly offering gifts 
to the great Photophag suddenly 
74 

break down and in extremes of fury hurl 
the last flames of an expended passion 
on to the Photophag's indifferent waves. 
A dandy, who deserves a thrashing, listens with 
contempt, 
and, in a drawling and degenerate voice 
which instantly reveals the Gondian, 
passes a comment of deliberate disgust 
which drops and dwindles to a sneering whisper 
on a level with his weary space-grimace. 
And the astonomer, chilled to silence by this, 
mutters apologies and ends the evening's viewing 
of the sights to be seen in outer-space. 
56 One day I met Chefone in the passage 
which leads in to the third Gopta Hall. 
Scornfully he asked me: What about the songs 
of cuckoo and thrush this year from Douris? 
Had the Mirna overcome her trifling ailment? 
I saw that you searched wildly and long 
below her breast to fmd the cause of trouble. 
Perhaps you found the right spot in the end? 
I stammer out a scared Goldondic greeting, 
report to him that Mirna died of grief, 
7J 

despite her visionary powers seeing no salvation 
for those imprisoned in this hold of death. 
And then Chefone laughed as though he saw 
sights that were comic here in Mirna's hall. 
I felt like collapsing in my dumb despair 
at thought of my lost home in Douris' valleys. 
But Chefone, impatient, bored by tears, 
strides on, and I am left there stiff and frozen, 
remembering the time when a thousand Springs 
turned to eternal winter in Mirna's hall. 
Is there still any hope of our salvation 
in Aniara, now that She is dead? 
I search for comfort, look in every comer, 
but all in vain. As vainly do I test 
advice and visions too. 
57 One day Libidel lay prostrated 
by the drug she had placed on her tongue. 
We sang by her grave, while the flames leapt 
to encircle one no longer young. 
Our shuddering conscience contracted 
frost-touched in the cynical heavens. 
Jo 

And our stainless steel vault was sealed up 
in seas where love's splendour had faded. 
58 A religion strongly rivalling the Cult 
has grown up in the torment of our darkness. 
Its adepts worship Light as an ideal, and f1re 
the goddess of their sect is a pure flame. 
The girl from Rind was chosen for this role. 
And the choir bellows like a great wind 
when she, the singer, whose own sight is gone, 
appears before the altar clad in light. 
She chants her hymns about the god of light 
and tells how she who once lived on Rind 
looked into light and saw it with her skin. 
The vision seared her. This is what it means 
to feel one's skin scorched by the fire of 
God. 
Ecstasy seizes her. No one can clearly hear 
what she is saying, but a vast choir 
of voices carries her as on the crest of a wave. 
Placed among a thousand lights, the blind saint 
in fireproof mantle made of silicates, 
surging towards the barrier of the Photophag 
pleads with shrill cries for light, more light, on 
Rind. 
77 

I often wandered towards the hall 
where this sect met, for its spirit moved me 
as it did many, on our long journey through 
darkness. 
59 A Mass of Repentance is held in the Hall of 
Memory 
and those of us who feel deeply contrite 
forgather there, our foreheads strewn with ashes, 
torturing ourselves with dirges of penitence. 
'Prepare for doom. The walls of wrath are closing 
around our fate, the fate we brought upon our­
selves. 
Our punishment is but the mirror reflex 
of those tortures we invented long ago. 
'When no excuse distorts the picture any longer 
the image in the glass itself is Hades 
and mirrors scorch you-best keep your hands 
off-
they reflect what was said and done.' 
Day after day I hear the dreary chanting 
of hideous songs by these grey fakirs of contrition 
and feel revolted. For who can rival 
the degradation they thus itnpose on themselves? 
78 

For me, a more important question is to fmd 
some means of healing Mi1na' s broken spirit 
and recreating the celestial 1nembrane, 
ruined by space waves from the darkened earth. 
6 0 Many an overwrought inmate of the space ship 
will listen gladly to the tranquil voice 
of Aniara' s astronomer as he tells the talc 
of pre-goldondic days and the glacion. 
He points out then how meaningless it is 
to speak about a cosmic clock of doom 
since the rhythm of Cosmos follows quite other 
patterns of time than those we knew on earth. 
For generations which should have been punished 
had already slept a thousand years in the deserts 
when space, using the scourge of frozen climate, 
struck mankind with an ice age. 
Quietly he explains, with sober illustrations, 
the course of the most recent glacion 
when the gondilder of the twenty-third century 
in the ice clime slithered from his throne. 
Man was busy just then with the millemlium 
whose dawn, however, was overcast by wars; 
7.9 

he was about to till the earth again 
when all human plans were suddenly crushed and 
broken. 
For the frozen nebula of Golmos met the sun 
which started then upon a pilgrimage 
through Golmos' night; and Golmos' shadow-play 
chilled our world with the moan of glacial winds. 
The heavy cap spread out across the earth 
a circumpolar covering. So great countries 
were clad in ice many kilometres thick. 
Not only arctic snow came moving down 
-the hexagons of frozen convolutions­
but cosmic snow too from the nebulosa, 
turning winters into aeons. 
An icy crust concealed the lands of Europe 
which hidden under huge sheets of ice 
were bedded down for sixteen thousand years, 
deprived of every ray of sunshine. 
And people in these countries 
carried their teclmical skills as far south 
as possible, making s01ne resistance for a while, 
then sank frozen into a barbarous coma. 
So through a period of twelve thousand years 
man was a savage 
So 

who, arn1ed with fragmentary n1emories of 
technology, 
waited to see the Sllll return again 
to kindle the woods of nature and realms of 
culture. 
Succeeding generations turned the wheels 
and spun the threads in primitive workshops 
where they were re-educated for hard living 
and accustomed to ice age conditions. 
The nebula of cold now passed the sllll, 
yet to humans in pre-goldondic days 
it seemed for fifteen centuries like a mourning 
vejl, 
a titanic cloth of coalƋblack satin 
which every evening rolled across the heaven 
darkening the galaxies with its widow's weeds. 
In time this dark cloth passed further off 
and being, by cosmic standards, small, 
it lost as it grew more remote 
its first resemblance to a mourning veil, 
and hardly more than eleven thousand years 
after the centuries when the sun left Golmos 
and continued on its way to renewed glory 
this sombre patch had almost disappeared 
from the centre of a heaven refreshed. 
By then the ice had melted and new races 
tasted the blessing of clear Springs in Gond. 
81 

61 I invented, with the utmost dificulty, 
a screen composed of two sorts of rays, 
and found a way of hanging this as it were 
out in space, some miles from the goldonda, 
and towards this space-screen then I could send 
a third sort of ray which transmitted pictures. 
In this way I contrived to establish 
the illusion of a wall in space-a kind of frieze 
stretched out there and made up 
of pictures of forests and moonlit lakes, 
mountains and cities. Sometimes I introduced 
a mighty army of people carrying banners 
of victory-all to make a seeming wall 
which could shut out the intolerable void. 
Later I built up yet another wall 
this time on another side, and in between 
these two resplendent walls of dense illusion 
our space-ship glided-well screened from the 
1mmense 
and gaping gorges which could no longer 
stare in at us, as they'd done for the last nine 
years 
stinging us like lances, pricking us like needles. 
But even such tapestries of fantasy 
need the support of some human will at least, 
the contribution of some secret drearns 
from those who only crave but never give us 
-anything but emptiness, a void 
82 

which must be Cohstahtly filled and embellished. 
And now this emptiness turned against me, 
pursuing me to dark corners of the ship, 
threatening my life when I could not 
explain at once why emptiness remained. 
I saw then how things are and how they were. 
No one can hide his inner emptiness. 
Mirna had been smashed against the waves of time 
like Humpty-Dumpty on his famous wall. 
No one could mend poor Humpty-Dumpty then. 
Still less have I any chance of mending you. 
Your emptiness is terrifying indeed. 
I keep on conjuring-but at bottom 
the effort is hardly worth the trouble, 
but you contribute nothing of your souls, 
and so the pictures faded clean away. 
6 2 We tum the wheel of routine. I lecture 
space-cadets on the science of the Gopta. 
Through the observation tower, suns 
peer in at us. They seem motionless 
though we know that with thunderous roar 
they sway and rotate in everlasting night on pyres 
of roentgen light, 

and while in my mind's ear I hear them sound 
like terrible war-drums in the long battle 
light wages against darkness without end, 
I hear n1y own voice making feeble sounds 
in answer to my question on the Gopta. 
'Only by revaluation of the new era 
and new extensions of the tensor calculus 
was it possible to find a means 
of discovering the split-up symmetry 
which through the formula of five divided by 
three 
was simplified and turned to real advantage 
in every tour made by the Go pta chariot.' 
And then the space cadets got up to go 
in perfect line into the hall 
where the next teacher, worthy and placid 
Giles, speaks to them about goldonda buildings. 
6 J A woman from Gond, now a widow, 
was often seen with her husband 
on the star-deck. For years they'd sit there 
with their bundles strapped ready as tho' 
expecting a landing. Though many looked at 
them 
with irony, which grew colder and colder 
84 

as time went by, nevertheless these two 
maintained a touching expectation 
gazing serenely on towards the Lyra. 
Still in their fond minds lingered 
the scent of thyme fields they'd known 
and of bread she'd once baked in the ovens 
they'd been forced to leave behind in Gond. 
How many thousand times these two had studied 
Heaven's prospectus, sitting close, absorbed, 
no mortal being here can tell, in space years 
which passed them by without a trace 
until they both grew grey at last 
and she was left sitting there alone 
in quiet recollection of bygone days 
when they had lived together, safe 
in Gond, till a game ofJacob's Ladder 
was suddenly proclaimed by wailing sirens 
and forced their headlong flight through Douris' 
plains. 
Huddled close together on Goldon' s airfield 
they took sad farewell of Do uris' valleys 
and with a parting prayer they laid 
their emigration problems in fate's hand. 
I used to notice how for several years 
the widow sat alone there, quiet and bowed, 
while we, who with ingenious leadership 

endeavoured to guide fate's hand, began 
to despair of reaching the Promised Land. 
64 Hear us, Xinombrians, who 
haunt you with memories. 
We who have passed on, and know, 
pursue you with visions. 
For several years Xinombra' s ashes 
floated gently down 
like snow. 
Each time you wake we stumble forward, 
our blackened arms 
holding up your shame. 
Xinombra' s pillar of ashes 
travelled across Rind. 
It reached the coast on the fifth day 
and came to Cape Atlantis on the seventh, 
but the survivors found no hope, 
no refuge even in the open sea, 
Where jellyftsh were seen to founder 
and octopedia rose dead from great depths. 
Like flowers of death Xinon1bra' s ashes 
floated across the waters. 
86 

Aquatic demons and angels 
swirled round together, 
all of them dead. 
Religion swam into men's thoughts 
carried on the gulf-streams of death. 
The holy stone of wisdom 
hidden in the slaughter-mask of genius 
was shot into the heart 
of the city of Xinombra 
which died for the third time. 
Oh, what a precious jewel was lost ! 
6 5 We lowered a curtain of dreams 
and between ourselves and memories of Xinombra 
a blessed forgetfulness 
filled with its own life sprang up. 
Thus magnified, transformed, 
our senses soared 
. 
. 
m a new gmse, 
bent on adventure among the dimensions. 
An intolerable nucleus of pain dissolved. 
We felt quite clearly 
the point at which it burst and welled out, 
giving a nameless bliss 
A.-H 

in which Aniara was no more 
and Chefone had died, 
no one knew how or cared. 
Relief pervaded us all so easily. 
Isagel was there also. 
Libidel and the libidinnians 
with the eight dormifides came gliding in 
changed by the drug as tho' by dew 
in mountain glens at break of day. 
6 6 More and more deeply has each tortured soul 
drunk of the Paradise I have here described 
but every time our laudanum is drained 
our visions of Eden quickly fade, 
Xinombra' s shrieking ghosts swarm in upon us 
sworn to revenge their ravished city's fate. 
6 7 I am roused by a scream. It is Chebeba' s. 
She stares at me with failing eyes 
their brightness lost. They dim and die. 
0 God, she cried, I can't bear to live 
where there is neither joy nor hope. 
How fearfully, how clearly, I recall Xinombra. 
Parched heat swept in from all directions, 
its climax, 
88 

expertly prepared in torrid formulas, 
the Phototurb 
which transformed all the air 
into stifling oven-heat. 
It was in autumn 
refugees spread the tale 
of cool lakes where, in fmal agony, 
one might attempt to drown. 
It is all over now, 
and there is no one left to blame. 
The men responsible? All dead! 
The instigators in oblivion ! 
The tools of power which held 
everything in a cast-iron grip 
were suddenly changed to ashes. 
All that could burn crumbled to ashes. 
The stones were glazed 
to a depth of four inches. 
In some places the glaze went even deeper. 
A foot or more 
of granite surface boiled. 
But humans were spared the sight of this, 
they had been whirled ahead, above, around 
like shooting cinders. 
What happened inside the houses? 
Hardly anything. 
Sg 

It was so quick there was scarcely time 
to grasp that it had happe17-ed. 
Imagine to yourself a bedside clock 
which, set to measure time in seconds, 
is taken unawares by its own dissolution 
and then boils up and whirls away as gas 
all in the millionth part of one small second ! 
Or the woman who lay asleep and unsuspecting 
and who, at the fatal instant, woke up and shivered. 
No ! Spare our feelings I hear you screaming . . .  
From the purgatory of repentance is heard the cry 
of Sombra 
like those which echoed, echoed, in Xinombra. 
6 8 We felt ourselves drawn off our course 
and indulged the hope that an end 
was close in the unutterable vastness. 
New hope fired the veins of the ancients 
as they felt her lurch in her orbit. 
Among all who were weary of suffering 
and longed for the peace of Nirvana 
the cry rang: She staggers, our beauty! 
She lurched once again from her course. 
Our innermost hopes found expression 
and no one derided his neighbour 
90 

when diferent doctrines and religions 
met up in the halls of the ship, 
with pennants and crosses and emblems, 
prayer-streamers and the Sign of the Lotus. 
She violently lurched in her orbit again 
and now hope was distorted by terror 
but soon raised its banners again. 
69 We ran into something like a fog 
which grew thicker every day 
till on the fifth day it began to smoulder 
against the ship's nose-cone. Quickly thereafter 
strange new phenomena appeared. 
A rainbow-shimmering gauzy veil 
wrapt itself marvellously round the ship 
covering it with a splendid spray of colours. 
Then a terrific display of fireworks 
dazzled all on board with blinding light. 
This festive image did not last long. We met 
resistance of an unknown kind next 
and a hurricane of glowing particles induced 
stark terror. The fear of immediate death 
seized all of us. 
We all thought now of doom and death. 
The many thousands who had occupied 
the four thousand rooms on the goldonda 
choked up the passages in their panic. 

At least a hundred refugees from Gond 
were trampled under the assembly halls 
and thousands were injured in other ways. 
The disturbances of gravitation 
which spread abroad sent waves of Chaos 
through all our souls 
when a thousand vibrations as from 
the impact of huge rocks made every heart shudder 
rousing such fear that nothing on the journey 
equalled the hideous terror 
which soon filled the halls and stairways 
where crowding in itself caused death: 
a human mill driven by human fear 
grinding itself in swirling waves of madness. 
Like a spiral drill employed by Titans 
the ship whirled up a cosmic sand cloud 
which smouldered, glimmered, and was soon put 
down 
against the shuddering metals of the nose-cone. 
And like a spi.tming top, in flames, lit up 
as though by nearby suns our ship plunged on, 
amid the thunderous roars of the surrounding 
matter, 
deeper and deeper it1to its gorge. 
And then 
as suddenly as it had started 
it was all over, and the goldonda fell 
along the loxodron1e 
which she retained in falling . 
.92 

What could it have been? The question rose. 
In spite of all our dead it was put first. 
It seen1ed in some way most important 
for our fantastic world of fear stil gliding 
on its customary course towards the Lyra. 
And now among these dead and mangled bodies 
the leaders were obliged to say what they believed 
and deemed a probable explanation: 
a cloud of cosmic snow perhaps; the ice 
of some strange substance; cosmic crystal powder 
adrift for centuries; son1e form of eternal snow 
drifting about in space for a billion years 
searching for a mountain 
to rest upon, 
to rest up m peace. 
The passengers accepted this hypothesis, 
bowed themselves and gathered up their dead, 
whose souls, having reached the haven of peace, 
had become cool as the snow 
which fmds its resting place 
on mountains of the Spirit. 
But much was changed thereafter in the life 
we led within that world which now was ours. 
The Hall of Mirrors, which for four long years 
had nourished our illusion, lay in ruins. 
A thousand shattered fragments, heaped in drifts, 
littered the floors once used for dancing 
and cut to pieces between jagged splinters 
93 

lay many a beauty, struck down by the yurg 
the Cloud had danced in space with our goldonda. 
With jewels placed high upon her hip lay Heba, 
and Daisi still as beautiful, while Y aal . 
lay dead beside the wounded Chebeba. 
This all befell in the twelfth year 
after our take-off from Douris' valleys. 
7 0 Back to featureless everyday we drifted on 
following as before the streams of Ghazilnut, 
the name given to that lobe of our galaxy 
which in contrast to other lobes 
can be described in human star terms. 
Which does not mean that Ghazilnut 
can be mastered or contained within 
the boundaries of human life !  
No, Ghazilnut just means, as things stand, 
a smaller lobe measuring four galactaves, 
one galactave is fifteen thousand light-years wide. 
In astronavin one usually reckons 
that the entire Milky Way covers a span 
of some eight hundred thousand galactaves. 
No, save us, please, the torn1ent of trying 
to explain in measurements the vastnesses 
into which Aniara has been plunged. 
94 

71 
THE SPACE MARINER 
Every time I try to check my memoirs 
it seems to me that I can trace 
No bia to Tlaloctitli, 
a tiny hospital base in the mountains of Doraima. 
This is a town which no one sees 
where hospitals are blasted into rock. 
An old deserted mine was once donated 
for the building of this town which 
-after some needed reinforcement of the 
mountain 
and alteration of its inner structure­
was established at a depth 
of fifteen hundred feet under the valley. 
I journey in thought now 
more and more often to this place 
which the Samaritans, with their money-box funds, 
have bought and built then1selves. 
They say it cost something like 
the sum of three million dyma 
-in Gondic currency five hundred thousand gondi, 
in Rindic phonocoins five million rondi. 
They collected this money for eleven years, 
they built, as deep as possible, for safety 
a reserve station among Doraima' s mountains. 
When one has lived long among fiends 
such goodness is like an exotic garden 
91 

whose fruits evince its real nature 
and single happiness is voiced 
by cuckoos singing in the gardens of the heart. 
7 2 Time went on, years came and vanished in the cold 
and glassy reaches. 
Life grew gradually more timeless for most people as 
they huddled 
peering from the lofty windows, half-expecting 
that some planet 
would break loose from its companions, head to­
wards them and come closer. 
Children .. grew up, played and gambolled on the 
tundras of the exiles, 
on the mouldering ballroom floorboards, now grown 
shabby and uneven. 
Modem times breed modem customs. Y urg was long 
ago forgotten 
and poor dance-demented Daisi slept for ever in her 
corner 
of the vault where only honoured prima ballerinas lie. 
I myself sat quietly thinking of the glorious Karelia 
where I once lived long ago, where I lingered through 
a lifetime 
spending more than thirty winters, more than nine 
and twenty smnmers 
g6 

before seeking other countries, meeting other, 
fresh adventures 
on the path of transn1igration. 
Memories return in flashes. Here in Cosmos there's no 
barrier, 
ages merge and I still see fragments from the 
different countries 
of my soul's long pilgrimage. 
Fairest of these memory pictures are the glimpses of 
Karelia 
like a blue streak between tree-trunks, like the paling 
summer waters 
in the }nne-translucent twilight when an evening 
scarcely deepens 
ere the cuckoo sends his flute-like invitation to sweet 
Aino 
to swathe veils of mist about her, rise above the 
summer waters, 
go towards the soaring smoke wreaths, come to meet 
the cheerful cuckoo 
'midst Karelia' s murmuring winds. 
Oh if one could take advice, 
good advice, from days long past 
where laws are dead, whose fields 
time has burned away. 
Here I sit on Mirna's halls, 
remembering that once I lived 
.97 

another life in which I learned 
wisdom from plain fare. 
Here I sit. Where is my mother? 
Here I sit. Where is my sweetheart? 
In a better world than this one? 
Was it because I used my knife 
that I may not have my dear one? 
Plunged it into my stepfather's chest 
as he smugly left the sauna 
squeezing my girl's breast with his hand. 
Where did all that happen? I recall. 
I can still see the glen, the forests 
deep in Karelia, the land of sagas. 
Here I sit, with all those others 
who boast roughly of their worlds, 
what they did and how they fared 
sumptuously on the King of Stars. 
Ninety centuries ago, one evening 
I sat quietly in the glen 
with my sweetheart, just before it happened, 
before the God ofJudgement exiled me 
from Karelia' s woodland glens. 
It is good that sometimes one forgets. 
Fortunate that memory only glimmers 
!)8 

for a n1oment now and again, 
soothing to escape constant reminders 
of one's dreary pilgrimage. 
Best to watch and say nothing. 
Maybe divine guards are sitting 
here and listening. Who can tell? 
If I can endure, be patient, 
if in silence I repent, 
perhaps, some far-off evening, 
I may see the end of al my memories, 
reach the limit of my wanderings, 
and scrubbed clean and labelled worthy 
of the noble Star of Kings, 
settle, like a bird in foliage, 
deep in the Karelian woods. 
LIBIDELLA 
(Secret song of Melancholy) 
7 J Does my dog sniff round your shadowy glen, 
Libidella, 
and my cat slumber in high disdain, 
soft-purring Libidell? 
99 

Does my ear hear only its own refrain 
Libidella? 
Does my home lie in someone else's house, 
listening Libidell? 
Libidella 
yield me your Isthmus urn. 
Now let stella 
alpha lights dimly bum. 
Midst the riddle of Alpha Centauris 
we wonder and weep together. 
0 nuda now 
in nudis glow 
under mandola' s moon for two. 
Libidella 
with me to Sirius turn. 
N udinella yield me your Isthmus urn. 
The widow, so tantalizing, 
obsesses the thoughts of men. 
0 nuda now 
in nudis glow 
under mandola' s moon for two. 
Libidella 
unclad in nudinell 
lift towards stella 
moon-pale your nudibell, 
in the starlight of Alpha Centauris 
we pledge these toasts with our tears. 
0 nuda now 
100 

in nudis glow 
under mandala's moon for two. 
7 4 Fear stares into a void that is too clear 
interpreting without the aid of thought. 
So obvious is glassy death in Cosmos, 
so obvious the emptiness which eases 
our understanding of the meaningless. 
So obvious the shooting star of fear. 
My friend, you know too much 
without having had to ponder. 
So, while you slept, vast seas of space, 
mercilessly clear, drowned your illusions 
and fear's own light blazed forth like a sun. 
7 5 A prize amounting to ten million gondi 
-a sum of money eagerly desired-
was promised to anyone able to turn our goldonda 
round 
and point her nose-cone back to Douris' valleys. 
But that was years ago, the prize today 
concerns the Comfortress in Mirna's hall. 
101 

Ah, who can penetrate the Mirna's secrets? 
Who can give the enchantress back her wand? 
This is our cry, resounding in outer space. 
76 With statistical notes on my knee, I listen quietly 
to our space historian, giving a lecture 
about the pioneers upon these seas 
which, tho' conquered, have yet been the grave of 
many. 
'In former days we ascended much more steeply.' 
(Ikaros, for example). 
Yes, there were those who actually imagined 
that, given suitable leverage, one might be 'fired' 
from a rocket-pedestal, and thus avoid 
the curving forces and fields of outer space. 
When this idea was fmall y discarded 
(after costing those wretched folk many sacrifices-
for instance, Thanatos) 
the second phase emerged, called 'heaven's ladder' 
when in a succession of power thrusts 
one could propel one's liner from the f1elds 
-this, in itself, was a method quite acceptable 
albeit extravagant and not without its risks. 
The accident statistics we see here 
speak for themselves of the problems that were 
vital 
in those far-off days before space was deflowered. 
102 

Compared with the curve of our own age, 
judged too by our n1odern n1ethods of measure­
ment, 
the curve of earlier days would seem deficient, 
we are entitled, in fact, to term it crude. 
7 7 We shudder when we see, through the ship's 
telescope, 
a coal-black sun, extinct, nameless, 
a sun in mourning in the graveyard of space, 
at once the blackened corpse and tombstone of a 
sun 
which once glowed in a firestorm at the Cape of 
Time 
flinging its flames into the jaws of darkness 
until it was gradually, in accordance with 
the law of entropy, sucked up by the Photophag 
which left only cinders and shell behind, 
a gravestone on the empty plain of darkness, 
one of many thousand dark stones standing 
invisible 
in endless night in the cemeteries of space. 
This sun reflects no light, but shows itself 
as the eclipse of a few gathered stars 
which only a month ago were seen 
on this same spot where now this murky sm1 
stands out, sharp-contoured, like a jet-black coin. 
A.-I 
IOJ 

Presenting in sombre majesty 
a rounded profile against the gaslight of the 
nebula, 
it seems a dark circular mountain mass 
in whose turgid grotto the spirit of the lamp 
died long ago in the embrace of darkness 
and choked by dingy cinders is kept frozen 
in a grave of light, in nameless oblivion. 
7 8 Our Chief Engineer, 
a man from Upper Gond, 
an acknowledged authority on Yesser tubing, 
collapsed at his post 
on Wednesday, the fifteenth of November. 
In view of his long years of service 
and important contributions to the science of 
goldondas 
his express ·wish to be entombed 
in a Tube of Rescue was granted, 
and he was duly shot off 
towards the Star of Rigel. 
A large crowd followed his body 
to the an tech amber 
where the Tube of Rescue stood on a catafalque, 
and sang at parting 
'Wide the embrace, the distant haven', 

then they went away, and the antechamber was 
closed. 
One could hear nothing but the rumbling 
of the aggregate machinery 
when the capsule of death was hurled 
into its grave of light-years. 
7 9 We came from Earth, from Do uris' land, 
the jewel of our solar-system, 
the only planet where Life has found 
a land of milk and honey. 
Describe the landscape that was there, 
the days that dawned and darkened, 
describe the n1en who there in beauty stitched 
the white shrouds of their race 
until God and Satan hand in hand 
from a defiled and poisoned land 
past plains and mountains fled 
the face of n1an; the King of Ashes. 
8 0 Far out on flaming horizons 
quivers an eye, a nucleus 
moving in pity-the distant 
star of love, magic, eternal. 
Every time it looks at the earth 
IOJ 

a meadow springs up, and blossoms. 
Pollen spreads day after day 
blithely through joyful summer. 
Flowers raise high from the soil 
a pageant of moving banners. 
The butterfly spreads its yellow 
draperies over the acuities of thistles. 
Bumblebees drone in the grass 
where the shadows of straws trace a pattern. 
Summer wind lingers, in passing, 
in swinging clusters of poppy. 
How elusive happiness is ! A moment's 
sunburst in white-clouded summer. 
Far beyond sentiment, high, above evil, 
summers' bright 'Love Star' 
glimmers on flowering meadows, 
the first among midsummer blooms. 
What better reason than this 
to be carefree and pious? 
81 A growing sense of oppression 
affected many minds in the nineteenth year. 
I sat with a pen in n1y hand 
making Goptic calculations concerning the traces 
of intensified radiation from the Lyra 
which had some tnysterious meaning. 
106 

So, in our twentieth year, we sat 
studying the light from the Lyra, 
Isagel interpreting traces 
of Beta and Gamma rays. 
The ironic winds of her soul 
alternating with tremors of horror 
joined forces with Isagel' s breathing 
and merged in the waves of her tears. 
And all the romantic sorrows 
whose lachrymose floods roused ridicule 
now joined the commonplace needs 
in a darkness bereft of all joy. 
I gathered my Isagel closer, 
comforted by the warmth of her tears, 
for she was the only living warmth 
now left to me on board. 
And so towards the gleaming Lyra 
our ship sped on, her casing defaced with scars, 
mementoes of the meteors 
we had met in the starry heavens. 
Isagel asked me not to sing, 
but, in spite of this, I had to 
hear my own insensitive voice 
crooning about asbestos and silicates. 
107 

For the shivering, sobbing girl 
I sang of the theory of elasticity. 
I also sang of our honour deflowered 
and of our lost irreplacable goddess. 
Then Isagel gradually ceased her weeping 
-yet weeping may be no worse than other 
phenomena! 
This was in the twentieth year 
of the journey we cursed in our hearts. 
8 2 An event of special note 
has been celebrated 
in space today. 
Our leaders ordered us to dress 
in our Sunday best 
in honour of the Law of Cosmos. 
We cli1nbed up a hm1dred steps, 
and all the four thousand rooms 
and two hundred and thirty halls 
were emptied in a flash. 
In the enormous central hall 
(known as the Hall of Light-Y ears) 
which holds ten thousand people 
the others and I n1et again. 
108 

We saw for the first time 
how mercilessly the years 
had dealt with every one of us 
when under burning chandeliers 
we stood among the crowding masses 
known to you and me. 
It seemed as though the spirits 
of all Earth's people 
had gathered here today 
in the halls where songs by angel choirs 
and speeches by goldondiers 
echoed and re-echoed. 
The Chief Goldondier spoke to us 
about the great significance 
of this most solemn day. 
'How mighty is the Cosmos, 
how powerful its secret, 
how puny am I.' 
Then the chorus swelled out 
deep in the Hall of Light-Y ears 
and the people shuddered on the brink 
of the precipice of Eternity. 
Many thousands wept 
and a few hundred said: 
This is the law of fate. 
1 0!) 

Our space-ship Aniara 
has been upon her journey 
full twenty years today. 
And many stood in silence 
till someone said abruptly 
'A light-year is a grave. 
Our twenty-year-long journey 
is sixteen hours of light away 
across the light-year sea.' 
At this we did not laugh. 
No, nearly all, we wept. 
'A light-year is a grave.' 
The Chief Goldondier dismissed us 
with a flourish of his baton 
and once again we went down 
the hundred steps, 
all treading very quietly, 
'A light-year is a grave.' 
8 J The flocks of exterior atoms on Nineveh's stones 
disperse with the passing of tin1e fron1 the seat of 
the n1ighty. 
Each stone is eroded in grooves and in forkings. 
One by one the incised features of lions and priests 
crumble away. 
IIO 

0 scar-ravaged stones, keep them imprisoned, do 
not let them vanish. 
Tin1e has corroded and licked at the mane of the 
lion 
like the manhood which ravished the virtue of 
Syria's wmnen, 
like the saliva frmn rain which eroded the tower of 
Han. 
The vices of disintegration survive through the ages. 
Dissolution's carousal gives life to the rose on the 
grave 
where the covetous tongue of the grass in depravity 
stretches. 
The nose of the stone-wolf is gnawed by the lupuȽ 
of caves. 
As stones fall to dust, so the law is corrupted by 
man. 
Every hypocrite furtively fears the sour stench of 
decay. 
When the clearness of insight pierces them, things 
come into daylight 
like the dry, burnt-out holes in the lava which 
buried Pompeii. 
Hear the rusty trombones. Hear how the zittras are 
playing 
of the Sphinx, marred and ravaged by lepra above 
desert sands, 
III 

to comfort the races which have seen all their 
custon1s disintegrate 
like boulders obscenely devoured by the merciless 
ages. 
84 Our Chief Astronomer showed us a picture 
of a galaxy which appeared to be receding, 
and many sank down on their knees 
and began praying: Make it come nearer, Lord ! 
They professed the religion of the galactaves 
and when I saw them praying, I recalled 
how Sister N obia once described 
the wide, high plateau of Doraima 
where the neighbouring galaxy in Andromeda 
during clear nights ingeniously magnified 
in order to be seen from the roof-tops of light 
cities-
seemed to shine like a goldfish, 
outlined by a giant mirror stretching for miles 
to the people of Doraima. 
8 5 The galaxy swings round 
like a wheel of shimmering smoke 
which is the light of stars, 
or sun haze. 
112 

For lack of other words, you know, 
we call it sun haze. 
I mean just that languages do not suffice 
to express everything 
contained in that spectacle. 
The richest of the languages we know, 
Xinombric, has some three million words, 
but the galaxy you are watching now 
contains far more than ninety billion suns. 
Has any human brain ever mastered all the words 
in the language ofXinombra? 
Not a single one ! 
Now you understand? 
And yet-do you? 
S ONG FROM G OND 
86 Now comes a God ofRoses 
for the day of the Rose has come 
and the goddess of the Lilies is here too. 
How peaceful when men fall asleep ! 
Look, curious fairies appear, 
and tints arc mixed in the cashets. 
The God of Violets wants colour. 
The day of the violets will come. 
IIJ 

We sink in the glens of the gods, 
tum to soil, and to pistils and rays, 
and the gods will soon paint surruner flowers 
on the canvas of our dissolution. 
The sooner we vanish and die 
the less will the gods feel their sorrow. 
Our life melts away like the snow 
when summertime starts for the gods. 
8 7 Time passed, change and decay began to show 
like wear and tear on the upholstery of chairs. 
Indolent minds, and aimless wasted spirits 
sat fettered by frustration, stupidly reclining 
in goldondic comfort which had known better 
days 
but which, owing to the la\vs of stress, was only a 
memory now. 
Boredom, the borderline between satiety and 
apathy, 
had long ago been reached and crossed, 
and now our souls turned back for solace 
to the sufferings which had marked our time. 
And novel words, the latest dance craze, 
followed 
close on each other, merely to sink, forgotten, 

in rapid streams of time, which swirled 
in sluggish currents towards the shores of death. 
The lazy brain became a burden to itself 
and the spirits on the bookshelves, never read, 
were seen to tum their backs on glutted minds 
which could no longer be disturbed by thought. 
Strange signs were visible in space. 
But since they could not be comprehended 
in the daily programme were soon forgotten. 
We came, for instance, fairly close one day 
to a strange sun, a half-extinguished neighbour 
of the one which shone so gloriously on Douris, 
and Isagcl came in to me and said: 
'Dear Friend, what do you think? Shall we-or 
not?' 
I replied that although the time seemed ripe 
space was, after all, a question mark. 
It might be wiser therefore for some time yet 
to keep the moth away from the bright flame 
which offered itself here as our cremator. 
And Isagel left things at that 
though her eyes blazed phosphorus with wrath, 
a wrath which at that tin1e was pure and holy, 
and so behind the backs of our dull crowd 
she protected our space goldonda, Aniara. 
IIJ 

8 8 But our clear-eyed spirit Isagel broke down. 
A sickly demon came into her eyes. 
Her widening pupils sought the sources of the soul 
and she heard cries and echoes from remote dis-
tances. 
She said that she had heard a voice which called 
her by a name she did not know 
and that afterwards the same call had often 
sounded in the halls of Mirna. 
It came from Mitna' s grave, and so one night 
when everyone else was asleep she obeyed the 
VOICe, 
crept to the graveside, and found sitting there 
a messenger from the Mansions of Eternity. 
I pretended to believe her, though I knew 
that Isagel, my frienJ, of all the things we'd met in 
space 
had been pierced by a splinter 
when we collided with the leonide. 
Thus it is not the wilds of space alone 
nor the spiritual void through which we travel 
here 
but also many a carefully guarded personal secret 
which deeply, cruelly, wears down our courage. 
She suggested once, sitting thoughtfully, 
that she identified herself with death, 
116 

who, keeping watch in Aniara's night, 
measured the meagre life-spans of the passengers. 
I thought at first this was a joke, such as imagined 
spleen, 
in deserts where there was no hope of rescue. 
But when I realized her trend of thought 
I tried to turn her soul to different pursuits. 
The ruler of pure thought, our spirits' succour, 
thus prepared herself for the fields of Glory. 
The deserts of space had no means of compre-
hending 
but I understood in my heart how this had 
happened. 
Invisible to us, she glided quietly 
into the region of the Laws of Numbers 
where endless, unexplored reserves await us 
when the Powers of Chance decide the hour has 
come. 
8 9 When one we love has passed beyond death' s door 
space seems more cruel and sombre than before. 
Our burden becomes heavier, we are crushed, 
our soul will never again be released 
from the dead grasp of evil space. 
117 

And so from the Picture Archives I take out 
all that I put aside from Mirna's days 
and Mirna's hall turns into a crowded grotto 
where fragments from the Mirna's visions paint 
in colours of the afterglow a frieze, 
a sunset in the realm of Aniara. 
9 0 At one time, out of favour with Chefone, 
I was hunted by his men and then condemned 
for an indefinite time to the ship's deepest dungeon 
in which only gangsters were usually confmed. 
And yet, I thought, the day will surely come 
when Chefone, though he'll not do it gladly, 
must liberate his expert on the Gopta, 
and when that day comes I'll be released. 
Almost as if in answer to my thoughts 
a violent tremor passed through the goldonda. 
It was as if my Isagel had called me 
from the hidden kingdom where she dwells. 
And that same night, after the watch had ended, 
Isagel can1e to me in a dream 
of supernatural light which filled my heart 
with warmth beyond description. 
And being now an expert in the reading 
of signs, and able to deduce 
118 

91 
what power they have to generate new thoughts 
resembling the Min1a' s formulas 
I saw now, filled with reverence, who she was, 
my Isagel, and why she still 
lingered so faithfully, harking to n1y questions, 
so that when need be she could answer me, 
and it dawned on me then that Isagel, 
the fair and glorious bride of my own mind, 
in this space world beyond the God of Life 
was Mirna's very self, 
was Mirna's soul. 
In Aniara's Gopta vault, equipped with aerials, 
tremors of Isagel-like sensitivity 
caused much disturbance, even to Chefone. 
So, against his will but at his orders 
I was brought back to freedom. 
In ordinary language (an inheritance from Douris) 
the disturbance I have mentioned revealed 
that the balance of our ship was now in danger. 
So, released from prison to locate the fault, 
I was restored again to Mirna's hall. 
We plummeted deep into the abyss. It sounds like a 
tall story 
written in desperate fear in every face. 
But there was general agreement on this. 
A.-K 
II!) 

One could not complain of lack of mass suggestion. 
A puzzling failure in the gravitation centre 
gave us this sense of falling, the illusion 
that no matter what we did we'd keep on falling 
in one direction, downward, through a void 
no longer rounded or vaulted, 
but like a well into which we dived headlong. 
My Gopta knowledge stood me in good stead 
and seldom have I seen people happier 
than when, helped by the Gopta Calculus, 
within a few hours I could lift the load of fear 
and sense of endless falling from their hearts. 
That was a red-letter day among celestial stars. 
Isagel, my beloved, where are you? Our fame is 
now assured. 
The Gopta calculus has scored a triwnph. 
9 2 All the fire that used to burn within us 
derived its light, its soul, from Mirna's waves. 
Never again have we found those scenes 
which, grouped round Mirna, we saw then. 
Beliefs long preyed upon by time, 
and impoverished 1110re and more by our own 
emptiness, 
arc difficult to hold in honour. 
120 

Continuously uttering their lamentations 
the exorcisers stood in Mima' s hall, 
swollen mouths sucking the goddess' blood. 
Even human sacrifice was reintroduced 
though custom had frayed its sanctity 
with its constant stream of broken oaths. 
Such sacrifices, however, soon lost their interest 
for us since we could find no redemption 
in sacrificial blood, indifferently offered, 
which, thus, meaninglessly flowed away. 
People who had experienced the scale of the Photo-
turb 
and known Xinombra' s day of holocaust in Gond 
found such offerings here ironically lukewarm 
imagined against the redhot backcloth of 
Xinombra' s. 
Even the memory of Mirna's days 
had a significance. And those who knelt 
in attitudes of prayer, following rites 
enacted only with a pretence of feeling, 
were ashamed. 
Soon, too, the soulless disciples of the Cult 
felt the flow of sacrificial blood grow cold 
sensing their own vacuity 
beside the remains of truth-loving Mirna. 
121 

Thus in due course even they refused to assist 
in the ceremonies commanded by Chefone. 
What a blow for that autocratic 
hardened circus-trainer! 
9 J Now everyone refusing sacrifice was humbled, 
for Chefone inflicted hideous punishment. 
Torn between four deadly magnets 
every rebel died in nameless agony. 
From that day on, no one entered the Hall 
where Mirna slept, and where the Cult had faded, 
for hope had little chance there against despair 
and even Chefone became apprehensive. 
In illuminated letters on his screen he published 
new laws to lessen the strain of our last days. 
He dressed up gangsters to look like good 
Samaritans 
and ordered them to mitigate the effects of 
penalties. 
And Chefone himself, now strangely benevolent, 
was seen quietly mixing healing ointments, 
and, as though suddenly transformed by magic, 
helping the sick and caressing the frozen. 
122 

D EATH CERTIFICATE 
94 An evil-minded baleful self-torturer, 
a wallowcr in egoistic sorrows, 
presided for a time in Mirna's hall. 
At Ygol he had 1nurdcred a whole people. 
Now he was the ruler 
of those who had come from Douris' valleys. 
After he had practically devoured himself, 
leaving only fragments 
which could not gobble themselves up, 
he vanished. 
The very floor on which he used to stand rejoiced. 
He was called Chefonc from Xaxacal. 
9 5 Now I no longer in this gorge 
set up a balance between fact and illusion. 
No one came now, indeed, to seck for illusion. 
The facts were all too obvious at last. 
As though from inside an enormous coffin of crystal 
all of us, or nearly all, saw whither we were going, 
for everywhere there was a window facing horrors 
and words of hope could deceive us no longer 
and only stars a million miles away 
peered into that coffm as it glided on 
123 

bearing inside it the proud race of Do uris. 
And as in a mourning bell of glass 
the clapper of each soul tolled in ecstatic fear 
against reverberating, transparent walls . .  
We crowded close there in Mirna's hall. 
I was squeezed in among the rest. 
Fear extinguished every memory of Do uris. 
I shared with them. the agony of that moment. 
96 The Leaders could no longer hide from us now 
the ncar approach of extermination; 
even so, they still tried hard to hide the facts 
in fornĦulas from our fifth tensor calculus. 
They refused nȒe admission to the calculus 
and forbade my entry to the prognoses roonH, 
but those who have once learnt to tell the time 
can always thereafter foresee the eventide. 
I went to Mirna's grave and fell prostrate, 
bowed deep in prayer to which god who can tell. 
I begged in the cold hall in desperation 
for a nȓiracle to be wrought \vith inanimate matter. 
And then, although there was no outward sign, 
I heard how inanitnate things bore witness 
124 

to a great n1ystery, which was deepened 
by light from Mirna's guttering graveside candles. 
9 7 All thought collapsed and imagination died 
· 
at the beginning of the twenty-fourth year. 
Crushed by the unending incomprehensibility 
of heaven's reaches stretching to infinity 
all our dreams gave up and fmally confessed 
their humble rank in Ghazilnut. 
Total darkness filled many souls. 
Lost to reality they moved about 
in the halls, vainly questioning each other 
about the way home, and far familiar things, 
crowding round the lamps as moths do 
in Autumn in the distant plains of Do uris. 
9 8 A sorcerer in Mirna's hall 
I hail all conquerors of bitter cold, 
I beg the seraphim for their support, 
I ask that visions may be vouchsafed. 
I pray that Isagel in this chill hall 
may rise unscathed from the shell of her urn. 
Arise, my Isagel, from the ashes of death. 
Arise, 0 Isagel, and give me strength. 
I2J 

9 9 I moved about the halls at a late hour. 
I shivered that night in Mirna's hall. 
The memory of Do uris, now freezing cold 
and foreign to all softness, tore my souȔ. 
Corrosion penetrated ever deeper 
into every cra1my our dreams tried to preserve 
and dust fell like the sand of time itself 
on tables and on floors in Aniara. 
So, in the twenty-fourth year, the goldonda 
travelled 
with unchecked speed towards the Lyra, 
and now the distant star of Do uris mingled 
with countless others in a dust-storm of stars 
which seemed to gather in flocks for company 
but which in actual fact quivered and hung 
so sparsely scattered in the eternal cold 
that each star was a martyr of the void. 
Quieter, more and more desolate, Aniara became: 
a proud goldonda once, now a sarcophagus, 
which, bereft of her own strength, could only 
fall 
along the loxodrome which 
she retained in falling. 
The pilots' cabin had long been empty 
and former navigators who had worked in the 
. 
. 
mgemous nose-cone 
126 

had lain for years now in the quiet place where 
Daisi Doody slept, 
entombed, as befits the queen ofYurg, 
in the centre of her court. 
The halls themselves were hushed, but somewhere 
11 
the nooks of the giant capsule sounds were heard. 
Walking some thousand steps towards this noise 
one arrived in the Mirna's hall where, frozen stiff, 
many space emigrants were sitting still. 
Absorbed in sorting various forms of death or 
sleep 
they played a game of chess with infinity. 
Then one of them, who had unobtrusively gone 
mad, a demogogue, 
suddenly stood up on a ladder of words 
and discoursed on the travels of mankind, 
on Punt and Tyre, Wineland and Da Gama. 
But rhetoric froze to silence in his mouth, 
and this last speaker abruptly ceased 
and stared about him shuddering in the hall 
where life's journey had now gone far further 
than anything ever dreamt of in the plain ofTajo. 
Only the echo of death came back in reply 
to the speech he had made for the fast-dying 
who now, in icy rigidity, empty-eyed 
peered at the Lyra from our Aniara. 
127 

1 0 0 There were no longer any lamps to light. 
A simple lantern burned by Mirna's grave 
where those still left had gathered now, turning 
their backs against death' s oceans, in helpless agony. 
The fmal ebbing hours ofhuman time 
were lighted by that one flame, and fi.lled with 
questions. 
So on the earth many a prisoner has sat 
beside the light of his last lamp, watching its 
flatne 
and listening as the squad comes marching up 
to the harsh stone of walls 
which will soon mirror the flash of frring. 
For space can never be more cruel than man, 
more than its n1atch is human callousness. 
The bleak despair, of prism:l cells on earth 
builds a deep vault around the souls of men, 
and chilly stones are heard to mutter dumbly: 
Here man is master. So here is Aniara. 
1 01 This was our fmal night in Min1a's hall. 
Soul after soul broke down and vanished 
but before each ego fmally dissolved 
the soul's will made itself quite clearly felt 
finding at last the strength to separate 
128 

time from the grip of space, and thus to grant 
oblivion to the race of Douris. 
1 0 2 I had coveted a Paradise for this race 
but since we left the one we had destroyed 
the Zodiac's lonely night became our only home, 
a gaping chasm in which no god could hear us. 
The eternal mystery of Heaven's stars, 
the miracle of the celestial mechanism, 
is the law but not the Gospel. 
Mercy can only thrive where there is life. 
We failed to grasp the true meaning of the Law, 
and found an empty death in Mirna's hall. 
The God on whom we fixed our final hopes 
lay wounded on the plains ofDouris. 
1 0 J I turn the lantern low, enjoining stillness. 
Our tragedy has ended. But with the right 
of travellers down the ages, I have told 
our tale, a vision in galactic night. 
With unabeted speed towards the Lyra 
the goldonda droned for fifteen thousand years, 
12.9 

like a museun1 filled with bones and artefacts, 
and dried herbs and roots, relics from Douris' 
woods. 
Enton1bed in our in1mense sarcophagus 
we were botne on across the desolate waves 
of space-night, so unlike the day we'd known, 
unchallenged silence closing round our grave. 
By Mirna's graveside fallen in a circle 
transformed once n1ore to blameless dust we lay, 
impervious to the sting of bitter stars, 
lost and dispersed in oceans of Nirvana. 
IJO 

Glossary 
ANIARA-A combination of letters, rich in vowels, which 
represents the space in which the atoms move. The 
adjective aniaros (fern. a11iara) in ancient Greek means 
sorrowful. Thus, Aniara = the ship of sorrow. 
GOLDONDA-Space-ship, from the 'gondola' of earlier 
air-ships, the imaginary land of Gond. 
MIMA-From the Greek mimos, an imitator or reproducer, 
and mimesis, imitation, art, especially acting. The word 
can also be formed from the first two letters in mini­
mum and maximum, and in micro and macro. 
DO URis-Also the name of one of Okeano' s daughters. In 
Aniara, the positive, motherly element (the earth). The 
valleys and plains of Douris represent the fertile, 
generous earth. 
THE MIMAROBE OR SPACE SAILOR-Mima' s special guardian, 
and the poet's voice. 
DAISI DOODY-The personification of sensual joy on 
board. 
CHEFONE-The master of the goldonda, a hard and hated 
dictator. 
THE BLIND POETESS FROM RIND-In nordic mythology, 
Rind is an earthly goddess. The Rind papyrus is called 
the oldest known papyrus with a mathematical con­
tent (approx. 1 800 B.c.) 
NOBIA-A Samaritan, the spirit of mercy and nnselfish­
ness. 
IJI 

ISAGEL-The Isis-Urania of modern mathematics and 
astronomy. Aloof from Aniara's passengers in her 
austere purity of thought, her search for truth is as 
uncompromising 
as Cosmos. Represents the im­
mortality of art-her presumed survival in 'the region 
of the Law of Numbers' kindles a ray of hope in 
Aniara' s darkness. 
An Interpretation of Some New and Unfamiliar 
Words in Aniara 
Song 
6 VIRAK-Adulation (incense) 
, 
1 2  YURG-The equivalent of any current dance­
craze 
" 
" 
" 
" 
" 
" 
" 
" 
1)2 
12 ooru-Lethargic, drowsy, from the French 
'dormir'. 
12 toru-Suggests a Malayan ape of the same 
name, perpetually dozing with crossed arms. 
12 CHADWICK-Relates to the discoverer of the 
neutron, Sir John Chadwick. 
1 2  GONDLES-From goldonda, the land of Gond. 
12 WATHED IN TARI-Draped in a robe, or sari. 
1 5  GAMMOSAN-A drug, relating to gamma rays. 
26 PHOTOTURB-An atomic bomb in which the 
total mass is transformed to light quanta. 
Relates to fiery light, turbulence, typhoons. 
28 THE CANTOR WORKs-Relates to Georg Can-
tor, the German mathematician who de­
veloped the theory of sets (Mengenlehre). 
Also to a transfinite organ which interprets 
the harmony of the spheres. 

Song 30 THE TENSOR CALCULUS-Einstein's theory of 
relativity. 
, 
32 TRANS-THOMIST PRINCIPLES-Trans 
= beyond, 
Thomist relates to the doctrine of Thomas 
Aquinas (d. 1274). 
, 
34 GOLDONDEVAN-0ath of allegiance taken by a 
space sailor. 
, 
34 GOPTA-Invented mathematical concept, am-
plification of the tensor. 
, 
35 YURGINNOR-Female dancers of the Yurg. 
, 
35 LIBIDINNOR-Libidinous women. 
, 
36 DORMIFID-From 'dormir' and 'sylphide', a 
slender bedmate. 
" 
" 
" 
" 
" 
" 
36 DORMIJUN-From 'dormir' and 'Junoesque', an 
ample bedmate. 
3 8 BIKINILLAN-Play on the expression 'Bikini 
. 
. 
' 
SWlmSllit . 
3 8 XINOMBRIC COMPLEMENT-The shorts of the 
swimsuit. 
39 JENDER CURVEs-Invented term for a graph in 
higher mathematics. 
40 XINOMBRA-A hot desert village in Mexico. 
X. in Aniara refers to Dourisburg or Gond, 
towns which, like Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 
were wiped out by atomic bombs. 
55 PHOTOPHAG-Swallower of Light. 

